Title
Review for Johnny Mnemonic (1995)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Set in the future, a courier has uploaded some data into a "hard drive" that
resides in his head, and must now escape the bad guys who are after that
very important information. Since he overloaded his "hard drive", he's also
racing against the clock before the information seeps into his brain and
kills him.
CRITIQUE:
Incoherent, boring, one-act drivel with no suspense, horribly unbelievable
futuristic environment, bad dialogue, career-defining bad acting by Keanu
Reeves and a hilarious ending. It's too bad because the premise of the film
was interesting, but unfortunately for my friends and I, this movie turned
out to be just as bad as everyone had warned us. It's one of those films
that makes you start laughing half-way through, when you realize that most
of the actors in it suck, the location shots are filmed in dark "junkyard"
type areas which they would like to have us believe to be futuristic
(whatever...), and all the sets look like....well, sets. There is also
absolutely no arc to this story. It basically starts off with Keanu
uploading info into his brain, and then a bunch of folks chasing him from
place to place until a laughable ending puts a stop to the former uneventful
proceedings. Gibson should stick to writing novels and "X-Files" episodes,
since his segue into the paranormal TV series was much more entertaining
than any of this garbage.
Some other hilarities of this film include Dolph Lundgren as some futuristic
Jesus character whose supposed to kick ass, Henry Rollins as a pumped-up
cyber-doctor or something, and Ice-T as some kind of a hobo dude with paint
all over his face (Don't ask). The ending is the funniest with some robot
dolphin and a stupid ghost-lady from inside the computer doing some stuff
that no one really cares about by that point. I'm ashamed to say this film
was shot in my hometown of Montreal, Canada, but sadly enough for us all, it
was. Some of the cyber-travelling special effects were okay (Hence, the
2/10), but overall, it's one of those bad movies that's just funny to watch
and cringe at. Thankfully for Keanu, he redeemed his sci-fi career with
1999's THE MATRIX (7.5/10). It's too bad that he has yet to redeem his lack
of acting talent.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
As of 1999, director Robert Longo never directed another full-feature film.
Hmmm...now isn't that odd? :)
Writer William Gibson immigrated from the US to Canada in 1968, after being
rejected for the draft. He lived in Toronto at first, but since 1972, has
made Vancouver his home. His 1984 novel "Neuromancer" and its sequels 1986's
"Count Zero" and 1988's "Mona Lisa Overdrive" are generally considered to be
the definitive works of the "cyberpunk" science-fiction sub-genre.
This film garnered Keanu Reeves a nomination in the "Worst Actor" category
in the 1996 Razzie Awards.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 5/26/95 
Running Length: 1:38 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, mature themes) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Keanu Reeves, Dina Meyer, Ice-T, Takeshi, Dolph Lundgren 
Director: Robert Longo 
Producer: Don Carmody 
Screenplay: William Gibson based on his story 
Cinematography: Francois Protat 
Music: Brad Fiedel 
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures 
     JOHNNY MNEMONIC has an interesting premise:  it's the second decade 
of the twenty-first century and information espionage has become so 
commonplace that human "couriers" are used to transport electronic data.  
These couriers have implants hardwired into their brains to accommodate 
uploading and downloading gigabytes, and they get paid handsomely for 
their services.  Meanwhile, the world is in the grip of a mysterious 
ailment called Nerve Attenuation Syndrome, which threatens half the 
population with neural seizures. 
     Unfortunately, once you get beyond this background, the film has 
little to offer aside from a second-rate cast, a dumb story, and cheesy 
special effects.  Computer-generated visuals a la THE LAWNMOWER MAN 
aren't nearly as stunning or interesting as director Robert Longo thinks 
they are.  Aside from being relatively easy to create (most theaters use 
this sort of thing in their self-promotional material), they get dull 
pretty quickly.  Alas, that doesn't prevent Longo from overusing them ad 
nauseam.  Apparently, he spent his entire effects budget on these, 
because several blue screen shots look embarrassingly fake.   
     Keanu Reeves, an actor of exceptionally limited scope, plays the 
title character with about as much wattage as a pen flashlight.  Reeves 
alternates between understated and over-the-top with alarming 
regularity, creating several unintentionally hilarious moments.  As 
evidence of how poor this performance is, consider that Dolph Lundgren, 
as a bionic villain, acts circles around Reeves.  That's right, I said 
Dolph Lundgren.   
     Johnny's head capacity is 80 gigabytes, but he uses a "doubler" to 
raise it to 160.  Nevertheless, on his latest job, a group of scientists 
have downloaded twice that, leading to a potentially-deadly "leakage" 
situation--if Johnny doesn't get the information out of his head in 24 
hours, his brain will explode.  The problem is, a group of yakuza 
(Japanese mobsters) are after him, because what he's carrying is worth a 
whole lot of money.  So Johnny's on the run through the decaying, 
futuristic city of Newark, New Jersey, with no download code, and a 
protector (Dina Meyer) who's only sticking with him until he comes up 
with the cash to pay her off, or until she falls in love with him 
(whichever comes first--you guess the answer). 
     Clearly, JOHNNY MNEMONIC is trying to be a BLADE RUNNER for the 
'90s, using cyber-space as its playground.  The main problem is the 
script, which is as dumb as action stories get.  Just because a film 
takes place in a futuristic setting doesn't mean that all logic and 
coherence have to go out the window.  Above all, why should we care 
whether Johnny's head explodes when Reeves' performance fails to spark 
any empathy for his character?  JOHNNY MNEMONIC is brash, flashy, and 
loud, but it lacks a few key ingredients--namely heart, soul, and 
intelligence. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Dragan Antulov
In 1980s cyberpunk was definitely the most popular sub-genre
of literary science fiction, with plenty of new, young and
talented writers exploring new, dark but fascinating high-
tech world of near future. However, for some strange reason,
the attempts to recreate this world on the screen (with some
notable exceptions) usually fell flat. Not even William
Gibson, the father of the sub-genre, could escape this sad
fate, as demonstrated in JOHNNY MNEMONIC, 1995 screen
adaptation of his best known short story, directed by Peter
Longo.
The plot is set in 2021, in a world run by multinational
corporations, where the information is the most valuable
commodity. Because of the hackers, the most precious
information is not transmitted via Internet, but by human
couriers with implanted memory chips in their heads. One of
those couriers is Johnny (played by Keanu Reeves), whose is
greedy and agrees to double capacity of the chip and risks
having his own brain melting down. While he carries
information from Beijing to Newark, rival corporation has
hired yakuzas led by Takahashi (played by Takeshi Kitano) to
steal the information from his head. The only shelter for
Johnny is the underworld ruled by LoTeks led by J-Bone
(played by Ice-T).
Even those accustomed to the good literature turning into
bad films would be unpleasantly surprised by JOHNNY
MNEMONIC. Gibson, who wrote and produced the film, wasted
almost entire screen potential of his short story. New
characters and subplots were introduced, mostly in order to
provide film with an interesting cast (that includes
Japanese cult director Takeshi Kitano, rock star Henry
Rollins and German actress Barbara Sukowa) and bring
ecological and "politically correct" anti-technological
angle to the story. But all those efforts failed miserably,
not only because those subplots seemed to be artificial
distraction to the story, but also because of the terrible
miscast of wooden Keanu Reeves as protagonist (whose flat
performance is even worse compared to Dolph Lundgren's
hilarious portrayal of homicidal preacher) and tragic choice
of director. First-timer Peter Longo, who had worked on
videoclips, proved to be unsuitable for feature film. Action
scenes are unattractive and repetitive, while special
effects are bad and often turn into boring display of cheap
pyrotechnics. The whole atmosphere of cyberpunk world is
missing from JOHNNY MNEMONIC, and anachronistic soundtrack
by Michael Danna and Brad Fiedel doesn't help either.
Because of all that, JOHNNY MNEMONIC is one of the worst
cinema failures of 1990s, and the audience really doesn't
have to find out why the fans of the original story
nicknamed this project "Johnny Moronic".
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
P Douglas Reeder
In summary: fairly good cyberpunk action adventure.
     Keanu Reeves (playing Johnny) does a fine job on a character
without any great depth.  Jane (sorry, I can't remember the actress's
name) is fine as a romantic interest, which is how the character in the
movie is written, but is not unduly plausible as a bodyguard.  Ice-T,
playing the head of the Lo-Teks (which are aren't that low of tech) is
fine, mostly because he doesn't have that many lines.  He has the right
visual appearance to carry the character.
     Costuming and sets are well done, convincing, and (where
appropriate) tasteful.  (The sets look properly futuristic, though we
all know that the future is going to look a lot like the present, only
with better computer graphics.  The cyberspace sequences are
esthetically pleasing and not overdone, i.e. don't take up an excessive
amount of screen time.  Perhaps the most convincing scene is Johhny
wearing data gloves and a VR headset, making motions that seem very
plausible to manipulate things in cyberspace.
     The screenplay is a good adaptation of the short story, and uses
all the short story elements well, adding some elements that fit well,
such as a degenerative nerve disease.  There is some gore, but not
overly much, especially for a current action-adventure movie.  No sex,
and not more than a flash of nudity., and only one kiss, not too
steamy.  This is good, because it wouldn't work, not without radically
changing the characters.  As it is, Jane is too sentimental to be
convincing as a bodyguard.
     The movie doesn't get any deeper than the action-adventure level,
though I can't think of any particularly obvious way it could.  I
suppose the main characters could have been a bit deeper.  The
supporting characters are well done, having personality.  Johnny's most
revealing scene is where he says he wants his shirts pressed like they
are at the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo.  How deep!  Jane, we have no idea
why she is what she is now or how she got there.  Okay, that's
definitely a missed opportunity.

Author
T. Robin Sutherland
     On the up side, this was a fun way to spend the afternoon.  A
futuristic action movie with lots of whiz-bang special effects, a
decent soundtrack, and not a few interesting shots and stunts.
     But this will not be one of the science fiction films we look back
on and say "this was a pivotal moment in cinema."  In fact, it seems to
me that somewhere along the line, the society which Gibson & Co. have
helped to fashion with their ideograms of cybericity has caught up and
now dictates to that work.  Too bad.  It would have been nice to seen a
screenplay--so extensively modified from the original short story--take
advantage of the transformation to continue to challenge its audience.
Johnny Neumonic does not do this.  It doesn't come close.  Instead, it
panders to the pop hysteria surrounding the Internet, hacker culture,
and the glitz and glamour which has become associated (ironically) with
the "power (computer) user."
     I dunno.  Maybe I was expecting too much when I found out that
Gibbie was doing the screenplay.  Maybe the cult following which has
been cyberpunk is so much a part of our culture now is just too much to
challenge.  But I don't think so.  It just all smells of a Hollywood
which is much more concerned with flash and bucks than making a good
film.
     Acting?  C'mon--this is sci-fi.  We don't get much of the talent.
Just watch the guys on DS9, B5, or SeaQuest.  I hear they're remaking
DEMOLITION MAN this year as DREDD.  Keanu's prowess as an actor has
never been in question as far as I've been aware, but the guy does have
something besides a 1995 face, which I think I finally have figured
out.  He's Arnie for Generation X.  And Gen-X doesn't use one-liners;
they just let their phases hang there without any meaning.  Done
effectively, this will leave you going "What-?" and KR pulls this off
from time to time.
     But a lot of the scripting was just plain dumb.  Much of it felt
like ninja turtle fare.  Two shots I immediately saw James Bond in.
Lines like "You will regret this," "It's time to let your daughter
die," and "You need to rest," come off as trite and cliche as they are,
and there is finally no way to take anyone seriously.  Reeves' forced
intensity drives the whole thing, along with fairly quickly paced
shooting sequences of fights, special effects, and loud music.
     As for the story itself--the twins are still there, as is the
dolphin and a guy named Ralphie (and a familiar bartender with a
mechanical arm), but even Molly is gone, replaced with a Jane who's
good in a fight, but has none of Molly's cyber-novelty.  Many layers of
story have been added, most of them pointless, some of them seeming to
have the Gibson hint of obscure metaphor, but all drowned in a diatribe
against dependence on the machine.
     Despite all of that, it is fun to watch if you like mind candy and
are not set up for a parable of our times.  Gibson fans will go in
droves and all of them will either be dazzled or disappointed.  And on
the upside once again, this was a short story.  No one seems to have
been stupid enough to go for the mother lode, yet.  If anyone has any
brains, they'll do one or two more short stories first.
     I read an interview in WIRED with Gibson and Robert Longo, which
said that this was originally designed to be a $1.5 million "artsy"
movie, and then went to $30 million budget.  I really wish now that I
could have a chance to see the former.

Author
Allan Toombs
        The first thing that JOHNNY MNEMONIC did was make me laugh, after
that it was all downhill. The cause of my laughter was a TRON style image of
moving light pathways upon which came the title 'THE INTERNET' and then '-
2021'. This kind of glib acceptance of current gee-whizz predictions for the
future typifies the film's crude approach to the SF genre.
        Johnny Mnemonic began in 1981 as a short story in OMNI by William
Gibson. Over the next few years the kind of bleak near-future vision
embodied by the story would gain itself the label 'Cyberpunk' to distance it
the more optimistic mainstream of science fiction. This tag soon grew to
encompass films like BLADERUNNER which seemed to share the same stark
stylism. Today the term has broadened to become a set of alt. newsgroups
with horrific noise to signal problems and an album by Billy Idol, yet the
hyper-realistic vision posited by that original SF clique continues to exert
a powerful influence.
        It must have seemed a natural winner to adapt Gibson's simple tale
of stakeouts into a big budget movie. Bill himself got to do the screenplay
yet somewhere along the way his intensely cerebral brand of SF excitement
got lost in the morass of action/adventure. Attention to detail is a crucial
part of cyberpunk's effect; 'Fragments Of A Hologram Rose' is another Gibson
short with this close-up view at the heart of it's narrative and it's title.
Similarly Ridley Scott's film drew our attention to a single snake scale or
the reflection in a mirror enhanced and amplified. Yet director Robert Longo
fails to bring any style to the cinematography. The direction is neither
poetic and lingering nor ram-raidingly crude like the MAD MAX series; just
bog-standard direction. Even the soundtrack was neither a stirring classical
score nor a moody synthesiser back-drop but somewhere inbetween.
        The Japanese actors in this piece were impeccable, displaying
well-starched malice and the absolute possesion of the Yakuza. Even the much
maligned Ice-T gave one of the best performances in this movie. Whereas
Keanau Reeves was awful, looking far too much like Harrison Ford and
delivering lines like someone doing a bad Scwarzenegger impression. Right
from the opening scene where is sun-bronzed physique was dwelt upon he seems
wrong as the technophile who has a chip in his head. He is meant to be
fragile, head over full with precious data, yet he slugs into every fight
there is. Towards the end he makes a speech straight out of GRAND CANYON and
sounds like a spoilt child throwing a tantrum. Gibson's words (if they are
his work) are memorable "I want starched shirts like they have at the Tokyo
Hilton" but Reeves makes them risable.
        William Gibson's novels always have a strong woman at the heart of
the action. In the original short story we have Molly Millions, ultra-cool
in mirrorshades that are her augmented eyes and razor sharp blades the
retract into her polished nails. Last year's excellent VIRTUAL LIGHT had the
quick-witted cycle courier Chevette Washington. Dina Meyer is woefully
miscast in this role and drifts through the movie like an extra from
Baywatch. It must be hard keeping your hair blow-dried when you live on the
street.
        Dolph Lundgren portrays a psychopath well, but the character was
surplus to requirements. It's as if Fox's bosses felt that there had to be a
white bad guy in case Gibson's deeply multi-ethnic future confused audiences
or over-use of the Yakuza offended Japanese corporate sensibilities. I would
have prefered alot more of Takeshi who was intensely charismatic and
conveyed loss and redemption very convincingly.
        There are some virtuoso computer animated sequences in JOHNNY
MNEMONIC bringing alive Gibson's vivid conception of Cyberspace (hey, the
man coined the term) yet these seem disconnected from the plot. Beautiful
yet pointless. Cyberspace has become nothing more than a fly-through MTV
video. What we do see of the net's future is couched in lazy gee-whizzery.
Our hero opens a world map, points to Beijing and then goes straight to the
Hotel he wants. Where's the vaunted information overload?
        Some moronic use was made of stock footage including a clip of an
aircraft landing - it's a Concorde. Now where's the attention to detail? I
thought everyone knew the Concorde fleet only has 20 years more life left in
it (many of them are cannibalised already!) and that the successor project
won't have a replacement for alot longer than that. By pitching JOHNNY
MNEMONIC in 2021 it's ensured that the Concorde is out of place. Similarly
there's a pitiful model shot of a communications satellite that is gratingly
cheap  sat next to the computer generated sequences.
        Overall JOHNNY MNEMONIC shows how Hollywood can take a promisingly
cinematic story, chew it up and spit it out without any soul. Evertything
has to be literal and visual. At the end of the movie with the contraband
data safely broadcast Reeves and Meyer kiss (happy ending ahoy!) and the
wicked corporate building bursts into flames, "Somebody getting some early
revenge" he explains. As if anyone can bomb a tower-block on a whim just to
give us a James Bond style ending. This is a tragicly wasted opportunity to
bring a unique science-fiction vision to the big screen and a reminder of
what a mess Hollywood creates when it thinks it knows what the kids want. 
        Everyone want's to cut off Johnny's head but in the end it's the
movie itself that runs around like a headless chicken.
 Allan Toombs
 http://www.cityscape.co.uk/users/bt18/atoombs.html
mailto:toombs@cityscape.co.uk

Author
Ben Hoffman
     No one I have known has actually ever accused Keanu Reeves of
being able to act.  This film will change no one's mind.  Johnny
(Reeves) keeps a straight face throughout the whole film.  If we are
looking to give him credit it must be that the plot is so ridiculous,
no one could have done any better.
     The film opens with a big splash across the screen:  INTERNET.
Innocent me, I thought maybe at last they have made a movie based on
real scientific electronic know-how.  Forget it.  That is the last of
any credible science fiction.
     In the 21st Century, the most important asset is information.   To
keep things secret and unavailable to competing corporations, "mnemonic
couriers" are employed.  Johnny is a professional courier who has a
chip implanted in his brain (did I say "brain?").  Into this chip
containing thousands of gigabytes of memory, Johnny is supposed to
store the information he has stolen.  As in everything, there is a
price and the price Johnny must pay for what he gets is that his own
childhood memory is removed to make room for the chip.  Little wonder
he looks befuddled.
     Others in this mess are Dona Meyer, Ice-T, Takeshi, Denis Akiyama,
Dolph Lundgren and a mysterious ghostly Barbara Sukowa, a strange ghost
in cyberspace.  Very weird film.

Author
wizardru <wizardru@netaxs.com>
     I've got to admit that I'm suprised that no one has submitted a
review of JOHNNY MNEMONIC yet, so here's my quick capsule report.
     I caught JOHNNY MNEMONIC over the weekend.  I had some good
expectations, having browsed the Sony Web pages devoted to it.  I saw
it with a small crowd (having gone to the 12:40 showing).
     First, let's talk about the story.  While some parts were
cohesive, the plot felt like it had been 'picked at'.  There were some
things that occured that seemed to deserve more discussion or coverage
than they received.  I had hoped for some more 'meat' on the future,
but didn't really get any.
     The plot, for those who haven't heard, is that Johnny--a mnemonic
courier--is sent to get some critical data for a final run.  He wants
to get his Mnemonic data implant removed so that he can get part of his
long term memory back, which he had to sacrifice to get the implant in
the indeterminate past.  The data he gets is hot, and the Yakuza
(constantly mispronounced thorughout the film as Yak-ooze-a, instead of
Yah-koo-zaa) are hired to retrieve the data.  Johnny, meanwhile, has
overloaded his storage capacity (how this is accomplished is never
discussed, it's just assumed that an 80 Gig drive, doubled by hardware
to 160 Gig, can hold 320 Gig (?) ).  The data, it turns out, is the
cure to a disease called NAS (an AIDS for the plugged-in set) that the
corporation PharmaKOM has been hiding, so that they can make a huge
profit in treating the disease, instead of curing it.  Things get muddy
from here.
     Keanu Reeves seems to walk through the part, and Johnny ends up
feeling like Keanu, distanced and impersonal.  We never fully grasp
Johnny as a character, or anyone else, really.  This is partly because
the plot never really gives you a chance to meet them, anyway.  Too
much happens so quickly, so that you're never sure what made it happen
in the first place.
     The effects are first-rate, and the cyberspace sequences are
highly effective.  The set designs are nice, as are the costuming
jobs.  Action is good, and the fight sequences are well staged.
     All in all, I would recommend this for a matinee or a rental.  It
was a good watch, but unless you're a Gibson fan, or you really like
Keanu Reeves, you probably won't like spending a lot of money to see
this.

Author
Stephen Donaldson
Donny the Punk reviews `Johnny Mnemonic'
     I rarely get excited about a film, but Sarah and i saw the opening
of the new Hollywood $$$$film JOHNNY MNEMONIC in New York City today,
May 26.  For anyone into the Internet (i.e., anyone reading this) this
is a MUST SEE!  Its based on William Gibsons pioneering cyberpunk short
story, and Gibson also wrote the screenplay, so you have to call it a
faithful adaptation.
     It's the (mostly crusty/squatter type) punx of the year 2020, led
by Ice-T and former Black Flag singer Henry Rollins (as a brain surgeon
running an underground hospital), versus the pharmaceutical
corporations, who have kept secret a cure for a horrible disease which
has swept the planet, in order to keep making huge profits off a drug
that treats some of the symptoms but still allows the patient to die
after a while (sound familiar?), and their Yakuza Japanese Mafia goons
(well, it *is* a Sony film), all in the context of a totally wired
planet.  Most of it takes place in the Free City of Newark, NJ (but was
shot in Toronto), much of the rest takes place inside the Internet.  It
is very fast-paced, bloody (lots of severed body parts),
well-photographed and well-directed.  Not a dull moment, and I can't
wait to get it on video and watch it in slow motion.
     Keanu Reeves tries to avoid losing his head over the secret cure,
which has been electronically downloaded into his brain for storage as
a courier and delivery to Dr. Rollins.  The eponymous hero delivers his
lines deadface but in a voice which struck me as remarkably similar to
that of Emilio Estavez in REPO MAN.   His female bodyguard is a role
model for all riot grrrls.   Henry's acting is nothing to make an
Academy nomination with, but the legions of punk anti-Rollins fans may
enjoy seeing him get killed by a deranged cyborg Christian (Dolph
Lundgren, who made the most of a small part).
PS--Tristar has a  Web site with info on this flick: http://www.sony.com

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     We're back in BLADE RUNNER territory with this one, conceptual
artist Robert Longo's vision of a William Gibson-inspired future
where information is the commodity to kill for.  Front and center
is Johnny (Keanu Reeves), a "cyber-courier" who smuggles data via
a "wet-wired" implant.  He's ready to quit the biz and get a portion of
his long-term memory restored, but, first, he has to finish one last,
dangerous job..
     The pressing problem in JOHNNY MNEMONIC is that Keanu Reeves seems
to have forgotten how to play an action hero since his stint on SPEED.
He's walking wood in a forest of stiffs that includes Henry Rollins,
Ice-T, and Dina Meyer.  (Dolph Lundgren's street preacher is in an
acting category all its own. :-)  Without a believable performance
between them, all we can do is sit back and watch the atmosphere, which
is pretty good in places.  The VR sequences are way cool, but the
physical FX--such as miniatures and mattes--leave a lot to be
desired.  Watch out for those bad blue-screens!
     We wouldn't mind a minute of JOHNNY MNEMONIC if the action played
better.  Too bad the debut director isn't very strong in this de-
partment.  His big finale is a sloppy, silly mess that runs twenty
minutes too long, which is way past the time that most of our "wet-
wired" processors have already shut down.
BOTTOM LINE:  YATF (Yet Another Tortured Future).  Skip it.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Silly and inane adaptation of Gibson's short story, which is
nowhere in sight. Gibson's script only adds insult to injury.
JOHNNY MNEMONIC is an awesomely bad movie. I say "awesomely" because it's
one thing to fail, but another thing entirely to fail so completely that
even the chances for camp value are sabotaged.
Keanur Reeves (who is terrible) stars as Johnny, an "information courier"
who can carry dozens of gigabytes of data in his head. He is given "one
last job" (whenever you are in a movie and you hear those words, RUN),
which involves him shoving so much data into his cranium that it could be
lethal. One of the neater touches that the movie brings in is that the only
way he could make such an arrangement work was by ditching all of his
childhood memories, but it's only followed up on in a token fashion.
For his trouble, Johnny gets chased by the Yakuza, who seem to be the new
bad guys in all the high-tech thrillers. What's funny is that if you watch
gangster movies made *in* Japan, there are whole gobs of details about
genuine Yakuza behavior and ethics, but of course there's no room in this
movie for any of that. The Yakuza are simply used to point guns, wave
swords, flaunt tattoos, and grimace menacingly. (I could go on about how
gangsters and criminals of many other ethnicities have gotten thoughtful
examinations in the movies -- BOUND BY HONOR, SUGAR HILL and AMERICAN ME
come to mind -- when Asians remain perpetually stereotyped. But that's
another essay.)
Anyway, Johnny runs and eventually winds up in Newark. Why Newark? Maybe
because it was cheaper to fake a future Newark than a future New York,
that's why. There, he meets an assortment of odd characters (Ice-T, Dolph
Lundgren and Henry Rollins play a whole gallery of weirdos). The script
deals with them with all the depth of pieces of furniture. It turns out
(what else?) that the data in Johnny's head could save a lot of people, but
of course Johnny only wants it out of his head so it doesn't kill him.
Handled right, this could have been absorbing, but the script manages to
mangle any chance of real sympathy for Johnny at every opportunity. 
The details about the look and feel of the future are all phoned in from
other, better movies -- BLADE RUNNER and BRAZIL come to mind. Everything
looks run-down and scummy, everyone dresses like they're punk rockers, and
videophones are commonplace. Snore. The only really interesting flourish is
an extended depiction of the way the Internet might work in the future
(complete with VR goggles and feedback gloves), but I kept thinking that it
was more like what some relatively un-technical fellow would *think* it
would look and behave like. A hacker of Johnny's caliber would be blasting
away with one command-line function after another, instead of wasting all
this time twiddling with holograms, but of course that's not cinematic.
Whatever.
What went wrong with this movie? Gibson wrote his own screenplay, which I
guess is part of the problem: what works as a short story doesn't work in a
movie. His ear for dialogue is terrible and the plot doesn't advance, it
convulses. From the script on out, it was probably all downhill. Renting
the movie to make fun of it is sort of pointless; there's no fun in kicking
a wounded dog, is there?

Author
Ben Hoffman
     No one I have known has actually ever accused Keanu Reeves of
being able to act.  This film will change no one's mind.  Johnny
(Reeves) keeps a straight face throughout the whole film.  If we are
looking to give him credit it must be that the plot is so ridiculous,
no one could have done any better.
     The film opens with a big splash across the screen:  INTERNET.
Innocent me, I thought maybe at last they have made a movie based on
real scientific electronic know-how.  Forget it.  That is the last of
any credible science fiction.
     In the 21st Century, the most important asset is information.  To
keep things secret and unavailable to competing corporations, "mnemonic
couriers" are employed.  Johnny is a professional courier who has a
chip implanted in his brain (did I say "brain?").  Into this chip
containing thousands of gigabytes of memory, Johnny is supposed to
store the information he has stolen.  As in everything, there is a
price and the price Johnny must pay for what he gets is that his own
childhood memory is removed to make room for the chip.  Little wonder
he looks befuddled.
     Others in this mess are Dona Meyer, Ice-T, Takeshi, Denis Akiyama,
Dolph Lundgren and a mysterious ghostly Barbara Sukowa, a strange ghost
in cyberspace.  Very weird film.

Author
Rob Furr
     I've paid my dues when it comes to cyberpunk in the visual media.
I've seen all the episodes of MAX HEADROOM, I've seen both versions of
BLADE RUNNER, I even still have an episode of WHIZ KIDS on videotape
somewhere.
     Of course, I could have skipped that last one and missed nothing.
Every scene in this movie (save one, and I'll get to that in a bit,)
gave me a galloping case of the "Been there, done that"s.  Which is
*incredibly* depressing, as the original short story was exactly that:
original.  "Johnny Mnemonic" and the other stories that were
collected in William Gibson's BURNING CHROME, were original,
well-constructed, painfully clear and brilliantly vivid short stories.
     Gibson's talent has been slowly fading since NEUROMANCER, it
seems.  COUNT ZERO was good, MONA LISA OVERDRIVE was all right, THE
DIFFERENCE ENGINE was tolerable, VIRTUAL LIGHT was boring, and now he's
got sole writing credit for this film, and it fits into that linear
descent just fine, thank you very much.  There are a few elements left
in JOHNNY MNEMONIC from the original short story, but they're hidden
behind an inordinately large load of, and I'm using this word
intentionally, crap, and the good bits are the ones that Gibson chose
to change.  Instead of the film noir-esque aura of the short story,
where there *are* no good guys, Gibson ladled gallon after gallon of
Hollywood Motivation into the plot--he's no longer just a courier with
information that matters nothing to him, he's now The Sole Hope Of The
World.  He's no longer just in danger of getting diced by a monofilament
thumb, he's now got a Tragic Flaw, by jiminy, and He'll Die Because Of
His Own Mistakes.
     This is not to say that I'm writing a rotten review because of how
different JOHNNY MNEMONIC is from "Johnny Mnemonic"; that's just why
I'm disappointed.  I'm giving JOHNNY MNEMONIC a rotten review because,
unfortunately, it's a rotten movie.
     It's stunningly unoriginal in production design; remember what I
said about having seen MAX HEADROOM?  Well, if you've seen any given
episode of MAX HEADROOM, you've seen what the designers of JOHNNY
MNEMONIC were trying to do, and you've seen it done twenty times better
than JOHNNY MNEMONIC did it, on an incredibly smaller budget.
     It features some stunningly bad acting: Keanu Reeves is rotten
... totally, unreservedly, completely rotten.  It's not his
fault--the script is the primary culprit--but, as bad as his portrayal
is, he gives the best performance of the cast.  Ice-T *could* have given
a decent performance--he's a better actor than Keanu is, in my humble
opinion - but he's got about six lines and about four seconds of screen
time, which makes it kind of hard to tell whether or not it was a
decent go at the role.
     It's got some hideously bad special effects.  Oh, *one* scene is
well done, but the rest was on a level with the effects done for STAR
TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER.
     It's got ... well, why go on? Bad acting, a bad script, unoriginal
and badly executed design ... this movie is a turkey.
     One scene--*one* single, solitary scene is impressive, and it's
almost enough for me to forgive most of the rest of the movie.
Fortunately, the people who assembled the trailer also saw a good scene
when they saw it, so most of it was included.  The "What are you
doing?" "Making a long-distance phone call." scene is probably the best
virtual reality scene ever done on film or on TV.  It's believable,
well-done--Keanu performs well--and if I had my way, I'd pull that one
single scene out of JOHNNY MNEMONIC and film an entirely different
movie around it.
     At any rate, I'm calling JOHNNY MNEMONIC a one-point-five star
two-star movie.  It didn't aim very high, and it missed what it was
aiming at, but it had a redeeming feature or two. (On the Furr Scale, I
rate movies by ambition and execution: rating EVIL DEAD II (a four-star
one star movie, i.e., it didn't aim very high, but, boy, did it
succeed) on the same scale as HEAVEN'S GATE (a one-star four star
movie, i.e., it aimed very, very high, and failed utterly) is
ludicrous.  So I don't do it.  A few examples; ROBOCOP is a three-star
three star movie (aimed relatively high, did what it wanted to do,) THE
RIGHT STUFF is a three-star four star movie (aimed very high, did
pretty much what it wanted to do) and THE LAWNMOWER MAN was a two-star
two star movie (didn't aim too high, and did what it was supposed to
do, but not very well.))

Author
Christopher Null
     In 2021, when the world is basically ruled by corporate Japan,
humans with microchip brain implants are used to transport the most
important of data files.  Computer networks are unsafe, because people
can "jack in" and neo-physically enter the complex world of cyberspace,
where a computer virus won't just knock out your computer, it'll kill
you outright.
     This is the world of writer William Gibson, and it seems like a
pretty interesting place to visit.  It's unfortunate that JOHNNY
MNEMONIC does very little in this setting and comes off as little more
than a remake of TRON, without the lightcycle sequence.
     The plot (if you can't guess) is like this:  Keanu Reeves is one
of these cyber-couriers, his brain so packed with information he
doesn't even know his last name.  The information?  The cure for "NAS,"
the plague of the next century.  Out to get him?  Both the corporation
he's working for and their rivals, preacher/mercenary Dolph Lundgren
(yes, it's true), plus the LoTeks, a gang of antiestablishment types
led by Ice-T.  On his side is a doctor (Henry Rollins, rounding out the
pop culture cast) and newcomer Dina Meyer, as his bodyguard.
     Lots of characters here--almost all of them plastic and lifeless,
especially Reeves in what could have been a great role.  In fact, the
whole movie is a "could have been," but it mostly sells out to the
young video game crowd the film is destined to attract and never makes
a point except for one brief scene with Rollins jumping around and
howling about how technology is bad.  Whatever.
     On the redeeming side are the ultra-cool cyberspace sequences,
which are required viewing on the big screen.  Also good, but
overpowered by the animation, is Meyer as Johnny's bodyguard and
eventual love interest.  Together, these two aspects of the movie make
it largely watchable.
     The main problem with JOHNNY MNEMONIC (as if I hadn't listed
enough already) is the plot:  the bad guys are trying to get Johnny's
*head* in order to extract the information.  What's the point of a
human courier if you can get the info out just by chopping his head
off?  Maybe a portable hard drive would be cheaper next time.
