Title
Review for This Is My Life (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     THIS IS MY LIFE is a film directed by Nora Ephron and written by
Nora Ephron and Delia Ephron.  The film stars Julie Kavner, Samantha
Mathis, Gaby Hoffman, Carrie Fisher, Dan Ackroyd.  Rated R, due to
safe-sex scene.
     THIS IS MY LIFE was a mostly disappointing experience, I regret to
say.  Julie Kavner has been one of my special favorites ever since she
first essayed Brenda Morgenstern on THE MARY TYLER MOORE SHOW and then
on the spin-off RHODA.  Since then, she's been in five Woody Allen films
and has played both Allen's mother (in RADIO DAYS) and his girlfriend
(in the Allen segment of NEW YORK STORIES), and she is in the forthcoming
Allen movie FOG AND SHADOWS.  Of course, she's also the voice of Marge
Simpson and was on THE TRACEY ULLMAN SHOW for three years before The
Simpsons took off.  She's a funny woman and I really looked forward to
her first role in which she carried a whole movie.
     Unfortunately, I failed to allow for the Ephron sisters, either
singly or in tandem, who first of all produced a completely unoriginal,
entirely predictable script that features the worse parts of PUNCHLINE
(the Tom Hanks & Sally Fields movie about stand-up comics) and MERMAIDS
(the Cher-Winona Ryder-Bob Hoskins confection of a couple of Christmases
ago--Samantha Mathis even looks like Winona Ryder).  We have definitely
seen this movie before.
     Nora Ephron's direction stretches out a half-hour sitcom into a
full-length snoozer, unfunny, dull, with hardly a joke in it.  Ephron
has provided not one but two competing voice-over narrators, one usually
being bad enough of an idea.  Each claims that this is her story.  Maybe
that's the problem, nobody ever figured out whose story it was, after
all.
     The script was adapted from a novel by Meg Wolitzer.  One can only
assume the novel was funnier, or at least more focused.  Dottie Engels
(Kavner) is never allowed to do a monologue; her voiceover upstages her
every time she gets on stage except when she has a couple of very
unfunny, very tired old jokes to tell about placenta creams and her dead
Aunt in Heaven; where's a voiceover when you need one?  Dan Aykroyd, who
is supposed to be some great shakes of an agent, seems mostly asleep --
he has one shtick and it ain't good enough.  Carrie Fisher comes closest
to being actually funny, but even she is at a loss of what do with her
underwritten part.  The greatest problem with the script is that Dottie
goes from demoing makeup to getting third billing in Vegas in the course
of a year, she suddenly gets the Agent to Die For for no perceptible
reason, and she makes $130,000 go further in Manhattan real estate than
anyone since Peter Stuyvesant.  In other words, the script is
unmotivated and unrealistic.  And shame on the Ephron sisters for this
mess!
     Bobbie Byrne's cinematography is dull and lifeless, even as he
steals a shot or two of Vegas signage from RAIN MAN.  Carly Simon's
songs add nothing excepts an unnecessary recapitulation of the "story so
far."  I hope she's not counting on a lot of MTV airtime with the
inevitable video outtake.
     Finally, you have got to wonder about the MPAA when they slap an R
on a movie for one scene in which a teenage boy fumbles with his first
condom, a scene with no nudity and no concupiscence.
     I cannot recommend THIS IS MY LIFE to anyone at any price unless
the person is a diehard fan of Julie Kavner and she or he has to see her
first starring role, regardless.
