Title
Review for Quick and the Dead, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
James Brundage
Starring Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman, Leonardo DiCaprio, Russell Crowe, and
Gary Sinse, Lance Henrickson
 All right, all right, I'm sorry I haven't been seeing the movies I should.
I haven't seen A Simple Plan yet, I admit it.  Everyone's been nagging me,
bothering me about it, telling me: "James, it's such a great film."  But I
haven't seen it.
 Anyway, that apology aside, I'm very glad I took time to watch Sam Ramni's
1995 film The Quick and the Dead.
 About three weeks ago, I was talking with a friend of mine after seeing the
excellent Miramax/Universal effort Shakespeare in Love.  Now I don't
remember how we got on the topic, it was something about very cliched films,
the formula that's done over and over.  Oh, yeah, it had to do with a new
version of Scrooge he had seen.  We agreed on one thing about cliched films:
There should be a law that, if you're going to make a terribly cliched film,
then you at least have to do something original in it.
 The Quick and the Dead exemplifies this.
 The Quick and the Dead is, quite naturally, the age-old Western formula
story about a gunfighter going into a lonesome town in the West, getting rid
of some evil villian, and appointing a new person to be the Sheriff.  Now,
here's the difference: the gunfighter in this film is Sharon Stone.
 Yes, you heard me right, feminism has reached a high in Hollywood to the
point that a woman has taken up the traditionally male role of a gunsligner
in the Old West.  And damn, did I love her doing it!
 Also, as far as new innovations go, Sam Ramni has perhaps the finest filmed
Western ever done on his hands.  In love with the zoom as ever, Ramni is up
to par with Shoemaker in the stylistic aspects of filmmaking, where Ramni
does what Shoemaker (sorry Joel, but it's true) always sucked at: the
substance aspects of it.
 Instead of characters as fake as the two story front to the one story town,
Ramni delivers us fully developed characters... with the exception of Gene
Hackman, who is, and always will be as far as this film is concerned, simply
THE BAD GUY.  We will never see him as human.
 Back to the stylistic aspects of the film, Ramni's repeated use of the zoom
and razor-sharp editing allows us to view each gunpoint with an infectious
tension.  Ramni will often intercut shots of each gunfighter, the worried
onlookers, the clock counting away the time, and Gene Hackman's face of pure
steely evil as we watch the fight.
 Also, once the shots are fired, we use either ultra-slow or ultra-fast pans
and zooms to view the progress of the shots through the air, and then the
effects are given to us with some of the finest fake blood outside of horror
films (should we be surprised that he is the aurtuer behind the Evil Dead
and Darkman series?).
 Also, Sharon Stone's character gives us some chance at morals with the
film, avenging a little girl's rape by doing a Bobbit with a gun, and
dealing with her own shocking inner deamons throughout the film.  And, if
that weren't enough, we have LA Confidential's Russell Crowe giving his
usual excellent as a preacher who is forced to return to gunslinging.
 Back to the matter of A Simple Plan, I will make a point to see it now that
I have tasted my first sample of the incredibly stylistic Ramni.  As far as
something new in a cliche genre: thank god.  If the Premium channels didn't
get real good during January and February, I would hate having to deal with
most of the films of the months, which are either Quick or Dead.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release on 2/10/95  
Running Length: 1:45 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, language, mature themes) 
Starring: Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman, Russell Crowe, Leonardo DiCaprio  
Director: Sam Raimi 
Producers: Joshua Donen, Allen Shapiro, and Patrick Markey 
Screenplay: Simon Moore 
Cinematography: Dante Spinotti 
Music: Alan Silvestri 
Released by TriStar Pictures 
     If movies were rated solely on the basis of style, THE QUICK AND THE 
DEAD would score highly indeed.  With its dazzling photography, inventive 
camera angles, and throbbing bass score, the film is an experience for 
the eyes and ears.  Director Sam Raimi (DARKMAN, ARMY OF DARKNESS) and 
cinematographer Dante Spinotti have woven a beautifully elaborate 
tapestry:  colorful and evocative--and depressingly two-dimensional. 
     The spaghetti Western is not a genre that lends itself to great 
leaps of originality.  Even the best of this genre tend to follow fairly 
familiar patterns.  THE QUICK AND THE DEAD is no exception--indeed, 
it's so predictable that there's almost no opportunity for tension.  
Raimi's choice to give the film a comic book-like aura of mingled camp 
and grit makes for some fitfully energetic and entertaining moments, but 
it's not enough to overcome THE QUICK AND THE DEAD's primary fault. 
     Surprise isn't always necessary, of course, as long as there's a 
decent dramatic underpinning to the story.  Such was the case in Clint 
Eastwood's UNFORGIVEN.  In THE QUICK AND THE DEAD, however, we have 
Sharon Stone in the lead role and, while she's good at looking peeved and 
delivering deadpan one-liners, her emotional range is limited.  During a 
scene where she's crying in a graveyard, it's difficult for those in the 
audience to avoid grimacing.  And where exactly did she get those 
designer sunglasses? 
     Stone plays Ellen, a female gunslinger who's out for blood.  At the 
outset, we don't know exactly why (although it's possible to make a 
pretty good guess or two), but she's after John Herod (Gene Hackman), 
possibly the fastest gun around.  Herod, along with fifteen others, has 
enrolled in the town of Redemption's quick-draw contest.  The prize to 
the winner is $123,000, but Ellen is concerned far less about the money 
than her revenge.  Now, all she has to do is bide her time and eliminate 
a few unsavory opponents along the way to a confrontation with Herod.  
Only one problem, though:  she's scared to kill anyone. 
     Gene Hackman is, as usual, a joy to watch, even though he is 
essentially resurrecting a somewhat over-the-top version of Little Bill 
from UNFORGIVEN.  Leonardo DiCaprio continues to show promise in a 
supporting role as Herod's unloved offspring, and Russell Crowe gives THE 
QUICK AND THE DEAD's best straight performance as a gunslinger-turned-
preacher-turned-gunslinger-again. 
     Depending on how you count them, there are eleven or twelve 
gunfights in THE QUICK AND THE DEAD.  While these street duels are 
necessary staples of the Western, this film has a few too many and, 
despite Raimi's use of different angles and techniques, they get tiring 
long before the predictable, climactic showdown.  All the nice "little" 
touches, such as the townspeople stripping corpses and a sight gag 
involving holes in bodies, don't make up for this repetition.  The script 
just doesn't offer enough variety. 
     There's a lot of movement in THE QUICK AND THE DEAD, but it's 
usually a case of going nowhere fast.  While the film is too slick and 
flashy to allow boredom, there's little in the way of substance.  Beneath 
the brightly-polished surface sheen, THE QUICK AND THE DEAD shows a 
distressingly hollow interior--and that's an unfortunate epitaph for 
any film's tombstone. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Andrew Hicks
        THE QUICK AND THE DEAD is a western starring Sharon 
Stone and Gene Hackman. Should've been called THE NUDE AND 
THE OLD. That last sentence, of course, is an example of the dangers 
of insensitive stereotyping, because we now know Stone actually 
can carry a film without taking her shirt off and Hackman, of course, 
has always been able to carry films fully-clothed (thankfully). This 
movie is a decent showcase for both of them as well as WHAT'S 
EATING GILBERT GRAPE star Leonardo DeCaprio.
        What the movie isn't a decent showcase for is good directing. 
Every "high noon" cliche in the book is brought out for THE QUICK 
AND THE DEAD, including rapid-fire closeups of all the characters 
and recurring shots of the town clock. (I'm also sure I saw a 
tumbleweed blow by on more than one occasion.) The writing 
also isn't the best, as when tough cowboy -- make that 
cowperson -- Sharon Stone arrives in town and is hit on by 
a tough guy:
        And we get to laugh at the ludicrous dialogue. Another 
area of fault is the plot. The nature of the premise dictates a thin, 
predictable plot. Even the "twist"of the ending you can see riding 
into town a mile away. The plot has a group of gunfighters entering 
a contest, where people square off in gunfighting competitions one 
by one, until only one is left alive to collect the $123,456 prize. We 
know from the get-go who the last two contestants will be, and 
even who the last four will be. Still, THE QUICK AND THE DEAD 
for the most part contains original entertainment from time-tested 
(and tit-tested) Hollywood performers.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Rob Furr
     I sail against the wind quite often, it seems, when it comes to
movies.  I actually liked SUPER MARIO BROTHERS, for instance, which
flopped, and I cannot stand the enormously successful EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS, a movie that I consider to be such an utter waste of
celluloid that I openly advocate using all existing copies to heat
homeless shelters in the New York area.
     I'm apparently sailing against a light breeze when it comes to Sam
Raimi's new movie, THE QUICK AND THE DEAD.  The overwhelming reaction
looks to be "Well, it's all right, if you like that sort of thing,"
said in a disparaging tone of voice, while I stand off in the corner
and say "It's all right, if you like that sort of thing" in an admiring
tone.
     From its opening frame, THE QUICK AND THE DEAD is clearly and
obviously a spaghetti western.  Like the movies that made Clint
Eastwood a star and Sergio Leone a legend, this film is set in a region
of the American west just south of Canaan and barely east of Hell.
Biblical overtones abound; the town where the action is set is named
Redemption, the primary antagonist is named Herod, and the only
righteous man in sight is not only a preacher, but is offered all the
kingdoms of the world during the course of the movie.  Like Leone's
movies, THE QUICK AND THE DEAD doles out its plot sparingly, and
instead presents us with memorable scum and finely calculated pacing,
and like Eastwood, the star of THE QUICK AND THE DEAD is left unnamed
for most of the film's running time.
     The plot of the film is as simply stated as that in THE GOOD, THE
BAD, AND THE UGLY.  There is an annual gunfighter's contest held in the
town of Redemption, it's sponsored by Herod, the gunfighter who rules
Redemption with an iron fist, and, along with the assorted scum,
Swedish fast-draw champions, and elegant fops with pearl-handled guns
who have been drawn by the promise of a prize of $123,000 to the
winner, a woman has come to compete, for an unknown reason.  Almost all
else follows from that basic concept; only one plot element is left
out: Herod has a pet project, an old associate of his who abandoned the
outlaw's life for that of a missionary.  Herod has a theory; once a
killer, always a killer, and the preacher is asked--forcibly--to
compete in the contest.
     That's it; a contest, a set of assorted killers, a reluctant
gunfighter, and a cipher, and once the pieces are in place, the movie
ticks along like the town clock that plays such an important role in
the film.  The key element of Leone's plots was always theme and
variations, and Raimi has taken that idea and distilled it down as far
as it will  go.  To my knowledge, no movies have ever included this
many classical face-off in the street gunfights, and none have ever
taken such pains to make sure each one is distinct and memorable.  The
pains are, in part, fruitless, because the middle of the movie does
drag a bit, somewhere around the seventh time the clock rings the hour
and someone gets shot, but the effort does show, and, for me at least,
is apprecated.
     The movie's weaknesses and strengths are the same: the actors.
Sharon Stone is wonderful for the first ten minutes and horrible for
five somewhere towards the end.  Gene Hackman is pretty good
throughout, but becomes wearing about halfway through, and only
recovers when he picks up his gun again.  Lance Hendricksen has several
fine scenes, but loses believability as he departs the movie.  The
acting is uneven, to put it mildly.  The cinematography and pacing
cover most of the real difficulties up, but the fact that they need
covering up detracts from the film.
     To return to my thesis; it is my belief that this movie "is all
right if you like this sort of thing."  If you like spaghetti westerns,
their simple plots and their spare characterization, their elegant
construction and their dusty world, you'll enjoy THE QUICK AND THE
DEAD, which is as typical of the form as any other movie ever lensed.
If you don't like the spaghetti western, you won't.
     Personally, I rate it as being a three-star three star movie (a
moderately ambitious movie that fulfills most of its ambitions
adequately.  The Furr Scale rates movies on ambition as well as
quality.  ROBOCOP is a four-star three star movie; a wonderful example
of non-epic moviemaking, while HEAVEN'S GATE is a one-star four star
movie; a film that tried to be majestic, sweeping, grand, and failed
utterly.  EVIL DEAD II is a four-star one star movie, and DAVE is a
two-star three star film.  I rate films this way because comparing the
rampant but hilarious idiocy of DUCK SOUP to the boring grandeur of THE
LAST EMPEROR.)

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Something happens when innovative, independent directors "go
Hollywood," and it's not usually a good something.  Some directors
are ready-made for the pressures and compromises involved in working
with big stars and big budgets; others are so clearly out of their
element that you can see them straining against the strictures of
studio projects.  Sam Raimi, director of the goofy and off-beat EVIL
DEAD films, was hand-picked by Sharon Stone to helm THE QUICK AND
THE DEAD, and it looks like he had some interesting ideas about how
to turn it inot a cock-eyed parody of spaghetti westerns.  Instead,
it's not played with enough of a wink, and it becomes an extremely
repetitive story muddled by tone shifts and unnecessary sub-plots.
     In THE QUICK AND THE DEAD, Sharon Stone rides into the tiny
Western town of Redemption as a Woman With No Name who later turns
out to be named Ellen.  The occasion is the annual quick-draw
contest organized by John Herod (Gene Hackman), a wealthy gunman who
rules the town with an iron fist.  Also among the entrants are the
cocky Kid (Leonardo DiCaprio), who has something to prove to Herod,
and Cort (Russell Crowe), a former riding partner of Herod's who
wants to make a new start but finds it denied to him.  As the
contest progresses and pretenders fall by the wayside, Ellen
prepares for a showdown with Herod which will end a twenty year
nightmare and bring redemption to Redemption.
     As THE QUICK AND THE DEAD opens, it appears that Raimi was
ready and able to turn it into a light-hearted and knowing homage.
Smoking a hand-rolled cigarette, wearing a wide-brimmed sombrero and
sporting a serape over her shoulder, Stone enters Redemption at high
noon looking like nothing so much as Clint Eastwood with a sex
change.  She runs into the obligatory collection of greasy
gunfighters with gold teeth, and dispatches them with a well-aimed
quip.  A few of the early gunfights are handled with typical Raimi
panache, including liberal use of the trackback/zoom in camera
movement utilized by Hitchcock and Spielberg most notably.
Everywhere there are glimpses of Raimi's twisted sense of humor,
nowhere more so than in a gunfight which ends with the loser staring
down at his shadow and noticing a hole in it.
     But that's all we get in THE QUICK AND THE DEAD -- glimpses.
Where Raimi wants self-awareness, screenwriter Simon Moore delivers
a fairly standard Western revenge saga.  The story has potential,
and particularly when a flashback reveals the source of Ellen's
grief there is evidence of some compelling psychological background.
There are also too many distracting side stories along the way, and
that is where Moore blunders and finds his story bogging way, way
down.  The simmering animosity between Ellen and Herod works, most
effectively in a tense confrontation at a dinner table; the rivalry
between the Kid and Herod doesn't.  The relationship between Cort
and Herod might have been exploited better, but for the most part
Cort is playing a part culled entirely from Eastwood's penitent
gunslingers in PALE RIDER and UNFORGIVEN.
     And this is the real knock on THE QUICK AND THE DEAD:  without
a real focus on Raimi's satirical sensibilities and acrobatic camera
tricks, it's just a less-than-mediocre knock-off of Eastwood's
oeuvre.  Gene Hackman is a marvelous villain, oozing despicable
charm, but his presence only magnifies the comparisons to
UNFORGIVEN, and when he exposes a boastful gunman (Lance Henriksen)
as a fraud, it sounds exactly like his debunking of English Bob's
self-aggrandizing tales in that earlier film.  Sharon Stone is
surprisingly effective as the haunted vengeance-seeker, but
ultimately she too is lost in a story that doesn't really seem to
have a sense of purpose.  THE QUICK AND THE DEAD boasts some fine
cinematography by Dante Spinotti and a wonderfully dilapidated
production design, and they could have been used in the service of a
nice piece of parody.  Unfortunately, Raimi couldn't or wouldn't let
the throttle out, and THE QUICK AND THE DEAD stalls when it's played
far too straight.

Author
Steven Krut
     This movie has been out for a while, but is still showing at
second run theaters.  See it on the big screen if you can, but if
that's not possible, this is a MUST RENT at the video store.  Here's
why:
        THE QUICK AND THE DEAD is quite simply the most viscerally 
exciting western ever produced.  This is due to the plot which is 
contrived (and I do mean contrived) to provide a full-throttled, 
HIGH NOON-style show down virtually every ten minutes of the film.  
The pretext for this action is a quick draw tournament organized by 
the town's oppressive boss, Herod (Gene Hackman).  It's sort of like 
Wimbledon for shootists.  There is, of course, no logical reason why 
so many people would be so willing to participate in such a deadly 
contest, but at least Herod has a solid rationale for holding the 
event.  As he explains midway through the film, the tournament allows 
him to confront his enemies face to face instead of having them sneak 
up from behind.  And he certainly has a lot of enemies. Every one of 
the Redemption's (the town) citizens would love to see him six feet 
under, and together they've secretly hired a professional gunman to 
take him out.  The newly arrived drifter, Ellen (Sharon Stone), also 
wants him dead.  Even Herod's illegitimate son, Kid, (Leonardo 
DiCaprio) wishes nothing more than to put a bullet through his 
father's brain (in order to gain his respect).  DiCaprio's 
performance, by the way, as a determined buckaroo ablaze with 
youthful arrogance is one of the films brightest spots.  As is Gene 
Hackman's performance.  Portraying the maniacally evil Herod, he 
generates a palpable menace.  His mere presence gives the film a 
solid grounding - just the right amount of realism to offset some of 
the movie's more whimsical qualities.
        The story, though, revolves around Sharon Stone's character, 
Ellen, who in the film's catalogue of stock Western stereotypes 
corresponds to the Clint Eastwood character - the cool, steel-eyed 
stranger who rides into town with a mysterious agenda.  The decision 
by Simon Moore, the script writer, to give the story a female hero is 
both the film's greatest strength and weakness.  It's a weakness really 
in a marketing sense since, judging from the film's poor box office 
performance, the predominantly male audience for Westerns isn't ready 
for a strong woman gun slinger.  This I know from personal 
experience, since I am (or was) one of these men.  I didn't see this 
movie when it first came out because I was turned off by the trailer 
showing a tough, squint-eyed Sharon Stone slinging bullets with the 
baddest dudes the West had to offer.  I just didn't buy it.  Women 
aren't tough, at least I don't want them to be.  Not tough like 
Clint, anyway.  And besides, it isn't historically accurate.  
Everyone knows there were no women gun slingers in the Wild West.  
Certainly none as stunningly beautiful as Sharon Stone.  I imagined 
the film to be a blatant feminist attempt to show that women can be 
just as ruthless and cold-hearted as men.
        When I finally saw the movie, however, I realized I'd jumped 
to a pig-headed conclusion.  First of all, because the movie doesn't 
pretend to be recreating a historically accurate vision of the Old 
West, it doesn't really matter whether there were women like Ellen 
back then or not.  Secondly, Stone does a good job of showing that 
Ellen's toughness is really a front, that underneath she's afraid 
and struggling for courage.  This makes her human and thus believable.  
The script helps Ms. Stone out by giving Ellen a strong motivation for 
becoming such an expert shootist.  The result is the first completely 
believable female gun-slinging hero.  It's a fairly noteworthy 
achievement, actually, and one which ultimately enhances the film by 
providing a fresh twist on what otherwise would have been just another 
cliched character.
        Speaking of cliches, THE QUICK AND THE DEAD is rife with 
them.  This is a deliberate artistic choice by Mr. Moore who gleefully 
piles every hackneyed Western convention in on top of the story, 
twisting and stretching each one into a cartoonish parody of itself. 
It's most evident in the gunplay which is some of wildest, most 
stylized gunplay ever seen.  I mentioned earlier that the film 
doesn't try to accurately recreate the Old West.  Instead, it builds 
its own hyperactive version.  This is a turbo-Western. The emphasis 
here is not on character development or plot intricacies, but on 
sheer heart-pounding adrenaline.  The story, such as it is, unfolds 
as a quasi-parable and in this respect is similar to HIGH PLAINS 
DRIFTER.  Unfortunately, also like HPD, it isn't clear what the 
parable is about.  Still, there are some intriguing moments involving 
Cort (Russell Crowe).  Cort is a former member of Herod's gang who 
has renounced violence.  He's become a priest and the scenes where 
Herod parades him, shackled and beaten, before a taunting crowd have 
a vague relevance to them. I got the impression a comparison was 
being attempted to present day America and/or the New Testament.  
But the theme isn't followed-up as the cruel tournament advances 
relentlessly, one bloody duel after another.
        Sam Raimi, the director, is perfectly suited to this kind 
of script.  You may be familiar with him from the "Evil Dead" movies 
and DARKMAN.  He has an eccentric visual style to put it mildly, but 
to his credit he's fairly restrained here.  The only time he really 
lets loose is during the actual showdowns and then his inventiveness 
serves to heighten the drama.  The camera zooms in on the 
antagonists' eyes, then on the clock about to strike noon, then 
follows the bullets as they whiz through the air.  Special effects 
and striking camera angles pump up the tension to a fantastic pitch. 
These are the most thrilling gun duels I've ever seen. Any single 
one of them could easy serve as the climax for a more modest film, 
but here they come fast and loose in a glorious string of Western 
carnage.  Great stuff.
        One flaw, though, is the film's ending which is formulaic.  
I suppose it's a reasonable enough wrap-up considering the nature of 
the story, but since the film was so witty all the way through, I 
was expecting something more original.  What happens is this:  Evil, 
which has kicked Good's butt all the way through the film, is 
closing in for the kill when, with a burst of inspiration, the 
heroes avoids tragedy by employing a clever though highly improbable 
gimmick.  The tables are turned, most of the set blows up real good, 
and the bad guys get what's coming to them.  I don't think I'm 
giving anything away by revealing this.  This is a Hollywood movie, 
after all.  How else did you think it was going to end?
        Minor complaints aside, however, I have to say that THE 
QUICK AND THE DEAD really has a lot going for it.  This is a movie which 
succeeds at everything it attempts.  It's funny, clever, compelling 
and even breaks new ground for female leads.  It's also full of 
great performances.  What more do you want from a movie?  

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Tri Star)
Directed by     Sam Raimi (DARKMAN, ARMY OF DARKNESS)
Written by      Simon Moore
Cast            Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman, Russell Crowe, Leonardo DiCaprio
Running Time    105 minutes
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for violence and language)
Reviewed at     General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh (11FEB95)
     In Sam Raimi's THE QUICK AND THE DEAD, Sharon Stone stars as a
squinty eyed gunslinger--a Woman of Few Words, if you will, who rides
into the town of Redemption (!) to compete in a quick-draw contest.
She's really there to kill the man who runs the town (Gene Hackman),
but don't tell him that.  He's busy trying to wreak revenge on his
former partner (Russell Crowe).  And don't mess with The Kid (Leonardo
DiCaprio), a cocky upstart who also wants a shot at playing Quickdraw
McGraw.
     THE QUICK AND THE DEAD forces the question of why we like to watch
westerns.  With so many cliches bumping heads--including Pat Hingle as
a bartender!--we know exactly how the story is going to be played out.
We know the speeches, and the stances, and the fact that the bad guys
are going to get it, and get it good.  That's why we're here, and
that's why this film is so disappointing--because it tries to change
what's tried and true.
     The story softens our hero by giving her feelings and that's a
mistake.  Instead of the standard "slow-burn," where Stone would brood
for a couple hours before killing her quarry, we have watch her wallow
in self-doubt and fear.  Her "human side" robs the story of strength.
No longer does the story have a solid center and, so, the film
immediately falls flat.  Give Ms. Stone credit, though, for *trying* to
be tough.  She's cute and, with less dialogue, may have been something
worth watching.
     Cult director Sam Raimi (DARKMAN, ARMY OF DARKNESS) tries to
compensate by digging deep into his bag of tricks.  He gives us cool
shots and wacky special effects, such as huge bullet holes that let
sunshine through.  He's clearly in his element, but the story structure
works against him.  Flashbacks are used to flesh out Stone's character
and they disrupt the momentum.  What was wrong with just showing what
happened at the beginning of the film?  Open with a flashback and you
*still* have suspense, Sam.
     The remaining technical credits are all aces.  THE QUICK AND THE
DEAD looks great.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     You probably will not believe it but besides BASIC INSTINCT which
brought her instant fame, Sharon Stone has appeared in twenty-one other
films.  That includes a quickie moment in Woody Allen's STARDUST
MEMORIES when he catches a glimpse of her on a passing train.  THE
QUICK AND THE DEAD was supposed to make us forget the films that went
nowhere but this one will not do it.
     From the opening scene of a cowboy on his horse approaching
us at top speed across the range, there was a noticeable giggle in the
audience.  Everyone, it seems, guessed it was our first glimpse of
Ellen (Sharon Stone) and for some reason it looked funny.  It just was
not the Sharon Stone we have come to know and love.
     The remainder of the film has nothing to add.  It is a typical
Western.  Instead of a dusty cowboy seeking revenge on some bad guy
(Gene Hackman, in this case), it is a woman who is out to get him for
his role in having her father, a Marshall, killed when Ellen was just
about ten years old.
     There are plenty of tough hombres in the town of Redemption which
Herod (Hackman) runs with the help of his cronies.  To reduce the
number, each year he stages a shooting contest, with the winner (he who
remains alive) getting a large cash prize.  As Herod is the fastest
draw in town, guess who always wins?  And guess who hates him for
that: his son, "Kid," (Leonardo DiCaprio) who gets no respect from his
old man.
     This year there is a slight change in the :hootout; a woman is
going to participate and, as the rules never said a woman could not be
in the contest, Ellen is allowed in.  Ah, revenge!
     As acting goes, there is not very much in the film to challenge
anyone.  Sharon never cracks a smile, Hackman never stops his sneering
smile, DiCaprio has little to do.  The story is not supposed to be
taken seriously (said Director Raimi) and you can bet that no one
will.
     Others in the cast include Russell Crowe who used to be in Herod's
gang but decided he would rather be on the side of God.  Then there are
gunfighters played by Lance Henriksen, Keith David, Tobin Bell and
Jonathan Gill.
