Title
Review for Fortress (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Justin Felix
Screenplay by Troy Neighbors, Steven Feinberg, David Venerable, and Tony
Curtis Fox.  
Story by Troy Neighbors and Steven Feinberg.  
Directed by Stuart Gordon.  
Starring Cristopher Lambert, Kurtwood Smith, Loryn Locklin.  
Rated R (contains violence, profanity, and nudity).  
Synopsis:  Sometime in America's future, a couple tries to have a second
child after their first dies, even though it is against the laws designed
to decrease the world population.  Caught and interred in the Fortress, a
prison run by a supercomputer named Zed, they discover a few of its
disturbing secrets before planning an escape.  
Comments:  FORTRESS offers a cliched, bleak, apocalyptic future and some
rather gory violence, but it still manages to be an entertaining sci-fi
thriller.  What probably saves this movie from being a turkey is its
storyline.  No spectacular, jawdropping special effects are required (which
is good considering some of the effects look very dated here despite the
fact that FORTRESS is only five years old).  It seems that the world is
having a population problem, and one of the measures instituted to correct
this problem is a strict law allowing couples only one child.  Violators of
this law are labeled "Breeders" and sent to prison if discovered.
Christopher Lambert and Loryn Locklin play such an unlucky couple who,
despite their best efforts, are discovered to be expecting a second child
(their first died very young) by the authorities.  Sentenced to several
decades of imprisonment, they are sent to the Fortress, an isolated prison
surrounded by desert.  It is here in the Fortress where things become
interesting.  A number of key surprises await the couple (and the viewers
of the movie, of course) regarding the nature of the prison's staff, the
creepy warden, and Zed, the computer which seems to have a mind of its own.  
Though Christopher Lambert and Loryn Locklin adequately play their roles as
the unlucky couple, the real star of this film is Kurtwood Smith, a veteran
actor who really does a good job portraying the prison warden.  His
character is the most interesting in the film and responsible for the
surprise plot twists.  
Despite its solid plot, script, and cast, FORTRESS is not without its
limitations.  As mentioned before, the special effects (and the setting
itself, for that matter) are a little on the campy side.  Also, I felt a
couple of the gory scenes, though by no means particularly excessive
compared to other films of the same genre, didn't seem justified in this
movie.  FORTRESS, I'll admit, however, has the distinct quality of being
the only film, to the best of my knowledge, where one may be
"intestinized."  Trust me, one does not want to be intestinized, as we
graphically find out in this film.  It is quite unpleasant.  For a movie of
this genre, I found FORTRESS, all in all, rather entertaining.  Science
fiction fans will definately find it worth watching.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I went with friends to see this one.  They had coupons.  It was a
dollar to get into the movie and twenty-five cents for popcorn.  My friend
Dale got the popcorn.  When the film was over I told Dale I hoped he had
gotten a dollar's worth of popcorn because he hadn't gotten twenty-five
cents' worth of film.
     Okay, that is a bit of an overstatement.  But certainly this was a film
that is better to have seen than it was to be seeing it.  There was a breed
of science fiction writing called "space opera" because it was really just a
bad Western or "horse opera" translated to a science fiction story just by
making substitutions.  FORTRESS is not really a science fiction film at all
but a bad prison film thinly disguised as science fiction because it takes
place in the future.  The plot is one long string of prison film cliches.
We have the good guy who is sentenced to prison unfairly for breaking an
unjust law.  He is threatened and abused by the sadistic prison warden while
the tough prisoners want make hamburger out of him.  The toughs try beating
up on him and can't.  Meanwhile he wins the hearts and minds of all the
prisoners but the toughest con and he proves he has guts by taking a
punishment intended for a weaker friend.  But he still has to prove he is
the top of the pecking order by fighting the biggest and meanest of the
prisoners.  By the skin of his teeth he beats up the tough and has him in
his power, but... surprise... he shows mercy.  And on and on ad nauseum.
This is a plot built of one cliche after another.  Except it doesn't take
place in some jerkwater prison in the present, it takes place in Tomorrow.
In this future the ZPG folks AND the pro-life folks have both gotten their
way.  The law in "one woman, one pregnancy."  Our hero tried to have a
second baby after their first baby died.  So into the clinker husband and
wife go.  The prison is privately owned by sadists who somehow can run this
ultra-modern electronic prison on the $26/day/inmate they get from the
state.  This prison may be uncomfortable, but it sure is fancy, and how they
run it on $26/day/inmate is beyond explaining.
     Christopher Lambert did a decent job as Tarzan in GREYSTOKE.  That is
mostly because there seems to be something strange about him that is hard to
put a finger on and there would be with Tarzan also.  But generally he just
is not a very good actor.  In this film his acting seems particularly wooden
as he plays John Brennick, the lone wolf standing up against a society gone
wrong.  Loryn Locklin plays Brennick's beautiful blond wife, loved by
Brennick and lusted after by the nasty warden.  She is bland but she can
speak her lines and does not bump into the furniture.  Kurtwood Smith who
seems to be making a career of playing stern villains (like the
unsympathetic father in DEAD POETS SOCIETY) here plays the prison warden.
As it turns out there is a little more to him than meets the eye at first,
but nothing that is very interesting.  Still admittedly he is a better actor
than either Lambert or Locklin.  Lincoln Kilpatrick--trying hard to be
Morgan Freeman and nearly succeeding--plays a wise old inmate.
     Stuart Gordon who is better known for horror directs, but the drab
prison motif robs this film of the black humor that his REANIMATOR films and
his PIT AND THE PENDULUM had.  About the only aspect of this film that is
above rather than beneath expectation is the art direction and set design.
The prison really has a decent look.  I just wish a better story was written
to take advantage of the look.  My rating for this is a high -1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Christopher Lambert, Loryn Locklin, Kurtwood Smith, 
           Lincoln Kilpatrick, Clifton Gonzalez Gonzalez
Director:  Stuart Gordan
Producers:  John Davis and John Flock
Screenplay:  Steve Feinberg, Troy Neighbors, and Terry Curtis Fox
Released by Dimension Films (a division of Miramax)
     It's the year 2018 and the population explosion in the United
States is out of control.  The government has instituted laws that
prohibit a woman from having more than one baby, but when the only son
of John Brennick (Christopher Lambert) and his wife Karen (Loryn
Locklin) dies as an infant, the couple tries for another child--and
gets caught.  Both of them are sent to the most feared prison in the
country:  The Fortress, a maximum security establishment from which
escape is impossible.  To ensure prisoner cooperativeness, each new
entry is fitted with a globe in the intestines that, upon disobedience,
can cause either pain or death, depending on the nature of the
infraction.  The Fortress is not a nice place, and its director
(Kurtwood Smith) is an emotionless servant of machines.
     Every time a movie about the near future presents such a bleak
picture of life on Earth, I always hope for a reasonable explanation
about how things got so bad.  Personally, I don't think that's too much
to ask.  However, for the most part, the film makers don't agree
(apologies to pictures such as the TERMINATOR series), since they could
care less about such details.  They have a specific situation that
needs to be set up to tell their story; everything else is irrelevant.
FORTRESS falls right into that category.  We can make a few guesses
based on clues presented in the film, but even the best picture will be
incomplete.
     The pattern of this film is unusual.  Most movies, no matter how
good or bad, have peaks and valleys during the course of their running
time.  FORTRESS, on the other hand, while starting at a pretty high
level, manages a consistent downward trend throughout.  It's somewhat
out-of-the-ordinary to be able to say that a movie gets uniformly
worse with every passing scene.  It's only the strength of the
beginning that keeps this film from collapsing into the nether regions
inhabited by such nightmares as SPLIT SECOND, another science fiction
gorefest that takes place in a dreary near-future Earth.
     The early minutes of FORTRESS are brimming with promise.  Scenes
bristle with the potential of interesting characters, strong
interaction, and intelligent plot twists.  Alas, little or nothing
comes of most of these instances; they become a method of cruel
teasing, tantalizing the viewer with what might have been.  The film
degenerates from intriguing to routine to dumb, all in the space of
ninety minutes.  By the end, it's all formula.  The action has become
commonplace and the characters flat.
     The cast does a reasonable job.  Christopher Lambert is probably a
better actor than the role deserves, and he occasionally manages to
make Jack Brennick believable.  Similar praise goes to Loryn Locklin,
an attractive blonde who infuses her character with strength of mind
and heart.  Lincoln Kilpatrick does as much as he can with a secondary
part, creating one of the few minor characters that the audiences comes
to care about.
     Ultimately, FORTRESS is nonsense, even if the slick futuristic
setting tries to put a new spin on the tried and true chase sequences.
Once the slant of the script changes from exploring the internal
mechanisms of the Fortress to following Brennick's escape plans, the
movie is sunk.  It's also at this point that significant plot
implausibilities start cropping up.
     One thing FORTRESS has going for is an impressive visual style--at
least for those who can stand a lot of gore.  There are exploding
stomachs, dismembered bodies, and a great deal of blood--all done
quite graphically, for the most part (would you expect anything
different from the director of RE-ANIMATOR?).  The set design is
excellent, and the action scenes are well-paced, if lacking in
legitimate surprises.
     FORTRESS isn't terrible science fiction, but it's far from the
top.  Hampered by a storyline that never reverses a downward trend, the
movie is unable to get on course.  Instead of entering the rarefied
atmosphere inhabited by such films as ALIENS and the original
TERMINATOR, it falls in line with the likes of FREEJACK and ALIEN 3.
Not the best company to be in, but it could be worse.  Watch SPLIT
SECOND and you'll understand how bad things can get in this genre.
After that experience, FORTRESS will look like high art.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the mid-1980s, following the splendid debut in Hugh
Hudson's GREYSTOKE and relative success of first HIGHLANDER
film, it looked like Christopher Lambert's acting career
might go somewhere. But, it wasn't meant to be, which became
obvious following HIGHLANDER II. In this decade Christopher
Lambert became associated with films with low budgets and
even lower quality. Very often such films were science
fiction, which meant that the fans of that genre learned the
hard way what to evade anything starring Christopher
Lambert. Whether it was because of real lack of talent,
terrible miscasting or simple bad luck isn't important - the
end result was almost always horrible. The same can be said
for FORTRESS, 1993 science fiction film directed by Stuart
Gordon, director who created cult following with his 1980s
horror gorefests like REANIMATOR and FROM BEYOND.
The movie is set in 2018. For some undisclosed reason, USA
introduced strict population control and couples are barred
from having more than one child. Jake (Christopher Lambert)
and Karen Brennick (Lori Laughlin) broke that law and are
caught by authorities on the border. Sentenced to 31 years
in prison, they are both thrown into Fortress, privately
owned correctional facility, equiped with state-of-the-art
futuristic technology and run by computer called Zed.
Although equiped with gismos that regulate every aspect of
inmates' lives and make any escape impossible, prison
authorities often use violence. Jake survives many ordeals
and earns respect of some inmates which would help him when
he begins planing the escape. Such escape should become
necessity, because the warden Poe (Kurtwood Smith) begins
showing unhealthy interest in Karen.
After rather intriguing beginning and some interesting
special effects that depict the futuristic settings of
prison, this film soon starts sinking into mediocrity. The
reason is in the screenplay that quickly degenerates into
whole series of prison movie clichés and situations that are
painfully predictable. By the time Brennick begins his
escape from Fortress, those situations not only begin to
look predictable, but utterly implausible too. Of course,
film never tried to explain why the country that lacks
resources to support its present population happens to spend
bucketloads of money on ultra-expensive supertechnology with
sole intention of keeping alive most useless and dangerous
members of the society. The initially interesting plot is
done even more wrong by stereotyped characters, played by
not too interested or talented actors. Lori Laughlin,
although physically attractive, shows the acting ability of
sequoia. Kurtwood Smith as prison warden is rather
uninspired, capable of solid, yet forgettable performance.
Lambert's performance is also good, but even the bigger
talent couldn't help this film, destined to end in oblivion.
