Title
Review for Fatal Attraction (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FATAL ATTRACTION (1987) Directed by Adrian Lyne. Screenplay by James
Dearden from his earlier original screenplay. Produced by Stanley R. Jaffe
and Sherry Lansing. Cinematography, Howard Atherton. Production design, Mel
Bourne. Editing, Michael Kahn and Peter E. Berger. Music, Maurice Jarre.
Cast: Michael Douglas, Glenn Close, Anne Archer, et al. A Paramount
picture. 121 minutes.  Rated R.
Some extramarital affairs are no bargains when the chickens come home to
roost. If the chickens are more like hawks with talons, the price rises
much higher.  As when, in "Fatal Attraction" Yuppie lawyer Michael Douglas
has a passionate weekend with career woman Glenn Close. She turns out to be
mentally unstable, thinks of herself as a victim,  and victimizes her
three-day lover.
"Attraction"'s unusual  credits  state: "screenplay  by James Dearden,
from his original screenplay. "  In fact,  Dearden expanded all of
"Diversion,"  a 45-minute British  film  that he had both written and
directed in 1979.  This  is  an excellent, tight work, where a commonplace
situation is packed with uncommon twists -- sharply observed, credible,
well-directed and acted.  It can be seen on television's A & E
"Shortstories" program.
In "Diversion,"  a  thirtyish London writer sees his wife and little girl
off on a weekend in his mother-in-law's  country house. Although he does
not look like a philanderer (he is rather colorless and solemn, ) the man
immediately calls a  young woman met some time ago at a party. She accepts
a date,  seems to be most realistic about  such escapades by married men,
treats the shy, embarrassed writer with irony, yet has an instant affair
with him.
Right away, she starts making demands on his time, resents his leaving her
apartment while she was still post-coitally asleep, wants to see him again,
cajoles him with her cooking. What was for the man a passing diversion with
a willing partner, becomes a problem as the  lady goes as far as
blackmail by slashing her wrists .She  hounds him by phone, even after the
return  of the wife and child. "Diversion" stops there, with an open
non-end, or lack of closure if you will.
James Dearden, a Britisher, is the son of  writer-director Basil Dearden (
"Dead Of Night,"" The Captive Heart,"" Sapphire,"" Khartoum," etc.) For
"Diversion" James Dearden  was awarded the Gold Plaque --  not by  the
American Dental Association, but by the 1980 Chicago Film Festival.
The compact  DIVERSION says all the better things that are found in
"Attraction,"  and does this more honestly, convincingly and believably.
At 121 minutes, "Fatal Attraction" is padded, polysaturated, flashy,
almost three times longer but not one-third as good.  It was directed by
another Englishman,  Adrian Lyne,  who came from   TV commercials and
applied their techniques to his two earlier features: "Flashdance," and
the  artsy , kinky-sex obsessed,  hard-breathing "9 1/2 Weeks."
The transformation of "Diversion"  into 'Attraction,"   the compromises
this entailed  (a different ending was shot originally), make it  obvious
that Dearden and Lyne took a  coherent,  sensitive product,  fiddled with
it , spiced it up with sensationalism  and   mass appeal gimmickry..
This is not to say that "Fatal Attraction"  is bad.  Though flawed,  its
first two-thirds are quite interesting. But when  the makers commit  the
public-pandering error of adding to the  basic "Diversion" theme the
dimension of a film noir  thriller,  "Attraction"  becomes ludicrous,
disintegrates   rapidly, accelerates its ripening   to the point of
gaminess.
Douglas and Close meet briefly at a party. A second time at a business
reunion. A third time in the street . They  have  an instant,  torrid
weekend affair. He wants to end it.  She does not , and makes his life
miserable , pursues him in every way, becomes increasingly demented, claims
that she is pregnant, and  does very nasty things to Douglas, his car and
his family.
>From sequence One , defects  creep in slowly, at first  perhaps visible
only to the habitual  moviegoer, but  later more and more noticeable.
Before Douglas and Close meet, the movie engages in too much cinematic
foreplay, with all the standard film and TV  homey preliminaries that set
up the happy family ambience chez  Douglas,  his  attractive wife Anne
Archer, and their child. The initial   Douglas-Close encounter is also too
cutied up  the second is natural, the third is full-time movie cliches :
Douglas  ,   struggling with a defective umbrella in a  Manhattan downpour
is rescued by  Close, who happens to be close by.  After a facile witticism
which Asian audiences will not appreciate (" the umbrella must have been
made in Taiwan")  the two fail to get a taxi, have a drink. You could guess
the rest from as far away as Hollywood and Vine,  as Close comes on very
strong to Douglas. The interplay is nicely scripted and played however.
But when we cut  to  love-making of scorching intensity,  the lust  is out
of character with  Douglas . As in his other roles, Douglas has a pallid
screen personality.  With  his  furious carnality, Director Lyne --all
surface and no depth --establishes  with drill-hammer subtlety the equation
of sex and violence.
The copulation  literally throws in the  kitchen sink , where it all begins
with the grace of mating wildebeest , Dolbyized panting and groaning, and
jutting, flowing faucets out of Film 269 :"Introduction to Sex Symbolism."
Physically joined, the couple repair  to the bed's horizontality.  Their
exertions, if copied nationally, would make all chiropractors into
millionaires.
The film's artsy explicitness  continues bulldozing its point through a
transitional close-up of a bubbling percolator. (This is doubly artificial
, since a   chic
woman like Close  would have an expresso machine, a Melitta filter, or a
Neapolitan macchinetta).  Unleashed  physicality later resumes in a freight
elevator,  shot with  suspense-story camera angles.
Yet even with its overkill, the movie  works nicely whenever it follows
closely "Diversion"  in plot, details, characterization and dialogue.  It
does a great deal of this--but at the same time it keeps getting uselessly
jazzed up . The modified plot requires  a confidant for Douglas . So be it,
but why make him into an awful, forced character (Stuart Pankin)?
"Attraction" adds more  leaden symbolism via "Madame Butterfly",  as a
nudge-nudge "cultural" reference for upscale audiences--Butterfly being
another desperate "other woman"   abandoned by her lover.
The feature even  resorts to the old  film noir  convention of the swinging
lamp that  produces now light, now shadow; or the trick of the mistress
visiting the  wife  under false pretenses.  Close's claiming a
Douglas-induced pregnancy is  hard to accept, as  the movie's unclear
time-frame  makes it unacceptably premature.  Since Close is  a fabulatrix
who will say anything to keep her man, a  better script would have kept us
wondering  about  the pregnancy.  Instead, it is not merely confirmed. The
plot works in   a rabbit -- a fertility symbol, not to mention the rabbit
pregnancy test .
That an ordinary,  staid  type like Douglas,  happily married to a
charming wife,  and  with  family  portraits on his desk, could have a
fling with a temptress , is credible. His  misadventure with Close is also
credible.  And in spite of its supercharged excesses, the  basic movie   is
still credible --until it  disintegrates by dragging in silly , gratuitous
shock-and-scare tactics  a la sub-Hitchcock (without the Master's finesse
and cool), a la Brian De Palma (Hitch's seldom  successful imitator)  and
other filmmakers.
Its  nadir may well be in the blatant references to "Psycho"'s  cutlery and
shower. But the movie is to Hitchcock what rabbit ears are to cable, and
all it can invent is to go from   the  shower shots  to a  xerox copy of
the bathtub scene of  the French classic "Les Diaboliques."
The  clutter of  sexually-oriented slashing and plumbing paraphernalia
--and a last, totally inadmissible twist involving the wife -- give  "Fatal
Attraction "a fatal blow.   "Attraction" does to "Diversion" what a
pretentious nouveau-riche might do to  a  classic dobosch torte by loading
it with all the whipped cream, fruit,  ice-cream and nuts stored in the
refrigerator
Like its source, " Attraction" is  a movie of two characters  but to fill
the available time,   the wife's role was  built up . Pretty Anne  Archer's
face is  set into one, unwavering  cheerful smile, which might in part
explain why  hubby strayed,  but it does not work that way,  as  nowhere is
Douglas shown as suffering from marital monotony.  Then, It's Thriller
Time!  and Archer wrings her hands,  has a generic fit  and does the dumb
things the director asks her to do.
There is no supporting cast.  All other actors are mere extras. Douglas's
performance is competent yet also  generic. But Close  is very, very good
in the gradations of her acting.   At  the start  she is an  attractive,
assertive single. She  rapidly becomes someone who is  interestingly
unorthodox yet also unsettling in an undefined way. Increasingly
disquieting, she evolves into a  menacing  maniac,  into  a personality
which is abnormal but  convincing, with each successive appearance having
its own demented logic.  Her physical changes are also cleverly  thought
through.  Close's luxuriant hair becomes gradually dishevelled . What was
originally a trendy, Gorgon look, becomes like the head of  the Medusa. And
Close's  steady, unflinchingly direct  eyes , change into  the stare of
Medusa who could petrify those she looked upon.   Glenn Close should be
remembered at Oscar time.
[Written 26 November 1987, during a period when no ratings with stars were
used by me]
