Title
Review for Gremlins (1984)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
Some films can function properly only at very specific
times, whether it is a particular hour, day, month or even
decade. This was usually the case with many 1980s
blockbusters - so called "event" movies that made great
success only to sink into oblivion as soon as the novelty
wore off. Today even those who feel certain amount of
nostalgia towards 1980s can have difficulty remembering
those films or remembering why did they like them in the
first place, mostly because those films seem utterly dated.
One of the films that didn't escape such fate was GREMLINS,
1984 juvenile horror comedy directed by Joe Dante, which is
hardly surprising because it had been out of its time during
its American release. With story and atmosphere best suited
for Christmas season, this film was originally planned for
release in December 1984, but the studio bosses, afraid of
competition during summer season, pushed for the earlier
release, making this film anachronistic almost in the moment
of its conception.
The plot begins in Chinatown, where eccentric and mostly
unsuccessful inventor Randy Peltzer (played by Hoyt Axton)
came in order to buy some special Christmas gift for his
family. He finds that gift in the form of "Mogwai", exotic
but loveable little creature that seems to be the perfect
family pet. His owner (played by Keye Luke), however,
doesn't want to sell it and Peltzer has to buy it from his
less scrupulous grandson who nevertheless issues warning to
the buyer - "Mogwai" mustn't be exposed to sunlight, water
or fed after midnight. When Peltzer returns to his home in
small town of Kingston Falls, his son Billy (played by Zach
Galligan) is enthusiastic about new pet called "Gizmo" and
try not to break the rules. However, the inevitable happens
when "Gizmo" gets presented to Billy's friend Pete (played
by Corey Feldman) - few drops of water are enough for
"Gizmo" to spawn few more "Mogwais". At first, Billy is
happy about five pets for the price of one, but those new
"Mogwais" soon show their true nature - first by physical
metamorphosis into ugly "Gremlins", then by engaging into
random acts of violence and destruction. Before Billy can do
anything to contain the plague, the leader of "Gremlins"
gets to the nearest pool and continues the procreation,
creating hundreds of new little monsters in the process.
Soon the whole town gets overwhelmed by miniature sociopaths
and Billy and his beautiful co-worker Kate (played by Phoebe
Cates) must fight the uphill battle in order to stop the
mayhem.
During the release of GREMLINS Joe Dante enjoyed reputation
of Steven Spielberg's disciple and this is probably the main
reason why many critics tend to dismiss this film as nothing
more than an example of Spielbergian 1980s formula. At first
glance those critics seem to be right, because GREMLINS has
all the proper ingredients - simplified, sentimental "feel
good" story that celebrates American way of life, plenty of
action and violence (yet toned down for the purposes of
family viewing) and, finally, the cute little toy-like
creatures designed to sell toys. What is even more
important, it is not technically the best example of
Spielbergian film - the opening is too long and too slow,
some characters (like the one played by Judge Rheinhold)
don't seem to serve any particular purpose (same as the
narration by Hoyt Axton) and the final showdown is not
particularly impressive or cathartic. But Joe Dante is
nevertheless very capable director who seemed the best
choice for this combination of action, humour and horror. He
knows how to create suspense, which is evident in the scenes
in which Gremlins begin their reign of terror. In this film
he also had various talents on his disposal, ranging from
seasoned and always capable soundtrack composer Jerry
Goldsmith to the creature creator Mark Walas. The special
effects were also very good, and new viewers who watch
GREMLINS today might learn a lot about Hollywood's
capabilities in pre-CGI era.
Screenplay by Chris Columbus might seem formulaic, but even
the casual observers might recognise the layers of satire
and social criticism in it. First of all, there are plenty
of dark overtones in the story that seem rather peculiar for
Christmas film (like Kate's re-telling of a traumatic
episode from her childhood). Furthermore, small town of
Kingston Falls is in many way burdened with problems that
pre-occupied many less fortunate Americans in Reagan's years
- while scruples yuppies (symbolised in underused Judge
Rheinhold's characters) are getting filthy rich, honest
hard-working blue-collar Americans are losing their jobs or
see their firms taken over by foreigners, which in turn
creates xenophobia, wonderfully portrayed by Dick Miller in
his role of Murray Futterman. Even the protagonist and his
family aren't spared of satirical or critical comments -
nice little suburban mom transforms into Rambo-like killing
machine when her kitchen gets invaded by few unfortunate
Gremlins while her son dreams of using Gizmo's instant
procreating ability in order to sell the prodigies and get
rich. However, this potentially subversive content is most
probably going to be missed by contemporary audience, most
probably because of the moralistic ending that brings
GREMLINS back to the realm of Spielbergian formula. Despite
being 1980s Hollywood blockbuster in its nature and, as
such, less interesting to today's viewers than to those
seventeen years ago, this film is still good piece of cinema
that could provide good deal of cinema craftsmanship and
entertainment.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Zach Galligan, Phoebe Cates, Hoyt Axton, Scott
Brady and Polly Holliday
This Steven Spielberg produced film became another hit for him,
even if he didn't direct it. The film opens with Ran Peltzer (Axton)
walking around in Chinatown. He walks into an odd shop, run by
a very old chinese man (Keye Luke) An odd creature called
Gizmo, who is a mowlgi. Ran buys the pet, three rules are told to
him (no water on Gizmo, no bright light, and don't feed him after
midnight, classic fairy tale stuff) and Ran gives Gizmo to his son,
Billy (Galligan) Of course, the rules are broken, and a group of evil
creatures start terrorising the quiet town of Kingston Falls (a very
Spielberg place), where Billy lives.
The problem with the film, though, is that Gremlins don't really get
into swing until one hour into the movie, when the Gremlins drive a
snow plough through a house. It's non stop action from there on.
But before that, the story has to be set up, and Chris Columbus
(Home Alone, Mrs Doubtfire) script has to keep the audiences
attention. Sadly, his script does start to lag, but thankfully, the
performances and direction don't. Galligan, Cates (who plays Billy
girlfriend), Judge Reinhold (Ruthless People, Beverly Hills Cop)
and Dick Miller (Twilight Zone The Movie) are all good,and push
the film along. Polly Holliday is reasonable funny in the role of Mrs
Beagle, even if her role is hopelessly underwritten. Joe Dante
directs well, making sure he can get the best out of the
performances.
But the best performances come from Gizmo, voiced by Howie
Mandel, and the Gremlins. Gizmo is sickingly cute, and has got
real character. The Gremlins, designed by Chris Walas (who did
makeup effects for The Fly) are sickingly sick, and are really
funny. Here, Joe Dante really shows what he's good at directing,
which is manic comedy/horor. There are some great deaths, some
silly scenes, and some groan worthy gags, but the film really gets
going when the Gremlins finally start to cause chaos. Here,
thankfully, any hope of a script disappears, and Columbus just gets
on with the mischief.
Stick with the film, then, and it's ultimately rewarding. With some
good music by Jerry Goldsmith (Total Recall, Star Trek: The
Motion Picture) an excellent supporting cast (Dick Miller is very
good) and some good (although nasty) laughs, the last 50 minutes
of Gremlins is some of the best black comedy you are ever going
to see. If only a stronger scriptwriter was hired, then maybe the
first hour would be excellent also. Gremlins 2 is better than this,
because it didn't have to explain much back story, and it was more
enjoyable generally. Gremlins, then, although flawed, is still
recommended.
