Title
Review for Krámpack (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Laura Clifford
Sixteen year old Dani's (Fernando Ramallo) riding high.  He lives in an
arresting modern home with a pool on a cliff overlooking the ocean.  It's
the onset of summer vacation, his trusting parents are leaving him to
take a trip to Egypt and his best friend is coming out from the city to 
join him in the Cannes 2000 Critics Week award winner, "Nico and Dani
(Krampack)."
Adapted from Jordi Sanchez's play by director Cesc Gay and Tomas Aragay,
the Spanish "Nico and Dani" is an honest, warm and funny coming of age
tale in which two best friends come to a crossroads together only to take
different paths.
Dark and scrawny Nico (Jordi Vilches) begins strutting his macho stuff,
from dreams of becoming a motorcycle racing mechanic to boasting about the
size of his Adam's apple.  Nico and Dani share nightly masturbation rituals
(the titular Krampack), where Nico teaches Dani that numbing one's hand first 
by sitting on it allows one to believe the hand belongs to another.  What
Dani shares with Nico is of a far more personal nature and Nico goes along
under cloud of sexual experimentation.
When the duo meet the brazen Elena (Marieta Orozco) and shy, virginal Berta 
(Esther Nubiola), Nico sets to pairing the foursome off and making dates
while Dani gets increasingly annoyed that the two don't spend more time 
alone together.  Dani has an unsatisfying encounter with a drunken Berta,
then begins to spend time with an older, homosexual writer who's a client of
his father's (in a neat parallel, Dani's treated much the same as he
treated Berta).  
"Nico and Dani" is refreshing after the lowbrow sniggering found in 
American teen sex comedies.  These kids act like real teenagers - young 
enough to still romp and play, old enough to want to appear sophisticated
and sexually desirable (amusingly enough, not too far afield from how the
film's adults are portrayed).
Blond, blue-eyed Fernando Ramallo plays Dani with an air of seriousness,
appropriate considering his character is facing a more difficult lifestyle
choice than his buddy.  Newcomer Jordi Vilches (a circus performer!) is
hilarious as the confidently goofy Nico.  He walks a line between
oblivousness and acceptance.  The film is given a bright, sunny look by
cinematographer Andreu Rebes and a lively, unusual score by Riqui Sabates.
"Nico and Dani" succeeds in portraying a difficult and confusing time in
human development with humor, compassion and truth.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Dani (Fernando Ramallo) invites his best friend, Nico (Jordi Vilches), to
spend the summer holiday at the family beach house in southern Spain. The
cool thing is that Dani's parents are off on a trip of their own to Egypt.
Late night dates and house parties are the order of the day as the two boys
enter the next stage of their sexual awakening, but each takes a very
different path in "Nico and Dani."
This little coming-of-age flick is one of the most honestly rendered tales
about growing up that I have seen in a long time. Sophomore Spanish helmer
Cesc Gay (who cowrote the screenplay with Tomas Aragay) takes a very
conventional tale about two friends on the verge of adulthood and infuses
it with a refreshing approach of no excuses, no explanations for growing
up.
The two boys playing the title characters are naturals. Fernando Ramallo is
the experienced actor and plays Dani as a young man who finds his sexual
desires draw him to boys and not girls. Nico, on the other hand, had no
problems with his same sex adolescent explorations with Dani, but now is
very much into girls. When Dani's friend Elena (Marieta Orozco) and her
friend Berta (Esther Nubiola) arrive on the scene, Nico is thrilled with
the chance to be with a woman. Dani is not so inclined and wants his
boyhood closeness to Nico to continue unabated.
Director Cesc Gay, with his talented young actors, takes this simply story
of growing up and gives it a fresh direction that we don't usually see in
the American equivalent. Here, in "Nico and Dani," there is no judgement
made over the boys' choices in life - Dani decides on a gay lifestyle,
while Nico shrugs off his friend's decisions and makes his own hetero
choice. The film leads the boys to the crossroads of life and they must
each choose their own path to follow.
"Nico and Dani" is a world class teen film that has meaning in many
different cultures and countries, not just Spain. This is the kind of
little, independent film that has so much to tell its teen target audience
that I hope it can succeed internationally. I wish there were more such
honestly rendered and thoughtfully told coming-of-age films. I give it a
B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The original Spanish title of Nico and Dani -  Krámpack -  sounds much more
exciting than the film actually is (Hint: It involves your hand, your mouth
and someone else).  It's received numerous awards from various film
festivals and a shocking number of positive reviews from various media
outlets, but I just don't get it.  Maybe it's because I cut my teeth on teen
sex romps like Porky's and Fast Times at Ridgemont High, as well as
my-parents-are-gone-so-come-over-and-let's-have-some-fun comedies like Risky
Business and Ferris Bueller's Day Off.
Dani is set over 10 days in and around a big beach house just outside
Barcelona.  When Dani's (Fernando Ramallo) parents leave their 17-year-old
son, he invites his buddy, Nico (former circus performer Jordi Vilches),
over for various teen hijinks.  Both boys are virgins and decide to do what
they can to remedy that situation, making Dani somewhat like a European
version of American Pie (do not fear - no pastry is violated).
Various adventures ensue, including trysts with two girls (Marieta Orozco
and Esther Nubiola), an older writer (Chisco Amado) and...well, each other.
That's right - the only remarkable thing about Dani is its gay content, and
I'd bet my next six paychecks that this film would have been completely
overlooked if it was about two "breeder" boys.  It's a simple coming-of-age
yawn...I mean yarn.  It's a yarn.  A coming-of-age yarn.
To make matters worse, Dani practically condones promiscuity and drug use,
and even features one of the boys raping an unconscious girl he has slipped
a mickey, but suffering absolutely no repercussion.  Is it realistic in its
portrayal of sexually charged young men?  Probably, but Big Brother is
realistic, too.  And nobody's raving about that.
1:30 - Not Rated but contains nudity, sexual content and language

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Nico and Dani (2001)
Fernando Ramallo, Jordi Vilches, Marieta Orozco, Esther Nubiola, Chisco
Amado, Ana Gracia, Myriam Mezieres. Screenplay by Cesc Gay and Tomas
Aragay, based on the play "Krampack" by Jordi Sanchez. Directed by Cesc
Gay. 90 minutes.
No MPAA rating, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"Nico and Dani" is a little film, focusing on a few days in the lives of
two young male friends. The story turns on the fact that one of the boys
is gay and in love with his straight friend and includes some modestly
staged sex scenes between underage characters (the actors playing them
are adults). But this is not an American movie, so the sexual exchanges
and related issues are presented as matter-of-fact instead of
scandalous. "Nico and Dani" works because it stays low-key. The
filmmakers understand that, regardless of whether one's orientation is
homo or hetero, once boys gets sex on their minds, they will do
virtually anything to make it happen.
Adapted from the play "Krampack," the subtitled tale is set in a
picturesque oceanside village near Barcelona, Spain. When Mom and Dad
leave for a trip to Egypt, Dani (Fernando Ramallo) invites Nico (Jordi
Vilches) to stay with him. The boys plan to hunt, fish and just hang out
together, but that changes when they bump into two young ladies, Berta
(Esther Nubiola) and Elena (Marieta Orozco).
Nico immediately clicks with Elena and Berta is attracted to Dani, but
he only has eyes for Nico. While the boys have often traded hand jobs,
Nico views the sessions as simply a means for sexual relief while on the
road to traditional sex with a woman. After just a few meetings, Elena
makes it clear to Nico that she is willing to help him realize his goal.
For Dani, the bedroom exchanges with Nico are the real thing and he
wants to carry the relationship further. As Nico and Elena become
closer, he grows increasingly frustrated. When his attempt to ruin the
relationship by telling Elena that Nico is gay proves unsuccessful, Dani
heads for the home of Julian (Chisco Amado), an adult writer and
associate of his father. Even though Julian has a girlfriend, Dani
senses an attraction and makes overtures to the man.
Back at the home front, Nico is experiencing his own confusion. While
Elena consents to sex, she only wants a one-night stand and Nico desires
more than that. To make matters worse, Dani is missing and he fears for
the safety of his friend.
Nothing earthshaking happens in "Nico and Dani." No matter how the
sexual politics work out, it is obvious that the boys will remain
friends. And both of them are likable despite the fact that they commit
some reprehensible acts, including serving narcotic-spiked drinks to the
girls. Anyone who looks back at their own youth will surely remember the
lousy things they said or did while trying to get laid. "Nico and Dani"
is merely a slice of life, but it's a well-observed, wonderfully-acted
slice of life that reminded me that, while adolescence is a nice place
to visit, I wouldn't want to live there.
