Title
Review for Matilda (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mara Wilson, Danny DeVito, Rhea Perlman, Embeth Davidtz,
      Pam Ferris, Paul Reubens, Tracey Walter
Director: Danny DeVito
Producers: Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey Sher, and Liccy Dahl
Screenplay: Nicholas Kazan and Robin Swicord based on the book by
      Roald Dahl
Cinematography: Stefan Czapsky
Music: David Newman
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     Arriving in the latter half of the summer, Danny DeVito's MATILDA
beats out such worthy contenders as THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME and
HARRIET THE SPY for best family fare of the season.  In fact, I haven't
enjoyed a so-called "children's film" this much since last year's BABE
or TOY STORY.  Although MATILDA, which is based on a story by Roald Dahl
(whose JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH reached screens earlier this year), is
primarily aimed at the under-10 crowd, DeVito has crammed this movie
with elements designed to appeal to adults.  The result is a highly-
satisfactory black comedy/fantasy that will find fans of all ages.
     MATILDA contains numerous elements of traditional fairy tales -- a
wicked step-aunt, a true friend with a pure heart, and more than a
little magic -- but "traditional" is about the last word that comes to
mind when describing this quirky film.  DeVito, whose previous efforts
include the viciously wacky WAR OF THE ROSES, is in fine form here,
exaggerating characters and situations to the point where they lose
their more terrifying edge without going so far that we no longer care
about any of the inhabitants of this world.  It's a fine line to walk,
but MATILDA rarely falters.
     The basic material may seem odd for a family film, dealing as it
does with issues of child neglect, abuse, and revenge.  By removing the
story from conventional reality, however, DeVito pulls it off.  This is
a world where adults (except two) are bad and children (except one) are
good.  It's a place where television is a force of mind-numbing evil and
where books represent escape and solace.  And, most importantly,
empowerment is genuine, not just a slogan.
     Matilda (Mara Wilson) is the youngest child, and only daughter, of
Harry and Zinia Wormwood (Danny DeVito and Rhea Perlman), who are
described as living "in a very nice neighborhood in a very nice house",
but not being very nice people.  Mr. Wormwood is a used car salesman
with the police tracking his every move, and Mrs. Wormwood is obsessed
with bingo parlors and television game shows.  Both parents are
extremely neglectful of their little six-and-one-half year old daughter,
even though she shows signs of amazing intelligence and various
remarkable powers (she and John Travolta's character in PHENOMENON could
have long, meaningful discussions).
     Eventually, Mr. Wormwood notices his daughter long enough to send
her off to Crunchem Hall, an elementary school lorded over by the ogre-
like Miss Trunchbull (Pam Ferris), whose motto is "Use the rod, beat the
child."  She practices what she preaches, taking delight in punishing
her charges and informing them mercilessly that her idea of a perfect
school is one where there are no children.  Fortunately for Matilda, her
first grade teacher, Miss Honey (Embeth Davidtz), is kind and good-
hearted, and immediately recognizes her new student's amazing gifts.
     Mara Wilson, who lit up the screen as Robin Williams' daughter in
MRS. DOUBTFIRE, and captured the Natalie Wood role in the remake of A
MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET, is enchanting without being either sickeningly
adorable or unbearably irritating.  She has a natural charisma, and
seems the perfect choice for the perky, indomitable Matilda.  Wilson
causes us care about the title character, and that identification is
necessary to MATILDA's success.  It's rare for an actor this young to
give such a polished performance.
     DeVito and his wife, Rhea Perlman, are effective in their
cartoonish roles.  Embeth Davidtz (FEAST OF JULY) radiates sweetness and
vulnerability.  And Pam Ferris takes on the Herculean role of Trunchbull
by sinking her teeth into it and going as far over-the-top as the
director lets her (which, in most cases, is pretty far).  She reminded
me forcefully of Ursula from Disney's animated THE LITTLE MERMAID.
Meanwhile, Paul Reubens (aka Pee-Wee Herman) has a cameo as one of the
cops shadowing Harry Wormwood.
     MATILDA is not politically correct -- it is, after all, a pint-
sized revenge fantasy -- but, in this case, that's a definite plus.
Besides, for those who want bland, "wholesome" family entertainment,
there's always Disney.  Children aren't likely understand much of the
black comedy and satire here, but they'll be so involved in the story
that they won't notice that a lot is going over their heads.  Hardly a
moment of MATILDA can be described as either juvenile or condescending,
and, compared with many of this summer's so-called "mature" features,
that makes for a delightfully refreshing change-of-pace.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The second Roald Dahl adaptation of the year is a James of a giant
disappointment, a strictly-for-kids revenge fantasy about an exceptional
little girl (Myra Wilson, from MRS. DOUBTFIRE) and how she gets back at
both her nincompoop parents (Danny DeVito and Rhea Perlman) and her
school's horrible headmaster (Pam Ferris).  Danny DeVito also produces,
directs, and even narrates, heaven help us.  (The effect of the latter
is actually quite jarring.  His voice is too recognizable and the
resulting contrast-- between the neutral narration and his non-neutral
character-- is so confusing that it nearly stops the film cold.) Behind
the camera, though, Danny the Director (WAR OF THE ROSES, HOFFA) is as
innovative as ever.  He has enough cinematic slight-of-hand up his
sleeve to rival Brian the DePalma.
    Unfortunately, DeVito doesn't know to quit when he's ahead.  The
director's fatal mistake is that he never pulls back from either the
cartoon cruelty or the overplayed buffoonery.  The result is a movie
that quickly grows tiresome and, like too many other summer entries,
ends up a one-dimensional ride.  Not that the intended audience will
mind.  Kids will laugh and scream and shout, while their parents pay
attention to other problems, such as the starkly lit exteriors, the
off-balance plotting, and one little girl with very little range.  (Myra
Wilson can express all of, what?, three emotions?  Or is four?) There
may be as much imagination at work, here, as in WILLY WONKA AND THE
CHOCOLATE FACTORY.  However, *this* Dahl needs to be handled with a
softer touch. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MATILDA ***   Directed and co-produced by Danny DeVito. Written by 
Nicholas Kazan and Robin Swicord from the book by Roald Dahl.  
Photography, Stefan Czapsky. Editing,Lynzee Klingman & Brent White. 
Production design ,Bill Brzeski. Music, David Newman. Cast: Danny DeVito 
( Harry Wormwood), Rhea Perlman (Zinnia Wormwood), Mara Wilson (Matilda 
Wormwood), Pam Ferris (Principal Trunchbull), Embeth Davidtz (Miss 
Honey), Paul Reubens (FBI agent), et al. A TriStar release. 95 minutes. 
Rated PG. 
Made both for children and grownups, plain funny or darkly funny in its 
depiction of downtrodden kids, "Matilda" will please all, disturb no 
one. It comes from a story by Roald Dahl whose fantasies were the source 
of  "Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory" and "The Witches." "Matilda" 
is fairy tale-ish enough to be unfrightening to youngsters and 
un-subverting to adults--unless the latter are as caricaturally stupid, 
uncultured, vulgar and insensitive as the crummy parents of charming 
Matilda.
Harry and Zinnia Wormwood dress horribly, talk dumbly, are concerned 
only with the most dubious blessings of suburbia and materialism. But 
they are very funny in a "yeech!" way. He is a used-car dealer of 
Himalayan dishonesty. He cheats the sellers, gives them a pittance, then 
scotch-tapes and camouflages the cars which he resells for 
thousands.There is nothing in him of the relative warmth of, say, 
car-dealer Ted Danson in the neglected "Made in America." As Harry also 
deals in stolen car parts, the FBI is stalking him. One of the two 
agents is Paul Reubens (Pee-Wee Herman) in a small role.
The most interesting thing about Harry may get lost in the shuffle as 
the story concentrates on the title character. Harry is not merely a 
felon and a mega-crook, but a creature who finds blissful, almost erotic 
thrills in his accomplishments, a man who waxes ecstatically 
self-congratulatory about his skills, the con-man as an artist.
The Wormwoods have two children, a boy sketchily used and undeveloped in 
the film, and their younger daughter. Matilda is like one of those 
characters in popular lore on whom a fairy godmother bestowed supreme 
intelligence. She is mentally so precocious that it makes her a junior 
version of John Travolta in "Phenomenon." Her self-absorbed, loutish 
parents are unaware of her genius as well as of everything else 
concerning the girl. 
In her bookless house Matilda teaches herself to read. Discovering the 
public library, this junior Wormwood becomes a Bookwormwood, goes 
through hundreds of volumes, mostly novels for grownups. A shot of her, 
sitting on the grass abd devouring a book while on the other side of a 
wire fence, children are playing, sums her up beautifully, even 
touchingly.
When Harry finally notices the books his reaction is:" What d'ya want a 
book for? There's nothing you can get from a book that you can't get 
from televison faster." Their living-room TV set, always on, is, by the 
way, stolen goods. While watching it that Matilda discovers that she 
also has the power of telekinesis and of making things explode.
Matilda would the embodiment of neglected (though not abused) children, 
were it not for comic exaggeratiions. At age six-and-a-half she tells 
her folks that she should have been in school, a notion that never 
crossed the Wormwoods' minds. Especially as they vaguely believe (when 
forced to think) that Matilda is still four! Additionally, as Harry says 
"If you go to school, who will sign for the packages?" The place is 
piled high with containers of illegal car parts.
Finally Matilda does go to a private establishment in a gloomy mansion 
whose principal, nicknamed Miss Trunchbull, is a sadistic monster. 
"Aaaah. Newcomers! Fresh Meat!" she says to herself. Miss T. was a 
shot-put, javelin and hammer throw champion at the 1972 Olympics. These 
were the games where Israeli athletes were assassinated in Munich. While 
Miss T., played by a British actress, has no national identity, she is 
built like a Walkyrie, wears a kind of paramilitary uniform and may well 
have been inspired by the infamous SS, Ilse Koch, The Bitch of 
Buchenwald, down to jackboots and riding crop.
I won't give away how she still practices her sports on the terrified 
pupils, how she affirms her authority, what is the special punishment 
room called "The Cruncher," what one of her dark secrets is, etc.etc. 
Enough to say that one of the signs in her school reads :"If You Are 
Having Fun Learning, You Are Not Learning."
Matilda, who is most appealing, lovable and (among other things) a 
mathematical genius with a computer mind, rapidly bonds with the much 
put-upon teacher Miss Honey (the name says it all). Miss Honey also has 
a deep dark secret.  She visits the Wormwoods and realizes what creeps 
they are. Miss Honey and Matilda become allies and defeat the Principal, 
with no small thanks to Matilda's increasing powers to move and levitate 
objects and people. Not in gory, vengeful fashion like Sissy Spacek in 
"Carrie," but 
nicely and constructively, for the common weal.
The special effects for all this can get a bit tiresome, but they are 
just a gnat in the ointment of this satirical, farcical, blackly 
humorous tale. The balance among characters is finely tuned. At one 
extreme are Matilda's family and the school principal. At the other, the 
mellifluous ("mel" means "honey" in Latin) Miss Honey. At the center, 
always perfectly normal in personality and character is Matilda, played 
with confidence, natural wisdom and mischievousness by the young actress 
of "Mrs. Doubtfire."
DeVito and Perlman, married to each other in real life, must have drawn 
inspiration from their experiences and observations. Though howlingly 
grotesque, they achieve, in a paradoxical tour-de-force, a basic level 
of believability that makes the children's triumph over nastiness even 
more satisfactory.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Mara Wilson, Danny DeVito, Rhea Perlman, Embeth Davidtz, Pam
Ferris, Paul Reubens, Tracey Walter Director: Danny DeVito Screenplay:
Nicholas Kazan and Robin Swicord based on the book by Roald Dahl
Cinematography: Stefan Czapsky Music: David Newman
'I'm smart and you're dumb. I'm big and you're small. I'm right and
you're wrong.'
I certainly hope that you don't speak to your children in such a
condescending manner.
Matilda has parents from hell. This bright, intelligent little girl
prefers to read than to watch T.V., has a passionate desire to learn,
and attend school. All of which is strongly discouraged by her parents
who believe a quick buck is better than an education. Her schooling is
also a place of nightmares where Miss Trunchbull, the head mistress,
tosses children around by their hair, locks them away in an iron
maiden, and believes 'a perfect school is where there are no children
at all'.
Sure this maybe an exaggeration of the 'evil adults' theme, but
children do not have a voice when they are mistreated and abused. In
this remarkable story, Roald Dahl gives the child the power and
ability to fight back, and Matilda does so with a vengeance that is
worth watching.
This is a movie for both young and old, where the magic of imagination
is the central theme. Sit back and enjoy, and for a moment you may
remember what it was like to be a child.
Great direction and acting from DeVito, with a strong supporting cast.
Roald Dahl at his imaginative best.

Author
Steve Rhodes
        Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
Date: Wed, 21 Aug 1996 09:03:08 -0700
Organization: Tandem Computers Inc., Cupertino, CA
Lines: 100
Message-Id: 
Nntp-Posting-Host: clr1-2.mis.tandem.com
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Mailer: Mozilla 3.0b5Gold (Macintosh; I; PPC)
     One of the great novelists of children's books is Roald Dahl.
This Spring we got to see an animated movie of his JAMES AND THE GIANT
PEACH and loved it.  We had a friend who leant us the book, and Jeffrey
(age 7) and I spent many a wonderful night this summer reading it.
With that in mind, we looked forward to a new movie, MATILDA, based on
another of Dahl's books.
     MATILDA is a live action film with Danny DeVito as the producer,
director, and one of the stars.  Between the two recent Dahl movies, it
would be hard to pick my favorite.  Finally, I should point out that
the best movie ever made from a Dahl book has to be 1971's WILLY WONKA
AND THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY.  I think I have seen that movie at least a
half dozen times.  I've got to write a review of it someday.
     In MATILDA, Matilda Wormwood (Mara Wilson) is born to the worst
parents imaginable.  On the way out of the hospital, father and
fraudulent used car salesman Harry (Danny DeVito) says of the hospital
bill, "five thousand dollars!  I'm not going to pay it.  What are they
going to do?  Repossess the child?"
     Since her father and her mother Zinnia (Rhea Perlman) leave her at
home all day from age four on, she becomes independent and an
exceptional reader.  Having only newspapers and magazines to read, she
dares one night to interrupt the family's nightly rendezvous with their
beloved television to ask a favor.  She asks her father for a book, and
astonished, he demands, "A book.  Why do you want a book?"  She meekly
answers, "to read," He sets her straight with, "there's nothing you can
get from a book that you can't get from a television faster."
     Although the book interchange is extremely funny, I reflected on
the fact that libraries are reducing their hours at the same time that
the average family spends something like three to four hours a day
watching television so people's actions are closer to Harry's than
Matilda's.
     Her father is the boss.  When he gives her orders, he ridicules
her with, "I'm smart; you're dumb.  I'm big; you're little.  And
there's nothing you can do about it."  Soon she strikes back.  She puts
super super glue on his hat so it will stick to his head and generally
makes his life miserable.  Dahl is not your sweetness and light author.
His characters have to learn to survive in a hostile world, and they do
it with style, imagination, and cunning.
     Matilda gets sent to a school run by principal Agatha Trunchbull
(Pam Ferris).  Trunchbull is a classic villain.  She looks, dresses,
and walks like a Nazi commandant.  The principal and the parents are
all done as near perfect parody.  The costumes by Jane Ruhm add
immensely to their tacky and overbearing images.  The wide-angle
camerawork by Cinematographer Stefan Czapsky is effective at
accentuating the evil in Matilda's young life.
     Too often kid's shows go awry by not casting effective villains.
Here Ferris is great as every kid's worst nightmare.  She gets some
tough lines like, "Use the rod and beat the child, that is my motto."
She tells the kids that, "My idea of a perfect school is one in which
there are no children."  Her school's motto is, "If you are having fun,
you are not learning."
     If Trunchbull gets angry at kids, she throws them out of the
window.  In typical Dahl fashion, children so discharged manage to pick
flowers for their wonderful and sensitive teacher, Miss Jennifer Honey
(Embeth Davidtz).
     The star of show is the charming and marvelous child actress Mara
Wilson.  You may have seen her strength and her screen presence before
in 1993's MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET or 1992's MRS. DOUBTFIRE.  I hope she
makes many more films.
     I liked all of the cast.  Beside the ones already mentioned, Paul
Reubens, a. k. a., Pee Wee Herman, plays an FBI agent trying to bust
Harry.  I do wish DeVito had not narrated the picture.  I found it too
jarring having Harry out of character when he was the narrator.
     I loved the show from beginning to end.  I found myself clapping
sometimes and then laughing out loud.  It has an infectiously happy
ending.
     MATILDA runs a fast 1:33.  It is rated PG.  There are a few
situations that might scare kids under 4 or 5, but the language is
pretty mild, and there is no sex, nudity, or violence unless you count
the cartoonish violence of kids being thrown out the window.  Jeffrey
loves the show and gives it three thumbs up.  I recommend the movie to
you and give it ***.  I almost gave it a little more.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
          In probably the funniest summer film this season, Mr
Wormwood and wife, (Danny DeVito and Rhea Perlman)  aided by  Matilda
(Mara Wilson) make a most hilariously enjoyable movie for both
children and adults alike.  By all means, this is not to be missed.
          Matilda is a very, very bright child whom the parents are
too stupid to notice.  At her very first birthday, with a nice
chocolate cake in front of her, she spells out her name on the
chocolate: M A T I L D A.   The idiot parents berate her for ruining
the cake, never noticing that the one-year-old is spelling.
          By the time she is 8-years-old she has devoured almost every
book in the library . . . and we do not mean those that have pictures.
Her father wants her to stop reading and watch TV.  "What can you
learn from a book that you can't learn better from TV?" he demands.
"And, by the way, what book are you reading now; she shows him it's
MOBY DICK."   In a frenzy he tears out the pages and berates her for
reading porno books.
               At school, she is sent to an institution that is more
like a jail, with the headmistress, Trunchbull, (Pam Ferris) , more of
a mean old witch than a school principal.   Fortunately, there is Miss
Honey, (Embeth Davidtz) Matilda's teacher, who helps and understands
the child's genius.

Author
David N. Butterworth
A film review by David N. Butterworth
Copyright 1996 David N. Butterworth/The Summer Pennsylvanian
Danny DeVito's MATILDA isn't about a boxing kangaroo.  It's an adaptation
of Roald Dahl's beloved tale of a little girl with amazing powers who's
"born into a family that doesn't always appreciate her."
As Matilda, Mara Wilson (one of the kids in MRS. DOUBTFIRE) is predictably
annoying.  Someone must have told her once that acting means blinking a lot
and I, for one, felt sorry that they didn't cast the marsupial instead.
Fortunately, there's enough to like outside of the title character to make
MATILDA worthwhile.
Neglected by her worthless parents Harry and Zinnia Wormwood (Danny DeVito
and Rhea Perlman), Matilda is forced to feed, clothe, and educate herself
from a very early age.  By the time she's four, she's read every magazine
in the house and starts walking ten blocks to the library each day in order
to enjoy such classics as Ivanhoe, Moby Dick, and The Pickwick Papers.  She
can also do complex calculations in her head.
Her parents are so caught up in their tiny little lives that they barely
notice Matilda's burgeoning genius.  When Harry finds her reading novels,
he chastises her with "there's nothing you can learn from a book that you
can't learn from TV more quickly."  His idea of quality family time is
snarfing cheese doodads while watching endless game shows.
DeVito and Perlman are clearly having fun in their roles.  Perlman is
colorfully over-the-top as the Brooklynesque, bingo-obsessed Zinnia and
DeVito is equally excessive--and very funny--as the shady car dealer Harry,
who fails to realize Matilda's true potential.
Harry's booming trade in stolen auto parts interferes with this daughter's
formal education.  "Who'll sign for the packages!?" he gasps, when his
six-and-a-half year old finally asks to be sent to school.
But sent to school she is, to the bleak and imposing Crunchem Hall, whose
principal Agatha Trunchbull is a tyrant of monstrous proportions.  An
ex-Olympian at shot-put, hammer-throw, and javelin, Trunchbull instills
fear in the students with the crack of a riding crop, throwing these
"squirming worms of vomit," "walking pustules" and other sleights out of
windows, or locking them in the "chokey."
"Use the rod, beat the child" is Trunchbull's personal adage, and it's in
keeping with the school's particularly downbeat motto: "If you are having
fun, you are not learning."
As Trunchbull, British actress Pam Ferris offers a tour-de-force
performance.  Ferris is rarely photographed more than two inches from the
camera lens, so we get to see her blemished skin and decaying dental work
in excruciating detail, adding to her gargantuan nastiness.  There's a
nicely bitter and twisted tone in her portrayal of the brutish
headmistress.  DeVito obviously delights in the macabre--witness the black
humor in THE WAR OF THE ROSES and RUTHLESS PEOPLE--and when he revels in
the darker side of Dahl's original story, MATILDA works best.
Being big fans of Mary Kate and Ashley, my daughters had no problem with
Mara Wilson's acting prowess.  They liked Matilda and her sweet yet
ineffectual teacher Miss Honey (Embeth Davidtz); they laughed at the funny
bits and cowered during the scary bits; and they cheered at the ending,
when Matilda uses her phantasmagorical powers to thwart the evil
Trunchbull.
The caricatures of evil in the film may be one-dimensional, but they're
infinitely more fun than Matilda's forced precociousness.  If you can look
past Wilson's cloying exhibition and appreciate the supporting
performances, MATILDA is everything it should be--an enjoyable children's
fantasy.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Mara Wilson, Danny DeVito, Rhea Perlman, Embeth Davidtz, Pam
Ferris.
Screenplay:  Nicholas Kazan, Robin Swicord.
Director:  Danny DeVito.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Every once in a while, when an exceptional family film comes along, I
will attempt to champion it by challenging parents to put their money 
where their mouths have been; with all the hubbub over the lack of films
suitable for children, it is remarkable how many non-Disney films
disappear in a couple of weeks.  Now I see that in so doing, I have
unfairly ghettoized these films.  So I am issuing my challenge not just to
parents, but to anyone who wants to support smart, funny, energetic
film-making:  see MATILDA.  See it in a theater, rather than shrugging and
waiting for it on video.  See the best film I have seen in 1996.  Not the
best children's film...the best film.  Period.
     Based on a story by Roald Dahl, it tells of young Matilda Wormwood
(Mara Wilson), an extraordinarily bright girl whose great misfortune it is
to have a pair of deeply stupid parents:  Harry (Danny DeVito), a crooked
used car salesman; and Zinnia (Rhea Perlman), a simple-minded bingo
addict.  The Wormwoods barely notice Matilda exists, and when they do, it
is only to scold her for spending too much time reading books.  When they
finally do send her to school, it is to Crunchem Hall, a bleak place run
by cruel, child-hating Miss Agatha Trunchbull (Pam Ferris).  But things
begin to look up for Matilda when she discovers a sympathetic teacher,
Miss Honey (Embeth Davidtz), who nurtures her natural inquisitiveness.
Matilda also discovers another special talent -- the ability to move
things with her mind -- which allows her to help herself and Miss Honey to
overcome Miss Trunchbull's cruelty.
     It was this spring's JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH which inspired me to
note that the best and most lasting tales for children tended to have more
than a hint of darkness to them, and you can bet that the Roald Dahl
responsible for the gleeful ghoulishness of JAMES and WILLY WONKA AND THE
CHOCOLATE FACTORY has more of the same in store with MATILDA.  And just as
JAMES benefited from the dark sensibilities of Henry Selick and Tim
Burton, MATILDA soars on the cock-eyed direction of Danny DeVito.  DeVito
made black humor a key element in THROW MOMMA FROM THE TRAIN and THE WAR
OF THE ROSES, and he contributes some memorable images.  In one scene, an
unfortunate girl is made an example of by Miss Trunchbull when she is
picked up by her pig-tails and flung through the air like a throwing
hammer; later, an overweight boy is forced to eat an entire massive cake
after he is caught stealing a dessert.  MATILDA is just twisted enough to
be a perfect fairy tale.
     It is also characteristic of the best children's tales that they
manage to teach lessons in such a way that children almost don't realize
that they are learning them.  There is a hilarious moment when Matilda's
television-addicted father snatches away the book she is reading (in a
wicked joke, he thinks _Moby Dick_ is pornographic) and forces her to
watch an inane game show (hosted by Jon Lovitz) in which contestants are
smeared with adhesive and placed in a booth filled with cash blowing
around.  MATILDA is a story which promotes the value of intellectual
curiosity over passive entertainment, and it does so while poking holes in
that most frustrating of notions for a child -- that because "I'm big and
you're little, I'm right and you're wrong."  More specifically, it has as
its heroine an intelligent, self-confident girl who struggles successfully
against other people's notions of how she should behave.  It is no
coincidence that MATILDA was co-written by Robin Swicord, who contributed
the superb recent adaptation of LITTLE WOMEN.
     Finally, MATILDA has that quality I find rarest and most treasured in
family entertainment:  it is family entertainment in the truest sense of
the word.  DeVito knows enough to make MATILDA fast-paced and appealing to
children, taking a deliciously nasty performance by Pam Ferris as Miss
Trunchbull and making it the focal point of some priceless physical
comedy, including a great chase through her dark house.  The child actors
are winning but never obnoxiously adorable, with Mara Wilson making
Matilda a clever and extremely likeable character.  But there are also
many, many delights for adults, including my favorite scene in which
Matilda uses her powers to frighten Miss Trunchbull by having chalk write
on a chalkboard by itself while Matilda's classmates recite in sing-song
fashion; there is also a deadpan cameo by Paul Reubens as an FBI agent
staking out Matilda's father.  I can't imagine anyone of any age leaving
Matilda feeling as though his or her intelligence had been insulted.
     MATILDA is a film which left me glowing with good feeling.  I will
see it again, and years from now I will watch it with my children.  And
now I will stop, because somewhere near you MATILDA is about to begin, and
there is a seat in that theater you should be in, if you have a child or
ever were a child.
