Title
Review for Gentleman's Agreement (1947)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Gentleman's Agreement" is a drama that explores prejudice
against Jews.  Not the kind of prejudice that is demonstrated
in a fiery, defamatory speech, but the quiet kind, done to
exclude Jews from a job, a home, or a social occasion.
The film also infers that it is not enough merely to not
discriminate personally, but that discrimination when found
must be confronted, or it will continue.
"Gentleman's Agreement" accomplishes these ambitious goals
while being compelling rather than pedantic.  Gregory Peck
is the lead, a widower writer with a young son who has
just arrived in New York.  He has a new job at a magazine
but has a difficult assignment: he must write an article
about anti-semitism from an emotional viewpoint.
Peck's character, who is a Christian, decides to tell his
co-workers and acquantainces that he is a Jew for the
duration of the story.  He soon encounters prejudice,
and always confronts it directly, even when it comes from
his fiancee (Dorothy McGuire).  People are quick to tell
him that they are not prejudiced, but their phrases
and actions say otherwise.
Peck is perfectly cast for the role.  His character
radiates integrity and deserved self-righteousness,
giving him the moral authority to identify (and tell off)
others when they show prejudice.  The script is also
kind enough to always give him the last word.  Peck
would later have a similar (and even more famous) role
in "To Kill a Mockingbird".
I don't like McGuire's character.  She is delicate and affected,
and can't handle stress or confrontation.  Peck must choose
between her and brassy Celeste Holm.  I won't reveal his decision,
but you can guess whose side I am on.  I am not criticizing
McGuire's performance though, as she plays the character well.
Time has made some of the film's references obscure.  Bilbo
and Gerald L. K. Smith were apparently nationally-known
at the time as hate-mongers against Jews.
While the romance in "Gentlemen's Agreement" is unconvincing,
Peck's battle against prejudice remains compelling and makes
for good drama.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
David Nusair
In "Gentlemen's Agreement", Gregory Peck stars as a reporter who 
assumes a Jewish identity in order to expose the biases of 1940's
society.  Watching the movie from a 90's perspective, it was a 
little difficult for me to associate with what Peck's character
was trying to do.  I think it's safe to say that, in 1999, overt
and obvious anti-semeticism has been virtually eliminated.  Yes,
there remains a number of individuals who still feel that one
particular race is superior over another, but that kind of racism
is no longer as polite as it was back in the 1940's.  Nowadays,
people hurl bricks through "offensive" stores and burn crosses;
back then, according to "Gentlemen's Agreement", people were
refused employment and stared at in public places.
The movie does have a lot of important things to say, it's just
that most of it is moot in this day and age.  It seems to be 
saying that back in the 40's, it was okay to be racist, as long
as you were subtle and somewhat polite about it.
Peck gives an excellent performance as the writer who starts
to alienate his friends as he falls deeper and deeper into his
story.  His obsession with finding out the truth ends up doing
more harm to his life than good.  When he discovers that a woman
he has been seeing is an anti-semite (a good-natured anti-semite,
but an anti-semite nonetheless), he quickly drops her.  
An entertaining film throughout, "Gentleman's Agreement" is 
nevertheless about half an hour too long.  This is pretty much
a one-note film, and after a while, the subject matter begins
to take over and drag down the pace.  Despite this, Peck and the
other actors managed to hold my interest just because they are 
such fine actors.
The director, Elia Kazan, was likely taking a huge leap of faith
with this picture, but watching it today, it comes off rather 
tame.  It's well made, don't get me wrong, the subject matter
just seems like such a non-issue in this day and age.
