Title
Review for Time to Kill, A (1996)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A TIME TO KILL is John Grisham's first novel, but the fourth one
to be adapted for the screen.  There have been two successful movies
from Grisham books, THE FIRM (1993) and THE CLIENT (1994), and one
turkey, THE PELICAN BRIEF (1993).  In production now is THE CHAMBER.
     A TIME TO KILL is my second favorite Grisham novel, the first
being THE FIRM, but A TIME TO KILL is definitely the most effective of
all the adaptations.  When I originally read the book, I thought this
would make for an excellent move, and director Joel Schumacher
(COUSINS, THE CLIENT, and BATMAN FOREVER) did exactly that.
     A TIME TO KILL has it all.  The plot includes, but is not limited
to, racial tensions, the Ku Klux Klan, courtroom drama, corrupt
officials, corrupt preachers, rednecks, ACLU, NAACP, lawyers, police,
disbarred lawyers, psychiatrists, alcoholics, church goers,
southerners, Yankees, judges, ambitious DAs, romances, bombings, money
problems, etc.  There is a little bit for everyone, but the best part
is the casting.  Even the third and fourth string actors are excellent.
Take for example, all of the actors playing rednecks.  Before they even
speak, you know you are looking at the genuine articles.  More on the
actors later.
     A TIME TO KILL is about young and broke Mississippi lawyer Jake
Brigance (Matthew McConaughey who has a brief part in LONE STAR).  One
day two rednecks rape Carl Lee Hailey's (Samuel L. Jackson from PULP
FICTION) daughter so he goes to where they are being arraigned and
kills them.  He hires Jake to get him acquitted by reason of temporary
insanity.  Doing this in the small southern town of Canton will be a
miracle since he is going against up and coming District Attorney Rufus
Buckley (Kevin Spacey from SEVEN).  Rufus figures this case to be his
ticket to the governor's mansion.  Judge Omar Noose (Patrick McGoohan)
is a good friend of Rufus to further complicate matters.  Would you
want to try a capital case against a judge with that name?
     Along the way Jake gets help from an alcoholic and disbarred
lawyer, Lucien Wilbanks (Donald Sutherland), an alcoholic divorce
lawyer, Harry Rex Vonner (Oliver Platt), an alcoholic psychiatrist (M.
Emmet Walsh), a scared secretary (Brenda Fricker), a frighten wife,
Carla (Ashley Judd), and a card carrying ACLU legal assistant, Ellen
Roark (Sandra Bullock from SPEED).  Beside the DA, the judge, and the
disbelieving jury, Jake has a new local chapter of the KKK led by
Freddie Cobb (Kiefer Sutherland) with which to contend.  He actually
gets a lot of help from the Canton police, especially Sheriff Ozzie
Walls (Charles Dutton from CRY THE BELOVED COUNTRY) and Deputy Looney
(Chris Cooper - the star of the great movie LONE STAR).
     There is some much right with this movie, and yet I like Grisham's
books much better.  Most of the movies are like the books, but if you
have already read them, it takes out a lot of the suspense.  One of my
favorite genres is courtroom dramas, and A TIME TO KILL has a good one.
In fact two of the best scenes in the movie are Carl's coaching of Jake
for the summation and Jake's summation in court.
     The best part of this movie are the actors.  Spacey is great as a
slimy prosecutor.  McGoohan is effect as a judge more interested in his
own image than justice.  Dutton and Cooper are quite believable as a
couple of honest peace officers.  Vonner is a good "Pillsbury Doughboy"
lawyer who doesn't really want to bother with the law, he'd rather
chase women and make money.  Bullock is tough, cute, and smart all at
the same time.  Jackson is wise, humble, and strong.
     I know I am alone on this judgment, but with the exception of his
summation, I think McConaughey's performance is weak.  He shows little
emotion and in a role that should be compelling, I did not care about
him at all.  I did like the way the script by Akiva Goldsman handled
the romantic tension between Jake and Roark.  The script has a good
ending and epilogue.  If I could have made a single change to the
script, I would have lighten it up a bit with a little more natural
humor.
     The movie does strain credibility.  A few examples.  Would lawyers
about to make opening or closing arguments in tough cases, really go
out and get drunk the night before?  If Jake is so broke, how can he
afford a brand new $30,000+ SAAB convertible?  The answer to both
questions, of course, is who cares.  It never amazes me how often the
Klan shows up in movies set in the South.  I'll give writers a hint.
The Klan is very rare these days and has been for a long time.  Also,
they do have air-conditioning down there so no need to show all of
those sweating scenes.
     A TIME TO KILL runs a little long at 2:29.  I wish editor William
Steinkamp had been more liberal with the cutting knife.  The film is
rated R for subject matter, violence, and some bad language.  It is all
done tastefully.  The show would be fine for any teenager.  I recommend
the movie to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Peter Dizozza
I saw Dr. Moreau (director John Frankenheimer) and A Time to Kill 
(director Joel Schumacher).
Moreau has the great H.G. Wells story, the second of the summer (war of 
the worlds being independence day).  The stars get their individual death 
scenes which disjoints the film, and then the lead actor tells us and the 
cat girl what we could have learned visually with him as he searched the 
lab records, but there are surprising Brando scenes.  He's so like a 
relative up there.  I feel such affection for the man.  He was really 
sweet in this film.  I think he was actually trying to do something on 
screen.  Rex Reed referred to his refinement as his Eleanor Roosevelt 
immitation.  Val Kilmer was Jim Morrison, and in this film he acts like 
one of his disciples.  Say, his last movie was a Schumacher film, Batman 
Returns, the Scorpio Rising homage to Kenneth Anger.  
Schumacher makes good films.  The affection in this legal one goes to 
Donald Sutherland.  I'm referring to a film whose more complete title 
should be: IT'S ALWAYS TIME FOR A FATHER TO KILL A MOCKING CHILD RAPIST.
Donald Sutherland is from Nova Scotia and I've been there so again, I 
feel like I'm related to the man.  Did you see Kelly's Heroes?  I 
particularly like his MASH role.  Then he became disturbing starting with 
Bertollucci's 1900 and Eye of the Needle.  
Grisham's story carries a lot of plots.  The most interesting conflict is 
the interpretation of the lawyer's non-action in the face of the immenent 
revenge murder.  First we get his reason, then finally his wife gets it, 
and the near affair ends.  Ms. Bullock, the other woman, gets short 
shrifted if you ask me.  She's almost left hanging in the field until the 
mickey mouse saviour comes along.  Was I wrong about feeling I was left 
hanging about some of the plot elements.  The appearance of the Klan 
seemed to spill over from the Moreau film.
The best thing about Moreau is the hour and a half length.  Remember the 
Laughton film of the thirties, Island of Lost Souls.  That one handled 
the animal misegenation issues well.
A Time to Kill and the Island of Lost Souls, two films dealing with the 
issue of misegination.  The refinement of animal instinct is unique to 
Moreau.  
I also saw Ms. Tyler in Bertolucci's Stealing Beauty, a funny story in 
that she's not only the last virgin in Northern Italy, but a virgin 
looking for the identity of her father, when it's perfectly obvious she's 
the Arrowsmith singer's daughter, but apparently she didn't know that in 
real life until her mother left her a cryptic letter, like the one in the 
film.  A RIDDLE solvable by a glance in the mirror while watching MTV.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Matthew McConaughey, Sandra Bullock, Samuel L. Jackson, Kevin
Spacey, Brenda Fricker, Oliver Platt, Charles S. Dutton, Ashley Judd.
Screenplay:  Akiva Goldsman.
Director:  Joel Schumacher.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
Opens Wednesday, July 24 in wide release.
     This just in:  Matthew McConaughey has already won the 1997 Best
Actor Oscar, will be on the cover of every magazine published in the
English language, and has been named Time's Man of the Year.  Those
suggestions should be absurd, but the way Warner Bros. is pushing John
Grisham's anointed one, they're merely the next logical step.  It's one
thing to be the Flavor of the Month, but McConaughey has become the Flavor
of Next Month, a star without a previous starring role.  That's a rather
unfair burden to place on an actor, but now that A TIME TO KILL is finally
here, it looks like the talent is up to the hype.  Leading an exceptional
cast, Matthew McConaughey helps create some riveting moments in an
occasionally melodramatic story.
     McConaughey plays Jake Brigance, a young lawyer in Canton,
Mississippi struggling to keep his practice afloat.  With bills to pay and
a family to support, Jake needs a big case, and he is about to find one.
Following the rape of a 10-year-old black girl by two white men, the
girl's father, Carl Lee Hailey (Samuel L. Jackson) guns the two men down
before their arraignment, and now faces first-degree murder charges.  And
if it isn't bad enough that Hailey is a black man accused of murdering two
white men, he faces an ambitious district attorney (Kevin Spacey) who is
cozy with the trial judge (Patrick McGoohan).  Jake takes the case,
assisted only by law student Ellen Roark (Sandra Bullock), but a lack of
resources may be the least of his problems when the brother of one of the
murdered men (Kiefer Sutherland) sets out to teach Jake -- and anyone
close to him -- a lesson.
     There is a fundamental problem which prevents A TIME TO KILL from
being a truly exceptional film, and it comes down to three letters:  KKK.
White supremacists are the Nazis of the 90s; film makers love them because
they know we love to hate them, and because they don't have to worry about
anyone protesting if they are portrayed as hissable cartoons.  But somehow
it detracts from the racial tensions at the heart of A TIME TO KILL to
have cross-burning, linen-wearing good ol' boys at the center of them.
There are plenty of complex issues involved in the story of A TIME TO
KILL, foremost among them the criminal justice system's entrenched racial
inequities, but director Joel Schumacher and his frequent screenwriting
collaborator Akiva Goldsman can't resist the impulse to be crowd-pleasers,
providing plenty of moments for audience members to applaud Klansmen being
beaten, spit upon, arrested or otherwise mocked, all underscored by Elliot
Goldenthal's strident strings.
     It is too bad that A TIME TO KILL needed the sneering evil and
repetitive cruelty of overt racists like Sutherland's character, and even
the poorly developed sub-plot involving the involvement of the NAACP,
because it is so much better at exploring its more three-dimensional
characters.  Samuel L. Jackson is superb as Carl Lee, a shaken man trying
to get some small piece of his life back.  Goldsman gives him a great
speech late in the film in which he forces Jake to confront his own racist
feelings, and what makes Jackson's delivery so potent is that there is so
little anger in it; he has come to an understanding of the gulf race
places between them.  Sandra Bullock, given an extremely misleading first
billing, turns in what may be her best work yet as the cocky legal prodigy
who smells a ticket to notoriety in the much-publicized case, and there
are memorable supporting turns by Oliver Platt (as a lovably unscrupulous
friend and colleague of Jake's) and Chris Cooper (as a sheriff's deputy
caught in Carl Lee's line of fire) among a handful of others.  A TIME TO
KILL is exceedingly well cast, and the performances sparkle.
     Then there is Matthew McConaughey.  He is being compared to everyone
from Paul Newman to Marlon Brando to Kevin Costner, but none of those
comparisons really does justice to his unique appeal.  There is an
absolute ease to his acting which you almost never see in actors his age
(McConaughey is a ripe old 26), along with a screen presence you rarely
see in actors of any age.  His Jake is a bit of an idealist and a bit of a
scoundrel; it's hard to get inside his head, but it's easy to like him.
And in a film which features a few too many loud and obvious scenes,
McConaughey is absolutely electrifying in a scene which is emotionally
crippling in its quiet power:  Jake describing the rape of Carl Lee's
daughter to the jury in graphic detail.  It is almost possible to accept
that Spacey's savvy prosecutor doesn't object to the obviously
inflammatory remarks.  Perhaps he, like us, was simply transfixed by
witnessing the birth of a star.

Author
Christopher Null
     Remember the hoopla over the novel "A Time To Kill"?  It was
celebrated author John Grisham's second book -- actually his *first* book
-- the book he published after "The Firm" became a hit.  The book that no
one wanted before he was famous.  The book, apparently, that, if it hadn't
had his name on it, would never have been published.
     Now it's the fourth Grisham movie to be made, continuing in grand
fashion that franchise of increasingly average film versions of his
increasingly average writing.
     In fact, A TIME TO KILL is the *most* average of all of these films,
and it hinges on two vital elements:  if you take a book written by John
Grisham and throw in Sandra Bullock in a see-thru tank top, you've got
yourself a hit!  And the producers are probably right.
     The story is so simple it barely merits retelling here:  A young girl
is raped.  Her father, Carl Lee Hailey (Samuel L. Jackson), faster than you
can yell "Oswald!", murders the two rednecks responsible.  Young upstart
lawyer Jake Brigance (Matthew McConaughey, playing the most-pumped-up
lawyer of all time) defends him, with a little pro bono help (if you catch
my drift) from Ellen Roark (the tank-topped Bullock).  Bad guy Rufus
Buckley (Kevin Spacey) prosecutes.  And good ol' boy Judge Noose (get it?)
(Patrick McGoohan) presides.
     Never has a 145 minute film been less thrilling and more predictable.
>From a continuity standpoint, it makes absolute perfect sense why each
scene follows another.  From an audience standpoint, this is *terribly*
boring.  Sure, A TIME TO KILL has some frightening imagery (particularly of
the KKK uprising) and some great speeches (Brigance's closing argument
brings everyone on the screen to tears, and probably some of the audience,
too), but you can't overcome a limp plot with that stuff.
     I suppose that's where Bullock's clothing comes in.  And another thing
-- why is everyone so *sweaty* in every scene?  I know this is the deep
South, but they do have air-conditioning in Mississippi, don't they?  And
why doesn't Brigance ever light his cigar?  Little questions... but
annoying ones.
     Who knows the answers?  Who cares?  Fine performances all around,
typical Joel Schumacher direction, and a nice analysis of Southern race
relations make for a movie that is simply indescribable as anything other
than...
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Edwin Jahiel
A TIME TO KILL ** 1/2 Directed by Joel Schumacher.Written by Akiva
Goldsman from the novel by John Grisham.Produced by Arnold Milchan,
Michael Nathanson, Hunt Lowry & John Grisham. Photography, Peter
Menzies, Jr.Production design, Larry Fulton. Editing, William
Steinkamp,Jr.Music, Elliot Goldenthal.Cast: Matthew McConaughey (Jake
Brigance),Sandra Bullock(Ellen Roark),Samuel L. Jackson(Carl Lee
Hailey),Kevin Spacey(Rufus Buckley),Oliver Platt(Harry Rex
Vonner),Charles S. Dutton (Sheriff Ozzie Walls),Brenda Fricker(Ethel
Twitty),  Donald Sutherland(Lucien Wilbanks),Kiefer Sutherland(Freddie
Cobb),Ashley Judd (Carla Brigance),Patrick McGoohan(Judge Omar Noose). A
Warners release. 145 mins.Rated R(violence,language)
Sometimes,in the heat of battle,a soldier gets hit by a bullet but does
not know it right away.In "A Time to Kill" many viewers, who, unlike
professional critics, don't watch it with eagle yes, may realize only
later that the film is full of eyebrow-raising items, manipulations,
weaknesses, inconsistencies and cliches.This is because it is such a
go-go-go, kinetic and suspenseful movie with a weighty theme. But do not
misunderstand me. It is a genuine movie-movie that, warts and all,is
interesting to watch, even thrilling at times.
The first reaction I heard after the film was by a bright, movie-savvy,
liberal (that's a compliment) Mississippian."They got the bad things
that happen much better than the good things."Right.
The bare bones of the story: In Canton, Mississippi,the 10-year old
daughter of construction worker Carl Lee Hailey (Samuel L. Jackson) is
raped and almost killed by two sickening white-trash louts. Her father
later shoots them dead while,unfortunately,wounding most seriously a
deputy.
Newish lawyer Jake Brigance(Matthew McConaughey),clientless and in
arrears with all his bills,is a conservative liberal and all around
great fellow. He defends his friend Jackson,even though neither have any
money. The opposition includes venal Judge Noose(Patrick McGoohan)and
D.A. Rufus Buckley(Kevin Spacey),snooty, cold and ambitious for the
governorship.
The town gets polarized between blacks and many of the whites. A dormant
Ku Klux Klan resurfaces in plain sight,goes after our hero-lawyer."Does
he have a family?" asks a Klansman. "Yes? That's good." You can see what
violence is coming,the kind that calls for the National Guard.
There's something so old-fashioned about the movie's style and content
that many filmgoers will think of "Intruder in the Dust" (1949) and "To
Kill a Mockingbird" (1962), both  great, near-flawless movies about
black people accused of crimes in White Power settings. But "A Time to
Kill" is not in their league.
Its time-frame is so nebulous that it is, at first, the new cars that
clue you in that all this is happening in our period--an awkward notion:
the new South may not be a paradise of racial brotherhood (or the rest
of the USA for that matter) but in the film it is seen as a throwback to
the bad old days.
This is mostly because much of the plot revolves around the question:
"Can a black person get justice from a white, local jury?" The answer is
arbitrarily assumed to be "No." When Jake asks for a change of venue, it
is repeatedly rejected by sneaky,tricky,dishonest and whisky-loving
Judge Noose.
Desperate Jake and Carl Lee do find modest funds for the sustenance of
the jailed man's family and for the trial. How this is done--plausibly
or not--is the neatest trick of the week,thought up by an unexpected
person. Many other aspects are clearly manipulative. Take the early
scenes with Jake's wife Carla. She is pretty,she is bra-less under her
tank top,she glistens with perspiration (ladies perspire, men sweat).
All this spells photogenic sex-appeal. 
Take the many scenes with Sandra Bullock. She too radiates sex-appeal.
She is a most talented actress who,unlike most other by-the-numbers
stars, has her own personality.It is a universal truth that Ms.B.is the
most likable and appealing new face of the 1990s.Now,except for Jake and
Carl Lee,all other characters have second-banana roles-which is
good.It's nice to see the British model applied to US movies,for
name-performers (like Bullock) to take on lesser roles instead of having
the film build up their parts for reasons of prestige or vanity.
The problem however is that Ms.B.'s part is phony. She plays Ellen, a
wealthy, patrician  Bostonian, a law student at "Old Miss" (The
University of Mississippi),the daughter of a legal eagle,the sexy owner
of a sexy Porsche convertible,the possessor of vast experience in
jurisprudence,of the ability to find legal precedents in a wink,of a
genius mind and many other fantastic (I used the word on purpose)
attributes. She keeps bugging Jake,offering her assistance for free. He
keeps refusing until,predictably,he takes her on. She keeps delivering
the legal goods,even if it means doing an improbable Nancy Drew turn by
impersonating a reporter,then sneaking into an office where she finds
with impossible rapidity files helpful to the Cause. It's suspenseful
but overdone.
Also predictable is the tentative (but mercifully aborted) start of a
romance between Ellen and Jake.This develops after the perspiring
Mrs.Jake gets ticked off at her husband's endangering his family, then,
for safety, goes with her daughter to stay with her parents.I am not
breaking a state secret by revealing that she will return,all love and
contrition. 
If all this is not undiluted Hollywood hokum,what is? Yet I do admit
that Ms. B. is a charmer,that by Tinseltown standards her lines are cute
and perfectly in character. 
Jake forms a too picturesque volunteer team with Ellen, Harry and
Oliver. Pal Harry (an excellent Oliver Platt) is an Oscar Levant type
(remember him?),a  self-deprecating,boozing youngish lawyer who
painlessly sacrificed his social ideals to the practice of divorce law
that has made him wealthy. Lucien Wilbanks (Donald Sutherland) is an
older man,a colorful alcoholic,a brilliant but
no-longer-allowed-to-practice lawyer. He supplies,it seems to me,more
ethical than legal support.Sutherland plays him with gusto,probably also
relishing the fact that his son Kiefer Sutherland is in the movie as ...
ignominious villain Freddie Cobb.
On the periphery is Jake's middle-aged secretary. She fills a small
function as a kind of Chorus to Jake. Her "I'm a respectable Southern
lady" is played convincingly by,of all people,Brenda Fricker who is
Irish and was Oscared for "My Left Foot."
Samples of additional improbabilities, cliches and in-jokes: 1) Max the
dog survives a fire, which  makes Jake and animal lovers happy; 2) The
overdone discrediting of the prosecution's medical expert followed by
the discrediting of the medical expert for the defense; 3) Sheriff
Walls, who is black and liked by all,enters a redneck bar. The camera
pans his body from bottom to top,as for enforcers in Wild West pictures;
4) Jake's dramatic summation gives us hitherto unmentioned facts
concerning the rape; 5) Judge Noose's name is like a take-off on Wild
West hanging judges,such as Roy Bean; 6) The nasty DA's name is
Buckley,like you-know-who; 7) Carl Lee Hailey's last name is like that
of the writer of "Roots"; 8) Carl Lee's shooting of the rapists is
photographed in cliche slow motion; 9) How did Carl Lee get so quickly
an assault weapon?; 10) Too many habitual or occasional drunks. 
Making up somewhat for excesses,movieish pulchritude or ugliness and the
abundance of local color,are some original points: The NAACP's
involvement, more for its glory than to help Carl Lee. The preacher of
Carl Lee's church who is not above an indirect bribe by the NAACP.The
penury of both defendant and his lawyer,something very real yet almost
never treated in films. Non-dragging courtroom scenes.
Production values are tops.The performers are all very good, including
newcomer-in-a-lead role Matthew McConaughey,the object of huge
publicity.  Whether his looks deserve the hype they're getting is not
for me to decide. Samuel L. Jackson is fine too,but he will surely be
outlasted by the memorable,magnificent Juano Hernandez,the proud Lucas
Beauchamp in "Intruder in the Dust."
The city of Canton is in Madison County. The moral brunt of this
overwrought but well-intentioned film is to throw bridges between races,
the bridges of Madison County.

Author
Rebecca Wan
Directed by: Joel Schumacher
Cast: Sandra Bullock (Ellen Roark), Samuel L. Jackson (Carl Lee Hailey), 
Matthew McConaughey (Jake Brigance), Brenda Fricker (Ethel Twitty), 
Kevin Spacey (Rufus Buckley), Charles Dutton (Sheriff Ozzie Walls), 
Patrick McGoohan (Judge Omar Noose), Donald Sutherland (Lucien 
Wilbanks), Oliver Platt (Harry Rex Vonner), Ashley Judd (Carla), Kiefer 
Sutherland (Freddie Cobb), Devin Lloyd (Willy), Terry Loughlin (Sisco), 
M. Emmet Walsh (Defense Psychologist)
Written by: Akiva Goldsman, John Grisham(novel)
Theatres: Golden Village Theatres.
Will a black man ever receive a fair trial from an all-white jury in a 
Southern US state? Will Sandra Bullock ever run out of hair to flick out 
of her eyes, and can John Grisham write a book that doesn't have the 
word "CONSPIRACY" flashing metaphysically across every one of its pages?
These, and other similarly urgent issues, are some of the things that 
will fascinate in A TIME TO KILL, the latest book-turned-movie from John 
"It's just you the reader and me the hero against the FBI, the entire 
American judicial system, and the Darn Way Things Just Are" Grisham.
In poverty-baked Missisippi, a tiny, sweet black girl is tortured, raped 
and left to die by a group of racuous, evil White Boys. Arrested and 
waiting for trial, they are then assailed and shot point blank by the 
girl's father, Carl Lee Hailey, played by a glowering Samuel Johnson.  
Enter the (by now) much talked about Matthew McWhatisname, Mr Esquire 
Magazine cum Guess Jeans Good Looks, as the young, white GoodHearted 
lawyer friend who takes on Hailey's defence, Jake Brigance.
Throw in Kevin Spacey as the dead confident prosecutor with a shakey 
Southern accent (if Sandra Bullock puts in the only believable 
performance of the whole cast, it must surely be because she doesn't 
have to Sound Southern), Donald Sutherland as Brigance's mostly drunk 
now but previously brilliant mentor, a mean, twisted Keifer Sutherland 
as the rapist's brother who's main purpose in the story is to Make Sure 
There's Trouble, and a burly, amoral Oliver Platt as Brigance's oily, 
wise-cracking sidekick for good measure, and you pretty much have the 
whole story. For extra insurance, the film's makers have thrown in the 
darkly beautiful Sandra Bullock in the role of, in her own words, 
"brilliant law student," who rushes down for the summer to help Brigance 
with his case. 
Finally there's Ashley Judd, Brigance's young wife, whose main job seems 
to be walking around the Brigance's new house in tank tops and sweating 
a lot, and his achingly cute blonde daughter. Both comprise a nice White 
parallel to the Black Hailey's own loving family, and form the empathic 
comaparison between the successful Brigance and the misfortunate Hailey.
One of Brigance's main concerns is that if he were Hailey, he would have 
done exactly what he did.
If I seem preoccupied with identifying "character types" and Plot 
Structures, it's only because that's how the movie seemed to work the 
whole time. While most of the characters were nicely etched out and the 
script is generally well-written, I got the feeling that the movie was 
more interested in presenting issues to its audience than actually 
working them out. For example, there are the scarey KKK scenes that 
bring out the powerful weirdness and danger of racism, but that don't 
seem to amount to anything in the conclusion, the will-they-won't-they 
thing between Bullock and McConnaughy that abruptly concludes without 
one iota of resolution, and the this-case-is-breaking-up-my-family 
schtick that Brigance has to go through that culminates in a scene that 
I can only describe as surreal. 
In the end, although there are a lot of things going on in A TIME TO 
KILL, nothing really happens. The film is hardly a courtroom thriller, 
because McConaughey spends more time arguing with his wife, drinking 
tequila with Bullock, and taking long meadow walks with Sutherland than
actually preparing for, or even doing anything, in court. His final 
courtroom summation is feeble and maudlin, and cannot convince an 
audience well-versed in the verbal maneuvering of David Kelley drama 
series (Picket Fences and L.A. Law), or even previous courtroom movies 
that turn on racial or social issues like TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD or 
MURDER IN THE FIRST.
Conclusion: although somewhat interesting, I didn't think this movie was 
worth $7.
 The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.


Author
Michael J. Legeros
     And it goes something like this:  rednecks rape a little girl; her
black father (Samuel L. Jackson) guns them down in a courtroom; a young
white lawyer (Matthew McConaughey) refuses to budge from the center of a
high-profile, small-town trial; a local chapter of the Klan is formed;
the NAACP comes to town; crosses are burned; riots erupt; tourism to
rural Mississippi plummets to an all-time low; a visiting law student
(Sandra Bullock) flirts; an ambitious District Attorney (Kevin Spacey)
schemes; a crusty judge (Patrick McGoohan) cautions everyone against
grandstanding, which of course they do, while glistening in sheets of
sweat as they attempt to work their high-paid tongues around what must
be a dozen different variations on the traditional Southern accent.  All
that's missing is a cameo from Gregory Peck, y'all.
     As adapted from the John Grisham best seller, A TIME TO KILL is as
shamelessly string-pulling as INDEPENDENCE DAY.  There isn't an ounce of
depth-of-feeling to the characters, but you can project in all you care
to.  (Especially during the racial confrontations, which may be the most
gratuitous depictions that we've seen since MISSISSIPPI BURNING.)  Blame
an over-ambitious story.  The movie runs for about two-and-a-half hours
and it's still too short.  Director Joel Schumacher (working from a
script by his BATMAN FOREVER and CLIENT collaborator Akiva Goldsman)
paints in broad-but-succinct strokes.  The plot merrily churns away and
most people probably won't notice that they are reacting more to the
dramatic devices than to the characters.  No problem.  A TIME TO KILL is
easily the most entertaining of the Grisham films.  The plot makes
sense, the acting is superb, and there's even a minor message delivered
at the very end.  Not bad for a summer movie.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Matthew McConaughey, Samuel L. Jackson, Sandra Bullock, 
      Kevin Spacey, Oliver Platt, Brenda Fricker, Charles S. Dutton, 
      Ashley Judd, Donald Sutherland, Kiefer Sutherland, 
      Patrick McGoohan, M. Emmett Walsh, Kurtwood Smith
Director: Joel Schumacher
Producers: Arnon Milchan, Michael Nathanson, Hunt Lowry, and 
      John Grisham
Screenplay: Akiva Goldsman based on the novel by John Grisham
Cinematography: Peter Menzies Jr.
Music: Elliot Goldenthal
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Consider this situation:  your daughter has just been raped and 
beaten.  The two men who attacked her have been apprehended, but are 
likely to be set free.  You are a Vietnam vet with combat training and 
have access to an M-16.  What do you do?  Sit by and hope that the 
fickle American courts decide the issue based on who has the best 
lawyer, or take decisive action now?  Author John Grisham recognized 
that this scenario would make for a compelling tale, so, during the late 
1980s, after spicing it up by including themes of racial tension and 
capital punishment, he wrote A TIME TO KILL.  Seven years later, the 
film version of the writer's first book has reached the screen.
     Grisham has stated publicly that A TIME TO KILL has the most 
personal meaning of any of his works, and, as a result, he demanded a 
measure of creative control in the movie-making process.  So, with Joel 
Schumacher (THE CLIENT, BATMAN FOREVER) at the helm and Akiva Goldsman 
(THE CLIENT) credited with the screenplay, Grisham is listed as one of 
four producers.  And, while aspects of the script differ from details in 
the book, the overall storyline is very similar.  This is fortunate, 
because, of all Grisham's novels, A TIME TO KILL is the one best suited 
to generating a compelling motion picture.
     It's possible to argue all day about how much of the race issue in 
A TIME TO KILL is a legitimate exploration of black/white tension, and 
how much is sensationalism used to spice up the story.  The KKK has a 
prominent role, but couldn't a more moderate, less universally-despised 
group have filled a similar function?  There are times when A TIME TO 
KILL preaches, but isn't Schumacher aiming the sermon at the converted?  
The movie clearly touches on some important social issues, but it's up 
to the viewer to dig beneath the propaganda and unearth the messages 
that mean something.  Then again, it's worth noting that this Hollywood 
production is actually saying something, rather than just churning out 
eye-popping special effects while relying on a regurgitated plot.
     The basic setup has 10-year old Tonya Hailey, the daughter of Carl 
Lee Hailey (Samuel L. Jackson), being raped and beaten by two rednecks.  
Taking the law into his own hands, Carl Lee guns down the pair in front 
of dozens of witnesses in the Canton, Mississippi courthouse.  In the 
process, he also seriously injures a local deputy (Chris Cooper, star of 
John Sayles' LONESTAR).  Carl Lee is arrested for the double murder, and 
faces trial.  For his attorney, he chooses a local white lawyer, up-and-
coming hotshot Jake Brigance (Matthew McConaughey).  With a team that 
includes a sleazy divorce specialist, Harry Rex Vonner (Oliver Platt), 
an energetic assistant, Ellen Roarke (Sandra Bullock), and his old 
mentor, Lucien Wilbanks (Donald Sutherland), Jake goes up against the 
local DA (Kevin Spacey).  When the KKK become involved, Jake discovers 
that his life, and the lives of everyone close to him, including his 
wife (Ashley Judd) and daughter, are in danger.  And the defense of Carl 
Lee Hailey has just begun... 
     Even with a one-hundred fifty minute running time, A TIME TO KILL 
is perhaps too ambitious.  In remaining faithful to the novel, the movie 
gives us too many characters and themes, and some of both get lost in 
the cracks.  Take Jake's secretary (played by Brenda Fricker), for 
example.  She's superfluous -- remove her and nothing changes.  Then 
there's the issue of capital punishment.  Jake and Ellen debate the 
subject, but it's a perfunctory argument that doesn't do much for either 
side.  
     Still, despite my reservations, it's impossible to deny that A TIME 
TO KILL is well-directed, expertly paced, and largely entertaining.  
Thankfully, grandstanding during the trial is kept to a minimum.  
Hollywood loves all sorts of twists and surprises in court dramas; 
Grisham has kept these to a minimum.  There are a few, primarily to keep 
the audience interested, but nothing so outlandish that we leave the 
theater shaking our heads in disbelief.  With respect to the filmed 
versions of Grisham's other novels (THE FIRM, THE PELICAN BRIEF, and THE 
CLIENT), there's no comparison -- this one is much better.
     The most compelling question raised by the film is whether Carl 
Lee, as a black man, can get a fair trial from a white judge and jury.  
As it turns out, he hires Jake because Jake is white.  "You see me as 
they see me," he tells the attorney.  "If you was on that jury, what 
would it take for you to set me free?"  Ultimately, A TIME TO KILL shies 
away from offering a definitive answer.  Perhaps, under the 
circumstances, it's not a question that can be answered definitively.
     A TIME TO KILL attracted a top-notch cast with star power and 
ability to match.  Sandra Bullock, as appealing as ever, gets top 
billing, but the real lead is Matthew McConaughey, who mixes intensity 
and natural talent with good looks.  Samuel L. Jackson is excellent as 
Carl Lee, radiating a palpable outrage and grief.  The supporting cast 
includes such luminaries as Ashley Judd, Kevin Spacey, Donald 
Sutherland, Charles S. Dutton, and M. Emmett Walsh.  From top to bottom, 
everyone does a credible job.
     There's not a lot of real tension about what the verdict is going 
to be, although the film unsuccessfully tries to lead us astray.  But 
there are enough interesting side-issues going on that there's no fear 
of a viewer losing interest.  Despite certain drawbacks, A TIME TO KILL 
is involving, energetic, and occasionally thought-provoking.  All things 
considered, this film will make for a worthwhile trip to the cinema for 
all, not just those who have time to kill.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     John Grisham's first novel is also (reportedly) his most serious.
It makes his most interesting film adaptation to date.  That is in
large part because it is a serious story, looking at racial tension
rather than being a throwaway thriller.  It makes the most satisfying
of his films, if slightly over-polished and simplistic.  Rather than
telling one complex story, it jumps around showing a broad collection
of characters, few of whom get much development but many of whom get
nice rounded stories that reach conclusions.  None of the individual
subplots is very original or interesting, but the total is more than
the some of its parts.  Like a narrative mural we get a large picture
made of many smaller stories of what happens during a trial and the
resulting clash of townspeople at both ends of the political spectrum.
     The setting is Canton, Mississippi, with its mix of small town and
rural people.  As the film opens we see two white men in their early
twenties looking for trouble and finding it by raping and very nearly
murdering a ten-year-old black girl.  Unexpectedly, the girl lives and
within hours the two men are behind bars.  But the girl's father, Carl
Lee Hailey (played by Samuel L. Jackson) is filled with rage and fear
of the very real possibility that the men could end up not being
punished for their crime.  In a rage he hides himself in the town
courthouse and the next morning as the men are being walked through he
takes justice into his own hands and guns down the two men,
accidentally also crippling a deputy escorting the men.  For his
defense he chooses a local white lawyer and acquaintance Jake Brigance
(Matthew McConaughey), to whom Hailey had hinted the day before that he
might be planning to murder the rapists.  Brigance decides to use
defense of temporary insanity, though it is relatively obvious that the
killing was an angry act of revenge but not insanity.  Through Brigance
we meet his daughter and his wife (Ashley Judd) who is reluctant to
have her husband take the emotionally-charged case.  We also meet
Brigance's old law professor (Donald Sutherland), now disbarred and
enjoying a drunken retirement.  Kevin Spacey plays an ambitious and
tricky prosecutor wanting to ride the case to bigger things, and
Patrick McGoohan plays the aptly-named Judge Noose.  Most unlikely
seeming, is the arrival of a brilliant, attractive law student, Ellen
Roark (Sandra Bullock) anxious to bull her way onto the defense team
with an impressive arsenal of legal knowledge.  But the trial also
beings a revival of the dormant Ku Klux Klan threatening everybody on
the defense team.
     Director Joel Schumacher's strong suit has us usually been setting
and mood.  This was certainly the case with his brooding Gothic medical
school in FLATLINERS and his oversized but under-thought BATMAN
FOREVER.  His Mississippi town is less exaggerated, but little details
seem to be intentionally carried a bit too far. Housewife Ashley Judd
looks to be laminated in sweat, as if she was sprayed with Pam, but
only from the neck down and no other character is sweating nearly so
profusely.  As the Klan walks into town a plate glass window reflects
them as three times their height--Schumacher's visual sense often plays
with size--and far more intimidating than they actually are.  Peter
Menzies, Jr., gives the film's photography a somewhat more subdued feel
than previous Schumacher films, but the director's style is still
there.
     A TIME TO KILL has been compared to Robert Mulligan's TO KILL A
MOCKINGBIRD and naturally it falls considerably short of that film.
But the two films are related only in subject matter.  I would be more
likely to compare A TIME TO KILL to Spike Lee's DO THE RIGHT THING in
its breadth rather than depth view of the people affected by the trial.
This film is really not moving and perhaps not even greatly intelligent
in the way that TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD was, but it gives a feel for
Southern politics and law better than other Grisham films and it tells
its story engrossingly.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael Redman
Strongly reminiscent of "To Kill A Mockingbird", this is an incongruent
combination of riveting performances, a controversial topic, compelling
tear-jerking, one dimensional characters and overly simplistic political
statements. The film is based on John Grisman's first novel, and feels
much like the rest of his books turned films ("The Firm", "Pelican
Brief", "The Client").
A young black girl is brutally raped, beaten and left for dead by two
southern rednecks. Arrested and lead through the courthouse, they are
gunned down by the girl's father, Carl Lee Hailey (Samuel L. Jackson)
who has learned they would probably be released in less than 10 years
because she is black and they are white.  The remainder of the
two-and-a-half hour film features his trial and the question of whether
a black man can get a fair trial in Mississippi with an all-white jury.
Hailey's white lawyer Jake Brigance is played by Matthew McConaughey,
Hollywood's latest instant star and the focus of the film. In a twist,
this particular golden boy's hype is justified and he is one of the high
points of the movie. Aided by his alcoholic mentor (Donald Sutherland),
sleazy buddy (Oliver Platt) and sexy plucky northern legal aide (Sandra
Bullock); Brigance sets out to find a way out of what looks like a
no-win situation.
The film addresses heavy questions concerning racism in a bizarre mix of
some very human situations and a few cartoonish scenes. Jackson gives a
great performance in his talks with McConaughey concerning his view of
black and white relations. Contrast this with the caricature of the
self-serving NAACP representatives and the cinematic short-cut of white
racism as evidenced by the KKK, both of which are peopled by cardboard
characters.
The acting and casting are also a mixed bag. Jackson and McConaughey are
notable in their roles. Bullock, a personal unfavorite, turns in one of
her better performances (faint praise indeed), but for a strong female
role, she is sure dressed as if she=B9s fulfilling the babe role. It=B9s
entertaining to see Donald Sutherland on one side and son Keifer on the
other, but they are both one-note characters. Sutherland The Younger is
a KKK member in yet another of his (surprise!) psycho roles.
Platt has a fascinating screen presence and could have contributed much
to the film, but is casted in a throwaway role. There are far too many
characters who clutter up the story and could have been dropped from the
movie without affecting the story at all.
The strong acting makes up for the film's flaws, but leaves you
wondering how it would have worked if the rest of the elements had
measured up.
[This appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
8/15/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A ham-handed and over/underwritten morality play masquerading as
entertainment, so muddled it doesn't even know what it's really advocating,
if anything.
A TIME TO KILL has been hailed as the best of the Grisham adaptations, and
it's easy to see why: it presents a strong, almost rancorously so, story;
it is full of good actors (Samuel L. Jackson, Matthew McConaughey, Sandra
Bullock, Kevin Spacey, Charles Dutton); and it's ostensibly about some
important social issue that we're all tangling with. It is not, however, a
good movie, and all of the reasons I've listed above have something to do
with why.
Right from the beginning, the movie is dead-set on stacking its deck as
thoroughly and unrepentantly as possible. A pair of redneck whites, boozed
and drugged out of their minds, kidnap a young black girl, abuse and rape
her horribly, and leave her for dead. After their arrest, their father
(Jackson) takes an assault rifle and guns them down on the way to trial.
McConaughey is then drafted in as his lawyer, and the rest is somehow
strangely predictable courtoom movie dramatics.
The acting is not quite what it should be, given the cast we have. Sandra
Bullock (who is a good actress but not a serious one) looks clueless;
Spacey's accent switches itself on and off at random (and he's given a
totally thankless role to play as well, a role without an iota of depth);
and McConaughey's role is stamped from the cardboard back of a cereal box.
The most memorable role is Donald Sutherland's, and his is a bit part.
I always consider it an index of a movie's desperation when it is able to
present shocking and outlandish events, and somehow not have them generate
an ounce of impact. There is one scene -- a riot outside the courtroom --
that should have created incredible tension, but winds up playing out like
a textbook exercise on how not to deploy a scene like this. Because the
movie doesn't know what it's really about, it *can't* generate any genuine
tension, and so it has to artifically inject tension through clumsy
plotting. One of the ways it does this is by throwing in a whole subplot
about a bunch of vicious KKK cross-burners -- which is tidied up so neatly
that it borders on the nihilistic. I was reminded of the despicable
BETRAYED, which tried to tart up a fundamentally empty story by injecting
vile, graphic acts of racism as little more than an attention-getter.
The movie immolates an enormous amount of its potential by making a few
critical mistakes. First of all, the Jackson character is not hard to
judge; there's no tension in his dilemma. He's self-admittedly guilty and
should be sent to jail, no matter how moral his crusade. The old saw about
how no court in the land would convict him, if he was white, is supposed to
be the underlying theme of the movie, but it's never developed into an
organic component of the story. It just sort of floats around on top while
the movie grinds away furiously with its plot mechanics.
Another mistake is in motivational logic: By not having the two white thugs
arraigned FIRST -- or maybe tried and then dismissed from lack of evidence,
say -- we have that much less empathy for Jackson's character. I'm probably
supposed to think that just because he had his daughter raped, we are
*automatically* supposed to feel empathy for him, but that's precisely the
kind of facile thinking that makes real justice impossible. (See THE VIRGIN
SPRING for more on that note.) Is Jackson's character then simply insane?
That prospect isn't given terribly serious treatment either.
One of the most aggravating things about coutroom movies is how little they
seem to know about how the law works, or how lawyers get their information.
McConaughey's character makes an important slipup late in the movie, when
one of his witnesses turns out to have been convicted of a capital offense.
How did the prosecution get this information? How come HE didn't get it?
The whole way these questions get handled are symptomatic of the movie's
way of dealing with complex legal and moral questions in cheap
screenwriterly slam-bang fashion.
This is the biggest problem: the movie isn't ABOUT Jackson's character, or
his dilemma, or this case, or any of its (frequently interesting despite
the porcine writing and direction) characters. It's not ultimately about
anything at all, except its stupid geared-down plot, which inches onwards
in one unremarkable scene after another towards a totally contrived ending.
At two and a half hours, the movie is overlong and drastically overwritten:
there's endless stuff about things which ultimately add up to nothing, and
no writing about the material that should really matter. It's all
handwaving. The closing argument are also sneaky and underhanded, and
underscored my suspicion that the movie is manipulative and unfair.
It's not easy to make a movie ABOUT something. The other day I saw
Kurosawa's phenomenal RASHOMON, a movie that is really ABOUT the way people
deal with truth and reality (or don't). A TIME TO KILL is as empty and
ponderous a movie as I've seen in a long time.
