Title
Review for Swimming to Cambodia (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Upstill
    SWIMMING TO CAMBODIA is an hour and a half of a man talking.  Spalding Gray
spent several weeks in Thailand acting a small part in the film THE KILLING
FIELDS, and this film (a record of his performance before a live audience, in a
perfomance gallery in New York) is a monologue about events and observations
surrounding the filming, including the decimation of Cambodia, the nature of
Hollywood reality, the fleshly pleasures of Bangkok, the Gulf of Siam, drugs,
American foreign policy, relationships and himself, Spalding Gray.  You can
imagine, this is a film with scope.
    It was directed by Jonathon Demme, who, after the Talking Heads concert
film STOP MAKING SENSE and the Yuppie comedy SOMETHING WILD, is rapidly
becoming a hero among modern directors.  His presence in the film is firm but
subdued, providing emphasis and enhancing mood with sound effects, camera
angles, cross-cutting, editing and Laurie Anderson's understated music.  The
star, of course, is Gray, and he makes the time go by lickety-split.  He is of
that rare breed of storytellers who command the totality of your attention and
imagination while speaking, and he leaves you with something when you go out.
    This film is valuable for several reasons.  First, as a completely
successful exercise in minimalism: you're never less than interested in what
he's saying, and often deeply moved.  Second, as a political lesson, bringing
home the real horror of the rule of Pol Pot (who now lurks behind the border of
Thailand waiting to take over again with the support of the United States).
Third, as grist for the intellectual mill.  Gray is really talking about movie
reality vs. flesh-and-blood reality, and how they get all mushed up.  Fourth,
he is an inspiration.  Seeing the world through his eyes is a challenge, to
observe and absorb in the same probing, synthetic way.  Finally, this film is a
document of an archetype: Gray is pounded by what he experiences, but he never
loses his very '80s irony and detachment towards it.

Author
Pedro Sena
Stage shows do not translate very well to film....
But then again, there are certain things you can not exactly put on film, or
on the stage, for that matter.
Spalding Grey, all by his lonesome, has an attitude about the stories he
tells us that are a t first weird, then get better, and then, they hook us
into laughing.  This whole thing is actually one man's view of his
experiences in Vietnam, and the various incidents and accidents that
happened, even when he was an actor on the set of the film THE KILLING
FIELDS.  And the adventures go from totally crazy, to being far out, to 'you
got to be kidding me...' and then some.
For a one man show, this is excellent, it really doesn't get any better than
this.  It has an easy setting, and is augmented by some very good music by
the artist Laurie Andersen, and well co-ordinated by the  director to keep
us as in tune as possible.
There are some incidents that aren't pleasant, but then, the description of
the events comes off so surrealistic, that it is difficult to distinguish
where the event stopped and the writer started with his literary license.
And license, he does take.  From the discussions of the beach Hiltons and
the holidays with bullets a la carte to the prostitutes and their ways about
the foreign men, who paid them better than any job might in a whole year, of
course, if there were jobs... after all this was a war, and the jobs were
non existent.
But amidst all this, there is at least one man scared out of his wits, and
his comic demeanor manages to save the day on occasion.  It is all somewhat
of a distant memory of Spike Milligan's wonderful stories about his part in
the fall of Hitler, and Hitler's part in Spike's downfall.
An evening of delightful entertainment awaits you if you get to see this
oddity of a show.  It isn't an action movie.... unless you have
the imagination to be sooooo active.  And for some of us, there are a few
visual aids to help us figure out what he is talking about, which at times
is a problem.
Extremely fast paced, it gives you no breaks at all. Worth seeing, as a
reminder, that even if we make mistakes, we not only
can learn from them, we can also laugh..... and cry.
