Title
Review for Modern Times (1936)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Not so modern, actually, but in the more than sixty years 
that have passed since MODERN TIMES was released, it has 
remained one of the indisputably hilarious classics of the early 
Hollywood era. Charlie Chaplin, the king of the silent film, made 
his last full-blown silent feature here, playing a hard-luck working 
class hero. MODERN TIMES flows effortlessly from set-up to 
set-up, setting a standard for physical comedy that has been 
seldom approached since, Woody Allen's BANANAS and 
SLEEPER almost being exceptions.
        Chaplin satirizes the world of corporate bureacracy and 
economic depression, playing an assembly line employee whose 
job is to screw nuts onto the parts as they go by. This provides 
instant opportunities for humor as Chaplin tries to keep pace with 
a speeded-up conveyor belt (in a sequence that undoubtedly 
inspired the famous "I Love Lucy" chocolate factory episode) 
and later goes becomes mentally unstable and starts screwing 
everything that moves (in a sequence that undoubtedly inspired 
Ted Kennedy).
        The movie shifts as Chaplin is carted off to an institution, 
is released and later sent to jail after accidentally setting off a 
workers' demonstration by picking up a red flag that fell off a truck 
and waving it in the air for the owner to see, thus attracting the 
workers who thought he was praising the virtues of Marxism and 
causing the authorities to see him as a Red. This kind of mistaken 
identity humor has been retooled over and over again these past 
six decades in movies and sitcoms but has never seemed so fresh 
and funny as it does here.
        MODERN TIMES, besides being one of the quintessential 
film comedies and a thinly-veiled critique of capitalism, also has 
some poignant romance moments as Chaplin meets a beautiful 
orphan girl (Paulette Goddard) and the two fall quickly in love, 
longing for a house to move into. Chaplin tries to find work to 
save up for the house, first as a night watchman in a department 
store and later as a singing waiter (who forgets the lyrics and has 
to instead sing a hilarious nonsense song).
        The whole movie is a wonderful experience, and it's even 
more amazing that such a piece of entertainment was constructed 
with no dialogue. But that Charlie Chaplin was a comedic genius, 
even if he did have the same moustache as Hitler. Aside from 
scripting, directing and starring in MODERN TIMES, he also wrote 
the famous song "Smile" for this film, half a century before Michael 
Jackson got his gloves on it for his effeminate cover version on the 
HIStory album. So the man has inspired not only the face of modern 
comedy but a certain corner of pop music as well, although I doubt 
that moustache of his will ever come back in style.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Brian Koller
"Modern Times" is Charlie Chaplin's last silent film.
It is my favorite of his movies, at least of those that I've
seen.  It has several outstanding sets, and a great score.
There are also many clever gags, and the Tramp character
is, as always, both funny and affecting, often at the 
same time.
"Modern Times" begins with the Tramp working in a factory.
Repetitive motion causes a nervous breakdown.  He loses his
job, and ends up in jail.  Released for good behaviour,
he befriends an equally poor but spirited young woman
(Paulette Goddard).  They dream of a better life, but their
actual efforts just seem to get them in and out of trouble.
The sets for this film are superb.  The factory has a
conveyer belt assembly line, leading to a marvelous 
conglomerate of gears and levers.  Chaplin, and later another
employee, get stuck in this immense set to great effect.
Another wonderful contraption is an automatic feeding device
that the Tramp is strapped to, and when this device malfunctions
it is the funniest part of the film.  A dilapated old house,
and various levels of a department store also make great sets.
One problem that most silent films have is that the original
score has been lost or replaced, if it ever existed.  Since
"Modern Times" is the last significant silent, falling well
inside the sound era, the soundtrack has been preserved, and
the score (by Caplin and Alfred Newman) is much better than 
anything John Williams has ever composed.
Goddard has a lot of energy, and makes an appealing sidekick
for Chaplin's Tramp character.  No wonder she also starred in
his next film, "The Great Dictator".
Surprisingly, "Modern Times" was not nominated for any
Academy Awards.  Perhaps the Academy was annoyed because
it was a silent picture.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
