Title
Review for Pura formalitŕ, Una (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Raymond Johnston
Cowritten and directed by Giuseppe Tornatore
Starring Gerard Depardieu, Roman Polanski
     Polanski has been spending quite a lot of time recently in
storm-isolated houses. The rains come, the phone goes dead, the
power eventually goes out. A stranded wanderer gets interrogated
about his life. The first time Polanski was in such a house this
year was as the director of the intriguing DEATH AND THE MAIDEN.
This second time he is in the house as an actor. Polanski plays
Inspector Leonardo da Vinci in the film A PURE FORMALITY.
Polanski is a great actor who too seldom plies that craft before
the public.
     Unfortunately, Guiseppe Tornatore  cannot match Polanski's
skill as a director. A PURE FORMALITY achieves little suspense
and only manages for a few brief moments to be even interesting.
 The large bulk of the film takes place in a leaky border zone
police station. Tornatore tries to break up the space by
sticking the camera on the most unlikely places, beneath the
keys of a typewriter, under the water of a toilet bowl, on the
ceiling and so forth.  All this achieves is underscoring that
without tricks the story is of little interest.
     The title is quite apt. The film is nothing more than a
formal exercise in basic existentialism. Some broad clues that
are clumsily thrown out to anybody who knows the least bit about
mythology give away the "surprise ending." The surprise,
however, is not a new one. In fact, to take a phrase from
vaudeville, the gag is so old it has whiskers. 1960s TV shows
like The Twilight Zone and Alfred Hitchcock Presents managed to
tell very similar stories in a half hour or hour format. At
close to two hours, A PURE FORMALITY seems heavily padded.
     The basic story (not giving away the 'surprise') involves a
well-known novelist (Gerard Depardieu) running through the
border zone without his papers. He gets arrested and taken to a
station that has a sieve for a roof and little else that works
any better. The novelist's name is Onoff, like on/off. Even
though his picture is well known, nobody recognizes him. Then
Inspector Leonardo da Vinci (Polanski) arrives and quizzes him
for hours about the different characters in his novels. Why?
Because the police have recently found an unidentified body.
Onoff's defense is that he has amnesia. Disjointed images of his
missing hours come back, one of the few successful effects in
the film.
      Depardieu and Polanski are fabulous together on screen.
The leaden paced editing, and ham fisted direction of the film
cannot destroy the magic they create when the story finally
heats up to a tepid simmer. When Polanski starts scoring points
in their literally depicted cat and mouse game, it even seems as
if  the film might be good after all.
     Then the "surprise" ending comes, reminding everyone that
is, as stated in the title, a purely formal rehash of some
rather basic existential motifs. To see Polanski at his best as
an actor, check him out in THE TENANT and CHINATOWN, both of
which he also directed. He also makes appearances in  ANDY
WARHOL'S DRACULA, Andrej Wadja's A GENERATION.
