Title
Review for Designated Mourner, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 5/2/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:35
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Mike Nichols, Miranda Richardson, David de Keyser
Director: David Hare
Producers: Donna Gray and David Hare
Screenplay: Wallace Shawn based on his play
Cinematography: Oliver Stapleton
Music: Richard Hartley
U.S. Distributor: First Look Pictures
     If you were bored by MY DINNER WITH ANDRE, THE DESIGNATED MOURNER 
isn't for you.  If Spalding Gray's monologues put you to sleep, prepare 
to snooze through THE DESIGNATED MOURNER.  And if you think TWISTER is 
perfectly paced, give THE DESIGNATED MOURNER a pass.  This film, a 
series of often-disjointed ruminations about culture and class, demands 
active intellectual participation, and those who prefer motion pictures 
to be passive events will be profoundly unappreciative of its approach.
     THE DESIGNATED MOURNER began life in 1996 as a stage play at 
London's National Theater.  Directed by David Hare, written by Wallace 
Shawn, and starring Mike Nichols (yes, that Mike Nichols), Miranda 
Richardson, and David de Keyser, the production was a success, and the 
BBC agreed to provide funding for a film version.  So, with the 
participation of all the stage principals, Shawn and Hare made the 
changes necessary to adapt THE DESIGNATED MOURNER for the screen.  The 
result is this motion picture -- a deliberate, keen examination of 
thoughts and ideas that features a terrific performance from Nichols.
     Bizarre as it might sound, there is actually a similarity between 
THE DESIGNATED MOURNER and TWISTER.  Neither has a particularly coherent 
narrative.  However, while 1996's second-highest grossing film filled 
the void with special effects that brought in more than $200 million at 
the domestic box office, THE DESIGNATED MOURNER plugs the hole with 
ideas and philosophical tangents, and will be lucky to garner one 
percent of TWISTER's take.
     Describing THE DESIGNATED MOURNER's storyline is almost an exercise 
in futility.  The film is basically a monologue delivered by Mike 
Nichols, who plays a character named Jack.  He tells of how, as a young 
man, he fell in love with a woman, Judy (Miranda Richardson).  Judy's 
father, Howard (David de Keyser), was a well-known author and liberal 
activist whose "capacity for contempt" for the right wing was boundless.  
However, while Jack was initially drawn to Judy and Howard's lifestyle, 
he soon grew weary of it, and, when it became apparent that their 
political beliefs might be dangerous, he abandoned ship, leaving them to 
suffer the consequences when the government cracked down on potential 
troublemakers.
     Approximately 80% of THE DESIGNATED MOURNER is Jack talking.  The 
other 20% presents comments and short soliloquies from Judy and Howard, 
who are sitting next to Jack, facing the camera.  Occasionally, but only 
rarely, there's a bit of dialogue as they argue with one another about 
their perspectives of an event.  Mostly, though, this is about Jack -- 
his thoughts, ideals, and still-open wounds.  By the end of the film, he 
believes that he has found closure.  But at what price for society at 
large?
     At one point, Jack is described as being "lazy", and it's an apt 
term.  He divides the world of art and culture into two categories:  
"high-brow" and "low-brow", and states that most people lie about liking 
the former while really preferring the latter.  Jack pretends to read 
poetry, but doesn't understand it.  Instead of curling up with a book of 
poems, he'd rather lie in bed masturbating or watching television.  
Judy, Howard, and their faceless friends are all "intellectuals" who 
appreciate life's artistic elements.  So, when the government ruthlessly 
purges society of their number, the only ones left to remember their 
passions and causes are people like Jack.  He's a survivor, not a hero.  
He'd prefer to remember that there once was something called "art" 
rather than fight to keep it alive.
     It's easy to see THE DESIGNATED MOURNER as a cautionary tale:  in a 
world where pop culture is becoming increasingly brain-dead, who will 
preserve art?  Does anyone still read WAR AND PEACE for personal 
satisfaction?  For that matter, how many children today read because 
they want to, not because they're told to?  Europeans, who often view 
exported American culture as a polluting influence, may find that this 
film has more resonance for them than it does for U.S. audiences. 
     One of the delights of THE DESIGNATED MOURNER is the variety of 
topics that Jack touches on during his rambling account of his 
association with Judy and Howard.  He discusses human motivation, 
poetry, morality, the ambiguity of identity, ego, government corruption, 
sex, pornography, and numerous other issues.  Shawn's screenplay is 
laced with subtle humor and certain evocative phrases like "the colors 
in the park were quite edible."  
     From a technical perspective, nothing is done to "open up" the 
play.  The three characters never move from their position around a 
table.  They rarely speak to each other, almost always addressing their 
remarks to the camera.  But the closeups permit the actors to perform 
with their features and eyes, which adds a dimension not readily 
available on stage.  In a character and idea-based movie like this, 
cinematographer Oliver Stapleton's simple photographic choices seem to 
offer the best approach.
     Is THE DESIGNATED MOURNER static?  Indeed it is -- so much so, in 
fact, that there were moments when I squirmed a little.  We're not used 
to movies like this -- no more than a handful have come out in the past 
few years.  THE DESIGNATED MOURNER demands an ongoing effort from its 
audience.  You get out of it what you put into it, which guarantees that 
its appeal will not extend beyond those who occasionally crave more than 
simple entertainment in their cinematic diet.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ben Hoffman
To say that this film is not for everyone is an understatement.  If you
enjoyed MY DINNER WITH ANDRE, there is a good chance you may very well
like THE DESIGNATED MOURNER in which the main character, Jack (Mike
Nichols in an exceptional acting perfortmance in his first film),
almost immediately says "Christ, you know, I remember so clearly the
moment . . . when was that?  . . . years ago . . . when someone was
saying, 'If God didn't like assholes, he wouldn't have made so many of
them.'"
In 1996, the play on which the film is based, was first performed at
London's National Theater.  The play (and film) were written by Wallace
Shawn.  There is a total of three characters; they speak directly to
the audience except with very rare exceptions when they address each
other.
Jack is the main character.  There is his wife, Judy (a radiant Miranda
Richardson) and her father, Howard (David de Keyser).  These three, in
a sort of disjointed "stream of consciousness" tell us what they are
thinking about themselves and each other.  There is no indication of
what prompts each new declaration, an unburdening of one's life.
Jack's first words are:  The designated mourner.  I am the designated
mourner. I have to tell you that a very special little world has died,
and I am the designated mourner.  Oh, yes, you see, it's an important
custom in many groups and tribes. Someone is assigned to grieve, to
wail and light the public ritual fire.  Someone is assigned when there
is no one else.
This pretty much sets the tone of the film.
Jack complains about his father-in-law, a liberal, a literery snob and
poet.  Jack further complains that he (and others) have to pretend they
like poetry; that is one of the things that distinguishes the so-
called highbrow from the lowbrow.  Who is going to admit that he
really enjoys lowbrow entertainment?
Judy complains of Jack:, "The one thing he never would say  . . . the
word he couldn't stand: love.  I love you."
Howard did not like son-in-law Jack.  "Sometimes Howard would pick on
me to play the role of idiot---well, I guess he ALWAYS did--ha ha ha--
and that was really quite fun in a way. "  "And after the knife had
gone in, he would just continue."
Jack was always wondering what we were waiting for.  "The appearance of
the Messiah?  Was all this nothing?"  What is life?  His greatest
pleasure was "the sweet, ever-changing caress of an early evening."
Looking for something different?  Try THE DESIGNATED MOURNER.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Remember back in your college days when your English literature
professor would assign novels so dense with prose that it took five
readings to get through the paragraph-long sentences?  After many late
night sessions of reading and rereading the text, you were finally able
to decode the sentences and begin to glean the book's complex messages.
     THE DESIGNATED MOURNER is the film equivalent of that assignment. 
Since it was written by Wallace Shawn, who also wrote the famous and
successful MY DINNER WITH ANDRE, his latest film comes with impressive
credentials.  MY DINNER WITH ANDRE set the gold standard for film
talkfests with its imaginative and enlightening dinnertime conversation
between two friends, Wallace Shawn and Andre Gregory.
     With perhaps three viewings, one might be able to decipher some of
THE DESIGNATED MOURNER's nuances.  With only one, understanding it, and
more importantly caring about it, becomes a challenge.  Whether the
material is worth the effort is problematic.  Like the college
assignment, one must decide whether its mastery has sufficient payoff.
     The film opens with three talking heads, whose fidgety bodies rest
most uncomfortably in straight back chairs.  Jack (Mike Nichols) and
Judy (Miranda Richardson) are a frequently warring married couple, and
Howard (David De Keyser) is Judy's revered father.  Although Judy is
married to Jack, the bond with her father is much stronger.
     Filmed by Oliver Stapleton in harsh lights and shadows, the
lighting has the same standoffish effect as the dialog, which is
univitingly cold.  Behind the chairs are blurry lights so that the
attention is drawn to the large heads that fill the screen.
     Nichols gets most of the lines so the film's success rests mostly
on his shoulders.  In short, he is no Spalding Gray.  Whereas Spalding
Gray (SWIMMING TO CAMBODIA, MONSTER IN A BOX, and GRAY'S ANATOMY) can
mesmerize an audience with his monologues, Nichols just talks fast. 
Gray has a compelling storytelling ability that Nichols lacks.
     Although snippets of the dialog have power, most serve only to
obscure and befuddle.  ("The past and the future don't actually exist. 
I mean where are they?")  Jack tells us, "Stories are as necessary as
food."  Well, if that is so, then this movie will leave many starving.
     The film, based on a play by Wallace Shawn, does have a story or at
least the brief sketches of one.  However, the story is little more than
a plot device to let Jack babble along at a breakneck pace.  Whereas
Gray talks to us, Jack ramblings seem more directed to himself.
     Howard, the father, is an intellectual who switched in his 20s from
prose to poetry.  This helped protect him from the unnamed totalitarian
government under which they live, government officials being unable to
realize that his poetry might be subversive.
     A recurring subtheme revolves around the trials and tribulations of
the male sexual organ, with its name used frequently for shock effect.
     "I guess, I've always been a low-brow at heart," reflects Jack in
his big conclusion scene.  He never did fit in with Judy, Howard, and
their literati friends.  There is a good chance that you may feel
similarly left out.
     THE DESIGNATED MOURNER runs 1:35, which might seems short but it
was long enough to put one of the four critics in our private screening
to sleep.  He snored through some of it, but missed little -- it's that
sort of a movie.  I cannot recommend this inaccessible film, but I do
give it ** for its risk taking and a valiant effort.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
