Title
Review for Lady Beware (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chris Webb
Cast: Diane Lane (Katya Yarno), Michael Woods (Jack Price), Cotter Smith 
(Mac Odell).
Directed by Karen Arthur
Written by Charles Zev Cohen and Susan Miller
        This is a TV movie which became a feature film, and worked its 
way into a string of movies on a video tape that my family owns.  So, 
after watching FATAL ATTRACTION and MOONSTRUCK, I decided to explore this 
so-called thriller.
        Its MANNEQUIN: The Dark Side, as Diane Lane runs from a 
psychopath who has intercepted her mail.  This is how he knows all about 
her life.  Her name is Katya Yarno and she creates window dressings with 
mannequins for artistic purposes.  She has quite the mouth, but that 
impresses the mayor who commissions her work.  A newspaper sends Mac 
Odell (Smith) to cover her work, and they fall in love almost 
instantaneously.
        This is when Jack Price (Woods) begins his stalking.  We listen 
to his eerie phone calls and then become even more frightened once we see 
him in her apartment.  His presence is not as scary however, as his 
dancing in a towel after he has bathed in her tub.  He then lies naked on 
her bed, but director Karen Arthur decides to cut that scene short.  Jack 
is as witty and catchy as a rock.  He talks about how he'll climb a 
beanstalk to get to her and about how nimble and quick he is.  I'm sure 
he used other nursery rhymes to scare her as well.
        Karen Arthur is a veteran of TV movies and she shows it here.  It 
fits within a low-grade movie frame that you might watch on a Friday 
night.  Except film allows her to explore nudity and profanity.  The 
writers, Charles Zev Cohen and Susan Miller, must have really received 
backlash from this movie, because they have never written anything for 
any screen since.  Ladd, at least, has escaped this debacle with JUDGE 
DREDD and THE FULL MONTY.  Hopefully, she has been able to forget this
movie more than I will be able to.
        LADY BEWARE turns the tables once Katya decides to go after Jack, 
putting her life more in peril.  This movie is predictable, boring, and 
not scary at all.  It plods and we snooze.  One side note, this was 
filmed in Pittsburgh, and it gave two of Mr. Rogers' actors, Don Brockett 
and Audrey Roth, some big screen time.  That's perhaps the one nice thing 
about LADY BEWARE.   
