Title
Review for Home for the Holidays (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Edwin Jahiel
*
Directed and co-produced by Jodie Foster.
Written by W.  D.  Richter.
Cast: Holly Hunter, Robert Downey, Jr., Anne Bancroft, Dylan McDermott,
      Charles Durning, Geraldine Chaplin, Steve Guttenberg, Claire Danes,
      Cynthia Stevenson.
Distributed by Paramount and Polygram.
     The title "Home for the Holidays" suggests either a feel-good
story, a family drama or a comedy, but guesses can be wrong.  There was
a made-for-TV movie with that title in 1972 which turned out to be a
Christmastime thriller.  Now, the current film's distributors have
announced it as a comedy, but this description will do only if you
stretch it.
     Claudia (Holly Hunter) just lost her job as an art restorer at a
museum.  (You wait a long time to find out that the museum is in
Chicago.)  With some trepidation, Claudia leaves behind her
sixteen-year old daughter (we later learn in passing that Hunter is
unmarried) and flies to another state to spend Thanksgiving with her
parents. (You wait a long time to find out that it is Maryland.  If
your eyes are peeled, you might catch the sign "Maryland Lottery.")
     The opening sequence tries for screwball comedy style, but it is
only slightly weird and far from hilarious.  Soon the film goes into
fast decline, in a structure that is a succession of sections, each
with its title.
     "Flying" is followed by "Mom and Dad."  Mom is Anne Bancroft, nee
Anna Maria Luisa Italiano, one of the very few Catholics who can do a
Jewish Mother turn, which she sort of does here.  Perhaps husband Mel
Brooks is of help.
     Dad (Charles Durning) is a retired something or other employee of
an airline or of the Baltimore airport. (This is made clear only at the
end.)  He is a kind of putterer now.
     Pa and Ma are eccentrics, sort of, but uninteresting as
individuals and as a couple.  If you remember Bancroft as the famously
seductive Mrs. Robinson in 1967 THE GRADUATE, you can now see her in
bra and slip.  She may be showing us how well kept she is at 64, but
her talent does not show in HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS.
     The next chapter, "Company," centers mostly around Claudia's
brother Tommy (Robert Downey, Jr.).  Tommy is gay, but you can't tell.
You learn it only when you hear that "he has broken with Jack."  On the
other hand, Tommy is relentlessly gay in the old sense, ebullient,
bouncy and far, far too cute.  You feel right away that Downey is
uncomfortable in, and unconvinced by his role.  He arrives from Boston
with Leo Fish (Dylan McDermott) whom everybody takes for a new lover.
     Each section has Claudia in it but is normally focused on one or
two additional characters.  In "Relatives" we meet Mom's unmarried
sister, retired schoolteacher Geraldine Chaplin.  She too is an
eccentric, unconvincing and unconvinced.  Her closeups are cruel.
Someone flatulates.  There's an in-joke: a furnace repairman works for
"The Big Heat" Company, a reference to a classic film noir.
     In "More Relatives," we meet Claudia's younger sister Joanna, her
sententious husband Walter (Steve Guttenberg) and their two kids.  The
house becomes a zoo of agitation and hyperactivity, forced and seldom
funny.  Only the cat is normal.
     Next, "The Dinner" reveals that Tommy had married Jack some time
ago.  Joanna calls Tommy a freak.  He keeps his good mood but overacts
again.  By accident, Joanna gets a plateful spilled on her dress.  It
turns out that Leo Fish is heterosexual.  Geraldine Chaplin
passionately kisses Dad--on the mouth.
     Watching the slicing of the turkey, it dawned on me that this film
was trying to be a slice of life.  But it is also a turkey that Jodie
Foster directed--her second effort, after LITTLE MAN TATE.  Just as
responsible is the uneven writer W. D. Richter, whose biggest hit was
the dubious BUCKAROO BANZAI.  His best works were SLITHER, NICKELODEON,
and the excellent remake of INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS.  The Stephen
King story he scripted before HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS was the disastrous
NEEDFUL THINGS.
     In "Cleanup" Claudia's daughter calls, tells mom that she is
disgusted with her boyfriend and is still a virgin.  Tommy and Walter
have a fight.  Jack telephones Tommy.  Tommy is happy.  The marriage is
on again.  The movie turns "sensitive."
     "Now What?"  follows.  Here, this mish-mashy, misguided,
mis-written film predictably brings together Leo Fish and Claudia.
Earlier, Leo was passable as a quiet observer.  Now that he emotes, he
is artificial.  The couple have a too-cute impromptu date and kiss.
Taking leftovers to Joanna's house, the sisters have a heart-to-heart
talk.  Says Claudia:  "We don't have to like each other.  We're a
family."  This, I guess, is the moral of the story.
     Viewer Liberation comes with "The Point."  Claudia and Leo, by
mutual consent, will not have sex as they are going in different
geographic (and other) directions.  Dad watches home movies.  More
sentiment.  The real point is that this movie is pointless.  That not a
single performer is explored, seems to believe in his part, plays well,
is involving, That no one uses more than two basic expressions.
     Claudia takes the return plane.  Who comes in but Leo, with a
ridiculous lamp (don't ask)?  He proposes that they spend the two-hour
flight sitting together.  Perhaps they'll go to sleep.  That's what the
film's audience ought to do too.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Most romantic comedies are about strong, emotionally secure people
finding each other.  A WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING or a PLAY IT AGAIN SAM
may be about someone superficially shy, but you will rarely see a
character have serious problems holding his/her life together.
Divorcee Claudia Larson (played by Holly Hunter) is to that point.  She
has lost a job she loved and her sixteen-year-old daughter has confided
that this Thanksgiving weekend she is ready to have sex with her boy
friend.  Claudia is also catching cold and though she hates planes she
has to fly from Chicago home to Baltimore.  Claudia has lost control of
her life just when she has to go through the annual trial of
Thanksgiving dinner with her eccentric family.  Holly Hunter usually
plays self-assured women and her performance makes the freshly written
and acted early part of the film the high point.  However, as the film
starts focusing on more characters and as Claudia finds her way back to
peace of mind, the film loses its creative bite.  Instead it finds its
way to the easy route of a well-worn romantic comedy.
     The Larson family is a study in contrasts and odd personalities.
Mother Adele (Anne Bancroft) is cold and needling and tries to be
always in control.  Father Henry (Charles Durning) is a late-in-life
romantic finding odd moments to dance with his wife and play the organ,
but has lost the capacity to be serious.  Brother Tommy (Robert Downey,
Jr.)  is a consummate but often obnoxious clown.  His pranks are
amusing for a short time, then start to grate on the characters and the
audience.  Tommy is gay and has brought a bemused friend (Dylan
McDermott) to the party.  Sister Joanne (Cynthia Stevenson) is an
upwardly mobile yuppie striving for a starchy respectability.  Aunt
Gladys (a skeletal Geraldine Chaplin) is getting a little strange in
several ways at once.  They will come together, clown around with each
other, get on each other's nerves, and make some painful admissions to
each other.  The contact will strengthen some relationships and show up
weaknesses in others.
     Jodie Foster's LITTLE MAN TATE was a heavy-handed and misplaced
argument against the fostering of intellect in children.  HOME FOR THE
HOLIDAYS's study in relationships works considerably better while that
study is really what it wants to be.  It falters only toward the end
trying to force a happy ending.  Even the chaotic Thanksgiving dinner,
the showpiece of the film, manages to show more humanity than farce.
Richter's script, based on a short story by Chris Radant, goes a little
overboard in some of its characterizations, especially those of Tommy
and Adele, and the dialogue is interesting, but not always believable.
Nor is it really believable that this family lets so much hang out ata
family get-together.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS is one of those bittersweet holiday comedic
dramas.  In a fresh setup, we have a grownup single mom, Claudia (Holly
Hunter), reluctantly going back to stay with her parents for
Thanksgiving.  Hunter is a gifted actress most recently seen giving an
excellent performance in the great movie COPYCAT.
     Claudia is down on her luck.  In the opening scene, her boss at
the art museum tells her, "You're fired.  I had to.  We lost ninety
percent of our federal money."  She then proceeds to lose her coat on
the way to what she envisions will be the Thanksgiving from hell.  Her
sixteen year old daughter (Claire Danes) drives her to the airport and
reinforces that notion by warning her, "Check out what you have to look
forward to: cigarettes, junk food, and Gram's family stuffing."  Her
daughter nonchalantly informs her as she is driving off that she
intends to sleep with her boyfriend while her mom is gone.  The movie
seems to be saying, such is single motherhood in the 90s.
     When Claudia arrives at the airport in Baltimore, her mom (Anne
Bancroft) and dad (Charles Durning) are there to greet her.  Actually,
her mom seems to be there solely to offer a constant stream of
unsolicited advice.  Upon driving away, they get stuck in holiday
traffic.  Mom has a mile long cigarette stuck in Claudia's face most of
the time while she lectures Claudia with such wisdom as "I can see your
roots."  The small car is an extremely confining and claustrophobic gas
chamber for Claudia.  Don't feel too sad for her however because
eventually everyone in the movie including Claudia ends up smoking like
chimneys.  Hollywood continues to think that most Americans smoke and
have taken drugs, even if some of them have never inhaled.
     Claudia's daughter told her to "Float.  Just float" like the angel
fish when tense.  Claudia repeats this as a mantra while at her
parents, but she also steaks off to her old bedroom to smoke pot.  This
drug usage was one of many unnecessary scenes in the picture.
     The movie does not know what it wants to be.  In W. D. Richter's
script, based on a Chris Radan short story, sometimes it is quite
funny.  Other well written lines are extremely poignant.  When talking
with her uptight sister Joanne (Cynthia Stevenson), Claudia tells her,
"You don't know the first thing about me."  To which Joanne thinks and
then says, "If I just met you on the street and you gave me your
number, I'd throw it away."  Claudia, visibly hurt, replies, "We don't
have to like each other.  We're family."
     Against the all too infrequent laughter and well written serious
moments, we have a lot of balderdash and sight gags - adults shooting
each other with water hoses and that sort of thing.  One of the stars
of the show is Claudia's brother Tommy (Robert Downey, Jr.).  Downey
grates on your nerves with severe overacting.  He is a mercurial actor
who needs good directorial advice which director Jodie Foster never
provided.  He is literally bouncing off of the walls in most scenes as
if he was mainlining caffeine during breaks.  In one of the worst
series of scenes we have him constantly driving off burning rubber when
Claudia or his friend Leo (Dylan McDermott) try to get back in his old
hot rod of a car.
     Second to the gratingly bad performance by Downey is that of
Bancroft's.  She delivers a heavily cliched rendition of an overbearing
mom.  Durning is okay playing a dad who seems sort of out of it.
Although Stevenson has to be part of the disgustingly silly old joke of
a flying cooked turkey that falls in her lap, I thought she was
interesting in a minor, one dimensional role.  Her banker husband
Walter (Steve Guttenberg) is given a part with no substance.  He gets
to mouth only a few lines, e. g., "Cash is King.  Cash is the fossil
fuel that keeps our economic pistons pumping."  It sounds funnier than
it is in the show.  There is also crazy Aunt Glady (Geraldine Chaplin)
who wears Fruit Loops for a necklace and says one outlandish thing
after another.  Chaplin was fine with the part.
     I am a big fan of Holly Hunter.  I though she was quite good in a
highly uneven movie.  The best scene is when she is at the door of her
childhood bedroom and is trying to figure out if she really wants to
fend off an admirer or not.  She can do romance well if the directors
would just let her.  Too often they back off and have her cut to comedy
as they did in BROADCAST NEWS.  I would have liked HOME FOR THE
HOLIDAYS to have spent a lot more time on her romance.
     I found myself constantly monitoring my watch wondering how much
more of this I had to endure.  Every time Downey or Bancroft got in a
scene, which is most of them, I thought, yuck, what next.  In fact, the
movie is a series of labeled vignettes, and toward the end one is
actually labeled "What Next".
     There is a good movie contained within HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS which
I suppose is why most of the critics love this show.  For me, there are
way too many failed sight gags and characters that got on my nerves
with their antics and mannerisms.  If Claudia's mom didn't leave her
alone soon, I thought I was going scream.  The best part of this movie
for me was the ending.  Not that the ending is good, which it actually
is, but that it finally came and I could go home.
     HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS runs way too long for me at 1:43.  It is
rated PG-13 for drug use and profanity.  There is no sex or nudity.  It
is acceptable for teenagers, but the movie is so uneven and the bad
parts so grating, that I do not recommend the movie.  It gets * 1/2
from me for a significant number of good parts.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Holly Hunter, Robert Downey, Jr., Anne Bancroft, Charles Durning,
      Dylan McDermott, Cynthia Stevenson, Steve Guttenberg, Claire Danes
Director: Jodie Foster
Producers: Peggy Rajski and Jodie Foster
Screenplay: W.D. Richter based on a short story by Chris Radant
Cinematography: Lajos Koltal
Music: Mark Isham
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Certain holidays have a greater appeal for film makers than others.
Take Christmas, for example--there have been dozens upon dozens of
pictures set on and around this late-December observance.  Alas,
Thanksgiving has not enjoyed the same cinematic exposure.  Aside from
PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES, few Turkey Day pictures leap to mind.
So the field is ripe for a prime entry.  With Jodie Foster in the
director's chair and Holly Hunter in the lead, HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS
looked like a likely candidate to help fill the vacancy.  Unfortunately,
this film ends up more like stuffing than meat.
     As dramatic comedies go, HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS is highly uneven.
In general, the humor works pretty well, even if it is often of the
cruel sort.  Foster's film offers its fair share of laughs, although
most come at the expense of "easy mark" characters.  Dramatically,
however, the movie is only a step up from a flop.  It's difficult
connecting with these oddball personalities, who all seem like refugees
from David Lynch's version of middle America.  And, with no emotional
link, who really cares whether one person or another overcomes their
problems?
     Holly Hunter plays Claudia Larson, an art restoration expert who
has just lost her job.  After sharing a passionate lip-lock with her
boss (Austin Pendleton), she heads to the airport for a Thanksgiving
trip home to Baltimore.  In the car on the way, her daughter (Claire
Danes), who is remaining behind in Chicago, informs Claudia that she
intends to lose her virginity in the next few days.  What can a mom say
to that except "use protection"?
     After a plane trip spent sitting next to someone who won't shut up,
Claudia arrives at her childhood home.  There, one-by-one, she meets the
entire weird crew.  First up are her mother, Adele (Anne Bancroft), and
father, Henry (Charles Durning), who are getting ready for the holiday.
Then there's the family's black sheep, Tommy (Robert Downing Jr.), who
arrives in the middle of the night with a friend (Dylan McDermott) in
tow.  Next is Aunt Glady (Geraldine Chaplin), a spinster who wears Froot
Loops necklaces.  Finally, there's Claudia's baby sister, Joanne
(Cynthia Stevenson), who acts like a petulant martyr.  Of course, when
all of these people sit down for dinner, disaster occurs.
     With the exception of Robert Downey Jr (CHAPLIN), who spends the
whole movie over-the-top, the acting is fine.  Holly Hunter (THE PIANO,
COPYCAT) gets the most out of her role, and Cynthia Stevenson (THE
PLAYER) does some nice things with a thinly-scripted part.  The problem
is, most of these characters are written as offbeat weirdos just for the
sake of having a bunch of oddballs.  Take a look at Nora Ephron's MIXED
NUTS to see what a mistake that is.  Also, so much effort is put into
distancing the audience from the film's population (so the jokes won't
seem too mean-spirited) that when we're required to sympathize with them
for dramatic purposes, it doesn't work.
     At the center of all the chaos is Claudia, who has reached an
emotional crisis.  The film's solution is to give her a love interest,
even though there's no obvious chemistry between Hunter and McDermott.
In the end, we could care less whether they get together.  And that's
the problem with most of HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS--we don't care enough
about what's happening.  Aside from a few effective, low-key scenes, the
movie doesn't involve the viewer.
     HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS astutely observes that no matter how much one
hates Thanksgiving, Christmas is always around the corner for a repeat
of the "festivities."  If it's all the same, one holiday is more than
enough with this group.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It is hard to believe but Jodie Foster, a most talented young
actress, has appeared in thirty-two films.  When she further became a
director, in the wonderful LITTLE MAN TATE, no one could deny that here
was someone very special.  So when HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS was about to
be screened I could hardly wait.  Sadly, the movie is very mediocre, to
which we must add, even the best do not always succeed every time.
     With a great cast and a brilliant director, the fault lies mostly
with the story itself.   My having spent many years at family
gatherings at holidays, with Thanksgivings being the most memorable,
and all of them joyful, it was difficult to relate to HOME FOR THE
HOLIDAYS where holiday gatherings where close relatives attended every
year but wished they did not have to.
     Claudia Larson (Holly Hunter) has just been a victim of
"downsizing" (what an ugly euphemism!) at her job in an art gallery.
Her 15-year-old daughter says she is not going to the Dinner but will
stay home with her boy friend and "go all the way."  With this and more
on Claudia's mind and heart she takes a plane to her family in
Baltimore.
     Mom (Anne Bancroft) and Dad (Charles Durning) a most loving
couple, are, as usual, the hosts.  Eccentric Aunt Glady is there, as
are Claudia's sister and brother-in-law and their children.  Brother
Tommy (Robert Downey, Jr.) is there, too, but only because Claudia felt
she could not endure the gathering without him. He arrives with his gay
friend, Leo Fish (Dylan McDermott) which astonishes most of the family
who did not know about Robert and Leo.
     Bickering abounds before, during and after dinner.  Again, I found
it hard to relate to that.  And through it all, much of the dialogue
(screenplay by W. D. Richter) seems as if most are speaking lines
rather than real-life talk.  It was difficult to warm up to the family
and the movie.  With all that was going on, there was nothing exciting
to make me want to know what happened next.  Nothing much did.
