Title
Review for Simon (1980)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Along with ALTERED STATES, this uneven comedy by Marshall Brickman
seemed to make 1980 the year for isolation tank experiments.  Alan
Arkin plays the title character, a college lecturer who has been
selected for an elaborate, if somewhat fey, experiment by Austin
Pendleton's elite scientific task force.  Through various
none-too-subtle methods (it's a comedy, after all), Arkin is duped into
believing that he is not a human being, but, in fact, an
extra-terrestrial.  Once this plot turn takes effect, the direction of
the story is anyone's guess.  It's obvious that writer-director
Brickman wanted to milk as many ideas from this premise as he could.
Instead, the satire becomes muddy.  Part of the problem is that
Brickman keeps shifting targets - religion, television, the government
- and doesn't provide a cruel enough edge to his story.  Its light tone
is reminiscent of the earlier Woody Allen movies (particularly SLEEPER)
that Brickman had a hand in.  Arkin, a fine actor who has demonstrated
his comedic touch in many other roles, is stuck with an impossibly
confused character.  In the end, Simon becomes little more than a
melange of his more familiar mannerisms.
Despite flaws, film still manages many funny moments - a highlight is
Arkin's mime of the evolution of man, excitedly narrated by observing
scientist Wallace Shawn.  Shawn and his colleagues (particularly Max
Wright, who fits his role like a glove) provide much humor as the cabal
of geniuses that conspiracy theorists love to think are secretly
running the world.  These scientists, however, are not interested in
major issues - their pursuits are petty or fanciful.  The newly
'alienated' Simon, in like fashion, is interested only in the trivial
aspects of modern life.  Intentionally or not, this keeps the whole
story inconsequential.  Yet although Simon has none of the
disorientation we would accord any extra-terrestrial visitor, he does
draw attention to one element we might otherwise overlook: If aliens
did appear on our planet, their culture shock would not be generated by
such global concepts as politics, religion, or war, but rather the
petty accessories of people's everyday lives.  Film's uninspiring title
didn't contribute much to its box-office.  Also with: Madeline Kahn
(less kooky than usual), and Judy Graubert as Simon's girlfriend.
(An older film, submitted for inclusion into the Database)
