Title
Review for Touch (1997/I)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 2/14/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:37
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, nudity, sex, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Skeet Ulrich, Bridget Fonda, Christopher Walken, Tom Arnold
Director: Paul Schrader
Producers: Lila Cazes and Fid Attieh
Screenplay: Paul Schrader based on the novel by Elmore Leonard
Cinematography: Ed Lachman
Music: David Grohl
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     These days, Elmore Leonard is hot.  Not only have his novels GET 
SHORTY and now TOUCH recently been adapted into motion pictures, but at 
least two more titles are on the way, including Quentin Tarantino's 
anticipated version of RUM PUNCH.  But, while GET SHORTY was a bonanza 
for just about everyone involved, TOUCH proves that having the rights to 
a Leonard story isn't enough.  This particular adaptation is ambivalent 
not only about what it wants to say, but how it wants to say it.  The 
result is a dissonant war between drama and satire, between characters 
and caricatures.  
     On the one hand, we have the story of Juvenal (Skeet Ulrich), a 
former Franciscan monk who now works at an alcoholic rehab center.  
Juvenal's a quiet, unassuming person with an amazing gift:  he can heal 
with a touch.  His arms, feet, and side bear the wounds of Christ, and, 
when he heals, they bleed.  While Juvenal is a deeply spiritual person, 
he has become disillusioned about organized religion, and, when a smooth 
talking con man by then name of Bill Hill (Christopher Walken) comes 
along, Juvenal is easy prey.  That's the drama.
     On the other hand, we have all of the extraneous subplots orbiting 
around this tale of spiritual exploration.  There are Bill's attempts to 
get the young man booked on a trash TV show (with host Gina Gershon) and 
secure the publishing rights to his story.  A fundamentalist Christian 
(Tom Arnold) insists that Juvenal can only remain true to his calling by 
giving up his relationship with Lynn (Bridget Fonda), an "impure" woman.  
The mother (Lolita Davidovich) of one of Juvenal's miraculously healed 
children wants to prolong her fifteen minutes of fame.  Finally, there 
are reporters and agents (played by Janeane Garofalo and Paul Mazursky, 
among others) who see Juvenal as a meal ticket.  That's the satire.
     Taken separately, either the satirical or the dramatic elements 
might have formed the backbone of an interesting motion picture.  
Together, they create an unfocused mess.  The parody isn't as biting as 
it could be, and we've seen this kind of stuff before.  Fundamentalist 
religion is an easy target, especially when it involves sleazy 
televangelists.  The Tom Arnold character is a painfully irritating 
caricature who should have been purged from the script altogether.  
Christopher Walken, putting on his best oily smile, is one of the few 
aspects of the film's cynical side that works.  That, and the "Juvenal 
Touched Me" tee-shirt worn by a healed child.
     Then there are Skeet Ulrich and Bridget Fonda, who act like they're 
in another movie.  As far as they're concerned, this is a romantic drama 
about two lonely souls finding each other.  He's having a crisis of 
faith and she's having a crisis of conscience.  They're not particularly 
concerned that they are being manipulated.  In fact, at one point, 
Juvenal makes the absurd statement that he can't be exploited if he's 
allowing the exploitation to take place.  Huh?  
     Part of the problem with TOUCH is that the audience is never sure 
of Juvenal.  I don't mean that he's complex or cleverly ambiguous; he's 
murky and poorly-developed.  We never get much of a sense of what he 
feels about having these amazing powers, how he reacts to the 
possibility that he may have lost them, and whether he's resentful of 
all the media attention.  Ulrich radiates a blandness that does nothing 
to define his character.  He and Fonda make an appealing couple, but 
their romance is only a small part of what's going on.
     TOUCH waffles regarding its views about spirituality, as well.  By 
the final reel, we're not sure if the film views faith with reverence or 
contempt.  And what seems to be a clear-cut message about selling out is 
negated during the climax.  Films like LEAP OF FAITH and THE RAPTURE, 
which dealt with similar issues, maintained consistent viewpoints that 
didn't leave the viewer unsure of the film makers' intentions. 
     Paul Schrader has done some interesting work in the past as both a 
director (LIGHT SLEEPER) and a writer (TAXI DRIVER).  Here, however, he 
has gone off track.  As intriguing as the material is -- and who 
wouldn't be interested in a story about a con man's attempts to exploit 
a miracle worker who may have lost his powers -- Schrader never gets a 
handle on the right approach.  The result is disappointing and 
disjointed.  Simply put, TOUCH just doesn't have the right feel.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Kong
When Get Shorty came out, I was not too excited to see it.  I wondered what 
was so wonderful about that movie.  And when it came down to it, I did miss 
the movie in the theatres.  But, after many recommendations later on from 
co-workers, I went out and rented the movie to watch.  And what a wonderful 
movie.  The best part of the movie was the dialog.  The movie was filled with 
great dialog.  I regretted not seeing Get Shorty in the theatres, so when 
Touch, another movie based on a Elmore Leonard novel, came out I rush out to 
see it.
Touch is about a young man, named Juvenal, who bleeds from his palms and heals 
with his touch.  Touch is also about a woman, Lynn Faulkner, played by Bridget 
Fonda, who falls in love with Juvenal unexpectedly.  Christopher Walken plays 
a snake-skin-boot-wearing-television-evangelist-turned-RV-salesman who weasels 
his way into becoming Juvenal's agent.  Tom Arnold plays a crazed religious 
activist.
The movie is feels split between two completely different stories.  One is 
about the relationship that is building between Juvenal and Lynn.  The other 
is about Walken's character and Arnold's character trying to get access to 
Juvenal.  The relationship story has potential, the other story has a cheap 
feeling to it.  As if the writers needed something to be the conflict that 
pushed the relationship story.  Arnold heavily overplays his part and most of 
the time makes it feel as if his character really didn't belong in this movie. 
 Walken's character is not overplayed by Walken, but its over stressed by the 
director.  How many shots of his snake skin boots do we need to see to figure 
out that he is not an honest guy?  Fonda and Ulrich do a good job with their 
parts.
The movie has a cheap low-budget feel to it.  And there are cheezy lines 
spouted as, "Controversy is the oxygen I breathe!"
Did I enjoy any part of the movie?  Yes, I did.  I enjoyed the parts of the 
movie when Janeane Garofalo was on screen.  She is a cynical publisher in the 
movie, and plays it right on the money.  She is funny in all the scenes that 
she has, and is just about the whole comedy part of the movie.
All in all, I wish that I had seen this on video or better yet on cable, and I 
still want to see Get Shorty on the big screen.  If you're planning to see 
this, wait till it hits the small screen, it's just not worth seeing in the 
theatres.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TOUCH is a film about healing through stigmata.  For those of you
like myself who recognize the word but have no idea what it means, the
movie's information kit defines it as "a spontaneous manifestation of
bloody wounds on a person's hands, feet, and side, similar to wounds of
the crucified Jesus Christ."  It goes on to claim that over 300 cases
have been recorded.
     With this much information you probably figure TOUCH is another
movie from some religious order.  Wrong.
     The director is Paul Schrader, who also wrote the screenplay based
on the book by Elmore Leonard.  Schrader is a director who likes his
material on the edge.  His two best movies were CAT PEOPLE (1982) with
Nastassja Kinski and PATTY HEARST (1988) with Natasha Richardson.  The
first featured a scene where a naked Kinski runs like a cat through the
woods with the blood of a rabbit dripping from her mouth.  The second
has Richardson locked in a dark closet for scene after scene while
Cinque screams profanities at her.
     As you can now guess, Schrader approaches TOUCH in ways that other
directors might not.  As always, he attracts a high caliber cast.
Although TOUCH does have its moments, I spent most of the movie as
confused as the actors.  As occasional nervous laughter crept into what
was otherwise an unusually silent press screening, I kept asking
myself: Was this line supposed to be funny?  Are we laughing with the
show or at it?
     Most of the actors were confused as to whether they were in a
serious film or a comedy.  Others seemed to feel they were in a parody.
Many scenes were quite enjoyable, and yet...
     Perhaps it was the movie's beginning that turned me off.  Any show
that starts with someone throwing objects at a television screen
because he does not like what is playing puts my cliche meter
immediately into the red zone.
     As it turned out, the guy doing the throwing was an alcoholic, and
his wife was blind.  Someone, who goes by the unlikely name of Juvenal
(Skeet Ulrich), comes to the rescue of the abusive husband.  Juvenal,
whose real name we will learn is Charlie Lawson, works at the alcoholic
treatment center at Sacred Heart.  When he sees that the man's wife is
blind, he holds her head, bleeds on her (see stigmata definition
above), and restores her sight.
     Skeet Ulrich's acting makes the picture.  You are never sure what
he is going to do next, and he has the innocence of a true faith
healer.  Juvenal has supposedly spent the last six years in a jungle in
Brazil, and Ulrich's performance make this easily believable.  His
goatee and overall appearance are meant to remind the audience of Jesus
without trying to copy some religious picture exactly.
     An ex-minister named Billy Hill (Christopher Walken) who now sells
recreational vehicles witnesses the miracle.  Since Hill's specialty is
religious cons, he smells money.  With the help of his fellow con
artist Lynn Faulkner (Bridget Fonda), who used to twirl the baton at
his services, he tries to find out about Juvenal.  Walken and Fonda are
great actors and watching them pull off these ambiguous roles was one
of the delights of the film.
     In an unnecessary side plot, probably to boost ticket sales, Lynn
and Juvenal have a fling so both get to take their clothes off.  This
also allows Lynn to inquire when doing her lover's laundry, "Do you
think it's all right?  Stigmata blood in the wash?"  And Juvenal can
confess to her, "I bleed from five wounds and heal people, but I've
never been in love."
     TOUCH bogs now more than you would expect from a Paul Schrader
film.  In one long scene, for example, Walken and Fonda are forced to
sit around making small talk.  Walken is better doing something creepy,
and Fonda seems too intelligent to bother with this meaningless banter.
     Easily the weakest character in the film, Tom Arnold gets large
amounts of screen time as August Murray, the head of a protest movement
within the Roman Catholic Church.  His group is known as "the gray army
of the Holy Ghost."  They break up masses with guitar singing priests
by stripping the priests of their vestments during the service.  Latin
is the only language for their church.  Their gray shirts are
reminiscent of Hitler's brown shirts.  Arnold's performance borders on
the embarrassing.
     The movie is full of known actors.  Paul Mazursky plays a record
producer who spends most of his time on his cell phone.  A director and
an actor, Mazursky has had mixed success with both careers.  Here he is
the most wasted of all of the actors.  He is not asked to do much and
he doesn't.  He gets lines like, "A prompt man is a lonely man."
     Lolita Davidovitch appears as a stripper whose son is cured of
leukemia by Juvenal.  Davidovitch acts with great gusto in what is a
part so small that it would have vanished without her energy.
     Janeane Garofalo, who was so wonderful in THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS &
DOGS, has a part as the skeptical newspaper reporter Cathy Worthington.
Garofalo takes her few lines and makes them special by her mere
presence.
     The show will build toward a visit by Juvenal to see Debra
Lusanna, an Oprah style talk show host played by Gina Gershon.
"Controversy is my oxygen," Lusanna says.  "It's the air I breathe."
Gershon's acting abilities appear limited to large smiles.
     An off-beat show, certainly.  And sometimes, an interesting one.
But too much of its far out humor just doesn't work.
     TOUCH runs just 1:37.  It is rated R.  There is some male and
female nudity, a little sex, a little violence, and a few cuss words.
Perhaps it was the sacrilegious aspects that got it the R, but I would
have expected the film to have gotten a PG-13.  The show would be fine
for any teenager and perhaps those just a bit younger if they can
understand the humor in the material.  I liked parts of the show
especially some of the acting, but cannot bring myself to recommend it.
I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
