Title
Review for Kicking and Screaming (1995)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Edwin Jahiel
KICKING AND SCREAMING  **  Written and directed by Noah Baumbach. 
Photography, Steven Bernstein. Editing, J. Kathleen Gibson. Production 
design, Dan Whifler. Costumes, Mary Jane Fort. Music, Phil Marshall. 
Cast: Josh Hamilton, Olivia d'Abo, Carlos Jacott, Chris Eigeman, Eric 
Stoltz, Jason Wiles, Parker Posey, Cara Buono, Elliott Gould, et al.96 
min.  Rated R (language, sex). 
I can't decide whether "Kicking and Screaming" is the child of movies 
like  "Slacker," "Metropolitan," "Barcelona," "Clerks" and the like, or 
just a relative. The common ground and style are there.
The film is mainly about four preppyish men who have just graduated from 
college (school's name and location unspecified) and somehow still hang 
around. Since the cast also includes and involves a number of current 
students, it is sometimes confusing to tell who's still taking courses 
and who is not.
The quartet spend a great deal of time in conversations and 
bull-sessions. There are even scenes of a course in what I take is 
Creative Writing, an awful class treated with good irony. 
The film's start is auspicious. Then you wait and wait for interesting 
things to happen or to be said. They do not, unless you think that 
endless talk that tries to probe into hearts and minds is fascinating 
--dialogue that focuses on media trivia, pretentious and undigested 
cultural references, sex or  post-sophomoric sophomorisms,what one 
character later denounces as "Liberal Arts bull...t."   
The quartet , now  with diploma in hand, are still at the chrysalis 
stage, at some distance from the change to butterfly. They are still 
dazed and confused, to borrow the title of  Richard ("Slacker") 
Linklater's film on 1970s high-schoolers. Some of the graduates pose as 
sophisticates but know that they are not  yet ready for life outside the 
academic cocoon.
The movie tries to be of the mid-1990s, from references to Prague (where 
one man's girl has gone) to chat about nose rings, but with minor 
changes it could be any time since 1980. It is divided into chapters 
whose headings are "Graduation," " Four Months After Graduation," "Fall 
Semester," "Midterms,"  "One Month Before Christmas Vacation" and "Three 
Weeks Later." 
Unlike the steady or occasional lightheartedness of its  filmic 
relatives, this movie's tone feels rather downbeat. The mood is often 
underlined by a kind of morose under-lighting. The man-woman episodes 
are not exactly uplifting either.
A character who is  22 ("Wow! Old Man River!" exclaims a female 
undergraduate) and looks older, is gauchely paired off with a girl who 
is about to become 17, looks younger and, to put it politely, is not 
exactly refined.  When another student, bare-breasted, chain-smoking and 
gum-chewing, tells her new bedmate that she did it because "it seems 
like the college thing to do" this is more depressing than droll. 
There are some clever or sharp moments and bits and pieces that find "le 
mot juste" or the right situations. On the whole though, I wonder 
whether the film is a phony assemblage itself or the true depiction of  
phony characters. Assuming it is the latter, those people and their talk 
are not especially stimulating, just as their affairs are without  true 
sentiment --not to mention passion,-- just as replicating life is not  
in itself necessarily interesting. If this is a portrait of the age, it 
is a cheerless one. 
Credit however Noah Baumbach, the 25-year old writer-director, with a 
debut that, while low on originality and excitement, is promising and 
rather skillful. A huge number of  first films come  from personal 
experience, a common rite of passage in movies. Here, the director may 
be too close to subject, too involved in it, therefore hampered in the 
process of  selecting,  separating chaff from wheat, maintaining 
clarity, giving shape and tempo to his creation.  
At least one famous director has said that you make only one film in 
your life. This means, more or less, that an "auteur"'s 
psychological-social-intellectual nature results in dominant themes and 
treatments. Some of the best filmmakers have done this, but with 
variety, variations and quality. I suspect that Noah Baumbach, with more 
maturity and distancing will --unless he sells out to commercialism -- 
eventually come up with a more complex picture. 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Josh Hamilton, Olivia D'Abo, Chris Eigeman, Parker Posey,
      Jason Wiles, Carlos Jacott, Carla Buono, Eric Stoltz, Elliot Gould
Director: Noah Baumbach
Producer: Joel Castleberg
Screenplay: Noah Baumbach based on a story by Noah Baumbach and
      Oliver Berkman
Cinematography: Steven Bernstein
Music: Phil Marshall
U.S. Distributor: Trimark Pictures
     If we're to believe the movies, members of the so-called Generation
X are hopelessly caught in the grip of ennui, struggling (and mostly
failing) to make sense out of life and the world in general.  We've seen
this story so many times that it's starting to wear thin.  In many ways,
KICKING AND SCREAMING is mildly enjoyable, but all it really does is go
over old ground with new characters.
     Much of KICKING AND SCREAMING's appeal results from its cast.  Josh
Hamilton (WITH HONORS) is the weakest of the performers, giving a
somewhat bland portrayal as Grover, a 22-year old would-be author with
writer's block.  Much better is Olivia D'Abo (THE LAST GOOD TIME,
GREEDY) as Jane, his girlfriend, who decides to move to Prague after
graduating.  Chris Eigeman essays Max, a character with the same sort of
acerbic wit as the ultra-patriotic American he brought to life in
BARCELONA.  Jason Wiles, Carlos Jacott, and Parker Posey are effective
as Grover and Max's friends.  And what would any Gen X picture be
without the presence of the ubiquitous Eric Stoltz?
     The basic premise of KICKING AND SCREAMING is to follow a small
group of college graduates as they are reluctantly forced to face
"reality"--moving away from campus, forming new relationships, and
getting jobs.  As it turns out, none of the characters are able to make
a clean break.  Grover and Max still hang out around their alma mater,
Jane runs away to another country, Otis (Jacott) goes to grad school,
Skippy (Wiles) audits a few classes, and Chet (Stoltz), the career
student, returns semester after semester.
     The characters are all pretty likable, and it's not too hard to
sympathize with their situation--at least until their social paralysis
becomes irritating.  But KICKING AND SCREAMING is essentially a film of
moments.  Much of the dialogue is crisp, and there are several
individual scenes that work to near-perfection (most notably the
flashbacks that detail the building of Grover and Jane's relationship),
but the connecting material is weak.  Above all, the movie comes to a
conclusion without a sense of closure.
     KICKING AND SCREAMING is often witty, occasionally hilarious, and
ultimately bittersweet.  But, in the final analysis, there's not much
here that's original or insightful.  This is essentially the story of a
group of post-college slackers wrestling with life's many, varied
tribulations--not exactly virgin ground for '90s film makers.  And, in
this case, what's on screen is just a little too familiar to be worth
lauding.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by Noah Baumbach
Story by Noah Baumbach and Oliver Berkman
Starring Josh Hamilton, Sam Gould, Catherine Kellner, Eric Stoltz, Olivia
d'Abo, Christopher Eigeman, and Parker Posey
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 The question that one is immortally faced with as a critic is one of
personal interpretation.  You see a movie and it could be taken one of two
or more ways, often making the difference between a completely terrible film
and a great literary document.
 In a more outlandish example we had 1997's Starship Troopers, a film that
could very well be viewed as an anti-fascist document and a representation
of Nazism.  However, with exuberantly high and seemingly useless body count,
Starship Troopers got a bad review from me on the account that it was your
standard-edition, boring-as-anything, action film.
 There were people who took Starship Troopers in just this aspect, said that
it was a great film, and had a points so good that they could not be
logically countered.
 Similarly, we are faced with the 1995 film Kicking and Screaming, which was
said to do for college what Dazed and Confused did for high school.  Yes,
it's undeniably funny.  Yes, its dialogue is so razor sharp that it cuts
through any obstacle and right into your funny bone.
 But the problem is that, in the method it is done, one would expect a huge
point to come at the end of it.  Sadly, it doesn't.  It is one of those
films that does not end, only stops dead in its tracks.
 Were this just any film with just any apparent point of illustration I
would decry the pointlessness of the movie simply stopping and leave it as
just a mildly entertaining movie.  But here's the rub: Kicking and Screaming
is an illustration of the directionless nature of post-college life.
 As far as plot goes, that's just about it.  Grover (Josh Hamilton) is
trying to get over Jane (Olivia d'Abo), who went to Prague.  Max
(Christopher Eigeman) is trying to decide where to go in love and life after
a basically useless philosophy degree, but ends up just spending time
sleeping with freshmen.  Chet (Eric Stoltz) is trying to finally work his
way to a degree but is content to merely be a student.
 The ending of Kicking and Screaming, which doesn't even have a fade out
(the credits just suddenly start), could be viewed as an illustration of the
lack of direction that the characters have.  However, it could also just be
viewed as a bad ending... an anticlimax.
 The movie is able to pull its weight with an incredibly witty repartee
throughout the 96-minute running time, but is unable to go beyond the point
of just jokes.  Were this from the studio world, which is strictly a
business and is more for love of money than trying to do art, I could
understand and write the lack of a good ending on script doctors who are
only good with good lines, but instead this is what is called "an
Independent masterpiece."
 To me this spells a slight bit of hypocrisy on behalf of the viewing
public.  If someone were willing to patron and love Kicking and Screaming on
the merit of repartee alone, than, by that argument, great one-liners would
make a great film.  On this same line of logic, a movie with great action
sequences is a great film.
 You could subdivide and say that a movie with great dialogue makes a great
independent film, but that would be another cop-out.  Studio films may not
always have great dialogue, but neither do Independents.  In fact, the only
difference I have ever discerned between Studio films and Independents
(budget aside) is that most Independent films could not successfully be
pitched to studios.
 Perhaps I am seeing this all wrong.  Perhaps pointlessness being the point
is something that has just flown over my head this time.  But, you know
what, if someone has to wonder if you have a point or are just out for cash,
you didn't do a good job.

Author
Kobayashi Syonan-Teo
Directed by: Noah Baumbach
Written by: Noah Baumbach
Cast :  Josh Hamilton, Olivia D'Abo, Eric Stoltz, Elliott Gould
Produced by : Joel CastleBerg,  Trimark Pictures
Rating : *** out of *****
Theatres: Shaw Cinemas
      If I were a white boy.  O, if I were a white just-graduated 
middle-class American boy.  All day long I'd diddee-diddle-dum, 
play crosswords, talk in conversations involving the simulated 
quiz-show sound "Ding!", watch washing-powder ads, listen to 
taped ansaphone messages from my girlfriend in Prague, drink 
in townie bars, get laid with freshman-girls, and still look morose.  
I'd re-enrol in college, or maybe I'd back out of graduate school  
because I  couldn't adjust to the one-hour difference in the timezone.  
I'd put my life on hold for years, and then realize this WAS my life. 
And I'd have to put it all on film. 
       I could do all of the above, but really the thing is to get a bunch 
of us graduated white boys, and divide up the work.  So let me 
introduce Otis (Carlos Jacott), the ever-embarassable, who has this 
habit of doing vaguely alternative things without the confidence to 
admit to them ("Are you wearing mascara?" "NO!.....[pause]...yes.").  
Then meet Chet (Eric Stoltz),  the everlasting student, prolonging 
his postgraduate education into its dozenth year while moonlighting 
as a bartender.  On the same note (but with hazier motivations), 
there's Skippy (Jason Wiles), re-enrolling in college to take all the 
classes he missed (and also to keep an eye on his flirty undergrad 
girlfriend). As court-jester-cum-prophet-of-gloom we have Max, 
(Christopher Eigeman) an aimless sort with a gift for acid-sharp 
one-liners (on hearing about someone turning seventeen,  "Now 
you'll finally be able to read Seventeen and get all the references.").
                And then there's Grover (not the blue furry superhero-cum-loser, 
but quite possibly inspired by him).  He's the one with the heart troubles, 
paining for his girlfriend who's gone to study in Prague, recalling in 
flashbacks the unfolding stages of their relationship. This is meant to 
be the emotional core of the film, but as played by Josh Hamilton, 
Grover comes across as being both boring and dislikeable. When he drolly 
tells a friend on the phone (within earshot of the girl he's bedding), 
"Sorry, I can't talk now, I have to sleep with a freshman", the director 
probably wants usto empathise with his ennui, but all I can do is wonder 
why that girl even talks to him, rather than doing something far more 
worthwhile likekneeing him in the groin.
       Much better is Olivia D'abo, (remember the sister in 'The Wonder 
Years'?) as his girlfriend,  Jane.  She's got an appealingly awkward 
habit of toying with her tooth-braces, and she has enough intelligence 
and gopher-cheeked charm to make her easily more interesting than 
any of the boys.  That said, though, Chris Eigeman is very good -- 
he's perfected the knowing sarcastic role in films like METROPOLITAN, 
but here hismelancholy and self-deprecation make him more than just 
another smart aleck.  Oddly enough, for all his gloomy humour, he 
seems the least self-pitying and least deluded of the guys.
      This is a movie I should like a lot -- and in some ways I do.  It's got very 
smart and often funny lines, and it paints a sharp picture of a certain 
group of people, a picture that aims to be both satirical and 
sympathetic (and it nearly works).  But I've got problems watching 
this film.  It's not so much a suspension of disbelief that's required 
to enjoy this film, as a suspension of dislike.  One has to put aside one's 
annoyance at these guys' silly habits, their self-absorption, their thinking 
of themselves as so terribly smart and funny and hopelessly doomed in 
that Gen X kindaway .  One must bravely resist the urge to tell them to 
shape up, get a life, get a job, call your bloody girlfriend if you miss her 
so goddam much. Maybe it's because (and not in spite of) my being about 
22 and also freshly graduated : it's close to home, yet it doesn't hit the 
mark, somehow.  Maybe, whatever bits I do identify with,  I don't like that 
bit of myself enough to want to see it on screen. Or maybe if I were a white 
boy, I'd enjoy this film more.  Whatever it is, I still believe this Noah Baumbach 
(a first-time director) has it in him to direct some rather brilliant films.  I 
just think KICKING AND SCREAMING isn't one of them.
Kobayashi Syonan-Teo  is a little-known dissident snailrace 
commentator who is living in exile on a tourist island.
THE FLYING INKPOT's rating system:
 * Wait for the video. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
___________________________________
This review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT
.">http://bizdir.com.sg/inkpot/>. We're inkier! We're pottier! We're
wordy! All flying bricks welcome.  Leave your penguin at the door.

Author
Christopher Null
     Opening night of the Austin Film Festival and Screenwriters'
Conference brought me this little gem, a story of five guys who just
got out of college, the three women that float amongst them, and the
question that haunts them all, "What the hell am I going to do with my
life?"
     I wouldn't look to KICKING AND SCREAMING for the answer.  Rather,
the movie is a hilarious example of what not to do when you graduate.
The guys, Chet (Eric Stoltz), Grover (Josh Hamilton), Max (Chris
Eigeman), Skippy (Jason Wiles), and the show-stealing Otis (Carlos
Jacott), can't seem to give up the college life.  They hang out at
college bars, woo freshmen, and sneak back into classes.  Otis can't
even seem to get out of his pajamas.
     Women are only half the problem.  Jane (Olivia d'Abo) is Grover's
lover, but she jets off for Prague after graduation, leaving Grover in
despair.  Miami (Parker Posey) is Skippy's trouble-prone, flighty
girlfriend.  And Kate (Cara Buono) is Max's latest attachment, a
cafeteria worker he picks up while haggling over an extra potato.
     The plot basically follows the series of perpetual indecisions
that plague the friends, an ironic reality that most of us seem to face
at some point in our lives.  The so-called "touching" moments are
unfortunately pretty drab, and the mushy flashbacks where Jane and
Grover's fledgling romance is built up are real snoozers.  The film is
rightfully a study of misery.  This happiness stuff just gets in the
way.
     The acting and direction by Noah Baumbach (who also wrote the
script) are perfectly dead-on.  Carlos Jacott should gain a lot of
notice (and at least one of the various movie awards) for his
outrageously droll part as Otis.  If the script had avoided the
over-sentimentality, the film would have been even better.  And oddly,
a real ending seems to be mysteriously lacking.
     KICKING AND SCREAMING pokes fun at the pretense and phoniness of
virtually every college clique imaginable.  If you're one of those
sensitive types, you'll probably be offended at some point along the
way.  But hey, look on the bright side, at least you'll have it better
than these guys.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Rhodes
     KICKING AND SCREAMING is a good, but too frequently trite movie
about the superficiality and meaninglessness of young people's lives
today.  It tells the story of a group of boys just graduating from
college, and although there are many girls in the cast, they are in
secondary roles.  It is being billed as a droll comedy, but it really
isn't.  The movie at its best is an insightful satire on young
adulthood.  I laughed a couple of times, but more often I was either
touched by the dialog or just bored.
     First time writer and director Noah Baumbach assembled a cast of
typical college kid looking actors and actresses.  Most have been in
other shows about Generation Xers that either I have never seen or that
I hated, i.e., shows like NAKED IN NEW YORK or AMATEURS.  None had been
in the absolutely wonderful BEFORE SUNRISE which is proof positive that
shows about people in their 20s can be both well made and not
depressing.
     In KICKING AND SCREAMING's circle of friends are Grover (Josh
Hamilton), Max (Christopher Eigeman), Skippy (Jason Wiles), and Ottis
(Carlos Jacott).  The perpetual student and local bartender, Chet (Eric
Stoltz) has "taken every class in school" and yet is still a student.
Chet says that he can not understand why people want to be lawyers or
doctors, when they can be students.  Chet is also the only one
interested in real knowledge.  The others spend their time in make
believe trivia game shows and appear to have vast surface knowledge
about everything like "the names of eight movies where monkeys played a
leading role", but no interest in the meaning of anything.  One
semester Skip takes only: Ethics, Scandinavian Literature, and
Personality.
     Their girlfriends are Jane (Olivia D'Abo), Miami (Parker Posey),
and Kate (Cara Buono).  Finally, Elliott Gould, an actor who was never
very good, is a complete embarrassment in this movie as Grover's dad.
He demonstrate what happens to a bad actor when he goes down hill.
Luckily, he has a limited number of scenes.
     Two of the main girls in the movie, Jane and Miami, have an
unusual way to flirt with boys.  They take the retainers out of their
mouths and hold them like cigarettes or twirl them around their fingers
and then get their boyfriends to hold them.  Weird.
     The movie has way too many failed attempts at sight gags.  Jacott,
who is almost as bad as Gould, wears a pajama top with a tie to the
graduation party.  In another scene, someone breaks a glass in his
kitchen and then puts a sign that says "broken glass" over it rather
than sweeping it up.  Baumbach should have concentrated on the dialog
which is the high point of the show and given up on the sight gags.
     Baumbach's dialog ranges from the insightful to the bizarre.  Chet
is the philosopher even when serving drinks.  To a regular who thinks
Chet is nuts, Chet muses, "If Plato is a fine red wine, then Aristotle
is a dry martini."  In another scene, Max, talking about his parents
says, "It's like my real parents were assassinated, and they were next
in line for the job.  They fight a lot, but they'd never split."  Jane
keeps calling Grover from Prague and leaving messages on his answering
machine about everything, even her tour of Auschwitz.
     Although the guys and gals hang out a lot, none of them have more
than a superficial interest in each other or in life itself for that
matter.  I found this part of the movie believable but incredibly sad.
The kids smoke a lot, and drink all of the time.  I am sorry to report
that movie seems to say that you can drink Scotch and Colt 45 malt
liquor with one large swig after another, and yet never get mush
mouthed, stumble, or have it in any way affect your body or your
behavior.  Since the film is clearly targeted at the 12-29 age groups,
it is freighting that this movies trivializes alcoholism so much.  Most
kids in the show have major drinking problems that the picture makes
almost invisible.
     Other than the two pieces of terrible acting mentioned previously,
the other actors and actresses were good.  Eric Stoltz who needs good
direction to be effective got it from Baumbach.  Stoltz has been
pathetic in some films (NAKED IN NEW YORK and SAY ANYTHING) and quite
good in others (ROB ROY and THE WATERDANCE).  Here he was the best
person in the cast.
     The almost sepia colored photography by Steven Bernstein and the
depressing and lifeless costumes by Mary Jane Fort add to the overall
moroseness of the show.  Bernstein likes using a series of black and
white stills that dissolve into a lightly colored set of stills which
then dissolve into a live action scene.  It is a technique that works
well at focusing the audience's attention on the character's
expression.
     KICKING AND SCREAMING runs a quick 1:34 thanks to editing by Julie
Dole.  It is rated R for heavy drinking that teaches a bad lesson,
heavy smoking (ditto), some bad language, some nudity, a little sex,
but no violence.  If you let your teenagers go, go with them if you can
and talk about the movie afterwards, especially the drinking, the
smoking, and the real reasons for going to college.  This could be a
good opportunity to open up some communication with them.  I found
myself touched by the movie, and although Baumbach's film showed a lot
of potential, too much was unrealized for me to be able to recommend
it.  I give the movie my average movie rating of **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Larry McGillicuddy
**** (out of 4)
Directed by Noah Baumbach
Starring Josh Hamilton, Olivia D' Abo, Chris Eigeman, Eric Stoltz, 
Carlos Jacott, Parker Posey, Jason Wiles, Cara Buono, Elliott Gould
"The prose is like the bastard child of Raymond Carver", one 
character in a literary class says. You would think a character with 
such a great line would be a main character in the movie. However, he 
is a nameless character, and never shows up or says anything else for 
the rest of the film.  This line is spoken about halfway through 
Kicking and Screaming, during a flashback scene demonstrating the 
first time two of the characters met. There are several lines like 
this in the scene, also said by nameless people, as they discuss how 
a short story has a "1,000 years of solitude bend to it", and is 
written in "that pseudo russian novel ilk." The professor says no 
dialogue, but conveys a character that is simultaneously proud and 
condescending of his students. All of this happens before the scene 
even gets to it's purpose, which is showing the first time Grover and 
Jane met each other. Noah Baumbach is interested in details. Baumbach 
gives us a vivid background so his characters can exist and interact 
in the rea
 world, amongst extras who say real dialogue and have real facial 
expressions. He starts with a beautiful canvas, and onto it he paints 
one of the most memorable stories ever told with a camera.
Kicking and Screaming opens as it's main characters have just 
graduated from college. In one brilliant extended scene, a college 
graduation party, we learn more about the characters and their 
relationships than most movies tell us in 2 hours. Grover is a 
stubborn individual who doesn't accept change. So when his girlfriend 
Jane tells him she has received a scholarship to Prague, he decides 
to stick with his plan of living in Brooklyn.  Max is a bitter man 
who uses sarcasm to hide his true fears of having a meaningless 
existence in this world. Otis is an intelligent but odd character 
with strange habits like wearing a pajama tops underneath his suit.  
Skippy is their naive friend whose girlfriend Miami adores him the 
way you adore a puppy. 
The movie focuses mainly on the relationship between Grover and Jane. 
After the breakup, Grover tries to live on, but his attempt to do so 
is challenged as Jane constantly leaves messages on his answering 
machine. She speaks in a sad, desperate voice, afraid that Grover has 
forgotten about her. He just stands there emotionless and listens, 
and cuts the answering machine off before she says something that 
will make him pick up the phone. The movie intercuts these scenes 
with flashbacks that show the beginning of their relationship, 
including their argument in the literary class, and subsequent 
encounters in coffeehouses and bars as they begin to confide in one 
another. Grover and Jane are confused and nervous as they learn about 
each other and begin to fall in love. Rarely before has chemistry 
been so evident in a movie.
Max spends his time sitting at home trying to find something to do. 
Usually he ends up singing songs inspired by household items, filling 
out the crossword puzzle, or berating himself in the mirror because 
he "does nothing." This maudlin existence is interrupted when he 
meets Kate, Grover's 16 year old tutee. She is an intelligent beyond 
her years, no nonsense teenager. She doesn't take sarcastic rants, 
from him or from anybody else. He responds to that. He's finally 
found someone who won't take his crap and he likes it.
Otis has majored in mechanical engineering and is supposed to go to 
graduate school in Milwaukee. At the last minute he decides not to go 
and delays his admission. He spends the year working in a video store 
with the most ridiculous categories fo rit's movies (terminal illness,
 dog-buddy pictures, interesting failures). This is the weakest part 
of the movie I think, because it is played too broadly. It's 
basically making fun of Blockbuster and other big video chains, and 
while much of this is really funny, I think it belongs in a different 
movie.
In a similar situation as Otis is Skippy, who re-enrolls in college 
to stay near Miami, who was a year behind him. Skippy has the habit 
of saying inappropriate things at the wrong time, and stating the 
grotesquely obvious followed by "if you know what I mean."  
Late in the film, Grover sees something and actually gets a 
spontaneous idea. He tries to talk himself out of it, but can't 
resist. He runs up to a counter, but someone prevents from achieving 
his goal. In a heartfelt monologue filled with confused anger, 
apologetic sorrow, and inspired pleas, he begs this person to allow 
him to accomplish this. It's something he has to do. It will be a 
great moment in his life, and it would be criminal for anyone to 
prevent him from doing it. His speech is convincing, and she pulls 
some strings to allow it to happen. He is elated. He finally did it. 
No more giving up and letting things be. Unfortunately, he is missing 
an item necessary for his quest, and is turned away at the last 
minute. He can do this tomorrow, but that's 24 more hours for him to 
talk himself out of it. Will the enthusiasm still be there?
The constant theme in Kicking in Screaming is that these characters 
are afraid to move on with life after college. They don't know 
anything else except staying together, and are afraid of what the 
outside world has to offer them. Grover refuses to move with Jane to 
Prague, Max stays at home doing the crossworld puzzle, Otis defers 
admission to grad school, and Skippy re-enrolls to stay near Miami. 
Each of them is afraid of the challenges life is offering them. 
Probably the most admirable thing about Kicking and Screaming is that 
it has answers for some of the characters, but others it does not. 
For some it will take them longer to figure out what their purpose in 
the real world will be. Or maybe they will end up like Chet, the 
local bartender who has been going to college for 10 years because 
that's what he does in life.
Baumbach has assembled a brilliant ensemble of first-rate character 
actors, all perfectly suited for their parts. Hamilton and D'Abo find 
the perfect notes in their scenes together, as they speak with lumps 
in their throats while falling in love. Carlos Jacott gives one of 
the funniest deadpan performances in recent memory as Otis, and Eric 
Stoltz adds another great character to his resume as Chet. Eigeman, 
whose Max is similar to characters he essayed in Metropolitan and 
Barcelona, is perfectly cast and Jason Wiles perfectly captures the 
endearing lost puppy quality of Skippy that Posey's Miami finds so 
attractive. Also showing up in a memorable cameo is Elliott Gould as 
Grover's father, a sad-eyed man who has not recovered from his 
separation with his wife, and whose relationship with his son 
primarily exists of talking about New York Knick games.
Noah Baumbach is a master of meaningful and relevant dialogue. Every 
line, wether spoken by a main character or an extra makes sense. He 
is also a master with the camera, as his freeze frame introduction 
into the flashback scenes gives them a poignant, bittersweet feel. 
This is his first movie and he has already mastered filmmaking at 
every single level. It is an experience I will never forget. Ten 
years from now, people will talk about the debut movie of the 
greatest filmmaker in America, and they will call it Kicking and 
Screaming.

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
Review- This wonderful surprise was hands down the funniest movie of 1995.
 This film tells the stry of four friends who just graduated from college 
but are uncertain what to do with their lives. The plot may sound similar 
andf this story has been botched many times before, but this time it is 
perfect. I loved every minute of this film.
        Josh Hamilton stars as Grover, who on graduation night learns that his 
girlfriend, Jane, is moving to Prague. Grover asks "So how will that work 
if you're living with me in Brooklyn?" Jane responds, "It'll be the same, 
except I'll be in Prague." Jane leaves for Prague, and in a futile 
attempt to get over her, he sleeps with a different freshman each night 
it seems. Jane continues to leave messages on the answering machine, and 
Grover tries not to listen, but he does. The film shows the beginnings of 
their relationship in flashbacks, after we have already seen them breakup.
 This is an intelligent device, and makes the flashbacks all the more 
poignant.
        Chris Eigeman plays Max, the cynical wisecracking Matthew Perry-ish best 
friend of Grover. Max graduates and realizes he has to start all over 
again. "8 hours ago I was Max Beaumont, English major, college senior. 
Now I'm Max Beaumont who does nothing." Max always seems to have a self 
deprecating manner, and apparently is never happy with himself. Enter 
into his life a 16 year old high school student (Buono). They make an odd 
couple, but thats probably what Max likes about her. He couldn't stand 
being with someone like him, so he has to be with someone different. 
        Carlos Jacott plays Otis, the dopey one. He is supposed to go to 
graduate school, but doesn't have enough confidence and decides to take a 
year off. He is constantly doing strange things such as wearing his 
pajamas during the day, coming out of the bathroom unbuckled, and putting 
mascara on. He takes a job at a huge Blockbuster style video store that 
has numerous confusing movie categories such as Dog - Buddy pictures and 
Interesting Failures. This is an obvious attempt at spoofing Blockbuster 
and it is very funny, but seems out of place in this film which otherwise 
mines its humor from real life situations. This is a very minor nitpick 
in an otherwise perfect film.
        Jason Wiles plays Skippy, the naive and carefree one who re-enrolls in 
school after graduating so he has an excuse to stay in town with his 
undergraduate girlfriend, Miami (Posey). This is a very entertainig 
relationship between the two that suffers a crisis, and at the end we 
understand why he has put up with her, and why she has put up with him. 
The last scene between the two is wonderful. We realize their annoyances, 
but we understand their significant charms.
        In the middle of all this is the bartender Chet, played by Eric Stoltz. 
He has been going to college for 10 years. "I did skip a semester my 
sophomore year," he helpfully informs us. Chet is comfortable with what 
he does in life, and isn't looking for a career. He is a college student, 
and thats all he wants to be. 
        "Kicking and Screaming" was written and directed by Noah Baumbach in a 
stunning debut. The depth he puts into each and every character is 
astonishing. Notice for example the scene in the Creative Writing class 
where some characters that only have one or two lines have fully 
developed personalities, especially the teacher, who says only one word. 
The dialogue is highly entertaining and realistic. There are 
conversations here that rival the popular ones in Pulp Fiction, such as a 
discussion on the Friday the 13th films, and on wether you would want to 
fuck a cow or lose your mother. The acting is terrific. There isn't one 
imperfect performance in the bunch, and Jacott's uproarious deadpan 
portrayal of Otis deserved the Oscar for best supporting actor. Elliot 
Gould has a very effective small role as Grover's dad. This little 
independent feature didn't even make 1 million in its theatrical release, 
so I beg you to rent this so we will get to see more from Noah Baumbach 
in the future. This is one of the funniest movies of the decade.

Author
Nicholas Parrott
     KICKING AND SCREAMING is one of the many new movies being shown at
this years film festival.  It played to a surprisingly packed house at
the Commodore. But then it does deal with a theme that many at
Aberystwyth will find familiar.
     A bunch of guys decide to stay around college after
graduating.  They hang out in bars and chase freshers, but these are
the occasional highlights of an otherwise boring existence.  Shortly
they find their friendships starting to fracture as frustration and
personal jealousies set in.  Wannabe writer Grover (Josh Hamilton) is
plagued by memories of his girlfriend (Olivia D'abo) who left for
Prague straight after graduation.  His flashbacks of that romance are a
recurrent theme of good times lost.  His inability to reply to her
messages on his answerphone symbolic of his lack of direction.  Skippy
(Jason Wiles) re-enrolls in classes and tries to keep his relationship
with the flighty Miami (Parker Posey) alive.  While Otis (Carlos
Jascott), the lovable buffoon, tries hard to adjust to his new role,
applying to Graduate School but ending up working in a video store.
Role model to them all is the philosophising Chet (Eric Stolz), bar
steward and eternal student, now in his tenth year at college.
     KICKING AND SCREAMING is an enjoyable movie, but it does lack
some punch.  The end is inconclusive as the characters start to drift
away.  Otis eventually flies back home.  His departure inspires Grover
to fly to Prague to see Jane, but he gets grounded because he doesn't
have a passport.  As in real life the characters just start to drift
apart, not necessarily in pursuit of something new but because they
know they have climb out of the hole they have dug for themselves.
Despite a limp ending the film is an impressive debut for writer and
director Noam Baumbach and an wonderful vehicle for a clutch of gifted
young actors.
