Title
Review for Trainspotting (1996)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Michael Dequina
(R) *** 1/2
        While ID4 ate up all of the mainstream press the months leading up
to its release, the independent film community was all abuzz over
Trainspotting, which had gone on to be the second-highest grossing British
production of all time (behind Four Weddings and a Funeral).  Danny Boyle's
heroin drama has finally washed up on U.S. shores, and this sometimes
surreal, always harrowing film truly is unlike anything anyone has ever seen
in recent years.
        This brisk, darkly humorous, 95-minute ride follows one Mark Renton
(Ewan McGregor of Boyle's Shallow Grave), an aimless Scottish youth who,
with his buddies--the dimwitted Spud (Ewen Bremner) and Sean
Connery-obsessed con artist Sick Boy (Jonny Lee Miller)--choose not to
"choose life," opting instead for the empty but pleasurable life of heroin
addiction.  The film follows Mark and the gang as they quit and get hooked
again, have disastrous flings with women, have a couple of sick--but
hilarious--mishaps with feces, and get in trouble with their violent,
hard-drinking (but not drug-using) friend Begbie (Robert Carlyle).
        Trainspotting, based on Irvine Welsh's controversial novel of the
same name, has been accused of glamorizing heroin, and it does... to a
point.  While Boyle and screenwriter John Hodge, through the use of a
voiceover delivered by Mark, never deny the pleasure in shooting heroin, the
visual cues speak for themselves: everyone lives in filthy, cramped
apartments on the brink of collapse; everyone appears unclean and is prone
to passing out and defacating on oneself.  The more surreal moments, which
Boyle uses to capture the addict's state of mind, may hold some appeal and
serve as convincing pro-heroin propaganda for the most impressionable
viewer, but, as a whole, Boyle and Hodge don't smooth over all of the rough
edges--witness the manic, bizarre, but unsettling withdrawal scene that
occurs about halfway.
        If Trainspotting has a major flaw, it is in the area of character
development.  McGregor is a likable actor, and he thus makes Mark
sympathetic to the audience, but Mark remained somewhat of a mystery.  Sure,
he tosses off a couple of good one-liners and enjoys heroin, but I wasn't so
sure what motivated him, save for that abstract concept of "not choosing
life."  This becomes especially bothersome come halfway through the film,
when his personality and look on life takes a dramatic turn; it is
apparently brought on by a comment made by his teenage sometimes-lover
(Kelly Macdonald), but I'm not completely convinced that was all that
motivated it.
        Miramax seems to be touting Trainspotting as the next Pulp Fiction,
but I don't think it'll catch on here as it did overseas.  While it is a
fine example of efficient, resourceful filmmaking, with the sharp writing
and dark humor that characterized Pulp, it is not as easily accessible, at
least not for an American audience.  All of the actors have thick Scottish
accents and speak in the local slang, which will be largely inscrutable to
Yankee ears, and I'm not so sure the bulk of America is ready to embrace an
admittedly odd film about the glories of heroin addiction.  What it will
attract is a loyal--and sizable--cult following.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Directed by: Danny Boyle
Produced by: Channel Four Films (aka Film Four International) / Figment
Films/ PolyGram / The Noel Gay Motion Picture Company 
Runtime: About 93 minutes 
Cast: Ewan McGregor (Mark Renton), Ewen Bremner (Spud Murphy), Jonny Lee
Miller (Sick Boy), Kevin McKidd (Tommy)
Rating: ***1/2 out of *****
Whew. This film oozes energy, the kind of breakneck, no-
holds-barred, in-your-face risk-taking filmmaking that is seldom seen
on screen these days. Like the marginal, motley bunch of
post-apocalyptic youths director Danny Boyle tries to depict,
TRAINSPOTTING veers on the edge of utter mayhem but ultimately
retains its footing and control. The result: a movie that is a
delightful example of how the medium is the message.
The message: a bunch of losers with loser names, Mark Renton (Ewan
McGregor), Spud (Ewan Bremner), Sick Boy (Jonny Lee
Miller), Tommy (Kevin McKidd), and Begbie (Robert Carlyle). Bored,
aimless
and restless, their routine consists of getting drunk at the local pub,
grooving to techno or glam-rock at the local disco and getting shots up
the arm at the local den and procuring cash through a variety of
methods, some ingenious, others plainly dumb and desperate. Not part of
the daily dose if obtained, sex is a bonus.
You can find these characters as they are, foul-mouthed, dirty,
pathetic, ugly perhaps but definitely interesting, in Irvin Welsh's cult
novel of the same name. What makes the film a completely different
experience is how director Boyle uses every tool at his disposal to make
the filmic medium synchronous with the message.
One of the first things you'll notice is how the camera seems to dart
around restlessly. It'll truck into a character's pimple, just as soon
as
it will dolly out to an establishing shot. Distracted and curious, it'll
maintain a character's eye-level or drop right to the ground to show the
doped-out-eye-view. You'll even find characters peering into the camera,
their faces smeared across the wide-angle lens. This film camera is just
another one of the guys.
Tiptoeing that indistinguishable line between fantasy and reality,
Boyle employs a healthy dose of surrealism to get the message across.
Bored kids daydream and bored kids deprived of a heroin fix have
nightmares. I don't want to give too much away, but if you cross Chuckie
from CHILD'S PLAY with some of the wacky fantasies in HEAVENLY
CREATURES, you might have an idea just how fun or pants-wetting scary
the alternate state of consciouness can be. That said, this film
has a good share of drugs - consumed, vomitted, defecated, pissed off,
exchanged, bought, sold, injected, smuggled, enjoyed and regretted. If
that isn't your cup of tea, nobody forced you to see the film. Stay at
home and rent UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL.
And what's a buzz without tunes. From Pulp to Iggy Pop (yes, he's
still alive), the aural landscape is as engaging as the visual energy
permeating the film. Good and bad vibrations tangle like the conflicting
desires and values of the message. Every once in a while, a film comes
along with the kind of energetic filmmaking that matches the intensity
of its characters it hopes to depict. Trainspotting is that shooting
star that burns across a sky littered with static constellations. 
Dom is a part-time filmmaker who graduated from Northwestern
University's Radio/TV/Film programme not too long ago. He has laboured
on various music videos and short films in and around campus and
Chicago. NOWHERE TOWN, a 26min short film that he shot, co-directed and
co-produced recently scooped up the grand jury prize at the Charleston
International Film Festival for best student production. He is currently
finishing a couple of small projects. With his minute amounts of leisure
time, dom does Nell impersonations. 


Author
Edwin Jahiel
(UK, 1996)*** Directed by Danny Boyle. Written by John 
Hodge from the novel by Irvine Welsh.Photography, Brian
Tufano. Editing, Masahiro Hirakubo. Production design, Kave Quinn.  
Cast: Ewan McGregor (Renton), Ewen Bremner (Spud), Jonny
Lee Miller (Sick Boy), Kevin McKidd (Tommy), Robert
Carlyle (Begbie), Kelly Macdonald (Diane) and Shirley
Henderson (Gail). A Miramax release. 93 minutes. Rated R (everything you 
can imagine in a drug movie). At the Art.
"England and America are two countries divided by a common language."
Never has this been so true as in "Trainspotting," even though the US 
release is said to have been partly or fully redubbed. The film, set 
mostly among low-class to lower-middle class people in Edinburgh's 
suburb of Leith, is not spoken in the often colorful, singsong Scottish 
burr but in a slang that most of us will find from 50 to 75 percent 
impenetrable, although the almost constant voice-over by the main 
character, Mark, is relatively clear. The story, however, does come 
through in its essentials, especially as the younger people who do all 
the talking do not drop literary gems in the process. This is filmmaking 
at the opposite pole of Masterpiece Theatre. 
Still, I am sorry I didn't see the picture at the Cannes Festival, where 
it was a most sought-after film among the not competing titles. It was 
subtitled in French, which means that , ironically, a lot more French 
people than Americans have gotten the details of dialogues or 
monologues. There is a short subtitled  stretch in "Trainspotting," but 
that's in a conversation inside a dance-hall where the din is deafening.
The movie is about a group of mostly male friends and co-addicts. Not 
all, however shoot up. If I understood the goings-on correctly, one pal 
is clean, another (the violent Begbie) is addicted to drink. Overall 
though, and no matter what type of addiction, heroin reigns supreme, 
with its grunge, its glum, its filthy rooms populated mostly by syringes 
and needles--plus a baby who is neglected. 
But then everything else is neglected. The Big H has taken over, has 
made its victims victimize others (thefts and other crimes) to sustain 
the habit. A familiar story, rendered unfamiliar up to a point by 
merciless, harrowing depictions that have little or none of the 
sentimentality of many other drug movies. 
The movie has been a runaway hit in the UK, where it has been repeatedly 
compared to "A Clockwork Orange" and where it has caused controversies 
--one criticism being that it does not condemn drugs.
It does not, indeed, not in a preaching way, but it still is powerfully 
anti-drugs simply by showing what happens to its habituees. On the other 
hand, while it shows, abundantly, the symptoms, it does not go to the 
causes --something far more difficult to do and necessitating much more 
than a mere 93 minutes. There is even a cop-out when Mark says "Who 
needs reasons when you've got heroin?" -- dumb, dead-end reasoning. And 
Mark (or one of the group) comes up with the praise of heroin: "Take the 
best orgasm you ever had, multiply by a thousand, and you're still 
nowhere near." 
Reasons, however, are given. They are in the deja vu, 
rebel-without-a-cause tradition. Mark gives us the classic, ironic 
anti-bourgeois-life cause. "Choose life. Choose a job. Choose a career. 
Choose a family. Choose good health, low cholesterol and dental 
insurance. Choose fixed-interest mortgage repayments." 
The film is at its best when portraying the friends, their milieu, their 
drug and sexual adventures (there's an instant pickup of a too-young 
Catholic school girl that flashes right away to sex), and the surrealism 
of their hallucinations. The most notable one is when a  man goes to the 
"Worst Toilet in Scotland," drops in by mistake a couple of capsules, 
then plunges in after them in a nightmarish scene that takes him 
underwater. Next best (?) is when Mark, who has overdosed, is taken to 
Emergency then back to his parents' home, where, in his bed he gets 
frightening shakes, sweats, chills and visions. 
After a test for AIDS, he says "I'm the luckiest of men. I'm HIV 
negative in the middle of an epidemic." He then decides to stay clean. 
But wait...
Next, he looks for "something new" which is a respectable job in London. 
Here the movie fails in its intent. There's a rather sudden transition 
to Mark in London, walking about the City in a correct business suit, 
looking like a neat and healthy employee of whatever business it is, and 
saying in voice-over "For the first time in my life I was almost 
content." 
The way this was presented is so gauche that I thought it was another 
figment of Mark's imagination --but it was not. Then back in the saddle 
again, Mark and Co. get in n a deal to buy smack from some Russian 
sailors and resell it. They asked for 20,000 pounds, got 16,000. Pretty 
good, and pretty well filmed. So is the testing of the smack by Mark who 
gets hooked again, but, at the end, in a realistic illustration of "No 
honor among thieves"  sneaks away with the wherewithal to be voluntarily 
co-opted by the bourgeois life he had so despised.
There's more to this film than I can reveal but essentially, its 
strength is in the dispassionate way it documents the life of those 
"unfortunates" who, had they been alcoholics instead, I would have 
called them "sediment." There are some injections of humor that may or 
may not work for you.  
Within the plethora of "Addiction of the Month" theatrical and TV 
movies, "Trainspotting" stands as "Addiction of the Year." I wish,for 
comparison, that I had the time to see again a fierce competitor, the 
excellent "Panic in Needle Park" (USA, 1971) by Jerry Schatzberg, Al 
Pacino's second feature and his explosive entrance in the Great Actors 
class.
The movie's cryptic title refers to the British hobby of standing by 
passing trains and collecting the numbers on locomotives. This may be 
taken as an addiction, a useless habit. Stupid perhaps, but at 
least, benign.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Danny Boyle 
Writer: John Hodge (based on the novel by Irvine Welsh)
Starring: Ewan McGregor, Johnny Lee Miller, Ewen Bremmer, Robert Carlyle, 
Kevin McKidd, Kelly MacDonald, Peter Mullan, Irvine Welsh, Keith Allen, 
Andrew MacDonald
I'm reviewing this film immeadiately after I've reviewed Kubrick's "A 
Clockwork Orange" because they are so similar yet different (If that makes 
sense).  Both are similar in their social satires but different in their 
styles and targets.  While the aim of "A Clockwork Orange" was violence and 
its necessity in society, "Trainspotting" puts a kind of 90s twist on it and 
says drugs are also a necessity in society as well as violence.  Now all I 
have to do is make a film where I show sex is a necessity in society and the 
trilogy of amoralness and how it is needed to create society is completed.  
But while "A Clockwork Orange" took its time in telling its story (it ran for 
about 2 hours and 15 minutes, give or take a second), "Trainspotting" goes 
quickly and energetically at a brisk 93 minutes (also give or take a second). 
 From the moment the protagonist's feet hit the street in a giddy chase scene 
to Iggy Pop's "Lust for Life," we are taken full speed into a world of 
despair and self-destructiveness that is more fun than any action film, more 
thoughtful than any hokey Hollywood drama, and more clever than a typical 
Hollywood romantic comedy.  Of course, this film comes from England where it 
was all the rave.  There, it's the equivalent of "Independence Day."  Here, 
it's a cult hit with a minor release but with a good sized following from 
those of us who paid attention to the news (or saw Boyle's earlier work, 
"Shallow Grave," also written and produced by the same people and starring 
this film's star, the amazingly awesome Ewan McGregor).  
Contrary to popular opinion, "Trainspotting" is not really all about drugs.  
Sure it's "anti-drug" and all, but I would hardly classify this as an 
"anti-drug film."  It's really a social satire in the vein of "A Clockwork 
Orange" (which also wasn't really all about violence and how bad it is).  The 
drug of choice in "Trainspotting" is heroin, although it shows other drugs 
being used, such as hash, alcohol, and even valium.  In "Trainspotting," 
which takes place in 80s Edinburgh (instead of the near future of "A 
Clockwork Orange"), everyone has their drug fix.  The protagonist, Mark 
Renton (the aforementioned Ewan McGregor, my pick for new breakthrough actor 
of the year), is a part of a group of mates, most who do heroin (including 
Sick Boy and Spud).  Another friend, Begbie, does alcohol.  Yet another 
friend, Tommy, doesn't do drugs, but lifts a lot and likes to videotape 
himself having sex with his girlfriend.  Renton's mother is even a drug 
addict, albeit a socially acceptable one, doing valium.
Renton, or "Rents," isn't really the leader, just the more sensible one.  
Sick Boy (Jonny Lee Miller) is the resident Sean Connery knowitall, 
theorizing endlessly on Bond and his own personal meaning of life ("Well, at 
one time, you've got it, then you loose it, and it's gone for ever").  Then 
there's Spud (Ewen Bremmer), who's the least harmful and selfish of them all, 
but very weak-like.  He's the second most sympathetic character in the film, 
other than Rents.  Then there's Tommy (Kevin McKidd), who as I said, hates 
drugs but once his girlfriend dumps him (after a hilarious mix-up, see the 
film to find out what) he gets into it with tragic results.  How could I even 
forget Begbie (Robert Carlyle), who gets off on beating people up.  He drinks 
furiously and has a temper so bad it makes Sonny Corleone look like Florence 
Henderson.  He's the most disturbing character, obviously.  All of these 
people are clearly defined as they drift in occasionally.  Rents is in most 
of the scenes, hence he is the most likable one, the same way Alex DeLarge 
was the most likable character in "A Clockwork Orange," but Rents is far less 
amoral than Alex.
The film takes us viewers through what it is like to be on drugs: starting us 
off without them in a highly satirical beginning which shows how dull life is 
without them.  In this first Act, many of the funniest parts occur, including 
the infamous "Worst Toilet in Scotland" scene that is humorous, surreal and 
disgusting at the same time (and will have you talking about it no matter 
what you thought of it).  Then we get back on drugs and everything is great 
for a while, but then some horrible things happen: Rents get arrested for 
looting for money to afford drugs and he later O.D.s in a brilliantly shot 
scene where he sinks into the floor in a red coffin and is taken to the 
hospital to be cured while Lou Reed's "Perfect Day" is ironically played on 
the soundtrack.  The final Act has the film trying to form a drug-selling 
plot which ends the friendship between the clique and has Rents choosing to 
stay off drugs and lead a normal life.
"Trainspotting" shows why people use drugs: to get away from life.  In the 
first opening speech, Renton says the famous, "Choose life.  Choose a job.  
Choose a career." etc speech, which is so utterly satirical that it's 
amazing.  Drugs make everything unimportant and when you're off them, "you 
are suddenly obliged to worry about all sorts of other shite.  You have to 
worry about bills, about food, about some football team that never wins, 
about human relationships and all the things that really don't matter when 
you've got a sincere and truthful junk habit."  It's so true that it pretty 
much makes you want to get a junk habit.  "Trainspotting" shows the pro-sides 
of being on drugs.  The forgetfullness of life.  The pleasure.  Then it turns 
right around and shows all the billions of down-sides, quickly quieting all 
yearning to ever pick up a junk habit.  
First off, you HAVE to worry about things in this kind of society.  You just 
can't turn yourself off and hope to just lie around injecting skag your 
entire life.  In one part, a woman with a baby who has a heroin addiction, 
wakes one day from her haze to find her baby has died from her not caring for 
it.  Then there's the whole risk of getting a bad stash.  At one point, 
Renton O.D.s from a bad stash and launches into the aforementioned "Perfect 
Day"/sinking into the carpet scene.  Then there's the whole AIDs thing, which 
happens to the only character who picks up the habit later on in the film and 
dies in a horrible way (still I laughed at the circumstances, so would you). 
The other thing is the whole friendship thing.  Danny Boyle certainly has a 
knack for showing cliques in trouble.  In "Shallow Grave" he showed a group 
of obnoxious flatmates who turn on eachother when a suitcase of money is 
found.  In "Trainspotting," the friends have defined themselves by the drugs 
they use.  They all really hate eachother (except Spud, 'cause he's such a 
darn nice guy) but they put up with eachother because they all like doing 
drugs with eachother.  At the end, when all of them are totally sober, Renton 
takes the opportunity and screws them all in hopes of helping himself with 
his life.  
Then there's the title.  What does it mean?  Well, my friend (with a cool 
"Trainspotting" homepage) made it clear for me: "Trainspotters" are losers 
who write down all the schedules of trains - the guys in this film are told 
to get a life, hence "Trainspotting."  I thank my friend for this one.
In the end, "Trainspotting" is a biting satire of a society where it sucks so 
much that people have to escape into a drug-induced state just to get any 
kind of pleasure.  In this film, the phrase "Get a Life" is broken down and 
analyzed.  Would getting a life be really good and make one happy?  And if 
you chose not to get a life, will you be able to not have a life for a 
pro-longed period of time and still be happy?  The answers are both clear 
"NO"s.  This film knows that and it makes an anti-drug statement in a 
brilliantly realized social satire.  
The film is very well made by Danny Boyle, with a sort of enthusiastic style 
which is kind of like a drugged-up "Hard Day's Night."  It is very episodic, 
but it is very smooth and moves at high speeds.  The violence, drugs, and sex 
are all presented full-forcedly, the way they need to be.  Danny doesn't 
glamorize these, just brings them down to our level for analyzation.  The 
writing by John Hodge, who adapted the HUGE novel by Irvine Welsh (who plays 
Mikey Forester, a 3 scene, 2 line role), and made it interesting, witty and 
brilliant.  He should have received an Oscar for his endeavor, but he lost it 
to Billy Bob Thornton.  At least he didn't lose to "The English Patient." 
(laugh track)
The acting is pretty much flawless.  Newcomer Kelly MacDonald is wonderfully 
non-ignorant as a Catholic schoolgirl who fools Renton (heh heh - won't tell 
how).  The rest of the cast, including Miller and Bremmer among others is 
absolutely fantastic, but the best two performances come from Robert Carlyle 
(as the insanely brutal and blunt drunk/jerk Begbie) and of course, Ewan 
McGregor.  Ewan was awesome as the obnoxious, funnyman Alex in "Shallow 
Grave," but here he shows depth as Renton, who isn't a jerk or anything, but 
a very sympathetic, deep character.  He gives the film what it needs to be 
whole.  To paraphrase "Jerry Maguire", he completes the film.  (Shut up!  You 
had me at hello!  --- sorry, Cameron Crowe posessed me for a second there)
"Trainspotting" is a lot like "A Clockwork Orange," from its socially 
satirical message to its choice of amoral protagonists with bad habits.  But 
the two are different in their approach and while "A Clockwork Orange" is 
better, "Trainspotting" holds it own and is my pick for best film of 1996.
*Note: Also like "A Clockwork Orange," "Trainspotting" is an assault on the 
senses and might not be good for people with a weak stomach.  It has graphic 
language, graphic sex, graphic drug use, and even graphic violence.  Graphic 
film, I might say.  And, please, view this with an open mind.

Author
Christopher Null
     It's the most heavily-hyped and anticipated indie film I have ever seen.
     It's a foul and grotesque exercise in nausea, yet completely
engrossing from the start.
     It's the most experimental film to gain a large release in America
since SLACKER.
     Its subject matter is something eschewed by almost everybody -- heroin
addiction.
     Its unique structure, built around metaphor and over-the-top imagery,
will make the film inaccessible to most audiences, as if the thick Scottish
accents that make most of the dialogue indecipherable don't already.
     Making an independent movie about drug addiction isn't the easiest
thing in the world.  Gus Van Sant tried it awhile back, in DRUGSTORE
COWBOY, with fair success.  This time it's director Danny Boyle (who helmed
last year's Movie Emporium #1 Film of the Year, SHALLOW GRAVE), with a few
familiar faces from the aforementioned masterpiece (led by GRAVE's Ewan
McGregor, as our narrator Renton) and a lot of Boyle's signature
avant-garde direction.
     The story is based on Irvine Welsh's cult novel of the same name, as
TRAINSPOTTING tracks the downward -- and upward -- spirals of a group of
heroin-addicted friends in Scotland.  The title comes from a popular
pastime in Britain, where people apparently sit by the tracks and record
every possible detail of the passing trains -- sometimes for days at a
time.  The futility of this task is yet another metaphor in a
metaphor-bloated picture, where nothing on the screen is exactly what it
seems.
     The film truly defies description, and even a full 12 months of hype
couldn't adequately prepare me for what I eventually saw.  Suffice it to
say that this horribly nasty and raw expose of how unglamorous the junkie
life really is manages to overpower anything else I've seen on film in a
long while.  Beyond that, you'll just have to see for yourself.  But *be
prepared* to be shocked, disgusted, and at the same time, enthralled.
     I could talk about the bothersome aspects of TRAINSPOTTING:  an
annoying techno soundtrack, a dragging middle section, and rapid-fire,
heavily-accented dialogue that went in my ears and never quite reached my
brain.  Or I could talk about how, after leaving the theater, I wanted to
immediately see the film again.  But, as TRAINSPOTTING's Renton puts it,
why would I want to do a thing like that?
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1996, R, 94 minutes [1 hour, 34 minutes]
[crime/drama]
starring: Ewan McGregor (Mark Renton), Robert Carlyle (Begbie), Johnny Lee
Miller (Sick Boy), Kevin McKidd (Tommy), Ewen Bremner (Spud), produced by
Andrew Macdonald, written by John Hodge, directed by Danny Boyle, based on
the novel by Irvine Welsh.
Films about the destructive power of drugs all have the same message, but
none of them dare to show how good drugs can make their user feel.
"Trainspotting" dares to play up that angle, as it gets inside modern junkies
and examines their mindsets. It allows us to share in the rush and escapism,
but also the harsh consequences of it all.
The film starts out with tremendous energy with a fast-paced chase sequence
and a narrator describing his escapist lifestyle. His name is Mark Renton
(McGregor), a 20-something Scottish "wanker" who says he "chose not to choose
life, instead... heroin." 
Renton and his friends Sick Boy (Miller), and Spud (Bremner) are all
addicted to heroin and describe the high in such a glamorous, detailed manner
it is easy to understand the appeal. Renton's other friend Tommy (McKidd)
doesn't touch the stuff (at first), but can't help being curious. Then
there's Begbie (Carlyle), the nearly psychotic bully of the gang who gets his
kicks from drifting and fighting. We don't know how these guys came together,
but it's not relevant.
Boyle's direction is fantastic, much like Oliver Stone, he uses hyper
editing techniques to define mood. No scene lasts longer than two minutes, in
fact, most of them last less than 30 seconds. The story, just like the
characters' lifestyle, is constantly shifting and never dwells on the
obvious. There are scenes of moody drug parties, surrealistic clubs, quick,
cheap sex, etc., all of which add up to a mood of pure nihilism. 
Because everything happens so quickly, it would seem as if characterization
would be sacrificed, but just the opposite is true. The erratic storytelling
tells us all we need to know about the characters, showing how great their
highs are, but how horrible their lows can be. There is one scene involving
Renton and "The filthiest toilet in Scotland" that perfectly illustrates how
pathetic drug addiction can be. It is so disguisting it's impossible not to
squirm, but at the same time, the satire of it all is quite funny.
The film uses satire in a very surrealistic manner, much like Kubrick's "A
Clockwork Orange." However, the reality here is more brutal than "Orange"
because the narcotics are stronger and more addictive. When Renton tries to
quit cold turkey there is a surrealistic montage so powerful it will probably
be as close as a film ever comes in showing the devastating pain drugs can
wreck on the mind.
Although there isn't much of a story to the film, the final act does try to
set up what will probably be Renton and the gang's final scam. Not
surprisingly, when Renton tries to go straight and clean, he has trouble
doing so, and the same is true for the film's effort to tell a normal crime
story. It doesn't make any major mistakes per se, it's just a bit too jumbled
and overwhelming to take seriously.
The anti-drug message in "Trainspotting" is powerful, and its surrealistic
style is impressive. Perhaps it could have been even more moving had it not
been so strange, but it's still a good film for what it is.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Jeremy Dennison
This British import follows the (mis-)adventures of a group of heroin
crazed Scottish youths.  There is Marc Renton (who narrates), Spud (the
dim-witted one) Sick Boy(The Sean Connery obsessive), and Begbee (the
violence obsessive). Powered by a top rate, but not top name
soundtrack(Iggy Pop, Sleeper, Elastica, Lou Reed...) the film follows
Renton who gets clean, gets back into heroin and gets clean again. Some of
the wit in this movie is sharp and Pulp Fiction-esque, and some is just
Dumb & Dumber gross(the bed sheets) and stupid (the bb gun)
Although the film starts out on a comic note, it takes a sharp term in the
middle, and becomes almost depressing. 
The film is based on an Irving Welsh novel bearing the same title. I can
honestly say that this is one of the best movies I have ever seen. It is an
obscure gem that has been over shadowed in the US by such movies as Mission
Impossible and ID4. The film is hard to follow with the heavy accents of
the actors. This is a very original film, as far as films go today. It
definetly deserves multiple viewings (partly because of the slang and
accents)

Author
David N. Butterworth
Some British phenomena, like the Beatles, have crossed the Atlantic with
resounding success.
Others, such as prawn-flavored crisps, warm beer, and Cliff Richard,
haven't fared so well.
TRAINSPOTTING is the latest box office smash in the U.K.--an in-your-face
look at a group of Scottish wankers who are about as unfabulous as the Four
were Fab.  It's unlikely to appeal to Ma and Pa back home in Iowa.  Because
of its language--by degrees very adult, artsy, and acutely accented.
Because of its endless parade of hypodermics slipping in and out of pasty
flesh.  Because of its scatological excesses.  Maybe simply because of its
obscure title.
But TRAINSPOTTING manages to be hip, happening, graphic, tragic, violent,
cool, filthy, sick, and very funny, and the tragically hip arthouse crowd
on this side of the ocean are going to eat it up.
Writer John Hodge's adaptation of Irvine Welsh's kaleidoscopic novel
follows the highs and lows of a bunch of down-and-out heroin addicts who
lie, cheat and steal their way through a series of tragicomic
misadventures.  These "so-called friends" are excellently played by a
largely unknown cast.
As the film's central voice, Renton (a mesmerizing realization by Ewan
McGregor) narrates TRAINSPOTTING with all the buzz and the beauty of
Welsh's highly-stylized, antagonistic poetry.  Renton is forever aching for
just one more hit, and the lengths to which he will go are best exemplified
by the scene in "the worst toilet in Scotland."  Heroin may be a thousand
times more potent than any orgasm but in the gospel according to Renton,
Archie Gemmill's goal against Holland in 1978 ranks right up there.
Renton's "we're ruled by effete arseholes" speech in the Scottish highlands
gets the film's biggest laugh, but there's true emotion here: he half wants
to believe there are better things than the needle, but "choosing life" is
painful and damn near impossible for him.  Although Renton cynically admits
that "nothing really matters if you have a junk habit," perhaps his
greatest fear is that nothing really matters if you don't.
Then there's Spud (Ewen Bremner), a moronic, four-eyed git who draws the
obligatory sympathy vote.  His speed-induced enthusiasm at a job interview
makes for memorable cinema.
Sick Boy (played by Jonny Lee Miller), with his shock of white hair, is a
better-looking version of Jim Jarmusch.  He idolizes fellow countryman Sean
Connery, ruminating on the actor's career with an overabundance of facts
and opinions.  He's likable and interesting for the first third of the
movie, but then fades out.
Tommy (Kevin McKidd) starts out straight until his girlfriend dumps him,
then slides quickly downhill to life as a doss house smackhead and a
toxoplasmotic end.
The villainous Begbie (an unnerving performance by Robert Carlyle) is a
nasty piece of work.  His friends agree "he's psychotic, but he's a mate."
Skag deals turn sour, quiet evenings down the pub aren't, and shared living
quarters become unlivable whenever Begbie's around.
The women here are either slags, knocked up, or underage.
Massively hyped in the U.K., TRAINSPOTTING has clearly been targeted at the
youth market.  At times it feels more like a 501 jeans ad than a movie, and
its soundtrack was designed to sell: Renton raves to the pulsating sounds
of Sleeper, Blur, and Elastica; he sinks into the carpet in a drugged-out
stupor to Lou Reed's "Perfect Day"; and his dingy bedsit is described to
perfection by Pulp's "Mile End."
Director Danny Boyle (SHALLOW GRAVE) is somehow able to inject his film
with a smart sense of humor, pathos, and keenly observed characterizations
amidst unrelenting scenes of junkies shooting shite.  TRAINSPOTTING is both
offbeat and downbeat, difficult to watch at times but ultimately worth the
trip.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1995 
Release date: beginning 7/96 (limited) 
Running Length: 1:33 
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, drug use, sex, nudity, violence) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1 
Cast: Ewan McGregor, Ewen Bremner, Jonny Lee Miller, Kevin McKidd, 
      Robert Carlyle, Kelly MacDonald, Peter Mullan 
Director: Danny Boyle 
Producer: Andrew MacDonald 
Screenplay: John Hodge based on the novel by Irvine Welsh 
Cinematography: Brian Tufano 
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
     Next to INDEPENDENCE DAY, TRAINSPOTTING may be the most hyped 
motion picture of the summer.  Miramax Films, the distributor that 
saturated the market with ads for THE CRYING GAME in 1992-93 and PULP 
FICTION in '94, has struck again.  TRAINSPOTTING, which is based on 
Irvine Welsh's cult novel and is directed by SHALLOW GRAVE helmsman 
Danny Boyle, became a smash hit in the UK during its run there.  
Miramax, hoping for a similar reaction on this side of the Atlantic, has 
been shouting from the rooftops, using big, splashy print ads and 
chaotic TV and theatrical spots to lure in their target audience.  The 
danger is, of course, that TRAINSPOTTING's substance will get drowned by 
the marketing. 
     "I chose not to choose life.  I chose to choose something else," 
says the film's narrator and main character, a twenty-something 
Edinburgh man named Mark Renton (Ewan McGregor), near the outset of 
TRAINSPOTTING.  In rejecting the yuppie culture of a nuclear family, 
material possessions, a paying job, and dental insurance, Renton is 
rebelling, but this isn't just the usual disaffection of youth -- it's a 
deeper, more pervasive dissatisfaction with a culture he views as sick 
and stifling. 
     Renton's escape is through drugs -- primarily heroin, but really 
anything he can get his hands on.  He's surrounded by his "buddies", a 
group of crooks, liars, and psychos who are even more twisted than he 
is.  There's Spud (Ewan Bremner), a shy, inoffensive junkie; Sick Boy 
(Jonny Lee Miller), a vicious, duplicitous con artist who's obsessed 
with Sean Connery; Tommy (Kevin McKidd), a "virtuous" young man fighting 
the temptation of heroin; and Begbie (Robert Carlyle), a nutcase who 
gets his thrills from beating up people.   
     TRAINSPOTTING is careful not to present a one-sided view of drug 
use.  After all, why would anyone use the stuff if all it leads to is 
misery and unhappiness?  In Renton's words, to get an idea of what it's 
like using heroin, "Take the best orgasm you've ever had, multiply by 
1000, and you're still nowhere near it."  There are no worries about the 
problems and concerns of everyday life, just where the next hit is going 
to come from.  The giddiness of heroin addiction is well-illustrated 
during some of the film's early scenes, but it's a euphoria that gives 
way to tragedy. 
     In the end, TRAINSPOTTING has an anti-drug message, but it presents 
its case through character studies, not preaching.  There are a lot of 
gruesome images, some of which are presented in an oddly humorous 
context.  For example, take Renton's headfirst dive into the "worst 
toilet in Scotland" or Spud's reaction when he wakes up in soiled 
sheets.  In portraying the cycle of addiction -- using drugs, trying to 
get clean, then giving in again -- TRAINSPOTTING recalls DRUGSTORE 
COWBOY and THE BASKETBALL DIARIES.  Boyle's style, however, is 
distinctly his own.  This is a kinetic movie, where everything, 
including the camera, keeps moving.  This isn't an examination of the 
Scottish drug culture from the outside looking in, it's one from the 
inside looking out. 
     For one hour, TRAINSPOTTING is as compelling as any motion picture 
to be released this year.  It's exciting, energetic, thought-provoking, 
and never lets up.  Unfortunately, during the film's last third, the 
focus starts to shift, and, in doing so, it blurs.  Suddenly, after 
battling addiction for sixty minutes, Renton and his friends become 
Scotland's answer to Quentin Tarantino's RESERVOIR DOGS -- a group of 
inept thieves committing the "dodgiest scam" in a lifetime of petty 
crimes.  There's mistrust, betrayal, and bloodshed.  But, while this 
material has some appeal, it's debatable whether it belongs here.  For a 
segment like this to really work, it needs more time and attention than 
Boyle and screenwriter John Hodge are able to give it.  As such, the 
subplot seems almost like an afterthought, taking the film away from its 
darker, more compelling material and opening the door to a hopeful, if 
ironic, ending. 
     The overlong epilogue aside, TRAINSPOTTING is one of the summer's 
most arresting motion pictures, and not just because of the offbeat 
visual style.  There's nothing new or unique about the story, but it is 
presented in a manner that reinforces its immediacy and impact.  The 
film makers were determined to make this a street-level view of 
addiction, not some "voyeuristic Oxbridge graduate's perception of these 
people".  In that goal, they have succeeded, and, while TRAINSPOTTING is 
not without its faults, it offers a powerful portrait that all of 
Miramax's overhyping cannot diminish. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Jason Overbeck
Trainspotting is one of the most exciting, fresh, and energizing films I
have seen.  It is a film about heroin, and the depravity that the
addiction leads to.  This is handled with flash and pizazz, there is a
pure joy of film making with every scene, no matter how sick.
The story follows Renton his Clockwork Orange-type cronies as they fight
heroin, police, yuppies and for freedom in life.  Begining scenes have
Renton trying to quit heroin, and we get a detailing of what the special
quiting program will contain.  Following is his one last hit which ends
up in a toilet, THE WORST TOILET IN SCOTLAND.  How does he get it back,
in a nausiating surreal scene as he ends up swimming through the dirty
tub.
How you react to scenes likethese is up to you.  I felt they were very
funny in a darkly comical tone, others will find it sick and depraved. 
They are as right as I.  Trainspotting is about sick and depraved life
of drugies.  That is the point of the film.  It is very funny if you
like your comedy dark or absurdly surreal.
Some people found that Trainspotting was undecided about heroin, neither
for or against.  THIS IS ABSURD!  Showing te drugies very
uncompromisingly may look pro-heroin, but it is also honest.  You learn
many negative things about heroin and see how it tears apart the lives
of good people as well as bad ones.  If Trainspotting was handled wrong
and to unrealistically positive, you would have a laughable film like
Reefer Madness.
Trainspotting is not the best film about heroin, it can't top Drugstore
Cowboy even with the pop imagery.  Trainspoting is a great film,
though.  One of the years best.  It is also one of the most exciting
films I have seen.  One that, if you dig it, energize your spirits and
love of film.  Director Danny Boyle (previously did Shallow Grave) is a
stylist to watch.  
I don't want to neglect the acting in this film.  Everyone in the cast
gives well proportioned and controled performances.  Standouts are Ewan
McGregor and Robert Carlyle (later in Full Monty).

Author
Vince Deehan
Directed by Danny Boyle.  
Written by John Hodge 
Produced by Andrew Macdonald 
Cast: Ewan McGregor,  Ewen Bremner, Jonny Lee Miller,  Kevin McKidd,  
Robert Carlyle and Kelly Macdonald.
Release Date:  23 February 1996 (UK)
TRAINSPOTTING is the new film from the same team (Boyle, Hodge and Macdonald) 
who made the 1995 film SHALLOW GRAVE.  This film is based on the Irvine Welsh 
novel of the same name, which has become a big cult favourite in the last
couple of years here in the UK.  This film has become the focus of a mammoth 
promotional campaign here, which has reached media saturation and then some. 
Such has been the intensity of the adverts, billboards and widespread magazine 
articles that I was seriously considering avoiding this over-hyped film.  Out of
sheer curiosity I succumbed and I went along to see if it could live up to the 
hype, which last year's similarly hyped SHALLOW GRAVE failed to do, in my 
opinion.
The film concerns the lives of a bunch of heroin addicts living in a grotty 
flat, more than likely an illegal squat, in Edinburgh.  The main character 
in this loose bunch is Renton, an emaciated young man played by Ewan McGregor 
(totally unrecognisable from his part in SHALLOW GRAVE). The film focuses on 
his life and how he tries to kick his habit.  His "so-called friends", as he 
terms them, include the suave Sick Boy (Jonny Lee Miller- HACKERS) who is 
very popular with the girls and a goldmine of opinions and facts on the career 
of Sean Connery, and Spud a bewildered and slightly dotty bloke
(Ewen Bremner -NAKED) who memorably attends a job interview while high on 
speed.  Robert Carlyle (PRIEST) plays their psychotic, though admittedly 
drug-free, friend Begbie who never misses a chance to inflict brutal violence 
on anyone who irritates him, and even those who just happen to be around him 
at the time.
We see how Renton tries to get off his heroin addiction, which proves an 
ordeal for him although he appears to be successful, because suddenly the 
film cuts to London and shows Renton seemingly enjoying himself in the 
wheeling and dealing of his new found status as an estate agent.  His obvious 
enjoyment with the job is a bit hard to fathom and hard to relate to the 
Renton we have seen earlier in the film, but it isn't long before his
old friends encourage him to take part in a risky drug deal. 
The controversy over this films revolves around the notion that the film 
glamorises drugs.  IT DOES NOT.  The film makers have bravely decided to show 
that some people get great pleasure from drugs, and to this end the film shows 
and describes the blissfulness experienced by Renton after he has just injected
himself with heroin.  But, whilst the filmmakers recognise the highs it also 
shows the desperate lows when Renton is trying to get off the drugs and starts 
suffering the hellish horrors of withdrawl.  The film, in my opinion, shows 
the lows far more vividly than the highs and this leaves the viewer in no doubt
that the downside of heroin is an experience which would nullify any potential 
pleasure.  This film is not explicitly anti-drugs, but it leaves it up to the 
intelligence of the viewer to make the decision for themselves.  
There is much humour in the film and it is all not doom and gloom.  The scenes 
involving Sick Boy where he ruminates on the careers of Lou Reed and Sean 
Connery are especially funny.  The thumping dance and rock soundtrack, while 
very prominent, is never obtrusive and perfectly creates and compliments the 
mood of the film.  The acting throughout is great, though it is hard to like
many of the characters who all seem hell bent on oblivion for much of the film.
I was pleasantly surprised by TRAINSPOTTING, in that it is worthy of much 
of the praise that is being showered on it.  It's a brave film that dares to 
show the realities of heroin addiction and lets the viewer decide for 
themselves.
Review written on February 27 1996 by Vince Deehan
(vince@deehan.demon.co.uk) 

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Nihilism does not equal art.  I want to get that point out of the
way, because it appears to be a widely-held belief that critics feel
exactly the opposite.  People note the praise lavished upon films like
NATURAL BORN KILLERS, KIDS and SEVEN and conclude that there is some
conspiracy among the film cognoscenti to force bleakness down the
collective throat of the viewing public.  While I can speak for no critic
but myself (I admired SEVEN, but not NBK or KIDS), I believe that the
common thread is actually daring.  Film-makers dealing with unpleasant
subject matter are almost forced to be inventive to keep the audience
watching.  Others, if they choose, may praise TRAINSPOTTING for its
squalor; I prefer to praise it for the invigorating perspectives of a
writer and a director with ideas and the ability to convey them.
     The ostensible hero of TRAINSPOTTING is Mark Renton (Ewan McGregor),
a young man in Edinburgh who, as his opening monologue announces, has
chosen "not to choose."  Instead, he has chosen to remain perpetually high
on heroin with his friends Spud (Ewen Bremner) and Sick Boy (Jonny Lee
Miller), unemployed and uncaring.  Though he attempts to go straight on
occasion, he always returns to his one and only love, even when
discouraged by non-using friends like Tommy (Kevin McKidd) and Begbie
(Robert Carlyle).  It is only when he is caught shoplifting that Renton is
forced to go cold turkey, and to confront every unpleasant reality of his
life.
     TRAINSPOTTING, a smash hit in Britain, has received a great deal of
comparison to A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, both of them tales of amoral youth with
a likeable, philosophically inclined first-person narrator.  It is a
connection director Danny Boyle obviously doesn't discourage, since one
scene is set in a nightclub styled after CLOCKWORK's Korova Milkbar, and
he is going for a similar kind of social criticism.  Though Renton begins
the film with a rant against materialism and suburban values, it is always
clear that his heroin habit has nothing to do with protest.  In one
memorable scene, Spud goes to a job interview required by social services
if he is to remain eligible for unemployment, and he is forced to do his
best to make sure that he doesn't actually get the job.  They are
unapologetic leeches, but Boyle and writer John Hodge (adapting the novel
by Irvine Welsh) also show the hypocrisy of those who criticize Renton,
each with his or her own addiction problem:  Begbie is a drunkard, Tommy
smokes, and Renton's mother takes Valium.  No one is clean; it's all a
question of degree.
     But if there is one thing Boyle does masterfully, it is showing
exactly how brutal this particular degree can be.  The users' relationship
with the drug might be romanticized -- including a scene in which Renton
feels himself sinking into the floor -- there is nothing romanticized
about the effects of heroin addiction.  Boyle's most effective scenes show
users literally wallowing in their own filth:  Renton as he rumages
through a toilet to find the heroin suppositories he just lost, eventually
being swallowed by the bowl; and Spud waking up in a strange bed to find a
rather disgusting mess.  In some of these scenes there is a comic edge,
but Boyle counters them with some absolutely chilling moments, including a
tragedy for which the only response anyone can think of is to get high
again, and a nightmarish detox hallucination by Renton which is guaranteed
to have you squirming.  With a virtuoso's skill, Boyle is able to take
viewers deeply enough into the experience of heroin users that they can
see both the horrible toll the drug takes and the sensation which makes it
all worthwhile to them.
     TRAINSPOTTING's third act, focusing on a heroin deal which interferes
in Renton's attempt to live a straight life, is something of an
unfortunate side trip, as the film loses much of the urgency it had done
such an exceptional job of building.  It does give Robert Carlyle's
hair-trigger psychotic Begbie a showcase, but the whole episode feels like
padding in a much edgier film.  There is one thing that sub-plot does
quite a good job of demonstrating, however, and that is how truly
meaningless drug friends can be to each other; once they're not high, the
lads in TRAINSPOTTING are ready to screw each other over in a moment.  It
also provides a perfect comic coda for Renton's stab at respectability,
because it's clear he doesn't have the moral fiber for it.  That actually
shows what a neat trick Boyle has pulled off:  he has made a moral film
without moralizing, even though it might not look like one on the surface.
Bleak may not always be beautiful, but in TRAINSPOTTING it is necessary to
make the point, a point as sharp as a needle in the arm.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The cardinal rule for making a reviewer's life easier is to give
high marks to everything you see.  You especially want to praise
popular movies, and most of all you want to save your highest rating
for cult pictures with strong and vociferous followings.  Nothing like
grade inflation and ignoring your instincts for making your own life
more bearable.  I consistently ignore this rule.  I am generally in the
mainstream of reviewers, but when I can not stomach a show as I
couldn't in TRAINSPOTTING I say so knowing full well I will get
complaints.  Less than full honesty isn't fair to my readers.
     TRAINSPOTTING was a smashing success last year in Britain and made
buckets of money.  Its coming to America has been perhaps the cinematic
art house event of the year.
     TRAINSPOTTING is a far, far out comedy about a group of young
heroin addicts in Scotland.  Set in Edinburgh, this extremely explicit
depiction of the heroin drug culture focuses on Mark Renton and his
battle with heroin.  He loves shooting up, but does on occasion try to
give it up.  Mark is played by Ewan McGregor who was Frank Churchill in
EMMA and Alex Law in SHALLOW GRAVE, which is director Danny Boyle's
only other film.  For my money, SHALLOW GRAVE, flaws and all, is a much
better film than TRAINSPOTTING.
     Mainly TRAINSPOTTING focuses on the camaraderie of the druggies
and of their humor.  The ongoing joke has them trying just hard enough
to get a job so they don't get kicked off the dole, but being sure that
they are so repulsive that no one will actually hire them.
     The dialog by John Hodge and based on Irvine Walsh's novel has
many funny lines.  If the images were not so horrible, perhaps I could
have enjoyed them.  As Mark Renton puts it, "Choose life.  Choose a
job.  Choose a starter home.  Choose dental insurance, leisure wear and
matching luggage.  Choose your future.  But why would anyone want to do
a thing like that?"
     Most of the humor is visual with a subtext of isn't addition fun
and funny at the same time.  This makes for a hard to watch film, which
isn't necessarily bad.  I enjoyed HAROLD AND MAUDE about suicide and a
lot of other films with shocking subjects, but in TRAINSPOTTING the
filmmakers are so far over the line, that I could not like the picture
no matter how hard I tried.  I kept thinking to myself, what is next?
Are we going to have a comedy full of realist images about how much fun
it was to gas people in World War II?
     Let me give you two typical scenes and then I will be done with
this review.  Mark's friend Spud (Ewen Bremmer) passes out and then
ends up spending the night at his girlfriend's house.  What with his
going on and off of drugs, he has developed diarrhea.  When he wakes up
his sheets are full of feces.  He takes his sheets into the dinning
room where his girlfriend and her family are having breakfast.  Her
mother and he get in a tug of war over the sheets which ends with
realistic feces going all over everyone and into the breakfast.  The
lingering camera makes sure you see in detail the feces dripping down
each of their faces.
     In another scene, Mark dives into a public toilet labeled, "the
worst toilet in Scotland."  He dives into the bowl to retrieve his lost
suppositories.  Never in your worst nightmare have you seen such a
filthy place.
     For completeness sake, let me say that the rest of the cast
includes: Jonny Lee Miller as Sick Boy, Kevin McKidd as Tommy, Robert
Carlyle as Begbie, Kelly MacDonald as Diane, and Peter Mullan as
Swanney.  Although some of the cast do not use heroin, most shot up
regularly and feed their habit through a combination of taxpayer's
money and stealing from people.
     TRAINSPOTTING runs 1:33.  It is rated R, but why it is not NC-17
is beyond me.  In addition to the frequent heroin usage scenes, there
is violence, constant foul language, sex, and full male and female
frontal nudity.  Since the MPAA gave this film an R, they might as well
just retire the NC-17 rating.  I strongly recommend that teenagers not
see this film at all.  For adults, I will grant you that the show is
imaginative and the dialog sharp, but I can not recommend this painful
show to anyone.  For a show I truly hated, I still will give it * 1/2
for the high energy and the clever albeit unbearable script.  As it is,
I feel like I am being ridiculously generous to the film.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 12, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Gabby J-Man
The URL of this review is 
http://moviereviews.com/jman/trainspotting.html
Channel Four Films (1996) Starring Ewan Mcgregor, Jonny Lee Miller, 
Ewan Bremner, Robert Carlyle. Directed by Danny Boyle. 93 minutes.
***massively raw, hardcore direction and dialogue.
Ewan Mcgregor is plain awesome as Renton, and the supporting play is 
very solid indeed - sick boy is amazing.
***very funny in places, and rather sad at others times - it takes 
an unusual film to achieve both in such frequent and convincing 
succession.
***a real filmlover's movie - the action is uniquely cinematic and 
couldn't be done with similar effect in any other medium. You'll 
know what I mean when you see the film.
***Extremely inventive - although the film was totally storyboarded 
one gets the feeling many of the creative touches were thought up on 
set. Characters jumping from out of one scene and into the next, 
subtitles to make dialogue understood in a noisy nightclub, photo
sequences in the place of 24-frame film, dead babies crawling along 
the ceiling...interesting!
***Simply manages to be unusual, astonishing, hilarious, shocking, 
and even fairly enjoyable - all on a $2 million budget, and shot in 
six weeks. A considerable achievement, considering some films a 
hundred times the budget can't even hold water. 
***Too many Tarantino-isms, though I'm sure Danny Boyle didn't plan 
on this - it just comes across in that way. The sudden, shockingly 
violent outbursts with blood everywhere. We are meant to think a 
glass tankard shattering bloodily on a innocent bystander woman is
funny. If you think this kind of thing is funny, file this under 
"pros".
***Considering the massive hype (in the UK), the film is basically 
disappointing as a whole.  It's just not entertaining enough - 
though some sequences are wonderful (the scene where
Renton climbs into the toilet and finds himself swimming in a Blue 
Lagoon type paradise).  It alternates uncomfortably between a very 
stark reality and total "movie magic" (see toilet
bit) - rather strange and it didn't work quite right for me.
***I didn't feel any real depth to this, which would have been fine 
if the basic film was entertaining enough - but it wasn't. Renton's 
withdrawal bit in his bedroom at home is a nightmare to watch - 
again, for those who like their movies grim and cringemaking, file
this under "pros".
Another film I had really high expectations for, with those high 
hopes ultimately getting a little floored. I'm not normally into 
outlining the story in my reviews, but as most of the US audience
won't have heard of Trainspotting I'll make a brief exception here. 
This film is mainly concerned with detailing the exploits of a group 
of heroin druggies, how they steal together, get wired
together, and ultimately try to clean up - the main focus is on a 
character called Renton, and how he lives his sordid life. If that 
sounds depressing then I've only slightly misled you - the film does 
do its best to disgust and shock, but has (perhaps) a slightly 
optimistic ending. There's such a total lack of sentimentality or 
cliche here, you actually may find yourself secretly looking foward 
to the comfort of the next la-la John Hughes production, certainly 
one of the guys I saw it with said he "didn't go the movies to see 
this kind of trauma". Still, considering the tiny bugdet, 
considering the limited and home-grown production team, the props 
hand picked from charity shops and jumble sales, and the relative 
lack of experience of the writer/director/producer team - 
Trainspotting is a wondeful achievement. The film's been praised for 
just about everything over here, and that's natural because British 
people become very excited after they make a good film, but in truth
Trainspotting's greatest asset is probably it's sheer range of 
shinning visual creativity, a true testament to the special art of 
the low-budget film if ever there was one. 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It has all been done before.  This is a superficially non-
judgmental look at four friends who are heroin addicts.  A fifth
friend, Begbie (Robert Carlyle) is clean--at least of heroin--but is
just on the near side of psychopathic.  However, you have only to step
back half an inch to see that this really is a morality tale about just
how bad life can be when heroin becomes your closest friend.  Much of
this film is strongly reminiscent of THE LOST WEEKEND.  Recently we saw
much the same approach in BASKETBALL DIARIES.  In TRAINSPOTTING the
addicts' lives are seen through the eyes of Mark Renton (Ewan
McGregor), marginally the least hooked of the group of addicts.  Also
in his group are the rather sodden Spud (Ewen Bremner), a Bond film
enthusiast trying to be suave, Sick Boy (Jonny Lee Miller), and the
retiring Tommy (Kevin McKidd).
     For the first three quarters of the film there really is not much
plot.  The viewer does get a grand tour of places the viewer does not
want to be.  This includes a side tour outside and inside "the worst
toilet in Scotland," dunking for drugs.  This particular treat is a
sterling example of the kind of in-your-face (sometimes nearly
literally) humor that packs this film.  Some really is funny, but much
is more a successful attempt to churn the viewer's stomach.  It is
humor that is more depressing than funny.  As the film opens Mark, an
Edinburgh junkie maybe in his early 20s, has determined to get off
drugs.  From there basically all that really happens is that he gets
off, he gets back on, he gets in trouble with the law and he gets off
again.  At some point Mark decides that he wants to get away from drugs
and junkies, only to be pulled back as surely as Al Pacino is in the
"Godfather" films.  Along the line he gets himself the first serious
girlfriend he has had time for in a while.  Toward the end of the film
a little more does happen, but not a lot.  Plot is not TRAINSPOTTING's
strong suit.  Texture and background is really what it is all about.
It takes the viewer inside the life of a junkie and that it does very
well--perhaps just a spot too well.  These are people you do not want
to invite into your home and the film gives good reasons why not.  But
much of the wacky behavior and even some of the dating jokes have
little to do with the main premise of the film unless to show that in
some ways the main characters are not a whole lot different than they
would be off of drugs.  The humor is never quite as wild or as hip as
intended.  These are people who are disaffected from being Scots--as
they describe it, the colony of a bunch of wankers--and find escape in
hypodermic needles.
     American viewers may have a problem making out some (perhaps much)
of the dialogue.  TRAINSPOTTING uses Scottish slang and the dialogue is
spoken with a heavy Scottish accent.  Generally I was able to make out
about 80% of what was said.  My average was a little less with the
character Spud, but toward the end of the film it become clear that
even people in the film are not always sure what Spud is saying.
Irvine Welsh's novel TRAINSPOTTING--the title is a hobby that never
actually gets mentioned in the film--was a bestseller in Europe and the
American publishers had to push up the date of its publication here.
It seems they had planned an edition to coincide with the release of
the film, but so many copies of were being brought in from Europe that
the publication had to be moved forward to compete.  The book was
adapted to the screen--leaving a bit too much out some say--by John
Hodge.  Danny Boyle directed and Andrew Macdonald produced, as they did
for the film SHALLOW GRAVE.
     TRAINSPOTTING has its creative moments and sometimes it can be
funny, but the viewer should be prepared for a downbeat experience and
should expect to find himself some places he would never go of his own
accord.  As with the film CRUMB, there is a happy ending in which
viewer escapes the theater and the people with whom he has just spent
an hour or so of his life.  I expected a film more original than this
one was, but I give it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Ewan McGregor, Ewen Bremner, Jonny Lee Miller, Kevin McKidd, Robert
Carlyle, and Kelly MacDonald
     Choose life.  Choose a job.  Choose a starter home.  Choose dental
insurance, lisure wear and matching luggage.  Choose your future.  But why
would you want to do a thing like that?
     Thus begins (with severe editing) Trainspotting, the film that took
Britian and didn't even dent America.  Why it didn't take America is still a
mystery to me.  I think, perhaps it was too liberal for those conservative
wankers.  But then I remember, I dunna know a soul who cares about shite
like that.  Perchance it was too funny for those with a stick up the'r arse.
Then I remember that it was made by the brits, who classicly have a stick up
the'r arse.
     Then methinks its just that the bloody wankers can't see past a bunch
of Scottish slang.
     Yes, that would be the reason that I've just sounded like I've took a
few too many pints down at the pub.  The fact is that, between having a
British director (Danny Boyle), a Scottish writer (John Hodge) and being
based on a novel that could serve as a dictionary for Scottish slang (Irvine
Welsh's "Trainspotting"), Trainspotting doesn't hold much appeal for the
average moviegoer.
     But, you know what?  I don't particularily like the average moviegoer.
Why?  The average moviegoer is someone who makes a lot of money for a lot of
bad movies and then makes the penny-pushing tight-arses at the studio come
out with even more bad movies, which, for me, are like the trials of Job.
     The fact is that Trainspotting is one of the finest British films I
have seen n ages, and I see a lot of British films.  Trainspotting takes us
on a wild ride with five heroin adicts as they go on and off the drug and
then make a deal that may make them rich.  In particular, it follows Mark
"Rent-boy" Renton (Ewan McGreggor), a full-time heroin adict who spends the
first half of the movie taking us on a drug ride funnier than any Cheech and
Chong film and then spends the second half of the film making us actually
realize the massive mistake he has made by getting on heroin in the first
place.
     In the first half, we get pleanty of jokes and some plot development as
Renton and his four mates (Spud (Ewen Bremmer), Sick Boy (Jonny Lee Miller),
Tommy (Kevin McKidd), and Franco (Robert Carlyle)) spend there time
basically going out on the town of Edinburgh.  They spend their days getting
high and their nights at the pub.  Sick Boy and Renton decide to quit
heroin, and, in order to celebrate, they go out on the town where Renton
falls in love (or at least slleps with) with a wonderful piece of jailbait
named Diane (Kelly MacDonald's breakout role).  At the same time we get to
see two other sex scenes turn to crap (literally and figuratively) as
everything possible goes wrong with them.
     The hour and a half movie pretty much equally divides us between making
us laugh and making us step back and look at the tatterred landscape that
remains of what was once a promising life.  It paints the portrait of a
character who, if he ever had native morals, has lost them a long time ago
and now only lives for the moment.
     Not for the weak of mind, heart, stomach, or any other bodily organ,
Trainspotting is about the most liberal film you will ever find on drugs.
It shows both the good and the bad about heroin... giving it a fair trail
and still executing it.  Not for conservatives, not for people who can't get
past the huge Scottish accent that hangs over the movie like a thick fog,
Trainspotting is a film for that one other group: independent film fans.
You guys, please, watch, enjoy, get the message and give a message (through
your money) so that they make more movies like it.

Author
Bryant Frazer
In the very first shot of Trainspotting, a good-looking Scot with
close-cropped hair and his gawkier sidekick are running like hell through
the streets of Edinburgh, a pair of security guards in close pursuit and
Iggy Pop's percussive "Lust For Life" pumping on the soundtrack. The
imagery and sound are absolutely perfect, characterizing the film's
headlong, nihilistic style in its very first moments of action. In
voiceover, Mark Renton (Ewan McGregor) is taking a sidelong gander at his
options for clean living. "Choose life," he drawls almost playfully in a
thick Scottish brogue.  "Choose a job. Choose a career. Choose a family.
Choose a fucking big television, choose washing machines, cars, compact
disc players, and electrical tin openers." 
He's mocking the bourgeois lifestyle, of course, concluding, "Choose life
.... Why would I want to do a thing like that?" Casting aspersions on
notions of a normal life, Trainspotting is a deliciously entertaining and
only vaguely depressing show that presses thumb to nose throughout its 93
minutes. The film is eager to shock and sicken, but it takes such a keen
interest in character -- and its performances are so surefooted -- that
even as it dives headlong into the murky toilet water of the Scottish drug
culture, Trainspotting emerges triumphant, a cockeyed grin plastered
across its face. 
In Irvine Welsh's celebrated novel, director Danny Boyle and screenwriter
John Hodge find the humanity that eluded their previous effort, Shallow
Grave.  It was hard to really care about the characters in that film, a
trio of greedheaded flatmates who destroy themselves for the love of
money. It may have seemed an even more formidable task to penetrate the
unlovable patina of heroin-addled youth, but Hodge's smart, compact
screenplay, coupled with winning performances by McGregor, Ewan Bremner
(Spud, Renton's cohort in the opening scene), Jonny Lee Miller (the
weirdly charming Sick Boy), and Robert Carlyle (Begbie, who's sort of
Scotland's answer to a Joe Pesci character), makes for a downright
charming picture. 
Renton is the smartest of these unapologetic junkies, and the film's
subjective center. We watch through his eyes as he and his mates tie off
and shoot up, and we process thoughts along with him as he ruminates on
the meanings of life and death, the severity of his cravings, and the
place of his fellow Scotsmen in the world. "I hate being Scottish," he
rants in a rare moment of social consciousness. "I don't hate the
English-they're just wankers. We, on the other hand, are colonized by
wankers." McGregor's delivery is easily hilarious, but the true feelings
that it suggests boil well under the surface of this film, as does much
situational unpleasantness. 
Trainspotting's stylish gloss is hardly realistic, and its portrayal of
addiction is nearly as glamorous as the film's detractors may have you
believe-but it's not a glamour without consequences. We see the deaths
that are brought on by all this nihilistic cavorting, and the film's
centerpiece is a nightmarish, surreal drama of overdosing and kicking the
habit, set to the longing strains of Lou Reed's glam-era "Perfect Day" and
some truly disturbing imagery that could have been nicked from Jan
Svankmajer. (The overdose itself actually reminds me of the funeral
procession from Carl-Theodor Dreyer's Vampyr.)
What really gives Trainspotting credibility is its close relationship with
the body. Needle tracks, accidental and deliberate bloodshed, casual sex
with schoolgirls, and explosive diarrhea are all part of the tableau.
Understanding that you can't make a movie about the pleasures and pains of
drug addiction without seeking intimacy with the body that feels the rush,
Boyle's camera gets close to McGregor's starmaking performance, going so
far as to set one flatulent scene in "the worst toilet in Scotland." 
You may well be wondering how I can use words like hilarious and charming
to describe such a picture. The simple answer is that Trainspotting is
brilliant and audacious filmmaking. Trainspotting helps you understand the
lure of the heroin culture by introducing a gang of addicts who are
affable and charming and addicted to a rush that's described as superior
to a thousand grade-A orgasms. These kids seem to be victims of
circumstance and class struggle as much as anything (again, such concerns
are left to flow well below surface level), and there's a simple vicarious
thrill to be had by the audience in sharing their outlaw lifestyle. I
wouldn't want to be Mark Renton, but I surely wish him well. 
Even so, there are audiences who will find this all to be a little much,
and who might characterize the humor or its attending sentiments as
"sick." They would do well to stay away. Others may well be put off by the
lack of any strong female characters -- the most prominent is Diane (Kelly
MacDonald), playing jailbait, and she's in the film for about five
minutes. (Somebody obviously identified the "boys club"  angle as a
marketing waterloo, since ads feature MacDonald prominently even though
she's a decidely minor character whose best scenes were cut before
release.) Again, it's good to know what you're getting into before you buy
your ticket.  Trainspotting is a vein-tapping, shite-slinging, loo-diving
virtuoso piece -- and it's best recommended to folks who aren't timid
about that sort of thing. They'll be rewarded. 
