Title
Review for Blade Runner (1982)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Dragan Antulov
Sometimes in the late 1980s "Sfera", club of science fiction
aficionados from Zagreb, Croatia, asked its members to take
a poll and name the ten best SF movies of all times. The
results were printed in "Parsek", club's official fanzine
with the accompanying article that commented each film's
ranking. As many had expected, the top spot was held by
BLADE RUNNER, 1982 cult classic by Ridley Scott. However,
the author of the article didn't bother to give any broad
explanation for its success. "BLADE RUNNER is simply movie
to be seen and enjoyed", he wrote. The author of this review
was faced with exactly the same problem any time he tried to
give his reasons why he considered BLADE RUNNER one of the
best pieces of seventh art ever made. For me, every time I
watch the movie (and it happened quite a lot in the last
fourteen years) it is almost like a religious experience,
something that defies any rational discourse. Put that in
perspective with the deluge of reviews, essays, books,
studies and numerous references inspired by BLADE RUNNER in
last decade and half, and you'll also see that is very hard
to find anything original to say.
Anyway, many times I indeed tried to find the reason why I
like BLADE RUNNER so much. The closest thing to answer was
somewhat sentimental nature; when I saw movie for the first
time, it actually turned out to be the end of a period in my
movie watching habits. BLADE RUNNER was actually the last
movie that I had liked so much that I bothered to go to
cinema for the second time. Never again I was so blown away
by cinematic quality to buy tickets for repeated viewing.
The movie wasn't just the end of an era for me personally,
it was also the end of an era in history of contemporary
science fiction cinema. It was based on the novel DO
ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEPS? by Philip K. Dick, the
science fiction writer who got enormous popularity with his
works that depicted worlds of near future with the sharp
contrast between superior technology and nightmarish state
of humanity. Visions of the author (who died short before
the movie premiere) were very in line with the dominating
pessimistic trends of science fiction and futuristic films
of the late 1970s and early 1980s, like ALIEN, OUTLAND or
MAD MAX. Although probably the best of them, the movie
flopped at the box-office and was abandoned by the critics,
sealing the fate of mainstream science fiction cinema for
next decade and turning it to mindless Spielbergian
infantilism.
The plot begins in Los Angeles in November 2019, decaying
megalopolis drowning in Malthusian nightmare, permanent smog
and acid rain. The only refuge from the hopeless reality of
dying planet lies in the off-world colonies, where
artificial humans known as the replicants provide slave
labour for the colonists. However, following the bloody
off-world revolt, replicants are permanently banished from
Earth and special police force, known as the Blade Runners,
is authorised to exterminate them on sight. One of their
former members is world-weary Rick Deckard (Harrison) who
reluctantly agrees to return to his old police job for one
more time. His target is a group of new, state-of-the-art
and deadly Nexus 6 generation replicants, led by Roy Batty
(Rutger Hauer). While he tracks the group, he stumbles onto
Rachael (Sean Young), beautiful woman that doesn't know
about her own replicant identity.
On the surface, the plot of the movie looks like material
for cheap B-movie schlockfest. However, BLADE RUNNER
actually wasn't intended to be something like that and its
plot is probably the least memorable or important element of
the big picture. The audience who initially expected
conventional action thriller or futuristic horror was
probably disappointed, but almost anyone remembered
something else - characters, music, brilliant production
designs, costumes; the atmosphere in general. Perfectionist
care about even the most single details of futuristic world
and originality of artists' ideas paid off in the end, and
BLADE RUNNER is now considered to be one of the most
recognisable movies of all times. The same thing can be said
of musical score by Vangelis, whose melancholic tunes remain
one of the composer's best works to date.
After the atmosphere, the characters are strongest point of
BLADE RUNNER. Most of them have few screen time, but they
are made unforgettable through superb acting. One of the
biggest ironies of BLADE RUNNER is its lead role; Harrison
Ford played Rick Deckard so differently from his usual
all-American hero image. His Deckard is cynical,
unsympathetic chandleresque anti-hero who actually has to
wait to the final shots in order to redeems himself. To make
things even more ironic, Ford privately doesn't appreciate
his most unconventional and one of the best roles. Perhaps
that was due to the fact that the show was stolen from him
by excellent Rutger Hauer. His portrayal of Roy Batty is not
only the most remembered performance in his entire career
but also his own ad-lib intervention is responsible for the
monologue that remains one of the best in the history of
motion pictures.
The other actors were somewhat overshadowed by leading duo;
yet, almost any of them gave a strong performance. For some
of them, like Edward J. Olmos, M. Emmet Walsh, James Hong
and Daryl Hannah is quite understandable why they became
huge stars or dependable character actors later on. Some,
like Sean Young, William Sanderson and Joe Turkell, weren't
that lucky and that's a real shame. Same can be said also
about director Ridley Scott, who slowly reduced his almost
divine reputation by making stylishly perfect movies bellow
the standards of BLADE RUNNER.
The strength of the movie isn't just in its popularity and
the cult that steadily grows with each new generation of the
moviegoers. It can also be seen in the influence it had on
other media. BLADE RUNNER, at least initially, didn't
influence other movies (which is understandable, because of
its commercial failure), that was compensated in the area of
science fiction literature. Because it was so stunningly
refreshing, this movie is considered to be the main
inspiration to the extremely popular sub-genre of cyberpunk,
and later to the sub-culture of cyberpunk on Internet. BLADE
RUNNER was also one of the very rare movies that dared to
predict future and to become more accurate in its
predictions as the years went by.
Some movies aren't just good because of their own quality.
They are also good because of the viewers feedback,
especially when they inspire them to ask questions and get
often very different answers. In the case of BLADE RUNNER,
the followers of cult had a great schism due to the great
replicant controversy - issue that was adressed in a 1992
released Director's Cut. Another endless debate is between
those fans who like the voice-overs in original 1982 version
as a tribute to the great film noires of 1940s, and those
who consider them as unnecessary dumbing-down. Anyway,
although some argue that those controversies can prove the
lack of perfection in BLADE RUNNER, the author of this
review thinks that they can be just another reason for
people to enjoy this movie.

Author
Frank Maloney
     BLADE RUNNER--THE DIRECTOR'S CUT is a film directed by Ridley Scott
from a script by Hampton Fancher and David Peoples.  It stars Harrison
Ford, Rutger Hauer, Sean Young, with Edward James Olmos, James Turkel,
Darryl Hannah, Brion James, Joanna Cassidy, and M. Emmet Walsh.
Production designer is Lawrence G.  Paull, art director David Snyder,
consultant Sid Mead, and special-effects by Donald Trumbrull.
Cinematography is by Jordan Cronenweth.  Music by Vangelis.  Based on
the novel DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP by Philip K. Dick.  Rated
R, for violence.
     BLADE RUNNER--THE DIRECTOR'S CUT is Ridley Scott's 1992 version of
what the 1982 film would have looked like if it had survived its preview
screenings and a nervous studio.  Gone is the Raymond-Chandler-style
voice-over to explain it all to us.  Gone is the sappy ending.  Added is
a key dream sequence (that presaged, as it turns out, Scott's 1986
fantasy LEGEND), the rest of the Vangelis score, and some additional
footage to several key scenes.  The director's cut makes this great cult
film only greater, more impressive, more stimulating, more interesting.
     It is probably pointless to try to review BLADE RUNNER as one would
a new film, even though there a lot of people who have never seen even
the original theatrical release.  (It was, lest we forget, a huge box
office bomb in 1982, being completely swallowed up by the audience rush
to E.T., which had opened in the same month.)  Mostly, I am here now to
tell you that this is one of the greatest sf films ever made.  And that
if you are near one of the 60-some U.S. cities that opened BLADE RUNNER
this last Friday September 11, you simply must go see it.  Not only is
the film wonderful (for reasons I will touch on in a minute), but it is
an energizing experience merely to be in the same block as a venue like
Seattle's Egyptian Theater and to experience the huge crowds outside, a
line endlessly snaking around the building and down the alley to the
next street, another crowd of people who have just gotten out of the
last showing and who obviously don't want to leave, who want to stand on
the sidewalk and talk about what they have just seen.  And inside to
feel the excited hubbub of the audience waiting, waiting, to hear them
applaud the dimming of the house lights, to hear them applaud loudly the
final credits.  This is what movie-going is supposed to be about:
excitement, stimulation, satisfaction.  I haven't felt quite the same
rush of group anticipation since the original STAR WARS opened.  By
comparison, opening night audiences for BATMAN were bored and
noncommittal.
     As for what makes BLADE RUNNER great, allow me to sketch out of few
beginning points, without pretending to exhaust the subject.  For one
thing, this movie has a great theme, the greatest human theme: life,
death, and their meaning.  What does it mean to live, to die?  Rutger
Hauer's speech in the rain on what he has seen, on the memories that
will die with him, is deeply moving, coming especially as it does from
the ostensible villain of the piece.  And that's another source of BLADE
RUNNER's greatness, its ambiguity, its willingness not to explain.  It
shows and lets the audience put it together, on the fly, as it were;
this quality was not seen in 1982 as a strength by those preview
audiences who were reportedly confused by the story.  It's hard for me
to imagine that being a problem today; certainly, my partner Lyndol, who
literally knew nothing about BLADE RUNNER except that was an sf film I
wanted to go to, followed it perfectly and without the film noir
narration that had Harrison Ford say such inanities as "What the hell
was happening to me?"  Putting it another way, BLADE RUNNER is an sf
film that treats its audience as adults, intelligent adults.
     Another source of greatness is the look of the film.  Seldom will
one be exposed to such a detailed, imaginative, and intriguing design.
The now famous Scott look is still fresh and effective here: the wet
black streets, the steam, the chiaroscuro, the sourceless beams of
light, the random craziness in the background and edges of the main
action.  The eye and mind are condemned to miss so much even while
picking up so many delightful minutiae.  They make the world of 2019
L.A., with its flying billboards, its 700-storey arcologies, its
medieval street life, open markets and open sewers, the grungy soba
bars, the dwarf scavengers, the open bonfires complete and whole and
real.  Everything about the design is rich and satisfying.  For those
who know the film, I have only to point to the chase scene that ends
with crashes through multiple windows to find an example of the visual
imagination that so mightily informs BLADE RUNNER.
     A third area of achievement that sets BLADE RUNNER off from almost
all other sf films is its commitment to examing relationships, to allow
long sequences of characters establishing their characters, establishing
their relationships.  These sequences are not flaccid, they do not
deflate the tension of the prolonged chase that is most of BLADE RUNNER.
They are themselves basic to the theme and story, basic to the adultness
of the film.
     Of course, there are some flaws.  Most especially, I object to
Sebastian's toys.  They are too cute, as well as too obviously Little
People in fancy dress.  Cuteness is out of place in this world.  Even
the nerdy whimsy of a Sebastian, the genetic designer, should not have
been reduced to a reply to the R2D2 kind of sweetness.
     Go to BLADE RUNNER--THE DIRECTOR'S CUT.  Pay what you must, you
will get your money's worth.

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
BLADE RUNNER--THE DIRECTOR'S CUT:  First there was David Lean's LAWRENCE
OF ARABIA, then Stanley Kubrick's SPARTACUS, and now Ridley Scott's
science fiction cult classic BLADE RUNNER has been restored to the
director's original vision of the movie and the new version released on
its own to theaters.  As with the previous version, it can be taken
simply as a stylish, futuristic detective/action flick, or an
exploration into what it is to be human (those interested in the latter
might also wish to read Philip K. Dick's DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC
SHEEP, on which both versions were based).
Plot/kick-off:        In the near future, some Nexus 6 replicants (sort of robots,
difficult to tell from humans) escape and try to hide in Earth's grimy
21st-century society while their leader, Roy Batty, looks for a way to
"live" past their predesigned life spans.  Deckard, a retired Nexus 6
hunter, is coerced into tracking them down to kill them.  Good pacing,
interesting detective work: contrary to the previous version, I was
able to follow the action this time, since more transition scenes were
included (it didn't seem random this time) and the annoying voice-over
narration was cut.  I'd rather be shown than told, and this version did
a much better job of that.
Characters/acting:  Harrison Ford plays Deckard, a beaten-down man who
doesn't like his job but doesn't seem to have much of a choice, and is
smart at what he does.  Rutger Hauer is weird but compelling as Roy, and
his last scene in the movie is amazing.  Sean Young is beautiful and
stiff as the beautiful and stiff Rachel, who is drawn to Deckard.
Others include Darryl Hannah and other replicants, and Edward James
Olmos as one of the other officers of the law.  Which characters are
really the more "human" ones?  You decide.
Cinematography/FX:  This movie is worth seeing for its cinematography
alone, especially on the big screen.  The city is futuristic not so much
through new fantastic technology (though there were aircars flying
through the city, sometimes the viewers "flew" with them around
buildings and giant TV billboards), but through the small changes in
everyday objects.  New scenes were added in of the city in the early
parts of the movie, which helped give more of a "feel" to get the viewer
into what was going on in the movie earlier.
Score/Sound:  Vangelis, synthesized, but also some sax, I liked it and
it fit the movie.
Violence/Gore:  Bullet holes in bodies, crushed heads, finger-breaking,
fights/shootings.  Pretty violent, but not a gorefest, no slow-mo fights
or lingering shots of gore.
Skin/situations:  Kissing, fairly short breast shot.
Analysis:  It's been at least a couple of years since I saw the previous
vision, but I thought this version was great, partly because it was my
first time seeing it on the big screen for either version.  Some people
might prefer the previous, slightly happier, version, but I think this
is the superior version.  I recommend it to fans of the old, and even
more to those who've never seen either version.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
2:05, R, Science Fiction/Action/Cult, 1992 (BLADE RUNNER was
first released in 1982)
Director: Ridley Scott
Cast: Harrison Ford, Rutger Hauer, Sean Young, Daryl Hannah,
      Edward James Olmos, Joanna Cassidy, Brion James, M. Emmet Walsh,
      William Sanderson, Joe Turkel, James Hong
     Harrison Ford is a hired Replicant hunter, who is forced out of
retirement by M. Emmet Walsh to find four escaped Replicants, robots
that look like humans and have artificial intelligence.  The replicants
have a life span of four years and their leader Rutger Hauer is trying
to find a way to make them live longer.
     BLADE RUNNER: THE DIRECTOR'S CUT is better than the original.
Harrison Ford's annoying voice-overs have been removed and some of the
scenes have been rearranged.  I recommend this film to fans of the
original BLADE RUNNER.  Those who disliked BLADE RUNNER will probably
not like BLADE RUNNER: THE DIRECTOR'S CUT.  BLADE RUNNER: THE
DIRECTOR'S CUT will probably have a greater impact if seen in the
theater.  The flying scenes will also be more dramatic in the theater.
On a scale of zero to five, I give BLADE RUNNER: THE DIRECTOR'S CUT a
five.  BLADE RUNNER: THE DIRECTOR'S CUT is rated R for female nudity,
adult situations, explicit language, and graphic violence.
     Ridley Scott (ALIEN, BLACK RAIN) has created a dark and dreary
film that will certainly not be liked by all people.  The original
version has become a cult film.  All of the cult fans of the original
version should also enjoy this version.  The film is very well written
and held my interest throughout.  There aren't many science fiction
films that I can watch the number of times that I have this one.  The
sets used for this film are excellent, however I think that someone
went overboard with the Coca-Cola name placement.
     Harrison Ford (PATRIOT GAMES, INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE)
is great in his role.  This film is another example of why Harrison
Ford became the star that he now is.  Daryl Hannah (MEMOIRS OF AN
INVISIBLE MAN, SUMMER LOVERS) wasn't a big name star when this film
originally was released.  She is quite spectacular in her role as one
of the Replicants.  Rutger Hauer (BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER, FLESH +
BLOOD) is excellent.  He can make quite a sinister person.  Sean Young
(NO WAY OUT, SKETCH ARTIST) is good as the Replicant that Harrison Ford
falls in love with, although out of the cast, I think that she was the
weakest actress.  Brion James (ANOTHER 48 HRS., TANGO & CASH) does a
good job in his short role as a Replicant.  M. Emmet Walsh (MISSING IN
ACTION, RED SCORPION), as per his usual, does a great job with his
role.  I think Joanna Cassidy (DON'T TELL MOM THE BABYSITTER'S DEAD,
MAY WINE) was also a rather weak actress in this film.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: The godfather of modern science fiction films earns every bit of
its culthood, its influence, its longevity, and even its pretensions.
There is something very intimidating in the way BLADE RUNNER has so
completely lionized the sphere of the imagination in sf, in movies, in
culture, in futureology, in a whole heap of things that would previously
not seemed to have much potential to inform each other. But they have.
BLADE RUNNER is not just a movie -- and a remarkable one at that -- but a
cultural reference point, a landmark.
When movies like CITIZEN KANE, 2001, LAWRENCE OF ARABIA and GONE WITH THE
WIND were released, they changed how movies of their kind -- and many other
kinds -- were thought about, conceived, executed, and dealt with. BLADE
RUNNER did the same, not only with sf movies in general, but with the whole
*act* of looking into the future. The hokey glittering utopias of movies
like LOGAN'S RUN had been replaced with a perpetually extended now, a world
in which one layer of jury-rigging on top of another was "progress". This
was what the future as we knew it *felt* like.
The plot is basic noir, given a techno-injection. Harrison Ford plays Rick
Deckard, a "blade runner" -- a police assassin whose specialty is hunting
down "replicants", or androids that have gone renegade. He retired, but is
now being dragged back in for one last job that involves several extremely
advanced and dangerous "skin jobs", as replicants are snidely termed. The
irony of the replicants' plight is plain: the motto of the company that
makes them is "More Human Than Human", but their inherent lack of dignity
and their built-in obsolescence -- a calculated four-year life span --
renders them pitiful. Deckard has pity for them, and cannot own up to it.
There is also Rachel, a replicant who is the prototype for the models he
has been sent to destroy, who was given false memories as a way of making
her more credibly human, and it works so well that Deckard finds himself
drawn to her. And then there is Roy, the vicious but also angrily
philosophical ringleader of the replicants, who rages against the dying of
his light -- a noble enemy who has a lesson for Rick in the end.
Ford's acting is monotonous; deliberately so. He is playing a character, as
we soon see, who either does not have emotions to begin with, or has
systematically cut himself off from them. (In which case, what's the
difference?) And in that light, the hokey narration that was slathered on
top of the original release to "clarify" the movie's substance seems
weirdly appropriate. The acting, both in his case and throughout the movie,
works through the accumulation of details -- it's never any one thing, but
everything: the way he says "Kiss me", the way he tries to drink and gets
blood in his glass, the way he bluffs his way into an exotic dancer's
dressing room.
And then there is the movie's look, which has been copied and slavishly
imitated in comics, in other movies, books, advertising, and God knows what
else. In other movies, we felt like we were looking at sets; BLADE RUNNER
makes us feel like we're peeking *into* the future, it's so closed-ended,
total, and convincing. The haunting Vangelis score makes the already-wide
scope of the movie seem even broader, almost operatic -- especially in
scenes like the one where Roy confronts his maker and doesn't like what he
finds.
BLADE RUNNER had a difficult production history -- much of the budget and
production value for the movie was supplied by the Shaw Brothers kung-fu
filmmaking house -- and was critically rejected and commerically
unsuccessful on its first release. Audiences who were used to Ford's
Indiana Jones / Han Solo schtick were turned off by the brooding,
introspective Rick Deckard. The brutal violence and overall atmosphere of
gloom didn't help things either - and still make the movie overwhelming on
first viewing.
In fact, BLADE RUNNER is a movie that demands being seen at least twice --
once to get the spectacle and shock value of the movie assimilated, and
another time to let the story unwind and present itself. Beyond the look
and feel, the story and theme of BLADE RUNNER show great promise of
withstanding the test of time and making the film not only prophetic, but
deep and true.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
In our time a good science fiction film is a rare artifact and a true
treasure. The essence, the heart of the genre, the endless possibilities of
imagination are now replaced with primitive action sequences and impressive
special effects. The result is that the genre (especially in the 90s) has
become a synonimum for dumb and predictable "popcorn films". That is why we
have to look back at the time passed to find good science fiction films.
Every genre has its masterpieces. And "Blade Runner" is one of them. As a
falling star it has lit up the sky, opening new ways of science fiction by
defining its own genre.
Not since Kubrick's "2001: A Space Odyssey" has it been such a complex,
thought provoking  and sophisticated science fiction film. It is a strangely
compelling and humanistic detective story, set in L.A., year 2019. Humanity
has expanded far beyond the Earth, engaged in the eternal quest for new
frontiers. Those left behind are too old, infirm, poor or stubborn to escape
for the off-world colonies; they're stuck with the dregs of civilization, as
represented by a gloomy, rain-sodden Los Angeles. The only flies in the
ointment are artificial humans, colloquially known as replicants, deployed
in the most hazardous of environments. These artificial humans are designed
to serve man, by doing all the "dirty" and dangerous work, such as warfare
and collonisation of other planets. In their latest incarnation, Nexus 6,
these replicants have surpassed their makers, a moment of transition. On
Earth rogue replicants are outlawed, a hazard that demands execution. So
when a replicant unit is discovered in LA, the police assign their blade
runner division to the clean-up operation. It seems that the replicants are
trying to infiltrate the Tyrell Corporation, the monolithic entity that
built them, presided over by genius Eldon Tyrell (Joseph Turrkel). Rick
Decard (Harrison Ford) is one of the unfortunate blade runners, that are
stuck on earth, forced into taking up the chase.
"Blade Runner" is a brilliant analyses of the earth, human kind, its
development and evolution. An interesting fact is that Chinese has become
the new main language, since the world is mostly populated by the oriental
population. The world of the future is cold, dark and unfriendly. It is a
time of decay, fear, trash,neon and promises of clean air, blue waters and
green grass. The film also presents a great deal of dazzling special effects
and some of the most original art direction I have ever seen. From the very
beginning of the film we see the grand skyscrapers and buildings that arise
from the dark, almost dead soil. The art director has been inspired by the
Mayan and Egyptian architecture, combining it with Ultra modern art design.
The result is mesmerizing and wonderfully imaginative, and yet never
completely alien.
Director Ridley Scott has transformed Philip K. Dick's novel 'Do Androids
Dream of Electric Sheep?' beyond recognition. Along side with screenwriters
Hampton Fancher and David Peoples, he uses his ideas as a philosophical
launching pad. The film takes place in the middle of a silent war between
humans and artificial humans. Through the film both sides pose the very same
global questions: who am I? where am I going? This leads the audience to
concider the very essence of humanity itself. What makes us human? Memories?
Sentience? Thoughts? Ideas? Feelings? Does it really matter if they ar
artificial? And if they are, does it make them less human? This is all
thought provoking and original material that has been copied throughout the
years. Surprisingly enough, the film loose as fresh and original as at its
premiere in 1982.
The cast, consisting of 10 cast members, is nothing less than fabulous.
Harrison Ford is believable as the sad and quite Deckard - angry, hurt and
vulnerable. Forced to stay on earth, with no choice but to hunt for the
replicants. Falling in a certain apathy, he feels that he has absolutely
nothing to live for. His love interest, played by Sean Young, portrays
innocence and vulnerability, warmth and consideration, projecting an image
of what we concider humanity. When she turns out to be a replicant, we are
forced to pose the basic question: what makes us human? Rutger Huer, as the
leader of the rebel replicants, is the most captivating. He is charismatic
via lyricism, some memorable lines ("All those memories will be lost in
time..like tears in the rain.."), but mostly by his pationate nature and
desperate love of life. Off course  there are some characters in this film
that are created to give a more vivid and live image of future society. The
ingenious creator of the replicants, Dr.Eldon Tyrel (Joseph Turel) is a
cold, sinister character that became corrupted by the opportunity of playing
God. Another interesting character is J.F.Sebastion, a previously attractive
and respected genetic designer, he is now suffering of a terrible illness
that stops him from moving to the Off-world colonies. Living in almost
complete isolation, he makes his own friends, creatures that resemble
characters from fairytales and sagas, so that he won't feel alone. There are
many bizarre characters and events in the film that make it more interesting
and captivating. The fabulous cinematography by Jordan Cronenweth, combined
with Richard Hart's lightning frames the characters and the story in beauty
and imagination. All are the part of the warmly , symbolic whole, a mood
enchanted by Vangelis' magical and dreamy score. A music that is intimate
and distant at the same time. This may be the best soundtrack Vangelis ever
created.
The film ends in a monstrous, violent and emotionally engaging finale, that
makes a lasting impression. 'Blade Runner' is a unique film, incredible on
every level. This is a prophetic and emotional tale that stands out as one
of the most original and intellectual science fiction films ever made.


Author
Jim Gillogly
     The definitive version of BLADE RUNNER runs until 10 Oct 91 at the
Nuart in West Los Angeles.  The test audience that saw this version
before the initial release was befuddled and depressed, so the studio
added lots of lame Harrison Ford voice-overs and tacked some tacky
aerial footage (recycled from THE SHINING) onto the end, together with
more lame voice-overs suggesting your standard Official Hollywood Happy
Ending.  This release reverses those losses, turning a good and artistic
(but flawed) film into an impressive, integrated film that deserves
another two stars on *anybody's* scale.
     Getting rid of the patronizing and distracting voice-overs achieves
most of the gains.  The story flows just fine without them, and we're
allowed to concentrate on the wonderful dark sets and the Vangelis
score.  The score appears to be utilized differently; I don't have it
all memorized, but I noticed one change -- when Deckard is noodling with
his piano in the Criterion Laser Disk version, the Vangelis score is
woven around the notes he's playing; the piano stands out more in the
Director's Cut.  I believe we're hearing more of it during the long
approaches to Tyrell Corporation where we used to hear voice-overs.
[SPOILER WARNING -- I'm about to go into detail that you may not want to
read]
     Some of the gorier scenes that had been added back into the
Criterion LD were not present in the Director's Cut (DC).  The extra
footage of Dr.  Eldon Tyrell's eyeballs getting popped and dripping down
his face were left out, as was the second shot at Pris which resulted in
her flailing around even more vigorously on the floor, and the nail
popping out the back side of Roy Batty's hand.  Good riddance to all of
them, say I: they didn't advance the story or our identification or lack
of it with any of the characters.
     The movie ends with Deckard and Rachel getting into the elevator at
Deckard's building after finding the silver foil origami unicorn; we
still hear the echo of Gaff's parting remark: "She won't live, but then,
who does?"  It's great -- just perfect.
     For the real aficionados, two of the more blatant continuity errors
have been fixed:  Bryant tells Deckard in his office that *two* of the
replicants were fried in the electric field when they tried to break
into Tyrell Corporation.  This means we no longer need inside knowledge
about Mary, the All-American Mother Replicant, to count the bodies.  The
other bug that was fixed was the Asian lady reading the serial number
off the snake scale in her electron microscope: she now reads the same
one we're seeing.  Those are the only ones I noticed; there might have
been more changes.
     The issue of whether Deckard is a replicant was not clarified at
all in this version (and I was glad of it).  We still have the classic
lines from Rachel ("Have you ever retired a human by mistake?"  "This
Voigt-Kampff test of yours -- have you ever taken it yourself?")  and
Gaff ("You've done a man's job.").  [Quote accuracy not guaranteed]  We
still have Deckard's eyes glowing gray in two places (as opposed to the
gold glow in Nexus Six replicants' eyes): when Rachel says "I'm not *in*
the business:  I *am* the business."  and when Rachel is playing the
piano while Deckard is resting.  Some have speculated that Deckard's
unicorn dream would appear in this version, definitively settling the
question, since Gaff's origami unicorn would indicate that he knew one
of Deckard's mind implants.  However, there was no hint of this dream in
the DC.
     All in all, it was a wonderful experience...  the same feeling you
would get if you'd seen only the colorized version of CASABLANCA, and
finally got to see the original black and white.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Ridley Scott
Writers: Hampton Fancher and David Peoples (based on the book "Do
Androids Dream of Electric Sheep" by Philip K. Dick)
Starring: Harrison Ford, Sean Young, Rutger Hauer, Daryl Hannah, Joanna
Cassidy, Brion James, William Sanderson, M. Emmet Walsh, Edward James
Olmos, James Hong, Morgan Paull
It's pretty much the requisite that a film taking place in the future
has a lot of action, maybe a little romance, and grade-A special
effects.  "Blade Runner" has the latter two, and has a plot that sounds
like it would contain a lot of big action sequences: a police officer
called a blade runner has to silence four illegal androids called
replicants.  It sounds like a B-movie action sci-fi pic, but "Blade
Runner" takes this idea a whole different and original way, which
disapoints some (the flick bombed at the box office), but pleases
others.
The "Blade Runner" of the title is Rick Deckard (Harrison Ford, around
the time he had just gotten big with "Star Wars" and "Raiders of the
Lost Ark"), a retired Blade Runner in L.A. 2019.  He is basically your
typical Phillip Marloe/Sam Spade/John Shaft loner detective, dressing in
trench-coats, and always brooding over something (although getting
significantly less booty than Shaft).  Harrison Ford has been criticized
for his portrayal, but I thought he gave a nicely alienated performance,
with touches of humor in it, without never loosing the core of the
character.
Deckard is called in to "retire" four "skin jobs," as his ex-boss (M.
Emmet Walsh) puts it.  He says the job is "bad, the worst," chiefly
because these illegal androids, which were deemed illegal when they
started going beserk and killing people, have come back to earth, in the
city where the plant that created them is: Tyrell Corp., headed by the
epnonmysly named genius (Joe Turkel, the bartender in Kubrick's "The
Shining").  He reluctantly agrees to do it, and is sent out with his
quiet assistant (Edward James Olmos) to investigate...slowly.
The four replicants in the film - leader Batty (Rutger Hauer), acrobatic
Pris (Daryl Hannah), kinda dumb Leon (Brion James), and seductive Zhora
(Joanna Cassidy) - are shown in intercuts between the action of
Deckard.  They aren't shown as truly evil creatures, but are given a bit
of respect.  They are, after all, beings who are given a short lifespan
and don't to die after experiencing life for only four years, after
which they die.  Their actions are only influenced by their necessity to
survive, like any other kind of living organism.
Also in the film is the replicant Rachael (Sean Young), who has no clue
she's a replicant.  She has been given a past, inplanted by Tyrell, and
when she finds out, she begins to become obsessed with the man who found
her out - Deckard.  They share a bizarre relationship, seeming to fall
in love, which is the cruel ironic twist in the movie.  When she finds
out, she begins to run, and Deckard finds out he has to retire her as
well as the other four.
The film moves at a very slow, leisurely pace.  While this pisses a lot
of people off, it's no slower than a detective film noir from the 40s,
like "Malteese Falcon."  The twist on the detective noir story is that
it's in the future, and it works nicely.  It not only builds up a
wonderful paralellism between humans and androids, but creates a
memorable world (which was nominated for an Oscar, but lost to "E.T" -
okay, let's see: creating an entirely new world, or creating one goddam
little alien?  the choice shouldn't be that hard, folks).
The world that is depicted is one that is totally amazing to view, but
shown in a lovely bit of satirical insight into our world.  What has
happened is we have apparently destroyed earth, and the rich and elite
have moved to the "off-shore colonies," which is shown in ad campaigns
flying around the streets of L.A., which are filled with trash, and
mostly aisians (hmm...).  The rich and elite who haven't off earth live
in the tops of tall buildings, which seems to be the only source of
light in the world.
The direction, script, and acting are very good, although they are all
both dark and brooding, sometimes too much so.  The lighting in the film
is somewhat like that of Ridley's brother Tony's - blue foggy lights -
but used to a poignant and cooler effect (the blue foggy lights in Tony
Scott flicks are there for...um...well, there is no reason why they're
there).  The writing sometimes features some really dumb and corny lines
that aren't always well-said by the actors ("Wake up!  Time to die!"),
but it's plotting is nice, leaving a lot of themes and symbolism to pop
out nicely and smoothly, and for a message to be conveyed, instead of
lost in a stupid action sci-fi pic. 
And the acting is generally good, with notable performances by Rutger
Hauer (who does overdo it a bit towards the end), Sean Young (who gives
what is probably the only good performance of her career), and William
Sanderson (the leader of the "Daryl"s from "Newhart," who gives a
senstive performance as a diseased engineer who helps some of the
replicants out, and actually got a lot of pathos from me).
There are two versions of this flick: the original and the director's
cut.  There seems to be some contreversy over which one is the better
one.  The director's cut doesn't change A LOT, but what it changes are
excellent.  For one thing, the annoying-as-hell, unnecessary, montone
voice-over narration by Harrison Ford is thankfully omitted (some say it
helps; I think it is annoying, and spoon-feeds all the themes to us, not
letting us figure it out).  Another thing is the love between Rachael
and Deckard is actually backed up a little more, making it a tad more
realistic than just some cruel irony tossed in by the writers.
And then there's the ending.  The studios basically fucking freaked when
they saw this original film because it wasn't "Star Wars," and they
realized the general public would hate it.  So they tried their best to
sabotage it, apparently for the better.  So they made him toss in a
stupid final scene where a nice, sun-shiny twist was revealed.  The
director's cut cuts this out, and leaves off with the darker ending,
which suits the film a little better.
But even if you don't see the director's cut, it's an excellent film,
although a tad flawed.  And even if you can't get into the story, or
like any of the characters, at least your mouth can drop at the gorgous
sets, special effects, etc, etc, etc.  And besides, you get to see Daryl
Hannah do the "Onnatop" spiel from "Goldeneye on a lucky Harrison Ford!
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
