Title
Review for Happy Gilmore (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Has it really been 16 years since CADDYSHACK?  In the better days of 
comedy-- yes, even the eighties-- the course was played a mix of seasoned 
pros and young upstarts, like Chevy Chase, Bill Murray, and Rodney 
Dangerfield.  Directors such as Harold Ramis (CADDYSHACK), Ivan Reitman 
(STRIPES), and John Landis (THE BLUES BROTHERS) were making very funny 
movies about very silly people, and *everybody* was having a good laugh.  
Now, too many years later, in what might be called the Chris Farley/Jim 
Carrey decade, the funniest person on the block is Adam Sandler.  Has it 
really come to this?
     Mr. Sandler, a player on TV's "Saturday Night Live," is actually 
pretty good here.  He stars as a hockey player wannabe whose supersonic 
slap shot lands him on the pro-golfing circuit.  His putts are a putz, but 
he can cross the green in a single stroke and his juvenile antics are 
bringing the highest ratings to the game in years.  There's also a 
grandmother involved-- and her tax money-- but HAPPY GILMORE is less a 
mission from God than just an excuse for Sandler to hit things.  Such as 
pucks, balls, and fellow golfers.
     Director Dennis Dugan (PROBLEM CHILD) does a great job of sustaining
momentum.  Though his timing is often off, the seemingly one-dimensional
story doesn't grow tiresome until the last twenty minutes.  Several
familiar faces also give a boost, including Christopher McDonald, Carl
Weathers, and Richard "Jaws" Kiel.  And don't miss Bob Barker in a
priceless bit that starts as a round of golf and ends up as a fist fight
with Mr. Sandler.  Come on down! 
     As co-written by Tim Herlihy (BILLY MADISON), HAPPY GILMORE has a
rather mean-spirited streak that most of my fellow audience members didn't
seem to mind.  They laughed at any occasion for Sandler to punch, slug,
hit, or curse somebody.  Only when I turned around in my seat, did I
realize the source of such support:  rows and rows of young males, all
wearing baseball caps.  There must have been a hundred of them. 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
HAPPY GILMORE is one of those movies that you assume was intended as a
comedy, but you don't laugh.  It's one of the most disquieting films I've
seen -- not because of what it showed, really, but because it assumed that
everything it showed would automatically be found funny by its audience.
Take, for instance, the title character, as played by Adam Sandler.  Sandler
is one of the most charmless people to ever step in front of a camera.  Like
so many other "comic" actors today, he assumes that if people laugh when
someone raises their voice to a roar, people will REALLY fall apart laughing
if he raises it to a pavement-splintering bellow.  More is not better.
Happy Gilmore is a kid with a hockey fetish and what some counselors would
probably call "an anger control issue".  He can't play hockey to save his
life, and this enrages him.  Constantly.  Then he discovers, quite by
accident, that his bad hockey playing translates into great golf playing,
and soon he's taking part in a tournament that promises to help pay for his
grandmother's back taxes.
How interesting is any of this?  Not very.  It's only made worse by the fact
that the one gag in the movie is Happy's temper tantrums.  If this were a
serious movie, it would be something along the lines of COBB: about a
dangerous sociopath who is only redeemed by the fact that he can channel his
aggression into a socially acceptable form.  Here, it's a lame clothesline
to hang a bunch of extremely uncomfortable scenes masquerading as comedy.
Here's the thing: Take these psycho-behavior scenes out of this movie, like
the one where Happy smashes a beer bottle and goes after his golf rival, and
you'd have the pieces for a completely different story -- maybe one of those
Paul Schrader films, like TAXI DRIVER or ROLLING THUNDER, about tormented
loners who take out their anger on the world around them.  But instead the
same ingredients are used to make a comedy, and the result is ugly and
unsavory.
Why is any of this supposed to be funny?  After the credits rolled, that was
the only thing that stayed with me.  That and Adam Sandler's shrill and
unlikeable screen persona, who on the basis of this film I won't be
interested in seeing ever again.

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, PG-13, 91 minutes [1 hour, 31 minutes]
[comedy]
starring; Adam Sandler (Happy Gilmore), Carl Weathers (Chubbs) Christopher
McDonald (Shooter McGavin), Julie Bowen (Virgina), Frances Bay (Grandma),
written by Tim Herlihy, Adam Sandler, produced by Robert Simonds, directed by
Dennis Ducan.
Adam Sandler is a young man full of energy and comic wit. His first film,
"Billy Madison," was wild and unpredictable, but "Happy Gilmore," his
follow-up is trite and cliche. I kept thinking "I know I've seen this
before," and kept predicting all the jokes because of that feeling. This is
another typical screwball sports comedy with a stupid villain and a deadline
for a huge amount of cash.
Happy Gilmore (Sandler) is spoiled idiot manchild (wonder where I've seen
this before?) who lives with his grandmother (Bay) who he actually cares for.
He loves hockey but really stinks at it and can't comprehend his failure at th
e game. One day the I.R.S. comes to his grandmother's house and repossess all
of her property because she hasn't paid her taxes in ten years. This is told,
blatantly, quickly, and so dumbed down it's almost a children's story, and a
bad one at that. 
There is a quick, token sports comedy scene in which we discover Happy has a
hidden talent of hitting golf balls very far. When he goes to the local
driving range he is seen by a retired golf pro named Chubbs (Weathers), who
of course tells him he's gifted, and tries to convince him to go pro, but of
course Happy doesn't listen until Chubbs mentions he could make money playing
golf... could this get any more predictable?
Most of the movie depicts Happy's struggle to make it to the top. Along the
way we watch him beat up other players, hecklers, his caddy, even Bob Barker.
And then there is Shooter McGavin (McDonald), the arrogant pro who feels
threatened by Happy and wants him kicked out of the sport. Let's not forget
the sexy-woman-who-won't-give-the-main-character-the-time-of-day, Virgina
(Bowen), the PGA publicist who both of the men try to impress. 
Cliche after cliche after cliche is not a good formula for a movie, truly
good movies always do something different. Yes, "Billy Madison" was cliche,
but it was much funnier because of it's total wackiness and craziness. This
isn't wacky, this is just plain dumb.
Do I have to reveal the ending? I don't think so. 
"Happy Gilmore" was a fair movie, but it was just too predictable. Some
parts were quite funny, I'll have to admit it, but not enough to make up for
the overall simpleton attitude. 
[Note: What really annoyed me the most was the blatant plugs throughout this
film. Never have I seen a movie that was so blatant in these plugs as this
one was. Example: shots opening on Pepsi and Subway billboards, Happy's
constant snacking at Subway, Happy even does a Subway commercial!]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Dennis Dugan
Writers: Tim Herlihy and Adam Sandler
Starring: Adam Sandler, Christopher MacDonald, Julie Bowen, Frances Bay,
Carl Weathers, Ben Stiller, Bob Barker, Kevin Nealon
While Chris Farley films pretty much rely on Farley's weight problem and
his ability to scream and overact, Adam Sandler seems to more
versatile.  Well, in comparison.  I didn't see his "Billy Madison," and
have no desire to, but he makes far more comically interesting flicks
than Farley, or any of his SNL generation cohorts.  In comparion,
obviously.
"Happy Gilmore" is actually the name of the protagonist, played by Adam
Sandler with great energy and overacting, although far less than
Farley's.  He's a likable over-reactor who wants to play hockey for a
living, but has a problem: he sucks.  He can't skate, he can't shoot,
but he has such a short temper that he could probably take out anyone in
an actual NHL game.  Anyway, so that's as much as I know about the sport
of hockey.
But one day, when his grandmother, who raised him after his father was
killed by a hockey puck, is evicted from her house, and forced to live
in a nursing home (headed by a sadistic Ben Stiller, who uses the old
people to do slave labor), Happy tries to get her money so she can pay
the mortgage on her house, and get it back.  And one day he finds out he
can hit a golf ball farther than anyone else (and hit various people - a
joke that I admittingly laughed at every time).
With his ex-golf player mentor (Carl Weathers, who needed the paycheck)
who's missing a hand due to the fact that an alligator chewed it off
(another redundant gag target), Happy goes to a bunch of golf
tournaments in his hockey shirt, and is soon winning everyone, much to
the disenchantment of the only big golfer (Christopher MacDonald,
currently enjoying a role on that Kirstie Alley sitcom, "Veronica's
Closet") who hasn't won the big tournament yet, where he receives a
yellow jacket.
There's a half-assed love interest that goes on with some chick who
handles the tournaments or something (Julie Bowen), and then there's the
whole fascination with Happy, who is known to yell obscenities at the
golf ball, and beat up mocking people.  And then there's the bit about
his grandmother.  This is all, luckily, handled with the utmost amount
of non-seriousness, and even the skating scene where Adam and his chick
skate to the theme from that Brooke Shields masterpiece, "Endless Love,"
is handled hysterically.
But this film is only funny when watched every now and then.  This is
not a flick you see over and over and over and over again in a short
amount of time.  Sure Adam's a funny guy.  And Christopher MacDonald
makes a hilarious villain (who stumbles on his obscenities sometimes,
making him a good old incompetent nemesis).  And the Ben Stiller
sub-plot is pretty funny. But the film never really becomes the
absolutely hysterical film it should be.  The jokes are usually ones
you've seen before, most of the time earlier in the film.  But luckily
the parts that would be handled melodramatically aren't.
"Happy Gilmore" IS a funny film, and remains more enjoyable than most of
those cheap SNL spin-offs/member vehicles.  But it's still not the
greatest flick, and never shows that Adam Sandler will get the respect
that ex-SNL people like Bill Murray and Dan Ackroyd at one time got 
It's just a minor little film that you forget until the next Adam
Sandler flick comes along.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It is quite possible I suppose that a golf enthusiast might find
Happy Gilmore (Adam Sandler) funny.  Not being a golfer, it seemed like
pure slapstick.  The big joke being that Happy is a hockey player of
sorts who discovers that with his hockey stick he can slam a golf ball
over 400 yards.  Golf is where the money is so Happy switches to golf
much to the horror of the sedate golfers he meets on the various
courses.
     Happy does a weird kind of approach from about 5 feet away from
the golf ball before he wiggles and takes a swipe at the ball.  The
camera immediately pans up into the sky as the ball disappears into the
wild blue yonder only to land a few feet from the cup.  Once in a while
he gets lucky and his 400+-footer gains him a hole in one.  On the
occasions when he gets only close to the cup, he can take 5 small puts
before he finally sinks the ball.
     Happy would have liked to be a pro-hockey player but he lacked one
essential: he could not ice skate.  Fortunately, skating is not a
requirement for golf.  Unfortunately, it takes more than the film's
story to make a good comedy.
     Others in the cast include Virgina Venit (Julie Bowen), the golf
tournament's PR person who is assigned to handle him.  Happy has a
one-handed coach (Carl Weathers) and a homeless man he engages as his
caddie.  And so on.

Author
James Berardinelli
     When it comes to golf comedies (not a very popular genre, 
apparently), the film residing at the dubious pinnacle is Rodney 
Dangerfield's CADDYSHACK. HAPPY GILMORE, the new release featuring 
SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE alum Adam Sandler, tries gamely to attain 
CADDYSHACK's level.  Alas, this picture just isn't on par with the 
passable 1980 farce.  Sandler's movie is worth a few laughs, but not 
many of the comic sequences are original, and even fewer are inspired.  
     I feel compelled to mention that this is undoubtedly Sandler's best 
outing to date.  However, considering the quality of his other films --
AIRHEADS, MIXED NUTS, and BILLY MADISON -- that's not an especially 
impressive statement.  Nevertheless, despite the mediocrity of HAPPY 
GILMORE, it's apparent that Sandler has some aptitude for physical 
comedy, which puts him on a significantly higher plane than, say, Pauly 
Shore.
     Actually, one of the biggest problems with HAPPY GILMORE is that it 
pretends to have a plot.  Sandler's comic skits would have worked better 
had they not been burdened by the silly, unnecessarily storyline that 
results in a lot of virtually intolerable tripe linking the funny parts 
together.  And, during the film's numerous golf matches, why are we 
forced to endure Verne Lundquist's inane voiceovers as he provides TV 
coverage?
     HAPPY GILMORE starts off like THE CUTTING EDGE on grass.  Happy is 
a hockey player at heart, but, since he can't play his favorite sport 
(he's not a very good skater), he tries his luck at golf.  One day, 
while bashing 400-foot drives at a driving range, the local pro (Carl 
Weathers) spots him and encourages him to enter a tournament.  The lure 
of big money attracts Happy -- not because he's greedy, but because he 
needs $275,000 to buy back his grandmother's house from the U.S. 
government.  Happy wins the tournament, and, as a result, joins the PGA 
tour, where he becomes an instant phenomenon.
     Along for the ride is a beautiful publicist (Julie Bowen), who 
becomes (surprise, surprise!) Happy's girlfriend; a haughty pro 
(Christopher McDonald), who is embarrassed by the presence of such an 
uncouth player on the tour; and a hulking fan (Richard Kiel, Jaws from 
THE SPY WHO LOVED ME and MOONRAKER), who's always ready to jump to 
Happy's defense.  Making cameos as themselves are Lee Travino and Bob 
Barker.  The latter provides one of the film's most-advertised moments 
as he gets into a nationally-televised brawl with Happy -- and wins.  
     Product placement is out-of-control, with every corporation from 
AT&T to Pepsi getting a mention (each fake golf tournament is 
"sponsored" by a real company).  In the most blatant motion picture 
advertising campaign since Sinbad hawked McDonalds in last year's 
HOUSEGUEST, Subway gets an interminable amount of screen time.  A little 
product placement is usually inoffensive; taken to these extremes, 
however, it becomes distracting.
     HAPPY GILMORE could have been a lot funnier.  As it is, at least it 
offers more to chuckle at than most of the dead-in-the-water "comedies" 
of early 1996.  And, thankfully, we're spared the flatulence jokes that 
have become the staple of many similar films (DUMB AND DUMBER comes to 
mind).  Nevertheless, irrespective of how many comic moments it 
provides, HAPPY GILMORE is still several strokes short of a respectable 
finish.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
John Paul Powell
Eggbert: Good day, readers. I'm Reginald Eggbert, a multi-bazillionaire 
residing in Forest Hill. 
Driskel: Yo. How ya doin'? I'm Dean Driskel, an auto mechanic outta..ah... 
Rosedale...yeah...Rosedale!  
Eggbert: Rosedale? Rosedale! How can you perpetuate such a conspicuous 
falsehood? Shame on you! Proclaim contrition to the good people.  
Eggbert: Tell them you're sorry, you slobbering baboon.  
Driskel: Alright. I live in Parkdale. Happy now, Reginald?  
Driskel: Anyways, you Outreach readers wuz expectin' J.P. ta give ya da 
skinny on da flicks. Due to circumstances beyond his control, he couldn't 
make it. Me an' Egghead are fillin' in. 
Our Numero-Uno film is called Angels And Insects. My old lady. Sometimes 
I don't git her. She goes freakin' nutso for these kinda movies. You guys 
understand what I'm gettin' at. Stinkin' rich Brits dressed up fancy, 
smokin' expensive cee-gars, yappin' d'ose big words, sippin' wine and readin'
mushy poetry written by real dead guys. She loves dat stuff. She be slobberin'
all over me when the tape's done, so I close my eyes and pretend I fell
asleep. It works like a charm.  
Angels And Insects stars Patsy Kensit. She wuz dat South African babe who 
had hot tamales for Mel in Lethal Weapon 2. Personally, I thought she wuz 
better as da werewolf-ninja-commando-assassin in Full Eclipse. She severely
kicked Mario Van Peebles' ass. Not hard enuff though. He still made 
Highlander III and Panther.  
Eggbert: Desist dallying this instant! You're deluding yourself supposing 
that they revere your monosyllabic, incoherent babble.  
Driskel: No problem-o, Richie Rich. Geez. Tip da chauffeur an' you ain't 
hearin' da end of it. As I wuz sayin' before Eggbert threw a hissy fit, 
Patsy plays the useless Eugenia Alabaster. She don't work. She don't go 
ta school. Eugenia don't hafta do nothin' cuz her old man's rich. If she 
wuz my kid, I woulda booted her out da door.  
Driskel: The rest of da family are damn lazy too. Mrs. Jabba (The Hut) 
Alabaster crams powdered cakes an' candies down her yap like she wuz one 
of Sally Struthers' starvin' kids on TV. Eugenia's brother Edgar is a 
horny drunk. Old man Alabaster invites a poorbug scientist to shack
wit them and da family gits bent outta shape.  
Eggbert: The proper term for the character you ignorantly alluded to as a 
"bug scientist" is a "Naturalist".  
Driskel: They collect bugs and stuff, right?  
Eggbert: Yes. (Sigh) They collect bugs and..."stuff".  
Driskel: Man, did I pick the wrong line of work. I use ta be good at catchin'
grasshoppers. Do you know dat if ya stick a grasshopper inna freezer long
enuff they go into suspended animation?  
Driskel: Yeah. Then, if ya zap 'em inna microwave, they thaw out, turn red an'
explode.  
Eggbert: How delightful. Hours of entertainment, I'm sure. 
Driskel: More than I can say about Angels And Insects. I vote thumbs down.
It wuz like a nature special. I hate them. I only watch da ones where
alligators and sharks chew off da crew's arms and legs. Dat's kool. 
Eggbert: I beg to differ. As the honourable Naturalist, Mark Rylance was
superb. My predicament is, I can't recommend Angels And Insects in good
conscious because the filmmakers endorse an unjustifiable contempt for the
Victorian English aristocracy. Symbolically comparing a nobel, principled,
mannered peoples epitomizing refinement and propriety to loathsome insects
is an insufferable slight. My manicured thumb goes down.  
Eggbert: Our next film is Happy Gilmore. An impertinent farce brutishly 
mocking a gentleman's sport. Happy Gilmore features the uncouth Adam 
Sandler. He formerly of the Saturday Night Live television program.  
Driskel: Saturday Night Live sucks. They should do da humane thing an' 
take it out back behind da barn an' shoot it.  
Eggbert: Mr. Gilmore (Sandler), a failed hockey player, holds two 
illustrious records. He spent the most time in the penalty box and is the 
only player ever to attempt to lacerate an opposing competitor with a 
skate. The churlish lout has but one forte. A slapshot which transforms 
smoothly to a pulverizing, 400 yard tee shot on the links. Under the 
tutelage of golf pro Chubbs Peterson (Carl Weathers)...  
Eggbert: ...Gilmore joins the Pro Golf tour to save his tax-evading 
Grandmother. His uncontrollable temper and scandalous behaviour entice 
common riffraff to cheer their moronic hero.  
In 90 minutes, the boorish American filmmakers malign golf's opulent 
traditions and despoil a proud heritage taking centuries to cultivate. 
Rude gestures and obscene language on prominent golf courses? Unruly club 
house brawls? 
Driskel: Take a Valium, Reggie. Take a whole box.  
Driskel: Adam Sandler busted my gut. I laughed so hard, it brought tears
ta my eyes. Happy Gilmore stomps Caddyshack, dat's fer sure. It's worth da
eight bucks justa see Bob Barker git a whoopin'. Thumbs up!  
Eggbert: Precisely what I'd assume from an unlettered Neanderthal.  
Angels And Insects is rated S for Snotty. Mark Rylance - terminally dull 
dinner chatter - gratuitous swooning - heavingbosoms + extreme close-ups 
of hatching insects + dandelion handcuffs - pretentious highbrow symbolism
= National Geographic meets Merchant and Ivory.  
Outreach Rating: 3 cuddly ant farms / 10 
Happy Gilmore is rated C for Comical. Adam Sandler + a hockey 
stick-shaped putter + guest star Lee Travino + assault and battery on a
caddy x an AC/DC T-Shirt x wilful property damage to a mini-putt course +
one midget cowboy + Jaws from Moonraker x Adam Sandler vs Bob Barker in a
Texas Street Fight x golf balls dinging people in the head = a hole in
one.  
