Title
Review for Hope and Glory (1987)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Manavendra K. Thakur
Cast: Sebastian Rice Edwards, Geraldine Muir, Sarah Miles, David Hayman, Sammi
Davis, Derrick O' Connor, Susan Wooldridge, Jean-Marc Barr, Ian Bannen, Annie
Leon, Jill Baker, Amelda Brown, Katrine Boorman, Colin Higgins, Shelagh Fraser,
Gerald James, Barbara Pierson, Nicky Taylor, Jodie Andrews, Nicholas Askew,
Jamie Bowman, Colin Dale, David Parkin, Carlton Taylor, Sarah Langton, Imogen
Cawrse, Susan Brown, Charley Boorman, Peter Hughes, Ann Thornton, Andrew
Bicknell, Christine Crowshaw, William Armstrong, and Arthur Cox.
Credits: Written, Produced, and Directed by John Boorman. Co-Producer: Michael
Dryhurst. Executive Producers: Jake Eberts and Edgar F. Gross.  Director of
Photography: Phillippe Rousselot. Production Designer: Anthony Pratt. Costume
Designer: Shirley Russell. Editor: Ian Crawford. Sound Editor: Ron Davis.
Original Music Composed, Arranged, and Conducted by Peter Martin. Art Director:
Don Dossett.
     "John Boorman."  The name brings back some of his great thrillers from the
past: POINT BLANK, DELIVERANCE, EXCALIBUR.  The last thing one would expect
from a director of such grand mythic adventures would be a cheerful, humorous,
and quirky recreation of childhood memories of London during World War II.  And
yet, that's exactly what John Boorman has done with HOPE AND GLORY.  It's a
delightful film that is thoroughly entertaining because it draws richly, and
quite paradoxically, from its seemingly serious subject matter.
     The question that underlies most of HOPE AND GLORY is how to respond to
periods of great despair and tribulation.  One can take refuge in the
banalities of housecleaning like Tevye's wife in FIDDLER ON THE ROOF, one can
retreat behind a self-created emotional wall like Pink in PINK FLOYD--THE WALL,
or one can respond in any of a multitude of other ways.  War is perhaps the
worse creator of misery, and it directly invokes the question of how the human
spirit survives its pressures.  Many films have depicted the horror of war as
well as grand myths of heroic efforts and noble sacrifices of soldiers who
fought them.  War has also been examined from a child's perspective in great
films such as FORBIDDEN GAMES and THE NIGHT OF THE SHOOTING STARS.
     Boorman's film transcends all of them through its casual debunking of the
sentimental myths surrounding war-torn England in its darkest hour.  But while
all the other films focused on the tragedy of war, Boorman shows the comedy of
it.  The beauty of HOPE AND GLORY is that its satire is so deeply submerged
beneath the film's truly funny and nostalgic story that it is unapparent on
casual viewing.  That sort of subtlety is rare in current cinema and is what
makes HOPE AND GLORY a true classic.
     The film is about 7-year-old Billy Rohan (Sebastian Rice Edwards, in his
acting debut) and his family as they weather nightly bomb runs of the
Luftwaffe.  The very first night of the bombing, Billy and his 16-year-old
sister Dawn (Sammi Davis) rush out, surprisingly enough, to dance in their
front yard under the bomb flashes.  The next day, Billy begins his prized
shrapnel collection as he makes his way to school.  At school, he and his
younger sister Sue (Geraldine Muir) are bombarded with patriotic songs and
speeches from the schoolteachers, who are every bit as nasty as the teachers in
PINK FLOYD--THE WALL, and indeed portions of Billy's neighborhood resemble the
Alien Landscape in which young Pink wanders.  But the overpowering tyranny that
Pink succumbs to in that film simply bounces off the youthful resiliency of
Billy and Sue, even when they are forced to recite multiplication tables while
wearing gas masks in a shelter during an air raid.
     Their response to the war in general is very much like that of many MIT
students last year when Hurricane Gloria brushed Boston: "If it causes damage,
I can't do anything about it, so let's have fun!"  Billy joins a new gang (he's
initiated into it by learning new swear words) which rummages inside the ruins
of bombed houses, smashing already broken windows and furniture.  When Dawn
hears Neville Chamberlain's announcement of war on the radio, she exclaims that
the war isn't her fault and that she still needs her stockings that she's
looking for.  Their attitude is not one of crass materialistic infatuation but
one of focus on the immediate relevancy of the here and now.  The war simply
gives Billy and the other kids new games and toys to play with as they go on
living life their own way.  Danger is present everywhere around them, yet they
recognize it and absorb it in a uniquely childlike manner which few, if any, of
the adults possess.
     Nonetheless, the characterizations of the adults is just as rich as that
of the children.  The entire film is a three-dimensional portrait of Billy's
family, and each character's screentime is used to the fullest.  Billy's mother
Grace, his father Clive, his three aunts, his Grandma, and grandfather George
are all fully developed human characters, and there is not a single bad
performance among the actors who portray them.
     More importantly, they all are seen through Billy's eyes as he remembers
them, which means that he sees individual eccentricities that he (and therefore
the audience) finds most interesting.  It's difficult to forget Billy's
expression of disgust at being repeatedly kissed on the cheek by his mother and
aunts, or his toothy grin as he playfully tells his grandfather, who had just
completely missed shooting a field rat, that the rat was limping as it walked
away.  It is because the characters and plot develop through seemingly banal
scenes as these that the film is so disarming.  Savage insults worthy of Luis
Bunuel or Jonathan Swift are completely absent.  In their place is a much more
gentle and smooth story that depends as much on what is not shown as well as
the scenes that are.  The nonstop comedic moments tend to make even that
sub-satire virtually unnoticeable, and yet it is there for those who wish to see
it.
     One particularly good example of that sub-satire occurs early in the first
half of the film, which concentrates on Billy and his family's reactions to the
initial declaration of war.  Billy's father Clive (David Hayman) interrupts his
horsing around with Billy to reveal that he has joined the military.  After his
announcement, he motions for Billy to lean towards him so he can convey an
important message.  At this moment, the audience inwardly groans because it
expects a tiresome speech from Clive about how Billy is now going to be the man
in the house, how Billy must now grow up and shoulder more responsibility.  But
no, that's not what Clive does at all.  He instead teaches Billy how to throw a
googly to confuse the batter in a game of cricket, and he conveys it as a
family secret!  Although this is one of the more obvious moments, the film is
rife with similar instances where Boorman twists conventional expectations such
that the comedic results can be interpreted to whatever depth the viewer
chooses.  The deeper levels of anti-heroism are there, but the shallower strata
of simple action and humor provide more than sufficient satisfaction.
     Billy's grandfather George (Ian Bannen) dominates the film's second half,
and rightly so because he becomes the most influential person in Billy's life
after an ordinary fire (of all things!) burns down Billy's house, forcing the
Rohans to move to George's riverside country home far from the turmoil of
London.  Although he continually comes across as a cantankerous, semi-senile
old man -- he is first seen early in the film drunkenly toasting all the women
he's ever slept with -- his humanity shines through after Billy's old school is
destroyed by a stray bomb.  George and Billy laugh all the way back to the
countryside, gleeful at Billy's respite from school.  George begins to spend a
great deal of time with Billy, teaching him how to row, playing cricket with
him, and telling stories.  Billy is far more endeared to his grandfather's
piqued muttering and mean jokes than his aunts' romanticizing or his sister's
tears when her newly found Canadian lover is stationed elsewhere.
     Although the film's sharp division between the males and the females would
be considered sexist today, the film doesn't harp on that because it's not a
political film.  Boorman simply portrays idyllic country life as he remembers
it -- complete with beautiful and lushly green scenery that belies the urgency
and tension usually associated with war.  Ian Bannen's performance as George is
so magnificent that George's personality overpowers and disarms whatever
notions the audience takes with it inside the theater.  Much like the crusty
old men in TRAVELLING NORTH (Leo McKern) and A MIDSUMMER'S NIGHT SEX COMEDY
(Max Von Sydow), George and his saucy ways are forgivable, especially since
the film portrays him not from any current context but as Billy sees him, with
his childlike perspective of 1940s England.
     That perspective is well depicted through superb technical production
values.  In one of many similar strokes of genius, the film's editing by Ian
Crafford conveys Billy's feelings to the audience by depicting the Rohan's
burning house for what seems an eternity, yet only showing the bombed school
building for a few fleeting seconds.  The creation of the Rohans residence and
street by Production Designer Anthony Pratt and Art Director Don Dossett is
thoroughly convincing, and Phillippe Rousselot's camerawork demonstrates a
perceptive and guiding intelligence, especially when the camera pans in very
tightly on the small toy soldiers Billy plays with on his front lawn, making
the green grass seem almost like a jungle and the figurines somehow mythically
alive.  And later in the film when a barrage balloon breaks free, the camera
lovingly makes it seem a joyful and wonderous event rather than the accidental
mishap it actually is.  With the exception of some extremely sappy music by
Peter Martin, each individual technical detail -- the costumes, lighting, hair
styles, etc. -- coalesce together so well that the crew's work seems
completely natural and at ease with themselves, the actors, and the audience.
     And in that fusion one must not forget the unifying hand of John Boorman.
Children have an uncanny ability to see events unhindered by social and
cultural baggage -- to see their immediate importance -- and Boorman's film
captures that beautifully, from the wonder and the pity to the tears and humor.
The children are not cute little tykes completely oblivious to their
surroundings, like the small children in Juzo Itami's THE FUNERAL.  Billy and
the other children in HOPE AND GLORY are perceptive enough to see the effects
of the war, but they are go-happy enough not to be too bothered by it.  The
depth of Boorman's portrayal of these children, as well as the other
characters, is one that can only come from cherished and heartfelt personal
memories.
     HOPE AND GLORY is Boorman's second film that he has written, produced, and
directed (the first was ZARDOZ).  This time the results of his efforts
represent the maturation of his filmmaking abilities, the extension and
completion of John Boorman as film director and auteur.  HOPE AND GLORY is his
personal masterpiece, and film historians will no doubt add it to the list of
films that achieve near artistic perfection through their subtlety, insight,
and multi-layered depth -- films like ANNIE HALL, THE SEVEN SAMURAI, RULES OF
THE GAME, and THE GENERAL.  For filmgoers now, however, it is a sheer joy to
see Boorman's work on the screen, with all its humor and intelligence.

Author
Kevin Romano
     Having been tremendously impressed by John Boorman's work on THE EMERALD
FOREST, I went to see HOPE AND GLORY over the weekend, and, true to the reviews
I had read previously, it is a very realistic and convincing evocation of the
World War II era in England as seen through the eyes John Boorman -- the 
child.
     There is humor, pathos, tenderness and lots of other endearing virtues to
this movie.  What there is not is drama.
     Even if we don't agree with our imperfect institutions, such as the law,
government, the political economy, there are historical reasons why they
developed the way they did.
     Likewise, in film, the structure of the screenplay has developed through
years of experimentation, trial and error, relationships shared with other
forms of drama, as well as many other reasons.  To challenge such collective
wisdom requires the true force of historic genius pushed to an inevitable clash
with what has gone before it, and through such a clash is born the advancement
of the human race.
     However, for me, HOPE AND GLORY is not such an event, even though John
Boorman has chosen to challenge them in this film.
     The essence of drama is the clash of the human will against obstacles --
the testing of just what it means to be a man or a woman.  In this process our
human condition is illuminated.
     Now it is rather obvious that we share certain things with the animals;
physical bodies, a certain level of emotional life etc.; it is equally certain 
that there are things which we don't share -- things which make us uniquely
human.  Lest I digress too much, by way of example let me say that I greatly 
enjoy movies about nature, but for me, for the most part, nature films are
unable to create true drama just because they lack this testing, this probing
and searching out of the good, the bad and the ugly of the human will.  
     So too reminiscences -- no matter how wonderful, how evocative, how
well-crafted are not drama if they lack this crucial testing and this, I feel,
is a major weakness of HOPE AND GLORY.  To be sure, it has lots of other
virtues, virtues which others have amply pointed out.  I offer this merely as
something to think about if you haven't already seen the film, or are going to
see it again.  Both my wife and eleven-year-old daughter liked the film more
than I did, so I thought I'd try to put down in words just what it is that
bothers me about it.  
     As film history progresses we will perhaps see the advent of new forms of
filmic story-telling.  It's an exciting thought.  HOPE AND GLORY, however,
takes us, in some ways, a step backwards.  

Author
Jonathan Gingrich
     HOPE AND GLORY offers a unique, startling, and funny child's-eye view of
life duing the Blitz.  The destruction of the oppressive row house suburb
transforms it into an amusement park for the young.  But beyond this vision,
there is little in the way of plot, and despite fine acting and a deft,
economic staging, the movie must be carried by the characters, whom ultimately
I found stilted and unconvincing.
     On one level the movie is a comic slice of what life was really like
during the Blitz, full of petty frustrations, antics, and concerns, mocking the
"glory" of fighting the good fight.  And it is the presumably autobiographical
account of "hope," the rescue of young Bill from the clutches of suburban
squalor.  The comic bits are crisp, often brilliant, be they the discussion of
whether the can of German jam is really poisoned, the adventure of a runaway
barrage balloon, or the capture--by a motley crew of nervous neighbors--of a
downed German pilot who reeks of confidence and sexuality.
     But for me, the latter incident is the only moment the rampant randiness
really works in the movie.  And randy it is.  Bill's elder sister is sexually
active at 15 and pregnant by 16, the neighbor's wife boasts about her affairs
and runs away with a Polish flyer, his mother's affair with the neighbor may be
purely Platonic, his grandfather gets drunk every Christmas and toasts all the
women he has bedded, the neighborhood boys line up to look in the panties of a
girl who exchanges the favor for looted jewelry, but when his younger sister,
perhaps 6, offers a sage comparison of the copulatory expertise of her elder
sister and lover versus her parents, my patience ran out.
     Nor do the others emerge unscathed.  The schoolmaster is a bastard, the
teacher a bitch, the neighbor boys sweet, innocent, insensitive, and headed for
loutishness.  His dad and the neighbor are both ineffectual, even impotent, the
aunts all stuck in bad marriages, at least according to the grandfather, who is
a raging, uninhibited spirit, full of crankiness and nastiness as well as love.
In the second half of the movie, the family moves into the grandfather's house
on the river, and young Bill is granted a Tom-Saywer-like escape from the gray
suburbs with the guidance of his grandfather.  But like the war, the ugly side
of this patriarch is truly never shown, and his competition for Bill's and our
affection is so lightweight that the whole thing feels contrived.  Besides, he
constantly wears a white suit that made me think he was Italian.
     Looking back, the movie has a number of merits I was not prepared to
concede as I left the theater.  But the constant sexuality was so integral to
the texture of the story, and stuck out like a sore thumb, that I almost feel
betrayed by a number of reviewers who failed to mention it at all.  For me,
Boorman is an "almost" director.  He has wonderful vision here, in EXCALIBUR,
and in THE EMERALD FOREST, but he has trouble tying up plots.  In THE EMERALD
FOREST, after weaving a wonderful modern fable of conflict between man and
nature the whole thing runs out of yarn and he substitutes M-16s at 20 paces
between natives in white hats and black hats.  And here again, he has almost
made a superior movie.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  John Boorman's reminiscences of
     childhood during the London Blitz form the basis of this
     unconventional but believable comedy.  This film is filled
     with memorable characters and a child's sense of wonder at
     the War.  Rating: +2.
     There are lots of films made about World War II.  Some are idealized--
and just about any English-language film made *during* the War was--and some
are more realistic.  There are at least some films made about the British
home front but very, very rare is the film that does not idealize.  You get
this vision of a dedicated British people suffering bombs and bullets with
an idealized British stiff upper lip.  Many seem inspired by MRS. MINIVER.
John Boorman, whose films usually are abstract and in the fantasy genre, has
turned out a realistic reminiscence of the WWII British home front which
probably has more than a little autobiography.  HOPE AND GLORY is a
child's-eye view of the home front, though we see what is happening with the
understanding of an adult.
     Very simply, HOPE AND GLORY is the comedy/drama of the Rohan family of
five when Daddy enlists in the army and goes off to war.  The first scene of
the film sums up the best of the film.  We see a weekend movie matinee
audience at a theatre.  On the screen, a somber newsreel talks about a
worsening international situation that we know will soon lead to
hostilities.  In the audience, however, war seems to have broken out already
as screaming kids run around, throw things at each other, and generally have
the high old time that kids always have if given half a chance.  Well, the
war does come but it still leaves the children that necessary half a chance.
This is was with a sense of wonder.  After each bombing the children
joyfully run around to pick up souvenirs like shrapnel and shells.  Even the
adults stare with childlike wonder as an errant barrage balloon, almost as
big as a house, floats solemnly through the neighborhood, capriciously
damaging a chimney here or a roof there.  And in this world of the inanimate
balloon seeming like a mischievous floating monster, we see some of what
could have inspired Boorman's love of fantasy.
     Unfortunately, partway through the film seems to lose some of its
vision.  The story of the children gives way to to soap-operish story of
Young Bill's teenage sister.  The subplot of the sister drags the film down
a bit but the mother's character is every bit as well-drawn as young Bill's.
And in one sequence a prayer voiced under the mother's breath focuses the
film and elevates her part from a portrayal of a hysterical mother to a
tragic hero.  The film is at its best when it is about the mother or son in
London.  When the film shifts away from London, as it eventually does, it
loses its uniqueness.  But until that point it is nearly perfect.   Rate
HOPE AND GLORY a high +2.
