Title
Review for Rookie of the Year (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     Henry Rowengartner (Thomas Ian Nicholas) is a poor Little League
player who can throw strikes (not very hard), but has trouble catching
the ball.  Then one day, while trying to impress a girl at school, he
has an accident trying to prove that he doesn't drop every fly that
comes his way.  His arm ends up in a cast for most of the summer, but
when the doctor finally takes it off, Henry discovers a remarkable
thing.  Because of "tight tendons" in his right arm, he can somehow
throw a ball in excess of 100 miles per hour.  It doesn't take long for
the Cubs to give the twelve-year-old a tryout, then sign him up (how
desperate is this team?)  It's a move that pays off because, after a
rocky debut, Henry becomes the catalyst that leads the team into a
Pennant Race.
     Before I do the written equivalent of tearing this film into
shreds and dumping the remains where they belong, I'll be honest enough
to admit that boys around the age of ten seemed to enjoy ROOKIE OF THE
YEAR very much.  The movie is clean enough to be considered a family
film, although I doubt many of the bored girls and disinterested
parents in the audience would endorse it.  Personally, I think that
family films should be enjoyable for everyone in the family, not just a
select sex/age group.  There are movies available that meet this
criteria (ALADDIN, THE SANDLOT, and A FAR OFF PLACE, to name a few).
Unfortunately, their number is dwindling as they are replaced with
dim-witted, poorly-conceived dross like this picture.
     As the title suggests, ROOKIE OF THE YEAR aspires to be a baseball
movie.  In this, it fails in almost every respect.  Fans of the game
will be horrified by the lack of attention paid to the nuances and
subtleties of baseball, while those who don't like "America's pastime"
will probably find this film uninspiring, unimaginative, and
uninteresting (all of which it certainly is).
     A gargantuan misstep is that ROOKIE OF THE YEAR tries a few stabs
at drama while its outrageous setup allows only for the most absurd of
comedies.  Maybe the Monty Python troupe could have done something with
the premise, but it's way beyond Daniel Stern's meager abilities.  As
an actor, Stern has a flair for comedy (as showcased in HOME ALONE and
CITY SLICKERS), but as a director (at least from the evidence we're
given here), he is inept.  Unfortunately, as far as this movie is
concerned, Daniel the actor doesn't do much better than Daniel the
director.  His character, that of a wacky pitching coached who got
beaned once too often, is easily the most potentially-amusing member of
the Cubs, but Stern tries too hard for laughs and ends up getting
little more than grimaces.
     This movie is bad even as a fantasy for Cubs lovers and Mets
haters.  There's not enough substance here to give meaning to the "big
game" between the two clubs.  Added to that, the Mets are portrayed as
such a ridiculously over-the-top gang of thugs and losers that it's
impossible to hate them.  Besides, given the team's current woeful
brand of real baseball, setting this team up as the heavy is a huge
mistake.  No one despises New York's National League team any more
(except perhaps their own fans)--they're too woeful for that.
     ROOKIE OF THE YEAR presents a perfect opportunity for a line of
cameos by current and ex-Major League players.  However, with the
exception of fleeting glances of Bobby Bonilla, Pedro Guererro, and
Barry Bonds (in a Pirates uniform--oops), there's nothing.  No members
of the real Cubs are around, and play-by-play announcer Harry Carry is
conspicuous by his absence.  Personally, I can't stand the man, but in
a film so indulgent of Wrigley Field fantasies, the omission of Carry
is profoundly felt.  Instead, all we get is an embarrassingly silly
John Candy doing his best Harry imitation--and a pale one it is, at
that.
     This is a genuinely insulting movie.  It takes every formula and
cliche and binds them together into a package that doesn't work.
Things might have been better if the director and screenwriter had
shown a hint of aptitude, but nothing like that is forthcoming.  Most
baseball films, even the best of them, are formula-driven.  Robert
Redford hitting a home run in the bottom of the ninth is pure fantasy,
not to mention absolutely predictable, but it's still a great movie
moment.  ROOKIE OF THE YEAR lacks this kind of style, and its comedy is
so daft that it can't compete with the likes of MAJOR LEAGUE (which
was, at best, a mediocre film).
     Of course, the characters are stock, and the actors aren't able to
do anything with them.  Amy Morton, playing Henry's mom, overacts
outrageously.  Thomas Ian Nicholas, in the title role, manages to make
his character as annoying and unpleasant as possible.  I'm sure I'm not
the only one who wished someone would plunk that kid when he was
dancing off first base and making fun of the Dodgers' pitcher.
     Outperforming every one is Gary Busey, but his is a thankless
job.  He puts an effort into bringing to the surface several facets of
what is essentially a two-dimensional character, but there's not much
that Busey can do to save Chet Steadman.  However, a purpose served by
the presence of Busey is to give a yardstick by which the lackluster
performances of the rest of the cast can be measured.  Opposite him,
none of them look good.
     If you're a ten-year-old boy who wants to vicariously live out the
fantasy of playing for a big-league ball club, this might be a movie
worth seeing, but for anyone else, it represents a blunder as big as a
hanging curve ball.  In baseball, you get three strikes and you're out,
but in the making of ROOKIE OF THE YEAR, Daniel Stern has gotten far
more than that.  Nearly the only good thing about this film is that I
saw it in an air-conditioned theater on a day when the thermometer had
nudged above the 100 degree mark.  Nevertheless, half-way through the
movie, the heat outside was starting to look good.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "That extends the Cubs to their longest winning streak of the
season, two," loudly proclaims Cliff (John Candy), the Cub's announcer,
in ROOKIE OF THE YEAR (1993).
     It was just a few days earlier that the Chicago Cubs had found
their salvation in 12-year-old Henry Rowengartner (Thomas Ian
Nicholas).  Before he showed up in the stands one day and accidentally
demonstrated his 100+ MPH fast ball, the team was about to go bankrupt.
     It all started several months earlier when the hopelessly
unathletic but baseball fanatic Henry had fallen and broken his right
arm.  When it healed, the doctor found that two muscles had fused
together creating the effect of a wound-up rubber band.
     Sam Harper's script blends baseball fantasy and childhood
friendships.  The former has a delightful imagination that rarely lags,
but the latter is a rehash that drags frequently.  What makes the
picture is that the film is smart enough to concentrate on the fairy
tale although not quite savvy enough to eliminate the many characters
that simply do not work.
     Chief among the characters that should be benched is that of Phil
Brickman, the idiotic pitching coach, played by the director Daniel
Stern.  (This uneven farce, based on a promising script, is perhaps one
of the reasons that actor Stern has never directed another movie before
or since.)  Brickman, when he isn't inadvertently locking himself into
some small space, utters such inanities as, "Punctuality: Without it,
time stands still," or gives out crackpot advice like using hot ice as
a cure for sore muscles.  Stern overacts with a vengeance in his,
thankfully modest, number of scenes.
     The whimsical story doesn't try to make too much sense.  Henry
shows up for his first day in the majors without practice and without
ever even seeing the dressing room.  He tells his mother to leave him
at the gate since the other player's moms are not going to escort them
in.  When he takes his place for the first time on the pitcher's mound
at Wrigley Field, the full stands go crazy.  That his pitches are as
wild as they are powerful is soon solved by an old pro and rapidly
fading star pitcher Chet Steadman (Gary Busey).
     As a soon-to-be has-been, Busey is well cast.  The story also
includes a needless romantic triangle between Steadman, Henry's mother
Mary (Amy Morton), and her boyfriend of three weeks, Jack Bradfield
(Bruce Altman).
     Typical of the show's charm is the scene where the coach finally
lets Henry bat in a game.  After he gets on base, he is so slow that
the runner behind him almost runs him over.  Together they tag home
seconds before the catcher tries to tag them out.
     By the end of the movie, the writer has just about run out of
ideas and is down to having Henry pose in commercials where they demand
that he "look sexy."  With his immature and nerdish appearance, this is
essentially impossible.
     The writer, after several highly predictable decisions,  appears
to have painted himself in a corner, but he finally revives the magic
from the beginning and saves the picture with a cute twist in the last
inning.
     ROOKIE OF THE YEAR runs too long at 1:43.  It is rated PG but I am
not sure why as the film contains nothing offensive to any age.  My son
Jeffrey, age 8, thought the film was "okay, but kind of boring because
all they do is play baseball." I was charmed by its fairy tale aspects,
so I am recommending the movie and giving it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
