Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
65

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
I have already seen _The Matrix_ three times, and this was within a week and
a half.  I never do that.
Part of it was my fault: I told too many people that I would see the film
with them.  But part of it is my complete fascination with this film,
perhaps the first truly original sci-fi film with mass audience appeal
since, dare I say it, _Star Wars_.  Oh, I'm sure there are many others, but
my head has a low attention span.  Very few films can create a world so
entirely different from our own, and push the boundaries of plot
development, mythical references and special effects as this.  
The first time I saw it, it was solely as one being totally envelopped by
the story and them phenomenal action sequences.  When we first meet
"Trinity" (Carrie-Anne Moss), she effectively disarms the four policemen
around her, running up walls, kicking people in mid-air, and using her
karate kicks.  If that sequence didn't wake you, nothing will.
But then the story kicks in.  And without detailing too much, it's about the
hacker Neo (Keanu Reeves, perfectly cast, but still can't act), who comes to
understand that this current world isn't really what it seems.  He is
introduced to Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne), the leader of a small troupe of
cool-looking rogues out to save the world.  
The "big secret" will not be spoiled by me.  How can I?  It is impossible to
really explain the film within a space of a couple of paragraphs, and it
takes up more than an hour to do so.  I will, however, name it's influences:
_DreamScape_, _Brainstorm_, _The Terminator_ films, Greek mythology, _Tron,
_Blade Runner_, martial arts films, _Die Hard_, _Soul Food_, the Plasticman
cartoon, the Superman phone-booth, and the Bible.  Whew.
The second time I saw it, I was contemplating its references.  Neo.
Morpheus.  Nebuchadnezzer.  Trinity. Zion. The Traitor.  "The One." An
argument can be made that this is a modern retelling of the coming of Jesus
in the New Testament.  (The articles in www.hollywoodjesus.com/matrix.htm is
highly recommended).  I enjoyed it even better the second time.  (I can't
say no to action films with religious themes).
The third time, it was starting to be a little overkill, I admit.  I
focussed more on the acting of the film, and it resulted in a resounding
thud.  It's easy to pick on Keanu, but he's not the stinker of the bunch.
Like I said earlier, he can be perfectly cast, and still not act.  The
screenplay fully exploits his lack of emotion in anything he says, or his
monotone voice.  There's one sequence that's totally laugh out loud as he
fights with a baddie with the most laconic expression on his face.
No.  The stinker actor is, sadly, Laurence Fishburne.  Ouch.  He combines
Shakespeare with Shatner.  "I know, (pause) EXACTLY, (pause) what-you-mean."
His methodical annunciation of every line only serve to add to the mundanity
of the script.
Even so, it is rare for my every emotion to be engaged while watching a
big-budget popcorn flick.  It presented a world that fully held my mental
attention.  Then the special effects came in to dazzle me.  Then the action
sequences came to thrill me.  Little nuances between the characters came to
humor me.  The underlying story came to inspire me.  And even a little
romance came in just the right dosage, at the right point.  My prediction:
The Matrix will change moviegoing, and inspire plenty of imitators.  
P.S.  Whoever you are, stop blaming "The Matrix" for the trenchcoat look
that inspired the Littleton massacre.  The movie had hardly been out a week,
and these horrible kids were wearing the coats for _years_.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne and Carrie-Anne Moss
Directed By Andy and Larry Wachowski
Running Time: 2 hours 16 minutes (U.K cut)
After the minor thriller Bound, the Wachowski brothers follow up their
directing debut with this nifty piece of sci-fi action. Keanu Reeves plays
Thomas, a lowly worker who works for a software firm. He is soon contacted,
however, by Morpheus (Fishburne) who wishes to talk to Thomas about the
'matrix.' Thomas agrees, and Morpheus tells Tom the unthinkable: Tom's
'world' is created by computer, and the entire human race appear to be
plugged in to this fake existence. Morpheus identifies Thomas as 'Neo,' the
messiah who can save the human race from the matrix. Yes, Keanu is indeed
Jesus. The film then follows Neo, Morpheus and the rest of the rebel clan as
they try and destroy the matrix machine, while trying to avoid the sunglass
clad 'Agents' who wish to destroy them.
The plot is cliched, the acting occasionally off, and the dialogue not so
hot, but The Matrix is a surprisingly well made, and even intelligent movie.
Reeves, it appears, is back on track after the hiatus after Speed. Although
lacking in some areas, The Matrix delivers where it should: sci-fi hokum
with some violence chucked in to boot. The action is a real stand out, using
'flo-mo,' a system where the action goes into slo-mo, while still 'panning'
around the actors. It's an awesome sight, but sadly not used much until the
end of the movie. Also, the movie seems to spend a helluva long time
explaining what the Matrix actually is, which gets tiresome. Still, the kung
fu and gunfight sequences that punctuate the movie are fast paced and well
done, and are good entertainment.
The actors also play a part in providing some fun. Although Reeves still has
little or no acting talent, he is curiously suited to the role he is given
here. His 'where the hell am I?' look actually fits around his confused
character. I'm sure this was all completely unintentional on Reeves behalf,
but it works anyway. Fishburne, usually confined 'Samuel L. Jackson Jnr.'
roles, holds his own here, and is the highlight of the film. Unfortunately,
his character is curiously underwritten, and is given little to do at the
end of the film. Although he is given a lot of dialogue, much of it is 'plot
forwarding' and not much development is given to the character itself, which
is a shame. Maybe in the inevitable sequels we'll see more of him.
Carrie-Anne Moss provides eye candy as the attractive but empty Trinity, and
Hugo Weaving is evil enough as the relentless Agent Smith.
Much of the stuff contained in The Matrix has been seen in many other films,
but not with this much style or energy. The special effects actually help
the film, with some nice scenes of the Matrix itself (although it still
looks like one large computer graphic.) The film has a gritty, Blade Runner
feel that adds to the disturbing atmosphere. The gun battles are well
staged, and there's enough twists and turns in the plot to hold the viewers
attention.
In summary, The Matrix, while not making any great leaps in screenwriting or
acting, is a well crafted and directed thriller. Don't go in expecting non
stop action, however, as you'll be disappointed. Only the first and last 15
minutes contain 'pure' action. The rest of the movie is a taut, sometimes
slackly plotted (the movie is overlong) that provides enough interest and
laughs (sometime unintentional) to be above average sci-fi hokum. Star Wars
will have to go a long way to beat this, especially for the adult crowd. The
epitome of hip sci-fi.

Author
Rahul Prasad
    Before I saw "The Matrix", I was only aware of the Wachowski Brothers
earlier effort, the critically acclaimed "Bound". Now I wanna see it! This
is probaly one of the better films of the year despite some labelling it's
complex plot as too ambigious. Surprisingly, the best thing about the movie
is not the stunning special effects, the stunts or Laurence Fishburne, but
Keanu Reeves. The actor has consistently been given the thumbs down by
critics, but his perpetual frown and quizzical look is exactly what the
movie needed.
He plays Neo, a computer programmer/hacker, who is contacted by
renegades led by Morpheus(Laurence Fishburne) who is convinced that Neo is
the man to lead the people of Earth out of the Matrix. The Matrix is an
elaborate and intricate program that depicts a make-believe world for
humans. Everything in it resembles the real world but it is infact a prison
for the mind. It is invented by machines who use the humans as Guinea pigs
to feed their AI. With the help of Neo, Morpheus and Trinity(Carrie-Ann
Moss) alongwith a bunch of others are out to break the stranglehold that the
machines have on the human sub-conscious. Neo is upto the challenge, but is
not so sure of his own ability until he realises in the movie's breathtaking
climax that the human mind is too fast for the machines to keep up with.
The make-believe world is however zealously guarded by agents, who are the
gatekeepers of the Matrix and destroy anyone/anything that disturbs or tries
to break out of the Matrix. Australian actor Hugo Weaving in his first major
role as a baddie is delightfully wicked and is clearly enjoying himself!
There are some stunning special effects, well-choreographed stunts and
the fight scenes are fabulously worked out! The movie is a treat on the big
screen and despite it's plot, not too many will walk out without a sense of
amazement and awe. I know I did:-)
The acting is adequate at the most but it is not the driving force for
the movie. The movie was shot in and around Sydney last year and is a
welcome change, although mostly the setting is dark and brooding in keeping
with the movie's premise of doomsday and it's aftermath. Go see this if you
have'nt already done so!!! You won't complain about not getting your money's
worth:-)
Rating: **** out of *****

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Andy Wachowski and Larry Wachowski.
Cast: Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving, 
Joe Pantoliano.
1999 - 135 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and violence).
Reviewed April 3, 1999.
The Wachowski Brothers' sophomore directing debut (after 1996's fabulous 
"Bound"), "The Matrix," is a very clever sci-fi film, but perhaps not in 
the way you might expect. No, it isn't "clever" for its intelligence or 
startling imagination, but for the exact opposite of that. By throwing 
into the mix a highly convoluted and complicated storyline, frenetic 
action, and almost constantly stunning visuals, its ultimate master plan 
is to actually make you forget that it pretty much borrows ideas from 
almost every movie of its type ever made. Apparently, as hints of their 
desperation to brainwash its audience about its so-called inventiveness, 
or lack thereof, the Wachowski Brothers have actually decided to bombard 
us with cross references to other past works of film and literature 
(namely "Alice in Wonderland" and "The Wizard of Oz").
By the halfway point in "The Matrix," the film was tugging me in so many 
different directions as it miraculously would make up its own set of 
ground rules as it went along, only to contradict them later, I finally 
stopped caring or believing anything on the screen. And because of the 
fact that it is so complex (but in an empty, shallow way), it would be 
difficult to discuss the plot without giving away major plot points, but 
here goes. Neo (Keanu Reeves), living in New York circa 1999, is an 
office worker by day and computer hacker by night, who begins to get 
mysterious messages on his computer screen concerning something called 
"the matrix." Soon afterwards, to the warnings of an at-first unseen man 
named Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne), Neo is being hunted down by Agent 
Smith (annoyingly played by Hugo Weaving) and his group of henchman with 
suits and briefcases, because he is the "chosen one" that may obtain the 
ability to defeat them. Not only that, but it becomes clear that perhaps 
Neo's life really is just a facade for his upcoming actual life in a 
different time period, and world.
Confused? If you are, don't worry, because although the movie is 
slightly easier to understand than my extremely vague description, it 
nonetheless still adds up to very little in the long run. To start off 
with the positive aspects of "The Matrix," I'll make a brief list: (1) 
the visual effects and "look" of the film is constantly dazzling; (2) 
several of the action sequences in the second half, particularly one 
involving a helicopter, are exciting and stunningly executed (although 
the one mentioned is a clear rip-off of the ending of 1994's Arnold 
Schwarzeneggar vehicle, "True Lies"); (3) the film got off to a great 
start with its intriguing opening twenty minutes; and (4) 
well...um...Carrie-Anne Moss, as Trinity, a woman on Morpheus' team, 
shows a great deal of charisma when she isn't shoved into the 
background. To me, it was Moss who was the most intriguing character, 
not Neo, who is played by the wildly uneven Reeves (this is one of his 
weaker performances) and given such highly intellectual lines of 
dialogue like "Woah!"
Now for the bad stuff. Aside from the aforementioned direct references 
to "Alice in Wonderland" and "The Wizard of Oz," the movie also heavily 
borrows from "Brazil," "Alien," "Lost Highway," "Terminator 2," and even 
the direct-to-video "Puppet Master" series(!). One of the few actual 
witty moments came when, in one scene, "Night of the Lepus," a cheesy 
'70s movie about giant killer bunny rabbits, was playing on a television 
in the background.
I can just imagine the conversation the Wachowski Brothers had 
concerning this movie: 
Wachowski #1: "Sure, the movie is complete rubbish, but we'll make it 
look really flashy and visionary."
Wachowski #2: "But what if the more discriminating audience members are 
able to see right through that and immediately catch onto all of the 
film's obvious weaknesses?"
Wachowski #1: "Good point. I guess what we'll have to do is make the 
story have a lot of twists and turns, albeit shallow ones, and add some 
big action scenes."
Wachowski #2: "Good idea. We made the stylish and original movie 
"Bound," so it shouldn't be too difficult to come up with some things 
that haven't been seen before___"
Wachowski #1: "What are you talking about?! Why use our brains when we 
can just steal things from other movies?"
Wachowski #2: "Okay. Now that that's out of the way, don't you think we 
should at least set some ground rules in the story so that the audience 
will know what can and can't be done?"
Wachowski #1: "Huh? Why would we do that when all we are going to do is 
break those rules. That way, we can do whatever we want with the story, 
but it doesn't all have to necessarily make perfectly kosher sense."
Wachowski #2: "You're brilliant. And you know what else we should do? We 
should even steal a key plot point at the end from some Grimms fairy 
tales, like "Snow White" and "Sleeping Beauty!"
Wachowski #1: "Oh, I see what you're saying now! I agree that would make 
a touching, yet happy ending. And to make things even better, we'll add 
this ridiculous character called the Oracle, who is a psychic. That way, 
whatever she says has to happen, even if we have just killed a 
character. We can just bring the people back to life if that's what the 
Oracle says!"
Wachowski # 2: "How'd you get to be so smart, bro?"
Wachowski #1: "Well, you're smart too, and we got that way because of 
Hollywood! You see, when we made "Bound," we really had to try hard 
since it was a relatively low-budget film and needed a lot of critical 
raves to be a success. With "The Matrix," we have a much larger budget, 
so if we just throw various "bigger is better" ingredients into the pot 
and stir well, this one might very well be a box-office success and make 
back its budget."
Wachowski #2: "Yep. After all, look at last year's "Dark City." Now that 
movie really was original and a visionary achievement, but also a 
box-office bomb. Apparently, those unconventional films that stray from 
the confines of a basic Hollywood movie don't do so well. So maybe "The 
Matrix" will work better if we also create a visionary achievement, but 
in place of originality, we'll simply add violence and elaborate chases 
and shoot-outs and kung-fu!"
Wachowski #1: "You know, bro, we make a great team together!"
Wachowski #2: "I couldn't have said it better myself!"
       - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
         Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: March 31, 1999
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Joe
Pantoliano, Hugo Weaving, Marcus Chong
Directed by: Andy Wachowski, Larry Wachowski
Distributed by: Warner Brothers
MPAA Rating: R (sci-fi violence) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/matrix.htm
Perhaps the most dramatic changes in the motion picture industry in this
decade have to do with special effects. There is no question that
action-adventure and science-fiction/action movies are now judged by the
character of their light and noise. Whereas classic adventure pics of
the last twenty years, such as RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK, were made in
grand traditional fashion; contemporary films like JURASSIC PARK are
multimillion-dollar creations of computer technology. The latest in this
visually awesome series of movies, the Wachowski brothers' THE MATRIX,
is a testament to the skilled use of special effects and its ability to
enhance a movie's story. 
Unlike many sci-fi movies which promote themselves as effects-heavy
blockbusters but fail to deliver on that promise, THE MATRIX is a
carefully constructed special effects event. It runs 135 minutes in
length and employs a countless number of computerized tricks which range
from gimmick to grandiose, and the quality of the effects remains
constant throughout the film's length. Contrary to popular trend, THE
MATRIX commits itself to being a spectacle of light and sound. 
In this regard, the movie is something like a card sharp. With its
flashy mass stripped away, THE MATRIX would be quite shallow and
untalented. The script is characteristically weak, and the dialogue
suffers in lieu of a far more innovative visual approach. But, like the
card sharp, THE MATRIX wows its audience to such a high degree that
actual content is irrelevent. The viewers don't care about what THE
MATRIX has to say as long as the next special effects sequence is right
around the corner. 
And right around the corner they usually are, for the script tells a
fast-paced, albeit frequently revisited story. As the movie explains,
the world as we know it is nothing but an elaborate computer program
constructed by an artificial intelligence for the purpose of placating
mankind. Billions of human beings lie in this dormant state while the
intelligence -- the Matrix -- "farms" our life energy. Only a select
group of individuals knows of the "real" world, and a particularly
ingenious squad of these rebels is led by ultra-cool Morpheus (Laurence
Fishburne). Morpheus and his crew recruit a computer expert named Neo
(Keanu Reeves), believing he is a prophesied individual who will help
them overthrow the Matrix and return peace to Earth. 
The cast plays out this story in stylish fashion. The set design is very
dynamic, running the gambit between cramped and dreary to bright and
airy. The costumes, as well as the actors who wear them, add to the
roles. For instance, the manifested antagonists in the movie, a group of
"agents" created by the Matrix in its computer program, all dress in
matching Secret Servicewear; the rebel fighters, on the other hand,
dress in rich hues of leather. The casting cannot be criticized, for the
typically stoic Reeves isn't required to say much and Laurence Fishburne
gets plenty of time to be so damn cool. Supports in Carrie-Anne Moss,
Joe Pantoliano, and Hugo Weaving are all effectual. 
One of the best comparisons to THW MATRIX is last year's science fiction
masterpiece DARK CITY, particularly if one ponders how this same premise
would've worked from a different approach. The Alex Proyas film was far
more dark and introspective, requiring a bit of thought before themes
became clear; here, the Wachowski brothers have managed to construct a
thrill-ride motion picture with little abandon and much noise. The
better picture between the two depends on the viewer, but the key to the
success of THE MATRIX is that the noise did not get in the way of the
fun. 

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
"The Matrix" is a movie that one goes into for a special-effects ride, and
comes away from with a story.  In today's Hollywood, that's something to
write home about.  It dazzles, it entertains, and it even provokes a bit --
it's got at its core some remarkably soulful themes, including the question:
who among us are heroes, but those that simply stand up when the moment
arises?
The movie features Neo (Keanu Reeves), a computer enthusiast whose day job
may be in danger because he spends too many of his nights hunched over his
computer, illegally swapping files with other criminal digerati.  Some of
them are a little more high-flown than others: Apparently a near-godlike
superhacker named Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne) has been urgently trying to
get in touch with him. He eventually does so -- through a cell phone that
arrives by Federal Express (!) -- but Neo doesn't understand why Morpheus is
so fixated on him. Eventually Neo and Morpheus do meet, and...
And at this point I hesitate to say any more about the plot, because one of
the movie's grandest pleasures does not deserve to be ruined through a
review, but if you wish to know more, read on.        Neo's world of skyscrapers
and computers literally doesn't exist -- it's a digitized fiction fed to him
by direct neural input.  He and the entire rest of the human race are living
like pickled plums in vats of organic goo, kept sane through the illusion of
reality while their brainpower and bodily energies are "harvested" by...
well, things that certainly aren't human.
The plot warps onwards.  Morpheus and his band of hackers break Neo out of
his prison and show him the real world.  More than that, they also give him
the tools to fight their war back inside the Matrix -- the name for the
computer-controlled illusion that the rest of the human race is still living
inside.  Morpheus is convinced that Neo has power over the Matrix that no
other human being has, but Neo is less quick to believe.  Sure, he's
fascinated by his potential (there's a hilarious scene where he gets
"downloaded" various martial arts), but also unnerved by it.  After all, A),
if what came before wasn't real, how is *this* any more real?  And B), who's
to say that what they say about me is true, regardless?  "The Matrix" does a
nice job of confronting these ideas.
What "The Matrix" does best, however, is entertain, and I regret not spelling
this out sooner.  This is, simply put, one of the most visually transcendent
movies ever made.  When we see Neo and his gang engaged in a gun battle, it's
not just another action sequence: it's a metaphor for what's going on in the
hero's minds.  And in a way, a reflection of what we would all like to do, in
a way: reincarnate ourselves as superhuman fighting machines on a war to save
humanity from mental slavery.  That's what makes it more than just an action
film -- its action furthers a larger agenda.
The evil of the Matrix is emodied in the forms of the Agents -- AIs that take
on human form (and look, predictably, like MIBs).  The most deliciously 
sinister of the bunch, Agent Smith (Hugo Weaving), seems like a mouthpiece
for the Matrix in general -- he's not just coldly disconnected or indifferent
to humanity, the way the Borg in "Star Trek" were, but outright disgusted by
it.  Smith has a great scene with Morpheus where he spells out his revulsion
in terms that only an AI could love.
What I liked best about "The Matrix" was how it satisfied so many levels of
the audience's attention at once.  It's the only successful cross-pollination
of John Woo gunplay, techno-wizardry, Phil K. Dick-like meditations on the
nature of reality and destiny and wall-crunching, ass-kicking martial arts I
know of. Such is the nature of cinematic innovation in 1999.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
THE MATRIX is possibly one of the most imaginative Hollywood film of this
decade. This kung-fu laced sci-fi fantasy has the enough action to drive any
action fan crazy (even put to shame many kung-fu based movies from Hong
Kong) and one of the most imaginative yet surprisingly believable plot ever
conceived for commercial film. This review contain spoilers that may ruin
your enjoyment of the film by knowing too much but this is one film which is
so hard to review without giving away too much. Do discontinue your reading
now and watch the film immediately! I guess by now, word-of-mouth would
generated on this movie would have seep through the crevices of every
movie-goer in this world. So does it matter really? Oh well.
The story brings us the revelations concerning `The One' Thomas Anderson
(Reeves), a computer-geek who when not working in his white-collar computing
job in a big firm, he will be spending time at home, in front of his
computer, grabbing `contraband' information from the net for sale. Call it a
bit of `side-income' but Thomas is indeed onto something when he is
mysteriously led to the man he has been seeking for so long; the elusive yet
almost godly Morpheus. Thomas's obsession is fueled by his curiosity on THE
MATRIX and it this inner obsession that inadvertently led him, almost by
fate to Morpheus, the guru on the subject.

Author
James Sanford
If you find yourself completely baffled by what's going on at any
given time during "The Matrix," don't be too hard on yourself.  It
appears the Wachowski Brothers, who wrote and directed this lavish
sci-fi thriller, wound up losing track of who's doing what to whom
early on in the game and decided to simply play the rest of this opus
by ear.
Like "Alice in Wonderland," from which it takes an early cue, "The
Matrix" creates its own logic, setting up rules just to break them and
making it clear that the one thing you can count on in this tale is
that you can't count on anything.
The erratic plotting would be a built-in turn-off in most movies, but
the Wachowskis manage to somehow turn chaos into an always intriguing,
frequently nightmarish look into the dismal future. The Wachowskis'
"Bound," a tense study of a deadly love triangle, quickly became an
acclaimed cult film when it was released in 1996, and "The Matrix"
seems certain to follow a similar course.
Perhaps the most impressive thing about "The Matrix" is the
Wachowskis' handling of Keanu Reeves, an actor who has lately bombed
hard in roles outside of his patented Valley Boy/wastoid niche.
Anyone who suffered through "Johnny Mnemonic" or "Chain Reaction"
probably won't be exactly geeked about the prospect of seeing Reeves
in action again.
And yet, his flat-toned voice and blank-slate face actually work to
his advantage as Neo Anderson, who's the only man on Earth capable of
destroying the Matrix, a computer-generated dreamworld controlled by
emotionless Agents, themselves the outgrowths of artificial
intelligence run amok. Assisting Neo in his mission are the
inscrutable Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne), the unsteady Cypher (Joe
Pantoliano) and Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss), a lithe beauty whose body
ought to be classified as a lethal weapon.
The action sequences which make up easily 80 percent of the movie are
spectacularly well-executed, combining kung fu and jujitsu moves with
time and space trickery that allows the fighters to hang in mid-air,
run up walls and freeze flying bullets before they reach their
targets.
"The Matrix" also includes some truly amazing visions of the world 200
years from now, including fields of cocooned human fetuses ready to be
harvested by towering robots, and fleets of Sentinels, electronic
monsters that look like neon-tinged jellyfish.
But what truly sets "The Matrix" apart from other exercises in style,
such as "Dark City" and "Blade" are the bursts of wit that keep
popping up: having the infamous monster movie "Night of the Lepus"
playing on TV some 200 years in the future, or showing us an
all-knowing oracle who lives not in a temple or a palace, but in a
run-down apartment where she bakes cookies in between predictions.
And, unlike "Dark" and "Blade," which lost their impetus after strong
starts, "The Matrix" actually picks up steam as it goes along. Who
cares if it never makes much sense? At least it's not dull.

Author
Joe Viglione
Written & Directed by Larry & Andy Wachowski
The cinematography is stunning!  At the beginning of the film at the
discotech, Keanu Reeves and Carrie-Anne Moss are face to face...the
camera closes in on Keanu with a blue light throbbing in the
background...that sets the tone for the rest of the film.  For two and
a half hours we get breathtaking shots and bleak gloom and doom, it is
quite a contrast.
A friend noted how there was much dialogue and less action for the
first portion of the film (Kevin Maynard's review on Mr. Showbiz
pointed out Keanu has limited dialogue...interesting... hey, how many
words did Arnold Terminator speak in the first movie? 64???)...
Laurence Fishburne's Morpheus is quite good.  At first he seems evil -
would you trust him?  Then he becomes the teacher - "morphing" Keanu's
character to this next level of development.
Hermetic Philosophy, Star Wars, Bruce Lee, ahh...but the real twist is
how this film is in reality a combination of Total Recall and
Terminator 1 and 2.  That is the key which makes this work on many
levels.
Where so much science fiction is derivative in a bad way, watering
down what came before (how many bad Star Wars clones will emerge in
July and August after Chapter 1 gets unleashed?)  ..The Matrix is a
clever script, solid acting (Joe Pantoliano's best role...you won't
recognize him for awhile)...this movie gets you thinking.
The Oracle is the other side of Yoda.  Her "students" are thought
provokers, and through it all, one wonders if The Matrix isn't really
Morpheus (a combination of Morphing and Orpheus), and The Oracle
playing mind games to help an individual get to their next level of
existence.
In other words, Keanu Reeves isn't only "The One", anyone walking the
path is a candidate.  Anyone.
http://pages.prodigy.net/millermedia/pubmac/

Author
Alex Fung
THE MATRIX (Warner Bros. - 1999)
Cast: Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss,
      Hugo Weaving, Gloria Foster, Joe Pantoliano
Screenplay by the Wachowski Brothers
Produced by Joel Silver
Directed by the Wachowski Brothers
Running time: 136 minutes 
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   If one only considers their excellent previous film, the taut,
   intensely-plotted lesbians-versus-the-mob caper picture BOUND, there
   would appear to be little to connect the Wachowski Brothers with the
   dazzling futuristic thriller THE MATRIX, but when taking into account
   their background as Chicago-based comic book writers, the picture
   quickly clears.  Wildly imaginative and visually frenetic, THE MATRIX
   is essentially a sensational live-action comic book put to celluloid,
   and reaches spectacular new heights for this film genre.
   Already filmmakers of particular distinction on the basis of their
   attention-grabbing debut picture, THE MATRIX cements the reputation
   of Larry and Andy Wachowski as first-rate visual stylists who know
   how to make every shot count.  Thanks to the bravura work by
   cinematographer Bill Pope, who shoots the dark picture with an
   appealing glossy sheen, this is a fabulous-looking movie, rich in
   fantastic art design and employing groundbreaking visual technology
   which, in the hands of visual effects director John Gaeta, result in
   some truly stunning visceral sequences which overload the cool
   quotient.
   As incredible as the film is simply to look at, it's bolstered by an
   elaborately-constructed story spanning time and reality, with
   elements as disparate as mythology and Lewis Carroll factoring
   prominently into the tale in surprisingly cohesive fashion.  (The
   Wachowskis are so thorough in regards to the latter that not only are
   there overt "Alice In Wonderland" and "Through The Looking Glass"
   references, in one scene they even playfully threw footage of
   scampering rabbits on a background TV set.)  Given that one of the
   joys of the picture is to unweave its unusually well-developed
   storyline (and that promotional teasers are intentionally vague),
   suffice it to say that THE MATRIX initially tantalizes through
   deliberately-oblique scenes which intrigue, leaving gaping holes
   without trying our patience, and eventually reveals itself to be a
   futuristic Things Are Not What They Seem To Be variant, with a ragtag
   group of survivors including the zen-like Morpheus (Lawrence
   Fishburne) and Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss) recruiting computer hacker
   Neo (Keanu Reeves) to help save the world.  It's comic book mentality
   run amok, more ambitious than it perhaps ought to be, but it's far
   more consistent and better realised than the similarly-styled THE
   FIFTH ELEMENT.
   Aside from the flashy, hyperkinetic camerawork, the film
   distinguishes itself through its arresting action sequences.  The
   Wachowskis were clearly influenced by John "More Bullets" Woo, and
   the picture's gunfire battles, especially one involving Neo and
   Trinity pinned down in the lobby of an office building by the
   sinister Agents, are spectacular -- the best in any American action
   picture since, not coincidentally, Woo's own FACE/OFF.  As the
   steaming spent shell cases rain down in slow motion and marble
   pillars are pulverized in the frenzy of ammunition, it's an
   adrenaline thrill to watch the heroic characters performing
   impossibly evasive gymnastic stuntwork amidst the cheerfully wanton
   violence. The martial arts fight sequences are similarly jaw-dropping
   and almost certainly the best to ever come from a North American
   film.  Impressively choreographed by Hong Kong stunt master Yuen Wo
   Ping and vastly energetic, the wired hand-to-hand combat in
   conjunction with the energized camerawork produce such eye-popping
   results that they appear to be straight out of video games and
   Japanese anime, showcasing limitless flexibility of the combatants in
   terms of speed and fluid airborne motion.  Through it all, the actors
   are imbued with a glamorous cool chic, adorning ultra-hip
   black-dominated apparel with the requisite sunglasses; this is a
   picture which not only looks great, but where it's also crucial to
   look great.
   The film also sounds terrific due to stellar sound work by David
   Lee, who captures each squib with precision, and through the
   fierce score by Don Davis (who's assisted by a top-notch rock
   soundtrack featuring the likes of Rage Against The Machine and
   Prodigy).  From top to bottom, THE MATRIX is a technically superb
   accomplishment.
   With the riveting imagery on display in the picture, the best that
   the actors can hope to fare is to avoid being overwhelmed by the
   visuals, and they're largely up to the challenge.  While Reeves and
   Fishburne acquit themselves admirable in the physical aspects of
   their roles, the actors who leave the greatest impression are Moss,
   whose commanding presence as a leather-clad warrior reminded me of
   Michelle Pfeiffer's Catwoman in BATMAN RETURNS and Famke Janssen's
   lethal Xenia Onatopp from GOLDENEYE and who tackles her intense
   action sequences with a ferocious vigor, and veteran Australian
   actor Hugo Weaving as the menacing Agent Smith, who has a wonderfully
   flat, dispassionate delivery, speaking his lines without really
   moving his lips.
   While THE MATRIX has its share of flaws -- its coda is far less
   inventive than the rest of the picture, the laboured love story plays
   as if it was tossed in as a concession, the zen dialogue often feels
   like third-rate Yodaisms, and the Cypher character (Wachowski regular
   Joe Pantoliano) tips his hand far too early -- it's still a wild ride
   with much more interesting writing than per the norm.  The film isn't
   as provocative as it's likely meant to be, but it ably takes the
   audience into a memorable world with unprecedented dazzling visuals.
   "Whoa," whispers an amazed Neo during one scene; it's also the effect
   which THE MATRIX leaves.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them
 in on the whole conspiracy.  Half the time I have no idea what they're
 talking about." - Martin Landau

Author
Gregory Dudek

Seldom have I been as pleasantly surprised by a film as I was by The 
Matrix.  Many science fiction films are marred by gratuitous special 
effects and a weak and illogical plot.  The Matrix successfully avoids these 
pitfalls and delivers an exciting and well reasoned escapist thrill ride.
Keanu Reeves plays Neo, a computer hacker who is drawn into a group that 
has discovered an insidious manipulation of reality.  He puts in a fine 
performance as the perplexed and overwhelmed lynchpin in what he discovers 
is a resistance movement led by Laurence Fishburne and abetted by Carrie-Anne.
To say much more about the plot would give away too much, and the gradual 
revalation of what is going on is one of the pleasures of the film.
While there is a slightly cartoon-like air to some of the characters and 
sequences, the movie hangs together well and provides a sustained adrenaline 
rush.  In fact, the directors have a background in the cartoon field and 
successfully adapt some of those metaphors, including zany cartoon-physics,
to the movie domain. 
As escapism goes, this film delivers a solid dose of thrills 
and a vicarious sense of invincibility.  Like other escapist fare such as True 
Lies or any James Bond film, the film involves plenty of action-filled 
confrontations between the bad guys and our heros.  Some aspects of the 
film are reminiscent of other sci-films such as Dark City or Alien, 
but in this case (unlike Dark City) several characters are well 
worked out and earn our empathy.  This doesn't make the film a careful 
character study, but it does make it rich enough to assure that we care about the 
outcome.  Equally important, the specifics of the plot are consisent
with one another and textured with interesting embellishments.
For example, like the dissapointing Johnny Mnemonic 
(which also starred Reeves) people can have information downloaded into
their heads, but in this film it's an incidental detail kept vague enough
to seem plausible.  
Finally, the plot has enough twists to for it keep us on wondering 
and captivated right to the end.
The graphics and sound effects are excellent, but there isn't a sense that 
the film was constructed simply as a vehicle to deliver them -- despite 
their overwhelming technical quality they support the plot rather than 
distract from it.  Despite the fact that, or perhaps because, I teach computer 
graphics I am 
usually not impressed by special effects in their own right.  In this film 
several sequences provoked me to tell myself "I've got to see that again" as 
soon as they finished.  Some of the tricks involved morph-like techniques 
using footage supposedly shot at almost 12000 frames per second (yes, twelve 
thousand frames), so even for the technically jaded it's pretty impressive.
Together the effects span creatures akin to those of H.R. Giger and 
battles that would be at home in a Batman flick.  The combination leads to 
a strange sense of unreality and unpredictability that is very comprelling.
All in all The Matrix is a great ride: 
intelligent enough to be satisfying, disturbing enough to be provocative, 
thoroughly exciting and a technical tour de force.
 Overall rating 4.5/5
 Genre keys: action, science fiction, fantasy, futuristic
 Warnings:  several grotesque scenes and images, extensive violence.
 I you like these, consider this film:
    Dark City, Terminator, Blade Runner, Batman, True Lies, James Bond, 
    Alien, Johnny Mnemonic

Author
Robert Workman
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review:
What's worse than Y2K?  How about a fully digital future where NOTHING
is real?  That's what computer programmer Neo (Keanu Reeves) slowly
learns as he enters the dangerous world that is The Matrix, a movie
directed by The Wachowski Brothers (the guys behind the hip thriller
Bound).
Before you groan at the presence of Reeves in the lead role, hold on.
There's actually a story with depth here.  It seems that a group of
hackers is out to stop the system that is The Matrix, led by the bald
but brilliant Laurence Fishburne and assisted by Carrie Ann Moss, who
looks quite cool in leather, I must say.  Neo (Reeves) is pretty much a
key player in this fight, although he really doesn't look it at first.
Could this amateur be "the one" as Fisburne thinks he is?
Credit the Wachowskis for putting together a great story that allows
suspense to build, something that few special effects-laden films seem
to do these days.  There's plenty of effects to go around, of course,
but at least there's a backbone to build them on as well.  Reeves is
surprisingly good in his role as Neo, particularly in a fight scene with
Fishburne that comes across as goofy, yet great.
I wish the villains weren't quite so "generic" (leftover G-Men from
looking for a sweet sci-fi actioner with plenty of stop-motion swooping
camera angles and, of course, a motherlode of a helicopter explosion.
Now the Wachowskis are headed into horror films with their next project.
Bring it on.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
"Our tragedy today is a general; and universal physical fear so long
sustained by now that we can even bear it.  There are no longer problems of
the spirit.  There is only the question:  When will I be blown up?"
William Faulkner, Nobel Prize Lecture, 1950
Faulkner wrote those lines in the years after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, in
the early days of the Cold War, back when the threat of nuclear apocalypse
was real and powerful.  Today, that threat has subsided, leaving us free to
concentrate on the problems of the spirit without fear of imminent
destruction.
Unless, of course, you're in Hollywood.
In Hollywood, the question isn't "When will the world be blown up?" but
"How can we blow up the world?"  In the Decade of the Digital Disaster,
Hollywood has the technical means to blow up the world a dozen times and
still have everyone out of the theater in time to catch Seinfeld reruns.
The only limits to the scope of the apocalypse are the imagination of the
screenwriter and the creativity of the technical wizards.  Together, they
can wreak all sorts of havoc, whether with a large-scale asteroid or a
small-scale virus.
The Matrix, if nothing else, deserves credit for the most creative
apocalyptic scenario so far.  The Matrix plays on two of the themes of the
1990's:  the fear of an impending environmental collapse and the
realization that people are getting stupider as their machines get
smarter.  Eventually, we are to believe, people get so stupid that they
destroy the environment, forcing a new generation of super-intelligent
machines to build... The Matrix.
What is the Matrix?  Well, not to give away too much, but The Matrix is a
giant planet wide virtual-reality simulation in which humanity exists.  As
long as you accept the reality you're given, you're in good shape.  Once
you question that reality, however, things start to happen.  You're no
longer completely bound by that reality.  You can leap tall buildings in a
single bound, for example.  Of course, once you start doing that, the Men
In Black come after you.  (In The Matrix, the Men In Black have guns
instead of neuralyzers, and they can leap bigger buildings than you can.)
The alternate universe of The Matrix is a fun place to be.  It's rendition
of the post-industrial apocalyptic landscape is stylish and as
well-conceived as anything in genre classics like Aliens or The
Terminator.  It's populated by smart, resourceful villains and really
scary-looking alien ships.  It has a good sense of humor and some insanely
well-choreographed action scenes.  The Matrix has everything going for it
except for one thing:  it isn't very good.
The Matrix manages to be less than the sum of its parts.  It starts out as
a top-notch sci-fi thriller, in which super-hacker Neo (Keanu Reeves)
learns the secrets of The Matrix and escapes its evil clutches.  But The
Matrix betrays its promising beginnings.  The last half of the movie is
just your standard cheesy superficial action movie.  While it has very good
computer-driven special effects and some cool stop-motion sequences, it's
ultimately a tedious whirlwind journey where the clichés fly faster than
the bullets.  (Fans of the lets-put-down-our-guns and fight-man-to-man
cliché and the fight-you-never-backed-away-from-anything-in
your-life-fight cliché will feel at home in The Matrix.)
As in other movies in the Digital Disaster genre, the acting isn't that
great.  Most producers simply can't afford to hire talented actors and do
high-tech effects at the same time.  (Steven Spielberg and Tom Cruise's
rumored Minority Report project may be the exception that proves this
rule.)  Laurence Fishburne as Morpheus, leader of the human resistance, is
the best of a bad lot, but does little other than provide atmosphere and
profound-sounding speeches.  Carrie-Anne Moss has the Michelle Yeoh
love-interest-with-an-attitude role, but she does a lot better at acrobatic
computer-enhanced fighting moves than dialogue.  The rest of the pirate
crew can't disguise .  The rest of the pirate crew might as well have
Starfleet red shirts on for all they add to the proceedings.  Only
Australian actor Hugo Weaving, as the leader of the Men In Black, makes any
kind of impression.
Detractors of Keanu Reeves will enjoy The Matrix more than most.  The
Matrix seems designed to maximize Keanu's strengths and minimize his
weaknesses, like talking.  (Fittingly, Reeves does his best acting in a
wonderful scene where he is deprived of the power of speech.)  He does an
awful lot of chopsocky, especially given his twig-boy physique.  There's
nothing especially horrible about his performance -- he's about as good
here as he was in Speed, which may be about as good as he'll ever be --
but one gets the feeling that this is a movie that calls for more.  Reeves
has his entire reality ripped away, a situation that would be tailor-made
for driving most people completely barking mad, but it doesn't seem to
affect him that much.  He doesn't even ask that many questions, even,
accepting the new reality he's given with little curiosity.
But the real problem with The Matrix is not the weaknesses in the plot or
the acting.  Where The Matrix is very concerned with blowing things up, it
pays little attention to the "problems of the spirit" that Faulkner
defined.  While there is some debate in the movie about whether a
comfortable virtual existence is better than an arduous real existence,
there's not a lot of human warmth or interplay in the movie.  Everyone in
the movie seems stiff, almost lacking in affect.  It's almost as though
everyone is trying hard not to outact Keanu (which must have been a
strain).  There are a lot of punches thrown in the latter half of the
movie, but there's no emotional impact to counterbalance the fight scenes.
We can gaze at amazement at the detail of the set design, and marvel at the
technical artistry needed to create the movie, but without some form of
emotional resonance, somewhere, it's not worth much.  The Matrix promises
us a good, filling meal but only serves us eye candy.
To quote Faulkner again, The Matrix "has forgotten the problems of the
human heart in conflict with itself which alone can make good writing".
Instead, it settles for a CGI conflict with an out-of-control video game.
Nothing wrong with that, for people who like such things, but anyone
looking for a real movie will leave The Matrix disappointed.
MovieNation:  Movie Reviews in Black and White
http://members.xoom.com/movienation
movienation@xoommail.com
"No children have ever meddled with the Republican Party
and lived to tell about it."  -- Sideshow Bob

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) THE MATRIX is a great piece of eye candy. From our
normal, everyday "reality," the film travels back and forth into
Wonderland, and changes the definition of which is which.
Keanu Reeves is Mr. Anderson, a cubicle-dweller in an unconvincing
high-rise. His job, his life, and his caricatured boss are never
explained, and so the movie starts out flat and amateurish. It's
disappointing, but we know this soon won't matter, so we continue to
watch.
In his cube he receives a phone call that tells him to get out of the
building; the suits at the elevator are coming for him. Sure enough,
peering over his cube, he sees some men in black come his way. The voice
on the phone directs him to a window in the high rise, from which he's
supposed to make a difficult jump to a scaffolding. Realizing he has
nothing to hide and has no idea who the caller is, he wisely chucks the
phone and turns himself in to the suits.
For the first 20 minutes of the film, the suited "establishment" and the
vague "underground" fight for his attention and loyalty, warning him not
to join the other side. Neither side explains who they are or what they
want with him, but when the "underground" expose a bug planted in his
gut by the other side, he agrees to trust the underground. He is taken
to their leader, Morpheus (Lawrence Fishburne). 
THE MATRIX packs a lot of mythology into its story. Readers of Joseph
Campbell, the scholar of comparative mythology, will recognize in
"Neo's" (Reeves') story, the traditional hero's journey -- the call to
adventure, the refusal of the call, the spirit guide, the special human
ability attained by those who open themselves to it....
So when Morpheus offers the choice of a red pill that leads to danger,
adventure, and self-awakening; or a blue pill that leads a safe,
comfortable return to the status quo; the age-old story has already
chosen for him. Anderson (his computer name is Neo) eats the red pill
and is reborn, both mythically and visually.
Through the looking-glass, Neo meets the half-dozen others who have gone
before him. The small band comprises those who have awoken from their
DREAM OF reality, into reality itself, a dark cloudy world a century
into "the future." In this reality, humans and artificial intelligence
are fighting for control of the planet, and for control of each other.
Neo, the chosen one, is prophesied to be the first who can beat the
computers on their own turf (that is, in the virtual reality that is the
Matrix).
I suppose this nerdly premise is partly borrowed from such sources as
DARK CITY and the TERMINATOR movies. Still, the concept is sufficiently
creepy to drive the plot, and the overlay of both ALICE IN WONDERLAND
and timeless mythology adds a dash of legitimacy to the otherwise
adolescent fantasy.
As I said, THE MATRIX is a great piece of eye candy, and credit should
go to the visual effects supervisor John Gaeta and cinematographer Bill
Pope. Although the unflavored modern world from the first scenes is
uninspired, the later settings -- the stark white void, the bleak future
underground, and the computer-enhanced "reality" are convincing,
interesting worlds.
The time-changing special effects are the next evolutionary step in
cinematic gimmickry. Watch a few commercials from the last year and
you'll see what I mean -- time stopping while the camera moves, or the
speed of time changing instantly. Until now, these tricks have not been
integrated in to a feature film. They've been used as tricks to catch
your eye to sell products. 
But the same way TERMINATOR 2 commanded the morphing technologies of the
day and actually did something with them, THE MATRIX commands these
time-shifting film tricks and folds them into a story.
Does that mean the film automatically deserves praise? Not necessarily.
But because it's the first big film to use this technique as part of its
story, it will be as important to film history, decades from now, as T2.
(In the short term, it means that Hollywood is going to need a new bag
of tricks.)
Pope (who has worked with the Wachowskis before, and with Sam Raimi)
does deserve praise. His mastery of the texture of light -- the
highlights, shadows, and reflections -- show such tight control that the
film would look just as beautiful in black and white (a feat that's
harder than you might imagine).  
So THE MATRIX must be an awesome movie, right?
Well... sort of. There are several things that keep THE MATRIX from
being perfect.
The first that comes to mind is the film's ending. Or rather, endings.
The first ending is a false one, and the second one has a coda. It's as
though the Wachowski brothers knew they were on a roll and didn't want
to stop. Worst of all is the final scene of the movie where "love" comes
into play from out of the blue.
Also lacking is the acting. Keanu is no Anthony Hopkins. It's not that
he spoils the movie -- he doesn't -- it's just a little hard to take him
seriously. Hugo Weaving (of THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE
DESERT) plays Agent Smith with a deliberately stylized persona. But even
so, his speech and mannerisms are slow, awkward, and distracting.
As for the film's message, there is an unhealthy moment (BEFORE we are
aware of the film's definition of "reality") where Mr. Anderson is told
that the world doesn't apply to him, that the world "has been pulled
over your eyes to hide the truth".
In other words, the world and all its rules, mores, and authority
figures are for everyone else, and not for him. In fact, the world is a
lie that must be DESTROYED if the truth is to be revealed. This talk
made me uneasy, particularly while the film was still in "our" reality.
If Mr. Anderson had any sociopathic tendencies, this might have
encouraged him to go postal. Watching, I knew the movie wouldn't pursue
that avenue, but the idea is disturbing enough, and THE MATRIX
illustrates it just a little too well.
So THE MATRIX must be a terrible movie, right?
Well... no. In fact, I think it's one of the better movies I've seen
this year. I liked it so much I hoped I could give it a very high
rating. But with so many things not quite right, I think it's only fair
to point them out. But if you are undeterred and are want to see it
anyway, I highly recommend it. See it on a big screen while you can. -
MARTY MAPES & ANDREA BIRGERS
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Gary Jones
In The Matrix, writer-directors the Wachowski Brothers have taken a
familiar science fiction idea - that what we perceive as reality is
merely an illusion - and from it have constructed a high-tech action
flick that is as cool as it is dazzling. 
The film seems to start out with a major handicap: it stars Keanu Reeves
- surely the worst actor ever to make it as a major Hollywood star. He
plays Neo, a gormless computer hacker who finds his world turned inside
out and himself transformed into the best hope for liberation of an
enslaved mankind. Keanu can do gormless OK, but the rest is heavy stuff.
Mercifully, his thesping is kept to a minimum and he is called on
instead to look good while flying through the air and dodging bullets.
We, and Keanu, are also lucky that there are some real actors in the
film to help out. Laurence Fishburne plays Morpheus, the leader of a
band of freedom fighters who explains to Neo, and to us, just what the
hell is going on. Hugo Weaving plays chief bad guy Agent Smith, a Man In
Black who is so spookily menacing he steals every scene he's in. But the
real star is newcomer Carrie-Anne Moss, who as Trinity, a ballsy and
resourceful gun-toting sexpot in black PVC, gives us an action heroine
to rank with Sigourney Weaver in Aliens and Linda Hamilton in Terminator
2.
In the illusory world in which much of the action of The Matrix takes
place, those who have realised that the world around them is not real
can, with training, manipulate the physical nature of that illusory
environment. This provides our heroes with the ability to run up walls
and leap between buildings, and gives the film-makers an excuse to let
rip with some fantastically imaginative use of technical wizardry. The
"flo-mo" process is used, in which the camera seems to move around
frozen action, as are a whole raft of effects of the kind that seemed so
revolutionary in Terminator 2. When such techniques are used in action
sequences that are as well choreographed and constructed as those in The
Matrix, the result is like seeing something genuinely fresh and
exciting. Such sequences are helped by the excellent soundtrack
featuring such heavyweight noisemakers as The Propellerheads, Ministry
and Rage Against The Machine.
Towards the end, The Matrix seems to abandon any exploration of the
interesting ideas at its core, and it doesn't have the mythical weight
of a film like Blade Runner, but at least is has some ideas, and as
action eye-candy it's hard to beat.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
Michael Dequina
What is _The_Matrix_?  A derivative mélange of elements borrowed from
other science fiction films, including _Dark_City_, _The_Fifth_Element_,
the _Terminator_ films, _Aliens_, and even this past January's deadly
_Virus_.  Factor in the presence of wooden Keanu Reeves, whose last venture
into the realm of sci-fi was the unspeakable _Johnny_Mnemonic_; Laurence
Fishburne, a fine actor whose talents were lost in uneventful spacefarer
_Event_Horizon_; and Carrie-Anne Moss, arguably the worst actress in the
tantalizingly trashy, much-too-short-lived Aaron Spelling sudser
_Models_Inc._ (which is saying _a_lot_), and expectations aren't exactly
set soaring.  In fact, they come crashing down.
Fraternal writing-directing duo Larry and Andy Wachowski put themselves in
a similar situation with their 1996 debut _Bound_.  In that revelatory
film, they took the unpromising, tin foil-level pairing of Jennifer Tilly
and Gina Gershon as larcenous lesbian lovers and turned into cinematic
gold--no less than one of the best films of that year.  And with
_The_Matrix_, the Wachowski Brothers have once again achieved such a feat
of alchemy, blending these modest parts into a stunning whole that really
has no business working as brilliantly as it does.
Reeves's blank demeanor is a perfect fit for the often befuddled character
of Thomas Anderson, a computer programmer who leads a second life in
cyberspace under the name "Neo."  One night he is contacted by the
enigmatic hacker Trinity (Moss) on behalf of the even more enigmatic
Morpheus (Fishburne) regarding a mysterious concept that has been haunting
him for ages--"the Matrix."
None of this may make much sense in and of itself, but to go into more
detail is the ruin one of the great pleasures of the film: that of
discovery--that of the story's the secrets as the layers are gradually
peeled away and of an entirely new world as imagined by the Wachowskis (and
brought to spectacular visual life by special effects producer Matthew
Ferro).  Once again, they have come up with a story that is smart,
challenging, and completely unpredictable, and their direction is
characterized by an uncommon attention to detail.  For example, the line
deliveries by Hugo Weaving (who plays the sinister Agent Smith) initially
strike one as laughably stiff, but it is eventually revealed to serve a
purpose.
_The_Matrix_ is more than a head trip, however; the Wachowskis deliver the
action goods and then some.  They are the first American filmmakers to
successfully duplicate the wild abandon of the Hong Kong action style, from
a number of exhilarating martial arts fight scenes (choreographed by Yuen
Wo Ping, director of such high-flying HK films as _Iron_Monkey_ and
_Wing_Chun_) to some of the best Woo knockoff shootouts one is likely to
find anywhere.  As viscerally exciting as these passages are, what is
especially impressive is how the Wachowskis come up with an underlying
explanation for all the gravity-defying derring-do--something no Hong Kong
filmmaker has ever bothered to do.
If this review has struck you as incredibly vague, perhaps maddeningly so,
then I have done my job.  As Morpheus tells Neo, ""Unfortunately, no one
can be told what the Matrix is.  You have to see it for yourself."  But I
will say this much more: one of Morpheus's repeated urgings is to Neo is,
"Open your mind," and while watching _The_Matrix_ the audience would be
wise to heed that advice.  Fortunately for all of us, the Wachowski
Brothers already have--and the visionary products of their unbridled
imaginations are free for everyone to experience.  (opens March 31)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com________________________________________________________
NetZero - We believe in a FREE Internet.  Shouldn't you?
Get your FREE Internet Access and Email at
http://www.netzero.net/download.html

Author
Jamie Peck
Rating: **1/2 (out of ****)
Warner Bros. / 2:16 / 1999 / R (language, violence, icky sci-fi goo)
Cast: Keanu Reeves; Laurence Fishburne; Carrie-Anne Moss; Joe
Pantoliano; Hugo Weaving; Julian Arahanga
Director: Andy Wachowski; Larry Wachowski
Screenplay: Andy Wachowski; Larry Wachowski
Keanu Reeves as an alleged Chosen One destined to liberate the enslaved
human race of a grungy futuristic setting instantly sounds like a bad
idea to end all bad ideas - it's Ted "Theodore" Logan as Mad Moses
Beyond Thunderdome! Any film capable of mining a casting coup out of
this ripe-for-ridicule synopsis, however, promises to take a lot of
people by surprise, and that's just what "The Matrix" will presumably do
with Reeves and still more adventurous elements. While watching "The
Matrix," the pulse is quickened, the eyes are dazzled and the brain is
twisted beyond recognition several times over.
Unfortunately, this is also a movie that isn't as deep as it sometimes
pretends to be, pleases viscerally more often than mentally and sports
murky concepts up the wazoo. The latter flaw definitely detracts from
the viewing experience, as important and much-needed exposition arrives
in sudden bursts of dialogue too thick to take in all at once - even
this typically story-savvy critic was left gasping for air (or at least
a rewind button) in certain places. But is it really fair to criticize a
film that boasts the imagination to create and continually play by its
own rules? Maybe not.
"The Matrix" provides a great deal of intrigue in early moments, where
Reeves' computer expert Neo slips into panic mode after being contacted
by a group of underground hackers lead by shady types Morpheus (Laurence
Fishburne) and Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss). They freak him out with
several disturbing bombshells - among them, 1999 is not 1999
(definitely), reality is an illusion created by malevolent robots that
have enslaved the world populace for battery power (probably), and Neo
is the dude who shall deliver us (possibly). Reeves' dazed, fazed and
generally endearing demeanor works for him in this role.
Before long, Morpheus begins playing Yoda to Neo' Luke Skywalker,
training him with a literal interpretation of the En Vogue dance hit
"Free Your Mind" - do so and almost any physical feat is possible in
this falsified universe (with the right computer upload, of course).
Wanna learn jujitsu? Done. Wanna be able to vault from skyscraper to
skyscraper in a lone leap? _Voila_. These sequences make for some
genuinely exhilarating moments - namely a hand-to-hand match between
Reeves and Fishburne that starts off in silly fight stances and finishes
up with spectacular gravity-defying choreography.
Then comes the empty midsection, which would be a downright snooze if it
weren't so hole-riddled and confusing. Not only are most of the weird
explanatory bits forcefully spewed forth here, the thrills take an
ill-fated detour with several head-scratching sidetracks involving a
half-baked act of mutiny and a supremely strange visit to an all-knowing
entity known as the Oracle. Brothers Andy and Larry Wachowski,
co-scribes and -directors here, seem guilty of both over- and
underwriting in these hazy passages, but their handling of most other
material is pitch-perfect.
"The Matrix" isn't so weak as to be labeled a sophomore slump for those
creative Wachowski boys, though 1996's nifty crime-drama "Bound," their
feature film debut, came together more cohesively. Even if their second
act doesn't live up to its awe-inspiring bookends, give them credit for
regaining footing for a sensational final half-hour that finds Reeves
and company infiltrating enemy headquarters and unleashing the Force -
or whatever it's called - to the fullest. This includes further unique
special effects like enabling the actors to run across walls and limbo
under slow-motion bullet trails.
When it sticks to incomparable tricks and treats like these, "The
Matrix" is deeply cool - perhaps enough to catch again if you're sure
the narrative will flow better. In other words, the likelihood of
running commentary by the Wachowskis addressing the huhs of the plot, as
well as other behind-the-scenes extras answering the technical-related
hows, on "The Matrix"'s sure-to-be-upcoming DVD release might be too
good to pass on, even for those who don't find the movie very
user-friendly.
Š 1999 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit The Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
"The best possible argument for including [a shot of Bruce] Willis'
genitals would have been that the movie, after all, contains everything
else." -Roger Ebert on "Color of Night"

Author
Ken Pierce
The following review is supplied by www.dvdfuture.com
Review: Well, The Matrix has to be one of the most difficult reviews I've ever
had the pleasure of writing. I say "difficult", because it's an incredibly
difficult movie to critique without giving away too much of the plot. Like so
many movies which have intricate, weaving plotlines, a lot of the fun is
watching the twists and turns unfold. As such, I will not go into a long
explanation of what The Matrix is about, but will instead talk about some of
the hits and misses for this film.
First and foremost, I expected a lot from this film. I should say out front,
though, that the filmmakers' previous effort, Bound, did not impress me at
all. I thought it was pretty standard fare, and suffered from a plot line
which dragged intensely at some points. Still, though, there was certainly a
dramatic flair, and a touch for those things odd. This is what excited me
about The Matrix, I didn't expect it to be standard fare, and I was right.
The Matrix is a movie that almost everyone can enjoy. I've heard some older
critics complain that the soundtrack is too loud, but I found it fit the look
and feel of the movie perfectly. This movie has the same art director as Dark
City, and it shows. It also shares more than a few plot elements with Dark
City, but goes places Dark City should've gone. The Matrix owes a lot to Dark
City and Terminator, but in most ways expands upon the ideas presented in
those films. I would have to say that The Matrix is much better than Dark
City, and (here is a huge compliment) as good as The Terminator. This movie
will be a science-fiction/action film classic.
First the pros: The art direction, set design and special effects are
outstanding. As is Carrie-Ann Moss as Trinity, Hugo Weaving as Agent Smith
and Joe Pantoliano as Cypher. The action sequences are incredibly well
filmed, and the movie clips along at an incredible pace. Warner Brothers gets
bonus points for not giving away the whole freakin' movie in the trailer.
Most of the "COOL!" shots in the trailer take place in the first three to
five minutes of the film (!), there's a LOT more here than the trailer shows.
The plot line is beautifully intricate, and keeps you guessing at various
points in the movie. It has a tendency to go left when you expect to go
right, except when you start to expect it to go left, then it goes right.
Great stuff!
The cons: Keanu Reeves is (as usual), quite wooden. I can't offer a better
casting suggestion, because quite frankly, his "look" is perfect for this
film. Still, though, I think any director using Reeves in future projects
would be wise to avoid having his character use the phrases "NO WAY!" or
"WHOA!". Flashbacks to Bill and Ted are inevitable at points. Surprisingly, I
found Laurence Fishburne to be somewhat wooden at the beginning of his
performance. He seemed to get more into it as the movie progressed, but I
have come to expect more of him. Also, there is a series of three
rear-projection shots used in the film which look absolutely terrible. You'll
know the shots I refer to when you see them. I suspect this wasn't re-shot
because of the relatively small budget for a film of this type($63-68
million). Last, and definitely least, I found the sound mix to be a little
underwhelming. The theatre I saw the movie in was Dolby Digital equipped, and
I found the directional effects limited and the low frequency range muted. It
wasn't terrible, it just seemed like it wasn't "enough". The next time I see
this movie (and I will be seeing it again, probably later this weekend), we
plan on going to The Coliseum here in town. The cinema it is playing in at
the Coliseum is THX certified, and if my opinion of the sound mix changes I
will let you know. 
That's it! It doesn't tell you much, I know, but I don't want to go into
specifics for fear of spoiling the movie. All I can really say is "go see it."
You won't be disappointed. This movie kicks some serious ass, and is the best
action film I've seen in a long time. It has a complex, but still coherent
plot, and relatively few plot holes considering the gaping possibilities that
were opened. Great stuff, and I hope the rest of 1999 is this good!
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Brandon Herring
WARNING: Contains what The Matrix is.
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Joe Panteliano
Some may be disappointed with The Matrix. I'll tell you I was. I sat there and
sat there and sat there waiting for something to happen. Now wait wait, I know
most of you loved it, and I'm not saying I didn't like it. What I'm saying is
the first half was extremely slow. Now seeing the trailer it makes you think
the whole entire movie is one big special effects show. Don't be fooled, this
movie has a big story. And big chunks of talky moments. But I will admit the
special effects and the acting were above par, deserving the rating above.
Ok now to the story. Well this may take a while. Ok first of all, our world we
live in now, is not the real world, actually we live inside a computer
generated world known as The Matrix. A man played by Keanu Reeves is about to
find that out, when is kidnapped and almost coaxed to go into the real world.
He does so, and finds out that he can do anything, be anything he wants to be.
But he has to fight a 'Matrix skipping' bad guy, who wants to send him back to
his own world or destroy him.
Laurence Fishburne, his guide of sorts plays his character well as does Keanu
Reeves. But I sat in the theatre for over and hour wondering where all the
special effects were. Yeah there were some in the first half but not enough.
The trailer for this movie was really decieving making people think that this
was a special effects laden movie.
Now for the second half, it is explosive, and saves the movie. Some of the
special effects and fighting were breathtaking. The sound, the music, and all
the effects were effective, and the last hour kept us entertained. But with a
running time of 2 hours and 20 minutes, this movie is at least 40 minutes too
long. One would have wished for a better 'Matrix', but I do have to say, I did
like it and I was entertained.
Reviewed April 5, 1999 by Brandon Herring.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Bob Bloom
The Matrix (1999) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence
Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss and Hugo Weaving.
 Ever have the feeling that you were living in someone's dream? That there
was something wrong with the world around you, but you really couldn't put
your finger on what it was?
 That about sums up The Matrix, a science fiction thriller that owes a debt
to the writings of Phillip K. Dick and William Gibson, as well as to the
imaginations of Larry and Andy Wachowski, who wrote and directed the movie.
 The Matrix is about a world run by computers and machines, in which humans
are bred as energy sources to keep the machines running. Only the humans
are kept in a virtual reality world in which they believe they are leading
normal lives.
 However, a group of freedom fighters, led by Morpheus (Laurence
Fishburne), are striving to end this domination. But to do so, they need to
find "the one," the individual who has the power to overcome the machines.
 That person is Thomas Anderson, alias Neo (Keanu Reeves), a renowned hacker.
Neo is recruited by Morpheus and his group to lead humanity's fight to
regain control of the planet and of their lives.
 The Matrix is basically a special effects extravaganza in which the human
actors are merely props to bounce around in front of green screens.
Kind of ironic, isn't it, that a movie about a future in which machines
dominate is dependent for success on the very machines the movie is warning
us about.
Even at two hours and 15 minutes, The Matrix is a perpetual motion flick.
The action hardly lets up.
 The performances are adequate, but that is all that is necessary.
 Reeves is rather stoic as the Christ-like Neo. It's difficult to picture
him as the savior of humanity, but he is able to pull it off with the right
amount of incredulity and panache.
 At first Reeves' Neo finds Morpheus' claims hard to believe. But when he
is eventually convinced, he joins the resistance without reservation.
 The Matrix has some nice touches. Much discussion surrounds the oracle, an
all-knowing individual who is the spiritual leader of the resistance. It's
a nice touch when she is revealed as a middle-aged black woman (Gloria
Foster) working in her kitchen baking cookies.
 Carrie-Anne Moss is Trinity, another of the resistance fighters who adds
spunk as Neo's comrade-in-arms and later love interest.
 Fishburne is stoic and stalwart as Morpheus, while Hugo Weaving is vile as
the robotic Mr. Smith, one of the brutal guardians of the matrix.
 The Matrix is fun. It's thought-provoking, especially if you are touched
with a pinch of paranoia.
 It's loud, explosive and a movie science fiction fans will appreciate.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
What is The Matrix? The Matrix is a movie that splices plot elements from
the superior DARK CITY (9/10) and STRANGE DAYS (8/10), slaps in plenty of
computer mumbo-jumbo and some AI (Artificial Intelligence) and mixes it all
into a healthy bowl of snazzy special effects and tremendous fight sequences
that will make your eyes bubble over in supersonic amazement.
PLOT:
It is the year 2199, and the world is now being run by an artificial
intelligence. It has constructed a computer-generated dreamworld, called the
Matrix, in which human beings live their daily lives, without any knowledge
of their false existence. Some rebel humans discover this horror, and
recruit the help of computer hacker Neo (Keanu Reeves), hoping that he will
be "the one" to rescue the world from this cyber-slavery.
CRITIQUE:
The last thirty minutes of this movie just kicks ass all over the place! It
combines special effects, with crazy fights featuring freaky Hong Kong
action and unbelievable strengths, and a non-stop pace to a chase that
seemed inevitable from the start. Unfortunately for my taste, this film's
second act ran into a major slow-down when it delved too minutely into the
intricate details of the explanation behind this "matrix". This muddled
back-and-forth wasn't improved upon by the set of questions that seemed to
answer the previously presented set of questions. Anyway, that aside, the
film starts off with a bang-a-gong that will set anyone's taillights ablaze.
The Wachowski brothers obviously have an eye for style, and fully take
advantage of their respected talent during much of this film's progression.
The slick action shots, decent suspense, and awesome cinematography
accentuate this flash, and feed us with plenty of excitement to let slide
the less interesting, and more standard scenes within the "real world"
outside of the matrix.
The acting is solid all around, with Fishburne making a fine showing,
despite the excessive unflattering close-ups of his once pretty face, and
Reeves pulling off a decent performance as the hacker caught in and over his
head. Whoa! One guy that did standout in my mind, was the head of the "bad
guys", Australian actor Hugo Weaving, who fed us with a fine dish of
confidence, terror and an awfully annoying chatter style. All in all, this
movie could have been trimmed a spot during its over-elaborate second act,
but comes through on all cylinders in respect to style, vision, mood, and
premise. But the biggest selling point of this film, a detail not gone
unnoticed by its own overzealous marketing team, is the visually stunning
special effect action sequences which trounce your pre-existing notion of "a
great fight sequence", and present all future filmmakers with a new
benchmark for fun and excitement. Kung-fu, crazy special effects, a girl in
a black rubber suit, John Woo-esque slo-mo action shots, and Keanu Reeves in
a shaved head. What is The Matrix? Cyber-kinetic futuristic fun for the
whole family!! :)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The four main actors including Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne
Moss and Hugo Weaving had to endure four months of martial arts training (9
to 5 every day, but Saturday and Sunday), under the auspices of Hong Kong
Kung Fu master Yuen Wo Ping, before any of the principal photography on the
film had even begun.
This film was filmed on location in Sydney, Australia. On soundstages and,
for two months, on Sydney's streets and rooftops and in warehouses.
Actor Keanu Reeves was born in Beirut, Lebanon, but brought up in Toronto,
Canada. His name means "cool breeze over the mountains" in Hawaiian. He
dropped out of high school when was 17 to become an actor. His father is
part Chinese, part Hawaiian. He was a geologist, but is now serving time in
prison. His mother is English. She was a costume designer for such rock
stars as Alice Cooper. He also plays bass guitar in his band "Dogstar".
Actor Laurence Fishburne began acting at the age of 10, and was only 15
years old when he won the role of a young G.I. in Francis Ford Coppola's
Vietnam War epic APOCALYPSE NOW (7.5/10).
And where did the black-rubber-suit-wearing actress Carrie-Ann Moss come
from? Well, she was born in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. She began
her career as a model and moved to Europe, modeling in Japan and in Spain.
While working in Spain, she landed a regular role in the television series
"Dark Justice," which was produced in Barcelona for its first season. Moss
moved to Los Angeles the following year when the series switched locations.
In the six years since her acting career began, Moss has appeared in more
than 60 hours of television as well as two television series prior to her
present role in THE MATRIX. Ironically, in 1993, she starred in a TV series
called "Matrix".
Bad-ass Hugo Weaving is one of Australia's most acclaimed actors. You may
remember him from his part as Tick/Mitzi in 1994's THE ADVENTURES OF
PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT. He has also voiced the animal voice of "Rex"
in both BABE movies.
And here's what the official MATRIX web site says about the Wachowski
brothers. Larry and Andy have been working together for 30 years (They are
actually in their early 30s). Their most recent feature film was 1996's
BOUND (8/10), which they wrote and directed. Little else is known about
them. We do know that they were born in Chicago, Illinois  :)
Producer Joel Silver is one of the most successful producers in the motion
picture industry today. The combined gross of his films is near $3 billion.
He was behind all four LETHAL WEAPON films, the first two DIE HARD films,
COMMANDO, PREDATOR, THE LAST BOY SCOUT, DEMOLITION MAN, and many others.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
THE MATRIX
Cast: Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Joe
Pantoliano, Hugo Weaving, Julian Arahanga
Directors: Andy Wachowski, Larry Wachowski
Screenplay: Andy Wachowski, Larry Wachowski
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 stars
The first immediately impressive aspect of The Matrix is its spectacular
visual style, the second its fascinating story line.  Directors/writers
Larry and Andy Wachowski have made a dark and often chilling Sci Fi
piece; one that sucks its audience into an incredible futuristic world
and never relents until the final credits roll.  Kudos to the
Wachowski's for providing enough intrigue to disguise some of the film's
weaker moments; intrigue that is created not just from clever scripting
but also from testosterone charged performances.  Keanu Reeves and
Australian Hugo Weaving are exhilarating opponents who face off towards
the end in a few breathtaking action sequences.   Like in 1998's Dark
City, there are significant holes in the plot, but none that can't be
overshadowed by the nightmarish atmosphere that is evoked.  In fact, The
Matrix often feels like a bad dream sweetened by amusing (although
derivative) subplots.
Posters, theatrical trailers and even the film's web site pose the same
question: what is The Matrix?  Well, that would be telling.  Since much
of the interest in this film comes from not knowing what it is about for
a lengthy period, it would be unfair to reveal the diagnostics.  Thomas
Anderson (Keanu Reeves) - a computer hacker known as "Neo" - is told
that he is "the one;" a man who will free the human race from the
clutches of The Matrix.  Anderson joins rebel-warriors Morpheus
(Laurence Fishburne) and Trinity (Carrie Ann Moss) in a journey across
time and reality, all the while battling a group known as "the agents,"
led by Agent Smith (Hugo Weaving).
If that synopsis sounds a little silly, rest assured that the basic
story line makes a reasonable amount of sense.  Bit by bit, we are
eventually told what is wrong with the seemingly ordinary world our
characters are based in, and yes - what The Matrix is.  At more than one
stage I was reminded of "The Force" - The Matrix is also a power that
can be manipulated to the hero's advantage.  Anderson undergoes
Skywalker-esque training, and these scenes provide great bits of martial
arts action and daring stunts including roof-to-roof leaps.  Morpheus is
our Yoda, and he has the right amount of wisdom and courage thanks to
Laurence Fishburne's enigmatic presence.
Filmed and edited entirely in Sydney, The Matrix will help put Australia
on the map as one of the best places in the world to make movies.  It is
rare for special effects to aid story as much as they do here, and it is
equally rare for a Sci Fi blockbuster to build as much premise and
intrigue as this one.  The Matrix is not only a crowd-pleasing success -
it is a fascinating look at reality and how it is perceived.  No doubt
this film, like The Truman Show, will make us look at our world in a
suspicious new light.


Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Joe Pantoliano,
Hugo Weaving
written and directed by Andy and Larry Wachowski
What is the matrix? If it helps answer the tagline question, THE
MATRIX is the most satisying and stylish action pic since
FACE/OFF. The second film by the Wachowski brothers, THE MATRIX will
remind many viewers of 1998's little-seen Alex Proyas masterpiece DARK
CITY. It has a similar look to it, and a similar message.  But after
seeing THE MATRIX, the movie that came to mind was Terrence Malick's
misunderstood war epic THE THIN RED LINE. Like THE THIN RED LINE, THE
MATRIX is a heavily disguised, poetic and metaphoric meditation on
finding God, and the difference between pure good and evil.
The complicated plot of THE MATRIX is too good to spoil, so I will not
go in depth.  Keanu Reeves plays Thomas "Neo" Anderson, a computer
programmer who wakes up one morning(a la DARK CITY) and finds that
people are out to get him. He is then contacted by Morpheus(Laurence
Fishburne), a man who says he's out to help him. He then joins
Morpheus' squad and travels into the matrix, a world that is supposed
to shield you from reality. Morpheus believes that Neo is "the one"
who can somehow save the human race. Neo trusts Morpheus and believes
his prophecy. And Neo decides to stay in the matrix, unable to ever
leave.
The Wachowski brothers, who made the brilliant mob caper BOUND, have
backed THE MATRIX's blistering, electric style with substance to
create what is not only a perfect futuristic noir thriller, but a
perfect pre-Y2K film. THE MATRIX took a long 5 year journey to the
screen, but the time all seems worth it. THE MATRIX should also be
credited as the film which revives Keanu Reeves' career. After trash
like JOHNNY MNEMONIC and FEELING MINNESOTA, Reeves is finally back in
style, playing the hero with as much natural tenacity as his hero in
SPEED. Mainstream audiences are likely to leave THE MATRIX feeling
clueless and cheated, but like THE THIN RED LINE, they should give the
film a second viewing to appreciate a subtlety that is largely lost in
modern cinema. THE MATRIX may not be an Oscar winner, but the film is
almost a shoo-in to be a cult classic. Of all the many questions I was
left with after viewing THE MATRIX, the most important one I could
think of was "When is the sequel?"
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST


Author
David N. Butterworth
        So preaches a very cool-looking Laurence Fishburne to a befuddled
and bewildered computer hacker played by the equally cool-looking Keanu
Reeves.  That observation serves as an apt commentary on the film itself:
it's better to see "The Matrix" than to have someone describe it to you.
Since it's my job, however, I'm obligated to try.
        Reeves' character (Neo to his online chums) is being "recruited" by
this guy Morpheus (Fishburne) who believes Neo to be The One.  The One who
can save Morpheus' rebel brigade from falling further down the existential
rabbit hole, so to speak.
        The One?  Rabbit holes?  The film is packed to the rafters with
these kinds of allegorical and literary allusions yet, surprisingly, the
end result is a totally original motion picture that grabs you by the
throat and doesn't put you down until the end credits.  It's all very weird
and confusing but it's great looking and moves at such a pace that you
won't notice the anomalies in the pre-programmed realities it stirs up.
        Morpheus and his "ragtag" band of space pirates (think Ridley
Scott's "Alien") are being pursued by Rayban-loving agents who sure look
like Feds but speak so slowly and deliberately (e.g., pronouncing the "n"
in environment) that you suspect they're not what they appear on the
surface.  Fortunately the good guys have this neat ability to travel down
telephone lines the minute danger threatens, as Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss)
ably demonstrates in the film's striking opening sequence.  Fortunately she
knows something about ju-jitsu--and defying gravity--too.
        Trinity finally hooks up with Neo and brings him to Morpheus, where
the psychobabble gets really heavy.
        After choosing a red pill (to learn what The Matrix is) over a blue
one ("you wake up in your apartment not knowing whether or not any of this
really happened"), Neo is reborn in a creepy futuristic world, immersed
cocoon-like in some serious glop, his head shaved and umbilical appendages
attached to almost every part of his quivering, naked body.
        First the Coens, then the Hughes, next the Farrellys, and now the
Wachowskis--the latest in a successful line of brother-directors keep this
visually stunning sci-fi thriller on the boil for well over two hours,
saturating their palette with dark and dingy hues, only rarely allowing
anything resembling color to engage the senses.  The writing is very smart,
if at times overly arch and occasionally bordering on the portentous, but
Andy and Larry have dreamed up an exhilarating vision in which reality, it
seems, is not what it seems.
        What is The Matrix?  It's a surreal, icky, post-apocalyptic
cyberpunk hacker mind-trip of a movie.  And a very good one at that.

Author
Brian Takeshita
It's an interesting premise.  Our reality is only real to us because
it is what we perceive to be real.  In truth, our entire existences
are lived out in our minds as we are fed information through
electronic inputs directly to our brains.  What we see, what we do,
everything around us is nothing more than a computer-generated
construct interlinked with the minds of others through a vastly
powerful artificial intelligence.  Our bodies, severely atrophied, are
kept alive for the sole purpose of generating heat and electrical
energy for a dominating order of machines which control the planet.
The sci-fi realm has been waiting a little while for something new to
come along.  THE MATRIX isn't it - the idea of a war between man and a
sentient computer network, a sham world, the ability to plug one's
brain into a computer, has all been gleaned from such sources as THE
TERMINATOR, DARK CITY, and a few Star Trek episodes (both classic and
Next Generation).  What is new is the ability to weave all of these
various elements together and succeed in producing a film that is both
entertaining as well as thought-provoking.
Keanu Reeves plays a computer whiz nicknamed Neo, who is plucked out
of the artificial world (known as the matrix) by a group of renegade
humans who are clandestinely fighting to expose the fallacy of the
computer-generated existence and free humankind from the oppression of
the machines.  The group's leader, Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne), has
chosen Neo because he believes Neo is "the one" who is destined to
lead the attack against the artificial intelligence.  
>From the beginning of the film, we are kept on our toes trying to
figure things out.  This, in a lesser movie would be annoying, but THE
MATRIX presents itself in an intelligent manner which makes the puzzle
rather interesting and even fun.  What is reality?  What is a sham?
The film turns our very perception of life on its side.  More than
once, we are also presented with the question of whether we would
rather know the harsh truth of reality, or live a life of relative
bliss, oblivious to the true nature of our surroundings.  As viewers,
this is intriguing enough, so imagine what it would be like for Neo.
And who to better play a bewildered person than Keanu Reeves?
Reeves, whom I've never really cared for as an actor, is competent in
roles which require a lot of straightforwardness, and little subtlety.
He was good in SPEED, for example, but laughably poor in A WALK IN THE
CLOUDS.  Neo is actually one of those roles which Reeves slips into
rather nicely, so much of my expectation was happily for naught.  In a
couple of places, the script even capitalizes upon his wooden nature,
and this is a heavy credit to writers/directors Andy and Larry
Wachowski.  I mean, since BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE, what
movie could you say really "utilized" Keanu Reeves?
More interesting than Reeves is Fishburne, who's Morpheus nearly runs
the gamut of emotions, and convincingly so.  Very surprising for a
sci-fi movie.  Fishburne also maintains a certain demeanor about
himself throughout, as if he always knows what to expect.  This helps
to further the aura of his character's proficiency and extensive
knowledge.  Hugo Weaving as Agent Smith, one of the artificial
intelligence's anti-intruder programs, is also good playing his
deadpan, no-nonsense, kick ass role, which requires him to show
emotion at the appropriate time.  Unfortunately, when Weaving speaks
for more than a few sentences in a row, the nature of his character's
speech pattern becomes a little more laughable than impressive.
Carrie-Anne Moss plays Trinity, Morpheus's number one assistant who
becomes somewhat of a love interest for Neo.  Although her character
is somewhat inconsistent, Moss nevertheless delivers an above par
performance when Fishburne isn't in the picture.
There were few expenses spared when it comes to the special effects.
Many methods of imagery are employed, from modeling to bluescreen to
computer graphics.  Of special note is the use of the "freeze and
turn" effect where the entire scene is frozen, turned, then continued
from a new angle.  This is accomplished by using a large number of
still cameras employed in a semi-circle, with motion picture cameras
placed at the two ends.  The motion cameras film the action, and at
the appropriate moment all the still cameras fire at once.  Place each
still image in a film sequence and you get a nearly seamless
transition from the first motion camera to the second.  Pretty slick.
THE MATRIX drips with style.  From the clothing to the music to the
action, we're watching an exaggerated version of what we're used to.
Much of it seems like the combination of two genres of the Hong Kong
action film - there's a lot of Kung Fu, there's a lot of gunplay.
When a character is letting go with an automatic weapon, much is made
of the empty cartridges falling to the floor in slow motion.  There's
also the element of the Japanese action cartoon (called anime by
aficionados), especially in the way the sequences are filmed in
sweeping pans and emphasized actions through special effects.
Combined, it's really like no live-action film I have ever seen.
The film is not without its faults.  Some of the scenes and ideas are
"borrowed" a little too liberally from other films, and one component
of the ending is decidedly disappointing.  Some of the lines are also
pretty bad - in one instance, a supporting character incorrectly
delivers a famous saying, and it wasn't meant to be a joke.  However,
these shortcomings detract little from what is an overall solid action
sci-fi film that for once does more than merely entertain.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Fasten your seatbelts and put on your thinking caps because the
Wachowski brothers are back, and they're about to take you on a wild
ride, one quite unlike any you've been on before.
THE MATRIX is the second film by the writing and directing duo of Andy
and Larry Wachowski, who last brought us the intriguing and unusual
crime drama BOUND.  This time they turn their considerable talents to
making a fascinating science fiction film that is both a mind-boggling
enigma and a thrilling action movie that rarely disappoints.
As the movie starts, we meet a lithe, athletic woman named Trinity
(Carrie-Anne Moss), who runs like the wind and leaps across tall
buildings with a single bound.  When sprinting, her body seems to
compress as if it needs to be more aerodynamic.  Although you might
think she is an invincible superwoman, there are "agents" chasing her
who are more powerful than she.
In a movie that wants to challenge your assumptions, it is not clear who
are the good guys and who are the bad and which side each is on.  Heck,
it's not even clear if it's the past, the present or the future.  It's
even more complicated than that.  Is what we are watching just a game, a
dream, a simulation or what?  See what I mean about thinking caps?
Trinity locates one Thomas "Neo" Anderson to tell him that Morpheus
(Laurence Fishburne) has been searching for him.  Neo, played with just
the right amount of bewilderment by a perfectly cast Keanu Reeves, has
himself been on a search, and it's not clear who is the searcher and who
is the searchee.
"They're watching you." Trinity warns Neo.  "Who is?" a perplexed Neo
asks.  She warns him about the aforementioned agents.  Eventually the
agents, led by an Agent Smith (Hugo Weaving), give Leo their own
admonition.  Looking like Gestapo dressed in Blues Brothers clothing,
they inform him that Morpheus is "the most dangerous man alive," and
they want to enlist his help in tracking Morpheus down.
At the heart of the mystery is something called the "matrix."  With
colossal bad judgment, most film critics are revealing too much about
what the matrix is.  Suffice it to say that it is bizarre and
fascinating.  The "X-Files" is straightforward in comparison.
The staging is marvelously imaginative.  Working in his cubicle, Neo
gets a phone sent to him via FedEx.  As soon as he opens the package,
the phone drops out and immediately starts ringing.  Answering it, the
caller barks orders to Neo on how to escape the men who suddenly start
chasing him.  The energetic story moves with the power of a rocket on a
trajectory to an unknown destination, and it isn't clear whether it's
heaven or hell.
Shot by cinematographer Bill Pope in the same denuded color style as he
used on BOUND, the film's look is striking.  Along with the sleek and
cold, futuristic feel, the eerie music pulsates with a heavy bass
foundation.  The film's sound is awesome as are its special effects, the
best of which have to do with literally dodging bullets.
The film constantly surprises you.  The bad guys, for example, have an
extremely clever and creepy bugging device.
When Neo admits his total confusion about what is happening and whether
it is "real," Morpheus has an answer of sorts.  "What is real?" Morpheus
asks.  "How do you define real?"
The Wachowski brothers manage to make the abstract concepts of virtual
reality and artificial intelligence, subjects hard to translate to the
big screen, both fascinating and compelling.  But what does it all mean?
As Cypher (Joe Pantoliano), one of Morpheus's men puts it, "It means
buckle your seatbelt Dorothy because Kansas is going bye-bye."  Agent
Smith explains it differently.  "Never send a man to do a machine's
job," he says.
Usually confusion is the sign of a bad filmmaker who is unable to
construct an understandable narrative.  Here, this exhilarating and
challenging movie works precisely because it is a logical labyrinth.
Some movies leave you feeling cheated, but this will likely leave you
with an exhausted satisfaction.  If you have any energy left, the one
word on your lips will likely be "Wow!"
THE MATRIX runs 2:10, but feels much shorter.  It is rated R for sci-fi
violence and a little profanity and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
Possible Gap product placements in "The Matrix": Khakis Explode?  Khakis
Virtual?  CyberKhaki?  In fact, there's a perfect moment to yell out
"khakis?" in a crowded movie theater: soon after Lawrence Fishburn
says, "You can get anything you want," that's the right time.  MST3K
could not have asked for a better lead.
Actually, the movie isn't MST3K fodder, beyond the usual quota of Keanu
moments; these pass quickly, though they're worth a few chuckles
("Keanu Fu").  Perhaps the best way to describe "The Matrix" as a movie
is to say it's some sort of live action Japanese anime.  You have the
hyperkinetic martial arts, the bad-ass pose downs for which the movie
lives, the impossible body dynamics of being tossed at a brick wall or
leaping gulfs, perhaps even a large-eyed woman if you use a little
imagination with Carrie-Ann Moss.  It's a fun, mindless action movie,
featuring the aforementioned Martial Arts Plus, prodigious amounts of
ammunition, and Quake-like charge-into-big-room-and-shoot-everyone
video game violence.  What more can you ask for?
Beyond style and action, I'm not sure what else to say.  Keanu's
character appears to have no past, so that's an indication of his
alienation from this world?  All the eye imagery and the sunglasses
indicate how strongly the world is based on perception?  I'm sure that
we can come up with lit crit that talks about the eye symbolism in this
movie, and the focus on sunglasses, mirrored or otherwise, and how
Agent Smith's pupils are apparently manipulated during the
interrogation scene to be more square than round.  But, you know, I
think all the sunglasses are there to look cool, and they're just
showing how Smith is the evil automaton he is.  Anyway, sunglasses go
with the black leather bad ass look.  That's what we're aiming for.  No
need for anyone to say, "hey, you're driving at night, take the glasses
off!"
Yes, they do try for the Deep Thought at times.  The primary one is the
Information Age update of Plato's Parable of the Cave.  When Fishburn
describes the nature of reality and his efforts of freeing others from
the illusions of life, his speech is almost lifted from the Cliff Notes
on "The Republic".  The notion of the world as shadow play on cave
walls is, of course, an old, rich science fiction vein; many have been
there before for ideas, and many will be there later.  No one is really
expecting "The Matrix" to break new SF ground, and in fact the various
"the Matrix is this, the Matrix is that" speeches that Fishburn gives
are repetitive (well, Keanu isn't the brightest) and bog down the
film.  A good ten or twenty minutes can be cut from the middle, and no
one would notice.
Oh, the link between The Matrix and the Gap khaki ads goes one step
beyond the large blank white rooms where some of the action takes
place.  There's also marriage of computer and camera, with the
augmented overcranking and the virtual camera tricks that make the
freeze-and-rotate effects possible [1].  The Matrix, as noted, is a
visual marvel.
[1] http://www.slashdot.org/articles/99/02/16/0843210.shtml

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Keanu Reeves; Laurence Fishburne; Carrie-Anne Moss; Hugo Weaving &
Gloria Foster
Let me first say that the conditions that I was forced to watch The Matrix
under were less than ideal. So I have tried to be as fair as possible
considering that my viewing experience was significantly less than ideal. I
watched The Matrix in a theater that is in serious need of upgrades at the
best of times. Under no circumstances, should it have ever been allowed to
show a big budget special effects laden film like The Matrix. This theater,
owned by the parent company of one of Hollywood's biggest studios, hasn't
even graduated into stereo sound yet. The mono sound that the audience was
subjected to sounded as if it was coming out of a speaker that was many
years past mandatory retirement age. In other words, the sound sucked. As
someone used to digital sound in a movie theater, bad sound doesn't do
anything to add to a film. I'm not even going to go into the horrible
splicing job that the projectionist did putting this film together.
There, I've had my rant, now on with the regularly scheduled review. Which
sadly won't include commentary on the film's sound which I'm assuming was
spectacular, but I'm just guessing. My guess on the sound seems like a
fairly solid one considering the visual quality of The Matrix. It is nothing
short of stunning visually. Sadly, the rest of the film, while pretty good,
doesn't quite measure up to the obvious effort that was expended on making
this film look so darn good.
The Matrix has at it's core a good concept, although it strays into the
confusing side more often than I would have liked. Keanu Reeves plays a
computer hacker who is drawn into the frightening realization that reality
is just a hoax. It turns out that that many years ago the world was
devastated by some sort of disaster. Now machines run the planet and humans
spend their lives in a sort of incubator, plugged into a computer network.
The computers are generating a virtual reality world which is a
representation of the Earth before it was destroyed. The population of the
planet never realizes that their entire life is a hoax and that they really
spend their entire lives as comatose. That is except a small band who have
discovered this horrible secret and have escaped their virtual prisons. They
now spend their lives combating the computers in an effort to expose this
lie. Reeve's character, Neo, is recruited by this band of rebels led by
Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne). Newcomer Carrie-Anne Moss and one of
Hollywood's most underrated actors, Joe Pantoliano, join Fishburne in the
band of freedom-fighters.
The action sequences are nothing short of spectacular. This can be
attributed as much to the amazing special effects as to many of the actor's
extensive pre-production training in martial arts. This lends itself to some
of the best martial arts sequences that you are ever likely to see in a
film. When you add this to some of the wild effects in the computer
generated world, it all adds up to an eyeful.
As I already said, the visuals far outpace the rest of the film. Acting in
The Matrix is not bad, but it certainly isn't real good either. Keanu Reeves
gives his usual fairly emotionless performances. Although to his credit, it
is one of his better performances. Laurence Fishburne on the other hand
often seemed to forget that he was in a sci-fi action film. More than a few
times he delivered his lines as if he thought he was performing in some sort
of Shakespearean drama. Joe Pantoliano was a little under used in this film
but he made the most with what he had. Carrie-Anne Moss turned out a
surprisingly good performance for this her first feature film role. It's
nice to see that she was cast as much for her talent as for her breathtaking
looks.
You have to give all of the main actors a healthy dose of credit for the
work that they obviously put into the physical training for their roles in
this film. It was clear that no small effort went into getting the moves
down perfectly for the fighting sequences. I also put much of the blame for
the somewhat strained performances in The Matrix on the dialogue, which was
terrible at times.
In more than a few places it got way too existential for my liking and at
other times it was just plain weird. It almost seems as though the writers
were having a difficult time trying to figure out how to explain the concept
for the movie. So they decided to make the dialogue as obtuse as possible so
that no one could figure out what the heck they were talking about. Thereby
covering up any leaps of faith that they may have had to make in the
departments of logic and believability. My other major complaint with The
Matrix was with the very unsatisfying ending. The setup for it was hokey and
frankly used in many a bad film before. The ending itself was just plain
strange.
The main reasons to recommend The Matrix are the visual effects and computer
animation which make this a real treat to watch. While the rest of the film
(acting, dialogue and to a degree plot) detract from the high production
values, they don't detract enough to prevent me from recommending The Matrix
as a fun way to spend an evening.

Author
Fontaine Lien
"To deny our own impulses is to deny the very thing that makes us human."
Amidst all the sappy romantic comedies that have come out on the
heels of spring, "The Matrix" is like a taste of what is to come, a prequel
to The Prequel, so to speak.  Not that the Matrix is like any of the
jingoistic summer blockbusters, but it's been a welcome relief for my
thriller-craving movie-goer heart.
The concept of the Matrix isn't all that new. It's been appearing in
all but hordes of movies recently: "The Truman Show" (albeit a movie of a
very different genre), "Dark City," and even in the trailer that preceded
the movie itself: "The Thirteenth Floor." It's that we as human beings are
part of a plan (usually set up by computers, and in this case machines),
that we are being "experimented on" (in this case enslaved) by something
we remain ignorant of.  When this concept is explored in sci-fi, good sci-
fi, like "Dark City" and this particular movie, it always makes me shudder
because it's just something so intangible, so fantastical, and so unknown
to the human mind.  Questioning reality (a tagline for "13th Floor,"
coincidentally).  
So, while it isn't groundbreaking in the screenwriting aspects, the
real treat is in the execution.  Absolutely brilliant effects, and solid work
in the art direction (kudos to the ultra-cool costumes--well, that's what
they all look like, but still) and cinematography.  I said "solid." I felt that
it could have been a bit more innovative and different, given the subject
matter it's dealing with.  And yet we've gotten competent work, with the
set constantly bathed in a green and black gloom.  Hell, even the sunlight
looks dark, if you know what I mean.  Especially harrowing is the scene
where Neo wakes up in his gelatinous bed among the whole "crop"; also,
the scene where the phone's ringing, a train is thundering by, and Trinity's
about to declare her love for Neo.   I'd like the sound effects to earn some
recognition come Academy Awards time next year but a) it's still a year
away b) more competition has yet to come c) this is sci-fi.  The action
sequences were directed with a John Woo-ish edge, and thanks to the "if I
believe it it's true" theory they're hawking in the film, they had a lot of
freedom when it came to the special effects.  Bullets stopping midair,
morphing men, raining bullets, and did I mention bullets?  
The story moved along at breakneck speed most of the time, so that I
rarely had a chance to catch my breathe before something stunning or
unexpected or humorous happened (yes, it's got some tongue-in-cheek
humor).  I'm still trying to figure out some points in the plot, and while it
was not without holes, I'm glad that it gave us something to think about
and that it was much improved over Keanu's last sci-fi outing.  Speaking
of Keanu (aka Neo), I can't think of anyone who was more perfectly cast. 
He's no master thespian, but he's the epitome of cool, and he has this
gaunt, bewildered, yet determined look around him that makes him so
perfect for this thriller.  And yes, I did think he did a competent job
(whoever does his makeup, however, needs to lay off on the red). 
Lawrence Fishburne (sp?) was haunting as Morphius, and he and Keanu had
some wonderfully spooky scenes together.  It's odd that this isn't really a
horror film, but I felt terrified at times.   I was not particularly satisfied
with Carrie-Anne Moss's (aka Trinity) performance, but she has the right
look.   And this *is* a movie where looks matter.  Excellent casting for
the Agents--they look like the high school teachers from hell.  
The Oracle, however, completely stole the movie.  She was well-cast
as well and it is oddly fitting that in the apocalyptic world the human
race's guide would appear to be something as mundane as a psychic palm
reader who bakes chocolate chip cookies.  The whole scene that took place
in her apartment brought a bittersweet feel that not many sci-fi flicks
achieve.  The way you kinda feel like when you go back in time and see a
dead relative still alive.  It's the same reason, I guess, why they made
something as commonplace as picking up the phone a matter of life and
death.  In a way it makes sense, since the Internet has become the primary
way most modern human beings communicate.  
On a deeper level the movie, like most good sci-fi, makes us think. 
Granted that the ending was more clear-cut and "happy" than some films
like "Dark City" (in the end, it is love that brings Neo back to life--Neo is
The One because Trinity and Morphius believed in him, causing him to
finally believe in himself), and there are some things that are never
explained--like what exactly is the Oracle, how it came to exist, who are
the Agents, and how Neo came to be aware of Morphius and the Matrix (or
are these just things I have to think about more?)--but it still leaves us
with interesting ideas, metaphysical (for example, the idea that
"supernatural" phenomena can occur *when* we suspend our disbeliefs)
and scientific (what we perceive *is* based on nothing more than
electronic impulses, after all) and such time-honored questions as what
makes us human and what makes humanity worth it. That's what you get
*in addition to* the shoot-outs!   
Three cheers for this smart sci-fi thriller.   
"How about I give you my finger, and you give me my phone call?"
*YKYAXPW (You Know You're An X-Phile When) . . . "Artificial Intelligence"
brings to mind the William Gibson (scribe of "Johnny Mnemonic,"
coincidentally) episode of the X-Files ("Kill Switch"), where wonder-hack
Esther Nairn is reunited with her lover only in the "AI."
* I liked how Morphius gave Neo (or Thomas Anderson as he was back then)
directions on his cellphone: "Go to the window.  Open it." Sounded like a
good ol' text-based RPG didn't it?  
* Wooooo, I'm glad BuzzCut!Keanu is back!  (So says a Supposed Former
Keanu Junkie . . . Hey, I went to a Dogstar concert, damnit! ;)
* It intrigues me how the sets are uniformly grim and dirty in sci-fi
thrillers.  I'd like to design a set for once where it's so goddamn happy it's
depressing.         
* YKYAXPW . . . The morphing Agent reminds you of the shape-shifting
Bounty Hunter from the X-Files.  Even their facial structures are similar.   
* I sure got a headache after seeing all those people getting slammed into
the wall and other hard surfaces.  OUCH!
* YKYAXPW . . . Wait, I thought The One was Cassandra Spender? 
Silver-Screen List Administrator and PVPHS Class of '99
http://members.aol.com/saitiau/welcome.html

Author
Vince Yim
(originally for The Ubyssey, the student paper of the University of
British Columbia, April 7, 1999)
   What do you do when you wake up one day and realize that your entire
life is a lie?
   After countless movie trailers that blow too many secrets and
ultimately fail to deliver, we finally have a product that far outweighs
the hype. The Matrix tells the tale of a computer hacker named Neo
(played by Keanu Reeves) who unknowingly holds the key to an effort to
bring down a mysterious organization that is manipulating reality and
the collective minds of humanity. Using high-tech implants and weapons,
Neo and an underground movement jump between reality and the manipulated
world. However, the question still remains. What is the real world,
anyway?
   Due to the film's dark atmosphere and the premise, The Matrix will
inevitably garner comparisons to 1998's underrated Dark City. While Dark
City is a well constructed sci-fi thriller, one glimpse of The Matrix
and it is clear which one will win out more fans.
   While the special effects and art direction in Dark City are nothing
to sneeze at, the visuals of The Matrix must be seen to be believed.
Despite a small budget (in this post-Titanic world, anything costing
$70M or less is considered small budget), the filmmakers truly push the
envelope, using technology that was beyond reach not too long ago.  Not
relying solely on CGI, directors Larry and Andy Wachowski call for some
very complex camera work, leading to bizarre visuals once seen only in
comic books and Japanese animated films such as > Ghost in the
Shell.  
   As the story involves characters that have found out how to
manipulate "reality", this leads to agonizing slow-motion sequences and
bizarre freeze frames in which a character jumps into the air and seems
to freeze in place as the camera flows towards another angle. In terms
of visuals, > The Matrix breaks a lot of ground with the camera
effects and computer renderings. This is largely due to the background
of the directors, who wrote comic books along side Vancouver based comic
book artist Steve Skroce (who also provided storyboards for the film).
   Apart from comic books and Japanese animation, the film also has
inspiration from Hong Kong filmmakers, thanks to HK martial arts
director Yuen Wo-Ping and three months of hard work and training by the
actors. When combined with the computer aided effects and gratuitous
slow-motion effects, it leads to many incredible action sequences,
especially a wild shootout that comes close to putting action maestro
John Woo to shame.  
   While the film is a dazzling spectacle that leaves the audience
gaping in disbelief, The Matrix could have benefited from at least one
more re-write of the script. While the storyline explores many
interesting ideas and bizarre concepts, there are a few noticeable holes
and inconsistencies, and some of the dialogue is unintentionally
laughable. Regardless, these flaws are immediately smoothed over as soon
as we see something really cool on screen. And there are a lot of really
cool things on screen.
   And of course, the film would not be much without the actors.
Surprisingly, Keanu Reeves comes off pretty well, although he does have
a tendency to degrade into a Bill & Ted type character at some moments.
Canadian newcomer Carrie-Anne Moss plays a rather unemotional role,
although that is pretty much all that the script calls for. Still, one
has to keep in mind the dedication that the characters put into the
roles, especially since within the three months of martial arts
training, they could have easily made another film.
   In a movie industry where just about every surprise is already blown
and nothing is new, The Matrix easily blows them all away. This film
will easily keep the most jaded sci-fi fans and movie buffs happily
satiated until the release of Star Wars: The Phantom Menace in May.

Author
Chase McCown
THE MATRIX, 144 minutes, Rated R for language and sci-fi violence.
CAST:  Keanu Reeves (Neo), Laurence Fishburne (Morpheus), Carrie-Anne Moss
(Trinity), Hugo Weaving (Agent Smith) 
Have you ever wanted to walk out of a movie, but felt that you would be cheated
out of $6.00?  Have you ever laughed when no one else was laughing because the
acting was so insipid and the lines just as inane?  Have you ever been to a
movie that was...just that bad?
If the answer to any of these questions is "yes," then maybe you've seen THE
MATRIX, a movie that takes itself so seriously that it unintentionally comes
across as a comedy.
Then again, what can you expect from a movie that stars "Ted" ("Bill and Ted's
Excellent Adventure" star Keanu Reeves) and some girl from the ill-fated TV
series "Models Inc." (Carrie-Anne Moss)?  There were times when I just couldn't
help but laugh out loud...like, the time when Keanu Reeves' character
enlightens us with the revelation, "I know kung fu."  Such forced dialogue and
a humorously unrealistic plot make up THE MATRIX.
Sometime in the 21st century, Neo (a computer hacker) discovers that all life
on Earth is merely a complicated illusion created by evil cyber-based people so
that each human body can be used to provide energy for the Matrix's world
domination plot (the real world, that is...not the cyber-based facade where we
are all supposedly dwelling).  Neo is "chosen" by rebels Morpheus, Trinity, and
an array of other one-dimensional characters to defeat the Matrix.
I realize that I am in the minority when I say that I truly loathed this movie.
 I can't understand why in the world critics have given it such good reviews. 
Aside from the special effects (yes, they truly were amazing), I found nothing
redeeming in the acting, the plot, or the screenplay.  Hello Hollywood!  Some
of us DO look for those elements when we pay good money to go to the
multiplexes of America.
Writers and directors Andy and Larry Wachowski (whose previous credits include
the Jennifer Tilly nightmare BOUND) have certainly made some interesting
statements with MATRIX.  What I learned was:
1)  When making a movie, acting is a small sacrifice if there are "awesome"
special effects!
2)  If there should happen to be loopholes in the plot, no one will notice,
because there are some kickin' special effects!
3)  The Matrix has your money.

Author
Brandon Herring 
Picture: * * *˝
The picture on this DVD in incredible. Besides a few moments where it is a
little dark, the picture is sharp and clear. Without having any lines or
anything. To me the picture could have been mastered a bit brighter in some
scenes, but then again the film in the theatre was dark too.
Sound- * * * *
Incredible. The film has 3 ch. English Dolby Surround 5.1, with music-only
audio only tracks and commentaries during the film from the cast and crew. When
you are in a theatre with great sound and the sound is behind you, even if you
have only 2 speakers, the 5.1 surround really is around you and amazing. I
would recommend getting audio equipment or speakers for best expierience.
Special Features- * * * *
The best feature of the DVD is the special features. It contains bio's of the
crew, including awards they've won, films they were in where they were born and
so on. It also has a great feature called 'Follow The White Rabbit' in which a
little rabbit icon appears at the bottom of the screen and when you press
select the DVD shows you how they made that certain special effect. Also it
contains the HBO First Look: The Matrix, a documentary of the making of the
film, 'Take the Red Pills' which shows you more of the making of the film
including the bullet scene. It also has scene selection, english subtitles,
Interactive menus, and enhanced features for your DVD-Rom PC, which includes
Are You The One? Challenge, Screenplay, Storyboards, and the genre essays 'Do
you know kung fu" Original theatrical website and sampler trailers.
Film Rating- * * *
Some may be disappointed with The Matrix. I'll tell you I was. I sat there and
sat there and sat there waiting for something to happen. Now wait wait, I know
most of you loved it, and I'm not saying I didn't like it. What I'm saying is
the first half was extremely slow. Now seeing the trailer it makes you think
the whole entire movie is one big special effects show. Don't be fooled, this
movie has a big story. And big chunks of talky moments. But I will admit the
special effects and the acting were above par, deserving the rating above.
Ok now to the story. Well this may take a while. Ok first of all, our world we
live in now, is not the real world, actually we live inside a computer
generated world known as The Matrix. A man played by Keanu Reeves is about to
find that out, when is kidnapped and almost coaxed to go into the real world.
He does so, and finds out that he can do anything, be anything he wants to be.
But he has to fight a 'Matrix skipping' bad guy, who wants to send him back to
his own world or destroy him.
Laurence Fishburne, his guide of sorts plays his character well as does Keanu
Reeves. But I sat in the theatre for over and hour wondering where all the
special effects were. Yeah there were some in the first half but not enough.
The trailer for this movie was really decieving making people think that this
was a special effects laden movie.
Now for the second half, it is explosive, and saves the movie. Some of the
special effects and fighting were breathtaking. The sound, the music, and all
the effects were effective, and the last hour kept us entertained. But with a
running time of 2 hours and 20 minutes, this movie is at least 40 minutes too
long. One would have wished for a better 'Matrix', but I do have to say, I did
like it and I was entertained.
Overall DVD Rating- * * *˝
The Special Features, sound, picture and film are all good on the DVD. Though
the film wasn't as great as I thought it would be and a bit slow in parts the
special effects were definately amazing. The 5.1 Surround was absolutely
incredible, and I would definately recommend the DVD of 'The Matrix.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring September 28, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss. Rated R.
The Matrix is something that must be seen to be believed; a visionary
achievement in filmmaking that delights the eye and the mind alike. It hails
from the Brothers Wachowski, the duo who brought us the much-acclaimed 1996
crime caper Bound, and here they achieve a new high in stirring the
imagination while they quicken the pulse.
I will go into some plot detail here, so if you have no clue what this movie
is about and want to be surprised, skip the next two paragraphs. The story
involves a computer programmer named Neo (not accidentally an anagram for
"One"). Neo (Keanu Reeves) is singled out by Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne)
because Morpheus believes that Neo is "The One". In the middle of the 21st
Century, humans are celebrating the creation of the first genuine artificial
intelligence. But the AI soon gets out of control, conquers humans and finds
in them an everlasting energy source, which is something that it cannot live
without. So the AI creates "The Matrix," an elaborate computer program which
exists in the humans' mind, simulating a fully-functional life, while they
sit in incubators and are being harvested for energy.
But there is hope for humanity yet, as there is a savior waiting to be found;
a person with the power to manipulate The Matrix at will. That person died
not long after The Matrix was created, but his resurrection has been
prophesied. Now Morpheus, and his band of "unplugged" rebels believe they
have found this savior and they believe that it is Neo who is destined to
rescue humanity from slavery.
As layers of this deeply structured, well thought-out story are peeled, we
are transfixed with awe; not only because of the technical prowess with which
this movie was created, but also due to the fact that The Matrix is wildly
far- fetched and yet eerily realistic. The story seems relevant and oddly
appropriate. It makes sense because the Wachowski brothers took the time to
think it through, but also because it's a cautionary tale that has real
impact. It involves subject matter worth cautioning about.
The film's visuals are doubtlessly spectacular, rivaling the best in cinema.
When Neo is "unplugged" and we see where he really is, the world created by
the Wachowski's is amazing and the images begin to linger in your mind.
Stellar cinematography helps as well, as the film from the very beginning
sets up an atmosphere that no less than hypnotizes the viewer.
Most of the first half of this 135 minute movie is story, but in the second
half the action takes over. Brutal hand-to-hand combat and breathless,
heart-stopping shootouts abound and I could not find a false, unnecessary
moment. Part of the reason has to be the flawless choreography of the action
sequences that more- than-redeems any thinning of plot that may (but doesn't,
really) occur in the second half of The Matrix.
Neo is a role crafted precisely for Keanu Reeves. It is a non-demanding one,
that requires Reeves to act as little as possible, and to my surprise, Reeves
is effective as an action hero; even more so than he was in his superb
actioner Speed. Laurence Fishburne is absolutely perfect as Morpheus,
engimatic and sympathetic at the same time as he is intimidating.
I don't know when I'll see another sci-fi film as breathtaking or as
intelligent as The Matrix. When watching this movie I dared not blink so as
not to miss a moment. Everything from the effects to the action sequences to
the story is flawless; and the Wachowski brothers' achievement is going
directly to my Top Ten list of 1999.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Matt Pusateri
With many big-budget science fiction films, great ideas are often wasted by
bad scripts, cheesy plot twists, and, terrible acting. The Fifth Element,
The Abyss, and Godzilla had great concepts squandered by bad acting,
writing, or both. At first glance, The Matrix, Larry & Andy Wachowski's
sci-fi/kung-fu/shoot-em-up spectacular, looks like a prime candidate to join
the list of high-concept bad movies, especially with dopey Keanu Reeves in
the leading role. But despite high levels of cheese and gaudy dialogue, The
Matrix works. It's an uncanny blend of action and surreal fantasy that
borrows from dozens of other films (most obviously the Terminator films,
Star Wars, and Total Recall), but remains refreshingly original and
interesting throughout.
Reeves plays Neo, a computer hacker who stumbles into an initially
bewildering set of encounters with "Trinity" (Carrie-Anne Moss), a rival
hacker who has supernatural powers and stunning good looks, a unseen,
omniscient cult figure known as "Morpheus" (Lawrence Fishburne), and a trio
of creepy men in dark suits who act like IRS agents from Hell. Neo quickly
learns that the world he has known all his life is not what it seems.
Moreover, he discovers that the grim, bleak world he is introduced to has
been waiting for him to save it. Neo is reluctant to assume the role of
messiah, with grave doubts that he is actually "The One" prophesized to come
and save the world.
Reluctant or not, what follows is a mix of Hong Kong-style slow-motion
shootouts, surreal dream sequences, high speed chases, and comic book
Kung-Fu fights. The film also raises interesting philosophical questions
about reality. How exactly do you know what is real and what is in your
mind? And if the real world were much harsher and grim than a fantasy one
you were living in, would you want to face the true world or continue to
live in a more comfortable illusion? Unfortunately, The Matrix doesn't
provide many answers to the questions it raises, but at least it puts some
ideas behind all the explosions, shoot-outs, and flying roundhouse kicks.
Perhaps stealing the entire show in The Matrix is Australian actor Hugo
Weaving, who plays Agent Smith, the leader of the creepy agents in
sunglasses and suits who seem capable of being anywhere and doing anything
to stop Neo and friends from destabilizing the Matrix. Weaving's stony
appearance, deadpan voice, and chilling comments put a grim human face on
the haunting, evil technological force that controls the Matrix. Like Robert
Patrick as the shapeshifting T-1000 Terminator in Terminator 2: Judgement
Day, Weaving is more frightening than any monstrous alien or homicidal robot
because, despite his power and seeming invincibility, he looks ordinary,
even scrawny. Weaving embodies his role with a memorably chilling presence.
The film features some truly breathtaking special effects and stylish
cinematography. It seems to be deliberately kitchy, with stylized fight
sequences directed by Hong Kong stunt specialist Wo Ping that reportedly
required months of martial arts training by the actors. In a few scenes, the
posing and posturing is unintentionally funny. Just seeing Keanu Reeves
engaging in serious Kung Fu is a bit jarring. However, with the comic-book
style and tone of the film, you can sustain willing disbelief long enough to
enjoy the ride without losing patience.
The Matrix isn't a classic. Its open-ended and confusing conclusion raises
more questions than it answers. It fails to resolve many of its own plot
twists and philosophical questions. It also relies on some conventional
sentimentality to save the hero - the kind of shmaltzy feel-good goo that
most of the film avoids. Reportedly, the producers have high hopes for the
film being the first in a trilogy and have already begun work on the story
for the sequel. Unfortunately, audiences deserve a little more than a vague
sense that the story will continue in the future. The Matrix is an fun,
enjoyable diversion, like a big puff of cotton candy at a carnival. Just
don't be surprised half an hour later when you still feel a little hungry.
Check out other film reviews, game reviews, features, and columns at The
Separate Radio Volume Knob (http://www.pusateri.org/knob.htm)

Author
DeWyNGaLe
While going into this film, I found myself asking the question that many were
probably asking- "What is the matrix?"  Never did I think walking into this
film The Matrix would turn out to be one of my favorite movies of all time. 
The trailers made the film look quite confusing, but the film cleared
everything up very simply and easily for me.  I was worried that the film would
be confusing just like Wing Commander, but I was wrong.  Because of the high
secrecy level about The Matrix, I will not reveal what the matrix is or what it
is even about.  The entire film is extremely unpredictable, and I do not want
to ruin this one of a kind film.
I will tell you this about The Matrix.  Laurence Fishburne is Morpheus, a
leader that is trying to overthrow the matrix.  He is one of few in his group
of people that is trying to do so.  Trinity, played by Carrie-Ann Moss, is one
of those people.  This group is out to find "the one", the one who can
overthrow the matrix.  They believe "the one" is Neo, a computer hacker, played
by Keanu Reeves.  In their quest to overthrow the matrix, they must battle
against "agents", people who are out to make sure the matrix isn't overthrown. 
Right now, it must sound very confusing, and much like a video game, but when
seeing the film, everything will be cleared up.  
The special effects are marvelous in The Matrix.  Some of the visual effects
are unlike any other I have ever seen.  They are very realistic and believable.
 Particularly, in a scene where Neo is trying to shoot down one of the agents,
the effects are highly original and outstanding.  In many films, the film
relies on special effects to make it good, but the special effects weren't even
half of what was so good about The Matrix.  Not only the effects in the film
are wonderful and top notch, but the music and sound is also astounding.  The
sound and effects together pretty much put you in the film itself.  The music
is upbeat and generation x, which is very similar to the music in Blade, only
much better.
The acting in The Matrix is perfect.  The characters of Neo and Trinity stood
out the most.  They are hardly developed at all, but you don't need development
when you have so many other great things to concentrate on.  Keanu Reeves is
very believable and dramatic as Neo, and he realistically acts out the pain and
confusion that Neo goes through.  Although Trinity is very silent through most
of the film, the character is still a lot of fun to watch.  Laurence Fisburne's
character was a very helpful one.  He explained what the matrix was so it could
be understood with somewhat ease.  The character of Morpheus was also a very
likable one.
The setting in The Matrix ranges from many different complex locations.  Places
contained outside the Matrix are very strange and dark, but at the same time
interesting and original.  I would not be surprised if The Matrix grabbed an
Academy Award nomination for Art Direction next spring.  It certainly deserves
one.  The costume design in The Matrix is quite simple, but simple means
perfect in this case.  Neo, Trinity, and Morpheus all wear a variety of
interesting outfits.  The agents all wear the identical outfit- a suit with a
wire connected to their ear.  They almost seem like villains from a video game.
Just to give you some idea of how much I loved this film, I would compare it to
Star Wars, one of my all time favorites.  Empire Strikes Back, the second Star
Wars film, which is another one of my favorites, is not as good as this wild
ride.  Not only is it a great movie, it is so much fun to watch.  The action
sequences are fast, exciting, and interesting.  With the special effects thrown
in, they are all the more dazzling.  The action sequences are without a doubt
the best action sequences I have ever witnessed in a film.  The Matrix is an
instant classic.  No science fiction movie since Star Wars has been as good and
original as this wonderful film.
The Bottom Line- Just like the "Matrix", this film is in a world of its own.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z Rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1999, R, 135 minutes [2 hours, 15 minutes]
Starring: Keanu Reeves (Thomas `Neo' Anderson), Laurence Fishburne 
(Morpheus), Carrie-Anne Moss (Trinity), Hugo Weaver (Agent Smith); produced 
by Joel Silver; written and directed by Andy and Larry Wachowski.
Seen April 17, 1999 at 7:10 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, N.Y.), 
Theater #2, by myself for free using my Hoyts' season pass.
        Before I could even begin to write this review I had trouble trying 
to distinguish which genre to classify `The Matrix' as. Considering the basic 
premise of the film and the sheer title alone, it definitely falls under the 
science fiction category, yet there are a lot of other elements that make up 
this film such as action, adventure, fantasy and a helluva lot of deep 
philosophy. But that's what science fiction is, and this film completely and 
totally lives up to all aspects of the genre.
        It seems that many modern filmmakers have lost the concept `science 
fiction,' which is as simple as breaking down the phrase into its two words. 
But instead of taking elements of science and mathematics and bending them to 
tell a story, creators seem to be relying more heavily on recycling bits and 
pieces of works of the genre and not concentrating on the basic ideals of 
science plus fiction.
        `The Matrix' succeeds where other films have not because its creators 
demonstrate a vivid knowledge and personal experience with all aspects of 
sci-fi and how to make it poignant, interesting and thrilling for a 
mainstream audience.
        The premise of the film and its look is not unlike many of the best 
sci-fi works Hollywood has produced in the last few years. The art direction, 
production design and cinematography go to show that the film has many 
inspirations, thus the result is a movie that does not seem very familiar to 
any specific work or series. It seems more like a mathematical result of the 
absorption of every aspect of the genre.
        As the film opens it's clear we're about to be told a story of 
something relative to the world as we know it, but of course with a sci-fi 
spin on it. And what else could be more scientific and modern than computers? 
The first shot is of a black screen with a green, blinking cursor in the top 
left corner which seems to type automatically a message partially 
understandable and partially coded. Then there's a shot of dozens of rows of 
letters moving vertically up the screen while changing thousands of times per 
seconds and slowly a phone number is revealed. It's a simple trace of a call, 
but listening to the conversation it has a very eerie tone and gives the 
feeling that what the voices were referring to wasn't remotely simple and 
mundane.
        After a brief, but visually-stunning opening credits sequence, the 
real story begins. The filmmakers, Andy and Larry Wachowski who are former 
comic book writers, show us they've been paying attention to what it takes to 
create a neo-Gothic setting without it coming off as cliche horror or 
pretentious hardcore. There is a brief but violent scene of arrest in which 
the arrestee, a seemingly normal woman (Moss as Trinity), moves so quickly 
and powerfully it's unreal. Then there's a rather typical rooftop chase 
scene, but at the same time the establishment and the villains who are one 
and the same, are introduced, demonstrating their power and cold presence.
        Soon the real story begins to unfold which revolves around a computer 
hacker/working stiff named Thomas Anderson (Reeves) who goes by the alias 
`Neo' on-line. His introductory scene shows him being awaken at his bedside 
PC by words slowly appearing across the screen. It's as if the PC itself is 
talking to him and the message is very typical of a sci-fi/fantasy story, yet 
still interesting and moving. It's reminiscent of `2001' and `2010' where 
unknown, unseen intelligent sources manipulated man's technology. The overall 
theme of the film is much the same as Stanley Kubrick, Arthur C. Clarke and 
Peter Hyams tried to evoke with those films.
        Neo is basically a loner who can tell that something is wrong with 
the world but can't put his finger on it. He's been searching for the hacker 
`Morpheus' (Fishburne), who has also been searching for him. When the two are 
finally introduced it's clear that the rest of the story about to unfold is 
not going to take place in the reality as we know it, or even one closely 
related to it.
        >>SPOILERS

        Morpheus also broadens the story (and thus the plot) but mentioning 
something about `Zion,' the last human city and that a man was born inside 
the matrix who prophesied the coming of `The One' who would free man from the 
machines. There is also reference to an `Oracle,' a psychic-like woman who 
will later tell Neo of his significance and will also make some other 
predictions about him that come true (sort of).
        And thus begins a story which is both simple and of epic proportions 
simultaneously. The conflict is as basic as good versus evil without many 
sub-plots or goals for the heroes to achieve besides beating the machines. 
Yet at the same time the Wachowski brothers go out of their way to continue 
to flesh-out the world they've fashioned and in the process create for 
numerous philosophies that are profound within the film's context, but many 
also carry over to the real world. 
        For example, one of Morpheus's crew members says he liked `Tasty 
Wheat' when he was in the matrix, but wonders how the machines knew what it 
tastes like. For all he knows, what he's tasting is the taste of chicken, 
`which is why chicken tastes like everything,' he says. That might not seem 
too deep much beyond a one-liner but there is validity to it and many of the 
other philosophies dropped here and there carry much more weight.
        Another sign of the film's intelligence and originality is in the 
structuring of its story. The basic idea of a man coming to save mankind 
isn't anything new, that's what the entire Bible (and Judeo-Christian 
theology) is about. Most creators wouldn't dare try to make such a parallel 
within a story with such universal implications, but the Wachowski brothers 
are able to pull it off well here. They don't try very hard to disguise their 
symbols, though (`Neo' is an obvious anagram of `one,' as is `Morpheus' to 
`Push Rome.' The last human city is `Zion' which is a term for Heaven in the 
Bible. Other references: the character name Trinity, the ship Nebuchadnezzar, 
a Judas-like betrayal of the alleged savior... oh, and a slight case of 
resurrection).
        However, the film is not without its problems. It essentially has no 
middle act  as the first two-thirds of the film are spent explaining the 
reality and the concept of the matrix to Neo and his importance and his 
training, and all of a sudden a specific conflict is thrown in as Morpheus 
and his crew fall into grave danger because of a traitor. The last half hour 
is mostly a typical series of violent action sequences in the name of the 
ultimate good versus the ultimate evil.
        Even if the last act is somewhat of a cop-out it's no different than 
many other excellent sci-fi and fantasy films' climaxes (eh hem, >cough

        Rumors indicate this film is only the first of a trilogy, but even if 
it's not, there's so much to the film that the viewer can conclude their own 
background elements and the long-term finale of the story.
        There's really nothing more satisfying than watching a film and 
getting the sense the creators are simply taking everything they've learned 
about the genre from tons of other similar works, drawing from them all and 
producing something new and original without coming off as trite and cliched. 
That's the feeling that comes with `The Matrix,' which is great because it 
doesn't rub off after the film is over. It's something to continually ponder 
how well so many elements were synchronized together to make for such an 
enjoyable piece of entertainment.                 
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 220 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Member of The O.F.C.S. (Online Film 
Critics Society)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     THE MATRIX is a tough film to review for many different reasons.
In the first place, what can one say about the basic concept without
revealing too much?  The entire premise of the film is something of a
surprise.  I will say that it is fair to say that things are not as
they seem at the beginning of the film, but saying anything more than
that about the premise could conceivably damage the viewer's enjoyment
of the film.  In this story the actuality is really very different from
being what it seems to be.  Philip K. Dick would have been right at
home in THE MATRIX with his frequent stories of reality being turned
inside out.  I believe there was an episode of the newer series of THE
TWILIGHT ZONE on this concept, but this is its first treatment in
detail in a feature-length film.
     Neo, the main character (played by Keanu Reaves), has this gut
feeling that there is something different that is going on beyond with
everybody seems to know.  It is something VERY different.  Neo wakes up
one morning with a phone call from the mysterious Trinity (Carrie
Anne-Moss) Trinity seems to be something like a hacker with what
frequently look like magical powers--powers like an ability jump
amazing distances.  Trinity takes her orders from someone even more
elusive and mysterious, the nearly omniscient super-hacker Morpheus
(Laurence Fishburne).  The government is trying to track down the
hackers Trinity and Morpheus, and sends to recruit Neo some agents who
look a lot like the title characters in MEN IN BLACK.  Neo is given the
choice of helping to capture Morpheus or of being enslaved by strange
forces.  Soon it is not clear to Neo what is real and what is in his
dreams.  But when he throws in his lot with Morpheus and Trinity,
things become even stranger.  And then they become a lot stranger
still.
     THE MATRIX is written and directed by brothers Andy and Larry
Wachowski who previously demonstrated that they could write and direct
a nice compact and tightly plotted thriller with BOUND.  There is,
sadly, little that is compact or tightly plotted about THE MATRIX.
This is a film just chock full of martial arts fights, shootouts, and
bomb explosions.  But the Wachowskis spend very little screen time
fleshing out their main characters or getting us to care too much what
happens to them.  We know they stand between the world and some really
nasty fate.  Presumably if they lose, the people in the audience lose
also.  But that is not the same thing as making us really care if these
people live or die. Keanu Reeves sees to be is a sort of stupor through
much of the film.  That is not unrealistic considering the
circumstances but it certainly kills his empathy value.  The characters
get themselves in and out of danger without ever creating dramatic
tension.
     Somehow in BOUND the Wachowski Brothers did a much better job of
getting the audience to identify with their primary characters.
Unfortunately, the two brothers were far more concerned about the look
of the film than about making the audience empathize with Trinity or
Neo or even Morpheus.  This film shows the main characters getting lots
of action, having lots of fights, but never giving us any reason to
care who wins and who loses those fights.
     The exquisite look of the film, frequently variations in visual
themes of blacks and reds, is created by cinematographer Bill Pope, who
previously filmed DARKMAN, ARMY OF DARKNESS, CLUELESS, and BOUND.
Perhaps part of Pope's inspiration was the noir-ish world of DARK CITY.
His photography nicely shows off the stunts and martial arts work of
Hong Kong director Wu-ping Yuen, here just a stunt coordinator and a
martial arts instructor. But all too often Yuen seems to be soaking up
screen time.  It seems a pity that this film has such an audacious
concept and ends up with so many fights that could have been taken from
any simple police procedural plot.  It is a little insulting to the
audience to present some of the more interesting ideas and then to
treat them on such a superficial level, almost as if the script did not
realize how good its own ideas were.  THE MATRIX could have done so
much more to engage the intellect and not simply a gut reaction.
     When there was so much potential for an intelligent story here the
Wachowski Brothers have opted to spend most of their screen time on
mindless action.  This is a good martial arts film and action film in a
world already overflowing with martial arts and action films.  It
should please the vast bulk of the audience who want to see it Friday
night, have a good time, and have forgotten about it by Saturday
morning.  Those who would want an intelligent and thoughtful piece of
science fiction will be more tantalized and frustrated than gratified.
I rate THE MATRIX a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros.
 Director:  Andy Wachowski, Larry Wachowski
 Writer:  Andy Wachowski, Larry Wachowski
 Cast: Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne
Moss, Joe Pantoliano, Hugo Weaving, 
  From the looks of the promotional posters that Warner Bros.
has scattered around town, you'd get the impression that
"The Matrix" is targeted to teens.  Perhaps only the recent
constituents of the comic book generation will make sense of
the plot.  There on the billboard are Keanu Reeves, looking
his usual wooden self, backed up by the marvelously
articulate Laurence Fishburne and the leather-clad Carrie-
Anne Moss--whom you'd not mistake for the 1950s Debbie
Reynolds.  They're wearing shades and leather and they
mean business.  If you're an adult patron with a consulting
contract with some teens, you'll get quite a bit of amusement
from the 135-minute movie and should find particular delight
in the design and special effects.  Like Roger Ebert's favorite
of 1998, "Dark City," this one dazzles the eye, overwhelms
the ear, and even challenges the intellect, as it strikingly
merges the conventions of the Woo-style kung fu, comic book
expressionism, computer games, MTV, and some clever
storytelling ideas.  Like "From Dusk Till Dawn," however, the
movie rocks during its first-half exposition and all but goes
down the sewer in the formulaic action-adventure, shoot-'em-
up culmination that resolves the adventure as though its
designers had to emulate a Fourth-of-July fireworks finale.
   The picture is directed by Andy and Larry Wachowksi--who
ignited the screen with their steamy, stylishly violent lesbian
caper "Bound."  "The Matrix" is propelled by a fascinating-
enough concept--which it fails to develop to an appropriate
resolution.  A small group of techno-geeks discover that the
world as we know it does not exist.  Morpheus (Laurence
Fishburne) and Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss) recruit a software
designer/computer hacker, Neo (Keanu Reeves), to splinter a
group of so-called Agents who are holding the entire
population in slavery--except that we only dimly comprehend
that we're vassals.  The folks on the planet Earth go about
their dull jobs every day as though there were no alternative
and take their conventional two-week vacations each year as
though no greater pleasures could be had.  We don't know
what the Agents get out of their domination of the world--a
serious flaw not found in the superior "Dark City" (in which
the Strangers wanted to study humankind to learn how to
adapt).  We do know that they serve as the manipulators in a
vast computer program that keeps earthlings functioning in a
world that exist only virtually.
   In short Neo, Morpheus, Trinity and their colleagues must
fight against Agent Smith (Hugo Weaving), his two partners,
with whatever technology they can muster.  While Neo
reclines in his chair wrapped in a mask to experience the
world of 2199, he sees himself struggling against Smith.  But
he's not watching a movie.  Since the body cannot survive
without the mind, Neo is no couch potato with a mask but is a
man in real danger.
   The battles include the best action scenes in the movie: a
training session pitting Neo against Morpheus in some
amusing kung fu wizardry that would be the envy of Jackie
Chan, as Neo learns to run up and down the walls
horizontally; and a diverting bit of techno-miracle that sees a
computer programmer virtually create an arsenal of weaponry
for Neo to use in the final shootout with the forces of
darkness.
   To underscore the seriousness of this Armageddon, the
Wachowski brothers cite a host of mythic references.  In one
case an Oracle--played as a down-home, cookie-baking
Gloria Foster--is brought in to predict the outcome of a battle
and to decide whether Neo is the world's messiah.  On the
whole, you could easily get the impression that if Plato's
"Allegory of the Cave" were a movie, this would be its sequel. 
The people of the world must be brought out of the darkness
of false images and into the light of truth and reality.
   My choice sci-fi movies are generous with intellectual
concepts and relatively bereft of swollen battle scenes. 
"Fahrenheit 451," my favorite of the genre, comes to mind: a
fable that nicked the influence of TV years before "The
Truman Show" and "EDtv" were on anyone's mind.  Its
conclusion eschewed a physically violent struggle between
good and evil in which the latter seemed unable to hit the
side of a barn with a plethora of firepower.  The story closed
simply, in a manner that would please Thoreau, as a group of
people in a modern Eden commit books to memory.  Books. 
If "The Matrix" allowed the f/x guys to take more breaks and
worked the storytellers harder, "The Matrix" would have been
transcendent.

Author
Homer Yen
In some of the trailers, we hear that `the matrix is something that has
to be seen to be understood.'  And, I think that I will have to preface
this review by making this same statement.  Indeed, `The Matrix'
introduces so many clever ideas, that this science fiction thriller
deserves to be seen and not just read in a review. 
You will not read any spoilers herein.  `The Matrix' of the movie is
some kind of entity that exists among us, but neither you nor I know
that it actually exists.  We just go about our daily business,
oblivious to it because `the wool has been pulled over our eyes.'  But
its purpose is heinous in nature and its destruction is something that
is seen as vital.  Only a few key people know the truth.  Those who do
face eradication by the Matrix and its loyal secret-service-like
enforcers, known as Agents'.  These few key people include the
patriarchal leader, Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne) and warrior princess
Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss).  Morpheus has been on a life-long quest to
find that one person who possesses the special ability to see through
the facade, understand the secret of the Matrix, and make things right.
 And he believes that he has finally found him in Neo (Keanu Reeves). 
The movie spends much of its time developing this premise.  Neo is
eventually convinced that what Morpheus has to say about the Matrix,
despite its hard-to-swallow absurdity and horrific ramifications, is
the truth, and he agrees to join.
Once this happens, the movie moves into high hear.  In order to prepare
Neo for what's out there, he is introduced to various training
programs.  Once such benefit is his teachings of the martial arts,
which creates opportunities for some very well-choreographed
hand-to-hand sequences.  Along with superb combat skills, he must also
develop his mind in an effort to be able to see the Matrix for what it
is.  Admittedly, I wasn't totally convinced at how he finally arrives
at that point, but getting there is terrific fun.  I hesitate to go
into more detail because the trailers don't give away any of the
secrets or the really good stuff of the film.  But I can say that the
best of science fiction isn't the power of the laser guns, the array of
wild humanoid creatures, or epic battles among spacecraft.  Rather,
they are the stories that give us a peek into our own humanity.  In
this case, as we are fast approaching a time when the line between
reality and simulation becomes increasingly blurred, the movie explores
the implications attached to making choices between what is real and
our fantasies.  But there is a fundamental question that the film never
answers.  What will happen next when everyone finally learns the truth?
 It's hard to imagine the answer despite the amount of imagination that
is present in this film.
Nonetheless, it's evident that a lot of thought went into the
progression of the movie and it's various sequences.  I really liked
the look and feel of this film.  It's atmosphere and enigmatic
characters (such as the Oracle and the chief Agent) suggested a world
with dark secrets.  The film is a dazzling feast of visuals and the
action sequences are terrific, especially one featuring a helicopter
rescue.  Even at 135 minutes in length, the energy of the film never
diminishes.  `The Matrix' doesn't give you all the answers, but it's a
pure adrenaline rush learning what you can.


Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by Andy Wachowski & Larry Wachowski
Starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburn, Carrie-Anne Moss, Joe Pantoliano,
Hugo Weaving
    It's about damn time.  The last truly great action film I saw on video
was John Woo's Hard-Boiled.  The last one in theaters Woo's Face\Off.  Sure,
there have been ones in between here and there that I enjoyed, but nothing
that stunned me as completely as did The Matrix.
     No film, including Face\Off and Hard-Boiled has contained such a
complete mastery over all aspects of proper action filmmaking:
well-choreographed shoot-outs, fight scenes.   Hair-raising tension,
psychological and physical.  Special F\Xs that are sure to at least be
nominated for the 1999 Best Visual Effects Academy Award (although they will
definitely end up going to Star Wars: The Phantom Menace).  A plot that's...
wait a second... plot's not supposed to be part of an action movie?
     But, in The Matrix, it is.  A formula is not employed per se.  What is
actually employed is dozens of formulas, a hybrid that becomes so original
on the merit of combining things never combined before.
     The Matrix is a marriage of science-fiction, kung-fu, and shoot-em-up,
much like 1997's Dark City was a marriage of science-fiction, film noir, and
mystery.  Perhaps it is best to describe the plot in similar terms.  Like
Dark City, The Matrix deals in false realties layered one over the other.
     As you may have heard, it focuses around a world where Artificial
Intelligence is the dominant life form.  We, in the words of the movie, are
equivalent to their Duracels.  We generate power and heat for them to run
on, and, as their paying us back in spades, we become part of a complex
virtual reality called The Matrix.  There, I've told you more than any other
critic will tell you, but only because that is the simple part of the story.
     Like many movies that the newborn production company Village Roadshow
peddles, its plot does sound so used and ludicrous that one would wonder how
it could possibly ever be good.  For those who have seen it, I will remind
them of Analyze This, from about two months ago, which has an equally used
plot and still ended up being a pretty good movie.
     The Matrix is the second film by brothers Andy & Larry Wachowski, who
previously released the overlooked crime thriller Bound, which, if you can
accept a few liberal aspects, is a wonderful yarn to rent.  It is to these
people that the acclaim should be sent.  Admittedly, Fishburn and Reeves
(who both had fairly disastrous encounters with science fiction in the form
of Event Horizon and Johnny Neumonic, respectively) give fine performances,
but the fraternal duo deserves most of the credit.  As they have adeptly
demonstrated, they have the golden touch.  They are able to turn rags to
riches, garbage to gold.  They have the lacking ingredient in the modern
director: an ability to actually tell a story that is enjoyable.
     Like they did with Bound, they littered the script with countless
references to items within the genre.  Bound, a crime film, did The
Godfather, Casino, and countless others.  The Matrix inserts references to
Virus, Dune, Terminator 2, Dark City, Blade Runner, Total Recall, and just
about every other sci-fi film, cult or popular.  It is my personal belief,
perhaps biased by respect for the authors of this film, that they have done
this as a way of saying: hey, we have a story to tell, so listen and we'll
entertain.
     The Wachowskis prove themselves once again as excellent storytellers:
masters of the screen but very conscious of the audience's desire for some
pulp.  The Matrix, as is Bound, is both great story and great pulp.   To
screw around with the slogan of Nike: Just See It.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
Trinity, an outlaw, attempts to evade capture by a group of mysterious
darksuited agents, a chase that involves progressively more implausible
stunts.  Meanwhile Neo, a hacker who is searching the network for an
enigmatic figure called Morpheus, is warned of his impending arrest.
Things get more complicated from this point on ...
"It's like totally virtual reality dude!"
It seems unlikely that an overdue entry to the big idea SF genre would
involve Keanu Reeves, who is still wanted in 20 countries for crimes
committed during "Bram Stoker's Dracula" and the wretched "Johnny
Mnemonic".  But even given the presence of the gnarly one, "The Matrix" has
a promising pedigree, including the Wachowski brothers (former comic book
artists who contributed the deft script to "Assassins" and directed the
excellent film-noir "Bound") and a top notch Hong Kong stunt & action
choreography crew.  It's a winner alright but what sort of one?  As is
always the case with movies that contain twists, this review must talk
around the surprises and be somewhat cryptic and brief.
Many others have sung the praises of "The Matrix" and I am not inclined to
disagree in any major way.  There's some kinetically absurd action that Jet
Li or John Woo would be proud of, some handy plot twists and turns, lovely
SFX, and good acting.  (With the exception of Keanu "cigarstore indian"
Reeves, who at least doesn't hurt the film.  Actually his essential
blandness is strangely appropriate.)  There's a literate substructure, a
nice joke or two, snappy clothes and hardware - there's a lot to love.  And
the film carves its own path in many ways.  Some plot developments are
never explicitly spelt out and the scenario is an uncommonly nihilistic one
for a Hollywood film.  And to partly repeat a previous point, Hong Kong
acrobatics are long overdue in mainstream cinema.  "The Matrix" is _the_
popcorn, brain-filler movie for the season.
Is there anything wrong with "The Matrix"?  Although you wouldn't think it
from general reactions, there is.  It's terrific fun, but falls short of
the film it nearly is.  The intellectual content isn't so much explored as
just dumped in front of you.  It doesn't have the mazelike complexities of
"Bladerunner" or even for that matter "Total Recall".  The implications of
the scenario are never explored, which is possibly just as well, for like
many comic books worlds it doesn't hold up to much examination.  The
inevitable talk of a sequel points how high on detail and low on
implication the world is.
Conversely, one might get the impression from promotional material that
"The Matrix" was a nonstop actionfest.  Actually the first half is packed
to the gunwales with talking heads and exposition.  It's to the credit of
the Wachowski brothers that "The Matrix" survives and thrives on this
schizophrenic nature, managing to be both a dumb action flick and a
thinker.  Again, Keanu is oddly appropriate, having been in both "Speed"
and "Little Buddha".  His character is actually problematic, a saviour who
is never explained, does nothing to earn his superiority, and conveniently
gets his act together just in time to end the film.  In this way, "The
Matrix" echoes "Dark City", a film to which it bears an uncanny
resemblance.
These problems aside, "The Matrix" is terrific and a hopeful sign that some
classic SF may be on the way over the next few years.  It isn't a great
film, it isn't a mindblower, but it is great fun.  Don't miss it.
[***/good] and really partying like it was 1999 on the Sid and Nancy
 scale.
"The Matrix"
Released 1999.
Directed by Andy & Larry Wachowski.
Starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving
--
Paul-Michael Agapow (p.agapow@ic.ac.uk), Biology, Imperial College
"We were too young, we lived too fast and had too much technology ..."

Author
M. Pierce
  In a dark hotel room, a women sits in front of a computer.  Cops bust through
the door, telling her to freeze and put her hands up in the air.  Down stairs,
a couple of mysterious FBI-type men, later known as Agents, tell the captain of
the police force that his men are already dead, that the women has most likely
escaped.
  How is this possible?  As we watch the first spellbinding minutes of The
Matrix, we are drawn into a masterfully created work of brilliance, a film so
absorbing and exciting, it is nevertheless an instant classic.  One of the true
great science fiction films ever to unfold on the silver screen.  I would rank
it right up on the list with Star Trek: First Contact, The X-Files motion
picture, and Andrei Tarkovski's Solaris.
  I hate to write long, drawn-out reviews, especially of films I really like,
so, for The Matrix, all I will say is See This Movie Before It Escapes The
Cineplexes!  Not only are the special effects truly amazing, the action
breathtaking, and the acting wonderful, the plot is a brilliant story, so well
thoughtout, so eluded with creativity, it simply is a state of movie magic,
"cinematic gold."

Author
David E. Smith
"The Matrix" (1999) - Lawrence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Keanu
Reeves...
        "Cyberpunk" is a young literary genre, but one intriguing enough
that Southeast already has a class devoted to its study. Dominated by
writers like William Gibson ("Mona Lisa Overdrive," "Neuromancer") and
Neal Stephenson ("Snow Crash," "Cryptonomicon"), cyberpunk fiction tends
to focus on a dark, gritty near-future setting where attitude and high
technology reign.
"The Matrix" is one of very few films that would fall into the
cyberpunk genre - the only other in recent memory is "Johnny Mnemonic"
(which, coincidentally, also stars Keanu Reeves). To fans of the genre,
"The Matrix" will likely seem a bit derivative, but the rest of us will
discover a action-packed film with a gripping story and some of the most
awe-inspiring visual effects since "Dark City."
Our hero is, naturally, a computer programmer. By day Thomas
Anderson (Keanu Reeves) works in a Dilbert-style dystopia, but by night
he's Neo, computer criminal. For the most part, his life is quiet and
lonely, uninspiring, the kind of cubicle Hell most of us have nightmares
about. He sits in his apartment most of the time, a bank of computers his
only friends, selling computer data like drugs.
Enter Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne), THE legendary hacker.
Morpheus offers Neo an answer to the one question even he can't fathom -
"What is the Matrix?" As it turns out, the Matrix is the ultimate
computer, the ultimate virtual-reality device, and the ultimate hack, all
rolled into one.
Explaining too much more would give away the plot, which would be
a shame since the rest of this review will be dedicated to convincing you
to see this movie.
So Keanu Reeves can't act. Many of his lines are delivered with
all the conviction of a cup of coffee. So what? The other actors
(Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving, Joe Pantoliano) don't do too
much better, but they get the point across. The real stars of "The Matrix"
are the story and the effects.
The story was written by Andy and Larry Wachowski ("Bound"), who
have turned out a splendid sophomore effort. "The Matrix" and its
McGuffin, the Matrix, has just enough twists to keep you off-balance, but
not so many as to make you dizzy.
That's the role of the camera and the special-effects team. Some
shots will, in fact, make you dizzy, but that's exactly the point. And the
visuals are uniformly stunning - you've seen the commercials, where
characters dodge bullets by making time seem to stop around them, but
those are actually some of the film's less impressive effects. All the
best parts are reserved for the theatre. The action sequences are
similarly stunning.
So, what IS the Matrix? That, gentle reader, would be telling. But
if you go see "The Matrix" you'll find out, and you won't be disappointed.
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Our collective existential/millennial/Y2K-bug angst now has been
channelled officially into one cinematic premise:  the line between
reality and virtual reality is growing too thin for comfort, and
cyberspace is intruding on our personal space.  No fewer than three 1999
releases are set to spook us with our infatuation with jacked-in
sensation:  eXistenZ, THE THIRTEENTH FLOOR, and the first entry, THE
MATRIX.  Though the marketing campaign (and official web site) teases us
with the cryptic question "what is The Matrix?", it wouldn't be giving
anything away to say that it's something you'll be seeing a lot of over
the next few months.
     We'll all be fortunate if what we see is as kinetically entertaining
as THE MATRIX.  The story begins as mild-mannered software engineer Thomas
Anderson (Keanu Reeves) -- alias hacker-for-hire Neo -- begins to suspect
that something is strange in his world.  He has been contacted by a
mysterious woman named Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss) on behalf of infamous
hacker Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne), and has become the target of shadowy
agents led by Agent Smith (Hugo Weaving).  His very concept of reality
bending around him, Neo meets with Morpheus to learn an astonishing truth:
nothing in his experience is what it appears to be, and Neo himself may be
the key to saving all humanity.
     If that description seems a bit coy, it's only because part of the
fun in the first half of THE MATRIX is allowing its bizarre cosmology to
unfold.  On the surface it bears a resemblance to 1998's psycho-dystopia
DARK CITY, but writer/directors Andy and Larry Wachowski (BOUND) avoid the
murky pretentiousness that turned DARK CITY into art direction in search
of a movie.  Though there's plenty of exposition required to explain
what's going on in THE MATRIX, the Wachowskis manage to do it with a wink
and a smile, investing the expository segments with wit and imagination.
The film's first hour is somewhat slow going, yet even while waiting for
it to gain momentum there's a certain confidence that it will.
     And boy, does it ever.  The action sequences in THE MATRIX are some
of the best in a long time, combining wicked visual effects (familiar to
those who've seen any Gap commercials lately) with creative choreography.
Fully aware that they're dealing physics of their own invention, the
Wachowskis let loose with both barrels, sending THE MATRIX over-the-top
and into the realm of video game excess.  Amazingly, it almost never feels
like a video-game movie, thanks mostly to the Wachowskis' sure-handed
pacing but also to some ingenious casting.  They take advantage of Keanu
Reeves for all the pretty-boy befuddlement he's worth, even having some
fun with his less-than-brilliant image; Hugo Weaving's clinically
enunciated diction helps turn Agent Smith into a perfect icy antagonist.
THE MATRIX is a blast, but it's never a dumb blast.  Where else would you
find a hero adding "Drunken Boxing" to his fighting repertoire?
     There are plenty of places where it feels like THE MATRIX could have
been tidied up a bit -- a lengthy chase here, a pointless romantic angle
there, a conversation about why everything tastes like chicken over there
-- to bring the running time down below two hours.  It's the kind of movie
that will turn off plenty of viewers, either because of its violence, its
convoluted story or its pokiness in getting to the good stuff.  Others
will see THE MATRIX as the kind of film that makes use of action and
special effects instead of being used by them, the kind of film that takes
that extra moment to turn its big showdown into a classic spaghetti
Western confrontation.  If virtual reality is the flavor of the month,
plug me in to something like THE MATRIX, and give me a world where the
adventure is worth two hours of my time.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Has there been a halfway decent science-fiction picture beyond the 
spectacular "Dark City" in the last ten years? The mind boggles. In one 
word: no. And the senseless, monotonous "The Matrix" will hardly qualify 
as anything but pure visual candy, yet the candy will rot rather than 
cleanse your cinematic spirits.
In an unsuccessful attempt to make us forget "Johnny Mnemonic," 
Keanu Reeves plays yet another emotionless, stone-faced cyber hacker 
nerd named Neo who sells illegal jack devices for virtual reality games. 
It turns out that Neo is living in a world that is a virtual reality 
game itself, an artificially created environment designed by aliens in 
Reservoir Dogs suits, otherwise known as The Matrix. The Matrix designed 
this world to learn about...human nature? What makes us tick? Who knows, 
yet a group of leather-jacketed freedom fighters with superhuman 
computer powers (and sunglasses) intend to fight the aliens and prevent 
more humans from being...programmed? They are Morpheus (Laurence 
Fishburne) and the attractive, interesting Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss), 
along with the aptly named Cypher (bald-headed Joe Pantoliano). Later, 
it appears that Neo is in fact the Matrix...or so we would think. Yes, 
in typical sci-fi glory, the Matrix will restore the world to what it 
was before becoming a live-action computer game. 
I admire directors like David Lynch who take us into Byzantine 
labyrinths - endless mazes with circular loops that ask us to make our 
own interpretations. But "The Matrix" is not that film. The movie simply 
has an idea - the Matrix - but no story or fleshed-out characters worth 
caring about. The idea simply sits there while we watch fantastic 
special-effects fill every inch of the screen. There are some beautiful 
slow-motion shots of guns firing and bullet casings grazing every inch 
of concrete on building rooftops - a keen reminder of John Woo's wild 
comic-book pyrotechnics. I also enjoyed watching the flips in the air 
and the frozen movements suddenly turning back into motion. If "The 
Matrix" were simply a financial ploy for an incredible, imaginative sci-
fi picture, I would have said that I loved it. But the movie is an 
exercise in pyrotechnics, nothing more.
Instead of some intelligent dialogue and imaginative story 
structure dealing with the mysteries of virtual reality and real life, 
the movie opts for straightforward action, predictable, formulaic 
thriller elements, and bland characters. Keanu Reeves can't even smile 
or wink, much less emote any expression (What happened to this actor?). 
Fishburne, one of the most distinctive actors on the silver screen, 
mostly stands around and utters epiphanies about the state of the world. 
The one actor who stands out is Carrie-Anne Moss, who turns from a full-
fledged kung-fu expert to a simple girlfriend for the seemingly 
indifferent Neo. What a sham!
"The Matrix" simply recycles elements from "Dark City," "Strange 
Days," and every other tired sci-fi thriller in the last year or so 
without investing any interest outside tentacled spider robots and kung-
fu fights. If this is the state of the genre now, what can we expect in 
a decade? 

Author
Mr Q. Z. Diablo
EXPLANATORY NOTE:  Mr Q. Z. Diablo would like to apologise in advance to
The Phantom for the tone of this review.  The Phantom reviewed horror
films from about 1989 until about 1993 in this forum
(rec.arts.movies.reviews).  Mr Diablo has derived more pleasure from The
Phantom's film reviews than those of any other reviewer, either in
cyberspace or on paper, amateur or professional.  He hopes that The
Phantom will regard this review as a homage rather than a cynical
attempt to ape the style of another for some kind of perverse personal gain.
It was an inclement Sunday night when Mr Diablo dragged a reluctant
bandmate to view THE MATRIX.  The local multiplex is not necessarily Mr
Diablo's preferred haunt but the sheer power of hype was to be reckoned
with.  Unlike The Phantom, Mr Diablo actually prefers art-house cinemas
with their coffee and black-clad patrons discussing possibly mediocre
films in an oh-so-serious manner (readers should refer to the
explanatory note and search in IMDB or DejaNews if this reference
escapes them).  The plan was initially to go to the 6pm screening but
distractions of a musical kind caused attendance to be delayed until the
9pm show.  The assumption that the late screening time on a Sunday would
dissuade Joe and Josephine average from venturing out to the cinema was
horribly mistaken.  They were out in their droves and Mr Diablo was to
be found muttering obscenities sotto voce while staring in dismay at the
lengthy queue, which stretched almost from the ticket office almost to
the amusement arcade opposite.  It seemed that Sunday night's treat was
to be abandoned.  Somehow he obtained a ticket and his response to the
cinematic entertainment purchased for the princely sum of $10 is the
subject of the next few paragraphs.
THE MATRIX is a not so much a genre film as a genres film and yet
somehow avoids being generic.  It simply bristles with ideas, albeit
mostly other people's (just like this review, the author hopes). 
Loosely speaking, the genre can be classified as science fiction which
runs a distant second to Mr Diablo's preferred horror films, of which
there has recently been a sad lack in either mainstream or art-house
release, the abysmal URBAN LEGEND and I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST
SUMMER notwithstanding.  As SF goes, THE MATRIX is a rather seductive
excursion into cyberpunk which possesses all the usual accoutrements of
the stable.  There are hackers, evil government agents, gunplay, urban
sprawl, dim lighting and a healthy dose of virtual reality.  In short;
everything a growing boy or girl needs for a satisfying night's
entertainment - in theory.  It also boasts a more than healthy dose of
eye wear, and Mr Diablo will attempt to refrain from obsessing about it
in the course of this review; an attempt that is probably doomed to failure.
Mr Diablo will attempt to outline as much of the plot as possible
without revealing details which will blunt the film's appeal.  It
concerns a young man (the irritatingly wooden Keanu Reeves, replete with
pudding-bowl haircut and Eastwood-esque squint) who works for a large
software company by day and operates as a hacker with the prophetic nom
de plume Neo in his spare time.  It seems that Neo has been a less than
well-behaved cyber-citizen as the merciless hounds of the law have taken
a particular interest in him.  Fortunately, an unknown organisation has
taken an interest in Neo's welfare and, while these unknown people seem
to be able to bend reality in uncomfortable ways, the alternatives to
throwing his lot in with them seem rather dire.  They are fighting a
construction called The Matrix which seems to be somehow woven in with
reality in some kind of sinister fashion.  When the nature of The Matrix
is revealed, all hell breaks loose as Neo and his new-found companions
battle the evil forces which have set it in place.
The last part of the plot synopsis is, as far as Mr Diablo can make out,
the chief flaw in the film.  Director/writers Larry and Andy Wachowski
(whose previous film, BOUND, escaped Mr Diablo's notice) have penned a
script whose exposition is absolutely enthralling but the lack of any
real plot means that the film begins broadcasting its structural defects
as soon as the protagonists' circumstances have been explained.  This
left Mr Diablo with action and computer generated effects in abundance
which appeared to be imposed upon the films central ideas rather then to
grow out of them.  As a result, he was left feeling a little ambivalent
about the action set pieces which populated the last forty minutes of
the outing.  He was also left wondering why anyone would squint as
constantly as Mr Reeves in such dimly lit locations, let alone why so
many people were insistent upon wearing sunglasses indoors in
semi-darkness.  He assumes that sporting sunglasses in tenebrous locales
represents some kind of cyber-chic that has heretofore eluded him. 
Perhaps someone had been listening to too much 80s music when the
costume design was being finalised.
Characterisations are somewhat less complete than one would hope for in
a cyberpunk outing, with most characters trying desperately to expand
from one to two dimensions.  Mr Diablo regards this as something of a
pity, as cyberpunk in written form has tended to produce extremely
complex characters and interpersonal interactions.  The good guys are
essentially the stereotypes presented to us in the STAR WARS trilogy. 
We have Luke (Reeves), Leia (the rather visually appealing Carrie-Anne
Moss as Trinity), a Han Solo and an Obi-Wan (Morpheus, guru-ed in fine
style by Laurence Fishburne).  The remaining good guys are, of course,
cannon-fodder apart from the addition of a traitor, whose demise occurs
altogether too early for Mr Diablo's taste, despite an irritating
performance straight out of the worst of the crop of action films that
arose, unbidden, throughout the 80s.  His scenery munching and
eye-rolling seems so much out of place that he broadcasts himself as the
rat almost as soon as he is introduced.
The action sequences are well-realised and exciting.  Mr Diablo has read
some reviews which have referenced Hong Kong action cinema as a
jumping-off point (so to speak) and he was pleased to observe a large
amount of Wing Chun Kung Fu amongst the variegated bare-hands fighting
styles on display.  Action sequences, therefore, tend towards the
choreographed which adds to the style-over-content feel that seems to
dominate the film.  Special effects are variable with computer generated
imagery veering between the well-integrated and the cheesily tacked-on. 
Some of the make-up effects have a high ick-factor and the various
mechanical contrivances seem to have been designed solely to take
advantage of our aversion to all things arachnid, insectiod and
cephalopod.  The soundtrack is often delightful, featuring very
contemporary electronic music that undercuts the action very effectively
indeed.  Readers should think Propellerheads (whose "Bang On" is used in
one of the better action sequences) and they've got the, erm, picture.
As concerns the borrowing of ideas that has been referred to, Mr Diablo
observed pieces of THE TERMINATOR, GHOST IN THE SHELL, HACKERS and the
awful THE LAWNMOWER MAN, grated and melted together to produce a
fondue-ish plot and themes.  Throw in the STAR WARS trilogy for
characterisation and mythic feel and add, when the mixture begins to
bubble, a dash of Terry Gilliam's wonderful TWELVE MONKEYS for that
little bit of post-apocalyptic flavour.  Other borrowings are present
but Mr Diablo would prefer not to try to remember all of them, both for
the sake of space (brevity not being his best attribute, in any case)
and because the hour grows late as he types this magnum opus.  In any
case, there are enough of them to keep train-spotting viewers
entertained almost as much as the film itself.
The basic premise of the film is almost reasonable but some considerable
suspension of disbelief is required to let the many inconsistencies in
plot devices go unheeded.  The very nature of The Matrix is such that Mr
Diablo fails to understand how the good guys cannot immediately be wiped
out at the whim of the evil forces at work.  He can't explain this in
any detail without revealing too much about the film's resolution but he
hopes that even the dimmest in the audience worked it out after the
first forty five minutes.  The only thing that Mr Diablo couldn't work
out was why the hell Mr Reeves didn't don a pair of sunglasses
substantially earlier to ameliorate his need to squint.  There was a
strong feeling that he'd blend in better with the rest of the cast as
well as avoiding strain on his vestigial acting muscles induced by
attempting to express emotions by adopting various facial casts.
Readers of this review should not labour under the misapprehension that
Mr Diablo thought that THE MATRIX was a bad film.  Far from it; despite
the unabashed borrowing of other films and styles, THE MATRIX has an
awful lot going for it.  The camera work consists of that mix of the
static and the mobile that Mr Diablo finds appealing  He regards any
film that gives him unpleasant flashbacks to INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE
as overdone in this department and was pleased that no such unpleasant,
dizzy, pop-music-video sensation was engendered during THE MATRIX.  The
vilification of a certain software giant (intentional or otherwise - Mr
Diablo hopes that the former is true as this would add a certain mordant
symbolism to the goings-on) is welcome, as is the epic father-figure
theme that underpins the sometimes empty action.
Mr Diablo enjoyed himself almost thoroughly for a couple of hours and
this is all that can really be asked, even though there was the constant
nagging question of WHY DOESN'T MR REEVES PUT ON SOME #$%&ING
SUNGLASSES.  He will refrain from awarding marks out of ten, a letter
grade or an arbitrary number of stars in deference to The Phantom, whose
work inspired him to pen this prose.  THE MATRIX is far from flawless
but will serve as a stop-gap until THE CUBE or a piece of respectable
horror cinema comes to town, whichever occurs first.

Author
Greg King
Great special effects, shame about the story!  
The Matrix boasts some of the most impressive and complex
computer generated special effects sequences of any movie.  However,
the barrage of effects and visual imagination cannot distract from the
fundamental lack of a clear narrative - even a week later I was still
scratching my head trying to puzzle it out.  At first I thought it was
because I saw The Matrix at 10.00 am on a Saturday morning, and I was
still slightly hung-over from the night before.  Then I realised that
my sore head was not the problem - it is the film itself that has some
serious problems.
Film making siblings Andy and Larry Wachowski have an
idiosyncratic style that was used to great effect in the gritty, tough
independent thriller Bound.  However, working with a large budget and
the latest in computer generated technology seems to have overwhelmed
them a little.  Filmed at the new Fox studio complex in Sydney, The
Matrix is a film of style and great ambition, but very little
substance.  All the money seems to have been lavished on the visual
effects, with little thought given to the actual plot that holds it
together.  It pales when compared to the recent Dark City, another big
budget, special effects driven sci-fi thriller shot in Sydney using
Hollywood know-how, money and stars.
The Matrix is set in a not too distant future, where the world
is seemingly controlled by computers.  Morpheus (played in grim and
humourless fashion by Laurence Fishburne) is the head of an army
battling to save the world from the domination of the computers.  They
can transport themselves between their bleak future world and our
present through a series of special telephones located throughout the
city.  Their nemesis are sinister men in black suits, led by the
enigmatic Mr Smith (Hugo Weaving, complete with glaringly phoney
American accent).  These characters are able to assume other
identities and are seemingly invincible.  Weaving seems to be enjoying
himself immensely here, and his performance at least seems to capture
the spirit of the film.
Keanu Reeves returns to action hero mode as Neo, a computer
hacker reluctantly drawn into this battle for the future of the world.
Reeve's sudden transformation from computer nerd into
Schwarzenegger-like action hero is not credible for an instant, and
this mish-mash unfortunately recalls his disastrous Johnny Mnemonic.
The Matrix ultimately seems jigged together using elements
from a number of other sci-fi thrillers, and if you take the time you
could probably identify all of the influences.  The very busy plot
throws together martial arts, slow motion shoot-outs, teleportation,
nasty alien creatures, sinister men in black, people leaping between
city skyscrapers, and frantic chases through the streets of some dark,
sinister city.  Ultimately, the disappointing lack of any intelligible
plot or genuine emotions will prove too alienating for audiences.
"No-one can tell you what the matrix is," declares the tag
line for the film.  I somehow suspect that includes even the writers,
directors and most of the crew.

Author
Walter Frith
The third season of my favourite television series, 'The X-Files', has an
episode entitled Jose Chung's 'From Outer Space'.  Studying the title for
the first time and making a quick judgment of that episode would lead you to
believe that a man named Jose descends from outer space.  Upon further
review and seeing the episode, we learn that it is actually the title of a
book that he's writing.  So like: Stephen King's 'The Shining', we have Jose
Chung's 'From Outer Space'.  A cleverly written episode of 'The X-Files' by
the series' most bizarre and imaginative individual, Darin Morgan.  The
episode Jose Chung's 'From Outer Space' was about perception and how we
distinguish or how we may not be able to distinguish the real from the
unreal.  A girl was supposedly abducted by aliens but later we learn it may
have been the military using alien technology to distort her perception of
exactly what happened.  Later, Agent Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) meets a
military pilot at a diner who doesn't know if the things around him are real
or a distortion.  The episode even throws in a humourous jab at it all by
portraying a man in black (Jesse Ventura) as a great philosopher who gives a
sermon on how
human perception is not quite understood by Earthly scientists but that
somehow people declare that "Seeing is believing".  What's the point of all
this you ask?  To illustrate that 'The Matrix' is a similar type of story
with a more complex and serious tone that has no humour which in this case
is a bad thing.
Keanu Reeves stars as Thomas Anderson, a computer hacker who works for a
large and influential software company who makes a fortune in side projects
by pirating and selling high tech information.  His cyber name is Neo and
he's recruited by a renegade band of cybernetic crusaders whose leader,
Morpheus, (Laurence Fishburne) believes that Neo is the chosen one.
Morpheus' right hand girl is Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss).  Morpheus tells Neo
that the people of the Earth are slaves and that the world is only a quality
of imagination and that it doesn't really exist.  He explains that people
rely too much on machines in their everyday lives and that today's Earth is
sort of like a virtual reality.  It was created by an outside force designed
to enslave humans.  It's THE MATRIX, but it can't be explained.  It has to
be experienced to be understood.  Morpheus compares the matrix to a dream
where it feels so real but it isn't so, and only those who have the dream
know how it is perceived.  Morpheus believes that Neo is the one who can
break it all up and save mankind and restore a sense of belonging and
happiness that human beings should experience everyday of their lives.  Sort
of like the John Connor character in 'The Terminator' saga who is the chosen
one to save mankind.  You can't have a movie like this without villains
trying to stop you.  They come in the form of artificial intelligence,
dressed in black suits with earpieces for communication, like secret service
agents and wearing dark sunglasses a.k.a. 'Men in Black'.
It's disappointing that I can't quite recommend 'The Matrix' for several
reasons.  Just when the film is getting really cranked  up for a grand
climax, they resort to formula (it was produced by Joel Silver) and the
climax is handled in a giant shoot out where the bad guys can't kill the
good guys no matter how many bullets they have.  It's almost as if a great
script had been written but the authors had writer's block going into the
final stages of its draft.  Maybe there was a different ending in mind.  I
like to think that the creative energy was there but that it was a studio
imposed ending with the ultimate decision on how to resolve things left up
to the suits instead of the artists.
It would be unfair to overlook the film's many virtues such as the
performances.  There is an intellectual and profound style of personality
executed very well by Laurence Fishburne, and Keanu Reeves is almost grown
up in his best performance since 'Speed' but he still can't make you forget
about his Bill and Ted days which will probably follow him throughout his
career.
Further hindering 'The Matrix' are too many references to other films in the
science fiction genre.  Obvious comparisons to other films this one makes
are to 'Total Recall', 'The Terminator' series, 'Invasion of the Body
Snatchers' and ironically, another Keanu Reeves movie entitled 'Johnny
Mnemonic' which was indefensible trash.  Many film makers, like Quentin
Tarantino, know how to draw on the past and take things from other movies in
order to make their own without making it look obvious.  'The Matrix' does
not do this.
The film is written and directed by the Wachowski Brothers, Andy and Larry
who made many 10 best lists in 1996 with 'Bound'.  As 'The Matrix' is their
sophmore effort, it fails like many others who come up with an encore for
previously praised work.  All you can do is re-group and hope that your next
film is a winner.  They just missed the mark here.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Murali Krishnan
Neo (Keanu Reeves) is a computer hacker. He is talented, but he has a
general disrespect for authority. He is contacted by Trinity (Carrie-Anne
Moss), a mysterious fugitive who is connected to the infamous subversive,
Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne). It seems that Morpheus wants Neo to join his
movement. At the same time he is being tracked by the authorities who want
his help in capturing Morpheus. It is no surprise that he chooses to join
the outlaws, and in doing so, he begins a surreal adventure, very similar to
"Alice in Wonderland".
At the core of the story is the distinction between perception and reality.
This is a very profound subject, and although it is not plumbed very deeply,
it is a much more intelligent foundation than can usually be expected from a
large-budget, special effects based action film. What the human mind
perceives as "reality" is the result of the signals that the human brain
receives from the eyes, ears, etc. However, it is well known that during
dreaming and with no sensory input, the mind constructs a very real world,
complete in all detail, which is obviously not part of the physical
universe. It would have been nice to see an engaging exploration of this
profound subject, but much more than what is attempted would probably
detract from the film's appeal to the mass market.
The narrative of the story is quite engaging. From the opening scene, it is
unclear what exactly is going on. This is very effective because it places
the audience in the same frame of reference as Neo, and only when Neo
understands the true "reality", does it become understandable. The film
mostly attempts to be intelligent and is usually successful, but sometimes
it cannot construct a seamless premise. The situation in which the humans
are placed is explained but does not fully make sense. There are often
inconsistencies in the powers accorded to different characters. There is
also the serious question of why an entity that defines the rules would not
be thus omnipotent and impenetrable. However, these weaknesses are mitigated
by the fast pace of the film and the unravelling of the mysteries. The film
is not meant to be a serious exploration of its philosophical elements, but
rather it is intended as a thrill ride, and it is quite successful in that
regard.
The acting performance are mostly unremarkable, but that is due mainly to
the writing and is not the fault of the performers. Considerable effort is
given in creating the story, but the drawback is that the main characters
are not fully developed, and the side characters are mere stereotypes.
Although Reeves is competent in the lead role, his performance is mostly
wooden, sometimes comically so. When Morpheus uses the term "AI" in
discussion with Neo, Reeves blankly asks "You mean Artificial Intelligence?"
in such a dry, moribund way that one cannot believe he is trying to portray
a computer hacker. To his credit, he performs well in the action sequences,
even paying homage to Bruce Lee in a Kung Fu fight.
The film cannot claim to be completely original. It borrows generously from
"2001: A Space Odyssey", the "Planet of the Apes" series, and it even has
many similarities to the recent "Dark City." It uses stock antagonists, and
other standard characters. However, the success of the film is that it
combines its sources into a balanced and cohesive result. It shows
remarkable restraint by not relying exclusively on special effects or action
to dazzle the audience at the expense of the story.
Recommended. It is definitely not a great film, but it is rather enjoyable.
It has an appealing mix of science fiction, Hong Kong style action, and
special effects that will appeal to a large audience.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
R.L. Strong
Warner Brothers Presents a Silvers Picture in association
with Village Roadshow    A Wachowski Brothers film
Keanu Reeves   Laurence Fishburne  "THE MATRIX"  Carrie-Anne Moss
Joe Pantoliano  Hugo Weaving   Co Producer  Dan Cracchiolo
Music by Don Davis  Cinematography by Bill Pope
Edited by Zach Staenberg  Special Effects  Matthew Ferro
Stunt co-ordinator  & Martial Arts Director  Yuen Woo-ping
Produced by Andrew Mason  Barrie M. Osborne  &  Joel Silver
Written & Directed by Andy Wachowski & Larry Wachowski
What if your reality wasn't real? That have been the several stories and
films that have utilized this construct. Titles as "Total Recall" and
"Blade Runner" jump immediately to mind as two example of such story lines.
But this production from Joel Silver does something unique and exciting.
Now I must warn you ahead of time, that if you want the surprises of "The
Matrix" to remain surprises, please skip the next two paragraphs, as I am
going to reveal aspects of the plot.
The film opens with a computer screen tracing a phone call to a computer
hacker named "Neo" (Keanu Reeves). The caller is a black leather clad
beauty named Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss). The police locate her and close
in. Also arriving on the scene are several secret service types lead by
Agent Smith (Hugo Weaving), who warns the police that the Trinity is no
ordinary woman. That fact is brought to stunning light by Trinity's swift
and explosive decimation of the police officers (an absolutely jaw dropping
sequence of acrobatic and martial art dexterity). The film takes a drastic
turn as Trinity escapes her pursuers by leaping off from the roof of the
building and onto the roof of a second, covering an impossible space in the
leap. She reaches her extraction point, a lone phone booth, but is run down
by Agent Smith in a truck. Surprisingly, she does escape.. but how we can't
tell.
'Neo' is the computer tag used by Thomas Anderson. He is contacted by
Morpheus (Laurence Fishburn), a notorious cyber terrorist that the
government is trying to capture. Neo is contacted and meets with Morpheus
who tells him that his life is nothing but a dream. That his reality is
nothing more that electrical impulses fed to him by a sentient life form
built by man in the late '90's. This Artificial Intelligence (spiritual
cousin to both the Hal 2000 from '2001' and 'Cyberdyne Systems' from 'The
Terminator' films) has destroyed all of mankind and is now breading man to
be used only as a living battery. When 'Neo' awakes from his dream, he is
rescued by Morpheus and his followers and trained to become the savior that
they believe him to be.
"The Matrix" is the second film from the Wachowski Brothers, Andy and Larry
respectively. Their first film, the remarkably subtle and stylish "Bound"
gave only a hint of the level of expertise and experimentation these two
filmmakers possess. What has been achieved in 'The Matrix" is nothing short
of awe inspiring. The effects, stunts, cinematography all combine to create
a completely dizzying world of fantasy. One so complex and multi-layered as
to be almost acceptable. No faint praise here. While the film doles out
ladles full of action set pieces (each one more extravagant and jaw
dropping than the previous one), one never loses site of the plot
machinations of the characterizations in the film.
While some of the characters are given short shrift in the film, all of the
principles do a fine job of carrying their roles. Keanu does a fine job as
the savior 'Neo', his growing acceptance of his role in the salvation of
mankind is a nice turn by an actor that has been giving little if no
respect critically. Here, Keanu ups the ante, by learning and performing
some of the most striking Martial Art fights ever caught in an American
film. Credit for that goes to Hong Kong master Yuen Woo-ping, who not only
trained the actors in the basics of several fighting forms but also
designed and directed the fighting scenes. The remarkable thing is that
these scenes intersect with the body of the film so well, that Mr. Yuen
might not receive the credit deserved him.
Laurence Fishburne returns with a nicely tempered performance as Morpheus.
His style and grace hiding the desperate passion with a man who knows that
the truth is a lie. And that the restoration of that real truth may cost
him his life. Carrie-Anne Moss is given the least amount of character
development (which is an unfortunate situation of almost all action films),
and this is a shame as her screen presence is so magnetic. You believe this
woman could save the world all by herself. Joe Pantoliano (who worked with
the Wachowski Brothers on "Bound") is his ever sleazy self, giving the film
just the right touch of levity and menace.
Now in a film that is dealing with the end of mankind and spectacular
battle scenes, the question comes up as to how good are the effects. Well,
for the first time we have a film here that does justice to all of the many
Hong Kong and Japanese fantasies of super heroes and super men that we have
seen and chuckled at over the past decades. It may now be near impossible
to watch an Ultraman episode without thinking them as quaint at best and
horrendous at worse. The complex digital and miniature work done on this
film are simple a marvel to behold. There are actually scenes here that out
gun anything by John Woo or Ringo Lam.
The sound design of the film is ecstatic. I haven't been this enthralled
with sound effects and their affront on my senses since 'Star Wars'. I
can't think of anything recently that had me ducking and blinking
subconsciously as much as this film.
If movies are becoming nothing more than glorified roller coasters, then I
hope that all future action films use this feature as a blueprint and move
forward from here. Now we've all been bludgeoned with films that have sold
themselves on the basis of their effects or action. But, for just pure
unadulterated entertainment, you could do much, much worse than spending
two hours in 'The Matrix"
On a scale of one to five "The Matrix" rates a solid four. A good time at
the bijou, and a film that cries out for multiple viewings.
Copyright Š1999 Areles' Delphian Dungeon
Nothing in this article may be copied, reprinted
or altered in anyway without the expressed written
permission of the author.

Author
Steve Kong
If I say too much about The Matrix I risk spoiling your fun when you see
it.  If I say too little about The Matrix I risk you losing interest in
this intriguing and thought provoking film.  So, let me say this up front
about The Matrix: Don't Miss The Matrix.  This is the best science fiction
movie put out so far this year and possibly for the rest of the year.
Neo (Keanu Reeves) is a bland software engineer by day and a daring hacker
by night.  As of late he's been getting some strange messages from an
unknown source warning him of a danger to his life.  The messages come from
a man named Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne) and are sometimes delivered by a
beautiful messenger Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss).  From here on, if I say
anything else I'll spoil the twists and turns that the movie goes through.
Let's just say that what you think is real, isn't.
The Matrix comes from the Wachowski brothers, Andy and Larry.  These are
the same two that put together the equally brilliant film Bound.  Being
their second film, I was sure that The Matrix was going to be a solid film
but what The Matrix really is surprised me.  These two are not just
Hollywood hacks; they are two talented moviemakers.  What makes the
Wachowski brothers so good is their sense of style and atmosphere.  If
you've seen Bound then you'll know what I mean.  With The Matrix they turn
the style and atmosphere up a notch.  The film is dark, gritty, and dense.
Shadows and light are used to the extreme, with shadows lingering and light
casting in all sorts of mysterious ways.  Actors are lit in ways that
attract the eye from one section of the screen to the other, while at other
times actors are half hidden in the shadows.  The Matrix is more than just
a solid film; it is an instant classic.
What makes The Matrix so intriguing is the way that the Wachowski brothers
tell the story.  Instead of laying the whole story on us at once, they
layer it on.  Using Neo as the freshman, we learn at his rate as he is
taught about The Matrix.  This slow layering of the story works well and
helped to keep my attention focused on the story presented.  It was only
until after the film ended that a big question popped into my mind, but
we'll get that later.
The Matrix is a mix of Dark City and Strange World with some Gibson stirred
in for good luck.  The ideas presented are horrifyingly plausible and
strangely engaging.  Keep this in mind; the film is not a brain-dead film.
The script is quite intelligent and though it'll be hard for you to lose
interest in the film, you'll want to keep the brain turned on for this
sci-fi action film.  The film doesn't stay with one genre too long, it
defies cliches and moves between genres at will and does this well.
There's quite a bit of action, some romance, a double cross, and a lot of
sci-fi.  The portion of the film, next to the sci-fi, that got a large
chunk of my attention was the action.
Most often American directors who try to emulate my favourite director John
Woo end up looking like cheap knock-offs.  But, this is the first time that
I've ever seen action done at a level that approaches Woo.  The Wachowski
brothers are, in my book, close or as good as Woo in doing action.  The
action sequences in The Matrix are of the same type of adrenaline pumping,
at-the-edge-of-your-seat action that Woo puts together.  There are many
standout sequences, including some incredibly choreographed hand-to-hand
sequences that will not be forgotten anytime soon.  The action sequences
that had me in awe were the gun-fighting sequences.  Sure, we've all seen
it done before; the slow-mo, and the bad guys that have no aim, the bullet
shells hitting the floor.  But, it's never been done this well.
The special effects by Matthew Ferro are a visual feast.  Bullets can speed
up, slow down, and can also come to screeching halts.  People can run up
walls, jump into the air and linger, and then come crashing down with
enough force to crack pavement.  Then there are the subtle effects that are
added for style.  Look at the way that Ferro and the Wachowski brothers use
reflections in Morpheus's sunglasses.  These are some of the best effects
to ever hit the screen.
Performance wise, all performers give good performances.  Actually, I think
that the secret with the Wachowski brothers is that they do not tailor the
performances of the actors to the movie, but instead tailor the movie and
atmosphere to the actors.  Keanu Reeves, whom when not pressured to emote
too much, can turn in good performances.  He did just that in Speed and
Devil's Advocate; and he does it again in The Matrix.  Laurence Fishburne's
last foray into sci-fi was the horrible Event Horizon; this time around he
does much better.  Not only does he have better material to work with, but
he also has a part that is tailored to his acting style.  Fishburne is just
right for the part of Morpheus.  Carrie-Anne Moss, whom I've never seen as
a performer, puts in a wonderful performance as Trinity.  But, the
performer to notice is Hugo Weaving who is one of the Sentinel Agents
(imagine an evil version of the Men In Black).  Weaving uses a monotonous
flat performance that turns out to be one of the best in the film.
The thing that got to me after I stepped out of the theatre was the fact
that the film ends a bit too abruptly.  It leaves a question that I
couldn't figure out the answer to and that I thought could have been
answered in the film.  I'll reveal the question and I'll do it in such a
way not to spoil any fun: What are the freed people going to do in the
world that they're freed into?  This question is a nagging question that
the film glosses over with a voice-over that really doesn't tie things up
as tightly as could be.  But, this is only a small nuisance of the film.
Looking at the film as a whole, it is a well put together and entertaining
film.
Let me just reiterate: Don't Miss The Matrix.  This is one of the best
films of the year.  Please do catch this on the big screen, there are some
effects that are meant to be seen on the big screen.  You'll have to see
the film to find out the answer to the big question:
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
The most successful use of the messiah-figure in movie-land so far has to be
Star Wars, where young Luke 'redeems' that far away galaxy. And of course
the narrative arc associated with the messianic character is the monomythic
cycle, per Joseph Campbell, whom Lucas supposedly read heavily. Meaning Star
Wars was no accident (i.e., was already ingrained into our cultural
unconscious). Neither is the Wachowski brothers' (Andy & Larry, best know
for Bound) The Matrix, which, instead of picking and choosing from the
monomyth per Lucas, instead just uses it all, from the 'parentless' birth to
the prophesied appearance to the ability to transcend reality. The messiah
here even dies and gets reborn, which means, yes, this has all been done
before. Thing is, though, it's never been visually-realized so well, from
the opening frame on.
It all starts with a nifty little showcase of the Gap-commercial camerawork
we know from the trailer, which provides perhaps the best opening-action
sequence around, counting Bond. The woman in black is Trinity (sci-fi newbie
Carrie-Anne Moss), and, while the special effects do get all the attention,
they also serve a second purpose: to make us wonder just how she can pull
them off. Meaning there's already a question to be answered, a mystery to be
solved, which in narrative terms translates as a compelling reason to move
forward. By the end of that opening sequence, we're hooked. And it only gets
better (or, the mystery, as all good mysteries must, only deepens).
Cut now to Neo (Keanu Reeves, already at home in the sci-fi future, via
Johnny Mnemonic, even Bill & Ted), our messiah, a cubicle-sitter by day,
minor league computer hacker by night. It's his night job where he really
lives, where he hears whisperings of the 'Matrix,' and some shadowy
terrorist figure called Morpheus (sci-fi veteran Laurence Fishburne). But
whisperings aren't enough: like Kirstun Dunst in Interview with the Vampire,
he wants some more. Soon enough he gets it, gets pulled into answering the
mind-bending question Donald Sutherland asked a long time ago in Body
Snatchers: What if this world is just nested in another world, which is
nested in another world, and on and on? He's introduced to the
question--introduced to the 'Matrix'--by none other than Morpheus, who
dresses it all up like a Through the Looking Glass experience. You almost
expect Grace Slick to punctuate the background for us some, but the
Wachowski bros. are able to reel it all in nicely, put the white rabbit on
someone's arm instead of onto the soundtrack. It all makes sense if you pay
just a little attention.
Once you're in on the secret then, (real, or Memorex?) everything shifts
into overdrive. Lots of spaghetti-western hero shots, with Neo's overcoat
whipping dramatically (see Cage in Face-Off for more shots like this). Lots
of gunplay and techtalk. Lots of stepping into and out of realities, per
Millennium (1989) or 12 Monkeys. Even a little romance. The Matrix simply
has it all, and then some; you'll want to see it twice, at least. And yes,
it does get a little gun-heavy for a while, but this is an action film,
after all. Slow-motion leadslinging is part of the package. And the spent
cartridges never quite rise above story-level, anyway, but not so much
because there's not a lot of cartridges to spend, but simply because there's
so much story there in the first place. That is what drew us to Star Wars,
after all, yes? The Matrix, though not a space opera, is just as good, and
has the added bonus of updated effects technology. The only place Star Wars
might have a clear advantage, really, is that Lucas didn't tack an
unnecessary coda on, where the Wachowski bros did. Minus those four or five
seconds at the end, however, The Matrix is the best sci-fi to come along
since Bladerunner. Just a lot louder.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE MATRIX" (Warner Bros.)
Aimed specifically at a young, male audience, this challenging
sci-fi adventure is big on visuals and short on story.  Bland,
androgynous Keanu Reeves plays a 22nd-century computer hacker who is
recruited by Carrie-Anne Moss to join a band of cyber freedom fighters
led by Morpheus - that's Laurence Fishburne - in a struggle against
the scary, menacing machines that control mankind. Powerful computers
keep their oblivious human slaves passive by literally plugging them
into a virtual-reality universe that appears as the 20th-century world
we know.  Written and directed by brothers Larry and Andy Wachowski
("Bound"), the complex, pretentious script combines mythology,
mysticism, and technical mumbo-jumbo in a kinetic blender and concocts
a dazzling but illogical, incoherent head-trip in which specific
public telephone booths are the only conduit from one reality to
another. According to the Wachowskis, "We began with the premise that
every single thing we believe in today and every single physical item
is actually a total fabrication created by an electronic universe. So,
if the characters can have instantaneous information downloaded into
their heads, they should, for example, be able to be as good a kung-fu
master as Jackie Chan." Sci-fi genre aficionados will spot familiar
elements from "The Fifth Element," "Virus,"" Dark City,""Terminator,"
and "Alien," and the stunt work was supervised by Yuen Wo Ping, one
Hong Kong's top specialists in both kung-fu and wire-stunts. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Matrix" is an eye-popping,
deafening, mind-numbing 3 - unless you're a guy who's gung-ho for the
muddled mayhem and dizzying arsenal of ammunition of a weird,
big-screen video game.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast:  Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving,
Joe Pantoliano.
Screenplay:  Larry Wachowski and Andy Wachowski.
Producer:  Joel Silver.
Directors:  Larry Wachowski and Andy Wachowski.
In one of the slickest movies to arrive in our cinema this year, we have
Keanu Reeves and ensemble gang members donning leathers gunning down
computer generated anti-virus programmes, and anyone standing in
between.
Issues:
1. Can a movie such as Matrix tip hormonally-charged, acne-ridden
adolescent teenagers into gunning down their schoolmates? Possible in
theory, but made impossible without the existence of guns.
2. What is the Matrix? It's not a non-alcoholic cocktail, it's not a
formula for cold fusion, and it's not another name for the Rubik's Cube.
But it does smell of computer generated world used to house human guinea
pigs for energy.
3. Who got to keep all the leathers after shooting the movie finished?
Was it real leather or imitation? A budget of more than 100 000 000
answers this question.
4. Can Keanu Reeves act? Yes, but he was still better as Bill, or was it
Ted?
5. Was the movie boring? I watched it twice, but my best friend fell
asleep and the guy on the other side of me started snoring.
6. On action and special effects. What you see on the ads is really what
you get. Lots of smooth, streamlined karate kicks and bullet dodging.
7. Will my girlfriend like it? She will probably end up fantasising
about Keanu, leaving you feeling like an overweight jerk, who has done
little with his life. WARNING: Keanu Reeves is looking devastatingly
good in this movie; this movie should not be viewed by any male
individual who has a poor self image, or is on the verge of commiting
suicide.
8. Will there be a sequel? Probably.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Matrix (1999)
Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving, Gloria 
Foster, Joe Pantoliano, Marcus Chong, Paul Goddard, Robert Taylor, Julian 
Arahanga, Matt Doran, Belinda McClory, Anthony Ray Parker. Music by Don 
Davis. Cinematography by Bill Pope. Written and directed by Andy 
Wachowski and Larry Wachowski. 136 minutes.
Rated R, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
Surreal and visually dazzling, "The Matrix" is one hearty bowl of sci-fi 
goulash. Andy and Larry Wachowski, the brothers behind the sultry lesbian 
gangster flick, "Bound," incorporate everything from John Woo-style 
operatic violence to "Alice in Wonderland" trippiness in this bleak-chic 
extravaganza. The production is extremely derivative, but still great 
gloomy fun. Besides, any filmmakers who can create a story that logically 
incorporates the superhuman fighting techniques from contemporary Hong 
Kong action movies, the freeze-frame, pivoting-camera special effect 
popularized by the swing-dance "Gap" ad, and the chronically dazed look 
on Keanu Reeves' face, are all right in my book. 
Like last year's "Dark City," "The Matrix" explores the very nature of 
reality. "Dark City" is a better film, more successfully creating and 
maintaining a quasi dream state, but "The Matrix" offers plenty of its 
own rewards. With movies like these, it's best to enter the theater with 
no advance knowledge and just let the story flow over you, but since 
feature length mind-fucks aren't everyone's cup of tea, I'll run down the 
basic set-up, if only for the benefit of your date.
(SPOILER ALERT: Reveals significant plot points) Thomas Anderson (Reeves) 
is a clean-cut computer programmer working for a software corporation in 
1999, but the young man leads a secret life. As a hacker called Neo, he 
seeks to ease his nagging discomfort with the way his life feels by 
searching for truth on the ominous fringes of the Internet. Moments 
before the authorities close in, his online mentor Morpheus (Laurence 
Fishburne) urges him to "Follow the white rabbit" if he wishes to avoid 
arrest. Spotting a tattoo of a rabbit on the arm of a young rebel, Neo 
joins her in a wild flight from the Men in Black that leads to a 
shattering revelation.
Neo's existence is a lie, a virtual reality construct devised by a race 
of sentient machines to control mankind. In the distant future, the 
remnants of humanity are kept in fluid pods, with fabricated lives piped 
into their brains. The retro 1999 setting is but a comforting illusion, 
reflecting the last year before the beginning of the fall of our culture. 
In the new millennium, the human race fought, and lost, a long, horrific 
war with the artificial intelligence they created. The machines now use 
people as a power source, and the Matrix is the mechanism to control 
their crop of souls. 
But Morpheus, one of the few remaining free human rebels, has been to the 
Oracle and believes Neo to be "The One," the messiah who will bring 
salvation. Freed from his pod, Neo joins Morpheus and his followers in 
their small ship and undergoes training. He must learn to discard all 
notions of physical limitations in order to plug in and fight the 
machines on the virtual battlefield of metropolitan 1999. But the 
Sentient Agents, led by the sadistic Smith (Hugo Weaving), have their own 
agenda. Using superior intelligence, they will capture the band of 
warriors and snuff out the organic rebellion once and for all (END 
SPOILERS).
The Wachowski boys do a dandy job of making this hooey seem more 
meaningful than it is by deftly working in overtly religious references, 
general undertones of mysticism and loads of technobabble. Thankfully, 
they throw in some humor as well. The story works because the heroes, 
while sketchily drawn, are just distinct enough, and the bad guys are 
deliciously nasty. As Agent Smith, Hugo Weaving is a wicked delight, over-
enunciating as he spits out diatribes about mankind. Laurence Fishburne 
carries the proper sense of authority as the human leader, Gloria Foster 
is utterly disarming as the Oracle, Carrie-Anne Moss makes for a hell of 
a warrior and Keanu Reeves succeeds because his typical stunned persona 
is actually appropriate in this context. 
But style is the real star of "The Matrix" and the film's powerhouse 
combination of grinding music and phenomenal visuals more than make up 
for the soggy plot that goes on a few minutes longer than it should. The 
cast, decked out in way-cool sunglasses, black leather and trenchcoats 
(even in virtual reality, fashion counts), employ a dizzying array of 
gravity-defying gymnastics and martial-arts moves, unlike anything ever 
seen in an American film. In addition to the aforementioned flow-frame 
shots and some unusual morphing effects, the filmmakers use high-speed 
photography, enhanced by computer, to depict characters running up walls, 
delivering impossibly fast punches and kicks, and making incredible leaps,
 sometimes stopping or shifting in mid-air. "The Matrix" is absolutely 
the best live-action realization of comic-book sensibilities to date. You 
may get a headache trying to decipher the ponderous storyline, but the 
amazing imagery will likely soothe your pain.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY:  http://www.sick-boy.com
In the opening scene of The Matrix, a foxy, leather-clad woman named
Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss, Models, Inc.) is surrounded by four beefy
cops intent on taking her down.  She doesn't go down.  Instead, she
beats the snot out of them so quickly and so effectively that you could
actually hear jaws hit the floor in the theater.  Who is she?  How does
she run up the sides of the walls?  How does she defy gravity?  How does
she seem to move four times as fast as the blockheads that are trying to
catch her?
While that amazing spectacle helps to draw you immediately into the
film, it's just the tip of the iceberg. Led by stunt coordinator and
four-time Hong Kong Film Award nominee Woo-Ping Yuen (Drunken Master),
The Matrix boasts some of the best martial arts ever seen in an
American-made picture.  It also features the finest slow-motion gunplay
not filmed by John Woo.
The story?  It's not bad, but it definitely takes a back seat to the
astounding visuals.  Keanu Reeves (Johnny Mnemonic) stars as Thomas
`Neo' Anderson, a corporate computer programmer by day and a
cyber-hacker by night.  His life changes forever when he decides to
follow the white rabbit to a gentleman named Morpheus (Laurence
Fishburne, Event Horizon), tries to get Neo to believe that the entire
world is just an elaborate computer program designed to pull the wool
over the collective eyes of mankind.
It's pretty tricky to follow, due, in part, to the distractingly
dazzling special effects (Matthew Ferro, Face/Off).  Writer/directors
Andy and Larry Wachowski (Bound) re-team with cinematographer Bill Pope
(Zero Effect) to create a nightmarish vision of a world where machines
are king and humans are cultivated as a natural resource.  And watch out
for Hugo Weaving (The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert), who
plays a creepy Robert Patrick-in-Terminator 2-style agent gunning for
Neo and his new pals.  (2:10  R for violence, adult language and some
very disturbing futuristic scenes)

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
As a viewer who is intensely devoted to the sci-fi/action genre of
film, it's difficult for me to separate myself from the genre to write a
review from a purely objective standpoint.  It's also hard when the film
is as astonishingly good as The Matrix.  The problem in this case is
that the film, which has been written and directed by the Wachowski
brothers (Bound), is a marvel in just about every way a film like this
can be.  Where do I begin?  Do I start by praising the truly amazing
visual image that the Wachowskis have brought to the screen?  Should I
first mention the story, which pays homage to numerous other stories
while still managing to create its own world?  Do I rave about the
characters and the dialogue?  
A frequent complaint about films like this is that they're all vacuous
eye candy.  The Matrix is pretty, but it's not vacuous:  in addition to
having made one of the most visually stunning pictures of all time (yes,
of all time), the Wachowskis have created a story that matches those
visuals in every way.  It's not a lopsided production like so many
action thrillers tend to be.  No, The Matrix is a thriller with a heart,
a science fiction epic with real people and conflicts at the center of
it.  True, it has the feel and posture of a comic book, but that's not a
bad thing:  The Matrix takes a familiar formula and builds upon it,
resulting in an exhilarating and invigorating cinematic experience. 
It's also the first movie I've ever watched that made me want to fasten
an imaginary seatbelt.
Another problem with writing this review is that I really can't say
anything specific about the film.  Part of the experience comes from
seeing it with your own eyes.  I can't accurately convey what I've seen
in words.  So I'll begin with the premise:  Keanu Reeves plays Tom
Anderson, a computer programmer by day, and a computer hacker by night
(his hacker alias is Neo, and he's mostly referred to as such).  Towards
the opening of the film, Neo is contacted by a strange woman named
Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss).  Trinity piques Neo's interest by mentioning
the Matrix.  "What is the Matrix?" he asks.  She says that the answer
lies with Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne).  Neo meets Morpheus, and the
journey into his question ensues.
All of this takes about twenty minutes.  The film goes on for two more
hours, but I can't tell you what happens.  All I can say is that when
Neo sees the Matrix, he vomits.  I can't even discuss the other
characters in the film and why they're significant, just because doing
so would give away crucial elements.  One of the things I liked most
about The Matrix is that, before seeing it, I thought I had it figured
out.  But the Wachowskis showed me things that I didn't imagine.  The
story has all the necessary elements for success.  Neo, for instance, is
a likable main character.  He has no personal history, but that's the
point of the film.  Reeves, though inappropriate in any production of
Shakespeare, is more than adequate here.  There's not a moment during
which he doesn't look woefully confused, and that's exactly what this
character needs.
The film is also saturated with colorful supporting characters. 
Fishburne and Moss make a strong pair of protagonists; Fishburne
effortlessly makes every word sound very important, while Moss is strong
as the female lead.  Character actor Joe Pantoliano has a juicy role as
Cipher, one of Morpheus' sidekicks.  Australian actor Hugo Weaving gives
a scene-stealing performance as Agent Smith, one of the antagonists
whose intentions are part of the big secret.  All of these great
characters are placed at the center of a familiar formula.  The
originality comes in the details, which the Wachowskis have worked out
with amazing precision:  I dare any viewer to find a significant plot
hole in The Matrix.  If you do, then you're too picky.  The film works
because the story will hold your interest into and beyond the action
scenes.
Honestly, though, you're going to be concentrating on those action
scenes when they're going.  I've never seen cinematography or special
effects like this; I've never seen such flawless use of slow-motion and
computer-generated images.  The Wachowskis have a better eye for a shot
than nearly any modern director I can think of.  Their crowning
achievement is in the last thirty minutes, and involves a helicopter and
a lot of bullets in slow-motion.  I'm going to go out on a limb here: 
this is the best action sequence ever committed to celluloid.  When it
was over, my heart was racing and I was short of breath.  And I'm not
exaggerating.  If The Matrix doesn't get your attention, then you need
your pulse checked.
The film isn't perfect; the main characters are often forced to kill a
lot of people, and I would have liked to see them address the moral
issues behind mass murder.  And some of the background information
reminded me a little too much of similar films.  I only mention these
things to prove that I am capable of looking at the film objectively. 
It's not likely that they'll hinder anyone's enjoyment of the picture.
So, here's a pop quiz for anyone planning to create an entry into the
sci-fi genre:  What's more important -- style or substance?  The
Wachowskis have created perhaps the best science fiction film of the
90s, and they did so by balancing style and substance.  Like all the
great films of the genre -- including Metropolis, 2001:  A Space
Odyssey, and The Terminator -- The Matrix will show you images you've
never seen before, and it will make you care by telling a good story. 
You don't have to be a sci-fi junkie to recognize the skill here.  The
Matrix is the kind of film that gives fans of the genre a burst of
hope:  there are still filmmakers out there who know how to use special
effects to tell a story.   

Author
Jamey Hughton
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey  Hughton:   http://welcome.to/movieviews
If you see one sci-fi/action movie with Keanu Reeves this year, I would
highly recommend seeing The Matrix.
I was thoroughly pleased with this film, on more levels than one. First
off, in a world chock-full of brainless science-fiction movies with
irrelevant plots, it has a storyline that can carry the viewer from
beginning to end on a cushioned seat. Keanu Reeves', obviously not the
best actor in the world, makes for a fairly believable savior of
human-kind in the form of Thomas `Neo' Anderson. He is contacted by a
world-famous computer hacker named Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne), who
thinks Neo is the `chosen one'. But I'm sure you're asking `What is the
Matrix?' and `The chosen one for what, exactly?'
The Matrix is, to quote a character in the movie, `the world that has
pulled over your eyes to shield you from the truth..' I'll not reveal
anything else, but consider this a favor toward you.
To learn how to manipulate the Matrix to his advantage, Neo first must
learn all the tricks of the trade (which involve spectacular stunts of
defying gravity, dodging bullets and leaping tall buildings in a single
bound, ala Superman). Then he must face-off against the enemy, called
the Sentinent Agents. They are dressed in black with strikingly cool
shades, and are headed by the immensely droll Agent Smith (the
delightfully deadpan Hugo Weaving). The acting is an all-around
surprise. In addition to Reeves there's the always excellent Fishburne
filling his role perfectly, and a hot newcomer named Carrie-Anne Moss,
who can seriously bruise a SWAT team. The special effects are seamless
and jaw-dropping, but they don't upstage the human dimensions of the
story.
I'll get right to the point: the action sequences in this film are
absolutely the best I've ever seen. The Wachowski brothers, Larry and
Andy, have obviously covered the book on how to construct a jaw-dropping
shootout. Until now, John Woo has been the unprecedented king of a
slo-mo action sequence. Until now. Even more impressive, however, are
the film's martial arts battles, which use a familiar device from the
Gap TV ads, where the camera circles the room while a character freezes
in midair with a drop-kick maneuver. Your reaction is bound to resemble
`Wow', or `Holy...' after seeing these unbelievable feats.
I had my grievances. There was an unnecessary double-cross scenario
planted unwisely into the 2nd act, and a few of the supporting
characters were only clichés from other movies of this kind. The Matrix
as a whole is a dazzling, wonderfully exciting escape from reality. What
is the Matrix? No, I won't tell, but it's a heck of a lot of fun finding
out.
.........................
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:   http://welcome.to/movieviews
movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Homme A. Piest
"The Matrix" (1999). Directed and written by Andy and Larry Wachowski,
starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss and
others.
For quite some time I'd wanted to see this movie, aroused as I was by
raving reviews telling me about 'a new standard in SF movies', 'a very
clever script', 'intriguing philosophical questions' and so on.
Finally, last weekend, time and money gave me the eye. And so I went,
expecting 136 minutes of thrilling entertainment with a bite.
"The Matrix" shows us a future world in which artificial intelligence
has taken over. Mankind has been enslaved. Malicious computer programs
keep human bodies alive in gigantic towers, to serve as an energy
source. Nobody is aware of this fact though, as their minds are fed
electronic impulses which hide the real world and make them believe
they're running their daily lifes as if it were still 1999. Only one
group of people, living in a renegade city called Sion, has managed to
remain free in both body and spirit. This group desperately tries to
wake up the 'dreamers', in search of The One: the person that posseses
the power to fight the AI. They succeed in contacting Neo, a young man
who might be this 'One', and manage to free him. Then the battle
begins.
So far, so good. Nothing wrong with these premises. Well, one might of
course ask whether the human body would really form such a good energy
source. Didn't it ever occur to the script writers that to gain a
certain amount of energy from a biological being you'd need to put in
a *multitude* of that amount first? Why doesn't the AI use thermal
energy to feed itself, just like that magical Sion is supposed to do?
And why all the fuzz of providing your slaves with an illusional
world? Why not just chain them, let them whine and go crazy? After
all, 'they're nothing more than a virus on the face of this planet',
to paraphrase one of the malicious programs. But, OK, the movie's
supposed to be about the conflict between the virtual world and the
real world, so let's not get too rational about all this.
What do we get then? Illusion versus reality. A nice theme for a
movie, with many intriguing possibilities. Of course, "The Matrix"
isn't exactly the first movie to delve into this matter. But let's not
mention "Dark City", as everyone else seems to do (Oops! Oh, well
....). To be honest, there aren't *that* much movies that do. But
there are lots of SF novels that do: read for instance Philip K.
Dick's "Ubik" and "Eye in the Sky". And they do it a lot *better*.
"The Matrix" may question the nature and independence of reality, it
doesn't exactly ask the most *exciting* questions. OK, so there's this
virtual world that's indistinguisable from a real world: minds are
tricked into believing that the signals they get are transmitted by
one's senses instead of being directly put into the brain. But hey, if
it's really so very difficult to distinguish between a real world and
a virtual world, then how can one be so sure the 'real' world actually
*is* the real world? What if that real world in turn is also nothing
more than 'a dream within a dream'? What if there's a mixture between
both? What if the virtual world actually *is* the real world? And if
the distinction is that hard to make, then what's so bad about living
in a world that at least has some sunshine and steak instead of
nothing more than eternal darkness and tasteless goo for breakfast?
Etcetera, etcetera, ad nauseam. Unfortunately, "The Matrix" only seems
to take the first step: this is real, that is unreal, and now let's
kick some ass. Again, nothing really wrong with that, but a bit
disappointing for a movie that's supposed to ask 'deep questions about
reality'. Maybe it's just me, but I couldn't help thinking all this
metaphysics wasn't anything more than just an excuse to show off some
nice kung fu, sky jumping and spoon bending.
So, what do we keep? Essentially, a world in which our heroes possess
supernatural strength and use it to fight the bad guys. Lots of high
kicks, lots of ammo flying around, lots of stop-motion effects: in
short, lots of John Woo. Done before, seen before. Nicely done, for
sure, but hardly 'a new frontier in movie making'. Still, no real
reason to get disappointed.
What really, really bothered me about "The Matrix" is not that it
isn't the New Movie that it's claimed to be. It's not the lack of
originality, it's not the lack of brains. I've seen worse. My main
problem with this movie is that it's so utterly *boring*. Once the
premises have been set (much too quick, much too early, much too
obvious), nothing happens that can't be seen with your eyes closed
half an hour in advance. We have to sympathise with people we never
get to know, we have the obliged love interest, we have the obliged
'traitor among us', we have the obliged demi-god for a hero, we have
the obliged snazzy dialogue between the goodies and the baddies - the
only thing missing is the car chase in rush hour. Without all the eye
candy (which I've seen better done on MTV, by the way), "The Matrix"
is just your average 'saturday night and all the other channels are
showing commercials' type of movie.
"There is no spoon"? Wrong. There is a spoon, and it's been polished
till it shines like silver, but there's nothing in it. Don't believe
the hype.
User ID: "Homme A. Piest "
PGP RSA Key ID: B0047F35; Size: 1024; Date: 1996/05/20
PGP DH/DSS Key ID: E2448E57; Size: 1024; Date: 1997/12/04
"Stat rosa pristina nomine, nomina nuda tenemus."

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        What is "reality?"  Most people would probably describe it
as the day-to-day events that comprise our existence.  Or perhaps
you'd call it the conglomeration of sensory input relayed to your
brain via your eyes, ears, nose, tounge and fingers.  Either is an
acceptable definition.
        But are there other levels?  If you find yourself trapped
inside a terrifying dream from which you can not awaken, is that
reality?  What if you'd spent your entire life trapped inside Star
Trek's Holodeck, and had no idea that everything around you was
a fabrication created by a giant computer?  It's all you've ever
known... but is it "real?"
        Now, suppose everyone else you've ever known is trapped in
that Holodeck with you, and none of you have any idea that the world
is anything less than it seems.  What do you call that?
        The Wachowski Brothers' new science-fiction thriller is
a slick, cerebral flash of ingenuity out of the clear blue sky.
Painted with broad strokes of characterization, the film is smart
and thought-provoking as it drags the viewer along with the sheer
force of its momentum.  The story borrows heavily from science-
fiction's illustrious past, plundering such works as "Pi,"
"Alien," "Tron," "Sliders," "Metropolis" and even "Nightmare on
Elm Street" for the parts from which it constructs its
Frankensteinian tale.  Such a haphazardly-built plot should
reek of staleness, but "The Matrix" takes its well-worn ingredients
and recycles them into an appealing mix all its own.
        Thomas "Neo" Anderson (Keanu Reeves) is a software
programmer cursed like so many of us with a job that he hates.
He toughs it out for one reason: it allows him to pay the rent
as he struggles towards his true goal: the decipheration of a
complex mathematical theory he refers to as the Matrix.  This
Matrix is part of everything in the universe, yet remains
intangible-- a bit like The Force in "Star Wars."
        Indeed, I'm curious to know whether the Wachowski
Brothers actually used George Lucas's famous trilogy as the basis
for this work, as the parallels are striking.  We have an
average guy for a hero, plucked seemingly at random and charged
with saving the universe from a formidable tyranny.  Along the
way he learns the ways of the Matrix (aka The Force).  There's
even an Obi-Wan character: Neo receives assistance in his quest
from a mysterious hacker named Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne),
who knows more about the Matrix than Neo's mind is able to
comprehend.  Morpheus recognizes his friend's confusion and
skepticism: "You have the look of someone who is accepting what he
sees only because he expects to wake up at any moment," he observes.
Nonetheless, Morpheus works diligently to help Neo learn the ways of
the Matrix.  He is sure that Neo is "The One"-- the person who will
be able to shatter the illusion of reality, thereby bringing
enlightenment to the world.  It is not an exaggeration to say that
Morpheus plays Ben Kenobi to Neo's Luke Skywalker as he trains his
apprentice in the ways of this strange power.
        "The Matrix" is one of the most kinetic films you're
likely to see this year; it's not a work that slows down for the
small details-- stop focusing on the screen and you're likely to
find yourself lost, if only temporarily.  Nor is the film a slave
to its effects: our characters here are interesting and well-acted,
with Keanu Reeves hitting the right note of confusion and
befuddlement required by his character.  (That sounds like a slam,
but it's not intended to be.  The same traits that made him so
laughable in "Bram Stoker's Dracula" make him a perfect Neo.)
As always, Laurence Fishburne is strong, confident, and impossible
to ignore.
        "The Matrix" raises a lot of thoughtful issues; the minimal
plot description I have given is really only the tip of the
proverbial iceberg.  This is a visionary work, and comes highly
recommended for fans of science-fiction.  Warner Brothers apparantly
thinks so too: there's already talk of turning the film into a
trilogy (yet another "Star Wars" comparison!).  I'll be interested
to see whether it can survive the onslaught of "The Phantom Menace"
in May.  It deserves to.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com

Author
Mikhail Iosjpe
Written and Directed by:
Andy Wachowski   (as The Wachowski Brothers)
Larry Wachowski   (as The Wachowski Brothers)
After their magnifficent debut with "Bound", the Wachowski-brothers have
returned to the screens with one of the most interesting, mind-bending,
original and captivating science fiction films of the past decade. So far
the best film of 1999, "The Matrix"  intellectually toys with dream and
reality, fantasy and nightmare, destiny and fate with such energy that it
will blow your away.
Thomas Anderson (Keanu Reeves) is a respected citizen of our comunity. He
works for a "..respectible software company,  pays our taxes and helps the
landlady to carry out her carbage..". But this is only one of his lives. In
his second life he is Neo a hacker that during night is breaking the law,
desperatly trying to find an answer to the question he can't find words for.
He is then contacted by a mysterious stranger that calles himself Morpheous
(Laurence Fishburne) who tells him about the Matrix - "..the world pulled
over our eyes to blind us from the truth..".
Neo is then offered a choice between ignorance - waking up in his bed in the
morning and continue to live his normal life..or he can step into the real
world, from which there is no turning back. Neo choses that truth and the
real world he discovers is horrifieng and alien, controlled bu
super-intelligent machines that
use us a bio-power sourse vital for their survivial. It is no longer 1999
it's closer to 2199. The frightening truth is that somewhere in the real
past and our future mankind celebrated the discovery of A.I. (Artificial
Intelligence). The machines that could think for themselves was going to
make our lives easier. But at the same time we were getting more and more
dependant on the machines - the machines evolved, prospered and formed their
bizzarre society. There was a war, it is uncertain who began, but we were
losing. Our last attempt to save ourselves was to reflect the sunlight from
the earth. We belived that since the machines were dependant on solar power,
they would not survive and the mankind could be safe deep under ground, near
the center of our planet where it's still warm. But the machines outsmarted
us again, a human body can produce more bio-power than a 120 V - battery. So
we are no longer born, we are grown like corn in the field. To keep us i
total control the machines have created a dream world for us, as it was in
1990-s, by sending certain electrical signals to our brain. Matrix can be
compared to a very big and complex computer game and we are the unknowing
players, born with a VR-mask on our face. Ironicly the humans and the
machines have changed places. We think that we live out our lives, when we
actually lieng helplessly inside an incubator as batteries for the machines.
Morpheous belives that Neo is the long expected Messias that can save the
world.
Although the film is a bit confusing at the beginning, the Wachowski
brothers revealing the big secrets pieace by piece, never leave you
completely lost in space. The script, although energic and full of action,
humour, betrayel and even romance is very gently and intelligently structed,
which is rare for science fiction films nowadays.
The casting is flawless;Keanu Reeves is again back on top after severel
flops and failures and is as effective as he could be in the part of
Neo.Laurence Fishburne is convincing as always as the mystifying Morpheous.
Another vital carector that is very important to the story is Cypher,
wonderfully played by Joe Pantoliano . He is the human element in the film,
willing to do anything for getting back his ignorance and return to Matrix.
Cypher rases many moral questions, such as "what is better living in total
ignorance and happiness as a slave or living freedome in misury and horror?"
Joe Pantoliano delivers in my oppinion the strongest performance in the
film, bringing in the comic as well as moral issues into the picture.
Carrie-Anne Moss is clever and voulnerble as Trinity and Hugo Weaving is
sinister, intelligent and calm as the leader-agent.
Behind the brilliant special effects, wonderful cinematography and solid
acting the Wachowski brothers display many important issues for us to think
about. "The Matrix" shows us the real world as a result of our many
discoverys, so the real villains the films are not the machines, but their
creators - us. When the machines tried to classify the human species they
classified us not as mammals, but as a virus, the cancer of this planet and
they are - the cure.

Author
Ross Anthony
"Unfortunately, no one can be told what the matrix is, you have to see it
for yourself," the radio ads drill. But, I can tell you this..."The Matrix"
(the movie) is a winding web of dream vs. reality vs. technological
dictatorship. It snatches you in your slumber, then challenges you to see
the real world as a dream. It won't insult your intelligence; in fact, like
Keanu, you'll spend most of the film trying to figure it out. As for the
rest: saliva will be evaporating from your wide open mouth as your jaw
lowers at the glass-shattering special effects.
I'm not sure why bullets are necessary to battle power-hunger software; but
it sure is cool to watch the empty shells fall to the ground in slow mo.
There are the times when the psychedelic, poetic, philosophic dialogue kind
of bogs up on itself and there's that lull in the second act ... but nothing
that a totally dope butt-woopin' climax can't blast from your memory. Now
that's why we go to see action movies!
The plot/concept is almost intricate enough to make you forget that fighting
technology with Kung Fu is essentially a silly idea. The acting won't steal
the show. It's the careful direction (unique, yet reminiscent of Terry
Gilliam, especially in "10 monkeys") and sensitive, creative use of
remarkable special effects that will burn this film in your memory. Buckle
up!
Starring Keanu Reeves and Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss and Joe
Pantoliano.
Written and Directed by the Wachowski Brothers.
Produced by Joel Silver at Village Roadshow/Grocho II/Warner Brothers.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Matt Williams
Mention a science fiction film starring Keanu Reeves and Laurence
Fishburne and you might conjure up frightening images of Johnny Mnemonic
or Event Horizon.  However, their new film, The Matrix, is a dazzling
and unique work that will certainly put those horrible nightmares to
rest.
Thomas Anderson (Keanu Reeves) is a normal guy living a boring life in
1999.  All his life he has felt something is not quite right. One
question inexplicably burns in his mind:  What Is The Matrix?
To escape the dull routines of daily life, Thomas lives a double life.
By day, he's a software programmer at a monolithic corporation. At
night, he becomes a computer hacker, using the alias Neo, desperately
searching for the answer to the question that plagues him.
He comes close to getting his answer when he is contacted by an elite
group of hackers, including Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss), Cypher (Joe
Pantoliano), and led by the enigmatic Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne). Neo
doesn't have long to decide whether to trust this ragtag bunch. When a
mysterious government agent (Hugo Weaving) beings pursuing him, he finds
himself forced to make a decision upon which rides the fate of his
entire existence.
Writer-directors Larry and Andy Wachowski have crafted a stunning fusion
of a Hong Kong action film and a cyberpunk graphic novel. The special
effects are impressive, particularly when they are seamlessly integrated
into the film's action sequences.  The film transitions from regular
speed to slow motion and back again in the middle of several stunts,
offering plenty of eye candy.
The Matrix is rife with symbolic imagery, so much so that it makes you
wonder if the entire film is a religious allegory of some sort. From
names (Trinity, Zion, The Oracle, Nebuchadnezzar, etc.) to religious
themes (faith, enlightenment, the chosen one, miracles, resurrection,
and so forth), there's a little bit of everything in The Matrix.  It is
not cohesive enough to make sense alone, but it does add an interesting
flavor to the scenes.
As with any science fiction film, you have to be willing to suspend
disbelief long enough to accept the premise.  At least, with The Matrix,
the premise is worth disbelieving for.  The film starts up in the middle
of the action, and it isn't until about halfway through that everything
starts falling into place.  Once you see the pattern emerge, it becomes
apparent that there was much thought put into the screenplay.
If the film has a weak link, it is with the characterizations. It's
surprising, since the writers were responsible for the multilayered
characters in Bound.  But, the characters in The Matrix are, for the
most part, flat and unchanging.
The idea behind The Matrix is not a brand new concept in science
fiction, however, it is one never before put so vividly upon the movie
screen. Action lovers, science fiction fans, and even those who just
crave a decent story will all find what they're looking for in The
Matrix.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Indra Moeljadi
"Have you ever had a dream so real, that you wondered if this dream is
reality or not?." Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne) said that to Neo (Keanu
Reeves) in The Matrix (1999).
The story of this movie is mixing up reality and virtuality. After you seen
this movie, you'll probably be wondering what is real, what is not, and all
that stuff in between like hyperreality and surreality.
This is what the Wachowski brothers do with The Matrix. So many special
effects that make people think whether this movie is real or a
computer-animated creation. Well, a few things are real though, all the
Ray-Bans worn and the Nokias used.
So this Neo is a hacker, which is the most logical explanation of how he got
into this virtual, or real world. His main quest is finding Morpheus, who is
like a God-Hacker. With the help of Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss) he finds him.
It turns out that Morpheus and Trinity are fighting for the human race, and
Neo is likely to be The One, the one that can save the human race. Just like
a reincarnation of Buddha (Hey, that was Keanu too!). Here, Neo will start
all his kung-fu lessons in becoming The One, if he is the one.
One thing leads to another, and then you'll see one hell of an action scene.
Neo and Trinity walking into a highly guarded building, shooting guards and
doing tricks in slow motion, both in black, without even sweating. This
scene is awesome, and I'm sure that it will be nominated for MTV's Movie
Award as Best Action Sequence.
That's all I can say about the story. Oh, and what is The Matrix? Go see and
find out yourself. It's worth it. At least you can choose one of the many
Ray-Bans for this summer.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

MATRIX, THE (directors: Andy Wachowski, Larry Wachowski; cast: Keanu
Reeves  (Neo/Thomas Anderson), Laurence Fishburne (Morpheus),
Carrie-Anne Moss (Trinity), Hugo Weaving (Agent Smith), Gloria Foster
(Oracle), Joe Pantoliano (Cypher), Marcus Chong (Tank), 1999)
How do you like to see Christ depicted in films? The Wachowski brothers,
refugees from Marvel comic books, with one critically acclaimed lesbian
noir type of film under their belt, BOUND, have chosen a guy who works
for a legitimate software company by day, Thomas Anderson (Reeves), but
at night works feverishly alone in his room, as a hacker, known as Neo,
who has broken every law in the book against computer misuse. The
Wachowski brothers must think they hit upon something really important
to convey, because in my book, any film that goes way over two hours in
length, thinks of itself as important, and by earmarking the young
literate computer age audience to buy into their intellectual sci-fi'er,
as they flatter them by telling them that it is only at a young age that
one can develop the ability to have a chance of understanding the
message delivered here, they have done just that, making me wonder how
they expect adults to react to their film.
And the Good News the film brings, is that "The One" is alive, as
prophesized in the Bible. Here he is just disguised as a regular person,
and he is a hacker. He will soon learn of an evil force out there,
called The Matrix, that not everyone is aware of, that is an
all-encompassing virtual-reality program overseen by omnipotent
computers. As the filmmakers get involved in their little
pseudo-philosophy game of what's real and what isn't, promising those
with an open mind a chance to be unplugged, to find out what is real. I
think, they really believe they will get unplugged, mainly, because they
had the good sense to pay money to see the movie.
What the Wachowski brothers are good at is style and visuals, and what
we see on screen is ground breaking fun to watch, in the form of
exhilarating camera work from the opening sequence onwards, as a mixture
of Kung-Fu and sci-fi schmaltz is used, which is as entertaining as it
is ominously intellectually pretentious, as a computer hacker named
Trinity (Moss), she is a take off on Mary Magdalene, which is why there
is no sex between her and Neo, just intent eye contact, as she uses her
Kung-Fu and super-natural skills, just like its done in the comics, to
escape from a police trap, that comes by way of info an informer gave
them. Arriving on the scene, just a bit late, are the ultra serious and
menacing Agents, created from artificial intelligence, skilled in
Kung-Fu, clad in uniforms of dark suits and sunglasses, led by Agent
Smith (Hugo), who is well aware of the group that Trinity belongs to,
and is optimistic that he will get that renegade group and their leader
Morpheus (Fishburne), who is depicted as a John the Baptist type. The
police informer has, also, tipped them off about a hacker named Neo, who
is about to be recruited into Morpheus's group, so the action now swings
into the police's capture of Neo, and we see how they bug him, and I
mean literally bug him, and when he escapes from the police, it is just
as thrilling to see how Morpheus's crew debugs him.
The action scenes are the virtue in this movie, when we get to see
Morpheus, on board his time-traveling hovercraft USS Nebuchadnezzar,
with his small crew of believers, he being depicted as the true
believer, who blindly believes in what he is doing is best for the
world, we are in pedantic trouble, at this jucture of the film, as we
all must be lectured to. All that talk, all those explanations, every
bit of pseodo- philosophical occultism is pulled out of the hat to make
the story plausible, except the more rationally it is explained by the
group's leader, Morpheus, the more holes in his story are opened up, and
the Judas in his group, who only wants to return to the matrix, in his
old job at the factory, is tired of all this hype after nine years of
eating the same slop, is played by Cypher (Joe), now eating a juicy
steak with the Agents and declaring ignorance is bliss, seems to make as
much sense as the mumbo-jumbo Morpheus is talking about. As Morpheus
explains all this to Neo, who believe me, if you just take one look at
him, no one in his right mind would mistake him for even one second, as
"The One." But Morpheus is convinced he is "The One," as he fills his
head with programs a young and up-and-coming Christ needs, no more
pacifism here, but plenty of Kung-Fu warrior stuff, as he prepares to
take him to the oracle for a private consultation. Evidently, she has
insights into things even the true believers and the next Christ don't
even know. At last, a voice in appreciation for the muses, arises.
This is a high tech movie, whose action scenes are for the most part
humorless, notwithstanding the facile ideas it throws in, as this film's
playful gestures come about as the chase takes place between the bad
guys who can't die, as depicted on screen with splendid computer
imagery, as we see those who represent the unnamed governments, in this
unnamed city, as lawful Agents, try to round up this group of hackers,
who also can't die, until all those action scenes get surplanted by the
very human and humorous scene of Neo and the oracle, played with grace
and dignity, by Gloria Foster, as he asks her if he is Christ, as she
tells him, if you are in love, you don't need anyone to tell you that.
So now we have a hero who has doubts, he has already learned from
Morpheus that the world he is living in is false, but he can't return to
normalcy, because he chose the red pill instead of the blue pill, that
Morpheus so dramatically gave him, when he told him that there is no
going back once you choose the kind of world you want to live in. And
now he is stuck searching for the truth. I don't think he even has time
to go out and see an escapist sci-fi film, just for kicks. It is serious
business saving the world, with not many people even willing to thank
you for your effort. But he, at least, found Morpheus, the one he was
searching for, but as an interesting twist in the story, it was Morpheus
who was looking for him. So the two have found each other, and now the
rest of the story has to be played out as it is written, or does man
have free will to make his own destiny?
You will only get questions in this film, not answers. But one of the
questions is, from what source do the questions come from, and that is
answered in an interview with the directors, I read in the film 'zine,
American Cinematographer, as the Wachowski brothers freely talked about
what kind of film they were trying to make and who influenced them.
The film ends with Neo, looking like Clark Kent, as he is stepping out
of a telephone booth, to give the film the full comic book flavor it
deserves, as if Superman is there, already in place, ready to stop the
bad guys. For the film's point of reference to anything resembling
theology and theory, it was Jean Baudrillard's Simulacra and Simulation
that was used as reference material, referring to his take on
Ecclessiastics. That was the book Neo had in his room when his computer
friends came by to pick up their pirated program. He is the modern
French philospher, with his theories of time as unreal and his critique
of hyperreality and how the truth can't be reached, but violence can,
that influenced the Wachowski brothers in the making of this film.
But even more than a Biblical film (though if you are looking for this
to be a spiritual film, there are plenty of symbols in the film to
allude to this being so), or another look at the world of Lewis
Carroll's Alice in Wonderland, this is a computer-age film, that
questions if we have just become batteries for our computers, who have
evolved past us in their knowledge of the world. And the questions of
who we are abound, as Neo is now free of the illusions he has lived
with, as he wonders how he will handle this new found experience. And
the only intellectual question we may be left to ask ourselves, if we
take the new myth presented here seriously, is who needs Christ when we
got Superman, or do we need neither or both, or do we just need Christ ?
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
