Title
Review for Interview with the Vampire: The Vampire Chronicles (1994)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Tom Cruise, Brad Pitt, Kirsten Dunst, Antonio Bandaras, 
           Christian Slater, Stephen Rea  
Director: Neil Jordan 
Producers:  Stephen Wooley and David Geffen 
Screenplay: Anne Rice based on her novel 
Cinematography: Philippe Rousselot 
Music: Elliot Goldenthal 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     Francis Ford Coppola's DRACULA.  Mike Nicols' WOLF.  Kenneth
Branagh's FRANKENSTEIN.  Suddenly, horror of the old genre (as opposed
to the '80s slasher flicks) is back with a vengeance.  The latest, and
arguably the most ambitious, to enter this potentially-lucrative market
is a cinematic version of Anne Rice's INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE.
     As was true with CRONOS earlier this year, INTERVIEW WITH THE
VAMPIRE makes some modifications to common vampire mythology (as made
popular in DRACULA and perpetuated in countless horror books and
films).  The fangs are still present, as are the insatiable bloodlust
and fear of daylight, but no longer will religious trappings hold the
undead at bay, and a stake through the heart has lost its
effectiveness.
     The film begins and ends in present-day San Francisco, with Louis
(Brad Pitt), a two-century old vampire, telling his story to a
fascinated interviewer (Christian Slater).  His tale opens in 1791
Louisiana, just south of New Orleans, where Louis falls victim to the
vampire Lestat (Tom Cruise).  Given a choice between death and eternal
life as one of the undead, Louis chooses the latter, a decision he will
forever regret.
     Louis cannot kill with the impunity of Lestat, but to sate his
hunger, he must feed, and the blood of animals is not enough.
Eventually, he pierces the neck of a grief-stricken young girl named
Claudia (Kirsten Dunst), whom Lestat then curses with his unholy form
of resurrection so that she can be a surrogate daughter to both himself
and Louis.  For a while, they are one "big, happy family."  But all
things come to an end, and Claudia's growing resentment of Lestat fuels
a bloody confrontation.
     When INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE works, it's as compelling and
engrossing a piece of entertainment as is available on film today.
When it falters, the weaknesses seem magnified.  Fortunately, under the
care of director Neil Jordan (THE CRYING GAME), instances of the former
are more frequent that those of the latter, although the film
noticeably stumbles during two key sequences (a needlessly drawn-out
exploration of life as a vampire in Paris and the illogical, dumb
conclusion).  Despite the ups and downs of the second half, however,
the first hour is classic horror at its most grotesque.  In the best
tradition of the GRAND GUIGNOL, INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE revels in
its graphic and horrifying bloodiness.
     Tom Cruise's Lestat is not a consistent villain, nor does he come
across as particularly multi-dimensional, but there are times when his
screen presence commands attention.  More effective is Brad Pitt's
Louis, who captures the audience's sympathy by fighting against losing
his conscience (although his constant wallowing in self-pity becomes
tiresome).  Most arresting of all is young Kirsten Dunst, whose
charisma is such that she continually steals scenes from her older and
more experienced co-stars.  Also featured are Antonio Bandaras (as the
ancient vampire Armand), Stephen Rea (in what is little more than a
cameo), and Christian Slater.
     As is true of many vampire stories, there is an erotic
undercurrent to INTERVIEW.  Here, explicitness is replaced by
innuendo.  While sex is rarely in the background, it's never on screen,
either.  Homoeroticism, the Electra Complex, and pedophilia are all
hinted at.
     As horror films go, INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE has the right
look.  Atmosphere may not be everything, but its importance cannot be
understated.  With its gothic settings, superlative makeup (by Stan
Winston), and sterling miniatures work, this film can claim visuals
nearly on par with those of Kenneth Branagh's stylish FRANKENSTEIN.
There are other parallels between these films, not the least of which
is their equally erratic pacing.  However, INTERVIEW's plot is probably
more coherent and its characters somewhat better realized.  There are
flaws to be found here--even for those not specifically looking--but
for the simple horrific pleasure offered, they can be set aside, if not
entirely ignored.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Tom Cruise, Brad Pitt, Kirsten Dunst, Antonio Banderas.
Screenplay:  Anne Rice.
Director:  Neil Jordan.
     INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE has far more in common with MARY
SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN than a November release date.  To begin with the
obvious, both are based on florid novels featuring "monsters" in
existential crisis, rooted deeply in the authors' feelings of loss.
And both were the subject of intense pre-release scrutiny as a result
of off-beat casting decisions.  However, the most relevant--and
unfortunate--similarity between the two is what ends up on the
screen.  INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE is a spectacularly executed
production, perhaps more consistent in its tone than FRANKENSTEIN, but
it also lacks that film's high points; it's simply too plot-heavy, and
ends up feeling extremely rushed.
     The story is told in flashback, as 200-year-old Louis de Pointe du
Lac (Brad Pitt) tells the story of his life to a young interviewer
(Christian Slater) in contemporary San Francisco.  In 1791 New Orleans,
plantation owner Louis despairs over the deaths of his wife and
daughter, a despair sensed by the vampire Lestat (Tom Cruise).  Lestat
offers Louis the chance to become like him, but after he accepts, he
soon realizes the implications of his choice--a bloodlust he loathes
but can't resist.  When Louis contemplates leaving Lestat, Lestat
creates another vampire, the child Claudia (Kirsten Dunst).  But Louis
and Claudia still rebel, and attempt to find out more about their
nature when they travel to Paris and find a cadre of vampires led by
the seductive Armand (Antonio Banderas).
     First, to the single most pressing question to anyone familiar
with Anne Rice's novel:  is Tom Cruise an acceptable Lestat?  The
answer is, sometimes.  There are moments, and not isolated ones, where
Cruise is positively fiendish, more so than one could have any right to
hope.  There are also moments when he is so completely wrong that every
fear of his detractors appears to have been justified, and this
schizophrenia is typical of the bumps in INTERVIEW.  More damaging
still is Brad Pitt, the real star of the film as Louis.  He has said in
interviews that he grew to hate playing the depressive vampire, and
that fact is sadly evident in his performance, a dazed and lackluster
turn.  Both Pitt and Cruise are put to shame by eleven-year-old Kirsten
Dunst, who does riveting work as the vampire who becomes a woman
trapped in a child's body.  She becomes the tortured soul whose plight
truly connects with the audience in a way that Louis's should have, but
never does.
     Part of the problem is that among the elements of Rice's novel
which are altered or abandoned, the one which is most ill-advised is
ignoring Louis's religiosity.  His despair is linked to a very Catholic
sense of guilt, and when all reference to his faith is excised he loses
a critical motivating factor.  Often his reluctance to take human lives
comes off as mere distaste, rather than a profound fear that he has
become an agent of the devil, or that there may be no God to judge
him.
     Of course, this is one of the dangers inherent in doing a big
Hollywood adaptation of what is essentially an interior monologue.
Director Neil Jordan has filmed the story beautifully, busing Philippe
Rousselot's cinematography to perfection, and scenes like the Theater
of Vampires production are nearly ideal translations from the novel.
The production design is magnificent, and Elliot Goldenthal's score is
a great mood setter.  It looks so good that occasionally I could
overlook the fact that in their rush to pack as much plot as possible
into two hours, Jordan and Rice had severely skimped on their
characters' motivations.  This is not to say that there haven't been
some significant improvements made from the novel, particularly adding
some much-needed black humor.  But for INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE to
work as anything besides simply spectacle, Louis had to becomes
something besides a pouting immortal, and Lestat had to be something
more than a sporadically zany eternal adolescent.  Lestat is more like
an abusive father, and that relationship is very poorly handled.
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE ends up positively gorgeous, and extremely
hollow.

Author
Eric Grossman
     There is a scene in INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMMPIRE when the nefarious
Lestat (Tom Cruise) takes a rat, kills it and pours its blood into a
wine glass for his new, angst-ridden companion and fellow vampire,
Louis (Brad Pitt) to drink.  This scene is both revolting and silly and
is indicative of the film's dual nature.
     Adapted for the screen by Anne Rice from her best-selling novel,
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE is a story told in flashback by Louis to a
young interviewer (played by Christian Slater in a role originally
intended for River Phoenix) that begins with him as a rich, New Orleans
plantation owner who has given up on life after the death of his
family.  The lonely Lestat discovers Louis and gives him the choice
between death or eternal life.  Louis picks the latter and from there,
the story takes us on a trip through two centuries, from 18th Century
New Orleans to 19th Century Paris to the present.  Like the characters,
we live in the dark and are surrounded by blood, angst and suffering.
We watch as Louis struggles to come to grips with what Lestat, a
vampire who relishes his own evilness and who kills the unsuspecting in
large numbers, has made him.
     After sleepwalking through his last several roles, Cruise has
taken on a hefty challenge playing Lestat and the results, while not
disastrous, are not terrific either.  At times, his performance works,
the evilness and selfishness of his character is convincing and his
English accent isn't even that bad.  Other times his performance makes
you want to bust out laughing.  There are moments where, despite all
the make-up and fangs (created by Alien and Jurassic Park effect's
wizard, Stan Winston), Cruise's illusion falters.  The performance
weakens because we know its Tom Cruise and his movie star persona that
he carries with him from film to film lessens our fear of him.  In the
final analysis, however, Cruise is just fine, it's just that movie
isn't.
     Brad Pitt has the film's critical role and it is a difficult one.
He has to spend most of the time being terribly depressed, brooding
over his fate as he walks the dark, empty streets of Paris.  He also
must make a vampire, an evil being, sympathetic.  Pitt pulls off the
sympathy because his character loathes the taking of human life, but in
the area of the struggle to maintain his last few drops of humanity,
Pitt's performance comes up short.
     The toughest character to play actually comes off the best.
Kirsten Dunst must be commended for rising to the very difficult
challenge of playing the pre-pubescent vampire, Claudia.  The twelve
year-old actress (she was ten when she started filming) is able to find
the right blend of sadness, scariness, and even sweetness for Claudia
who is simultaneously innocent and evil.
     There are other vampires such as Armand (Antonio Banderas), a
400-year-old Parisian of the night who desires Louis and Stephen
Rea as the fiendish, clown-like Santiago.  There is quite a bit of
homo-eroticism amongst these vampires.  Their longings are surges of
desire for companionship, for mothers, for fathers and for lovers all
at the same time.  These moments are reminiscent of the old days of
cinema when filmmakers were forbidden to show a man and a woman in a
bed, even if fully clothed, much less anything more risque.  In those
days, the acts of love, lust and sex were suggested through looks and
gestures not all that different from the way the Lestat, Louis, Armand
and Claudia look and gesture to each other.
     For his part, Neil Jordan did an excellent job directing this
film.  There is a never-ending supply of stunning imagery and he was
able to get strong performances from each of his actors.  The film
pushes mood to the max with its outstanding costumes by Sandy Powell
and its period sets by production designer Dante Ferretti.  Academy
award winning cinematographer Phillippe Rousselot deserves another
nomination for this film's soft, yet dark look.  The score by Elliot
Goldenthal and the editing by Mick Audsley will make you jump out of
your chair, although, there were a few too many of these cheap
thrills.
     INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMMPIRE is well crafted but its lacking
narrative is often slow and just downright goofy.   It is successful in
de-mything the vampire, making them into real beings with real
problems.  Unfortunately, in humanizing the vampire, they become less
frightening and eventually, less interesting.  After watching Lestat
and Louis for over two hours, I understood why Count Dracula was the
prince of his kind.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     Initially, the premise of INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE seems to be
an intriguing one: the depiction of the day-to-day lives of a group of
vampires.  We quickly learn that their lives are basically tediously
repetitive and ultimately without meaning.  Unfortunately, the same
terms of description can be used to describe the movie itself.
     The movie opens with a young journalist (Christian Slater) sitting
down to interview a man that he apparently has randomly selected off of
the street.  Much to the interviewer's surprise, his subject turns out
to be a vampire named Louis (Brad Pitt).  The bulk of the film is shown
in flashback as Louis relates the story of his life, starting at the
point when he was made into a vampire by a seductive and mysterious
vampire named Lestat (Tom Cruise).  The other key character in the film
is Claudia (Kirsten Dunst), who becomes a vampire as a young child,
thus forcing her to remain forever in a child's body.
     This is essentially a plotless movie, opting instead to
concentrate on the characters and the vampire lifestyle.  Anne Rice's
script (based on her novel) seems to indicate that the life of a
vampire is rather monotonous.  After a while, the film falls into a
very repetitive pattern with seemingly endless scenes of the vampires
seeking out the blood of mortals to drink.  After one or two of these
scenes, the film makes it very clear that the vampires have very little
difficulty obtaining victims.  Rice gives the vampires an ability to
essentially cast a spell over mortals, causing them to freely give
themselves over, eliminating any real conflict.  The film also never
bothers to tell the audience enough about the victims to really care
about their fate.  Louis spends a lot of time fretting over the
morality of it all, but the script makes it very hard for the audience
to feel much sympathy for this.
     The movie attempts to compensate for the fact that little actually
happens by piling on symbolism and subtext.  The vampires' victims are
often shown having an almost orgasmic reaction to being bit,
emphasising a parallel between vampirism and sexuality.  The film also
introduces a strong hint of homoeroticism early on in the relationship
between Louis and Lestat and later in a severely underdeveloped
relationship between Louis and Armand (Antonio Banderas), a charming
vampire that he meets in Paris.  The film glosses over this latter
relationship so quickly that it is difficult to ever figure out why it
is even in the film.
     Like Kenneth Branagh's recent film adaptation of MARY SHELLEY'S
FRANKENSTEIN, this film isn't really meant to be scary.  There may be a
few scenes that will startle a bit, but the movie never really inspires
any actual feelings of fear or dread in the viewer.  Rice's script is
much more concerned with the characters and subtext than it is with
surprising or horrifying the audience.  This is a valid approach, but
unlike Branagh's film this movie never really manages to generate much
interest.
     The two-hour running time of the movie really isn't enough time to
explore any of the subtext with much depth while also introducing the
characters and moving forward the film's minimal plot.  While Rice
probably had time to explore these things much further in her novel
(which I haven't read), they largely get lost in the shuffle here.
Similarly, some of the details about the nature of the vampires' lives
are also left muddled.  In particular, the issue of how a vampire can
be killed, as well as the *consequences* of that act, are largely left
unexplained.  Towards the middle of the film, one vampire "rule"
becomes very important to the plot even though it hadn't even been
*mentioned* earlier.
     Another area that is left very unclear is the concept of a "dark
gift" that is mentioned by several characters.  The impression is that
every vampire is given a different "dark gift," but this is an idea
that is simply introduced and otherwise left unexplored.  The film
implies that this is somehow important, but I could never figure out
why.
     Even prior to the start of filming, the casting of Tom Cruise as
Lestat generated a lot of controversy.  The fans of Rice's novel were
outraged by the decision and Rice herself expressed strong displeasure
with the choice (although she eventually publicly recanted after seeing
the completed film).  After all of this controversy, it turns out that
Cruise's performance is the best thing about the film.  Cruise plays
the role with a great deal of finesse and seductive charm.  When
necessary, he is also able to bring in an appropriate amount of
menace.  This performance is unlike anything that Cruise has done
before and the film absolutely comes to life whenever he is on-screen.
     Despite the top billing and the publicity surrounding the role,
Cruise's Lestat is really only a supporting character in the film.
Brad Pitt's Louis is the central character.  This ends up being one of
the film's biggest problems.  Pitt plays Louis with a constantly sullen
and generally lifeless tone.  The character may very well have been
written this way, but that doesn't make him any less dull.  It doesn't
take very long to tire of Louis' constant sour whining.
     When Cruise disappears during most of the final third of the film,
there is really very little of interest left.  It certainly doesn't
help that the final third transplants the action to another locale (the
early scenes take place in New Orleans while these later scenes are in
Paris).  It is a bit late in the film for such a radical shift.  At
this point, the film introduces several new characters without any time
to really let us learn anything about them.  In addition to Banderas as
Armand, these scenes also introduce Stephen Rea as a bizarre vampire
named Santiago and Domiziana Giordano as a mortal named Madeleine, who
becomes a mother figure for Claudia.  It is possible that this sequence
and these characters were all better developed in Rice's novel (or that
the characters are important for the sequels), but none of these
characters generate any kind of real impression in the movie.
     Claudia is the most original character in this story, but the film
falls short of using her to her full potential.  Kirsten Dunst is very
effective as someone that is eternally trapped between childhood and
adulthood.  Some fans of the novel have complained that at age twelve,
Dunst is nearly twice as old as the character was in the novel.  That
was probably an unavoidable change.  I simply don't believe that a
six-year-old could have convincingly played this character.  In fact,
it is surprising that a twelve-year-old was able to play it so well.
The character is weakened by the fact that Rice's script does not spend
enough time exploring Claudia's relationship with Louis and Lestat or
her desires to grow up.  We are given hints that her relationship with
the two older vampires may be deeper than just that of a parent/child,
but the film never follows up on this.  The movie does include a few
brief, effective scenes in which Claudia expresses her distress at
never growing into an adult body, but these just left me wishing for
more insight into this aspect of the character.
     The majority of the film's problems can be directly traced to Anne
Rice's script.  The script tries to jam in far too much material,
meaning that there isn't enough time to really explore any of it as
much as it needed.  Some of the dialog is also stilted and unnatural.
There are a number of scenes where the characters seem to be speaking
in verse, but it ends up just sounding pretentious and occasionally
downright silly.  Pitt in particular never seems to get the hang of how
to deliver this kind dialog.  It doesn't help that the dialog style
seems to switch indiscriminately between this poetic style and more
standard modern dialog.
     Of course, the fact that the story is told through an interview
required that Pitt provide voice-over narration, but this also isn't
used very effectively.  There are far too many scenes in which the
narration seems to be simply *describing* what is visibly happening on
screen or is about to happen.  Only occasionally is the narration used
to actually provide any insight that couldn't have been figured out
without it.
     Director Neil Jordan piles on quite a bit of blood and gore in the
film, but he does wisely cut away pretty quickly in most cases.  The
early scene where Louis becomes a vampire is the one place where he
probably does linger a bit too long.  I suspect that this is the scene
that has prompted some of the publicized walkouts.  I did find myself
getting a bit queasy during this scene and I had to look away from the
screen.  This movie is definitely not for the squeamish.
     Stan Winston has created some very subtle and effective vampire
makeup.  He creates a believable look for the vampires while still
allowing the actors' facial expressions to come through.  Dante
Ferretti's gothic-style production design is very interesting and
impressive, but is sometimes undermined by Philippe Rousselot's
photography.  Rousselot has a strong tendency to put the camera right
on top of the action, often in situations where a wider shot would have
been much more effective.  The inevitable dark lighting combined with
the overly "in your face" camerawork makes it occasionally difficult to
figure out what is going on.  The film would have been much more
effective visually if the camera had simply been pulled back a bit.
The movie probably would have also benefited if it had been shot in a
wider aspect ratio.
     Composer Elliot Goldenthal was brought in to write a last minute
replacement score and has come up with one that is serviceable but not
particularly impressive.  The score isn't intrusive, but there were
times where the movie might have been helped by a little more aggressive
music.
     While, fans of Anne Rice's novel may be able to fill in some of
the serious gaps in the film, I found myself to be occasionally
confused and frequently bored by INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE.  Good
performances by Tom Cruise and Kirsten Dunst along with a few
intriguing ideas are not enough to save this film from a general
tedium.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It seems a natural to write a vampire story from the point of view
of the vampire and to really explore what it must be like to be a
vampire.  It must have been done in pulp fiction, though I am not
specifically aware of any such story.  Fred Saberhagen tried it in 1975
with THE DRACULA TAPE.  But the idea became a sensation with 1976's
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE by Anne Rice.  This smoky, sensual novel of
the relationship between the new vampire Louis and the sublimely amoral
Vampire Lestat struck a responsive chord with readers.  Since then Rice
has become second only to Bram Stoker for popularity of her vampire
fiction.
     Neil Jordan has directed the new film version of INTERVIEW WITH
THE VAMPIRE.  At first look, it seems a long stretch from his popular
MONA LISA and THE CRYING GAME.  In fact, viewers who like this film
should also see his earlier COMPANY OF WOLVES and vice versa.  Each is
a unique, dreamlike, and Freudean exploration of the supernatural.
That film was a very creative retelling of Little Red Riding Hood as a
sort of sexual werewolf story.  The two films should almost be seen as
a pair.
     The story begins in 1791 as Louis (played by Brad Pitt) is a
plantation owner who has lost his family and thinks he has nothing left
to live for.  What he gets is not death but instead is undeath, the
gift--if "gift" is the right word--of the Vampire Lestat (Tom Cruise).
The two take up living together--if "living" is the right word--on
Louis's plantation as Lestat helps Louis through the hardest transition
of his life--if "life" ... well, you get the idea.  Much of the story
is just how Louis adapts to his new state.  Eventually Louis is fed up
Lestat's indiscriminate killing of humans.  He would leave, but Lestat
binds him by making the eleven-year-old Claudia a vampire and the third
member of the family.  Now Claudia will forever have the body of a
child--well, a child with an impervious body and sharp teeth--while her
mind matures to that of an adult.
     The pacing Anne Rice's story, fairly faithfully rendered since
Rice herself scripted, is paradoxically both slow and fast.  Years seem
to go by very quickly to immortals who never change.   But the story
has an almost Tennessee Williams feel of characters working out deep
emotional problems.  (Williams, incidentally, started out in the horror
genre himself.  Some of his plays, like SUDDENLY LAST SUMMER, still
show the hand of the horror writer.  This film may well represent the
sort of thing he might have written had he continued.)  The story give
us a sensory portrait of how the world is different for the Undead.
Much of the film is just concerned introspectively with the condition
of being a vampire and with the inter-relationships of the vampires.
Lestat accepts his condition and happily goes about the business of
killing.  Louis is more moral and detests his parasitic inclinations.
Claudia is torn between the ways of the two.  This is not to say that
the entire film is cerebral.  There certainly is some action and the
plot does advance.  But Jordan intentionally makes plot second to
style.  His story is told with dramatic visual style which takes full
advantage of moody settings in New Orleans and Paris.  The photography
is by Philippe Rousselot, who is known for atmospheric pieces like
DIVA, HENRY & JUNE, and SOMMERSBY.
     As far as to acting, I would say honors to all, but  the most
amazing acting award goes to Kirsten Dunst as Claudia.  Anna Paquin won
an Oscar for far less interesting acting in THE PIANO.  I do not know
the age of Dunst, but she has to play all the emotions of an adult
woman in the body of an eleven-year-old.  It sounds like an impossible
casting job.  Amazingly, Dunst has an adult's acting talent while she
still looks the part of a child.  I would not surprised if we end up
hearing a lot of her in the years to come.  Of course there was the
whole brouhaha over Tom Cruise in the role of Lestat.  Rice was at
first very vocal against the casting choice, then later claims to have
said that she liked Cruise in the role.  I went through the same set of
emotions.  This is a major departure for Cruise and he plays Lestat
with just the right air of flippancy.  It is hard to understand how
anyone saw it initially, but Cruise is just about perfect for Lestat.
Brad Pitt as Louis is fine, as the sometimes bewildered and sometimes
vengeful, but always well-intentioned vampire who at least nominally
the main character.  In smaller roles we have Christian Slater, Stephen
Rea (who was also in Jordan's CRYING GAME) and Antonio Banderas.
Whatever faults the film has, it is not in the acting.
     Neil Jordan seems to make one good film after another on the theme
of the sub-culture of people who live outside normal society.  As his
films go, this is not one of his best efforts.  But as far as an
exploration of the world of the undead, Anne Rice has nothing to
complain about.  This film get a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Geffen Pictures
Directed by     Neil Jordan
Written by      Anne Rice, from her novel
Cast            Tom Cruise, Brad Pitt, Antonio Banderas, Stephen Rea,
                Kirsten Dunst, Christian Slater
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for excessive gore and violence)
Running Time    122 minutes
Reviewed at     General Cinema, Raleigh (11NOV94)
     INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE is a triumph of tone--a masterpiece of
mood where atmosphere is everything.  Like, say, Tim Burton's BATMAN,
the sum here is more impressive than the parts.  Forget the
scavenger-hunt story and the lethargic line readings of Brad Pitt, Neil
Jordan's follow-up to THE CRYING GAME oozes with enough malice to send
even the toughest talk show host screaming.
     Anne Rice adapts her 1976 novel about a pair of 18th Century
vampires to questionable effect.  Her dialogue is rich, but cumbersome,
and the actors stumble through it better than they should.  Best of the
bunch is Kirsten Dunst, playing an Orleans orphan taken under the wing
of the vampires. She'll get a nomination.  Brad Pitt's a loss as Louis
(Vampire #1), but Tom Cruise is toothy fun as his amoral, arrogant
mentor, Lestat.  Too bad he disappears in the second hour, though.  His
replacement (the smoldering Antonio Banderas) barely registers as a
character.
     The hide-and-seek story doesn't explain all of what's happening
on-screen, suggesting that an earlier cut of the film was more coherent
than what's presented here.  Someone in the producer's chair probably
pruned this baby in the interest of streamlining.  INTERVIEW WITH THE
VAMPIRE feels rushed at 122 minutes and forces the viewer to
extrapolate the finer plot plots.  Not good.
     Condensing the story kills most of the visceral kicks, as well.
In the second hour, for example, there's no build-up to the fiery
finale; what should be a potent climax is little more than an amusing
set piece.
     Dante Ferretti's production design is a feast for the eyes; he's
just one of the many top technicians who expertly drain the life from
this story of death.  One question: who's responsible for all the
muted dialogue?  Don't be surprised if you miss half of what's said.

Author
Nizam Ahmed
     INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE: THE VAMPIRE CHRONICLES.  It doesn't
exactly trip off the tongue, does it?  Why the extraneous subtitle was
added I guess we will never know.  What we do know is that this film is
shortly to get its video release here in the UK.
     We all know about Anne Rice's horror as she realized her dark,
sexually ambiguous hero Lestat from her novels was to be played by Tom
Cruise, but it's hard to see what all the fuss is about.  Despite
having his name in lights above the movie poster, Cruise is nothing
more than a supporting role.  Brad Pitt plays Louis, the focus of the
film. as he recalls his centuries-old, unaging life to an interviewer
(Christian Slater).  He tells of his creation by another vampire,
Lestat, their life as they set up home together, his own creation of a
vampire "daughter" Claudia and his search in Paris for Lestat's
creator.  The story encompasses hundreds of years, and ends in the
present day.
     The whole structure of this film is S-L-O-W.  You really do get
the feeling that 300 years have passed when you leave the cinema!
Every camera shot, every scene is done majestically, taking in the
sumptuous sets, the fabulous scenery.  You can sense the sadness and
despair that immortal creatures would face, unable to die as everything
around them changes.  But this is also the main flaw of INTERVIEW WITH
THE VAMPIRE--if good production values are not what makes a film for
you, it's boring.
     Brad Pitt is apparently a "sex symbol."  Throughout this film, he
looks and acts more like Neil from THE YOUNG ONES.  He can't carry the
weight of the film alone, so it is up to the others to support him.
Cruise is good.  His strange manic energy fits his role, but a
ludicrous sequence which reminded me of a bad monster movie, with
Cruise coming back to life after multiple killings, ruined a good
character role.  Walking and talking with a body looking like charcoal
is a real credibility-loser.  Of the others, Kirsten Dunst who plays
Claudia is annoying, although that's probably how she was scripted, and
Antonio Banderas (Armand) is just another good-looking young actor
recruited to grab the punters.
     In fact, the whole thing reeks of marketing:
     "Hey, let's get three hunks together and cast them as vampires!"
"We could get Neil Jordan to direct and maybe pick up an Oscar or two!"
"Yeah, that would boost attendances, wouldn't it?"  "Quick! Let's get a
best selling novel and adapt it."  Any artistry that may have existed in
this production is muted by the sheer commercialism of it.  In the end,
you fail to see what it's trying to be.  A horror?  Not really.  A
drama?  Nah.  A romance maybe?  Hard to say.  Looks great, shame about
the story.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
Vampire films, as well as other horror films, are usually dumb and
predictable B-movies, meant to scare us by cliches and simple shocks.  It is
therefore interesting to watch Neil Jordans recent film that is not only
visually stunning, but has also a plot worth making movies about.
Based on Anne Rice's novel, "Interview with a Vampire" is a long, dark trip
to hell.
The film opens with gothic quire and dark streets of present-day San
Francisco. The camera slowly find particular window. A shape of a young man
is visible in the darkness. "So you want me to tell you the story of my
life?". The mysterious man is Louis (Brad Pitt), a two-century old vampire,
telling his story to a fascinated interviewer (Christian Slater). His tale
opens in 1791 Louisiana, just south of New Orleans, where Louis falls victim
to the vampire Lestat (Tom Cruise). Given a choice between death and eternal
life as one of the undead, Louis chooses the latter, a decision he will
forever regret. Everlasting life and eternal youth, promised to him by
Lestat, turn instead into never ending suffering, damned to eternal hunger
for blood and longing for peace.
Louis cannot kill with the impunity of Lestat, but, to sate his hunger, he
must feed, and the blood of animals is not enough. Eventually, he pierces
the neck of a grief-stricken young girl named Claudia (Kirsten Dunst), whom
Lestat then curses with his unholy form of resurrection so that she can be a
surrogate daughter to both himself and Louis. For a while, they are one
"big, happy family." But all things end, and Claudia's growing resentment of
Lestat fuels a bloody confrontation. When Luis and Claudia break loose from
Lestat, they travel to Paris, where the Euro-vamps Santiago (Stephen Rea)
and Armand (Antonio Banderas ), who introduced them to a bigger world of the
damned.
Director Neil Jordan ("The Crying Game") together with the talented director
of cinematography Philippe Rousselot and composer Elliot Goldenthal has
created an incredible atmosphere. As the film begins, there is an incredible
palette of colors, beautiful sunrises, lush golden fields, green forests,
inky-blue clouds and blending sun. When Luis is "born to darkness",
everything suddenly changes to dark velvet, lit only by the silver
moonlight. The beautiful production design by Dante Ferretti , wonderful
costumes and art direction by Malcolm Middleton re-create the multiple
historical periods in the film. From the renaissance New Orleans and the
beautiful rococo Paris of the 18th century, to our present days.
The casting is likewise good, involving some of the most famous and
beautiful stars of Hollywood, Ireland and Spain. The controversial casting
of Tom Cruise as Lestat is incredibly effective. Cruise is energetic,
sinister, charismatic, wild and bloodthirsty. Cruise's Lestat likes to
seduce young women before exacting his dark red sustenance. With alarming
swiftness, the victims switch from sexual excitement to outright horror, as
his murderous purpose becomes clear. "...Kill them mercifully, but do it.
You are what you are..for do not doubt, you are a killer!" That is how
Lestat is teaching Luis. But behind that furious facade is anger and
loneliness that he carries through the centuries and tries to smother with
nightly rampages. Brad Pitt is equally convincing as the "vampire with a
human soul". Antonio Banderas and Stephen Rea are effective, but since they
play more or less secondary characters, their performances are almost
invisible. The greatest performance in the film comes suprisingly from the
young Kristen Dunst, who manages to create an incredibly emotional and
believable character. The world is changing around the little child, but she
does not. She remains unchangeable - a child for all eternity. Only her
wise, dark eyes reveal her age.
Ironically the film's only miss is the script. Anne Rice's novel is a very
interesting read, and her script is rich, colorful and emotional, but it is
also tiering and too melancholic, at times resembling a soap opera:
Claudia: "....Is that what I should do? Let you go..my father, my Luis, who
made me...Who will look after me, my dark angel, when you are gone?"
Luis: "Everything will be alright.."
Claudia: "Do you really believe that?"
And then they hug emotionally. Moments like those displayed above and Luis'
self-pity is a bit tiresome.
However Rice's script is otherwise strong and well structured, bringing up
humor and comic episodes, that were more or less hidden in the book. When
Lestat finds Claudia's dead dressmaker, whom she has killed, he cries out:
"Who will make you that dress now? Be a little practical....Never in the
house !" Moments like that are both entertaining and appealing.
Neil Jordan's direction is beautiful and sensual as he plays with
interesting issues like eternity, homosexuality, love and loneliness. His
gothic saga is not meant to scare, but to display these issues differently.
Wrapped up in mystery, his new, original picture brings vampire-films to a
new height.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I never thought I could endorse the movie that aligned 
pretty-boy stars Tom Cruise, Brad Pitt, Antonio Banderas and 
Christian Slater and also inspired teenage losers with no identity to 
dye their hair red or black and wear those damn Army boots and Jim 
Morrison t-shirts everywhere. The ideal situation here would have 
involved me a) watching the movie, b) hating it, and c) writing a 
scathing review at the expense of Cruise, Pitt and weirdo novelist 
Anne Rice.
        Unfortunately for me, I enjoyed INTERVIEW WITH THE 
VAMPIRE from the beginning. It was fresh, original and--most 
importantly--violent. There were throat-slittings, beheadings and 
raging fires to appeal to the basest of animal instincts while 
counterbalancing that with intellectual prose obviously drawn straight 
from Rice's text. It does sound a little strange coming from the mouths 
of Cruise and Pitt, much like frat boys putting on a production of 
"Macbeth" ("Et tu, dude?"), but if you've ever had a fantasy about Brad 
Pitt eating a poodle (and please keep it to yourself if you have), 
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE is the movie you've been waiting 
for.
        The story begins with vampire Pitt recounting his life story to 
reporter Slater. We learn of how Cruise sucked and sucked on his neck 
(I said NECK!) and how they both seemed to enjoy it a little too much. 
Soon, Pitt was an immortal with a thirst for blood, but since he was the 
humane kind, he had to suck the life out of rats and poodles instead. 
You know, with all the Morrison-worshipping vampire clones out 
there emulating this movie, that's the one thing I'd like to see one of 
those freaks do. Of course most of them _are_ vegetarians...
        Cruise attempts to placate Pitt by "vampirizing" a 12-year-old 
girl (Kristen Dunst, in a remarkable performance) for his pleasure. Ah 
yes, the old placate-the-pedophile trick. It doesn't work in this case, 
unless the result Cruise wanted was to have his throat cut. So with 
Cruise out of the picture, Pitt and Dunst are free to enjoy the 
Renaissance together. Sure, the whole Pitt-Dunst relationship is a little 
sick, but there's no suggestion of a sexual relationship between the 
two, although they _do_ share a coffin.
        Yes, INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE is plenty perverse, a 
dark movie with violence and suction for the whole family, 17 and up 
that is.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE is the screen version of Anne Rice's
extremely popular book by the same name.  Since she wrote the
screenplay, I would assume the movie is close to the book which I have
never read.
     INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE starts in the present in Market Street
in San Francisco with Christian Slater interviewing a vampire played by
Brad Pitt.  It seems a couple of hundred years ago, Pitt was willing
made into a vampire by another vampire (Tom Cruise).  We then switch to
the past and watch Pitt's start as a vampire with Cruise teaching him
the ropes.
     So what is it like being a vampire you ask?  Well, you get to
drink gallons and gallons of blood.  I can handle that so long as there
is something else that makes me want to watch the screen other than the
drinking of blood.  I got bored silly and totally disgusted.  I am not
easily turned off; Pulp Fiction is one of my favorite movies this year.
     INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE was way off of any scale I can imagine.
You had one long scene after another where they would pierce someone's
vein, pour the gushing blood into a glass, and then pass the glass
around to share.  They killed rats with their teeth and got their
mouths dripping with the blood of the rats.  Ditto for pet dogs and for
hundreds of birds.  This movie is the grossest one I have ever seen in
my entire life.  Where are the animal rights people when you need them?
     On the good side, the filming is beautiful.  The colors in the
movie all have a warm glow to them.  The art decoration of the old
plantation was well done.  I applaud Cruise for taking so much risk as
an actor, and I was amazed how much he was able to hide his pretty boy
self.
     The movie runs a painfully long 2:00.  It is incorrectly rated
R--this is clearly an NC-17 show full of extremely violent
images.  It could give anyone nightmares for a week.  I recommend
this show to no one and award it * only for the previously mentioned
technical merit.  Were it not so well crafted, I would have given this
despicable show no stars at all.  I hated this show and found it
painful in the extreme to point my eyes to the screen.  You could not
pay me to sit through it again.  Yes, I have many friends that I
respect who loved it, but I honestly do not understand why.  At any
rate, my pain is over since I do not have to watch any more of it.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: December 9, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
