Title
Review for Operator, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Americans love lawyers. The evidence?  We are the world's
most litigious society, proving that we can't get enough of them. 
We watch courtroom dramas.  We recognize that attorneys make
their guilty clients 'fess up, they charge reasonable fees, and they
always wait until they're approached before they take a case.  In
fact studies have repeatedly shown that we accord them as
much prestige as we confer on used car salesmen.
   Of course as in every profession there are a few bad apples:
those who not only bend the law to get their clients off but are not
quite ethical in their dealings with others outside the courtroom. 
Gary Wheelan is one such operator.  He cheats on his beautiful
and trusting wife repeatedly.  He gambles compulsively, thinking
nothing of placing bets as much as five large on sporting events
with his bookie, a health-food nut with a Ph.D. in physics.  When
he's stressed, he takes out his anger on innocent people such as
telephone operators (another group of workers whom we love for
their efficiency and courtesy).  But he's a good lawyer and we
want the best for him, so writer-director Jon Dichter gives the
handsome 31-year-old striving solicitor a chance at redemption. 
Will he go for it, or will he be like a character in a Neil LaBute film
who meets a murky end?
  "The Operator," a Black Wolf production which enjoys a fast
pace, noteworthy performances by the entire ensemble, crackling
good writing, alternating the sardonic with the comical and the
satanic with the redemptive.  This is a thoroughly enjoyable
experience, a modern fable of an Everyman in discord who could
have moved straight up the ladder to be one of the most
distinguished denizens of Dallas but chooses the wrong path and
loses all.  Moored in metaphysical waters, "The Operator" could
have cut ice with medievalists, fond of miracle and morality plays,
but the anonymous spinners of tall tales a millenium or so back
would not have enjoyed David Sewell McCann and Kara
Sutherlin's sharp production values.
   "The Operator" opens on Gary Wheelan (Michael Laurence), a
lawyer who is himself caught in flagrante delicto by the husband
of a woman with whom he is enjoying a tryst, signalling the
audience that it's in for a rollicking good time if director Dichter
could keep up the comic pace and inject appropriate gravidas
into the extra-legal proceedings.  Having lost a major bet with his
bookie, Doc (Stephen Tobolowsky and unable to get through to a
client, he takes out his stress on a directory-assistance operator
(Jacqueline Kim)  who retaliates massively. Giving herself the
sobriquet of Shiva, the Hindu destroyer, she listens in to his
conversations and plays around with his credit card.  This
mystical matron proceeds to wreak havoc on the life of her prey.
   "The Operator" is a stunning psychological thriller  with
Hitchcockian undertones, the sort of drama which uplifts while
providing felicitous merriment to movie-goers fortunate to choose
this indie fare over the latest Hollywood blockbuster.  Michael
Laurence, known to avid acolytes of the New York stage for his
roles in classics like "Hamlet" and hip, contemporary productions
like Sam Shepard's "Tooth of Crime," knocks out a stunning
performance as a man who could have reached the heights in his
profession but, worked over by a phone company employee
wittier and smarter than any I have known, ends up a sadder and
wiser man.  His predicament hits home largely because of stellar
performances by the likes of Stephen Tobolowsky as an angry
bookmaker who enjoys dining on carrot juice while explaining to
his luckless customer that physics and religion are indeed
compatible. "You reap what you sow" meets "bodies in motion
tend to remain in motion."   Brion James as embezzler Vernon
Woods tests the penchant of attorneys to get their clients off no
matter how scurrilous their activities, pleased that his shady
lawyer has no problem challenging one prospective black juror
after another to eliminate those who would see the fraud for what
he is.
   "The Operator," then has what bright movie-goers want in a
theater experience: Sex and spirituality, phoniness and
philosophy, transgression and redemption--all put together in a
nicely honed package embracing the supernatural and the
sensible.
Not Rated.  Running time: 108 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
     Exhibit A in why you shouldn't be rude to telemarketers, no matter
your mood.
     Indie flick THE OPERATOR is a hybrid black comedy/Hitchcock
thriller about a real cad named Gary (Michael Laurence) -- a lawyer,
quite naturally -- who "reaps what he sows" after telling off a vengeful
telephone operator.  Gary cheats on his wife (and his mistress),
gambles, spends the savings on a fancy car, and represents dirtbags at
the office.  When the stress of his life gets too much to bear, he lets
a poor Ma Ball employee we known only as Shiva (Jacqueline Kim) take the
brunt of his wrath, which she turns back upon him in spades.
     Soon enough, thanks to the apparently unchecked power of the phone
company, Gary is out of the house, his credit cards are cancelled, and
he appears to be headed for unemployment.  The bulk of the movie
consists of Gary trying to ferret out his tormenter and coming to terms
with the notion of karma.
     In this regard, THE OPERATOR has some of its best moments, and
newcomer Laurence shows some excellent dramatic range as he eventually
welcomes the pain being visited upon him.  Set in Dallas,
writer/director Jon Dichter (who introduced his film at South by
Southwest) repeatedly called THE OPERATOR a "quintessential Texas
movie."  I'm not sure it speaks to the common fears of most of Texas,
though most of the characters do sport southern accents (although "Drew
Carey" star Christa Miller's is pretty over the top).
     In the end, THE OPERATOR is a pretty good time, especially
considering its obvious budget constraints.  My only real beef is with
the whole idea.  I pray to god the phone operators can't really transfer
funds from my account, charge things to my credit cards, and get my car
repossessed.  Hell, I doubt they can balance their checkbooks.
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
