Title
Review for Art of Amália, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Just eighteen days before the world premiere screening of
Bruno De Almeida's non-fiction pic "The Art of Amalia," we
received word that Julia Child has been awarded the Legion
of Honor, the highest honor that France can bestow.  If you
know the French, you can believe that this medal is rarely
awarded to a foreigner.  How does this current event relate to
Senhor de Almeida's film?  Amalia Rodrigues, Portugal's
best-known singer, was similarly given that award.  For Ms.
Rodrigues the award was perhaps more distinctive since,
after all, Julia Child devoted her life to promoting French
cuisine in the U.S., while Amalia Rodrigues merely performed
several times in Paris.  Obviously Amalia is a performer worth
knowing about.  Bruno de Almeida, who lives in New York,
does a remarkable job bringing her to life in his non-fiction
piece--a ninety-minute work edited down from a five-hour
miniseries that ran on European TV, one which the prestigous
online magazine Film Threat calls "One of the year's best
documentaries."  "The Art of Amalia" is crammed so full of a
variety of song excerpts--count 'em, sixty-seven--that one
wonders how much additional information de Almeida could
have delivered by the unedited version.
   "The Art of Amalia" is notable in part for two reasons.  One
is that the documentary does not go into her personal life,
which should be considered nobody's business unless a
performer wants particularly to expose her affairs to a broad
public. The other is that de Almeida avoids the soul-killing
mistake made by so documentarians of making an audience
sit through a plethora of talking heads--nieces, uncles,
nephews, friends, all gassing about the subject.  There's
really only one talking head, one person sitting and
discussing the subject of the film between shots of actual
performances, and that's Amalia herself.
   Now, nobody can accuse one of the world's great singers
of false modesty.  Discussing her art, she settles poised with
her long, flaming, dyed red hair, talking without apologies
about how she almost literally brought down the house in one
concert in Italy, how she is adored wherever she goes, how
she sang her heart out to the wild applause of her fans. 
That's OK. Why pretend?  We see proof of her
accomplishments by watching her in old newsreels, clips of
studio pressings, and best of all live concerts in Paris, Rome,
Naples, Los Angeles, Libson, Tokyo New York and Rio
among other cities.  We see how she guides huge throngs
into clapping to the rhythms of her more upbeat songs.  
   While we watch Amalia sing in Italian (Tarantella), in
French (Aie Mourrir Pour Toi), and in English (The Nearness
of You), her specialty is fado--Portugal's answer to Spain's
flamenco in that fado songs are passionate, sad, moody, or
to coin the oxymoron used in this film, sweet sadness.  While
flamenco has been embraced by the world to a much greater
extent, popularized in America by Brooklynite Jose Greco,
fado is a genre that has relied for its popularity on just one
person, the subject of this documentary. 
   Despite her extravagance of language during her interview
appearance, she is (as Internet critic Brian Matherly points
out for the Jacksonville Film Journal) "overwhelmed at times"
when on stage or presented with medals such as Portugal's
Great Cross of the Order of St. Iago de Espada, and in
Mathherly's view does not emulate "the actions of an
egotistical star who revels in her spotlight and immense
fame."  In fact, she tell us that despite her prominence and
fortune, she was never a happy person and in one instance--
during a trip to New York in 1985--she had planned to end
her life (because of a tumor she had developed, not because
of her experiences in the Big Apple).  But tumor removed,
she continued her 50-year career, surprisingly enough losing
little of her vocal qualities even into her seventies.
   Bruno de Almeida has done a splended job of bringing
together historical film clips from as far back as 1920,
interspersing scenes from performers who influenced Ms.
Rodrigues such as Fred Astaire.  Sadly, she died one week
before the completion of the film, so that our only chance
now to hear her would be through her many, many recordings
and this exceptional film.
Not Rated.  Running time: 90 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
     I don't know Fado from Fabian, but I do know what makes a good
documentary.  Regardless of how flattering your opinion is of legendary
Portuguese singer Amália Rodrigues, you owe it to yourself to separate
her talents from the movie that documents them, because the film clearly
doesn't do her justice.
     The Art of Amália starts with promise, with ex-Talking Head David
Byrne waxing earnestly about when he first heard Rodrigues's music.  But
the film abruptly detours after that one minute, becoming a strictly
linear monologue telling the story her life.  The picture is more boring
than a history textbook.  Why?  Because little in Amália's life was or
is extraordinary.  We wander, year by year, from her early days as a
nightclub singer to her career in cinema to more singing to the many
awards she's won and finally... to more singing.  And poof, the story is
over.  Ready for The Madonna Story, anyone?
     If you think I'm just a naysayer, consider a film like Theremin: An
Electronic Odyssey, which documented the life of a musician but did it
with style, despite the fact that the audience had never heard of the
man.  Amália was never kidnapped in her sleep.  Amália was not in the
KGB.  Nothing much happened in her life that's film-worthy at all. 
Amália sang and she sang a lot.  And while she was very good at it, that
doesn't mean it makes a great film.
     Then again, neither do slow zooms on newspaper clippings,
advertisements bearing her name, and still photographs, plus interviews
with some of the most poorly-spoken people ever to grace the screen. 
The production values are nonexistent.  The narration is banal and
obvious.
     Ultimately, even big fans of Amália are going to be disappointed
with The Art of Amália, the sole bright spot being her Fado music, which
is heartfelt and tears at the soul.  Some 60 songs are rendered by her,
in whole or in part, throughout the 90-minute film, and they're
certainly pleasing to the ears... provided you're tuning out the rest of
the picture.
http://www.arcofilms.com/amalia/index.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Ross Anthony
With an eccentric introduction by the delightfully eccentric David Byrne,
this documentary spans the lifetime career of Portuguese's singing gem,
Amalia Rodriguez. Born in 1920, Amalia's natural talent brought her quickly
to the forefront of international music and easily held her there nearly to
the end of her life in 1999.
Though dabbling in other styles, Amalia is synonymous with Fado - the
Portuguese version of blues. As Amalia puts it, "Fado is Lament."
Filmed in traditional documentary style; we watch clip after clip of this
vocal treasure singing her heart out with intermittent historical commentary
by the English speaking narrator. From Portugal to France to Italy to the
USA, the documentary opens our eyes to TV in other countries. Amalia's own
remembrances captured in an interview during the last year of her life are
added to the mix. She speaks in Portuguese, while subtitles flash across the
screen. It's a pleasant enough recipe for a half-hour program, but looses
its punch by the hour mark. Interviews with friends and loved ones would
have helped.
Additionally, the program seldom delves below the surface of success.
Turning the angle to explore how a "singer of the sad" handles success and
stardom could have enhanced the attraction of this production. Amalia
herself says, "I was never really happy. I was never a cheerful person." Her
frank demeanor and obvious talent make her naturally fascinating ... but the
film attends only a glossy nostalgia.
Minor suggestions: Three or four times subtitles wisp across the screen
faster than the average reader can grasp. Slow them down by taking advantage
of the moments when the interviewee is paused between sentences. The mention
of a blues collaboration begged a sample clip, though none was offered.
Lastly, the film comes to a close with only a brief footnote that Amalia had
died a week before its completion. In consistent fashion, no further
information is given regarding her death, leaving the audience wondering.
Placing this footnote prior to the last long cut of Amalia singing, would
have at least emphasized its treasure while ending the film on a sigh and a
tear instead of a question mark.
Even if Fado is not your fancy, they'll be no avoiding the genuine allure of
Amalia Rodrigues' fantastic voice. Recorded through inferior microphones,
stored on imperfect film and out-dated tape formats, the rich tonal quality
of her voice still rings resilient. She must have been absolutely chilling
in person.
The Art of Amalia. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Amalia Rodrigues.
Narrated by John Ventimiglia.
Directed by Bruno de Almeida.
Written by Frank Coelho and Bruno de Almeida.
Produced by Manuel Falcao at Avatar/Arco/Valentim de Carvalho TV.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
