Title
Review for Gun Shy (2000)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Reviewing "Eye of the Beholder" which opened one week
before "Gun Shy," some critics expressed their wit in the
following way: "When The Eye accidentally witnesses
Joanna in the process of committing a murder, he becomes
instantly smitten with her.  Who wouldn't be?"  A similar event
occurs in Eric Blakeney's "Gun Shy."  Nurse Judy Tipp
(Sandra Bullock) administers a barium enema to DEA agent
Charlie (Liam Neeson), and aggressively pursues him for a
date.  Who wouldn't?  "Gun Shy," a generally unfunny parody
of the wise-guys genre done with greater style in Kelly
Makin's "Mickey Blue Eyes," features Liam Neeson in an
allegedly comic role of an 18-year veteran of anti-drug police
work who dreams of retiring to a condo with an oceanfront
view.  Blakeney, noting the success of recent comic pictures
like Harold Ramis's "Analyze This," capitalizes on the current
fashion of showing heroes and mobsters who are
psychologically vulnerable--who are just plain scared and
who are playing the game with an eye to getting out of the
business.  But "Gun Shy" substitutes some bathroom humor
for the elan of "Mickey Blue Eyes." He also shoehorns a
romantic interlude that belongs in another movie and which
seems to exist only because Sandra Bullock, its producer,
sadly thinks she can make chemistry with Liam Neeson.  As
though the romantic breaks are not enough to divert our
attention from the principal, unamusing and forced storyline,
Blakeney--whose credits include occasional writing for
"Cagney and Lacey" and "Moonlighting" and who is
scheduled to direct the forthcoming "Without Apparent
Motive"--throws in some Ramis-style sessions on the couch,
none of which up to the humor of just about any of Bob
Newhart's late, great TV episodes.
   Borrowing a theme from Ben Younger's feature "Boiler
Room" (about a group of day traders in the stock market),
Blakeney's story deals with a couple of gay Colombian drug
lords and a family of wise guys who employ yuppie-ish
Howard (Paul Ben-Victor) in a scheme to manipulate prices
on the commodities market.  They buy up enough soybeans
to raise prices and to convert forty million dollars in cash to
billions in securities.  Mobsters Fidel (Jose Zuniga) and
Estuvio (Michael Delorenzo) team up with the reluctant Fulvio
(Oliver Platt) and are pursued in turn by the disinclined Drug
Enforcement Agency officer Charlie.
   "Gun Shy" relies on two comic themes. One is Charlie's
fear of criminals, justified enough since he had come within
seconds of being blown away by an Uzi and had witnessed
the execution of his partner just before a team of agents
storm into the blood-soaked room to clean up the gangsters. 
Charlie's psychosomatic stomach problems lead him into the
capable hands of Judy Tipp, who assures him that his
abdomen is reacting strictly to his anxieties and does what
she can to show him a good time before his anticipated
execution by the mob.  The other is the vaudevillian antics of
the cartoonish gangsters, principally Fulvio, who is said to be
able to read a person's soul through his eyes and who at one
point engages in an allegedly amusing staring contest with
Charlie--who has infiltrated the mob.
   The politically incorrect jokes are of the nature of Fidel's
going ballistic when he hears that Howard has bought
soybeans with the gang's money.  "What am I, a beaner?" he
shouts, dismissing any possibility that his Colombia family
ever went for the stereotyped food popular with Hispanics. 
The gross-out humor includes a joke that a gangster makes
about Fulvio's prostate in the obligatory men's room scene,
for which he gets his testicles shot off.  To add to the cliches,
Charlie participates in group therapy sessions with the uptight
analysands of psychiatrist Dr. Bleckner (Michael Mantell),
though Fulvio--who is henpecked by his bitchy, chain-smoking
wife Gloria (Mary McCormack), is obviously in greater need
of the doctor's couch.
   Neither romantic nor dark, neither humorous nor satiric,
"Gun Shy" tries to be "Bob Newhart,"  "Goodfellas," "Mickey
Blue Eyes" and "Forces of Nature" and succeeds at none of
the above.
Rated R.  Running Time: 102 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Michael Dequina
Sandra Bullock co-stars and produces; Liam Neeson, whose recognition is
at an all-time high thanks to a certain sci-fi prequel, is the lead;
character actor extraordinaire Oliver Platt plays Neeson's foil.  An
impressive assemblage of talent headlines _Gun_Shy_, yet Buena Vista is
only giving the film an initial regional release.  It could be argued
that the comedy's unconventional nature factored into that decision, but
a more convincing argument would be that the film simply falls far short
of its ambitions.
Neeson, in a rare comic role, gamely but awkwardly plays Charlie Mayo, a
deep cover DEA agent whose legendary toughness has been broken after one
particularly traumatic failed sting.  Even so, he is assigned to bust
mafia hitman Fulvio Nesstra (Oliver Platt) and Colombian drug dealer
Fidel Vaillar (Jose Zuniga) in a complex money laundering scheme.  The
newly-spineless Charlie is deathly afraid of the famously hot-tempered
Fulvio, but behind his cold stare hides someone decidedly less vicious.
Writer-director Eric Blakeney was obviously shooting for something along
the lines of a previous Buena Vista release, _Grosse_Pointe_Blank_: a bit
of the madcap tinged with a bit of the dark.  The difference is that
while the makers of that film aimed for smart, ironic humor, Blakeney
contents himself with cheap physical and bodily function gags.  Fidel's
associate Estuvio (Michael DeLorenzo) gets a testicle shot off and walks
strange for the rest of the film.  An even more tiresome running gag is
Charlie's stress-related illness; he cannot control his bowels, so every
so often we hear his stomach grumble and see him run to toilets--not
exactly what I'd call hilarious.
Charlie's health is what leads him to meet Judy Tipp (Bullock), a nurse
for whom he quickly falls.  This romantic angle never feels of a piece
with the rest of _Gun_Shy_, and the blame falls largely on Bullock.  She
is an easily likable actress, and she looks beautiful throughout the
film, but she isn't right for the part.  Not only does she have no
chemistry with Neeson, she is a bit too generically sunny to belong in
this darker world.  Blakeney also holds some blame, for Judy isn't a very
interesting character to begin with; she's just the token love interest.
In fact, the only truly interesting--and truly funny--characters in
_Gun_Shy_ are the henpecked Fulvio, played marvelously by Platt, and his
tough cookie wife, Gloria, played by a scene-stealing and unrecognizable
Mary McCormack.  One wishes that Blakeney had written a film that focused
squarely on them, for Charlie's story and the half-hearted mystery
revolving around who's really behind the shady deals never catches fire. 
Platt and McCormack ignite from the start, and one gets the sense that
_Gun_Shy_ would have had they been the main characters.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "GUN SHY" (Hollywood Pictures)
        It's got Sandra Bullock and Liam Neeson but something went
terribly wrong with the incomprehensible script and lame direction of
this silly mob comedy. Neeson plays a legendary undercover DEA agent
who suffers from post-traumatic stress syndrome after a failed sting
operation. That's why he seeks psychiatric help and winds up in group
therapy and takes up with a spunky nurse, Sandra Bullock, who gives
him an enema. Meanwhile, the nasty DEA chief (Mitch Pileggi of TV's
X-Files) assigns him to complete one final covert operation wherein he
must escape the wrath of a hot-tempered, trigger-happy Mafia leader -
known as "the Jeffrey Dahmer of hitmen"- played by Oliver Platt, and
his vulgar, no-nonsense wife, Mary McCormack, who are involved with
Colombian drug dealers in a complex money-laundering scheme. Sound
like Analyze This? Sound like The Sopranos?  The producers should be
that lucky!  Just because TV writer/director Eric Blakeney worked on
Moonlighting, Wiseguy, and Max Headroom does not mean he can pull off
this kind of unconventional feature film, particularly when he
presents a colonic irrigation as a romantic encounter and relies on
feeble poop jokes for laughs. Remember Grosse Pointe Blank? It
explored much the same ironic territory - far better.  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Gun Shy misses the target with a fumbling
4. Few laughs, little suspense and several talented actors who surely
could have found a better picture.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

GUN SHY (director/written: Eric Blakeney; cinematographer:Tom Richmond;
editor: Pamela Martin; cast: Liam Neeson (Charlie), Oliver Platt (Fulvio
Nesstra), Jose Zuniga (Fidel Vaillar), Michael DeLorenzo (Estuvio), Andy
Lauer (Jason Cane), Richard Schiff (Elliott), Paul Ben-Victor (Howard),
Gregg Daniel (Jonathan), Ben Weber (Mark), Sandra Bullock (Judy Tipp),
Mary McCormack (Gloria Nesstra), Michael Mantell (Dr. Bleckner), Mitch
Pileggi (Dexter Helvenshaw), Frank Vincent (Carmine Minetti), 2000)
"Gun Shy" puts in a lot of effort to be zanier than the other mobster
comedy films it takes the same theme as, except here it is a lawman
instead of a hood who is suffering from anxiety attacks and is in need
of seeing a shrink. Sometimes it succeeds in being mildly funny, like
when the legendary DEA undercover agent Charlie Mayo (Liam Neeson) finds
romance with a gastroenterologist's nurse, Judy Tipp (Sandra Bullock),
while she is giving him a barium enema. He has a chronic stomach
problem, which is used as a running gag throughout. It was also amusing
to see him in need of a psychiatrist (Mantell), who assures him "You
need to share more than anyone I've ever known." Liam talks his head off
to the shrink, but really gets help when he joins a men's group therapy
session and bonds with them as they talk about how they hate their jobs,
whereby he opens up to them how he lost his nerve for the job. Liam is
having second thoughts about his career in the DEA, as he is consumed
with fear that he will be killed in his latest undercover assignment. He
feels vulnerable after the last operation nearly got him killed. What
Liam wants now is a place with an ocean view and early retirement after
18 years on the job.
On this current dangerous assignment, Liam helps in putting through a
deal between the Colombian drug cartel's queer son Fidel Vaillar (Jose
Zuniga) and the Mafia don's psychotic son-in-law, Fulvio (Oliver Platt).
Fidel wants to money-launder the cartel's drug money and needs Fulvio's
help. Fulvio has hired a yuppie Wall Street investor Jason Cane (Andy
Lauer) to do the money-laundering and work a stock-fraud scheme. Liam as
the undercover agent is caught in the middle, as he is the calm one who
tries to keep each side from killing each other. His m.o. is that things
are constantly going wrong for him, but they always turn out OK.
Everything is played for laughs; Fidel and Fulvio are cartoon figures,
with the only difference being Oliver Platt is funny and Jose Zuniga is
seen as either being psychotic or preening, but he's not funny. He is
seen most of the time pouting over his bodyguard (DeLorenzo), who is his
lover.
This is TV writer Eric Blakeney's debut feature as director-writer, and
he gets mixed reviews. The comedy was mild, the script was choppy, and
the story had an inane charm to it, but no more. The usually bland Liam
Neeson had more of a flare for this type of farce than I thought he
would have and Platt, in his inimical style, got off a few good
one-liners, such as "Fun is overrated." Sandra Bullock, whose acting
career is spinning ever-downward, had a small role that only required
she look good in that oversized shirt she likes to always wear. Her role
put no other demands on her. She produced the film. Platt's sarcastic
wife (Mary McCormack) had a few zippy retorts, which she delivered in a
heavy New York City accent, as she made her presence felt in her very
small role.
Overall, the comedy was too slight, as was everything else about this
film, to make it more than passable entertainment. Its nearest relative
in ganster comedy films is "Analyze This"(Gun Shy was made before that
film), but this film didn't have De Niro as its star, which made this
film seem not as good, though it was on the same level.
But, if you ask me to state confidentially, the worst thing one can say
about this film, I would say that it suffered from too much flatulence.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ross Anthony
A wonderful lead in sequence: the camera dollies merrily through a New York
airport, working it's way into the men's room where a spooked plumber
overhears a neurotic, dangerous-sounding Liam Neeson ramble to himself about
life and death as he's sprawled on the cold tile floor of the handicapped
stall. The wide-eyed plumber tiptoes out to safety as Neeson's flashbacks of
a drug bust gone awry bring us up to speed. These flashbacks are produced
beautifully and artistically. They're a ballet of bullets and bodies,
blended with a marble-rich mix of humor, fear and hallucination. Bravo.
Though the overall concept is similar to last year's "Analyze This" where De
Niro plays the softening Mafia thug and Billy Crystal, his tagalong
psychiatrist; "Gunshy" is not redundant. Both movies are strong, funny and
unique in their own ways. Here, Neeson is the tough undercover cop nearly
crippled with fear over a near death experience during his last bust. But
instead of Neeson coupling with a single shrink, that role is split between
three other parties: four fellows in group therapy, Sandra Bullock as the
puppy-love interest, and even Oliver Platt as the "I'm sick of being a
cliché!" Italian thug.
In enlighteningly striking contrast to the other clients' petty grievances
of the day, Neeson offers his, "You're doing your best to bring in the bad
guys, the next thing you know, you're laying naked on a table full of
rotting fruit with an oozy up your @#$."
Neeson continues his undercover gig as the money savvy conduit between Mafia
thug (Platt) and drug dealer (Jose Zuniga). Andy Lauer's happy-go-lucky
performance as the yuppie financial investor lends a contrasting and funny
element to the quiet tough guy cast. Loosening up with Lauer's
party-oriented hosting, Zuniga admits, "You know, it's sometimes a pain
keeping up this Colombian Coke dealer stereotype - I never get to have any
fun!"
During a medical visit intended to relieve stress, Neeson stumbles across
Bullock. Later, when talking about her in group therapy he's asked, "How'd
you meet her? Did you score?" Neeson replies, "She gave me an enema." A
group guy conjectures, "I guess that's kinda like scoring?"
An over the shoulder shot of Bullock is surprisingly out of focus, and
uncharacteristically shoddy scripting make her initial scenes with Neeson a
little hard to digest. We feel rather rushed by the filmmakers to get her
into the story swiftly. Still, these blemishes along with a few other highly
implausibles seem minor and just don't slow this strong, fun production.
It's clearly a good time with a good heart. Go see it.
Gunshy. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Liam Neeson, Oliver Platt, Jose Zuniga, Michael Delorenzo, Andy
Lauer, Sandra Bullock.
Written and Directed by Eric Blakeney.
Produced by Sandra Bullock at Buena Vista/Fortis Films/Meat Hook.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
How fast can a film with a killer cast die?
GUN SHY, starring Liam Neeson, Oliver Platt and Sandra Bullock, opens in
an airport restroom stall, as Neeson is forced into an embarrassingly
bad routine as an undercover DEA agent known only as Charlie.  As
Charlie sits on the floor with his pants off, whining away, he scares
the janitor and the audience, albeit for different reasons.  The former
because the janitor thinks Charlie must be a psycho on the loose and the
latter because they fear, correctly as it turns out, that they've
stumbled into a deadly awful movie.
GUN SHY, written and directed with an awkward obviousness by Eric
Blakeney, is a comedy that's never funny.  Even if some of the script
might have sounded humorous on paper, on the big screen it is presented
so lifelessly that you'll want to take a gun and put it out of its
misery.
A nail-biting, pill-popping, booze-guzzling, chain-smoking, insecure DEA
agent, Charlie has more problems than being involved in a sting
operation that's going awry.  He's also got some serious bowel trouble
-- now that's a great unplumbed comedic source.  This allows him to meet
sadistic nurse Judy Tipp (Bullock), who gives him a barium enema while
taunting him with "Think happy thoughts!"
Oliver Platt, notably embarrassed to be part of such a production --
watch him rolling his eyes as a clue to his fans -- plays Mafioso Fulvio
Nesstra.  When we first meet Fulvio, he is in the process of chopping
his neighbor's hand off, Saudi Arabian style, for the crime of stealing
Fulvio's newspaper.  Fulvio, who'd rather be a gardener, doesn't like
his lifestyle or his sloppy wife.  One night he uses a toothbrush to
clean every part of their little kitchen so that the linoleum and the
Formica shine as bright as one of the mob's shiny chrome guns.
The film's coldly antiseptic look will probably match your reaction to
this peculiar, would-be comedy.  Charlie falls asleep during the middle
of a big drug deal -- a problem you will likely have as well while
watching it.
"Fun is overrated," Fulvio tells us at one point.  "Where is it?"
Charlie asks at another.  "Where is it?  Where is that happy feeling?"
One thing's for sure, it's not in this anything-but-fun film.  Arguably
the worst picture that Sandra Bullock has ever been in, the movie was
made by her own production company, so she has only herself to blame.
GUN SHY runs 1:41.  It is rated R for violence, language and some brief
nudity and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
John Beachem
If there's one thing Sandra Bullock desperately needs, it's a decent script to
get her career restarted. After a series of flops ("Speed 2", "Forces of
Nature"), she needs a good script with a good costar. Well, "Gun Shy" is a
rather entertaining script, and she has the always great Liam Neeson as her
costar, but there are two serious problems: First, the film was released at
what could be the worst possible time, the same weekend as "Scream 3. Second,
Sandra Bullock appears in perhaps six scenes throughout the film. Everyone
finished gasping in disbelief? That's right folks, despite what the previews
may have led you to believe, "Gun Shy" is hardly a romantic comedy because
there is seldom a female presence. The thing is, the film might be better as a
result.
Charlie Mayough (Liam Neeson) is an undercover DEA officer who is on his last
assignment before retirement. The problem is, he can't bring himself complete
the assignment unless he constantly attends group therapy to keep his nerves
under control. Charlie's final assignment involves catching illegal funds on a
group of mafia types, led by the uptight Fulvio (Oliver Platt). As a result of
Charlie's nerves, he's having another problem, which involves his, uh, bowles.
Well, he visits a proctologist named Jane (Sandra Bullock), who promises she
can fix all his anxiety problems in two weeks by dating him. 
It's not very often that a romantic subplot feels quite so tacked on as it does
here. Bullock's character serves absolutely no purpose, other than to give
Charlie occasional words of encouragment and to solve his prostatic
difficulties. In fact, if her character had been eliminated entirely and more
of the film had focused on Oliver Platt and his cohorts, this probably would
have been a much better film. Speaking of Oliver Platt, he is a riot as a hit
man who hates being made up entirely of cliches. The truth is, Oliver Platt
makes this movie. Liam Neeson may be a great actor, but he isn't given much to
work with here. Platt, on the other hand, is given some truly great scenes. For
example, near the start of the film, Platt is seated across from a neighbor,
telling him that in the Middle East they chop the hands off thieves. He then
prepares to do this to the neighbor for reasons we're not quite sure of, but
it's hysterical when we find out.
Charlie's sessions with his therapy group are fairly amusing, particularly when
he runs into one of them while on assignment. Unfortunately, any other time
when Oliver Platt is not on screen, things tend to drag some. We're also
introduced to someone that may possibly be the most irritating character I've
seen in years. Jason (I believe played by Andrew Lauer) is a big time
wallstreet dealer, who shows up to invest the gangsters' money. He is about
five foot ten, has an obnoxious, high pitched voice, and laughs insanely at
everything. After seeing him on screen for about ten minutes, I really wanted
to kill this character with my bare hands. I was tempted to knock a half star
off my rating simply because he was present. The other supporting characters,
while certainly eccentric, are more amusing than annoying. Watch for an
appearance by Mitch Pileggi, of X-Files fame, as Charlie's boss. The funny
thing is, it's almost the exact same character he plays in "The X-Files".
One last thing I must note is that I had a very hard time imagining a beautiful
proctologist going out with one of her patients right after attending to him. I
had an even harder time believing that Charlie could have made it through the
first date without constantly thinking about everything she had seen. "Gun Shy"
is obviously not an incredible comedy. It is, however, an amusing, harmless
little comedy that has has a lot of chuckles and a few true belly laughs. The
film may only run 100 minutes, but things do tend to drag a bit by the end,
which is drawn out well past what is needed. I'd recommend the film to fans of
Liam Neeson and Oliver Platt, but not to fans of Sandra Bullock, since there
isn't much of her in it. I give it three and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
