Title
Review for Chuck & Buck (2000)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Steve Rhodes
When Chuck and Buck were 11 years old, they were best friends.  Chuck 
long ago moved away.  He's now 27 with an important job and a lovely 
fiancée.  Buck, on the other hands, still has the social graces and 
mental capacity of an immature 11-year-old.  Most of all, what hasn't 
changed is that Buck still has a major crush on Chuck.
In Miguel Arteta's CHUCK & BUCK, one of the hits of this year's Sundance 
Film Festival, Buck is played with creepy innocence by the movie's 
writer, Mike White.  In a more straightforward role, Chris Weitz plays 
Chuck, a hard-working music promoter.
Although the film does have its moments, when it gets decidedly under 
your skin, most the movie is so devoid of energy that it rarely involves 
the audience.  Shot on videotape, the ugly cinematography has the look 
of a third generation tape copy.  The colors smear across the frame like 
a home video, which only calls attention to the amateurishness of much 
of the acting.  
After inviting Chuck to their old hometown to his mother's funeral, Buck 
follows him back to LA.  After taking up residence in LA, Buck, sucking 
on his signature red lollypop, starts stalking and voyeuring Chuck.  At 
first, at least, Chuck's fiancée (Beth Colt) is concerned about this 
child in a man's body who is obsessed with her future husband.  Later 
she becomes just as leery of him as her fiancé.
To make Chuck fully understand the feelings he holds for him, Buck 
writes an autobiographical play ("Hank & Frank") that rivals "Springtime 
for Hitler" from THE PRODUCERS for obnoxious banality, except that the 
latter was meant to be campy fun.  "Hank & Frank," however, serves only 
to remind us of how much worse the movie CHUCK & BUCK could have been.
The film's treacly music has a childlike happiness.  Sometimes it seems 
that the movie wants to transform itself into a parody, such as BUT I'M 
A CHEERLEADER, but it never does.
As the film slowly moves along, it does manage sporadically to shock and 
touch us.  But Weitz's overly obvious acting telegraphs its big surprise 
so badly that it takes the punch out of what should have been the 
movie's best scene.  
What we take away isn't the fear that some forgotten lover will come 
back to harass us.  Instead, what we are most likely to remember is that 
we don't enjoy going to the theater to watch images that look much worse 
than our own home videos.  
CHUCK & BUCK runs a long 1:36.  It is rated R for sexuality and language 
and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Max Messler
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/0746cecf152aec3588256909005a1169?OpenDocument
Forgiveness is a thing most people long for in their lives.  Forgiveness
represents a silent and indescribable object that opens doors of
acceptance and slams shut avenues of obsession.  It is a delicate object
that is difficult to find in people and their actions.  What amazes me
is how the slightest gesture, vision, or tragedy can become the main
element in the catalyst of this emotion.
Chuck & Buck is a story of forgiveness, a tale of individuals locked in
obsession, denial, and ignorance.  The film revolves around two guys,
Chuck and Buck, who were the best of mates growing up.  When Chuck moves
at the age of 11, the trauma ends up stunting Buck emotionally. 
Flash-forward about 17 years and we encounter Buck, who still plays with
Matchbox cars and keeps a glowing blue orb lamp stuffed full of
lollipops.  Buck's mother has just passed away so he writes a letter to
Chuck, whom he hasn't seen since the departure, asking him to come to
her funeral.
As it turns out, Chuck has become Charles, a straight-laced guy living
in LA with a BMW, a girlfriend, a white-collar job -- the type of guy
who put his G.I. Joes away a long time ago.  When Buck sees his new
buddy at the funeral, he becomes newly obsessed, packing all his things
up and moving into a hotel room in LA to try to reconnect with his old
best friend.  Then things get a bit weird.  Really weird.
Buck stalks Chuck at his office, shows up at his house late at night
with a collage of Chuck as a kid, writes a play about their
"relationship," and generally provides enough edge to creep the crap out
of the audience.  The unusual nature of Buck's stalking lends a strange
ambiguity to the motivations of the character.  To what ends will Buck
go to win back Chuck's friendship?
The beauty of the film lies in the script written by Michael White, who
also plays Buck in the film.  White creates a very original character
that retains the attitude and motivations of a child with a silent
sexual prowess that comes across innocently aggressive.  The script also
provides a number of U-turns, which appear out of nowhere to generally
up the spook factor of the film.  White also gives special attention to
the supporting cast by creating characters that are all in looking for
answers to their own personal dilemmas.
The film also marks a revolution with the entire production done in
digital video format.  Director Miguel Arteta was able to invoke some
amazing angles by climbing into tight spaces with the compactness of the
digital video camera.  The lighting is equally excellent.
The only real flaw of the film is that we are never given a clear
glimpse of the characters as children.  Their homes, their parents, and
the things they did together as children are never exposed.  Dreamy
flashbacks give evidence of the boys' friendship but don't define the
reasons for their kinship.
Chuck & Buck is not a film for everyone.  It leaves a strange uneasiness
at the end of the film that sits with you for days.  But it's too real
to ignore.
Director:  Miguel Arteta
Producers: Matthew Greenfield, Jason Kliot, Joana Vicente
Writer: Michael White
Starring: Mike White, Chris Weitz, Paul Weitz, Lupe Ontiveros, Beth
Colt, Maya Rudolph, Mary Wigmore
Rating: R
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html"> 
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Scott Renshaw
     RAIN MAN was not about Dustin Hoffman's Raymond Babbitt. There are
some who find the film overly sentimental, and others who consider
Hoffman's Oscar-winning performance little more than a gimmick, but it's
hard to argue that the basic structure of the story wasn't what it had to
be. Tom Cruise's Charlie Babbitt was the central character, the person who
grew and changed. Raymond couldn't be that character, because it's absurd
to build a narrative around the idea that someone with a profound
emotional/psychological condition can decide through a simple act of will
to be better.
     This lesson is offered to explain why CHUCK & BUCK, for all the
quirky things it does right, is ultimately an experience somewhere between
improbable and downright insulting. The troubled hero of our story is Buck
O'Brien (Mike White, who also wrote the script), a man living in about as
arrested a state of adolescence as you could imagine. Buck has never lived
away from home, never been to college, never even held a job. He is
therefore left adrift when his mother dies, and tries to fill the void by
tracking down his childhood friend Charlie Sitter (Chris Weitz), known to
him as Chuck back in the day. Charlie has moved on to a life as recording
industry executive in Los Angeles with a beautiful fiancee named Carlyn
(Beth Colt), but Buck just wants to play the way they did 15 years ago. 
And he's determined to recapture that friendship, even if it means moving
to Los Angeles and stalking Charlie to do it.
     There's a lot of interesting stuff built into the premise, including
a not-particularly-twisty twist that still generates a bit more interest
in the Chuck/Buck dynamic. White's performance as Buck is pitched just
right, somewhere between endearing and creepy in his striped T-shirt and
perpetually Blow-Pop-stuffed grin. Director Miguel Arteta's choice of
digital video seems an ill-advised one dramatically -- why heighten the
immediacy and realism of a story centered around somebody's fantasy world? 
-- but the technology and hand-held movement are rarely distracting. 
Throw in an infectiously innocuous theme song to set the tone, and you've
got the raw material for some solid whacked-out drama and dark comedy.
     And that raw material is left to rot. CHUCK & BUCK could have been
turned into a wonderfully grim tale of go-getter Charlie having to deal
with childhood events he's tried to forget being thrust back into his 
face. But Charlie is a huge sucking black hole of a characterization, left
utterly bereft of personality or motivations in Chris Weitz's performance
and White's script. He's merely a target of obsession, carelessly created
because White never intends for the story to be about anything but Buck. 
When that story turns to Buck's introspection about his life, and actions
he begins taking when he faces some hard truths, it's enough to make a jaw
drop in disbelief. CHUCK & BUCK's resolution is centered around the idea
that 15 years of juvenile infantilism are as easy to toss off as a striped
T-shirt.
     CHUCK & BUCK's saving grace is a sub-plot that ultimately has little
to do with the ostensibly main plot -- Buck's attempt to mount a
production of a play he has written about his childhood friendship, called
HANK & FRANK. There's some wonderful interaction between White and Lupe
Ontiveros (superb as a children's theater house manager given her first
chance to direct), and some funny stuff from Paul Weitz (Chris's brother,
playing the incompetent actor Buck chooses for "Hank" for his resemblance
to Charlie). A short film entirely about the play within the play might
have been great fun, unburdened by the need for grand third-act shifts of
character. CHUCK & BUCK sinks thanks to a fundamental misunderstanding of
how to structure a plot with a plausible character arc. It's like Raymond
and Charlie Babbitt walking into the sunset arm in arm, after Raymond
decides he just doesn't want to be autistic any more.

Author
Ross Anthony
Excellent Dialogue, editing and a superb performance by writer/lead actor
Mike White. But the story is only decent, the telling is quite slow and
linear, subject matter potentially off-putting and the quality of the image
on the big screen - sorely lacking.
Essentially this is the story of a grown up boy who is still in love with
his childhood playmate (by now a grown up man). It's been years since
they've seen each other, but the passing of Chuck's mom brings them
together. Very nicely directed, the funeral scene captures the delicate
interplay of contradictory emotions. Buck is more excited to see his old pal
than he is dismayed at his mother's passing. Chuck, on the other hand,
trying to act appropriately for the occasion, isn't sure how to react to
Chuck's jubilant smile.
Throughout the film, Buck remains resiliently pre-teen. He's bright-eyed,
hopeful, playful, and broodingly obsessive. His every word is that of an
11-year-old. His every eyebrow raise and smile curl is that of a game loving
pubescent. He's remarkable, absolutely rock solid.
And if this film was just about one man's undying grip on childhood memories
and his attempts to once again bring them into reality with his reluctant
old buddy - then I'd have been more interested, really. But when that grip
becomes a grope, it's all too apparent that Buck's interests aren't entirely
innocent.
Most of the film is Buck stalking Chuck. There are no independent side
stories and we, as an audience, spend most of our time across the street
from Chuck's house or workplace, pseudo-sympathizing with the stunted
maturity of Buck.
Then there's the technical: This movie is shot on videotape then transferred
to film. The casual viewer will most likely notice that it's not as crisp or
clean or rich as film, or that it's often grainy especially in low light.
But I found the stair-step edges and color bleeding plainly distracting.
Tape is much cheaper than film, however this production is so professionally
handled from story to acting, I'm left wondering why they just didn't shoot
it on film.
Some pictures actually work on videotape, "The Celebration" (a European
flick) shot on tape makes sense since it revolves around a family event,
we'd expect it to be captured on tape. In fact, video brings a hyperrealism
to it. But "Chuck and Buck" displayed no artistic reason for the choice.
Chuck and Buck. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Mike White, Chris Weitz, Lupe Ontiveros, Beth Colt, Paul Weitz,
Maya Rudolph, Mary Wigmore, Paul Sand, Gino Buccola.
Directed by Miguel Arteta.
Written by Mike White.
Produced by Matthew Greenfield at Blow up/Artisan release.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CHUCK AND BUCK (director: Miguel Arteta; screenwriter: Mike White;
cinematographer: Chuy Chavez; editor: Jeff  Betancourt; cast: Mike White
(Buck), Chris Weitz (Chuck), Lupe Ontiveros (Beverly), Beth Colt
(Carlyn), Maya Rudolph (Jamila), Paul Weitz (Sam), Gino Buccola (Tommy);
Runtime: 95; Artisan Entertainment; 2000)
Shot almost entirely on digital video with a hand-held camera, Miguel
Arteta's (Star Maps) Chuck and Buck is an arresting homo-erotic tale
about the pangs of growing up while still stuck emotionally at an
adolescent stage. It is about someone who is desperate to find someone
to love him, more than it is about homosexuality as a sex drive. It
features screenwriter Mike White as the mentally unbalanced Buck and
Chris Weitz as Chuck, the unwanted receiver of Buck's affection.
Buck's mother suddenly dies while having a coughing attack and the
27-year-old, who has lived his entire life in his mother's house, sends
a letter to his best friend Chuck from childhood days, who moved a
long-time ago to Los Angeles, playing on his sympathies as he lures him
to the funeral. Chuck is now a high-powered successful executive for
show biz music personalities (it looks like a role Tom Cruise would
play) and is engaged to the attractive and congenial Carln (Colt). Buck
is more happy to see Chuck than he is sad that his mother is dead, as he
longingly smiles at Chuck with his frozen dead-pan look, refusing to
recognize that Chuck has grown up differently than he has and is called
by everyone by his adult name Charlie.
Invited into Buck's room, which is filled with childhood toys, the same
toys he played with  as a kid, Chuck realizes that Buck has not
developed from childhood. Making excuses to head back quickly to L.A.,
Chuck is suddenly grabbed in the crotch by Buck foolishly playing the
same childhood homosexual games they played when they were eleven. Chuck
rejects him but he doesn't communicate this with his fiancée who, in a
socially correct move, invites Buck to L.A.. Chuck figures he will never
leave his mother's house anyway, but is startled when Buck calls to tell
him he's coming to visit, as he spends the rest of the film trying to
put him off with one excuse after another.
Buck is not someone who can take a hint, so he goes to L.A. anyway,
moves into a motel with all his childhood toys, smiles nervously while
leering at Chuck, sucks lollipops constantly and is dealt with in an icy
manner by the self-inflated executive, who is being stalked and is
receiving a barrage of unwanted calls by his disturbed friend. Chuck
never knows quite how to handle him, and so Buck continues to
relentlessly pursue him (it seemed odd that a person in Chuck's position
wouldn't know how to ditch someone).
Buck hangs around L.A. stalking Chuck to no avail, but he finds a little
fringe theater across the street from Chuck's office, where he
approaches Beverly, the earthy children's theater house manager (Lupe
Ontiveros), and tells her he wrote a children's play called "Frank &
Hank" and asks her to direct it even though she has never directed a
play before. She asks for $25 an hour and tells him it would take four
weeks of rehearsals to put on this one performance play. These scenes
are the heart of the film, as they bring out whatever brilliance there
is to be found in the characterizerations, depicting in an honest way
how those who are not destined to live a conventional life behave with
each other in a natural setting. The film allowed the supporting
characters to interact with each other, not going for the cheap comedy
it could have gone after by just making fun of Buck's tortured
character. Lupe Ontiveros brought an endearing and maternal warmth to
the film; Sam (Paul Weitz, Chris' brother), tries out for the main part
and gets it because he looks like Chuck, adding spice to the film; and,
one actress mentions that she is not inviting her agent to see this one.
This makes the supporting characters not that much different than Buck
as to their feelings of insecurity.
A gnawing flaw to this film is that it hits a dead spot, which comes
after the play is presented. Through Buck's manipulations, he gets Carln
to drag Chuck to see the play because she is curious about their
childhood friendship. The thinly disguised autobiographical play,
embarrasses Chuck. The film seemed to run out of steam at that point,
having exhausted itself of its underlying probe into the tormented soul
of Buck, who is seen more as a pathetic figure who is desperately in
need of being touched, someone who does not possess the social skills to
relate with others. The film takes a few deep breathes and returns for a
discerning conclusion, which was thoroughly credible and well-presented.
The relationships Buck makes that are endearing, are with Beverly and
Sam. Beverly can relate to how messed up he is, thinking who isn't
messed up in the world she frequents, therefore even though she thinks
of him as a weirdo, he's a nice weirdo. His relationship with the
boorish Sam, a bad actor who is also a social outcast, but of the
hetersexual variety, is based on the need to be accepted they both have.
After making a foolish sexual play for Sam, Buck is told to lay off that
stuff and they'll get along fine, as he moves into the apartment next to
Sam's. Sam figures Buck will never complain about the noise from the
music he plays late at night like the last tenant, a woman, who angrily
moved out.
The film hits a raw nerve about childhood experiences and how they are
perceived, and in the process tells a love story that is not restricted
to homosexuality. A tremendous effort by the indie film-makers is
realized to tell a moving character study, thereby achieving such a
high-quality film on such a low-budget, as it daringly rests its
unsentimental case on such a thin plot and succeeds because its
characterizations came to life and the effort to look at friendship and
human behavior was an honest one. It is also a disarmingly funny movie.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Remember when we were kids, had best friends, and
swore to each other that we would keep in touch for the rest
of our lives?  Maybe this sort of promise would work in a
traditional society like India's, but how many of us can
honestly say that we've even seen any of our childhood
friends ten, twenty, thirty years after we've grown up?  Not
many, I'll bet.  Why is this so?  Could be that we're now
working in different cities, or perhaps we're even in close
proximity but we have different lives.  In my case, I became a
high-school teacher while two of my buddies are doctors,
another's a dentist, yet another "best friend" is a CPA.  They
all live somewhere in New York City but I haven't seen or
spoken to them since we were 22.  Is this bad?  Not really. 
As we change our lives--if not our basic character--new
people enter our perimeters.
   But what if one day you were surprised to see your bygone
best friend unannounced at your front door?  You'd invite him
in, of course, but what would you have to say to each other? 
You might get a chuckle or two remembering your
experiences as kids, but aside from that, you're more than
likely to be on different wave lengths.  Now comes a movie
that develops that theme.
   In "Chuck & Buck," the character of Buck is played by the
film's scripter, Mike White, who goes through his role so
convincingly, with such seeming authenticity, that we are sure
there's no small element of his own life in this sad and
sincere tale of friendship gained and lost.  Shot in digital
video to give photographer Chuy Chavez more flexibility,
"Chuck & Buck," directed by Miguel Arteta, is as unaffected
as a faintly similar take on childhood, "Disney's the Kid," is
blatantly counterfeit and commercial.
   Buck's the kind of guy we've seen before, though not in
such a state of Peter-Panism as is on display here.  He's the
fellow who still lives with his mom though approaching thirty,
he's the married woman who calls her folks constantly to
recount every detail of her days and weeks, he's the guy who
double-dates with his sister, or the person who depends on
his parents to set up job interviews and negotiate with his
landlord.  Buck represents a more intense degree of
childishness, one who could use the services of both a
psychotherapist and an image-maker (like "Disney's The
Kid"'s Russ Duritz).  When his mother dies after a five-year
illness, the 27-year-old Buck has no idea what to do.  He has
no job, he has an inadequate education, and in fact he has
spent his days in his room playing with and matchbox cars
and listening to the records that were his favorites sixteen
years ago.  By contrast his best childhood buddy, Chuck
(Chris Weitz), is an upwardly mobile executive in the music
business with a Beamer, a trophy girl friend, and a lavish pad
in Hollywood Hills.  When Buck invites Chuck--whom he still
considers his best friend though he has not spoken with him
in a decade and a half--to his mother's funeral, Buck tries to
re-establish the old bonds as though nothing has changed.
He stalks him at home and office, and even writes a play
called "Hank and Frank" to express his feelings for the pal. 
As Chuck realizes that he must shake off this nuisance, the
executive also perceives that he too has gone off the deep
end.  He has cut himself off from his inner child as much as
Buck clings to his own frozen-in-time existence.  The story
features an impressive performance by the always excellent
Lupe Ontiveros, this time in the role of Beverly, the house
manager at the small theater which takes a chance with
Buck's play.  
   Forced by circumstances to find himself, Buck can look
forward to his first career and to joining the world of adults--
while still not giving up the preciousness of his childlike
character.  This whole enterprise is constructed with such
candor and openness that we wonder why the mass movie
audience still cheers on the endless escapism of the
Hollywood studios.  Could this tendency be a reflection of our
own wish not to grow up and encounter life as it really is?
Rated R.  Running time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
When Chuck (Chris Weitz) gets a note from Buck (Mike White) informing him
that Buck's mother has died, Chuck and his fiance Carlyn (Beth Colt) fly
out to the funeral.  Chuck's in for a shock, however, because Buck,
whom he hasn't seen since they were eleven years old, hasn't changed at
all and wants to renew a particularly special best friendship in "Chuck
and Buck."
The audience is immediately signalled that Chuck and Buck's reunion is 
going to be weird.  When Chuck and Carlyn enter the church during the funeral
service, Buck immediately spots them and grins widely, waving at an
embarrassed Chuck from his coffin-side spot.  Later, Buck makes an
aggressive sexual move on Chuck who firmly turns him down, gets Carlyn and 
leaves.  Chuck's troubles have only begun, however, as Buck packs up his 
childish belongings and moves to L.A., where he will stalk Chuck unrelentingly.
When Buck begins to comprehend that Chuck is avoiding him, he writes
a play, 'Hank and Frank,' and convinces the house manager of a childrens'
theater (conveniently across the street from Chuck's office) to direct
the one-night-only production.
"Chuck and Buck" is a true original in more ways than one.  In addition
to its most unusual and complex story, the three main characters are 
non-actors.  Buck is played compellingly by the film's screenwriter Mike 
White, who's unafraid to portray himself as a needy geek.  White and his 
screenplay make Buck initially creepy and gradually turn the tables until 
it's Chuck that one begins to question.  Buck has the social nonawareness 
of a child.  He's emotionally arrested in time, if not in intellectual 
development, sucking his always present (and Freudianly chosen) BlowPop.  
Chuck is played by "American Pie" producer Chris Weitz (his brother Paul, 
who co-produced "Pie," plays Sam, the man who subs for him in Buck's play).  
Chuck, who's now known as Charlie, is a successful music producer, handsome 
and well adjusted.  He's compassionate (how many people would fly to a funeral 
for a friend they haven't seen in sixteen years), but increasingly 
uncomfortable with Buck's appearances in every aspect of his life.  It's a 
reactive performance, but an effective one, first playing as the audience's 
creeped out point of view, then becoming the man we want to answer for Buck's 
obssessive condition.  Carlyn is played by producer and talent manager Beth 
Colt in the tough 'girlfriend' role.  She's initially kind to Buck much longer 
than Charlie has patience for (he has a guilty secret after all), but when 
she's had enough she's still strong and supportive of Buck, attempting to get 
him help rather than merely acting shrewish.
Support also has it's treasures, beginning with Lupe Ontiveros' ("Selena")
Beverly, the director of Buck's play (which she declares 'a homoerotic,
misogynistic love story').  She's initially cuttingly dry, but becomes
a mother figure to Buck.  Paul Weitz is the 'doth protest too much' 
homophobe who takes Chuck's place in Buck's strange play.  He can't act
and is hostile to woman, but accepts Buck as 'normal,' (he almost has to - he's
as much of a social outcast) which redeems his character somewhat and Weitz is 
good in the role.  Also a natural is Maya Rudolph (daughter of singer
Minnie Ripperton and a former SNLer) as Jamila, Chuck's assistant, who
faces her own problems shielding her boss from Buck.  Like us, she's
creeped out, then sympathetic.
The film is tightly directed by Miguel Arteta (who's first film, "Star
Maps," was underwhelming - Arteta's reversed the 'sophomore jinx').  
Director of photography Chuy Chavez shot on digital video, giving a 
jittery sense of being amidst the action.  Production design by Renee 
Davenport conveys the less-than-stellar face of L.A. as well as one of 
the most psychological looks at an adult's bedroom since Norman Bates.
Mike White's screenplay delves into such issues as hiding the child
within when facing the modern world, obsession and loneliness.  "Chuck
and Buck" is not afraid to cross boundaries not normally crossed and
make its audience uncomfortable when it does so.  The only faults I
find in this thought-provoking film are that its antagnoists are not
in balance - we always know Buck's thoughts, but not Chuck's (he doesn't
ever really discuss Buck with Carlyn, except for an offscreen conversation
which she mentions to Buck).  The ending is also a little too clean.  Still, 
"Chuck and Buck" is unlike any movie I've seen before.
As boys, Chuck (Chris Weitz) and Buck (Mike White) were inseparable special
best friends.  Their friendship was broken apart when Chuck and his family 
moved away when the boys were 11-years old. Now, 18 years later, Buck's mother 
has died and he invites his old friend back for the funeral. Chuck, now called 
Charlie, is a music producer and executive and is surprised, even shocked, to 
find that his boyhood friend has, quite literally, not grown up. Buck still 
plays with toys and sucks Blow Pops like a pacifier. An invite, by Charlie's 
fiance Carlyn (Beth Colt), to come visit them in LA ignites new hope that his 
best friend is back in the unusual, original, new film, "Chuck & Buck."
Some people are going to call "Chuck & Buck" a gay stalker film and dismiss it
as such. They'll be making a big mistake, though, by doing so. This sophomore
feature by helmer Miguel Arteta is much more than that glib description implies
and reps an unusual, compelling work about two men who are rejoined after many
years of separation.
Charlie is on a career fast track in the LA music scene. He has a high paying
and exciting job, owns a fabulous home, and is about to marry his beautiful
girlfriend Carlyn. Buck, on the other hand, has lived with his parents all his
life, surrounds himself with all his boyhood toys, and hasn't matured much
beyond the 11-year old that Charlie left behind so many years before. Charlie
is surprised, even shocked, to see the arrested development of his friend. He 
is even more shocked when Buck tries to grope him after the funeral. After this
incident, Charlie just wants out, but Carlyn's invitation still hangs in the
air, like an omen of things to come.
Buck, unknown to Charlie, moves lock, stock and barrel to Los Angeles and
begins to clandestinely follow his old friend. He waits, every day, outside 
Charlie's office building and makes repeated calls to his home at all hours, 
not saying anything when Carlyn answers the phone. Charlie is freaked by 
Buck's behavior and wants nothing to do with him, getting creeped out by 
the apparent stalking.
In the meantime, Buck wanders into the theater across the street from Charlie's
workplace and becomes enthralled by the idea of writing a play. (His
inspiration is a kid version of "The Wizard of Oz.")  With the help of the 
theater's manager, Beverly (Lupe Ontiveros, "Serena"), he writes a play and 
agrees to pay her $25 an hour to help him stage it. He becomes obsessed with 
his idea, seeing the play as the catalyst needed to return his friend back to 
him. Unknown to Charlie, the play tells about the very "special" relationship 
that Chuck and Buck shared those many years before. The obvious homoerotic 
story stuns Charlie who vehemently denies any memory of any such events. 
Charlie doth protest too much and the film's last quarter resolves the 
difficult dilemma between the two friends.
The strong suits for "Chuck & Buck" are the terrific performance by Mike White,
as Buck, and the edgy, interesting screenplay by White. Buck is a child in a
man's body, which leads to some creepy impressions of the guy in the first half
of the film. You don't know, at first, if Buck is a dangerous character or a
naif. Is his creepiness an indication of an underlying violent streak, or is it
only a part of a truly quirky personality spawned by his arrested emotional
development? The answers come to the viewer as the film progresses. We learn
that Buck is harmless and only wants to return to the time when he was happiest
- when he was with his friend, Chuck. It's a striking performance by non-actor
White that perfectly complements his screenplay.
Chris Weitz was one of the producers for last year's hit "American Pie" and is
also a newcomer to the acting fold. His Chuck/Charlie is a very confused object
of Buck's attention as he rejects his childhood buddy and denies that there was
anything special in their boyhood relationship. Buck's appearance in LA, his
"stalking" and his play all lead to Charlie's remembrance of that time when
more than friendship existed between the boys. Charlie's is a role of vehement
denial, at first, and then resigned acceptance of that part of his life he
thought was buried. Weitz isn't the natural actor that White appears to be and
his performance is more studied and less fluid than White's. He is the object
of Buck's affection and, as such, has to cope with the symbolic nature of his
role.
The tiny supporting cast help to bring life to the secondary characters. Lupe
Ontiveros, as Beverly, provides some of the film's comic relief moments as she
takes on the task of directing Buck's play (called "Hank and Frank") and
becoming his friend. She recognizes Buck's childlike demeanor and is helpful,
rather than condescending, to the simple man. Ontiveros gives a wry and
endearing performance. Another surprise is Beth Colt's perf as Charlie's
soon-to-be bride. Her Carlyn is truly three dimensional and sensitive to Buck's
turmoil, even if it does cause Charlie great consternation. Carlyn is a good
guy and the non-actress gives a pro perf. Also, Paul Weitz (Chris's brother) 
gets some decent laughs as the talentless actor who takes a role in "Frank and 
Hank" and, ultimately, befriends Buck.
Techs are a little uneven. The film was shot in digital and transferred to 35mm
stock and has the look of video. The handheld camerawork by Chuy Chavez ("Star
Maps") is sometimes annoying in its shakiness, especially in close-ups. Helmer
Arteta makes a positive leap over his debut film ("Star Maps") and shows that
he is learning his craft well.
The critics and the press will likely play up the homosexual angles for "Chuck
& Buck," but that will sell the film short. It received raves at the last
Sundance Film Festival and, for its scripter and lead actor, these are 
especially deserved. It's an unusual film and, once you get past the creepy 
factor early on, an intelligently satisfying one. It may be a little tough to 
find in the theaters, probably getting only art house treatment for its 
theatrical run, but is well worth the effort to find it.

Author
Jon Popick
Plenty of films that have explored the relationship between two
characters that were close friends at a young age only to grown apart as
they entered adulthood, but there's never been anything quite like Chuck
and Buck.  The film plays like a low-budget blend of Rain Man and The
Cable Guy, with a healthy dose of homosexual undertones.  In other
words, it's just the kind of film that will both delight the hearts of
independent film fans and draw the ire of closed-minded politicians
using the `family values' platform to win elections.
Buck (Mike White) is a twenty-seven-year-old Blow Pop addict from
northern California.  To put it simply, Buck is an idiot who hasn't
successfully made the leap from childhood to adulthood.  He does and
says whatever he wants without realizing the consequences.  He'd fit
right in as the third wheel to Lloyd Christmas and Harry Dunne in the
sequel to Dumb and Dumber.  But Buck is a kind-hearted, innocent boob,
and his character seems real, making him all the more likeable and
sympathetic.
As the films opens, Buck's mom dies (always the sign of a quality
disturbing film), and he sends a letter to his friend Chuck (Chris
Weitz) to let him know the funeral arrangements.  Chuck, who now goes by
the name Charles, moved to Los Angeles after graduation in order to
pursue a job in the music industry (he signed a band that sounds a lot
like They Might Be Giants), and hasn't seen Buck in years.  Thanks to
the funeral the two old friends meet, where it becomes quite obvious
that one has grown up, and one hasn't.
You know something sinister lies ahead when Buck tries to cup Chuck's
package during a post-funeral hug.  Despite the breach in etiquette,
Chuck gives his friend a vague invitation to `come visit sometime,'
before he and his fiancée Carlyn (Beth Colt) hit the road back to the
big city.  Being a simpleton with no living parents, Buck somehow
mistakes the offer for an invitation to go to L.A. and stalk Chuck.
Armed with all of his toys and his vaporizer, he shows up unannounced at
Charles' home and place of business, embarrassing and mortifying the hip
music executive in front of his smarmy new friends and business cohorts.
At first, Chuck painfully grins his way through each encounter, but his
patience is obviously wearing thin.  The more he avoids Buck, the more
psycho Buck becomes, eventually leading the man-child to pen a play that
jumbles The Wizard of Oz with his own life story (it's called `Frank and
Hank').  Things take some strange turns when Buck befriends the actors
who portray the younger and older versions of Chuck.  Buck also gets to
deliver some heart-breakingly honest lines, like `Wanna see my room?'
and `You're house is kind of old person-y.'
The acting in Buck might not be as professional as your used to seeing,
but that's because the majority of the acting talentwell, they have no
acting talent.  White, who wrote Buck, penned the dud Big Man on Campus
and served as a producer on two popular television shows (Freaks and
Geeks and Dawson's Creek).  Weitz co-wrote the script to Nutty Professor
2 and produced the gross-out hit American Pie.  The two have no acting
experience, and it shows.  Even Colt is an acting rookie, landing the
job only after working as a producer/first assistant director on Buck
helmer Miguel Arteta's first film (Star Maps).  Buck was filmed using
handheld digital cameras to add to the film's independent look.
If it seems like Chuck's character looks a hell of a lot like the
character that plays his part in `Hank and Frank,' it's because it's his
real life brother.  Paul Weitz, who also has no acting experience, also
co-wrote Nutty 2 and directed Pie.  As a side note, Chris Weitz looks a
lot like Dharma's Greg, and White shares the same vacant stare of the
lead singer in The Offspring.
1:35 - R for adult situations and adult language

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Miguel Arteta. Screenplay by Mike White. Starring White, Chris
Weitz, Lupe Ontiveros. Running time: 95 minutes. This film is not yet
rated by the MFCB. Reviewed on October 7th, 2000.
Provocative, sad, funny -- "Chuck & Buck" is all these things, in measures
unusual for a feature film, even an arthouse release. Even more unusual is
the fact that the picture manages to be all these things at once, rather
than tackling them in turn. It is a strange movie, moving in strange ways
and telling a strange story. But it is well crafted and its subject matter 
inspires thought -- even if that subject matter is more than a little
uncomfortable.
"Chuck & Buck" tells the story of two childhood best friends who reunite
after years apart. Chuck (Chris Weitz) -- now Charlie -- moved to Los 
Angeles and has become a music producer. Buck (Mike White, who also wrote
the script) stayed home to care for his ailing mother, and never really
grew up. Buck is stuck in a weird kind of mental nexus between childhood
and adulthood: he still wears clothes his mother picked out for him, still
sucks on Tootsie Pops, still plays sing-along records.
Charlie and Buck are reunited at the funeral of Buck's mother. Buck
expects their friendship to pick up right where it left off -- and perhaps
more so, as he makes a half-drunken pass at his old friend. But Charlie
has a fiancee, Carlyn (Beth Colt), and a life totally divorced from
whatever he once shared with Buck, and makes it clear he is not interested
in rekindling the old relationship. Buck follows Charlie and Carlyn back
to Los Angeles where he insistently tries to worm his way into Charlie's
life. Finally, Buck writes and stages a play, "Hank & Frank", in a
desperate attempt to remind Charlie of what they once meant to each other.
Central to the film is the character of Buck, and White is more than up to
the task of portraying such a complex, offbeat individual. White is
clearly intimately familiar with his story, and manages to portray Buck as
a bizarre man-child without making him seem exaggerated or unbelievable.
The tone is set early on when Buck, bored after the funeral, asks Charlie
and Carlyn, "Do you want to see my room?" in exactly the way he would have
done fifteen years earlier. But Buck is not a feebleminded idiot -- he
manages to make the move to LA and even carve out some semblance of a life
for himself, albeit one which still hinges around Chuck.
Buck is made more complete a character through his interactions with two
of the movie's supporting players. One is his play's director, the
supercilious Beverly (Lupe Ontiveros, giving the film's most deliciously
entertaining performance), who understands Buck but does not judge him.
The other is Sam (Paul Weitz), an incompetent actor whom Buck nonetheless
casts in the role of "Hank", his play's Chuck-parallel (in a clever bit of
casting, Paul Weitz is Chris Weitz's brother). Seeing Sam as a substitute
of sorts for Charlie, Buck attempts a relationship with the actor. Like
Charlie, Sam makes it clear that he is not interested; but unlike Charlie,
Sam opens the door for the two to continue a platonic relationship,
providing Buck with mature interaction through which he is able to grow.
Buck, then, develops into a realistic portrayal of a stalker. Eschewing
all the Hollywood stereotypes, he is not a menacing, calculating figure
forever lurking in the background of Charlie's life. Instead, he is a
forlorn man who almost plaintively tries to get his old friend to notice
him. Buck's actions are repulsive and perturbing, but it is difficult not
to feel some glimmer of pity (if not sympathy) for him as well. As is made
clear by the fairy-tale stylings of "Hank & Frank", Buck sees himself as
Charlie's putative saviour, and so while his methods are certainly
suspect, his goals engender at least some measure of respect, no matter
how twisted they might be.
That said, though, Buck is no innocent, no hero, and White does not forget
this. There is an effective scene where Buck, attempting to bond with the
young actor who is to play the youthful "Hank", lets the boy injure
himself with fireworks because Buck himself just doesn't know any
better. (Buck attempts relationships with all the "Chuck"s in the film,
and none of them work out quite as he had hoped.) Buck is undeniably
deranged; what makes "Chuck & Buck" so good is that there is more to the
character than just his mental deficiency. It is unfortunate, though, that
the movie does not delve more deeply into exactly how Buck came to be the
way he is. There are vague references to his parents being "crazy", and
presumably Chuck's departure was a shattering event, but a clear picture
is not painted of how these things came together to make Buck the person
he is today.
Weitz, disappointingly, fails to deliver a comparable performance as
Charlie. To be fair, his is not nearly as meaty a part. But Weitz never
succeeds in connecting with his role, meaning that Charlie seems to float
through the movie without ever quite feeling part of it. This is not just
a consequence of the distance that has developed between the two
characters in the years since Chuck moved away; Weitz never cultivates the
sense that a friendship ever existed at all. Fortunately, he is anchored
in the movie by Colt, who delivers a solid performance in a difficult,
compromising role as Carlyn.
"Chuck & Buck" is filmed in a grainy, low-budget style by director Miguel
Arteta, but this generally does not detract from the film. Only a few
poorly-staged shots belie the movie's humble background. For the most
part, Arteta's visual style only serves to enhance the sensation that such
bizarre, awkward, conflicting events can actually play out in real
life. And, even beyond issues of denied sexuality and the implications of
friendship, that may be "Chuck & Buck"'s most disturbing observation of
all.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/ChuckAndBuck.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |
