Title
Review for Quiz Show (1994)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Eric Mankin
     Robert Redford's dramatic reconstruction of the 1958 Van Doren
television scandals is profound, unpredictable and scathingly funny,
packed from its center to its bit player edges with acutely observed,
brilliantly acted characters  It consolidates ideas about family and
fatherhood, Gentile and Jew, celebrity and corruption that Redford has
been dealing with as actor and director for years, and does so
effortlessly and organically, without moralizing or contrivance.  It
recreates in achingly perfect detail a tail-finned, wood-veneer
black-and-white TV America without ever retreating into nostalgia.
It's about as good as movies get.
     The audience's guide into the film's universe is young Dick
Goodwin (Rob Morrow), first in his class at Harvard Law School, as he
continually reminds the world; Jewish, as the late-fifties world
frequently reminds him.  He has come to Washington D.C., to work for
the government, postponing the high money Wall Street career he sees as
inevitable for reasons that aren't clear to him; unconsciously looking
for a main chance that will redefine his life.  He finds it in a small
newspaper story about allegations of fixing in quiz shows, hit
programming in the exploding new medium of television.
     The film has already shown, in blistering detail, the origin of
that newspaper story.  Herb Stempel (John Turturro) had reigned for
weeks as resident genius on NBC's "Twenty One," mopping his sweating
brow inside the isolation booth, astounding the nation by knowing not
only the name of the man who lent Paul Revere a horse for his midnight
ride, but the fact that the horse was a mare.
     But then the show's producer, Dan Enright (David Paymer) had
decided, in consultation with the network and the sponsor, that Stempel
had run his string; that the country was tired of a nerd-next-door with
bad teeth from Queens, that it was time to find someone different:
someone more graceful, better looking, classier, less Jewish--someone
like Columbia professor Charles Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes), son and
nephew of Pulitzer prize winners; someone with a fresh face eager to
talk enthusiastically about television's role in educating the American
public.  Moving Herbie out and Charlie in takes Mephistophelean
abilities of manipulation.  But Enright can offer not just vast sums of
money, but the gleaming lure of television itself, "the biggest thing,"
as Herbie accurately tells his wife, "since Gutenberg." By the time the
deal has soured, and Stempel has called foul, Van Doren is a national
hero.  Goodwin's investigation bounces off a seamless wall compounded
from Enright's imaginative deceit, and Charlie's seemingly guileless
charm.
     "Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall," Van Doren quotes
Shakespeare at a glittering literary birthday party in Connecticut,
words spoken precisely at the peak of the trajectory that is carrying
him to a humiliation of his own creation.  The remarkable achievement
of this film is the dimension it gives this fall.
     The contributions to the achievement can be listed.  First, Paul
Attanasio's screenplay is in a class by itself.  Looking back years
into films, it is hard to remember one that does as many different
things in as many different ways as this one.  Ironically (considering
the subject) television may have been a beneficent influence  With the
virtual preemption of film to tell stories centered on vehicles,
explosions, and special effects, (and QUIZ SHOW was passed on
repeatedly by other studios at least in part because of the absence
these elements before being picked up by Disney) TV has become a refuge
for stories centering on character, in shows like "N.Y.P.D.  Blue"
or "Homicide," on which Attanasio collaborated with Barry Levinson
(who plays Dave Garroway in the film).  TV writing in the episodic
ensemble form invented by Steven Bochco long ago broke out of the old
film chestnut of every film being one person's story.
     Attanasio may be the first film writer to have thoroughly absorbed
Bochco's lessons.  While Goodwin remains at the center, the
exceptionally broad focus and reach of the story, the insistence on
seeing and telling the story from multiple points of view creates an
amazing density of texture.
     This sounds abstract, so perhaps one other note is in order.  QUIZ
SHOW is, quite apart from its other virtues, the funniest film of the
year.  Some of its characters are intentionally funny--as Herbie
Stempel's anguished, eloquent rages against the gods of TV--some
equally inspired unintentionally so, as when Dan Enright's cohort
Albert Freedman (Hank Azaria) asks what "a grejus" is, following a
conversation in which Van Doren objects to being simply given answers
to questions as "egregious."  In the same conversation Van Doren has
previously taken a moment to think things over: "I'm just trying to
imagine what Kant would make of this." "He'd go along with it,"
Freedman assures him.
     The actors run with it.  It was obvious from SCHINDLER'S LIST that
Ralph Fiennes--however he wants to pronounce his name--was good; this
film makes clear *how* good.  As the beautiful, flawed Charlie,
intrigued by the glittering new toy of television, trapped by his
vanity and desire to please his father, undone by his own inability to
lie about it, Fiennes turns an historical footnote into someone you
seem to have known all your life.
     Paul Scofield plays his father, the poet.  Scofield has played
Lear, and played him well; here he is given, along with much else, two
transparently simple lines; one about his joy: "not till you have a
son!" and one about his pain: "your name is mine," and makes each one a
world.
     It is no surprise that John Turturro is unforgettable as the
twitchy Herbie, paranoid for the best of reasons--people are out to get
him; the surprising thing is that a performance like this can't steal
the film, because the acting everywhere, *everywhere*, from all sides
is so seamlessly, uniformly, universally remarkable: Morrow (from
"Northern Exposure") subtly shading Goodwin's internal insecurities
behind a big cigar; David Paymer as Enright the wheedling fixmeister
(by the end of the film, you believe that on his deathbed he tried to
buy off the Angel of Death by offering him a job on a TV panel show.)
And on, and on and on, through the small but completely rounded parts
of Goodwin and Stemple's wives, (Johann Carlo and Mira Sorvino); or the
main-battle-tank-like presence of Allan Rich as the President of NBC.
If the film deconstructs conventional wisdom on unitary film story, it
writes in letters of fire another old saw: "there are no small roles.
There are only small actors."
     This kind of texture doesn't happen by accident.  Redford has
always been an exceptional director of actors.  Here, he orchestrates
the performances with a touch so light that it doesn't seem to be
there: the story seems to tell itself, to be assembling itself before
our eyes, absolutely autonomous, yet reverberating with films as
diverse as ELECTRIC HORSEMAN, THE CANDIDATE, DOWNHILL RACER, ALL THE
PRESIDENT'S MEN, THE WAY WE WERE, ORDINARY PEOPLE, A RIVER RUNS THROUGH
IT, suddenly casting all of them into a new line leading here.  If
Redford never exposes another frame of film, he has his place in the
pantheon: this is a great movie.

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.0 out of 10.0
CAST: John Turturro (Herbie Stempel), Rob Morrow (Dick Goodwin), Ralph
Fiennes (Charles Van Doren), Paul Scofield (Mark Van Doren), David Paymer
(Dan Enright), Hank Azaria (Albert Freedman)
DIRECTOR: Robert Redford
CERTIFICATION: PG-13 (USA) for language 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1994
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Picture, Best Director (Redford), Best
Supporting Actor (Scofield), Best Adapted Screenplay (Paul Attanasio)
QUIZ SHOW, an almost perfectly accurate true story, is based upon the
events of the popular television show of the mid-50's, "Twenty-One".  On
this trivial game show, contestants were placed in isolation booths and
then answered questions corresponding to a category of their choice, on
which they wagered an amount of points on.  The game went on until a
player reached twenty one points on felt they had earned enough points to
win.  But, after ratings began to fall when players were struggling to
break the zero mark, the producers decided to fix the game by giving the
answers to a contestant before the game began.  
QUIZ SHOW illustrates the true stories of two particular contestants,
Herbie Stempel and Charles Van Doren.  Stempel (John Turturro), a former
G.I. and your Jewish man raising a family.  Stempel has been the reigning
champion on "Twenty-One" for many weeks and has accumulated thousands of
dollars.  In his mind, he is the best thing on television and the people
love him.  Although, in the mind of the show's producers, Herbie Stempel
is getting old.  Dan Enright (David Paymer), in particular, feels that the
people are tired of seeing a "Jewish guy from Queens with bad teeth" and
that the kids need someone better to look up to.  Therefore, they
need to find another contestant whom would be a worthy role model
and the people will look up to and cheer to win.  Someone who can
defeat Stempel, even if they have to resort to cheating.  Enter Charles
Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes), a well-educated Professor from a widely
recognized family.  Van Doren had decided to try out for the game show "Tic
Tac Dough" because his friends thought he would be good at that sort of
thing.  But when Albert Freedman (Hank Azaria), Enright's assistant, spots
Van Doren, the two decide that they have found their soon-to-be-ruler of
the "Twenty-One" kingdom.  Van Doren is not too keen on the idea of
receiving the answers ahead of time, so Enright tells Stempel that he is
going to give the wrong answer, on purpose, in order to lose the game.
After Stempel loses the "throne" to Van Doren, he starts to feel cheated
(which he should).  Meanwhile, on his own, Dick Goodwin (Rob Morrow), a
Harvard law graduate, has decided to start an investigation on
"Twenty-One" to try and find out if there have been any wrongdoings.  His
investigation yields shocking results and leads to a trial for Enright and
the others involved.
QUIZ SHOW is an extremely well done movie, and Robert Redford's direction
is especially superb.  The performances turned in by John Turturro, Ralph
Fiennes, and Rob Morrow are very good, although it seems that Turturro
stands out more than any.  QUIZ SHOW is also very precise when it comes to
explicating the true events that inspired the film.  Definitely a film you
should not miss.


Author
Eric Grossman
     In our cynical times, a rigged game show would probably have a
tough time making the front page of a newspaper, let alone throwing a
nation into shock.  However, it is substantial enough to make a
compelling film.  QUIZ SHOW, Robert Redford's latest directorial effort
is a thoughtful, extremely well crafted movie about the fixing of the
1950's game show, "Twenty One."
     John Turturro plays Herb Stempel, a smart but uncharismatic man
who, as someone in the film said, "has a face fit for radio."  Stempel
is the top- rated show's reigning champion, battling new-comers each
week as he heads towards the big win.  But when the ratings begin to
slip, the chairman of NBC and the show's sponsor, Geritol, tell the
producer, Dan Enright (David Paymer),to find a more charismatic
champion.  Enright quickly takes action and offers Stempel seventy
thousand dollars if he will take a dive to challenger Charles Van Doren
(Ralph Fiennes).
     A member of the aristocracy, Van Doren is a handsome college
professor who is at first wary of Enright's proposal but is soon
overwhelmed by the chance for fame and fortune.  To take over the role
of reigning champion, Van Doren is fed the supposedly secret questions
and answers before the show.  Richard Goodwin (Rob Morrow) is a bright,
young lawyer fresh out of Harvard LawSchool who begins investigating
for the Congressional Oversight Committee, Stempel's claim that the
show was rigged.  During the investigation, Goodwin becomes friends
with the charming Van Doren and he must then wrestle with the dilemma
of putting television on trial without destroying the lives of the
contestants in a McCarthy-like ordeal.
     A major theme in QUIZ SHOW is temptation.  The temptation to
violate the public trust for the sake of higher ratings, the temptation
to trade one's values for fame and fortune, and the temptation to look
the other way to be accepted by the Establishment.  As Jews, Stempel
and Goodwin are both outsider to society's elite.  However, Goodwin is
more polished, more acceptable with his educational background and last
name ("its Goodwin, not Goodman," he says) to the Charlie Van Dorens of
the world.  Goodwin wants to be Van Doren's friend so badly that at one
point his wife tells him that he is "the Uncle Tom of the Jews."  By the
end of the film, Goodwin learns that Van Doren does not have the
character he thought he had, but he still cannot help but admire him.
     John Turturro once again turns in an excellent performance as
Stempel, the man who blows the whistle on the show because he was
denied fame and fortune.  The tragedy of Stempel's character is that he
failed to realize that the public did not want someone like him, they
wanted a handsome, wholesome face.
     It will be very surprising if Ralph Fiennes does not receive a
second Oscar nomination for his performance as Charles Van Doren.
Unlike his character in SCHINDLER'S LIST, we feel sympathy for this
man who has done a great wrong but who is also a victim.  The primary
basis for the sympathy is that Van Dorenis a man living under the
shadow of his over-achieving uncle and father.  Desperately wanting to
carve out his own name and success, he succumbs to temptation.  It is
difficult to condemn him for taking the road to easy money and fame
which had eluded him, despite his high intellect and strong pedigree.
In addition, the network (NBC) and the sponsor (Geritol) are the ones
who were the were the most guilty and who got off with the least
punishment.  Goodwin does place television on trial but ends up hurting
only the contestants in the end.  The producers who were implicated
went on to do the "Joker's Wild" and Goodwin ended up being a
speech-writer for Kennedy before settling down as a writer.  Stempel
and particularly, Van Doren, went on to live a secluded life.
     The film's beautiful look created by cinematographer Michael
Ballhaus, production designer John Hutman and costume designer Kathy
O'Rear is as much of a treat to watch as the acting.  Redford's
direction is nearly flawless.  His choices of shots, grasp of the
conflict and use of subtlety is what makes the difference in this
film.  The screenplay by Paul Attanasio does drag in parts but overall
it is well written, particularly the scenes between Charles and his
father, played with powerful presence by Paul Scofield.
     QUIZ SHOW gives us an entertaining account of the genesis of
television's moral decay.  The film shows us a time when people were
not cynical and trusted that whatever they saw on the "tube," was
true.  Redford uses the rigging of "Twenty One" as a focal point for
the beginning of the end of that trust.  But far more sobering than the
rigging of the quiz shows is that even today, with all the talk-shows,
tabloid news, "Date Line" scandals and political commercials, is that
television influences our opinions more than ever.

Author
Max Hoffmann
     A common complaint amongst film critics is "why aren't there more
literate scripts available?"  QUIZ SHOW gives signs of hope that the
art of writing isn't dead in Hollywood and that we need not only look
to independent films for thoughtful content.  Paul Attanasio's script
takes what could have been a tepid thriller (the Quiz Show scandals of
the late 50s) and delivers a telling parable about the emptiness of the
post war American Dream and the golden bubble that surrounds and
protects TV networks and their sponsors.
     The film is riddled with telling symbols (e.g. a '58 Chrysler, a
radio announcement of Sputnik) but is never heavy handed.  Deft
Direction by Robert Redford and keen performances by Ralph Fiennes,
John Turturro and Rob Morrow  dovetail perfectly with the carefully
honed script.  Redford departs from the usually overlight, "cable TV
quality" sets and camera work so common in recent 20th Century period
pieces.  QUIZ SHOW perfectly captures the colors and textures of the
Eisenhower years.  Although I was only 4 years old when the "Twenty
One" scandal broke, enough of the 50s icons survived throughout my
childhood for me to recognize the authenticity of Redford's almost
tangible palette.  From plastic covered furniture to carefully coifed
contestants, the images ring true from that era of rampant consumerism,
of a generation that had gone through 15 years of depression and world
war without "disposable income," before the manifestation of its
American Dream.
     The film deftly weaves several themes together, from assimilation
and exclusion of Jews from "the good life," to the lengths that a scion
of a literary family will go to to match his father's fame.  Though the
50s audience that is "rocked" by this scandal may initially seem naive
to us, they should appear all too familiar, with our current national
passion for the rise and fall of icons like Michael Jackson or Tonya
Harding.  Charles Van Doren and Herbie Stemple were the overnight mega
celebrities of their day.  The TV audience is almost a fourth main
character, always at the center of the decisions being made on their
behalf.
     At the film's end, the credits roll past slow motion footage of
that same 50s TV audience, mindlessly laughing at some piece of fluff.
Like the distorted mirror that captured a blurred swastika at the end
of CABARET, this "mirror" may reflect an image we're not all that
comfortable with.

Author
Mike Brown
Produced by Robert Redford, Michael Jacobs, Julian Krainin and Michael 
Nozik
John Turturro.................Herbert Stempel
Rob Morrow....................Dick Goodwin
Ralph Fiennes.................Charles Van Doren
Paul Scofield.................Mark Van Doren
David Paymer..................Dan Enright
Hank Azaria...................Albert Freedman
Christopher McDonald .........Jack Barry
Johann Carlo..................Toby Stempel
Elizabeth Wilson..............Dorothy Van Doren
Allan Rich....................Robert Kintner
Mira Sorvino..................Sandra Goodwin
"It's not like we're hardened criminals here. We're in show business." 
Albert Freedman from Quiz Show.
When I first saw Quiz Show I was reminded of such films like All the 
President's Men or The Paper. Although this film does not have anything 
to do with journalism it does involve a man on a quest in search for the 
truth. But in all three cases the reason to bring out the truth is 
questioned. Who is really the one who will get hurt and is it worth it? 
This is the question that is raised, among others, in this highly 
entertaining film about the true story of the much publicized game show 
scandal in the late 1950's. But what makes Quiz Show a great film is 
that it examines a time in the history of America that has been seen as 
innocent but is actually the end of an era where intelligence was looked 
upon as an asset. Now people become famous as a result of their actions 
no matter how idiotic.
Quiz show is set in a time that I only knew about from reading about or 
watching other films set in that era. It came across not only as a 
pleasant time but also one where issues like racism did not exist and 
people respected one another. But we can see that very little has 
changed since then even though we would like to think that we have come 
a long way. Human nature is still the same with greed and materialism 
present in all of us.
The story begins with an obnoxious working class Jew named Herbert 
Stempel (John Turturro) who has made a name for himself with his 
remarkable winning streak on a popular game show called "Twenty-One". 
Through his success he has gained fame and fortune but the producers 
find that ratings are declining and they believe it is because of him. 
Due to the declining ratings, the producers, Dan Enright (David Paymer) 
and Albert Freedman (Hank Azaria), set out to find a new "money maker". 
They find it in Charles Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes) a handsome university 
professor from one of America's most prominent intellectual families. 
With the producers convinced that they have found their new "golden 
boy", they persuade Herbert Stempel to take a dive only because they put 
it in his mind that he has a future in television. In one of the films 
most dramatic and tense scenes, we begin to see the extreme pressure the 
contestants as well as the producers are under. (There is a great shot 
where you actually feel like your are in the small claustrophobic booth 
where each contestant is contained.) But Herbert soon realizes that 
television will never be a part of his future and thus jealous of the 
fame and wealth acquired by Van Doren, the same fame and wealth he once 
had, Herbert begins to loosen his tongue about the real truth behind 
"Twenty-One". This attracts the attention of a young lawyer from 
Washington named Dick Goodwin (Rob Morrow) who begins to investigate the 
rigged game show and eventually takes on television, a battle we find 
out, he can not possibly win.
Quiz Show has many strong points but a particular one are the strong 
performances that can all be described in one word, perfect. However, 
John Turturro and Ralph Fiennes are the particular standouts among this 
great cast. We view both characters as society did with Herbert Stempel 
(John Turturro) being the nerdy working-class Jew and Charles Van Doren 
(Ralph Fiennes) being the successful good-looking young intellectual. 
Superficially, both characters are the exact opposite of one another but 
in actuality they are both morally weak and strive to be something they 
aren't. But in reality they both chose the same path of living a lie, a 
lie no one thought was hurting anyone. Both need to be something greater 
than what they were and being contestants on "Twenty-One" gave them that 
chance. Yet, these characters are not evil which is exactly how the 
media presented them. The true villains in this film are the Networks 
and the sponsors, specifically NBC and Geritol. But both, though making 
huge profits from contestants like Charles Van Doren, were seen as 
victims all the time knowing exactly what was going on. There is an 
interesting cameo from Martin Scorcese who plays the president of 
Geritol who knows exactly how everything will turn out. He has the 
answers Dick Goodwin is looking for but he also knows he doesn't have to 
tell him anything because like he said "the networks will go on and so 
will Geritol". It is they who profited from people like Charles Van 
Doren but they were not the ones who were labeled criminals. They simply 
offered them fame and fortune and the contestants accepted.
Also, much of my admiration goes toward Robert Redford as well. Ever 
since Ordinary People he has time and time again proven himself one of 
the best directors working today. He, unlike many other directors, gives 
us something to watch that is entertaining as well as interesting. He 
brings us back to a time in America that most people had forgotten. The 
questions he raises throughout the course of the film keep us involved 
in the story as we try our hardest to answer them. Through his direction 
we get an extremely interesting look at society's values at the time and 
how much they have changed. In what could have turned out to be an 
embarrassment actually became the best film of 1994 as well as one of my 
favourites.
Most importantly though, "Quiz show" is not simply about rigged quiz 
shows it is about a time in history when America lost its innocence. It 
portrays a time in America when greed took over and knowledge was no 
longer something to strive for. Some people may even think that greed 
has always existed and will continue to exist. It is a very cynical view 
about our society and where it is heading but if modern society bares 
any proof there has been a dramatic change and whether that change is 
for the better or the worse is up for the viewer to decide.
http://expage.com/page/mikesfilmguide

Author
Dragan Antulov
These days game shows are viewed as symbol of everything
which is false and artificial on television. But few decades
ago, in the pioneering days of the new media, perception of
game shows was completely different. In 1950s America quiz
shows were not just the most popular form of television -
they were viewed as the living embodiment of American Dream.
They gave Average Joes their chance for instant fame and
fortune. They also awarded good old traditional values like
hard work and education over physical looks, strengths and
luck - those qualities beyond the reach of mere mortals. But
in 1958 that belief was forever shattered with a scandal
that would gradually turn American Dream into nightmare...
At least this is what screenwriter Paul Attanasio and
director Robert Redford are trying to convince us in their
1994 drama QUIZ SHOW.
The plot of the film is based on the true story that began
in 1958. In that time the most popular television show is
NBC's "Twenty One". For several weeks one of its
contestants, Herbert Stempel (played by John Turturro) is on
the winning streak, earning huge amounts of money in the
process. Producers, on the other hand, don't share his
enthusiasm because New York Jew with the bad teeth can't
make sponsors happy. So, they pressure Stempel to take a
dive and find new, more suitable contestant in the form of
Charles Van Doren (played by Ralph Fiennes), good-looking
WASP college professor belonging to American intellectual
aristocracy. After few months, disgruntled Stempel
unsuccessfully tries to alert public about the rigging but
his efforts are fruitless until he meets with ambitious
congressional investigator Richard Goodwin (played by Rob
Morrow).
Redford again showed his good directorial skills and the
recreation of late 1950s is almost flawless. The acting is
great - Ralph Fiennes is good choice for charismatic
intellectual unable to cope with difficult moral choices;
Turturro makes great contrast as victim nobody feels sorry
for and Morrow is great as relentless, idealist public
crusader. QUIZ SHOW is, therefore, film that shouldn't
disappoint the audience. But the same audience probably has
few reasons to be very enthusiastic about this piece of
cinema. Reason for that lies in antiquated subject matter.
Rigging of game shows perhaps represented something quite
shocking for 1950s public, but for newer generations, those
raised on Watergate, Iran-Contra and Clinton presidency and
those who now take media manipulation for granted, this
"scandal" looks terribly insignificant. Those viewers could
hardly accept Redford's view of these events as something
that represented "the loss of American innocence". At least
not without some sort of irony, but the irony is something
this film terribly lacks. Redford takes everything in this
film too seriously, and, in the end, this film looks
outdated and quixotic, resembling one of its characters in
his last futile crusade against emerging power of
television. However, this cinematic effort, although failed
and, ironically, better suited for television as a medium,
still represents one of more interesting (and rare) examples
of socially conscious 1990s Hollywood films.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Tim Voon
Starring: Ralph Fiennes, Rob Morrow, John Turturro, Paul Scofield, David
Paymer, Mira Sorvino, Martin Scorsese, Barry Levinson Director: Robert
Redford Screenplay: Paul Attanasio based on REMEMBERING AMERICA: A VOICE
FROM THE SIXTIES by Richard N. Goodwin
Ask me a question, and I will guarantee you a correct answer (but first
tell me what the questions are before hand).
That's what cheating is all about. This is the subject of Quiz show. A
scandal that occurred in the 50's when Twenty-One' was the biggest
ratings game show on television. Whenever the ratings fell, the network
would find new contestants to replace the sagging ones. They found their
biggest ratings winner in Charles Van Doren (Fiennes), the son of one of
America's leading intellectual family. That was until a inquest was made
into the affairs of the show.
Unfortunately, the network (N.B.C.) escaped non-implicated. The
scapegoats for this embarrassing scam fell on the producers of the show,
and it's star contestant Van Doren, who bravely owned up to the
cheating. The issues of money, ratings, and human character are nicely
explored  in this movie. It probes the viewer's mind, as to whether you
would also cheat, if placed in a similar situation as Van Doren.
Crisp directing from Redford, intriguing movie material, and solid
performances from Fiennes and Turturro.
Comment: I'd like to see them try it on Jeopardy.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  John Turturro, Rob Morrow, Ralph Fiennes, David Paymer,
           Paul Scofield, Hank Azaria.
Screenplay:  Paul Attanasio.
Director:  Robert Redford.
     There is a certain irony to the involvement of Robert Redford in
the making of QUIZ SHOW.  Much like QUIZ SHOW's anti-hero Charles Van
Doren, Redford became a star based on nothing so much as his golden boy
good looks and charm.  There is perhaps even more irony in the selling
of QUIZ SHOW as a story about a loss of American innocence, since it
may be the ultimate debunking of the myth of the Eisenhower-era
American dream.  Brilliantly written and directed, it is a tale of how
television sold us what we wanted to believe about our country, and a
frighteningly contemporary examination of the cult of image.
     QUIZ SHOW opens in 1958, when prime time game shows like
"Twenty-One" were ruling the airwaves.  Herbert Stempel (John Turturro)
is the reigning champion, but only because the show is rigged to keep
the winners winning.  When Stempel's ratings wane, producer Dan Enright
(David Paymer) has him take a dive, and brings in Charles Van Doren
(Ralph Fiennes) to replace him.  Van Doren, an attractive upper-class
intellectual, becomes a national sensation; Stempel, meanwhile, becomes
bitter over his ouster from the champion's throne.  When Congressional
investigator Richard Goodwin (Rob Morrow) begins looking into the quiz
shows, Stempel tells all, leading to a series of Congressional
hearings.
     QUIZ SHOW opens with a visually arresting sequence which perfectly
establishes the foundation for Redford and screenwriter Paul
Attanasio.  In a series of dream-like dissolves, Goodwin looks over a
beautiful new Chrysler he knows he can't afford, while the salesman
makes his pitch.  Here he becomes a stand-in for everyone who was duped
by "Twenty-One," wanting too much to believe the fantasy.  As he
conducts his investigation, Goodwin befriends Van Doren, and begins to
travel in Van Doren's privileged world, revelling in his assimilation
until his wife accuses him of being "the Jewish Uncle Tom."  What
Goodwin learns, as the head of "Twenty-One" sponsor Geritol (slyly
portrayed by Martin Scorsese) explains, is that the viewers "watch to
see the money."  It's all about the dream, a dream of equal opportunity
that doesn't exist on the quiz show's carefully controlled,
demographically attractive selection of champions.  Morrow's subtle
performance as Goodwin shows how even a man who was "first in his class
at Harvard" (as he constantly reminds everyone) could be taken in.
     Morrow's is just one of a half-dozen performances in QUIZ SHOW
which will draw Academy Award consideration.  John Turturro turns in a
savage portrayal of Herbie Stempel, a life-long social outcast who sees
his removal from the spotlight as a personal betrayal, yet still finds
himself caught up in Van Doren's fall from grace.  Ralph Fiennes'
enigmatic Van Doren could have been flat and passive, but he becomes a
sheltered and overgrown child in Fiennes' capable hands, desperate for
approval and a fame independent from his literary family.  Veteran
actor Paul Scofield is dynamic as Mark Van Doren, whose mere commanding
presence does as much to explain the younger Van Doren's motivations as
Fiennes' performance; their scenes together are spectacular.  David
Paymer is also noteworthy as the slick and savvy Enright.  Only Hank
Azaria, as Enright's too- dense-for-words assistant, comes off a bit
overplayed.
     For my money, however, the true star of QUIZ SHOW is Paul
Attanasio, whose screenplay is certainly the finest of the year.  Every
characterization is full and rounded; every scene is a perfect
development of theme.  The dialogue is filled with crisp, subtle and
quotable lines.  In one perfect moment, Charles Van Doren's indignant
insistence to Enright that "I am a professor at Columbia," is followed
by a studio gopher who announces, "The professor's needed in makeup."
It's a brilliant encapsulation of how Van Doren had been taken over by
his own image, emphasized later in a masterful scene at his
Congressional testimony.  QUIZ SHOW is yet another example of what is
possible when a script is this good, the direction is perfectly
complementary, and the acting is first-rate.  The film to beat as
1994's best picture has arrived.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  QUIZ SHOW is an intellectual EIGHT
     MEN OUT.  It is an in-depth look at an almost forgotten
     scandal that made national headlines back in 1958.  Once
     the public realized that TV quiz shows were rigged to
     promote ratings, they would never look at television in
     quite the same way again.  Robert Redford directs from a
     terrific, ironic screenplay.  Rating: low +3 (-4 to +4)
     In 1958 the biggest things on television were the TV quiz shows.
They were a national craze of rarely matched proportions.  One producer
had four highly-rated quiz shows: "Dotto," "Twenty-one," "The $64,000
Question," and "The $64,000 Challenge."  Edward Hilgemeier Jr. was a
daytime "Dotto" standby contestant who was never actually chosen to
appear, but was waiting to appear if he was needed.  A woman waiting to
appear was chosen and she went on-stage leaving behind a small
notebook.  Hilgemeier read the notebook and found some odd notes.  The
woman contestant won that night against a man who was a former winner,
but all the answers she gave were in the little notebook.  Hilgemeier
went to the man she defeated and showed him the notebook.  The two then
complained to the producers and each was given a bribe to forget about
the notebook.  But Hilgemeier found out the actual contestant was paid
$4000 for his silence, he had gotten only a $1500 bribe.  This struck
Mr. Hilgemeier as unfair and he no longer felt bound to keep silent.
Soon the New York State attorney was involved.  Little attention was
paid to the story until a second contestant confirmed Hilgemeier's
claims.  This was a disgruntled former winner on "Twenty-one" named
Herbert W. Stempel.  He joined Hilgemeier to claim that the game show
he was on was also fixed.  Hilgemeier was a complete unknown but
millions of viewers knew Stempel and now the story was news.  The
result was a three-year national scandal that would rock the TV
industry and the country as well as tarnishing the name of one of the
most respected families in American academics.
     To tell the story in 130 minutes in QUIZ SHOW, those three years
have been somewhat simplified and scoped down to seem like less than
one year.  But the result is yet another powerfully-scripted and
beautifully made film co-produced and directed by Robert Redford.  The
film is like an ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN or EIGHT MEN OUT for the first
television generation.
     Why was it considered important to control the results on quiz
shows?  The most commonly heard explanation is a shrug and the comment
"This is television."  Indeed television was and is treated as if it is
a different reality and this scandal and its aftermath helped the
industry define just what television is.
     When the film opens the sponsor is unhappy that the reigning
champion on "Twenty-one" Stempel (played by John Turturo) is a Jew, and
one with a Queens accent and bad teeth.  The time has come to get a new
champion.  About this time Charles Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes) is
applying to be a "Dotto" contestant.  Van Doren comes from a family of
well-known scholarly academics.  Van Doren has just the WASPy style and
background that the show producers Enright and Freedman (David Paymer
and Hank Azaria) would like their champion to have.  But they need to
control him and ask will he play along and take answers?  "What would
Kant say?" Van Doren muses.  "He'd agree!" the producers tell him
confidently.  Van Doren and Stempel allow themselves to be manipulated
into cooperating with the rigging.  But when Stempel is first
humiliated by having to miss an easy question and then feels he is not
being properly rewarded he decides to take action.  The story is told
by Richard Goodwin (Rob Morrow), an idealistic Harvard grad student in
a low-paid job on House Subcommittee on Legislative Oversight who led
the investigation.  Incidentally, after the uproar the real Goodwin
wrote a book about the scandal and now is one of the producers of this
film based on the book.
     With the possible exception of THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, QUIZ SHOW
has the best script of any film I have seen this year.  Paul Attanasio
has written a screenplay full of often very funny ironic humor.  It is
also packed with contrasts and conflicts.  Beyond the obvious contrast
of honesty and dishonesty, we have a father-son conflict with Mark Van
Doren (played by Paul Scofield) representing the values and honor of
the family while Charles at once tries to live up to and rebel from
those values.  There is the high academic standard that the father hold
up for the family and the son who is only a disappointingly very good.
There is a conflict between the academic culture of the Van Dorens and
the mass culture that television and the quiz shows represent.  We see
the wealth of the aristocratic Van Dorens and the cheap and disarrayed
home of the Stempels.  There is a perceived anti-Semitism in the
viewing public to which the Jewish game show producers pander in their
decision to take Stempel off the show.  And there is just a moment of
negative reaction at the Van Doren when they hear that their guest,
Dick Goodwin, is from the predominantly Jewish town Brookline.  The
script also contrasts the slow money world of campus teaching with the
fast-money world of television where a college instructor who used to
earn under $90 a week but lives a quiet scholarly life can earn
thousands in one night at the cost of a life of fame and constant
tension.  All of these individual conflicts continue at the same time
in the script.
     As someone who considers SCHINDLER'S LIST and A MAN FOR ALL
SEASONS to be the two best films he has ever seen, seeing Paul Scofield
and Ralph Fiennes on the screen together as father and son is a special
experience in itself.  No character is really the main character of
QUIZ SHOW, but Ralph Fiennes's Charles Van Doren is the character we
learn most about.  And  Fiennes certainly cuts a trimmer and more
dashing figure than he did in SCHINDLER'S LIST.  He has not quite
mastered an American accent, but here one ascribes his tones to perhaps
having been educated abroad.  Scofield is very dignified as his father,
but it is hard not to see a lot of Thomas More's quick mind and starchy
correctness in his Mark Van Doren.  John Turturo is adequately abrasive
as his course vulgarian from Queens.  One of the biggest surprises is
David Paymer's slimeball executive.  He has usually played simpy nice-
guy roles and it is nice to see him in a role into which he can put a
little power.  Barry Levinson, who directed Redford in THE NATURAL, is
cast as Dave Garroway, long-time host of the "Today Show."  The two men
are entirely different types and one wonders why there was such an
inappropriate piece of casting.  Levinson gives the roles about the
same authenticity that Sylvester Stallone could give to playing Ronald
Coleman.  Martin Scorsese is also present playing a very high executive
for Geritol, but at least here nobody knows what a Geritol executive is
supposed to look like.
     Michael Ballhaus was director of photography and here one of the
big mistakes was made.  The entire film is shot in a tiresome yellow
filter to create some sort of period feel and in addition most scenes
seem dominated by the color brown, probably for the same reason.  The
effect is artificial and irritating, though it might have worked better
with a lighter filter.
     A few minor quibbles with the script: In a crowded restaurant quiz
show producer Dan Enright has a heated discussion with Stempel over
arranging for Stempel to lose.  It is very difficult to believe Enright
would be so indiscrete.  Levinson raises his hand in a gesture somewhat
like the one that Dave Garroway would use, but Garroway would say
"Peace."  Levinson merely raises his hand.  And frankly I do not
remember NBC using the peacock until the 60s, though I could be
misremembering.
     Still, this is a great script and a very good look at a nearly
forgotten, but nontheless influential American scandal.  I give it a
low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  9/14/94 (NY); 9/16/94 (limited); 9/23/94 (general) 
Running Length:  2:13 
Rated:  PG-13 (Language, mature themes) 
Starring:  Ralph Fiennes, Rob Morrow, John Turturro, Paul Scofield, 
           David Paymer, Mira Sorvino, Martin Scorsese, 
           Barry Levinson 
Director:  Robert Redford 
Producer:  Robert Redford 
Screenplay:  Paul Attanasio based on REMEMBERING AMERICA:  A VOICE 
             FROM THE SIXTIES by Richard N. Goodwin 
Cinematography:  Michael Ballhaus 
Music:  Mark Isham 
Released by Hollywood Pictures 
     "Something changed with this [quiz show scandal].  It really marked 
the end of a period of innocence in our social history.  No longer did 
people believe that what you saw on television was the truth....  It may 
sound peculiar to us today that a quiz show scandal could have provoked 
such public outrage, but it was really the first in a series of 
disillusionments that violated our sense of trust." 
          - Robert Redford, producer/director QUIZ SHOW 
     1958.  Television quiz shows like "Twenty-One" are ratings hits.
Americans tune in every week to root for the charming, erudite Charles
Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes) in his quest to vanquish new challengers.
Following his defeat of the previous champion, Herbie Stempel (John
Turturro), Van Doren, the son of the well-known poet Mark Van Doren
(Paul Schofield), has become a national celebrity, sending sales of
Geritol, the sponsor of "Twenty-One," through the roof.  But all is not
well behind the scenes.  Van Doren's victories are cheats, the results
of pre- supplied answers guaranteed to keep him on the air.  When a
bitter Stempel decides to go public and Congressional investigator Dick
Goodwin (Rob Morrow) listens to him, a national scandal erupts.
     The clearest message of QUIZ SHOW is a cynical truth: the
entertainment industry is a business where ethics are meaningless when
it comes to winning a ratings war.  This is hardly a revelation, of
course.  No American in 1994 is naive enough to blindly accept anything
they see on television.  "Twenty-One," however, is where that
disillusionment started.
     There's a secondary theme dealing with the shortness of the
public's memory.  Less than twenty years following his "Twenty-One"
disgrace, producer Dan Enright returned to the game show business with
another hit.  Today, programs like "Jeopardy" are big draws, and the
lure of a repeat champion is as strong as ever.
     Following events such as the quiz show revelations, Vietnam, and
Watergate, the nation's perceptions have changed.  We have grown up,
becoming a jaded society given to skepticism about everything from TV
programs to the word of presidents.  In 1958, we trusted.  In 1994, we
expect the worst, and wait like vampires to suck the blood of fallen
icons when those expectations are fulfilled.
     One of the reasons that QUIZ SHOW is so extraordinary is because
it spins a story as compelling on the personal level as on the national
one.  Ralph Fiennes' Charles Van Doren is a fascinating individual,
equally seduced and repelled by greed.  Desperate to escape his
father's shadow, he wallows in public adulation until it begins to
stink from his own hypocrisy.
     Consecutive films have now presented superb performances by
Fiennes.  Van Doren is nothing like SCHINDLER'S LIST's Amon Goeth, but,
taken together, both roles display the actor's ability and
versatility.  If he continues to choose his parts carefully, Fiennes
will soon be a major motion picture draw.
     On the other side of the father/son conflict is Paul Scofield's
character.  Masterfully rendered, Mark Van Doren is far more than the
usual stern, disapproving patriarch.  He is a man with keen insight and
sensitivity who looks sadly upon the track of his son's ambitions.
     John Turturro is exceptional as the uncharismatic Herbie Stempel,
a man so petty and dislikable that it's impossible to sympathize with
him even when he's presented as a victim.  Rob Morrow is good enough
not to be completely overshadowed by his co-stars, although his forced
accent could have been toned down.  Mira Sorvino, in her first
mainstream film after appearances in several independents, provides a
spark as Goodwin's wife.
     Crisply directed by Redford from a thought-provoking script by
Paul Attanasio, and featuring a slew of strong performances (including
appearances by Barry Levinson and Martin Scorsese), QUIZ SHOW is the
first giant of the Fall 1994 movie schedule.  It is deserving of the
pre-release hype.
     Towards the end of the movie, David Paymer's Dan Enright comments
that the sham of "Twenty-One" created a situation in which nobody
lost--not the sponsor, NBC, the public, or the contestants.  Viewers of
QUIZ SHOW, however, are likely to form the opposite impression--that,
in the end, there were no winners.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Raymond Johnston
     Robert Redford has proven that he is a better middle-aged director
than he is a middle-aged actor.  His recent roles in HAVANA, SNEAKERS,
and the truly dreadful INDECENT PROPOSAL can in no way stand beside his
stunning achievement in directing A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT and now QUIZ
SHOW.
     The ambiance of the late Eisenhower years is perfectly
recreated.  The cars, clothing, hair styles, magazine covers, and idiom
all come together to make a credible world, a world where naive people
believed that everything they saw on television was true.  It was
television that made everyone equal, and into this world come people
from diverse backgrounds.  All of them see the new medium as their
ticket to the top.  Television becomes something like a mirror that
reflects the character's moral make-up.
     When a film is based on questions of character, what a good
director needs most is character actors.  Quiz show is filled them.  John
Turturro (DO THE RIGHT THING) is mercilessly annoying in the role of
Queens, New York bookworm Herbert Stempel, a man whom one person
comments has a face for radio.  Few actors would have dared to create a
nudge with so few redeeming qualities.  Diametrically opposed to him is
Ralph Fiennes (SCHINDLER'S LIST) as Charles van Doren, the handsome
college professor and son of a prominent intellectual family.  He is as
flawless as Stempel is flawed.  Between the two of them there is variety
of fights: rich v. poor, Gentile v. Jew, handsome v. unhandsome,
suburbs v. city.
     While they are not top billed, the amoral center of the film is
the two game show producers, played by Hank Azaria and David Paymer.
They are two fast talkers who take basically honest people, and tell
them how the game show really works.  David Paymer as Dan Enright,
carries the heaviest load in the film.  If his depiction of the producer
who sees nothing more than ratings had been off the mark, the whole
film would have faltered badly.  But David Paymer is every media
executive.  If he doesn't win the Oscar for best supporting actor, it is
probably because the show is fixed.
     The only near miss is Rob Morrow, whose attempt at a Kennedy-esque
Boston accent manages to mostly be grating.  Also appearing in the film
is Martin Scorcese in a cameo.  One cannot help speculating that he gave
Redford a few tips on camera angles.
     The script by Paul Attanasio lets up on the moralizing enough for
a few good laughs.  Robert Redford keeps the longish film moving at a
good pace, leaving one story line for another just before it gets
boring.  QUIZ SHOW kicks off the serious fall Oscar race, and should
be a strong contender in most categories including minor ones like
costume and set design.
     This film would make a good double feature with Francis Coppola's
similarly themed TUCKER: THE MAN AND HIS DREAM.  Both are about the
gap between idealism and reality in the post World War II era.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     QUIZ SHOW is about a time in the late 50s that I remember from my
childhood.  21 was one of the most popular TV shows on then.  Everybody
watched it including this twelve-year-old kid named Steve Rhodes who was
a star in math but a third stringer as a football player.
     The 50s were a time when intellectuals were out and athletes were
in.  Friday night boxing was all the rage as was any live televised
sport.  People even took wrestling serious back then.  Somehow,
possibly because of the money, people went gaga over quiz shows.  In
QUIZ SHOW, the brightest, well at least those with the best memories,
were the heroes.  People structured their life so that they could be
home in time to see if Charles Van Doren, who was an intellectual with
a jet setter beauty, could win again.  Home video recorders were not
even a dream then.
     The movie about this time is directed and produced by Robert
Redford.  His movie focuses on the scandal behind 21.  The producers of
this show figured out how they could manipulate the vast television
audience by giving answers to the contestants they wanted to win and
forcing their contestants to take a dive when their ratings began to
plateau.
     I remember this era, and I have read about it so I can say that
the movie is a fairly accurate story with a couple of key exceptions I
will cover later.  What makes this movie work is the history, the
reenactment of the old quiz shows, and the excellent performance of
Ralph Fiennes as Charles Van Doren.  Fiennes is a brilliant actor whose
best work was as the evil Nazi concentration camp leader in SCHINDLER'S
LIST.  His cold bloodedness with no remorse in that movie was chilling
in the extreme.  In QUIZ SHOW he plays a sweet, lovable guy who manages
to sign a pact with the devil and yet not seem to realize what he has
done.
     Unfortunately, there is a lot about the show that does not work.
The show runs 2:10 but feels like 3 hours.  Many long scenes are
unnecessary and should have been cut entirely.  The script is too
mushy.  It paints everyone in varying shades of an evil gray.  Anyone
having anything to do with business - TV or sponsor (Geritol), is
especially evil.  The only true good guys are the government, and they
are like white knights trying to show everyone how evil the businesses
are but the contestants really were not that much at fault - they were
duped.  The purest of the pure are the congressional staffers.  Ah,
what a contrast with today.
     Now, the producers of 21 were bad guys.  The problem with the show
is that you think that the network and the sponsor was in on it too.
If you stay to see all of the credits you will learn that it was never
proven that either had anything to do with the scandal.  They word it
in such a way that you are supposed to believe that they actually did
and hence were guilty until proven innocent.
     About the network's guilt I know nothing, but about the head of
Geritol (played by Martin Scorsese) I read a recent article in the Wall
Street Journal.  It claimed that no proof of any kind was ever
presented but that the congressional hearings forever damaged this man,
and he spend the rest of his entire life trying unsuccessfully to get
his reputation back.
     Maybe I am just a softie, but I could forgive Redford his playing
loose with the facts for no good reason (the contestants and the
producers of 21 provided enough bad guys to go around) if he had just
made a better movie.  It needed more energy, crisper editing, and a
reworked script.
     In the end, I have to give the film a mild thumbs up as it is an
interesting story and the performance by Fiennes is worth seeing.  I
give the show ** 1/2.  It is correctly rated PG-13 for a little mildly
bad language and because it is a show that would not interest anyone
under 13.  I was disappointed by this show since I thought it would be
much better and because my number 2 show on my top ten list of best
movies of all of the 1980s was ORDINARY PEOPLE also directed by Robert
Redford.  Oh well, ...
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: November 11, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Croal, NGai
     QUIZ SHOW is the worst good film of 1994, which says as much about
the current state of American film as it does Robert Redford's most
recent directorial effort.  It sports an intriguing premise, a
top-notch cast, an ace cinematographer (Scorsese partner-in-crime
Michael Ballhaus) and a famously intelligent director.  But all of
these elements, like the trappings of the actual quiz show scandals,
are smoke-and-mirrors that conceals the fact that something is wrong at
the center--in this case, Paul Attanasio's screenplay--but for only so
long.
     The film begins with great promise.  Congressional investigator
Richard Goodwin (Rob Morrow) circles a spanking new convertible at the
center of a gleaming showroom; circling directly overhead is a
smooth-talking salesman who recites the specifications of the car like
the virtues of a lover.  Redford and Ballhaus depart from the Sundance
Kid's notoriously formal style; here, the two cross-fade from shot to
shot as Goodwin walks around the car, a rhythm that establishes the
seductiveness of the moment as well as its artifice.  The scene has
nothing to do with the narrative, but it's got everything to do with
the film's theme: the importance of probing beneath shiny surfaces.
     Redford effortlessly tops anything he's done to date with the next
sequence, which introduces us to the quiz show of the title,
"Twenty-One."  The camera prowls the studio where the show is shot,
introducing producers, contestants and a rapt studio audience.  Outside
the NBC building and across the country, men, women and children flock
to their television sets to watch long-running champion Herbert Stempel
(John Turturro) defy the odds and win yet again.
     The sequence is a marvel of simple-yet-effective cross-cutting, but
Redford doesn't stop there.  As he shows us the brilliantly scripted
puppet show taking place on national TV, he pulls back the curtain to
reveal the puppeteer standing behind it; in this case the Geritol
sponsor (director Martin Scorsese).  While the bosomy blonde sitting
next to him remarks that Stempel's face was "was made for radio," the
sponsor calls up the head of the network, who in turn calls up the
show's producers, who in turn inform Stempel that it's time for him to
go.
     The search is on for a new face--a "Twenty-One" champion "who
looks like he could get a table at Twenty-One."  Enter Charles van Doren
(Ralph Fiennes), an Ivy Leaguer who teaches at Columbia and whose
family seems to breed literati like rabbits.  A WASP among WASP, he's
the perfect replacement for the overbearingly Jewish (or is it Jewishly
overbearing) Stempel.  Needless to say, Stempel doesn't take the coup
very well, and determines to show the uncircumcised Hamptoner what
little Queens boys are made of, kicking off a grand jury investigation
that catches Goodwin's attention.
     What Stempel and Goodwin don't realize is the full extent of the
power wielded by the two institutions they're taking on--the old
whiteboy network and big business.  Goodwin is very nearly seduced by
the former; in investigating Charles van Doren, he finds himself so
drawn to their easy, erudite life of privilege that he resists
implicating van Doren until he can no longer protect him.  And the
latter, with millions of dollars behind it, walks into Goodwin's line
of fire and emerges unscathed.  "I thought I was gonna get television,"
he says, "but the truth is, television's gonna get us."
     For a while, QUIZ SHOW gets by on its gentle humor.  But Redford
is ill-suited to get to the bottom of the human comedy of the quiz
show scandal.  He trots out the usual suspects: Stempel is motivated by
his resentment of WASPs, Goodwin by his ambition and van Doren by an
Oedipus complex (minus the sexual component, of course).  None of these
are complicated enough to justify a two-hour movie--particularly one
with three main characters--unless it's balls-out satire.  Directors
with acid for blood, like Scorsese, Altman or Kubrick understand that,
which is why superficially superficial films like GOODFELLAS, THE
PLAYER and DR. STRANGELOVE shoot right to our core.  Redford is so
mistakenly brings a knife to a gunfight, so it's no surprise that he
fails to draw blood.
     Attanasio's script, while competent, is content to lay out a map
so complete that there are no surprises; there isn't a single moment in
the film that can't be predicted.  The source material may be
insubstantial, but there is a lot of ground the narrative has to
cover.  Attanasio's mistake is to attempt both breadth and depth
simultaneously; it's inevitable and unfortunate that both fail
spectacularly.
     The actors seem to understand that QUIZ SHOW should be a satire,
which has the effect entertaining us superbly even as it exposes the
hollowness at the film's core.  Ralph Fiennes, so effortlessly chilling
as Amon Goeth in SCHINDLER'S LIST reminds us why Day-Lewis status
isn't too far away for this young Brit.  Here, he strains for a
credible New York accent (as does Yank Rob Morrow), but the demons that
lie beneath his patrician exterior are only too believable.  Paul
Scofield puts in an award-worthy supporting turn as van Doren's father,
an man who intuitively, if not intellectually, understands the danger
that television represents.  And Martin Scorsese gives such a scabrous
performance an unflappable Geritol executive, that, at greater length,
could have rivaled his infamous backseat pussy-and-a-.45 monologue in
TAXI DRIVER.
     But the bravura performance is delivered by John Turturro.  He
sinks his teeth into Stempel's Jewish inferiority complex with such
over-the-top gusto that were this a Spike Lee film, cries of
anti-Semitism would be unleavened by Goodwin's good-Jew role.  More
sweaty, jittery and boorish than Tommy Lee Jones' warden in NATURAL
BORN KILLERS, the part is right out of Der Sturmer.  But Turturro
plunges so far into the part that he creates a truth completely outside
of Attanasio's scripting, refusing to sentimentalize Stempel in the
least.  It's as if Turturro were saying, "I double-dare ya to like this
shmuck."
     Unfortunately for Redford, the truth Turturro creates is so
effective that we can't be bothered to take him up on his dare.  Both
van Doren and Stempel may be frauds, but van Doren's smooth,
all-American beauty is far better company than Stempel's snaggle-toothed
chutzpah, so we can't begrudge Goodwin or Redford for deciding to spend
more time with van Doren.  We see van Doren at work, rest and play, but
every time we see Stempel, he's monomaniacally focused on "Twenty-One."
By hewing so tightly to Goodwin's point-of-view, Redford reinforces our
opinion that Charlie isn't so bad, and Stempel is a bit of a loser.  If
van Doren were more vacant, more greedy, more grasping than he turns
out to be, Redford could have punished us and Goodwin for falling for
van Doren's golden-boy charm.  Instead, Redford's even-handedness
becomes infuriating, and his insistence that television is the real bad
guy rings more-and-more hollow.
     Despite the screenplay's significant problems, QUIZ SHOW is very
entertaining.  Redford's skill with actors is very much in evidence,
particularly in the quiet scenes, and most impressively with Fiennes
and Scofield; the stunned expression on Scofield's face after hearing
his son confesses to him suggests a loss of innocence that was never
America's to lose.  But Redford slyly saves his best and most
disturbing image for last:  behind the end credits, a studio audience
laughs and applauds in ominous slow-motion, as if the scandal had ever
happened.  Turning the camera back on us, in fact, is the most
intelligent choice Redford makes in the entire film, a choice that
almost justifies QUIZ SHOW's existence.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     On a recent edition of his CBS talk show, David Letterman jokingly
stated that he had just seen Robert Redford's new film QUIZ SHOW and
that he felt compelled to confess that his show is completely fixed.
The basis of the humor in this joke is the fact that nobody today would
ever believe that the show *wasn't* mostly carefully planned and
scripted.  Letterman's joke actually hit on the essence of what
Redford's film is all about.
     QUIZ SHOW is a dramatization of the mid-1950s investigation into
early quiz shows that eventually resulted in the discovery that the
winners were pre- determined by providing contestants with the answers
ahead of time.  The film specifically follows young congressional
lawyer Dick Goodwin (Rob Morrow) as he investigates the claims of
disgruntled contestant Herbert Stempel (John Turturro) that the
producers of the popular quiz show "Twenty-One" forced him to take a
dive allowing charming intellectual Charles Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes)
to become the new champion.
     Paul Attanasio's smart, witty, and insightful screenplay feels
much like a detective story as Goodwin interviews suspects and digs
through papers and kinescopes slowly uncovering details about how
deeply the fraud extends.  The film gives the audience most of the
details up front, mostly in scenes where producer Dan Enright (David
Paymer) and his assistant Albert Freedman (Hank Azaria) are coaching
the contestants.  Giving the audience an omniscient view was a smart
move since most people will already have some familiarity with the true
events and would likely been annoyed if the film hadn't acknowledged
that.
     None of the characters in this film are clearly heroes or
villains.  Stempel is portrayed as an opportunistic man who comes
forward only when he no longer feels that staying silent is to his own
best advantage.  The film makes it rather clear that Enright could have
easily bought his silence if he had been willing to meet his price.
Stempel eventually does the right thing, but not entirely for the right
reasons.  Still, he isn't an evil man by any means.  He is shown to be
mostly a loving husband and father who is mostly looking for a better
life for himself.  We learn that his family has largely been supported
by his wife's parents and that he wants nothing more than to be able to
support his family on his own.
     Van Doren is shown as being an essentially good man who is seduced
by the easy fame and fortune being offered to him.  He is initially
reluctant to accept the answers and spends quite a bit of time trying
to figure out ways to justify his actions to himself.  Goodwin is also
less than perfect.  He takes a strong liking to Van Doren and clearly
doesn't care much for Stempel.  As a result, he attempts to protect Van
Doren while essentially allowing Stempel to hang himself.  In one of
the film's best written sequences, Van Doren asks Goodwin outright
whether or not he would have given into the same temptations.  Goodwin
repeatedly stammers a "no" as if he is struggling to convince himself.
     Even Enright and Freedman are not pure villains.  They are both
shown as being under strong directives from both the network and the
sponsor to hold on to popular contestants who generate high ratings.
On a larger scale, the shows are fixed simply because that is what the
audience demands.  They want to see the contestants that they like best
win and the producers are essentially giving them what they want.  At
one point, the sponsor (well-played by Martin Scorsese in a rare
acting role) tells Goodwin that if he succeeds in stopping the quiz
shows from being fixed that the result will be that the games will
simply become easier.  Of course, we all know that quiz shows survived
this scandal and that they *are* now much easier (witness the
popularity of "Wheel of Fortune," for example).
     On the surface, it might appear that Goodwin is the character we
are meant to identify with the most, but in truth the film also expects
us to recognize a bit of ourselves in Stempel and Van Doren.  Turturro
plays Stempel as a nerdy little guy whose strongest asset is his
ability to remember trivial information (often with little
comprehension).  The quiz show provides him with an opportunity for
fame and fortune but, more importantly, it provides him with some
*respect*.  Could any of us truly resist the opportunity to suddenly be
viewed as being smarter and more successful than we ever were before?
     As played by Fiennes, Van Doren is shown as being a true
intellectual with an upper-crust background.  He probably could have
had a great deal of success on the quiz show *without* cheating, but he
is seduced by the chance at an easy road to success.  Van Doren lives
under the shadow of his scholarly, Pulitzer-Prize-winning father
(wonderfully played by Paul Scofield).  His success on "Twenty-One"
helps him to move out of that shadow, in a sense gaining some of the
same respect that Stempel was seeking.  In the end, it is this desire
for his father's respect that makes it impossible for Van Doren to
continue to keep his secret.
     Goodwin essentially is the film's stand-in for the viewing
audience.  He is a fan of the quiz shows and is somewhat shocked to
learn that his trust has been betrayed.  He is also seduced by Van
Doren's charm and even becomes friends with him.  Morrow and Fiennes
play very well together and their scenes together are many of the
film's best.  Morrow plays Goodwin as a man who is somewhat trapped
between Stemple's and Van Doren's worlds.  He comes from a humble, New
York background much like Stemple's, but also likes to repeatedly point
out that he was first in his class at Harvard.  Morrow even plays the
role with a bizarre accent that seems to be a combination of Brooklyn
and Boston (unfortunately, this accent does make his dialog a bit
difficult to understand at times).
     Redford's direction, Michael Ballhaus' photography, and the work
of the production designers all do a great job of capturing the feel of
a simpler time period.  Everything looks right and the general
attitudes and ideas of the people on screen all seem correct.  Some of
the shock at the scandal comes from the simple fact that people were
less cynical back then.
     At its heart, this is really a movie about the point where mass
communications started to erode the naive trust that the public once
felt for the media.  As television has increased the flow of
information into our homes, it has also caused the public to become
more aware and less trusting. Today, most people are very aware of the
business aspects of television.  Today's quiz shows may not be
directly fixed, but most people are certainly aware of the care they
take to audition contestants to determine how they will go over with
the audience.  As the sponsor in the film suggested, they have also
been made easier.  Today's audience also tend to show a certain amount
of distrust towards other parts of television as well.  Letterman's
joke is particularly ironic since the "realism" of today's talk shows
is probably as questionable as the quiz shows shown in the film.  With
the growing influence of tabloid-style journalism, even the news has
become suspect.
     QUIZ SHOW provides an interesting expansion on some of the ideas
considered just last month in Oliver Stone's NATURAL BORN KILLERS.
Stone brought up the question of when news starts to become
sensationalism that is unworthy of reporting.  Redford's film may lead
one to question whether or not the stories being reported are even
*true*.
     Ironically, Redford's film itself is generating some controversy
about its accuracy.  The film fictionalizes some of the situations and
beefs up the importance of certain personalities (particularly
Goodwin).  It also narrows the story by concentrating solely on
"Twenty-One," only obliquely referencing the fact that other quiz shows
of the time were also fixed.  This bit of controversy may actually
*increase* the impact of the film.  It helps to underscore the fact
that the media frequently skews the truth to fit a specific agenda (in
this case, the alterations are largely made simply to make the film
more dramatic, entertaining, and easier to follow) and that one should
never depend completely on any one source for information
     QUIZ SHOW is one of the most fascinating, entertaining, and
thought-provoking films of 1994.  It is bound to generate a lot of
worthwhile discussion while also providing a simple, old-fashioned good
time at the movies.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It is not often that one is fortunate enough to see a movie that
has a good story, exceptional acting, not only by the film's stars but
all the supporting cast, and also has great direction. All of these are
found in this gripping, emotional film, and what a treat that is for
the moviegoer.
     Everyone probably remembers or has heard of the quiz show,
"Twenty-One," that swept the country's TV viewers in the mid-1950s, and
of the accompanying scandal when it was found the program was rigged
with some of the contestants being given the answers.   That it also
involved the son of a most distinguished intellectual family added
further drama.  Despite our knowing that story, it in no way diminishes
the excitement of the film.  This, again, is due to the fine direction
and to its superb cast.
     Herbie Stempel (John Turturro) is the man the show's producers ask
to miss a question when they feel he has outlived his popularity as the
show's top winner.  Turturro is perfect as he rages over being dropped,
and with the further ignominy over a question to which he (and everyone
else) knew the answer.
     Dick Goodwin (Rob Morrow) is the attorney who tenaciously sought
to find out if and how the program was rigged, and present it to the
Congressional Committee on Legislative Oversight. Charles Van Doren
(Ralph Fiennes), who rose to fame as the contestant who won the most
money; his father, poet and critic, Mark Van Doren, (Paul Scofield);
Quiz Show producer Dan Enright (David Paymer); and Jack Barry
(Christopher McDonald) the show's Host, all give wonderful
performances.
     Look for many nominations from Quiz Show come Oscar time, for Best
Movie, Best Acting by leads and supporters, and Best Direction.  One
extraordinary film!
