Title
Review for Witness (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Aren't we all just a little bit fascinated with the Amish? 
These are people who have rejected the American government 
as well as every technological advancement of the last couple 
centuries in favor of those oppressive suits, beards and brimmed 
hats -- bonnets for the ladies. Those of us who are slave to 
electricity and television, not to mention the utter extravagance 
of running water, wonder what these inbred cults could see in 
plowing and milking at 4:30 in the morning.
        These innate curiosities we all have about Amish people 
are what elevates WITNESS from being just an average 80's action 
flick. Harrison Ford, Mr. 80's Action Flick himself, plays a police 
detective assigned to crack open the murder of a fellow officer. The 
only witness to the murder is a little Amish boy (Lukas Haas) who 
happened to be hiding in a bus station bathroom stall at the time of 
the murder, most likely mesmerized by the flush technology.
        Ford drags Haas and his mother (Kelly "Top Gun" 
McGillis, in her other movie appearance) to the police station, 
making him root through mug shots and lineups. More 
importantly, he exposes young Lukas to a world of sin and 
corruption which McGillis and her bearded counterparts have been 
trying to shelter him from. That's when Haas sees a picture of one 
of the force's most respected officers (Danny Glover) and 
recognizes him as the killer.
        Since, beneath its Amish exterior, this is a typical 80's 
action movie, millions of dollars in drugs are involved and the 
police corruption runs pretty much throughout the department. 
So Ford has to find a place to hide himself and his Amish 
witnesses. What better place than Pennsylvania Amish country? 
That's when the tables are turned and Ford finds himself a fish out 
of water, a fish in an oppressive suit and a bigass brimmed hat.
        WITNESS could have been a contrived comedy -- those 
were very popular in the 80's -- but it instead tries to paint a 
realistic portrait of Amish life. This ends up being a lot funnier 
than a sitcom approach, because nothing is more laughable than 
life itself. They bring out every Amish stereotype in the book, 
even a barn-raising. In this age of political correctness, the Amish 
are one of the last constituent groups that are still safe to make fun 
of, probably because they won't ever see or hear about what's being 
said about them, nor do they care. In their eyes, Billy Graham is a 
heathen for owning an electric hair dryer.
        The middle half of the movie is the actionless assimilation 
of Ford into the Amish community, which is always interesting if 
not amusing. Crusty old Eli doesn't like Ford too much, especially 
when he finds him dancing to rock music with his daughter 
(McGillis). Amish Kelly doesn't compromise herself with Ford 
beyond the realm of hungry French kisses, even if she does appear 
topless in a shower scene. That's where I really wouldn't have 
minded the Puritan approach; McGillis looks just like my high 
school Bible teacher. Seeing her make out with Tom Cruise was 
bad enough.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!
