Title
Review for Donald Hall and Jane Kenyon: Keeping You Safe Beside Me (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
Donald Hall and Jane Kenyon: "Keeping you Safe Beside me"
Director/Photographer/Editor: William Hamilton
Production Assistant: Brett S. Shafer
Person Interviewed: Donald Hall
With the voices of: Donald Hall and Jane Kenyon
Released by The Indiana University of Pennsylvania
     Steps to becoming a film critic.  First, you must develop a tolerance
for movies.  Not just for violence on film, or sex on film or anything else
that you may or may not find personally distasteful, but for bad films in
general.  Humanity is dropped at the door if at all possible, and you
reflect on your experiences with a human aspect once you exit.  Second, you
must learn that the world you are entering into is not at all a pleasant
one.  Three: Find an outlet.  Online places, due to their relative ease, are
a good start.  Do not try to get pay from the start, because you won't.  A
great deal many of us have been in this for years and have reaped nary a
dime.  Four: Network.  Get to know the business and the people in the
business.  Anytime you can pick the brains of a filmmaker, do so.
     The big fish in the business of film criticism, Roger Ebert, Leonard
Maltin.  These people know everybody, and are very logical about their
reviews.   Myself, I know a lot of the people on the low level (i.e. the
agent of Jena Olin, the cinematographer my favorite shot in history, the
opening shot of The Player).  I know them peripherally at most, by email.
However, today I feel as if I have made a major career move, because I have
met someone who has produced his own documentary.
     Admittedly, this is not a great source of excitement.  I've met people
farther up the food chain than this guy, but its still a source of dumb
pride (this is what I get for living in the suburbs for many years).  No,
I'm not reviewing this as a personal favor to him, although I do consider
him a friend I told him candidly before the premier at the local branch of
IUP that I do not show mercy as a critic.  I'm writing this review because,
as far as documentaries go, it's one of the finest I have seen in the past
four years of criticism.
     Remember that a documentary's basic purpose is not to tell a story.  It
is not to entertain.  It is definitely not to be original.   There goes
every single aspect upon which I normally grade a film... or does it?  The
documentary, for which the entire cast and crew is listed above, blurs the
lines between documentary and docudrama as it tells the story of Donald Hall
and the late Jane Kenyon, a tale of poets in love.
     Giving background, Donald Hall and Jane Kenyon are both poets that
wrote the majority of their time in New England and, at least I believe, are
of the naturalist persuasion.  Truth to be told, I do not know very much
about them.  This is not to say that the documentary was not informative: it
told me very much of the enduring romance between Donald Hall, a very
traditional man, and Jane Kenyon, a woman who spent most of her life
fighting manic-depression and died of leukemia in 1995.  It told me about
two people who appreciated New England like only people from New England
can, the ones who don't mind that bugs eat you alive and will give it all up
for the smell of the sea.
     What was interesting about this documentary, and what made it much
better than the 35mm or 16mm filmed Pretty as a Picture: The Art of David
Lynch, which was the last documentary that I saw, was that it did not fall
into what I term as the "documentary trap."  The idea of a documentary may
be to inform, but the idea of human nature is to entertain oneself every
chance we would get.  So, unless I'm in a classroom setting, I'd rather
watch a documentary which is more like a docudrama, which is what this film
is.
     Whereas the normal documentary does not move the camera (except to
pan), this film does.  Where as the normal documentary spends its time in
color, this one switches in between color and black and white.  The normal
documentary has about as much residual noise as a silent film has spoken
conversation.  It also has a touching story and hints of a basically cyclic
film style (the first and last scenes are the same).  This film has a
soundtrack in the form of original (and not too shabby) compositions.  It
does fall into one trap of the documentary, however.  It does have bad
lighting, which I have seen on about every documentary to date, and thus I
believe it to be unavoidable.
     I'm not going to tell you to rush to the multiplex to see this film.
You won't find it.  I'm not going to tell you to tune into PBS to watch it.
You won't find it there, either.  In fact, it is currently in the hands of
the marketing department at IUP.  I'm just saying that, should you get the
chance to see this, jump on it.
