Title
Review for Liar Liar (1997)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4). LIAR LIAR is the funniest movie I have seen in a very
long time (A year? More?). It is Jim Carrey's funniest film role yet and
his funniest performance since the TV show IN LIVING COLOR.
Paul Guay and Stephen Mazur wrote some great comedy for Jim Carrey and
it should be noted that the material is funny without degenerating into
cheap jokes about human secretions and excretions. With that in mind,
this movie is as funny as the best work the Marx Brothers ever did, and
much more enjoyable than, say, DUMB AND DUMBER, BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD, or
even PRIVATE PARTS.
Jim Carrey plays Fletcher Reid, a lawyer who cannot lie for a whole day,
thanks to a magic wish by his son Max (Justin Cooper). Max lives with
his mother Audrey (Maura Tierney). When Fletcher and Max do see each
other, they love each other a lot. But Max easily tires of all the
broken promises from dad. So when dad skips Max's birthday party to
"work," Max lets loose with the birthday wish.
All of this is a relatively unnecessary setup for the real heart of the
movie, which is Jim Carrey's performance. In fact, the beginning and end
of the movie are about as unoriginal and clich'd as the worst
straight-to-video "family films." But this is the kind of movie sold on
the idea that film historian Bruce Kawin calls "high concept plus a
hook." The idea is easily summarized, and an interesting angle is chosen
from which to tell the story. The objective is not originality. The
objective is to get Jim Carrey in front of the camera in a funny
situation.
In that endeavor, LIAR LIAR succeeds wonderfully. I will refrain from
giving away any of the jokes -- I DETEST people who sit in theaters and
"predict" the lines they've read in reviews, especially in a comedy --
but I have a theory as to why Carrey is so funny.
Part of what makes great comedy is stripping a person down to their
core. John Cleese is so funny because the British are a stuffy, priggish
people. John Cleese looks, acts, and sounds British, but when all the
puffery is stripped away his sheer silliness is heightened. Jacques
Tati's MR. HULOT'S HOLIDAY is one of my favorite films ever. It is not
hilarious like LIAR LIAR but it is subtly funny in a way that makes it
endlessly watchable. It is funny because Mr. Hulot and all the other
guests at the resort are on holiday and they have left their inhibitions
at home. Each person can relax and be their true self at the holiday
resort. Each character is funny in their own way. Steve Martin is so
funny because his comic persona is naive. Martin walks on stage with an
arrow through his head and doesn't realize it for three or four minutes.
He tells you the way to make a million dollars is, first, to get a
million dollars . . .
Likewise, in LIAR LIAR, Carrey plays an inconsiderate prick who is
successful in part because of how well he tells little white lies. When
that outer shell is removed, his true nature shows through and it is
hilarious.
LIAR LIAR is a big step for Carrey as an actor. Okay, he had to do
slightly more acting in THE CABLE GUY than he did in the ACE VENTURAs or
in DUMB AND DUMBER, but in LIAR LIAR, his character is immediately
likeable, and not just because of the comedy. His love for his son looks
genuine. He and his son share a screen chemistry (if I may use that term
without being accused of NAMBLA sympathies) that is genuine and
heartwarming (in that straight-to-video "family film" kind of way).
Carrey is not a great actor, but he's not bad when called upon.
I hope Carrey is able to follow up with more great comedy like this.
Good comedies are hard to come by. Just check your local video store and
prove it to yourself. All the great films are docudramas, action epics,
or space sagas. Comedies come and go and are often forgotten as soon as
the credits roll. It's hard to sustain the humor for two hours and leave
the audience calling for more. Jim Carrey has that gift and it was put
to excellent use in LIAR LIAR.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I suppose one could find some sociological significance to the glut
of recent films about inattentive parents and neglected children, if one
were inclined to give a cliche a more grandiose label.  From Whoopi 
Goldberg in BOGUS to Arnold Schwarzenegger in JINGLE ALL THE WAY, from Tim
Allen in THE SANTA CLAUSE to Tim Allen in JUNGLE2JUNGLE, the reformed
workaholic has become the most popular protagonist in formula comedies,
going through a series of wacky adventures before giving a big hug to a
sad-eyed son or daughter.  Jim Carrey is the latest star to step into this
vehicle, and he certainly has enough pure manic energy to give is some
spark, but he has to work awfully hard to do it.  LIAR LIAR is a pure
show-off showcase for Carrey, and by sheer force of will he makes it
funny, despite a ridiculously limp script which has only one place to go.
     Carrey plays Fletcher Reede, a divorced attorney who has mastered the
art of the excuse, the prevarication, the flat-out lie.  Many of them come
at the expense of his young son Max (Justin Cooper), who is repeatedly
disappointed by his dad's no-shows and broken promises.  At his fifth
birthday party, with Fletcher again absent, Max makes a very special
birthday wish:  for just one day, he wishes that his dad were unable to
tell a lie.  Amazingly, Max's wish comes true, and the chronically
insincere Fletcher suddenly finds himself unable to be anything but
brutally honest.  This proves to be a professional obstacle, as Fletcher
is expected to find a less-than-ethical means of extracting a gold-digging
divorcee (Jennifer Tilly) from her pre-nuptial agreement.  It is also a
personal obstacle, as Fletcher's loose tongue gets him into trouble just
when he is trying to prevent his ex-wife Audrey (Maura Tierney) from
moving Max across the country.
     I have this theory that the script for LIAR LIAR, credited to Paul
Guay and Stephen Mazur, consisted largely of parenthetical gaps which read
something like "Jim does some weird physical stuff here" or "Jim makes a
goofy face."  There is a staggering lack of creativity in LIAR LIAR given
the possibilities of the premise.  Carrey is trapped in one situation --
the courtroom -- for far too long, and that situation begins to look like
an extended homage to Steve Martin's work in ALL OF ME, but without 
Martin's ability to maintain his dignity.  The dialogue consists largely
of one fairly obvious put-downs after another, most of which are salvaged
by Carrey's priceless reaction takes and his futile attempts to control
his honesty.  It seems fairly evident that without Carrey, LIAR LIAR would
have been an utter catastrophe.
     With him, it manages some genuine comic high notes.  A scene in which
Fletcher's jilted superior (Amanda Donohoe) forces him to tell the
partners what he really thinks of them turns into a wild orgy of insults;
later, Fletcher tries to get out of his court appearance by beating
himself insensible in a bathroom.  Carrey is cranked up to 11 from start
to finish in LIAR LIAR, and those who find him a bit much to take aren't
likely to have their opinions changed by this film.  Carrey seems to
realize that the entire film is riding on his shoulders, and he plays it
that way, as though the other people in the film were scenery to be
swallowed or knocked out of the way.  For all practical purposes they are,
particularly in the aforementioned partners' meeting, where a dozen people
sit around a table for the express purpose of being skewered; Carrey often
seems to be performing for the rest of the cast as well as for the
audience.  Only Cary Elwes, in a subtle turn as Audrey's painfully earnest
boyfriend, lends any support at all.
     As long as Carrey remains in overdrive, LIAR LIAR provides fairly
consistent moderate laughs -- as well as a few big ones -- but the entire
enterprise feels compromised by the tired paternal redemption motif.  It
almost spoils the fun of watching Carrey do his best impression of a human
pinball, knowing that eventually he's going to have to break down in a
tearful proclamation of devotion to his son.  It's too bad that, with
Carrey on board and a fanciful concept at the ready, LIAR LIAR can't work
up an inspired story to match Carrey's inspired performance.  In fact, it
can barely work up enough material to fill 90 minutes, resorting to
end-credit out-takes to pad the running time.  One of those out-takes 
shows co-star Swoosie Kurtz breaking up Carrey with an improvised snort of
"Over-actor!"  She may be right, but thank heaven someone involved in LIAR
LIAR was working as hard as all these single-minded screen parents we've
been seeing lately.

Author
Michael Redman
For such an over-the-edge actor, Jim Carrey has had a career of
"almosts". The witty television series "The Duck Factory" almost had an
audience. "Ace Ventura" parts One and B were almost funny. "The Cable
Guy" was almost a good film.
In "Liar Liar", the rubber-faced one is hilarious and he almost raises
the film above its terminally saccharine plot.
Fletcher Reid (Carrey) is a fast-talking lawyer with his occupation's
stereotypical lack of regard for the truth. On the fast track towards
partnership in his firm, Reid doesn't have much time for his five year
old son. He continually disappoints the kid by promising to spend time
with him and not showing up. =
Young Max is growing tired of the lies. Explaining to his class what his
father does for a living, he calls him a "liar". His teacher corrects
him, reminding him that he must mean "lawyer". Yeah, maybe.
On Max's birthday party (sans dad of course), his wish is that Fletcher
should go through one day telling only the truth. Luckily his wish comes
true =97 otherwise we wouldn't have much of a film. For a man who lives o=
n
little white lies, and a few enormous black ones, this is not an easy
task.
After spending an evening making a partner so that he could make
partner, he tells her "I've had better." In one of the movie's several
low neckline cleavage-heavy scenes, he tells a new resident in the
building exactly why men are so helpful to her. And on it goes.
The main storyline concerns a new, very important client. A young ditzy
blonde with the all important plunging neckline and ample bosom is
divorcing her zillionaire husband and Reid wants to take him for all
he's worth. If he does well with this trial, his partnership is in the
bag.
The problem is that with their pre-nup and her infidelity (seven lovers
at last count), there really isn't much of a case=85unless he plays fast
and lose with the truth. Now he can't lie.
The story is much the same as the other half dozen over-worked absent
father films that have graced us during the past few months. Nice young
boy, attractive divorced wife who still loves him, too much work: you
know the drill. Everyone's cute, cute, cute and I, for one, hate "cute".
When the plot's not cute, it's insipid. When it's cute, it's even worse.
The good news is that Carrey is a slapstick genius. Some of his bits
where he explodes onto the screen are inspired. A scene where Reid mugs
himself in a restroom, slamming himself into a wall, smashing his own
head with a toilet seat and punching himself out demonstrates his skill
as a physical comedian. His struggle with a pen is as classic as any
spit-take.
Unfortunately this doesn't mean that he's much of an actor here.
Obviously the film was constructed around his ad libs and antics, many
of which are great. The mistake happens when the movie turns to his
relationship with his son and even worse, with his wife. While the love
between father and son is believable, it never takes the film anywhere.
Without Carrey, the film would be unwatchable. As it is, it's only
unwatchable part of the time.
The best bits -- and this will tell you a lot -- are the outtakes shown
as the credits run. Director Tom Shadyac has the good taste to let
Carrey run wild most of the time, falling apart only when he attempts to
do something with a plot. Perhaps they should have made a movie entirely
of the film on the cutting room floor.
[This appeared in the 3/27/97 issue of the "Bloomington Voice",
Bloomington, Indiana. Michael Redman can be reached at
mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Side-splitting comedy that follows its own merciless logic almost
through to the end... but not without providing a good deal of genuine
laughs.
Most comedies these days have one flaw. They're not funny. They think
they're funny, but they are devoid of anything really penetrating or
dastardly. Occasionally a good funny movie sneaks past the deadening
Hollywood preconceptions of humor and we get a real gem: RUTHLESS PEOPLE,
for instance, which established a microcosm of a setup and played it out to
the bitter end.
LIAR LIAR is built the same way and is just about as funny. This is one of
the few movies I've seen where I was laughing consistently almost all the
way through: instead of a couple of set-pieces that inspired a laugh (think
of the dismal FATAL INSTINCT), the whole movie works like clockwork.
Jim Carrey playes a high-powered lawyer, to whom lying is as natural as
breathing. There is one thing he takes seriously, though: his son, and we
can sense the affection that they have for each other right away. But his
wife is divorced and seeing another man, and now it looks like they may move
away together. The son goes with them, of course.
The movie sets up this early material with good timing and a remarkable
balance of Jim Carrey's over-the-top persona with reality. Then the plot
springs into action: after being snubbed (not deliberately) by his father at
his birthday, the kid makes a wish as he blows out the birthday candles:
that for just one day, Dad can't lie. He gets the wish.
What happens next is sidesplitting. Everything turns into a confrontation:
when cornered by a bum for some change, he shouts, "No! I'm not giving you
any money because I know you'll spend it on booze! All I want to do is to
get to the office without having to step over the debris of our decaying
society!" He can't even get into an elevator without earning a black eye.
And what's worse, he's now gotten himself into an expensive divorce
settlement that requires him to twist the truth like abstract wire
sculpture.
Carrey, who I used to find unfunny, has gotten better at his schtick, even
if it's a limited one. He uses it to great effect in this movie. There is a
scene where he tries to test his ability to lie and nearly demolishes his
office in the process (there's a grin breaking out across my face right now,
just remembering the scene). He can't even WRITE the lie; his fingers
twitch, his body buckles like someone in the throes of cyanide poisoning,
and when he tries to talk it's like he's speaking in tongues. Equally funny
is a scene where he beats himself to a pulp (don't ask why), tries to drink
water to keep from having outbursts in the courtroom (it fails, with
semi-predictable results), and winds up biting the bullet when he gets
called into the boardroom to have everyone ask what they think of them. This
scene alone may force people to stop the tape for minutes on end.
The movie sustains its laughs and also its flashes of insight until almost
the end. A shame, too, because the movie insists on having a big, ridiculous
climax that involves Carrey's character flagging down a plane using a set of
motorized stairs, then breaking his leg, etc. A simple reconciliation would
do the trick. Why is this stupid pent-up climax always obligatory? It's not
even part of the movie's real agenda. Thankfully, LIAR LIAR survives it, and
so does Carrey. Maybe they were being merciful, on reflection. If I'd
laughed any more, I might have needed an iron lung.

Author
Jason Wallis
"Liar Liar" * 
Starring Jim Carrey, Maura Tierney, Jennifer Tilly, Swoosie Kurtz, Amanda
Donohoe, Jason Bernard, Mitchell Ryan, Anne Haney, Justin Cooper, Cary
Elwes, Randall "Tex" Cobb and Cheri Oteri 
Directed by Tom Shadyac 
What is it about Jim Carrey that America finds so appealing? Let's face it,
folks: if you're over the age of ten, the guy just isn't funny. I mean,
fart jokes can only take you so far. So what is it? He obviously isn't a
sex symbol (unless, of course, you dig dorky guys with bad haircuts). Why
does this man win so many awards? Why is he so popular? I do not have the
answers, and until someone does, this question will plague mankind for
years to come. Why doesn't someone just come out and tell him that he's
just a jerk who makes a living by making a complete asshole of himself? 
And the real kicker is this: it seems that Jimmy actually thinks he has
talent! I heard that when he was with his firs wife, he wouldn't do
anything that involved work because he said it "disrupted his creative
juices". Can you believe this guy? Here you have great actors like Steve
Buscemi or Joe Mantegna struggling on the fringes, while no-talent-bums
like Carrey are making twenty million dollars a movie and they get
conceited!!! Okay, I'm done now. 
Actually, I miss stated what I said above. What I meant was that Jim Carrey
has no talent as a comedian. In "Liar Liar", he is alot better in the
serious scenes that in the comedic ones. The guy just can't make me laugh
(although he came close in "Dumb and Dumber", but it was mostly the other
characters that made that a good film). Maybe (and I'm stressing the
"maybe" part) if he got a good script that didn't have him jumping around
like an idiot for an hour and a half, he might (again, might) make
something of himself. He just can't keep going on like this if he wants to
be taken at least somewhat seriously. 
Okay, now for the movie. The film, like Carrey himself, just isn't funny.
But, I will give it one star for at least trying. I admit that maybe once
or twice I had a mild smirk on my face. And how's this for a plot: for his
birthday wish, a kid wishes that his father can't lie for twenty four
hours. A little super-natural, if ya ask me. Then you have Carrey put in
obvious situations where if he tells the truth, he could be in some serious
trouble. In other words, same Jim Carrey crap, different title. 
Of course, the makers of "Liar Liar" have to be predictable and make part
of the storyline have to do with him winning back the wife he divorced (who
he cheated on, nonetheless). Doesn't it mean anything to her that he was
unfaithful? Is this really a good lesson to be teaching today's teens? As
amoral as kids are today, do we really need the message that if you commit
adultery, everything will probably end up okay if you don't do it anymore?
If you answered no, then you're right. Not to get all preachy or anything
(by the way, if you don't want to know how the film ends, skip the rest of
this paragraph), but don't you think it would be a little more realistic if
the wife didn't end up back with Jim Carrey? Wait, what am I talking about?
Of course any shred of realism is absent in a Carrey flick... 
But I guess credit is due for Maura Tierney (or whatever the name is of
that girl from "NewsRadio") who plays the divorced wife planning to marry
again (this time to Cary Elwes - a much better choice, in my humble
opinion). Her character always seems real, even in scenes with Carrey.
Kudos to her for being the only positive thing about this film (well, her
and maybe Jennifer Tilly). 
Out of all the crapsterpieces to come out of 1997 (including, mind you, the
likes of "Speed 2: Cruise Control", "The Lost World: Jurassic Park" and
"Batman and Robin"), this is probably one of the very worst. Or I guess you
could be optimistic and see it as bad filmmaking at it's best. You be the
judge (if you want to waste an hour and a half of your life, that is). 
Check out Jason Wallis' Filmaholics Anonymous web page at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Chad Polenz
1997, PG-13, 86 minutes [1 hour, 26 minutes]
starring: Jim Carrey (Fletcher Reede), Maura Tierney (Audrey Reede), Justin
Cooper (Max Reede), Jennifer Tilly (Samantha Cole); written by Paul Guay,
Stephen Mazur; produced by Brian Grazer; directed by Tom Shadyac.
seen Sunday, October 12, 1997 at 9:10 p.m. at Cine 10 (Northway Mall, Albany,
N.Y.) with my brother John for $2.99
There's no denying the fact Jim Carrey's movies are aimed at the most
massive of audiences to make millions of dollars. Sometimes they are actually
good and funny, while others are stupid and ridiculous. "Liar Liar" is a film
that will test each viewer's loyalty to Carrey, as the humor is mostly
derived from his wild antics. I'm not a huge Carrey fan, but his performance
was funny enough to make the movie work for me.
As with most of Shadyac's films, this one opens with a sit-com-esque
atmosphere as we are introduced to Fletcher Reede (Carrey), a greedy lawyer
who can't help but constantly lie. He dodges phone calls from his mother, he
comes up with elaborate stories to convince his clients he's going to win
their case, and he kisses up to everyone all the time. Carrey is very
happy-go-lucky here, making Fletcher out to be a caricature if you ever saw
one. He spits out the wisecracks and one-liners like a machine gun, but
they're funny and there's nothing wrong with that.
It's not surprising Fletcher has an ex-wife (Tierney as Audrey) and has a
kid (Cooper as Max) who he loves but never has time to be with. It's Max's
fifth birthday and what else could a cute little kid in a movie like this
want more for his birthday than for his dad to stop lying? Max wishes for his
dad to stop lying for one day and his wish comes true.
The hook to the comedy starts off slowly, but within 15 minutes we find
Carrey doing his usual slapstick routine. It's funny how the situation here
is so prone to slapstick, but it works because Carrey is such a master at it.
There's a scene in which he must fight with his own hand over a pen, which is
pretty stupid in premise, but funny to watch at the time. 
In fact, I'll have to admit a lot of what goes on here is pretty absurd as a
whole, but the actual breakdown is not. This film is a Jim Carrey comedy
machine, but that doesn't necessarily mean it's bad. Carrey puts his all into
every scene, so even if he's beating himself up (literally), or acting like a
lunatic in court, or insulting people to their face it's funny mostly due to
his delivery. 
There isn't much else to say about "Liar Liar" because there isn't much to
it. The screenplay might be a little weak (the ending is bit much), but the
jokes usually connect giving the comedy a high batting average. The film is
about silliness and what makes it work is that it realizes this and doesn't
apologize for it.


Author
David Wilcock
After the lacklustre success of The Cable Guy, you would think that Jim
Carreys career might have been over. But (sadly?) it isn't. Thankfully,
however, he has actually made a funny film. Yes, thats right, funny.
Jim Carrey plays a lawyer, who, naturally, lies. But he also lies to his son
a lot aswell. So, on his birthday
(the sons, not Carreys) he wishes that his dad cannot tell a lie for 24hrs.
And, of course, hilarous
consequences ensure. 
This film is good, mainly becuase of Carreys mugging. Watching his face
screw up when he's desprately
trying to lie is hillarous, and theres also a few good one liners in it. 
Sadly, the film gets a little too bogged down with emotion, (with a sickly
sweet sequence at the end) but
generally this film is enjoyable.
In fact, this is the funniest movie Jim Carrey has done. And its far better
than the terrible The Cable Guy. I
recommended it to anyone who finds Jim Carreys face hillarous, and people
who want to see Jim Carrey for the first time. 

Author
Max Scheinin
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html 
I think we should, as responsible citizens, all get together and stop Jim
Carrey from making another movie. He's changing the cinema as we know
it--and for the worst. I would willingly rewatch Batman And Robin rather
then again sit through this miserable collection of filmic
moments--prologues, epilogues, etc. The premise: A lawyer can't lie for a
day. Ho, ho. Normally a movie made from this premise would be terrible--mr.
Carrey suceeds in making it unwatchable. I laughed once--and I was laughing
at the sight of everyone else laughing. Grinding doesn't begin to describe.
It pounds on your head so forcefully and so unstoppably that, if you are a
normal person, you leave feeling sick. When it's not trying to be funny,
it's trying to be melodramatic--but it's just annoying, stupid and sappy.
At best. This movie is intended to make people laugh, yes, not to be voted
best picture of all time by Sight And Sound. But, it fails on every
possible level. It fails to be funny. It fails to be insightful. It fails
to be suspensful. It fails to be fun. They should pay people to see it.
It suceeds on one level--it makes me want to get down on the ground and
start thanking Orson Welles, for having lived. 
If you go in with the intention of coming out alive, please make sure that
you are overly fond of boob, fart, pimple and fat jokes--otherwise you will
go insane. Yes, literally insane. Stark, raving mad. It is boring, stupid,
melodramatic and in the end ugly. I reccemond it strongly. To Ed Wood.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jim Carrey, Maura Tierney, Justin Cooper, Jennifer Tilley, 
      Cary Elwes, Amanda Donohoe, Swoosie Kurtz 
Director: Tom Shadyac
Producers: Brian Grazer 
Screenplay: Paul Guay & Stephen Mazur
Cinematography: Russell Boyd
Music: John Debney and James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     While watching LIAR LIAR, it occurred to me that the chief problem 
with this film is that it has a script.  If Jim Carrey had been 
unleashed without such silly, incidental constraints as plot and 
dialogue, who knows where things might have gone?  As it is, however, 
Carrey is forced to confine his antics to the needs of LIAR LIAR's 
unimaginative screenplay, and the results are mixed.  There are times 
when Carrey is excruciatingly funny, but, on those occasions when he's 
expected to do anything remotely approaching "real" acting, his 
limitations become abundantly clear.
     LIAR LIAR is the latest in a long line of movies to skewer lawyers.  
In this case, the assumption is that it's impossible for an attorney to 
get through the day without resorting to all sorts of lies and half-
truths.  For a nation that has just endured more than a year's worth of 
O.J. Simpson-related testimony, this idea has a great deal of resonance.  
So, although a smartly-written satire about this subject could be 
immensely satisfying, that film is *not* LIAR LIAR.  As directed by 
physical comedy specialist Tom Shadyac (ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE, THE 
NUTTY PROFESSOR), this outing is designed for one purpose only -- as a 
showcase for Jim Carrey.  The potential richness of the premise is 
irrelevant.
     Carrey plays (and I use that word loosely) Fletcher Reede, a slick-
talking lawyer whose over-the-top court performances have earned him 
numerous unexpected victories.  When an airheaded bimbo (Jennifer 
Tilley) wants Fletcher's law firm to handle a lucrative-but-difficult 
divorce case, Fletcher is all too eager to oblige.  Unlike some of his 
cohorts, he doesn't have an ethical problem with lying in court, and 
lies, he believes, will win this case.  His predatory boss (Amanda 
Donohoe), aware of his ability, tells him that if he comes out on top 
this time, he'll be made a partner. 
     Meanwhile, Fletcher's five-year old son, Max (Justin Cooper), is 
celebrating his birthday.  When Fletcher calls to say that he won't be 
able to make the party (just another in a long history of no-shows), Max 
is crushed.  Then, with the candles on his cake beckoning to be blown 
out, he gets an idea and, as his breath extinguishes their light, Max 
makes a wish that his father will be unable to tell a lie for twenty-
four hours.  The wish comes true and suddenly Fletcher finds himself 
forced to speak the truth on a day when the ability to lie is critical.
     The comic apex of LIAR LIAR comes two-thirds of the way into the 
film, during a board room meeting where Fletcher bluntly and hilariously 
tells each of his co-workers what he really thinks of them.  Several of 
the court scenes are equally funny, with Carrey investing so much zany 
energy that it's almost impossible not to laugh.  There's no denying 
that the actor is a gifted physical comic, and his fans will almost 
certainly be pleased by what he has accomplished here.  
     Unfortunately, there is a dramatic element to this story, and 
that's where Carrey stumbles.  LIAR LIAR is a would-be tale of 
redemption -- its ultimate goal is to reunite a changed Fletcher with 
his son and ex-wife (Maura Tierney, from NBC's NEWS RADIO).  That aspect 
of the film doesn't really work, however, because Carrey's lack of range 
has us snickering almost as much at his attempts to be serious as at his 
most outrageous comic moments.  As a result, LIAR LIAR comes across as a 
series of manic explosions connected together by mush.  
     All-in-all, LIAR LIAR is pretty good fun, and it represents one of 
Carrey's most entertaining movies to date.  (Could he -- gasp -- be 
growing on me?)  The comic is in top form, both in the material that 
made it into the picture and during the end-credit outtakes (which, in 
many ways, are funnier).  And it's delightful to watch performers like 
Amanda Donohoe and helium-voiced Jennifer Tilley struggle to keep their 
composure when Carrey does something exceptionally goofy.  In the past, 
I have said that I generally prefer Jim Carrey in small doses.  This may 
be the exception.  Without him, LIAR LIAR would have been an 
unforgivably bad movie.  With him, it's a mediocre film peppered with 
amusing highlights.  And, honestly, I think that just about says all 
that needs to be said about Gentleman Jim's followup to THE CABLE GUY.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Nick Schaden
   Jim Carrey's career catapulted onto the movie scene with  the powerhouse
"Ace Ventura: Pet Detective", "The Mask", and "Dumb & Dumber".  He's the
kind of guy that you tend to either love or hate.   For this reviewer, I've
gotten sick of Jim Carrey's humor - he can't break out of his shell of
sophomoric, repetitive gags.   However, Carrey has greatly improved since
his major start in 1994.   While "Liar Liar" doesn't make for a higher
quality comedy, it certainly is passable entertainment and has its high
moments.
   "Liar Liar" has a standard comedic plot: it breaks the rules of reality
for humor.   Fletcher Reede (Jim Carrey) fits the definition of "sleazy
lawyer" perfectly: he ignores his son, he rather would sleep with the
company boss (to become a partner of the firm, no less) than spend time with
his family, and sleazes and deceives people to get further up the corporate
ladder.   In frustration, his son makes a wish at his birthday party that
Fletcher wouldn't lie for just one day.   Thus lies one of the larger
weaknesses of this movie - the humor is largely a one gag trick.   Every
joke in the movie ties in how Fletcher simply can't lie, and it the gag gets
old rather quickly.
   Furthermore, Carrey has to learn that more isn't necessarily better - his
goofball over the top antics ruin many of the jokes running throughout "Liar
Liar".  Carrey has to learn that more doesn't mean necessarily better.
   However, "Liar Liar" certainly does have its strengths.   For example,
Carrey for, is more controlled in this movie than others.   In addition, the
movie is can be fun at times, several of the courtroom jokes in the latter
half of the film make for some good entertainment.
   By the end, I left "Liar Liar" with a smile on my face - Jim Carrey
actually had starred in a watchable and moderately funny movie.  However,
largely due to the one-horse plot and Carrey's outlandish acting style - the
movie falls slightly below average.
    *** Movies rated from -4 (worst) to +4 (best), 0=average movie ***

Author
Michael Yagnow
   The last time Jim Carrey popped up on the big screen was is THE CABLE
GUY, a total waste of time. After THE MASK, DUNB & DUMBER, THE CABLE
GUY, and the same Ace Ventura movie made twice, I (along with most of
America over ten years old) was ready to give up on the goofy actor.
   I must say, though, LIAR, LIAR really surprised me. It actually had a
point, a message! The movie is about Fletcher Reid, a lawyer, father,
and pathological liar. After Fletcher (played by Carrey) misses his son,
Max's, birthday party, Max makes a wish that his father can't tell a lie
for one day.
   The next shot is of a clock: 8:15. The camera moves to Fletcher in
bed with a woman to his left. When asked how his recent sexual
experience was, he answers: "I've had better."
   So begins the plot: Fletcher Reid can't lie for twenty-four hours. So
how can he win his case for bimbo/adultress Virginia Cole (Jennifer
Tilly) when the only way to do it is to lie? How can he stop this curse
before he goes to court?
   LIAR, LIAR unfolds into a series of comic and, suprisingly,
heartwarming scenes with Fletcher, his son, his wife, his wife's
boyfriend, and Virginia Cole. The movie makes us face the truth that we
tell hundreds of little white lies every day. What if we couldn't?
   LIAR, LIAR is definitely Jim Carrey's best to date. Though it is not
one of my favorite movies, it is definitely worth seeing.
Rating: *** out of a possible ****
MPAA: PG-13 for profanity, sexual humor, and some mild violence

Author
Cameron Shelley
Better late than never, right? It was with some misgivings
that I went to see Liar Liar. Physical comedy and "low"
humor make good entertainment when done right, but I
don't have a strong wish to sit through 90 minutes of fart
jokes and pointless slapstick, nor do I need to pay to see
people simply acting like idiots. Jim Carrey's recent
offerings (and let's face it: movies with Jim Carrey starring
are "Jim Carrey" movies, not "action-adventure films",
"chick flicks", or "courtroom dramas") have been less than
inspiring in that regard. But, I confess, my misgivings were
misplaced - Liar Liar was worth the trip.
In LL, Jim Carrey plays a lawyer, Fletcher Reede. Of course,
lawyers are an easy target for humor, beginning with the
fact that the words "lawyer" and "liar" are so similar
phonetically. This little pun is exploited right off the top of
the movie - not a good sign. But LL manages to steer clear
of the easy and resentful humor usually directed at this
target. Fletcher is simply a guy whose success has gone to
his head, to the extent that he has lost the love of a good
woman and is now losing the affections of his son through
inattention. The fact that Fletcher is a lawyer isn't
particularly important in this respect, although it certainly
provides an excellent means for throwing his flaw into
sharp relief. So, LL ends up as a mixture of two types of
story: (1) a romantic comedy in which Fletcher is in danger
of permanently losing the love of Audrey (his ex) and Max
(his son), and (2) a slapstick in which Fletcher is in danger
of losing his chance at a partnership in his law firm due to
a comic and, for a lawyer, devastating flaw, namely an
inability to lie.
The first story is rather flat but, fortunately, mostly serves
to set up the second. Specifically, little Max, after being
disappointed by yet another broken promise from his
father (to attend his fifth birthday party), makes a wish that
his father would be unable to lie for just 24 hours. Well, as
the candles are blown out, a mystic wind brushes through
the curtains and makes the wish come true - and at about
the worst possible moment for Fletcher who is planning on
running some whoppers up the flagpole in court the next
day. Frankly, the results could hardly be described in words.
Fletcher is robbed completely of the ability to tell even the
smallest lie and begins, literally, to wrestle with the truth.
Carrey's unique and bizarre antics, expressions, and
delivery go to good use here. Instead of merely flailing
away like an imbecile, Carrey appears to be possessed by a
demon bent on destroying him in the most painfully
funny way possible. Each social, sexual, and professional
(but truthful) faux pas results in the appropriate contortion,
slap in the face, or fall to the floor. These fits appear so real
that Carrey can sell things like beating himself up with a
toilet and getting the laugh. There is, of course, lots of
parody of the office and courtroom settings, which generally
works well enough. But the movie also has a few moments
of high comedy - particularly a battle Fletcher picks with a
blue pen. In his desperation to lie, Fletcher picks a blue pen
up from his desk and tries to say "This pen is red." (I was
hoping for "This statement is false," but that would be for a
different movie.) He cannot, although he nearly ties
himself in a knot trying to do it. In a shot that would make
Peter Sellers proud, the pen then takes control of Fletcher's
hand and, perhaps resenting his attempt to misdescribe it,
returns the favor. Fletcher loses the struggle and emerges
with the truth written all over his face, in blue ink: "This
pen is BLUE."
Regrettably, but inevitably, the slapstick story starts to run
out and the romantic comedy begins to take over. In the
last twenty minutes or so, the two plots seem to struggle for
control. Fletcher wins his court case, in spite of the truth,
on a technicality. But he now realizes that justice has
hardly been served. Having been made to face the truth
that he's "an inconsiderate prick," Fletcher gets himself
fired, and ends up in jail while speeding to stop Audrey
from flying away to Boston with Jerry and Max. Serious
stuff. But after being bailed out, Fletcher impersonates a
piece of luggage and chases down Audrey's plane on the
runway using a mobile stairway gantry. In the final scene,
Fletcher and Audrey get back together. It wouldn't do to
complain too much about the unremarkable, romantic part
of the story despite its occasional intrusiveness, since it
serves to make Fletcher a sympathetic character. Otherwise,
he'd probably just seem to be pitiably insane.
Each story comes with a moral. First, people need to lie. LL
displays this point in an apt comic style, without preaching.
Second, self-deceit can make good things look bad, and vice
versa. The "vice versa" comes from Audrey, who
convinces herself that flying away with the wrong man is
the right thing to do. But this theme doesn't merit much
scrutiny or screen time. (Playing opposite Jim Carrey must
be intimidating. Hopefully Maura Tierney will get a better
chance to display her own acting abilities.) In combining its
two stories, LL works pretty well because it gives Jim Carrey
a chance to do what he does with a sympathetic, rather
than an asinine character. Certainly, lies and deceptions are
themes that can be revisited many times, if it's done well.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
            CEL: http://cogsci.uwaterloo.ca/>

Author
Edwin Jahiel
LIAR LIAR ** Directed by Tom Shadyac.Produced by Brian Grazer.Written by
Paul Guay & Stephen Mazur.Photography,Russell Boyd.Production design,Linda
DeScenna.Editing, Don Zimmerman.Music,John Debney.Cast:Jim Carrey(Fletcher
Reede),Maura Tierney(Audrey Reede),Justin Cooper(Max Reede),Cary
Elwes(Jerry),Anne Haney(Greta),Jennifer Tilley(Samantha Cole),Amanda
Donohoe(Miranda),Jason Bernard(Judge Marshall Sevens),Swoosie Kurtz(Dana
Appleton), et al. A Universal release. 87 min. PG-13.
A little Jim Carrey goes a long way. A lot of Jim Carrey goes a little way.
Even just 87 minutes of him. Still, "Liar Liar" has a watcher-friendly,
funny premise. I suspect that it is a retread of "Nothing but the Truth," a
1941 Bob Hope vehicle in which Hope, a stockbroker, bets that he can tell
just the truth for 24 hours. That was an amusing flick, a  remake of a 1920
then a 1929 movie,
Carrey plays Fletch, a trial lawyer without any ethical principles. Lying
has become second nature to him and has extended into his personal life
too. Somehow this also produces a non-stop joker and jokester in Fletch,
whether in public or private life.
The notion that lawyer and liar are not only sound-alikes but synonyms is a
perfect one in our days of lawyer jokes as the bashing of lawyers
flourishes --and as the lawyers laugh themselves sick on the way to the
bank. The device of a parallel plot that involves Fletch's son Max, sweet
ex-wife Audrey (Maura Tierney) and her current beau Jerry, is soupy
padding. It comes in handy however as Fletch who has promised to be at
Max's fifth birthday party, again breaks his word, inventing excuses. When
Max makes a wish that his dad tell just the truth for one day, and
magically the wish comes true, this sets everything in motion.
To climb the legal ladder and become a partner in his law firm, Fletch
tells one and all what they want to hear. He has just taken the case of
buxom Samantha's divorce settlement, a
serial adulteress who wants half of her millionaire husband's fortune, even
though she's not entitled to so much according to her prenuptial contract.
Jennifer Tilley plays her like an updated Gloria Grahame, vacuous and with
her cleavage seeming to increase by the hour.
Telling the truth may shame the devil but not in this case. It's a
mega-case of Liar Liar Pants on Fire. Since the mess it makes of Fletch's
life is supernatural, there is no active lesson for the man, no opportunity
for examining one's conscience. The plot attempts a Band-Aid treatment to
bring this about, a new Fletch --but it is unconvincing.
When the big change hits he had just spent a night with his colleague, the
gorgeous Miranda (Amanda Donohoe). "How was it?" she inquires the next
morning.  "I've had better " he replies, sending Miranda into a paroxysm.
Later he explains his reasons to Audrey. He didn't really want Miranda
"...but she's a partner and I thought I'd help myself by making her
squeal." ( Draw your own conclusions about the PG-13 rating).
That a happy ending will reunite Fletch, his ex and his boy is a foregone
conclusion. That the ending would be so dumb (Carrey on a motorized loading
ramp chasing a plane on the runway), is cheap stuff. The film's interest,
such at it is, is to watch and hear how the lawyer will handle his
temporary total inability to lie.
This is accomplished through Carrey's sounding and behaving abnormally, but
looking  normal in a would-be chic designer suit that's too wide and too
padded. Carrey goes through manic displays of behavior, contortions and
twists of his elastic frame, twists and grimaces of his rubber face,
shouts, groans and the whole lexicon of low, lower and lowest physical
humor. He even gives a new dimension to "bathroom humor" when, at the
trial, unable to lie, he takes refuge in the men's room where he beats
himself up.
In many ways, Carrey's  is an anachronistic performance. Here Jim Carrey is
blatantly the direct descendant of Jerry Lewis and Red Skelton, yet oddly,
while  Skelton, Lewis and such are now passe, Carrey is fashionable, at
least among viewers who bask in the obvious. This is not to say that there
are no funny bits about. But whatever inventiveness there is becomes
tedious, monotonous and repetitious.
If only the film had not been so hysterically and totally Carrey-centered;
if Carrey had been on Prozac to lessen his manic hyperkineticism; if he had
modeled himself partly on the great comedians' (viz.Bob Hope) delicate
balance between the normal and the outrageous; the movie might have been a
lot more human and a lot less jerky-mechanical.
One reason for my going to this film was to see the talented Swoosie Kurtz
in the small part  the lawyer for Tilley's husband. I have been waiting
forever for her to marry Patrick Swayze and become Swoosie Swayze. One
positive result of watching Carrey was to have the importance of big,
shiny, obvious teeth brought home again. So I called my dentist for a long
overdue cleaning appointment. Really.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Life is short so time is precious.  From that axiom we derive a
fundamental rule of movie going: Don't waste your time at movies
starring people whom you know you hate.
     Well, as of two weeks ago, I knew that I could not stand Howard
Stern or Jim Carrey.  The former was merely foul mouthed and the latter
was an incorrigible overactor.  Since I knew this to be so, I
studiously avoided listening to or seeing them.  There were more than
enough alternatives so skipping their acts was a prudent and obvious
decision for me.
     Last week I saw Howard Stern's PRIVATE PARTS and found it one of
the funniest and sweetest films in a long time.  This week it was Jim
Carrey in LIAR LIAR, and again, a complete surprise.  One of my fellow
critics suggested I see LIAR LIAR and the trailers did look promising,
but still this was Jim Carrey, whose last appearance was in THE CABLE
GUY.
     A second confession in as many weeks is in order for my readers.
Although his incessant physical comedy can easily exhaust his audience,
I thought Jim Carrey's performance was hilarious.  I hate slapstick
because it usually dissolves into mindless stupidity, but Carrey
manages to take this brand of humor to a new level.  Carrey has so much
skill and dexterity that he could breathe life into a bad comedy, which
LIAR LIAR is not.  The intelligent script by Paul Guay and Stephen
Mazur utilizes Carrey's talent masterfully.  I expected his antics, but
was surprised by the quantity and effectiveness of the one line
repartee.
     Director Tom Shadyac has the good sense to let Carrey set the
pace.  In the not-to-be-missed outtakes during the ending credits, you
can see how Carrey was the star around which the other actors revolved.
The film's cast has actors who can complement Carrey without ever
attempting to upstage him -- probably an insurmountable feat in any
case.
     As LIAR LIAR opens, five-year-old Max Reid (Justin Cooper) is
busying explaining to his class what his father does.  Although Max
claims his father's profession is being a liar, the teacher corrects
him by saying Max must have meant lawyer.  The story demonstrates that
Max was right.  His dad, Fletcher (Jim Carrey), lies non-stop.  Like
Mitch McDeere in THE FIRM, Fletcher is an insatiable workaholic, who
will do anything to advance his career.  Also like Howard Langston in
JINGLE ALL THE WAY, Fletcher has trouble making the key events in son's
life.  Unlike these pervious films, however, where the family
relationship was not credible, Fletcher is convincing about his love
for his son.  The chemistry between them, especially in "The Claw"
routines, is genuine.  Divorced from his wife Audrey (Maura Tierney),
Fletcher's part-time relationship with his son has just enough pathos
to make the humor more involving.
     Fletcher's busy schedule causes him to have to take Max with him
one day to the office.  "Why don't you go play in the office a minute,"
Fletcher tells him.  "Sue someone for everything they've got."
     The film takes the time to setup the long running big joke.  Along
the way we meet Virginia Cole (Jennifer Tilly).  She is a conniving
adulteress who wears skimpy clothes that advertise her wares.  In a
telling bit of dialog, Fletcher interviews Virginia in his office to
show her what a hotshot lawyer he is.
     "Mrs. Cole, the only problem here is that after you've provided
years of faithful service and loving support raising his children --,"
says Fletcher.  "They are his?"
     "After all that, your husband wants to deny you a fair and
equitable share of the marital assets based on one single act of
indiscretion," explains Fletcher showing how he will frame her case.
     "Seven," corrects Virginia.  "Seven single acts of indiscretion."
     Shrugging Fletcher says, "Whatever."
     Max does not approve of his father's lying so he makes a single
wish as he blows out his birthday candles, "I wish, for just one day,
Dad couldn't tell a lie."  Like the simple premise in GROUNDHOG DAY
from this one fantasy element springs the charm of the rest of the
story.
     Feeling compelled to tell the absolute truth can get a person in
more trouble than you would imagine.  Fletcher meets a woman in the
elevator who says it is her first day on the job, and she is surprised
that men have gone out of their way to be nice to her.  Fletcher takes
one look at her bulging breasts and low cut dress and tells her why the
men have been so obsequious to her.  She belts him one.
     Max informs him that, "My teacher tells me beauty is on the
inside."  Correcting him, Fletcher says, "That's just something ugly
people say."
     The heart of the show is Virginia's divorce trial.  Beside being a
sometimes touching and always sidesplittingly funny film, the movie
becomes something of a mystery as well as you try to figure out how the
trial will end.  Suffice it to say that the ending is as imaginative as
the rest of this delightful picture.
     LIAR LIAR runs a fast hour and a half.  It is rated PG-13 for
sexual humor and language.  This is a mild PG-13.  If your kids are old
enough to know about sex, they will probably love the film since it is
just as likely to amuse a ten-year-old as a fifty-year-old.  A good
spirited film that had me doubling over in laughter.  I give it a
strong recommendation and *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Universal)
Directed by     Tom Shadyac
Written by      Paul Guay and Stephen Mazur
Cast            Jim Carrey, Maura Tierney, Justin Cooper, Jennifer
                Tilley, Cary Elwes, Amanda Donohoe, Swoosie Kurtz
MPAA Rating     "PG-13"
Running Time    87 minutes
Reviewed at     Mission Valley Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (19MAR97)
     This crowd-pleasing comedy-fantasy stars Jim Carrey as a lawyer who
must tell the truth for 24 hours.  His son makes a birthday wish and,
poof, magic happens.  Just like a Penny Marshall movie.  And, because
dad is played by Plastic Man, he can't simply speak the truth.  He has
to shout it, or spit it, or contort his body to express it.  LIAR, LIAR
is as predictable as its one-joke premise suggests, with Carrey on only
a slightly shorter leash than usual.  Though the occasional bit is side-
splitting-- a board-room roast, a violent double-take or two, and the
definitive answer to "how's it hangin'?"-- there's little here that we
haven't seen (or heard) before.  Well, okay, he's never tried to tug at
our hearts, which is what happens at the end, easily the worst part of
the movie.  Thank God for the outtake reel, rolled over the closing
credits.
     LIAR, LIAR was screened at Mission Valley Cinemas, in Raleigh.
Fifteen minutes passed before the correct lens was installed.  And the
rude people in the row behind me were expectedly hostile, when I sug-
gested that they continue their conversation after the movie.  But they
*did* shut up.
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Luke Buckmaster
The rubber faced antics of Jim Carey have delighted and even disgusted 
audiences worldwide since the dawn of his career.  Perhaps impressing more 
people as an animated "mask" rather than a Pet Detective, Carey has earnt many 
loyal fans in his short lived in Hollywood spotlight - and expectations were 
high.  For the number one actor in Hollywood, the dismal success of the Cable 
Guy hurt his career badly, as he plundered down in fame and credibility.  Now 
the stakes have fallen, and it is a great time for a great comeback, which will 
in turn gain more fans than he ever had before.
Fletcher Reed (Jim Carey) is not your typical lawyer.  He isn't afraid to bend 
evidence to the needs of his case - not to mention lie, hurt and deceive his 
way to the top of his profession, crushing opponents and even those who care 
about him along the way.  Although some say he indeed fits the description of 
the typical lawyer, Fletcher's character is definitely appealing to the general 
population - and Carey is perfect for this role.  Fletcher's son Max is the 
person who is most affected by his unorthodox and inconsiderate life style, he 
loves his father but hardly gets to spend any quality time with him.  So when 
his birthday comes along, Max makes a simple wish - that his father cannot lie 
for a day.  Surprise surprise, it comes true.
Some hilarious, witty scenes are to follow as Fletcher slowly discovers that he 
is able to tell nothing but the truth - which spells doom for an involving 
court case that he must win for the benefit of his career.  Reed then finds 
himself resisting beggars, insulting strangers, smashing into concrete walls 
and even wrestling a blue pen to discover the error in his ways and ultimately 
change his life for the better.  And after discovering that Max and his ex-wife 
are moving to Boston, Fletcher is now caught up in a race against time to save 
his family and his soul.
The critics have has their say against this movie, but at the end of the day 
the fact remains that it is brilliantly funny and consistent throughout.  
Really the only major fault I could find in this film was the possibility that 
you won't hear some of the dialogue due to severe laughter around you, which 
was true in my case and I'm sure many others too.  Jim Carey is nothing but a 
delight to the film, showing that he can not only do his usual overacting 
routine but also proving to critics that he can provide genuine heart felt 
acting.  In all honesty, Liar Liar is simply the best of its kind, and I would 
think twice before I say that Carey will produce a better film later on in his 
career.  Liar Liar has been a worldwide success because this is, simply, 
brilliant - in all senses of the word.
4 = STARS
Jim Carey, a simple yet effective plot and continuous chuckles is the perfect 
ingredient for success 


Author
Walter Frith
There's an old episode of the sitcom 'Three's Company' in which Jack Tripper
makes a promise to himself that he will tell the truth no matter what the
consequences.  There is also a movie from 1977 entitled 'Freaky Friday' in
which a mother and daughter make a wish that they could be each other for a
day and it comes true as they switch personalities accordingly.
In 'Liar, Liar' slapstick funny face man Jim Carrey plays an unethical
attorney who is also a pathological fibber and is constantly letting down his
loved ones including his five year old son.  The boy makes a wish on his
fifth birthday that his dad will not lie for a day and it works and the
picture then moves into a phase of immature pratfalls and physical comedy
that Carrey is well known for and he often over does it.  Most of the laughs
I heard while attending a matinee of this movie came from children under the
age of ten and Carrey has fallen flat on his face again in the opinion of
this reviewer with his third critical misfire in a row after 'The Cable Guy'
(1996) and 'Ace Ventura - When Nature Calls' (1995).  Carrey's last mildly
entertaining role came in 1995 with 'Batman Forever' in which he played the
Riddler and while Carrey now enjoys laughing all the way to the bank at the
tune of twenty million dollars per film, he is no Robin Williams or Billy
Crystal.  These two men are performers of original and controlled comedy
(although Williams has sometimes overdone it) with far greater results as
they aim for genuine laughs instead of cheap ones.
There are a couple of good belly laughs in 'Liar, Liar' but that doesn't
constitute and entire film and Carrey's improvisational style of comedy in
which he often borrows from others makes him the director of the film at
heart instead of the man given credit (Tom Shadyac).  Shadyac is the man who
directed Carrey in 'Ace Ventura - Pet Detective' (1994) and I suspect Shadyac
is an easy director to control as Eddie Murphy pretty much had his way on
'The Nutty Professor' from last year which Shadyac also directed.  
If Jim Carrey can listen to a director and perhaps try his hand at drama then
his career would have much more credibility which would lead to acceptance
among those over the age of ten of what a fine comedian and actor he has the
potential of being.  Power trips can be fatal in an industry where you're
only as good as your last hit and while 'The Cable Guy' was a box office
disappointment, 'Liar, Liar' appears to have a chance but Carrey's act is
wearing mighty thin.

Author
Tim Voon
I believe the problem lies in the fact that his overacting has a
tendency to kill any good elements of plot or dialogue in his films.
More often than not Jim Carrey tends to overwhelm everyone and
everything in his films so much so that it becomes suffocating to watch.
However, I am relieved to say that 'Liar Liar' has somehow survived the
loud, colourful, overdone antics of Carrey. The story brings out simple
but important issues about life like keeping your promises, loving your
children and of course being honest. These are the things which are most
admirable about the movie, beside the fact that it is also very
entertaining.
This is Carrey's best work since 'The Mask'. Sometimes I just wish he
would tone down a little, but I guess 'that thing he does' is what makes
people love him as much as hate him.
This is a must for high powered executive fathers who have little time
to spend with their kids. Don't make the same mistake or your children
may just end up making a wish worse than not being able to lie for an
entire day.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     LIAR LIAR is basically a retread of a 1961 episode of THE TWILIGHT
ZONE.  In that story Jack Carson played a lying used car dealer Harvey
Hunnicut who bought a car that came equipped with a curse.  Whoever
owned the car could speak only the truth.  Carson made a few contorted
faces as he tried to force himself to lie to customers but eventually
had to give in to the acceptance that the curse really worked on him.
Eventually he was able to become a double winner not just because he
sold the car to someone else:  the person he sold it to was Nikita
Krushchev, Premier of the Soviet Union.  A similar concept was used in
THE WHOLE TRUTH, in which Bob Hope agrees to tell the truth for a whole
day.  LIAR LIAR is, however, much closer to the TWILIGHT ZONE story,
with the lying profession changed from used car salesman to an
unscrupulous lying lawyer.  The sorrowful or bewildered facial gestures
Carson gave his Hunnicut character.  But the facial gestures are
exaggerated by Jim Carrey into, well, what we would expect from Jim
Carrey.
     Carrey plays Fletcher Reede, not just a lawyer but the paragon of
lying lawyers.  Fletcher makes his living by subverting the truth.  And
what he does in his professional life he does in his private life.
With cheating and lies he destroyed his marriage to his former wife
Audrey (Maura Tierney) and is in the process of alienating their son
Max (Justin Cooper).  Fletcher has promised to be at Max's fifth
birthday party and is instead in bed with his boss (Amanda Donohoe of
LAIR OF THE WHITE WORM) trying to screw his way to the top.  The
disappointed Max makes a wish that his father cannot lie for a whole
day.  And the wish comes true, on a day when Fletcher needs to be a
skillful professional liar Fletcher discovers that only the truth can
issue from him mouth.
     LIAR LIAR could have had a deeper resonance if its positive
statements were not always undermined by what is just too much
slapstick.  The film was directed by Tom Shadyac of ACE VENTURA and THE
NUTTY PROFESSOR where it really needed someone of the caliber of Billy
Wilder.  In addition, it builds to an action-packed finale that goes
too far beyond what is really needed for this sort of material.  Again
the subtlety of Wilder could have worked wonders.  But for me the real
problem with LIAR LIAR is that the scriptwriters, Paul Guay and Stephen
Mazur, are never sure of the ground rules of the premise and so the
audience is never sure either.  What exactly is the wish all about?
Supposedly it was that Fletcher cannot tell a lie for twenty-four
hours, but what does that mean?  Does it mean that he can or cannot
evade the truth?  Sometimes the answer is yes, sometimes no.  Can he
remain silent or does he have to always be candid?  Is a promise made
in good faith and then later broken intentionally the same thing as a
lie?  For that matter is a promise made in good faith and broken due to
uncontrollable circumstances the same thing as a lie?  Do the same
forces that compel truth from Fletcher bend fate so that what he has
promised will come inevitably true?  These are all questions that
should have been answered before the first word of the script was
typed.  There were moments in this story when a truthful answer of "I
really would not want to answer that question right at this moment"
would have been the logical way out of Fletcher's current problem when
he instead seems compelled to give an overly candid response.
     In addition something not required by the premise are the over-
the-top rubber-faced expressions from Carrey who breaks through to
telling the truth like he is smashing through a physical barrier.  It
would not be a Jim Carrey film without some of this, but as he usually
does he carries a good thing too far.  Carrey is amusing, but his
antics get in the way of the viewer getting any real feeling out of his
part.  Implied, but never fully developed, is that the most important
effect of the curse on his character is that he can no longer lie to
himself.  By just being honest with himself he achieves a new level of
self-understanding that allows him to put his life in order.  The
script makes another ironic point.  While the film shows how much
damage Fletcher has done with his lies, some of his lies have had
positive effects.  His uncontrollable candor hurts people who relied on
some of his little fibs to bolster their egos.  Telling the truth to
everybody is almost as destructive as lying was.
     With a little more concentration on the script and a little more
subdued Carrey, this could have been a much better film.  As it is, it
gets a high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
John Bauer
It feels a tad awkward giving a Jim Carrey movie a higher rating than a
near-universally praised epic like THE ENGLISH PATIENT.  Antithesis
indeed!  I don't think I even like Jim Carrey; other than BATMAN
FOREVER (hardly representative), I have studiously avoided his films.
(I've seen previews.) But there it is.  And somehow it must be dealt
with.
Let's start with the premise:  a stereotypically conniving lawyer must
tell the truth for 24 hours.  This "high concept" actually has the
makings of a wonderfully clever, witty examination of the role of truth
in our lives and society.  LIAR LIAR isn't it.  So does its appeal lie
in the emotional underpinnings of a career-obsessed father confronting
his sordid, vapid life and effecting real change?  Only if you think
JERRY MAGUIRE was a groundbreaking film.
Then why did I enjoy this movie so much?  For better or worse, the
answer is ... Jim Carrey!  Somehow this man who can't go 30 seconds
without breaking into his schtick has come up with a tour de force of
meaningful slapstick.  The scene that illustrates this best is when his
character (whose name escapes me, but does it matter?  it's just JC
doing a bit) tries to prove to himself that he can lie:  he stares
intently at a blue pen and tries to insist that it is red.  The ensuing
battle between man and Bic is from a lineage that goes all the way to
Chaplin.
It helps that the supporting cast is good and that the film is brief
(87 minutes).  And though it's not as biting as it could be, there's a
nice subtle commentary on the way we all lie to grease the wheels of
civilization.  That the attempts at familial reconciliation strain
credibility hardly matters; Carrey's genuine rapport with his screen
son supplies a gentle sweetness on which the story can glide.  All in
all, a pleasant breeze of a movie.
If you stay for the credits you will also get a show of outtakes which
some think rival the main event for comic invention.  I found it
interesting in another way:  not only do you get to witness Carrey's
spontaneous virtuosity in action, you also get a glimpse of how it must
be working with him.  In a courtroom take with Swoosie Kurtz, she plays
a prank on the star by reciting an unexpected line.  Afterward she
keeps insisting that others put her up to it.  Is she afraid of
upstaging the genius?  Or maybe that's just how it is when you're
playing opposite a $20 million man.
April 25, 1997  
