Title
Review for Angel Cop (1989) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Repugnant, overlong anime that makes it clear how the genre
sometimes gets its bad name.
Anime, like any other genre or group, gets an undeservedly bad reputation
from its worst members. Aside from the wretched and overrated OVERFIEND,
there's other culprits: the insanely dull ODIN, for one. And ANGEL COP,
which is just plain vile. What can you say about a story where the title
cards are spelled out in splattered blood to the sound of machine-gun fire,
and then goes downhill from there?
ANGEL COP is like a bad version of Sylvester Stallone's COBRA fused with a
really low-rent rip-off of THE FIRST POWER and some ROBOCOP thrown in for
good measure -- which is really saying something, since FIRST POWER and
COBRA were wretched to begin with. Any association with ROBOCOP is a slur on
that fine movie. The whole thing clocks in at slightly under two and a half
hours -- edited together from five half-hour pieces, but while they were
doing that, they could certainly have brought the story down to a less
painful length.
The plot: An avowedly communist cell named the Red May are trying to
destabilize Japan through acts of terrorism. To combat this threat, the
police have created a black-bag ops group who work above the law. (Yes, I'm
quoting pretty much word-for-word.) Their leader's so macho he doesn't
bother wearing a shirt, but this has to be the first anime where I've seen a
normal guy who looked like he had more scar tissue than healthy flesh. Oh,
I'm sorry -- that's chest hair, combined with particularly bad character
animation.
He is assigned a new partner, a female cop named Angel who's probably even
more violent and undisciplined than he is. In a scene where the partner's
got a gun to her head, she blows away one of the other terrorists in the
room, splattering brains and bone all over the wall. In detail. Part of the
story ostensibly concerns how Angel goes from an unfeeling bitch to someone
with a bit more heart, but the way ANGEL COP plays that point off is by
giving her the nerve to ultimately blow her partner's brains out (and all
over their enemy). Oh.
Angel is, as are the rest of the characters, mostly nonentities who do what
the plot and the screenplay tell them to do -- which is shoot people, blow
things up, fall out of windows, and karate-chop people to death. Their
enemies are not much better, although they get a few allies who are
marginally interesting (before they get killed rather unceremoniously). I
wish there was more to leave out, but I'll sum by saying ANGEL COP is a good
way not to introduce someone to anime.
