Title
Review for Whole Wide World, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Novalyne Price Ellis is now 88-years-old.  The film is based on
her book, ONE WHO WALKED ALONE,  a remembrance of  Robert E Howard
whom she loved way back in the 1930s.  Howard was the very eccentric
author of the  weird stories of CONAN, THE BARBARIAN.  As he was the
first to unreservedly admit, he was "the best writer in the whole wide
world."
     The film is a precious gem from its opening scene of Novalyne
(Renee Zellweger) on the porch of her home in rural Texas to the
fadeout at the end that lingers lovingly on her face.   Vincent
D'Onofrio, who plays Howard, transports us into another world, that of
the writer who wanted no ties of any kind.  As Howard sits at his
typewriter, he verbalizes and furiously enacts the weird and ferocious
Conan stories.
  When Novalyne meets him it is love at first sight but his love is
not the same as hers.  Where she yearns for "normal" love, he feels
marriage is binding, that it will restrict, and he will have no part
of it. Like Robert, she too is a writer with the big difference that
she is unpublished.  Robert, a bear of a man and outspoken, tells her
that her stories are laughable.  He explains that the people in her
town about whom she writes are unreal because they bear no resemblance
to what the people are really like . . . and he despises all of them.
     Robert's father (Harve Presnell) is a doctor.  His sickly mother
(Anne Wedgeworth) makes the most of her illnesses thus keeping her
extremely devoted son close to her  to the point where it borders on a
sickness with Robert washing her, carrying her and always hovering
over her. As he explains to Novalyne, his mother was the first to
recognize his genius and he feels indebted.
     D'Onofrio's portrayal of Howard is in the Oscar nomination class.
Zellweger, too, is perfection, reminding me of a younger Steenburgen.
The music of Harry Gregson-Williams and Hans Zimmer is right on target
and never obtrusive; Claudio Rocha's photography brings us right into
agricultural Texas;  the film's pace is exactly right.    What more
could you ask for? Look for a nomination for Best Film of the year.

Author
James Berardinelli
[Note that the follow-up is set to rec.arts.sf.written rather than
rec.art.sf.movies.  This was done on purpose.  -Moderator]
United States, 1996 
U.S. Release Date: 12/25/96 (limited); 1/97 (wider) 
Running Length: 1:45 
MPAA Classification: PG (Mild profanity, mature themes) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
Cast: Vincent D'Onofrio, Renee Zellweger, Ann Wedgeworth, 
      Harve Presnell, Benjamin Mouton, Michael Corbett, Helen Cates 
Director: Dan Ireland 
Producers: Carl-Jan Colpaert, Kevin Reidy, Dan Ireland, and 
     Vincent D'Onofrio 
Screenplay: Michael Scott Myers based on the novel ONE WHO WALKED ALONE 
     by Novalyne Price Ellis 
Cinematography: Claudio Rocha 
Music: Hans Zimmer and Harry Gregory-Williams 
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics 
     During the course of his short, stormy life, Depression era writer 
Robert E. Howard created more than two dozen pulp heroes, and wrote 
hundreds of short stories.  His best-known creation, Conan the 
Barbarian, became so popular during the 1970s and '80s that he spawned 
comic books, more than fifty original novels (far outstripping Howard's 
original output), and two motion pictures (CONAN THE BARBARIAN and CONAN 
THE DESTROYER, both starring Arnold Schwarzenegger).  It's said that the 
best way to know an author is to read his writing, and, as Dan Ireland's 
THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD shows, Howard was a man who gave his all to his 
work. 
     During Conan's resurgence in the 1970s, a lot of things -- many of 
them profoundly uncomplimentary -- were written and said about the 
author, who had died some forty years earlier from a self-inflicted 
gunshot wound.  Novalyne Price Ellis, a woman who had enjoyed a special 
relationship with Howard, decided to set the record straight by 
revealing "the real Bob Howard."  The result was ONE WHO WALKED ALONE, 
which was published in 1985.  This memoir became the basis of THE WHOLE 
WIDE WORLD, which presents a portrait of Howard as seen through the eyes 
of a woman who loved him, but would never in return be loved in the same 
way. 
     The film opens during 1933 in Brownwood, Texas, with the meeting of 
Novalyne (Renee Zellweger), a would-be author, and Robert (Vincent 
D'Onofrio), "the best pulp writer in the whole wide world."  The two hit 
it off almost immediately, despite the difference in their life-views.  
Over the course of the next three years, their relationship ebbs and 
flows, with Novalyne falling for Robert in a way that is never 
reciprocated.  It's clear that he cares for her, but he is emotionally 
unable to commit to a relationship.  In his own words:  "The road I 
walk, I walk alone."   
     Although THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD is primarily a study of the 
characters and their romantic liaison, Michael Scott Myers' script finds 
time to explore other fascinating issues, including the philosophy of 
writing and the power of imagination.  Robert and Novalyne spend hours 
on end debating their craft and the dubious virtues of the Conan 
stories.  He explains to her that "excitement's my specialty... 
excitement and adventure."  When she relates the plot of one of her 
recent stories, he breaks out laughing.   
     THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD contains some wonderfully tender moments, 
including one where Robert and Novalyne hold hands with a glorious, 
golden sunset in the background.  There are also some startling 
sequences that evoke the state of Robert's mind.  In one scene, the 
camera zooms in on his eyes as he speaks passionately about who Conan 
is.  As his speech becomes more animated, we can hear the distant clang 
of clashing swords.  Ireland uses such innovative audio tricks to open 
the window to Robert's mental state a little wider.  And, while we never 
fully comprehend the complex workings of the author's mind, we 
understand that his extreme devotion to his mother (Ann Wedgeworth) lies 
at the core of his inability to resolve his feelings for Novalyne. 
     This film would not be as stirring, nor would the love story be as 
poignant, if not for the dynamic portrayals of the two main actors.  
Vincent D'Onofrio is commanding as Robert, presenting him as a "morose, 
ungainly misfit among men" whose shy, gentle nature is occasionally 
ripped apart by brief, psychotic episodes.  Renee Zellweger, who has 
become a hot prospect after her eye-opening turn in JERRY MAGUIRE, here 
proves that the talent displayed opposite Tom Cruise was no fluke.  
Novalyne, not unlike MAGUIRE's Dorothy, is a strong, independent woman -
- a spitfire with a vulnerable side.  And, considering the strength of 
her performance, you'd never guess that the role was developed with 
Olivia D'Abo in mind.  (D'Abo was five months pregnant when THE WHOLE 
WIDE WORLD went into production, and, as a result, was unable to 
appear.) 
     There's nothing earthshaking about THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD, a film 
that is, by the director's own admission, very small.  Nevertheless, it 
successfully accomplishes what it sets out to do, and the result is 
affecting and involving.  So, while it may be true that the best way to 
get into the mind of Robert E. Howard is to read his stories, seeing THE 
WHOLE WIDE WORLD will give you an appreciation of a side of him that was 
never revealed in any Conan yarn. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
[Note that the follow-up is set to rec.arts.sf.written rather than
rec.art.sf.movies.  This was done on purpose.  -Moderator]
THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD  ** to *** depending on viewer. Directed by Dan
Ireland.Written by Michael Scott Myers from the memoir "One Who Walked
Alone" by Novalyne Price Ellis. Photography, Claudio Rocha. Editing, Luis
Colina. Production design, John Frick. Music, Hans Zimmer and Harry
Gregson-Williams. Cast:  Vincent D'Onofrio (Robert E. Howard), Renee
Zellweger (Novalyne Price) Ann Wedgeworth (Mrs. Howard), et al.  A Sony
Pictures Classics release. 105 min. PG. At the Art.
While The Whole Wide World may or may not fascinate all audiences, it will
certainly intrigue those devotees of pulp fiction who revere writer Robert
E. Howard (1906-1936).
Texas-born Howard began to write at age 15. From the late 1920s to his
demise he was a hugely popular author of fantasy and sci-fi stories (he
called them yarns), mostly in the fanzine  Weird Tales. He created some
thirty lead characters who appeared in tale after tale. Conan, the most
famous of them, was in a record number of some 45 yarns.
In the 1970s pulp fiction became an object of study in American
universities for reasons that included breaks with and expansions of
established literary values, an interest in popular cultures, and in some
cases trend-seeking scholarly opportunism. Two Arnold Schwarzenegger
movies,  Conan the Barbarian  (significantly baptized  Conard le Barbare
in French) and  Conan the Destroyer  also contributed to a revival of
popular interest in Howard.
Novalyne Price, later Price Ellis, was from Cross Plains, in rural West
Texas, where Howard, his mother and his father (a respected M.D.) also
lived. Novalyne alternated between graduate studies and teaching to which
she was most dedicated. An aspiring writer, she was happy to meet Bob
Howard in 1934, when she was in her mid-20s. A curious relationship ensued.
It lasted under various permutations until Howard's end in 1936. She
continued college teaching, married William Ellis in 1947, was widowed in
1994 after 47 years of marriage.
The resurgence of interest in fantasy and science fiction caused Novalyne
to become indignant at the scholarly studies about Robert Howard and to set
out righting the wrongs with her memoir  One Who Walked Alone (1985). Her
version is the basis of the movie which was made by a first-time director
and a first-time scriptwriter.
The non-affair between Novalyne and Bob begins in a refreshingly un-cute
fashion which intimates that both people were originals. Soon however,
maverick Bob is revealed to be an authentic weirdo. While not a hermit, he
avoids the outside world in favor of shutting himself in his room to write
away. Material necessity does not explain this, since, even at half-cent a
word, Howard stretches out his texts, is prolific, financially well off and
lives very simply. The significant reason must be that Bob tends to escape
the real world and to sublimate his fantasies by working them into his
yarns. In a stentorian voice he reads his own fabulations and acts out his
creatures' parts.
He is exaggeratedly dedicated to his mother, a possessive, overly
protective woman with a life-threatening ailment. The relationship is
merely sketched out but clearly Oedipal, a tad incestuous and certainly
unhealthy.The father, out of the picture, is sad at his exclusion.
Novalyne and Bob have a slow-motion rapport that goes through a number of
minor adjustments that would take pages to relate. Its apex is when, many
months after their first date, they have their rather chaste first kiss.
Matters go no further. It is as if Bob's descriptions of his characters,
loaded with sexual references and often lurid, are all the sex he needs.
The virginal protagonists are well cast and played. Both have ordinary
faces and a sort of physical anonymity that makes Mr. D'Onofrio and Ms.
Zellwegger credible.  They are people, not actors, and they are a duo
rather than a couple.
My key to this odd relationship is "amitie amoureuse," (loving friendship),
an ambiguous, tricky concept that's quite common. Seen from another angle,
Bob is a mini-Pygmalion to the young woman. Surprisingly -- on the face of
it -- he gives her a book by the erotic writer Pierre Louys whose famous
The Woman and the Puppet (1898) was filmed as The Devil is a Woman,
starring Marlene Dietrich.  It would seem that Bob, in his spare time, is
trying to emancipate the lady.
Yet, for a progressive thinker, Bob often sounds sexist to the ears of the
1990s. I cannot remember a single instance of his calling his friend by her
first name, one that echoes futuristic fiction or medical products. He
always addresses her as "girl." "Listen, girl, "look here, girl, hey,
girl." This mode of address may grate today but was a Southern term of
endearment  for generations.
The depiction of Bob as neurotic, dysfunctional and a little mad occupies
center stage. To my ears, Brooklynite D'Onofrio's Texas twang sounded
authentic. Yet, setting aside the nasty cliche of some Southern accents
denoting hicks, the way Bob is written and performed does make him into
something of a bumpkin. This may not endear him to us but at least it
shatters preconceptions about what writers are like.
By mid-1936, the Bob and Novalyne had parted but without severing all
connections. The bad health of Bob's beloved mother had reached a point of
no return. When he heard that her end was near, he shot himself through the
head. He was 30.  Mother died 30 hours later.
Save for some awkward transitions, the film is a well-produced small slice
of Americana.  It must be one of the lowest low-budget  A  pictures ever
made given the tiny number of actors, locations, sets and props. Its rural
nature must have made it even cheaper than recent independent films set in
urban areas where "dressing" streets and controlling traffic add to costs.
I have the impression that the biggest expense in WWW went to recreating a
theater's marquee and renting some period automobiles.
To what extent the persona of Bob is genuine, or filtered by Novalyne's
memory (she was about 88 during the filming, living alone in Lafayette,
Louisiana), or fiddled with by the filmmakers, I cannot tell. The movie may
answer few questions about Robert Howard, yet it does present to us the
interesting case history of a one-of-a-kind individual.
This review and others can be found at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[Note that the follow-up is set to rec.arts.sf.written rather than
rec.art.sf.movies.  This was done on purpose.  -Moderator]
     In 1934 Robert E. Howard's friends called him "the best pulp
writer in the whole wide world."  These days that title would more
likely go to Edgar Rice Burroughs or H. P. Lovecraft.  However, in some
order, the next two names probably would be Walter Gibson and Robert
E. Howard.  Howard invented the popular genre of fantasy novel today
called "Sword and Sorcery."  His most popular character is, of course,
Conan of Cimmeria (a.k.a. Conan the Barbarian) who with a powerful
sword and a rudimentary intelligence fights the powers of Black Magic
in a prehistoric world of monsters and sorcerers.  (Of course, the
sword was made more powerful and the intelligence more rudimentary in
the 1982 John Milius film CONAN THE BARBARIAN and its 1984 sequel CONAN
THE DESTROYER, both starring Arnold Schwarzenegger.) But THE WHOLE WIDE
WORLD is not the story of larger-than-life people and huge mystical
events, it is more whimper than bang.  In 1934 a schoolteacher and
aspiring writer, Novalyne Price, met and got to know Bob Howard.  Years
later, in probably the only piece of her writing that ever got any
attention, she told the story of that friendship in a memoir entitled
ONE WHO WALKED ALONE.  That memoir is the basis of THE WHOLE WIDE
WORLD.
     Price (played by Renee Zellweger who currently also has the co-
starring role in JERRY MAGUIRE) is introduced to Howard (Vincent
D'Onofrio) by a mutual friend.  Most of the town of Cross Plains in
rural West Texas think of Howard as being a little strange and
unbalanced.  The truth is that most of the town is probably right.
Howard's life, other than his writing, is owned and jealously guarded
by his sickly mother. Howard takes care of his mother is some ways that
are more personal than most sons would and most of his world revolves
around his mother.  His one outlet is his typewriter where he turns
what are little more than expanded adolescent fantasies into adventure
prose, often shouting out that prose as he writes a story.  Price
intrudes on the relationship between the Howard and his mother to make
friends with the twenty-eight-year- old writer.  She maintains a
relationship that goes little beyond the platonic with the stocky
child-man.  She herself would like to be a good writer in the classic
sense and has a hard time telling Howard that he should aspire to
writing more than his swaggering fantasies.
     The great irony, of course, but one that the narrative never
admits except by its very existence, is that Price is 180 degrees
wrong.  There can be as much art to writing an adolescent fantasy
really well as there can be to describing the real world.  Her own
well-observed description of her dating period is of interest only in
that it sheds light on the forces that formed the pulp fiction she
looked down upon.  On the other hand Howard perhaps in innocence never
doubted that his swaggering stories were the gull-darnedest best
writing around.  And he was, in fact, writing a literature that once it
was rediscovered in the 1960s would never be out of print and would be
an inspiration to generations of writers.  Price's position in the
world of literature today is as a footnote, remembered as the woman who
dated Howard and whose reminiscences gave us a look into his personal
life.  This subtext is more of interest than the actual text of the
film.
     Vincent D'Onofrio is already establish as one of our better
feature actors.  Since he played the doomed Private Pyle in FULL METAL
JACKET he has had an enviable succession of character roles.  Renee
Zellweger is a graduate of horror films who has lucked into having two
star-making roles (JERRY MAGUIRE being the other) on the screen in one
Christmas season.  This is Dan Ireland's first time directing, though
he has produced, or executive-produced, such diverse films as the 1988
film TWISTER, PAPERHOUSE, and WHORE.  He does a reasonable job, though
fails to keep the characters consistently interesting.  Occasionally he
goes in for some hammy photography tricks like crudely darkening a
strip at the top of the screen to create the effect of a darkened sky.
     It is not clear that this film really stands well on its own.  If
it were a work of fiction it would just be a story of the dating
between two people who were not really very interesting in the final
analysis.  THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD gives little feel for the sort of
stories that Howard was writing at the time, except for their
overwhelming silliness and juvenility.  And certainly the stories will
bear that interpretation.  Where the story gets its real impetus is not
from the endings that Price sees in the story, but in the beginnings
that she does not appreciate.  I give this film a high +1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Sony Classics)
Starring:  Vincent D'Onofrio, Renee Zellweger, Ann Wedgeworth, Harve
Presnell.
Screenplay:  Michael Scott Myers, based on the memoir by Novalyne Price
Ellis.
Producers:  Kevin Reidy, Carl-Jan Colpeurt, Vincent D'Onofrio, Dan
Ireland.
Director:  Dan Ireland.
MPAA Rating:  PG (plentiful mild profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Bio-pics have been a Hollywood staple about as long as there has been
a Hollywood, but recently an entire sub-genre seems to have popped up
based on the tragic romances of real-life figures.  Beethoven in IMMORTAL
BELOVED, Dora Carrington in CARRINGTON, C. S. Lewis in SHADOWLANDS,
Picasso in SURVIVING PICASSO and Richard Feynman in INFINITY all have been
given solemn film treatments which play the "tortured/emotionally
repressed artist" card for all they are worth.  Some of these films worked
and some did not, but many of them inspired the question of whether we
would care all that much about the people involved if one or both of them
were not famous.  THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD is a polite, well-acted drama which
covers the same ground several times over in an hour and forty-five
minutes.
     THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD opens in west Texas in 1933, where a young
student and part-time school teacher named Novalyne Price (Renee
Zellweger) meets Robert E. "Bob" Howard (Vincent D'Onofrio), a friend of
her then-boyfriend.  Bob is a successful writer of adventure tales for
pulp magazines -- many featuring a creation named Conan the Barbarian --
and Novalyne's own aspirations toward being a writer lead her to turn to
Bob for advice.  The two become friends and frequent companions, but Bob
has difficulty returning Novalyne's affections as he focuses on his
writing and caring for his sickly mother (Ann Wedgeworth).  Over the
course of two years, Novalyne and Bob share an evolving relationship in
which Novalyne is one of the only people allowed inside Bob's tangled
emotions.
     THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD manages to stay fairly involving for much of its
running time largely thanks to the strong performances of the two leads.
Vincent D'Onofrio makes Bob Howard a complicated mix of Texas bluster and
buried pain, a fellow who lacks the emotional vocabulary to respond to
Novalyne's feelings.  Director Dan Ireland captures him vividly as he
describes Conan's world to Novalyne, and in his verbal accompaniment to
his own composition; Howard's fantasy world becomes his great escape from
his own life.  Renee Zellweger does nice work with a tough part, a woman
who is attracted to the teller of tall tales then finds herself unable to
"civilize" him.  She walks a fine line between anachronistic liberation
and discomfiting masochism, yet generally finds the right note of earnest
frustration.  Together Zellweger and D'Onofrio make an intriguing pair, a
couple of kindred spirits who nevertheless are quite obviously wrong for
each other.
     Therein lies THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD's fundamental flaw as a romantic
drama:  it is never really possible to root for the protagonists to end up
together.  Michael Scott Myers' script is based on an autobiographical
memoir by Novalyne Price Ellis, who clearly was deeply affected by her
friendship with Bob Howard.  As honestly felt as it might be, however, her
story lacks a narrative push.  Novalyne and Bob spend a lot of time
together, argue over philosophical differences, then make up; this process
occurs once then repeats three or four times.  The interaction between the
two is pleasantly interesting, but it isn't enough to sustain a story in
which neither character ends up changing very much.  The sad fact is that
the story might have been simply Novalyne's attempt to work through some
guilt issues (Howard committed suicide in 1935), and THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD
is affectionate without being compelling.  When Novalyne pronounces late
in the film that she was happy to have known Bob Howard, you don't doubt
her sincerity.  You just wonder why that sentiment warranted a feature
film.
     The only time THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD flirts with truly intriguing
material is when it focuses on Bob's relationship with his mother, played
with pallid possessiveness by Ann Wedgeworth.  There is an intense Oedipal
sub-text to Bob's obsessive need to care for his mother, and a scene in
which he changes her sweat-soaked nightgown after a feverish night is both
subtle and daring.  There is so much more going on in that relationship
than in the one between Bob and Novalyne that you wish Ireland or Myers
had recognized it.  But this is Novalyne's story, so she is always front
and center, static though she might be.  Don't expect a love story in THE
WHOLE WIDE WORLD.  At most it is a "like" story, and might have been
ignored politely if one of the two likers had not created Conan the
Barbarian.

Author
Steve Rhodes
[Note that the follow-up is set to rec.arts.sf.written rather than
rec.art.sf.movies.  This was done on purpose.  -Moderator]
     Your eyes may be playing tricks on you.  The title of this movie
is THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD and not the World Wide Web.  Many computer
types will probably have to parse the name several times to get it
right.  This is a film not about the Net, but about someone known as
"the greatest pulp fiction writer in the whole wide world."  It is a
true story based on the memoirs of the writer's lover and written
almost a half a century later.  The only real reason to see the film is
to catch more of that new star from JERRY MAGUIRE, Renee Zellweger, in
one of the movie's two leading roles.
     Although it has a classic three tissue ending, the rest of the
picture is a remarkably unmoving portrayal of two characters full of
potential.  As flat as the Texas prairie, the movie saves all of its
emotional impact until the end.
     Set in poor, rural Texas in 1935, Vincent D'Onofrio (from FEELING
MINNESOTA and ED WOOD) plays Robert "Bob" E. Howard, the prolific pulp
fiction writer who gave the world, CONAN, THE BARBARIAN among many
other contributions.  Renee Zellweger is school teacher, student, and
unpublished writer Novalyne Price.  Although Bob does not to seem to
have all of his marbles and is viewed as the local eccentric by the
town, she falls for his extroverted behavior and his literary success.
Although he likes her, he is also mighty fond of his mama, played by
Ann Wedgeworth (from A BURNING PASSION: THE MARGARET MITCHELL STORY).
     The cinematography by Claudio Rocha is gorgeous.  You may remember
his stunning work in PICTURE BRIDE.  Here he shows Texas as its best --
full of reddish golden colors.  The prettiest images are the sunsets,
but the forest canopy is warm and inviting as well.  The best sequence
has the camera pan down slowly from the highest branches to the
seemingly insignificant people under them.
     Making a living producing pulp fiction isn't easy.  As Bob says,
they "pay me only one half cent per word."  But he copes.  He reveals
that his solution is, "I stretch it out; I'm verbose."
     Bob is not prime date material.  His idea of a good time is
"drivin' and blabbin'," which he does frequently in the movie.  Herein
lies the major problem with the film.  Screenwriter Michael Scott Myers
rarely gives him anything to say worth hearing.  Even if this stems
from deficiencies in the book, Myers should have been able to fix it.
This is compounded by Dan Ireland's meandering direction and Luis
Colina's loose editing.  There are the ingredients for a good movie
here, but the mixture we are given does not gel.
     The two leads give good performances, but the rest of the cast,
especially all of Novalyne's women friends, are weak.  I found the
"Texan Spoken Here" sign at the soda fountain quite ironic since few of
the characters even attempt an accent.  Those that do come up with a
weak, vaguely Southern accent.  In a small Texas town before the advent
of television, you can be sure that all the accents would have been so
thick you could have cut them with a knife.  I grew up in Garland,
Texas, and know what small town Texas speech sounds like.  This is not
even close.
     No matter how hard Zellweger and D'Onofrio try, the movie never
made me care about their characters.  Zellweger's part was made more
earnest than touching by the script, and D'Onofrio's was reduced to
quirkiness.  In the finale, when it came time to break out the Kleenex,
my eyes stayed dry.  Some of people in the audience whimpered, but I
was never more than intrigued by the film.  A promising story, but a
disappointing delivery.
     THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD runs 1:45.  It is rated PG.  There are a
couple of mild cuss words, but no sex, nudity or violence.  Given the
mature themes, kids would probably have to be nine or ten to be
interested in the show.  Although the film has its moments, it is not
compelling cinema.  I give it a mild thumbs down and **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
[Note that the follow-up is set to rec.arts.sf.written rather than
rec.art.sf.movies.  This was done on purpose.  -Moderator]
    THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD, a love story left over from last year, is
another go-around with JERRY MAGUIRE's Renee Zellweger and her funky-
looking lips.  The Girl That Makes You Wonder About Collagen plays
Novalyne Price, the small-town schoolteacher (and aspiring writer) who
pursued Conan the Barbarian creator Robert E. Howard (Vincent D'Onofrio,
who also co-produced) during the Depression.  The story is true, the
scenery is nice, and D'Onofrio's rough-and- tumble character is
endlessly interesting.  The second hour is sluggish, though, and for a
variety of reasons.  In particular, I was curious about the passage of
time.  Over how many years does the story take place?
     THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD was screened at the Colony Theatre in Raleigh
on 3/7.  'Twas the quintessential off night:  a late start, a popcorn
shortage, *and* a projector shutter that closed before the end titles
(with epilogue) finished rolling.  Talk about a grumpy audience!
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/
