Title
Review for Whatever It Takes (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Screenwriter Mark Schwahn updates "Cyrano de Bergerac" in this stereotypical teenybopper comedy that's so stupid, crass, even misogynistic, that it's insulting to the vulnerable audience for whom it's intended.  And, for his cast, director David Raynr has recruited TV stars whose generic personas can barely fill the big screen.  Shane West of  "Once and Again" plays a nerdy, sensitive Gilmore High School senior who lends his poetic ability to the hunky jock - that's James Franco ("Freaks and Geeks") - who's smitten with West's next-door neighbor, Marla Sokoloff ("The Practice"). In turn, Franco helps West score with his cousin, the bra-less, bodacious Jodi Lyn O'Keefe ("Nash Bridges").  And, of course, the senior prom's just around the corner. What's inevitable is that West will realize that his true soul-mate is his best-friend Sokoloff and vice versa but it takes 92 excruciating minutes to get there. Not that I don't like teen comedies - but let's go back to the Joh!
n Hughes' "Breakfast Club," "Pretty in Pink,"  genre, where at least the actors had some charm. The only attempt at cleverness comes when the accordion-playing West does a riff on Tom Cruise's "Risky Business" lip-sync, dressed in boxer shorts and a cowboy hat. Then there's Julia Sweeney, as West's mother/school nurse, delivering a guaranteed giggle with a safe-sex demonstration. And as an alum of Beverly Hills High School, I was surprised to see that its famous hydraulically retractable dance-floor over the Olympic-sized swimming pool is still in good working order, as shown in the perverse "Titanic Dreams" prom finale. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Whatever It Takes" flunks with a 3. Well, duh!

Author
Mac VerStandig
--- A copy of this review can be found at
http://www.moviereviews.org/drowning_mona_and_whatever_it_takes.htm ---
Several nights ago I was forced to make a decision between attending a
screening of a) Drowning Mona or b) Whatever it Takes. My choice
wouldn't make much difference as I was destined to view both, so I
nonchalantly chose b. In retrospect, I should have opted for c) a warm
bath and a good night's sleep.
Drowning Mona, the third pathetic excuse for a movie from Destination
Films (Bats and Eye of the Beholder), has a very-much recognizable
cast that you expect to deftly guide it through what sounds like a
semi-intriguing plot.  Whatever It Takes, comparatively, comes from
the veteran Columbia pictures and features a bunch of no-names in a
very-much tired plot.
Danny DeVito hunts down the murderer of Verplank, New York's town
shrew in Mona while Shane West seeks a prom date at Gilmore High in
Whatever it Takes.  It has been a while since a who-didn't-do-it has
come along, so Mona certainly had the potential to be refreshingly
amusing. Unfortunately, as the list of Fargonian characters piles up,
it becomes increasingly apparent that the film's payoff cannot make
sense as not a single member of the all-inclusive suspect list has the
intellectual capacity to execute a murder.  I dare even say that the
only people dumber than the citizens of Verplank are the graduating
class of Gilmore High. The characters in Whatever it Takes are so
flagrantly single-dimensional that a quasi-Pleasantville feeling is
created.
Insuring that Drowning Mona dies a worst death than the one described
in its title are Danny DeVito, Casey Affleck, Bette Midler and Neve
Campbell.  DeVito likely won't suffer too badly from picking this film
as he can still be seen in the extraordinary Man on the Moon and has
an extremely respectable career to overshadow this work. Midler, on
the other hand, is fresh off of Isn't She Great (which isn't) and
needs to take a serious look at the current state of her career. It
has been nearly 10 years since the landmark in her vitae when she bid
Carson goodbye and although she continues to do acclaimed live
theatre, her film career seems to have nose-dived since that Memorial
Day weekend. As for Affleck and Campbell, they are both newcomers who
will have to fight to erase memories of Mona, but given their talent
they will likely succeed.
Whatever it Takes features Shane West and Marla Sokoloff as the
resident geeks who attempt to cross-date with the two most popular
kids in school, played by James Franco and Jodi Lyn O'Keefe. Sokoloff,
West and Franco will all likely be destroyed by this
play-it-by-the-convenient-cliché production.  As for O'Keefe, the
only actor with any experience to speak of (except for the always cute
Julia Sweeney in a supporting role), she will likely come away
stereotyped as the teenage bitch until she can no longer stop playing
a teenager, at which point the only line she'll have to remember is "Would
you like fries with that?"
For Mona, the kiss of death comes in a mid-film knife-throwing contest
when the tempestuous character is humanized. The second you feel
remotely bad for the deceased, the film goes from being really awful
to really really awful.  For Whatever it Takes, the unoriginal plot
mixed with the apparent inability to land a singly joke doom the
production for expulsion from the ranks of decent cinema.
Forget a hot bath and good night's sleep. I would have rather bathed
in an Alaskan lake and spent a the night with the Adams Family than
suffered through either of these movies!

Author
Steve Rhodes
Stop me if you've heard this one before.  An unpopular guy has his eye
on the most popular girl at his high school.  At the same time, her male
cousin has the hots for an unpopular girl, who is the first guy's
next-door neighbor and best buddy.  In order for both to get what they
want, the guys tell each other what to say.
Okay, so you've heard more permutations of this story that you can
count.
Second-time director David Hubbard, whose first offering was the abysmal
TRIPPIN', makes a more satisfying, if not very original, film this time
-- a teenage romantic comedy called WHATEVER IT TAKES.  Although it has
all of the requisite bathroom humor and underage drinking that I'm sorry
to say that many teens want in their movies, it also has some good
messages about the consequences of your actions and has some likable
leads.  It certainly isn't anything memorable, but it's a slightly above
the average member of its genre.
Shane West (from the television series "Once and Again"), the handsomest
guy in the cast, plays Ryan Woodman.  Ryan is so far out of the in-crowd
that its members think that he must have just transferred to their
school when they meet him for the first time.  He is a lovable accordion
player who has brains and looks.  The movie tries to make you believe
that he only has the former.
Marla Sokoloff (from the television series "The Practice") is the
supposedly plain-looking Maggie Carter, Ryan's long-time best buddy.
Their bedroom balconies are close enough for them to swap homework.
Maggie, as Ryan points out, "hasn't been on a date in, like, forever."
Maggie, of course, is the biggest knockout in the movie with a killer
body and an electric smile that would light up Broadway.
Ryan views Maggie as the functional equivalent of the sister he never
had.  (Everyone appears to be an only-child in this story.)  He'd no
sooner have romantic intentions for her that he would for a sibling.
Which, of course, means...  Well, you get the idea.
Meanwhile, back on campus, James Franco (from the television series
"Freaks and Geeks"), as the egocentric Chris Campbell, and Jodi Lyn
O'Keefe (SHE'S ALL THAT), as the stuck-up Ashley Grant, reign as the
campus king and queen.  Chris's idea of a come-on line is: "We can get
together and swap spit."  He's a self-proclaimed "nail and bail" man
when it comes to women.  Ashley is so vain that she demands a payment to
sign a yearbook and then backs out on the deal anyway.
Since Chris wants to date Maggie, and Ryan desires Ashley, the two boys
concoct a bargain.  Each will help the other one win the girl of his
dreams.  Needless to say, all four of them will be surprised with the
results.
Writer Mark Schwahn comes up with a few fresh ideas among all of his
retreads.  When an awkward Ryan tries to shake Ashley's hand rather than
kiss her at the end of their double date, Schwahn manages to have her
surprise us.  Similarly, the story's ending contains a well deserved,
albeit a bit sadistic, comeuppance.
So does the movie end in a prom?  As teenagers would say, "well, duh!"
The theme of the dance this time is "Titanic Dreams."  Talk about
telegraphing your punches.  When the predictable movie ends, what you're
likely to remember, however, aren't its flaws, of which there are many,
but Maggie and Ryan.  They are two adorable characters who win your
hearts even if the rest of the picture doesn't.
WHATEVER IT TAKES runs 1:32.  It is rated PG-13 for thematic elements,
sexual material and language.  The movie would be acceptable for
teenagers, preferably older ones.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c82c9deb90bed1e3882568aa000a4c71?OpenDocument
I sat down to write this review with a gleeful sparkle in my eye,
anticipating the bitter contempt I would quickly unleash on the entire
cast and crew of Whatever It Takes, citing an array of blunders ranging
from laughable dramatic moments to a disappointingly predictable
adaptation of the already over-used plot movements of Cyrano de
Bergerac.  Then I remembered Porky's and had a change of heart.
Whatever It Takes is actually a solid pinning of the high school
romantic comedy.  There's nothing especially original about its plot or
characters, but most of its target audience won't notice.  Basically,
what we have here is the standard
boy-wants-girl-but-she's-out-of-his-league-so-his-friend-coaches-him-and-she's-gullible-enough-to-fall-for-it
picture. The twist is that this is a two-way exchange.  Ryan Woodman
(Shane West) is a supposedly geeky high school senior lusting after
popular girl Ashley Grant (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe -- She's All That).  Chris
Campbell (James Franco of Freaks and Geeks) is a dumb but popular jock
looking to bed Maggie Carter (Marla Sokoloff), the smart-but-undervalued
hottie who lives next door to Ryan.  So the two begin a completely
unsurprising story arc in which the two most prominent teenage girl
stereotypes fall for every line in the book without ever suspecting a
thing.
The interplay between Chris and Maggie is everything you might expect
and totally uninteresting.  Ryan and Ashley, on the other hand, are a
riot.  While O'Keefe's role may set the women's movement back about
twenty years as the classic self-hating bimbo, it is pretty funny to
watch.  But then again, I'm a guy.  James Franco's acting is about the
same in this picture as on Freaks and Geeks, which isn't saying a lot,
but his delivery of Chris's chauvinistic lines is believable enough.
Shane West is bland but endearing as Ryan, and Marla Sokoloff has enough
irritable spunkiness bring Maggie to life.  What really makes this film
work is the supporting cast, including Colin Hanks as the Tyler
Durden-esque prankster, Floyd.
Aside from some excruciatingly bad sharing moments between Maggie and
Ryan on their neighboring balconies, the dialog carries well throughout
the film.  Screenwriter Mark Schwahn has written some of the funniest
one-liners in a teen movie since Sixteen Candles.
All-in-all, this is not a brilliant film.  It's not even at the top of
its genre.  It's about as close a resemblance to actual teenage life as
Days of Our Lives is to the daily tribulations of the Salem elite.
While its characters and story line aren't particularly convincing, it
has heart, good humor and plenty of sex.  I expect it'll succeed with
high-schoolers in the same way American Pie and The Breakfast Club did
before it-by relying on a soundtrack.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by David Raynr.
Cast: Shane West, Marla Sokoloff, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, James Franco, Aaron Paul, 
Colin Hanks, Manu Intiraymi, Julia Sweeney, Richard Schiff, Kip Pardue, Scott 
Vickaryous, Christine Lakin.
2000 - 92 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 25, 2000.
"Whatever It Takes" is the exact antithesis of "Here on Earth," this week's 
other teen-oriented movie. Whereas "Here on Earth" must be praised for its 
non-stereotypical view of teenage characters, "Whatever It Takes," directed 
by David Raynr, is a cliche-ridden high school comedy with few inventive 
ideas, but a fair amount of wit. Sort of a hybrid of "She's All That" and 
"Drive Me Crazy," and superior to the former, the film predictably follows 
two good-natured protagonists and their self-involved romantic counterparts, 
until the moment when...well...I think we both know how this one will end, 
folks. Because the ground rules for this genre have been so stringently laid 
out, its the "getting-there" that is more important than the actual payoff, 
and "Whatever It Takes," while certainly not one of the better teen comedies, 
is at least one of the more entertaining recent ones.
Ryan Woodman (Shane West) is an unpopular senior at Gilmore High School, with 
a long-time best friend and next-door neighbor in Maggie Carter (Marla 
Sokoloff), whose bedroom balconies conveniently face each other, so they can 
spend their free time talking between them. Maggie is seemingly nothing more 
than a sister to him, as he has eyes for the most popular (and superficial) 
girl in school, Ashley Grant (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe), even though she doesn't know 
he even exists. When jock Chris (James Franco) decides that he would like to 
have a chance with Maggie, he devises a plan with Ryan. Since Ashley is 
Chris' cousin, he will easily be able to get her to go out with Ryan, if Ryan 
helps him to win over Maggie. Pretty soon, it becomes apparent to Ryan that 
Ashley is nothing more than a shallow individual worried only about herself, 
and he slowly comes to the realization that his true feelings lie with 
Maggie. It sounds complicated, but it's really not; just another spin on the 
same old formula.
"Whatever It Takes," loosely based on "Cyrano de Bergerac," is a flawed movie 
in more ways than one, and it makes you long for the '80s John Hughes era, 
when teen movies like "Sixteen Candles," "Pretty in Pink," and "Some Kind of 
Wonderful" laid the groundwork for such '90s fare as this, but were done with 
a great deal more intelligence and overall heart. So why does "Whatever It 
Takes" fundamentally work? Easy. Going into a movie theater playing this 
film, you have it set in your mind exactly what is going to happen and how 
everything will be played out, and because it satisfies those expectations 
and doesn't resort to complete brainlessness, you come out happy. If you 
don't, then you really had no excuse for walking into the theater in the 
first place.
Shane West (TV's "Once and Again") and Marla Sokoloff (TV's "The Practice") 
are charming and likable as Ryan and Maggie. Their roles, like everyone 
else's, is a cliche, but they do their jobs professionally, and seem to be 
having fun in the process. 
The standout in the cast, however, turns out to be Jodi Lyn O'Keefe (1998's 
"Halloween: H20"), who is basically playing the same stuck-up character that 
she did in 1999's "She's All That," but with a fresh spin. About as 
self-absorbed as a person can possibly be, O'Keefe's Ashley is won over by 
Ryan not by flattery, but by criticisms, as any negativity directed towards 
her attracts her attention, since she is such an obviously insecure and 
pathetic creature. It might have been nice had screenwriter Mark Schwahn 
attempted to tear down Ashley's thin facade and explore her as a real human 
being (as John Hughes did spectacularly with Lea Thompson's popular sexpot 
character in 1987's "Some Kind of Wonderful"), but at least she isn't 
purposefully cruel--only highly materialistic.
"Whatever It Takes" is light, fluffy, fast-paced, and through the sludge of 
overdone ideas are a couple original moments, particularly in the Prom 
finale, whose theme for the year is "Titanic Dreams." With the gymnasium set 
up to look like the Titanic, complete with fake icebergs and lifesavers, a 
plot development occurs that immediately turns the dance into a basic 
reenactment of the tragic sinking of the title ship. But who are we kidding? 
The movie is little more than a remake of countless other films, done 
occasionally better but often worse. The play's the thing, however, and 
"Whatever It Takes" is entertaining throughout the duration of its brisk 92 
minutes.
