Title
Review for Things Change (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 THINGS CHANGE (director/writer: David Mamet; screenwriter: Shel
 Silverstein; cinematographer: Juan Ruiz-Anchia; editor: Trudy Ship;
 cast: Don Ameche (Gino), Joe Mantegna (Jerry), Robert Prosky (Joseph
 Vincent), Mike Nussbaum (Mr. Green), J.J. Johnston (Frankie), Ricky
 Jay (Mr. Silver), Steve Goldstein (Randy), W.H. Macy (Billy), J.T.
 Walsh (Hotel Manager), Willo Hausman (Miss Bates); Runtime: 100;
 Columbia; 1988)
Mamet's second effort as a director, after his diabolically successful
House of Games, is a totally different styled film. It's a Mafia black
comedy, with undertones of being film noir. The director's witty
dialogue and penchant for interesting plot lines are there, but this
film is not as sharp-edged as his other work. It teams the old
Italian-American shoeshine man Gino (Ameche) with the bumbling Mafia
flunky Jerry (Mantegna). The third impactful character is the big shot
Mafia don, Joseph Vincent (Prosky), who bonds with Gino and feels proud
that he has, supposedly, met a Mafia chieftain who is equal to him in
stature.
The film opens as an elderly Chicago shoeshine man, Gino, is approached
in his workplace by two well-dressed Mafia thugs who tell him there's
someone who has an offer for him and that he should come to the address
on the card they hand him; they also hand him a big bill under the card.
The offer, as explained by Mr. Green (Nussbaum), is that Gino take the
rap for someone who committed a murder who looks like him and in return
he will be granted what he wishes. They tell him that he will only have
to serve a three year sentence. At first Gino says no, which irritates
the mobsters, but then he changes his mind and tells them he will retire
in Sicily with the fishing boat they give him. As a token of friendship,
he is given a small silver coin by Mr. Green.
Jerry is on probation with the mobsters because he goofed up a previous
assignment, which means he gets lots of insults and K. P. duty. He is
chosen to be Gino's keeper for the next three days and told this is his
chance to get off Mafia probation by henchman Frankie (Johnson).
Confined to a stuffy hotel room Jerry gets bored with rehearsing Gino's
confession that he will repeat on Monday's court hearing and
impulsively, with big-time bravado, takes him to Lake Tahoe, Nevada, for
a supposedly low profile weekend of gambling and entertainment. There
Jerry is recognized by a limo driver (Macy) as being from the Chicago
mob, and his companion Gino is immediately assumed to be a Mafia
chieftain. He is given the royal treatment by the hotel which includes
free use of their best penthouse suite, unlimited credit for gambling, a
custom-made tailored suit, a manicure, and many other service amenities.
The two get caught up in this mistaken identity bit and all the
coincidences that come their way, as Gino is now known all over the
hotel as some kind of Mr. Big from Chicago. Their gambling venture turns
into the weakest part of the film because it is not believable. Gino
wins $35,000 because the roulette wheel is fixed and then must lose it
back to them with grace. They then attend a comedy show and the comedian
introduces them to two showgirls who end up with them in their penthouse
bubbly sunken tub. This is the entertainment highlight of the weekend
for them. It also sparks Jerry to tell Gino not to get too carried away
that the girls like them so much, "They always like you when you're
someone else." That's pure Mamet dialogue.
The local Mafia chief Joseph Vincent (Robert Prosky) hears of the
mysterious Mr. Big's arrival, and requests him to stay at his mountain
estate as a guest. Never having heard of him, he is about to either
welcome him as a member of the family or have him killed. This scene is
brilliantly done, a true pleasure to watch as the men through long
drawn-out silences converse without saying much that gives them away.
The gestures and the timing of the two is masterful, as the two embrace
after much vague conversational banter and recognize each other as
equals. Gino gives the don the silver coin Mr. Green gave him as a token
of his friendship. Later, by the beach, the don gives Gino a coin to
call him if he should ever need his friendship in an emergency.
Things get sticky when Gino is asked to stay overnight in the don's
house, as he is having a meeting with other Mafia kingpins from around
the country and wants him to meet his old pals. At this meeting is Mr.
Green, which prompts Jerry to steal one of the luxury parked cars and
head to the airport and get back to Chicago. But Jerry runs out of gas,
then discovers he doesn't have enough money to pay for the gas. In an
awkward and meaningless scene that drew no comedy from it, the gas
station owner is about to call the sheriff but Gino pays for the gas
when he borrows the money from the hotel's chief butler (Goldstein). He
just happens to also come in for gas and is in awe of him ever since
Gino told him how to shine shoes the right way.
In Chicago 'things change' as henchman Frankie takes Gino for a walk
near the waterfront, but Jerry decides that he can't live with himself
if he does what his bosses want. He has become attached to this
bewildered, regal old man of honor and lets his emotions do the thinking
for him. He dazes Frankie with a blow to the head, and Gino reacts by
remaining in character and calls the don with the coin he gave him. He
tells him who he really is and what he's up to, again finding the right
words to communicate with his new friend.
There were scenes that lacked weight and seemed phony, but these three
main characters gave this film a brilliance in character study: Ameche
by his brilliantly restrained performance, Mantegna by his energetic and
funny one, and Prosky by his perfectly menacing and touching one. It
lifted the film into a rich mixture of farce, gang violence, and
tenderness. It's a film that comes with a perfect shoeshine and a
perfect smile underneath its ludicrous and cynical premise.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brian Koller
Gino (Don Ameche) is an eldery shoe-shiner working at his small
shoestore in Chicago, who dreams of being a fisherman back 
in his native Sicily.  One day two serious, well-dressed men
enter his shop, give him a $100 bill, and tell him to appear
at the home of a gentleman that evening.
When Ameche appears, he is asked to plead guilty to a
murder in return for cash.  Ameche, it turns out, looks much
like the Mafia henchman who committed the murder.  Ameche
says no, but changes his mind.  He signs a confession and
puts his fingerprints on the murder weapon.  He is given
a silver coin as a sign of friendship.
Jerry (Joe Mantegna) is a likeable Mafia flunkie who has disobeyed
orders and is "on probation", which entails kitchen duty
and ridicule.  Mantegna is given the assignment to keep watch
over Ameche in a hotel room until he can appear at a hearing
on Mantegna.
Mantegna instead takes Ameche with him to Lake Tahoe.  There is
no mention of who pays for this junket.  When the two arrive,
Mantegna tries to impress a Mafia limo driver with a tale
that Ameche is a top Mafia kingpin.  Ameche is given a royal
treatment, the best room in the hotel, and is pandered to,
because the limo driver tells the hotel manager about Ameche.
Ameche is given gambling money and wins because the roulette
wheel has been fixed in his favor.  Ameche later loses the money.
The stereotype of crooked games and crime-run casinos isn't
very believable.
Two beautify women, apparently Mafia groupies, proposition
Ameche and Mantegna.  Their offer to go fishing is declined.
A local kingpin (Robert Prosky) hears of Ameche's arrival, 
and sends for him.  Suspicious, he is about to have Ameche killed, 
but decides not to when Ameche gives him the silver coin.  One is
reminded of "Being There", which had Peter Sellers mistaken
for someone of great importance.  Like Sellers, Ameche's
character is completely bland and unassuming.  Prosky
gives Ameche a quarter, telling him that he should give him 
a call if he is ever in trouble.
Feeling things are getting out of control, Mantegna decides
to return to Chicago early.  The hotel is having a
convention of Mafia businessmen (such a coincidence) and
they have to sneak out and steal one of the expensive cars.
Mantegna first runs out of gas, then discovers he has
no money.  The gas station owner is about to call the
sheriff, but Amecha pays the tab.  He has borrowed money 
(in another amazing coincidence) from the beautiful women 
who just happened to be returning from their fishing trip and 
getting gas at that same time at the same gas station.
Mantegna returns Ameche to the Chicago hotel room that they 
were never supposed to have left.  Mantegna, feeling bad 
about the shaft Ameche is getting, tells him to run for it, 
but Ameche stays put, saying he has made a deal.
A henchman shows up and walks Mantegna and Ameche to court.
The henchman gives Mantegna a handgun and gives him two minutes
to off Ameche, as things would be "cleaner" this way.  Mantegna
confronts Ameche but can't do it.  Instead, Mantegna assaults
the henchman, knocking him dazed to the ground.  Ameche calls
Prosky, who fixes things up: the henchman takes the rap, and 
Ameche is back working at his shoe story.  But Ameche now has a 
co-worker, Mantegna.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Jeff Meyer
Since this is a David Mamet film (he directed it, and wrote the screenplay with
Shel Silverstein), you can count on several things:
1)  Certain actors will be present, from Mamet's own personal stable of
    personal favorites: in this case, Joe Montagna and Robert Prosky.  Don
    Ameche is a newcomer to Mamet plays/films, and shares center stage with
    Montagna, and both do a beautiful job.
2)  Everyone talks in a kind of rhythmic manner -- the phrases and words
    spin and loop some.  No, people don't talk like that in real life, but
    that's why Mamet wins awards -- they sound, well, right.
3)  God help you if you're trying to predict what's going to happen in this
    film.  I didn't have a clue, and that was the best part of the film;
    THINGS CHANGE generates curiosity and suspense, as well as laughter,
    melancholy and drama.
With that, I *really* do not want to say much about the film; I'd prefer for
you to go in as virgins to the story.  Let's just say that it's about an old
shoe-shiner, a mob flunky on probation, Reno, and an interesting bunch of mob
personnel that Ameche and Mantegna get mixed up in.  Oh, it also has a moral.
I think.
