Title
Review for Blazing Saddles (1974)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Paul McElligott
"Blazing Saddles" is probably not Mel Brook's best film (that's a
toss-up between "The Producers" and "Young Frankenstein"), but it is
easily his most consistently funny work. It would never be made today
and that statement is as much praise for this movie as it is an
indictment of the politically correct times in which we live.
Nowadays, when we have to refer to the "N-word" as, well, the N-word, I
find myself actually nostalgic for a time when a movie was confident
enough in its own sense of humor to throw around the N-word with such
gleeful abandon.  Brooks has enough faith in his audience to expect them
to be in on the joke, and thus understand that he is an
equal-opportunity offender.  
This is a film based squarely on the old Abbie Hoffman quote that
"sacred cows" make the tastiest hamburger, serving up a juicy slab of
USDA Grade A irreverence.  It assaults your sensibilities, yes, but it
does it with a wink and a smile.
Watch this film and try not to take it, or yourself, too seriously.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
BLAZING SADDLES (1974)
Rated PG; running time 93 minutes
Genre: Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0071230
Written by: Andrew Bergman, Mel Brooks, Richard Pryor, Alan Uger,
    Norman Steinberg
Directed by: Mel Brooks
Cast: Cleavon Little, Gene Wilder, Harvey Korman, Madeline Kahn,
    Slim Pickens, Mel Brooks, Alex Karras, David Huddleston,
    Liam Dunn, John Hillerman, George Furth, Claude Ennis Starrett Jr.,
    Richard Collier, Charles McGregor, Dom DeLuise, Burton Gilliam,
    Count Basie
DVD standard features: Widescreen and "Pan And Scan"; scene access.
    Languages & Subtitles: English, French, Spanish
DVD special features: theatrical trailer; cast notes; production notes;
    55-minute interview with Mel Brooks
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsblazsaddles.html
According to the American Film Institute, SOME LIKE IT HOT is The
Funniest Movie Of All Time (or something like that).  And I can diggit,
really I can; I've TiVoEd it to see for myself, when I get a spare
couple of hours.  I defer to the wisdom of my reviewing elders; I'm just
a snot-nosed ponk when it comes to Film Knowledge.  But for me, I can't
think of anything that's made me laugh longer, harder, and more
memorably, than BLAZING SADDLES.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
The old western town of Rock Ridge stands in the way of progress, by way
of the railroad that Attorney General Hedley "Not Hedy, Hedley!" Lamarr
(Harvey Korman) is trying to build, on the backs of Chinese, Black, and
Irish laborers.  Lamarr wants the townfolk to leave Rock Ridge, since
land there will be worth much moolah was the railroad goes through town;
but the townfolk - all of whom are surnamed "Johnson" - aren't ready to
go.  With the help of dimwitted Governor Lepetomane (Mel Brooks), Lamarr
comes up with a plot to make the town so mad they'd be read'ta go...
...enter Sheriff Bart (Cleavon Little).  *Black* Bart.
The Upshot:
I like the tag on back of the DVD box: "Mel Brooks' Comic Saga Of
Cowboys And Imbeciles".  That pretty much covers it.
Having just watched this DVD again (I've lost track of the count at this
point), I'm amazed at how many BLAZING SADDLES lines have made their way
into my everyday life.  The husband wants me to do something that I
don't really mind doing much, but I want to josh with him?: "work work
work work work"!  Asked to do something incredibly stupid at the office,
against my better judgement?: "Mongo only pawn...in game of life"!
Silly "merit" games being played at work?: "Badges? We don' need no
steenkin' badges!"  And many a bruthaman has gone for the double whammy:
"'Scuse me while I whip this out" - and my all-time favorite - "Where
the White wimmen at?"
I don't do those lines justice, I know.  BLAZING SADDLES is as much
about the delivery of great lines by its actors, as it is the writing
and directing itself.  I can't say there's a bad act in the lot, though
it's the supporting cast that really worked this film into a froth [the
Johnson Chorus - David Huddleston (Olson Johnson), Liam Dunn (Rev.
Johnson), John Hillerman (Howard Johnson), George Furth (Van Johnson),
Claude Ennis Starrett Jr. (Gabby Johnson), Richard Collier (Dr. Sam
Johnson) - just brought to mind Greek comedy.  Am I warped, or what?].
Stars Cleavon Little and Gene Wilder (Jim, the Waco Kid) were matched
well, in a way that even Richard Pryor (one of the writers here) didn't
quite capture in later pairings with Wilder; and Little riding into
town, Gucci'd out with Count Basie providing the theme music, is but one
classic moment the underrated actor provided in this film.  But though
they were both great, it was Harvey Korman (in the role of a lifetime),
Alex Karras as Mongo (that horse!), Slim PIckens as Taggart ("You use
your tongue pretter'n a $20 whore"?  I wish I could use that one more
often!), and the late, great Madeline Kahn as bon vivuse Lili Von
Shtupp, who had me rolling on the floor, laughing.
I have page after page of highlighted, underlined, asterisked notes
about the double entendres and sight gags that flew across the screen;
some so quickly, or subtly, that I'm sure I missed them.  I could go on
for hours about BLAZING SADDLES - I won't - but I'd do Kahn's amazing,
Oscar-nominated performance an injustice if I didn't mention how much
her showstopping "I'm Tired" number almost made me bust a gut the first
time I saw it.  "They're always coming and going/and going and
coming/and always too soon"...man, I loved that woman.
Mel Brooks' madness petered out near the end (though the very last scene
redeemed his slip for me.  Whomever came up with that one, thank you!).
And amongst Brooks aficionados, BLAZING SADDLES doesn't seem to hold the
weight that his classic YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN does.  I can dig that, too.
As for me, deliver a Candygram For Mongo, and you'll get me, every time.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
I really shouldn't like this film.  Forget about the slapstick humor;
what with my general movie temperament, my stridency against racial
slurs and misogyny, and my Black Factor bent, this is the type of film
my militant side tells me I really shouldn't like.  If BLAZING SADDLES
had been made in today's climate, I probably wouldn't have liked it
nearly as much.  But to see it in such a light - to only notice the fart
jokes; to only hear the "nigger"s, the "chink"s, the "faggot"s, and the
"rape"s - is to miss The Point entirely.
And what is that Point?  For me, then and now, Mel Brooks' point is that
racists and their ilk are the stupid ones, ripe to be ridiculed and
ignored for the idiots they are.  In BLAZING SADDLES, we don't laugh
_with_ these fools, we laugh *at* them.  For me, that was truly The
Point.
Well, that and "fart jokes are funny as hell".  In the hands of a
master, that is.
DVD Thingies:
After jam-packing so many memorable moments into his 93 minute film, I'm
surprised there was anything left for Mel Brooks to offer - but he (or
at least his representatives) did, in the form of the goodies they've
made available on this DVD.  Along with standards like widescreen (yay!)
and scene access, extras like trilingual languages/subtitles, and the
original theatrical trailer, are provided.  On top of all that, the
55-minute interview with Brooks is a treat unto itself.  Be warned,
though: if you haven't seen BLAZING SADDLES yet, check out the interview
after you watch the movie.  You'll thank me.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I don't think BLAZING SADDLES could be made today; certainly, it can't
be shown on TV without being totally neutered, the guts of it wrenched
out on the censor room floor [and then, what's the point?].  And, given
the caliber of available artists and our general inability to laugh at
ourselves anymore, maybe that's A Good Thing after all.  These days,
that Point would be sitting on the curb, wondering how it got so lost.
BLAZING SADDLES (rating: greenlight):
They don't make 'em like they used to - so thank heavens for DVD.

Author
Brian Koller
"Blazing Saddles" is a parody of the Western movie.
While it is not a particularly good film, it became
the second grossing film of 1974 and has enjoyed a
strong reputation since that time.
The plot has greedy schemer Harvey Korman trying
to become wealthy by grabbing land associated with
a new railroad.  He must drive off the present owners,
who live in the western outpost Rockridge.  Part
of his schemes involves giving them a black sheriff
(Cleavon Little), who soon gets a sidekick (Gene Wilder).
It is hard for a slapstick comedy to be a good film.
The plot isn't much, and the setting exists mostly
to set up gags and jokes.  The film's quality becomes
dependent on how good these gags and jokes are.
How funny they are may be subjective: cowboys farting
after eating a plate full of beans may be hilarious
for a sixth grader, but not so funny for others.
On the other hand, youngsters may miss the humor in
Yiddish-speaking Indians.
Some moments in "Blazing Saddles" are funny.
The theme song (by Mel Brooks) is a riot.
Madeline Kahn's Marlene Dietrich impersonation scores
some points.  Dom DeLuise has a great cameo
as the director of a gay chorus line.  Howard Johnson
owns an ice cream parlor with a sign saying 'one flavor'.
But most of the humor is more silly than effective,
not enough to overcome the thin plot and characters.
Kahn got an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting
Actress for her performance.  Comparing her Dietrich-like
character with the real thing, Dietrich was a lot more
fun in another western comedy, "Destry Rides Again"
from 1939.  Another difference between the two films,
besides the quality of script, cast, plot and characters,
is that "Destry Rides Again" seemed to have a focus,
a direction, while "Blazing Saddles" wanders amiably
but aimlessly.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Cleavon Little; Gene Wilder; Slim Pickens; Harvey Korman & Madeline
Kahn
I'm giving this stinker 0 out of 10. Normally, the worst that I would ever
rate a movie would be 1 out of 10. But the total waste of time that is
Blazing Saddles is, compounded by the fact that this movie is incredibly
offensive, helped me come to the big goose egg. I'm not sure what the hell
Mel Brooks was thinking when he made this thing, or if he was even thinking
at all. Maybe in Mel's little mind a horse being knocked unconscious because
of a punch to the face is funny. In mine, it's not. Or maybe Mel graduated
from the Spike Lee school of filmmaking. Because only the self-righteous Lee
uses the N-word more often in his films than Brooks did in this one. At
least Lee has the smarts to realize that nobody is going to find that term
amusing. Brooks bandies it about like he figures the audience will be
rolling in the aisles every time they hear it. Wrong Mel! I would call you a
boob Mel, but that insults breasts everywhere.
This idiotic attempt at a comedy centers on the evil Lieutenant Governor's
(Harvey Korman) attempts to clear out a town so he can buy up the land cheap
and sell it to the railroad. He sends his goons to run the townsfolk out.
But the town appeals to the governor (Mel Brooks in one of many uninspired,
and unfunny roles) to send them a new sheriff to protect them. The governor
pawns the task off to Korman's character Hedley Lamarr. (I can tell you are
rolling off your chairs right now just thinking of all the humor in that
name.) Lamarr decides to send the town a black sheriff (gasp) in the hopes
that the town will be so disgusted at the prospect of a black man living
among them that they will all just leave. Hold on, I've got to stop while
these gales of laughter pass. It's just too funny. Racism passing as
humor -- gosh why didn't anybody ever think of that one before? Oh wait, I
think somebody might have -- they are called the KKK. I'm not calling Brooks
a racist -- but I am calling him an insensitive bastard who wouldn't know
what was funny if it hit him over the head. But I digress. Anyway, the black
sheriff rides into town amid a flurry of townsfolk using the N-word. Golly,
will the hilarity just never end? He ends up joining forces with a drunk
(Gene Wilder), who happens to be the former fastest gun in the West.
Together, they save the day from evil.
Not one person in this movie gives a decent performance. Wilder looks like
he is recovering from a head injury for most of the movie, and Korman looks
embarrassed to be a part of the movie. OK, he really didn't -- but he should
have. The films star Cleavon Little goes along with the black jokes as if
they were discussing the time of day.
I did not laugh once during this whole sorry experience. I admit to starting
to snicker on a couple of occasions. Actually, the end started to look as if
it was going to have some promise, but alas, it ended up being as crappy as
the rest of the movie. I can say with full confidence that Blazing Saddles
has no redeeming qualities whatsoever. Mel Brooks would be doing the world a
favor if he burned every last copy of this film.

Author
Frankie Paiva
What may be funny to one generation may not be funny to the get one. This goes
for several old films that had current humor that made fun of politics and
events going on at the time. I also imagine that this will happen with several
of the comedies that are being released in the 90s. The thing that's really
interesting is to see how our country has progressed over the years, how things
and attitudes towards people change, and how this is reflected in modern film.
This was the feeling that I got while watching Blazing Saddles, a film that,
when released 1974 probably didn't open to any protest or controversy, but
today would cause great destruction and cause much debate. Black people, the
gay community, women, Indians, there aren't very many people that this film
misses in offending. With all of the offending material should it still be
considered a classic? That's up for you to decide...
Hedley Lamarr (Harvey Korman) is the a wealthy man who wants the area
surrounding the town of Rock Ridge. He wants it because new train tracks are
being put in that area and he wants to cash in on the benefits of having his
own businesses at the train station. His trouble comes in thinking up a way to
scare the people living in Rock Ridge out of town. He can't come up with
anything good until the governor helps him, and the two come up with a
brilliant plan. So he sends a black sheriff named Bart (referred to as nothing
but the n-word here) thinking that all of the townspeople will be so horrified
that they will move far, far away. He's not accepted very well, but some of the
townspeople soon begin to gain his trust. Bart is just too clever to fall for
any of the schemes that Hedley uses to try and get the land. 
When they receive word that Lamarr is rounding up all of the thieves,
cutthroats, and plunderers he can find to form an army and destroy Rock Ridge,
they must come up with a plan. All of the members of the army are pretty stupid
and they easily escape, but not without a few twists and turns. The ending is
so bizarre that you may have to watch it two, even three times to fully grasp
what happens in the end. 
This film is a fine example of how America has changed its beliefs about people
who are different in the past 25 years. It's amazing to think that blacks,
women, homosexuals, and Native Americans were poked so hard at, and so brutally
abused just 25 years ago. Even my parents (who viewed the film with me) were
surprised at some of the things they said and did. On a lighter note, much of
the comedy (while very dark, or very offending) is pretty funny. Gene Wilder
makes an appearance as The Waco Kid, whose hands are quicker than lightning,
and Mel Brooks plays his usual crazy assorted characters. The plot however
wears thin near the end, and the madcap ending isn't very satisfying. While
some will consider it a classic, I don't think it's anywhere near Brooks' best
work. The offending, but funny Blazing Saddles gets ** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains lots of sexual comments including two women
who pretty much give themselves up to any man. The film is filled to the brim
with racism, homophobia, and misogyny. Some language and mild violence also
occur. Good Age: 13 & Up, but only if they know the way the characters treat
each other is not the way to treat someone today.
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html 

Author
Stephen Lang
Mel Brooks' greatest strength, I think, was his lack of discretion. When
watching an early Brooks film, one gets the impression he never wrote (or
directed) a joke he didn't utterly adore. Blazing Saddles, the director's
finest film, is a boisterous, quasi-offensive, absurd, and very often
funny parody of the western genre.
I doubt a summary of plot will do any good here. (I don't think synopses
serve much function in general, to be perfectly honest.) At bottom, the
continuous gags are the narrative. The script was assembled by a team of
four writers, including Brooks and Richard Pryor, and there are hints
throughout the picture of an incompatibility its collaborators had with
one another, manifested by its unevenness.
Brooks' directorial execution often suffers from premature ejaculation; he
has a propensity to spit out the punchline before we've been given the
proper set-up. This is hardly of any consequence, however, because Brooks
isn't looking to evoke any comedic orgasm in his audience. No sir, he
treats burlesque like a chore. So we get a few chuckles instead of the big
laugh.
However, all this bitching aside, I genuinely enjoy the movie. It's a romp
if there ever was one, at breakneck speed. Brooks is so careless, tact
being the first thing thrown from the window, that when you're not
laughing at the jokes, you're snickering at the sheer audacity the
director displays by staging some of these gags. Morever, there a few gems
in the film that would have most likely been abandoned by the more
self-conscious comedian/film-maker.  At times you feel as though your
"taste" is wrestling with the film's silliness, and in my case, the
silliness frequently prevailed.
I liked most of the performances, particularly Gene Wilder's, who so
perfectly plays the "Washed-Up-But-He's Still-Got-It" cowboy. Cleavon
Little is ingratiating as a black sheriff appointed duty in a racist town,
and Madeline Kahn pulls off a delightfully wearied dance number quite
nicely. And Mel in full Indian garb is a sight.
The most severe flaw in Brooks' oeuvre has been his affection for the
genres he parodies. Never do his films bloom into full-fledged lampoons,
this due to a certain respect he has for movies he's mocking. Sure, he
plays with the conventions of the western in Blazing Saddles, but his
satire is more akin to innocuous poking than effective uppercuts.
Blazing Saddles works because it exploits the genre's milieu as a
context for manifold gags; but when his films are parodies and little
more, such as Young Frankenstein and Dracula: Dead and Loving It, they
seem uninspired, impotent, and most deplorable of all, unfunny.
Stephen Lang -- (smj@phoenixat.com)
Premature Thoughts on Films --
(http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/smj/smjindex.html)
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are plenty of reasons why 1970s should be viewed as
the Golden Age of filmmaking. The most obvious of all those
reasons is better quality of movies, at least compared with
present times. That is evident not only in cinema industry
as a whole, but in careers of individual directors. Some
people whose names today are synonymous with mediocre or
downright bad filmmaking actually happened to make very good
films in 1970s, and some of those films are even considered
to be the classics. The best known example of such
phenomenon is the present-day career of Mel Brooks, actor,
screenwriter and director whose comedies in last two decades
were, to say the least, extremely disappointing. The
disappointment is even greater when we compare such letdowns
with the movies Mel Brooks used to make in 1970s. In that
period he created some of the most original and entertaining
comedies in the history of American cinema. One of such
films is BLAZING SADDLES, ultimate western spoof made in
1974.
The plot of the film takes place in the unnamed Western
territory in 1874. Hedley Lamarr (played by Harvey Korman)
is corrupt attorney general in the administration of
incompetent governor William J. Le Petomane (played by Mel
Brooks). Small town of Rock Ridge lies in the path of
encroaching railroad and Lamarr sees that as an opportunity
to make himself wealthy. Bunch of cowboy goons, led by his
trusted lieutenant Taggart (played by Slim Pickens), is sent
to terrorise the town and force citizens to sell all their
land to Lamarr. Instead of fleeing, good folk of Rock Ridge
petition governor to send them a sheriff. Lamarr grants them
their wish in the form designed to offend them - Bart
(played by Cleavon Little), black railroad worker who awaits
execution for striking his racist boss with a shovel. Bart
comes to town, and, naturally, good citizens turn out to be
racist bigots. The only help comes in the form of Jim a.k.a.
The Waco Kid (played by Gene Wilder), town's drunk and
former expert gunslinger that would become his friend and
mentor. Despite everything, Bart manages to do his job and
take care of terrorising cowboys, gradually earning the
respect of the citizens. Frustrated Lamarr uses another
approach and employs femme fatale talents of Lily von
Schtupp (played by Madeline Kahn), bar singer who should
seduce the sheriff. That plan fails when Lily gets seduced
by Bart instead, and Lamarr takes last ditch attempt by
assembling the small army of bandits that would raze the
town to the ground. Bart must use all their ingenuity in
order to save Rock Ridge and gets an absurd, but
nevertheless effective idea how to foil Lamarr's plans.
The screenplay for BLAZING SADDLES was written by five
different people (Brooks, Andrew Bergman, Richard Pryor,
Norman Steinberg, Alan Uger) and because of that plot gets
weak and quality of humour in the movie is uneven. But, in
general, the film is extremely entertaining, and Brooks as
director keeps the good pace, making this film 93 minutes of
pure fun. Brooks as parody maker has one great advantage
over his colleagues in later decades - this film, despite
sometimes loose plot, is actually very tight in terms of
general theme. And Brooks also shows a great fondness for
the object of his parody - the movie is full of references
to classic westerns and Golden Age Hollywood, references
that couldn't be made by someone who wasn't very familiar
with the period and that type of cinema. Brooks also enjoyed
privilege of having truly superb cast at his helm. Cleavon
Little, his lead actor, was actually replacement for Richard
Pryor, too controversial comedian at the time, but his
performance was great. Others were also great, each creating
memorable characters - Gene Wilder as alcoholic sidekick,
Harvey Korman as pathetic over-the-top villain and, finally,
Madeline Kahn in Marlene Dietrich impersonation almost as
iconic as German actress herself. Brooks also gave his
acting contribution in the role of governor that could be
seen as role model for Clinton. Brooks obviously enjoyed
working in this film (as well as the rest of cast, painfully
trying not to burst into laughter in front of cameras) and
also helped write few memorable songs ("The Ballad of Rock
Ridge", "I'm Tired" and "The French Mistake") together with
John Morris. The general result is short, but effective film
that could be seen thousand times and still make people
laugh.
There is another reason why this film should be appreciated,
and it is probably the same reason why 1970s are viewed as
the Golden Age of filmmaking. Only in that period BLAZING
SADDLES could have been made. Two decades earlier the same
film would be crucified as iconoclastic, subversive,
insulting to the memory of pioneers and opposed to all old
American values and other pillars of society. Two decades
later the same film would be equally unacceptable because of
the way it treats the new sacred cows of Hollywood - Jews,
blacks, Indians, women and homosexuals and all the other
"oppressed minorities". Looser standards of censorship,
together with the lack of "political correctness" enabled
Brooks to turn this film into equal-opportunity satire, in
which anyone might get mercilessly ridiculed. From our point
of view, and especially after experiencing low standards of
Hollywood humour in last two decades, viewing experience of
BLAZING SADDLES is quite refreshing. Huge popularity of this
film, still uncontested after so many years, really
shouldn't be that surprising.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
