Title
Review for Monolith Monsters, The (1957)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
The only movie about killer rocks you'll ever see.  It's hard to believe 
such a story pitch was ever greenlighted, and just as unbelievable to 
see that it actually works.  Concept is similar to that of J.G. 
Ballard's creepy novel 'The Crystal World', and execution follows the 
pattern of other more well-known genre films of the time: it has an 
ominous opening narration (usually a prerequisite for these films); a 
desert setting (always popular, since this gives the monster more time 
to roam about killing wayfarers before it reaches the already-alerted 
community nearby); a hero who works for the government with some 
military/scientific background; his girlfriend (subject for possible 
paper: Why are the leading couples never married in 1950s SF/horror 
films?); a quasi-scientific rationale for the monster's creation; and a 
race against time to find a means of defeating the invading creature.  
Where it differs most dramatically is the choice of monster.  It falls 
back on that SF staple, the silicon-based lifeform - if it is a 
lifeform.  The monoliths of the title are spires of obsidian, neither 
living nor dead.  Their only means of movement is to grow into spindly 
obelisks which then splinter and topple forward.  This is one of the few 
monster movies you'll see where you feel nothing whatsoever towards the 
monster (e.g. pity, revulsion, admiration, fear), but perversely it is 
this complete lack of connection that makes the monsters more 
threatening - they are truly alien.
Film manages to maintain interest despite sticking to formula - the 
effects are good (and original); the dialogue isn't embarrassing 
(there's only one silly line, when hero Grant Williams remarks "You're 
absolutely right, it's ridiculous - but that's what they said about the 
wheel when someone first thought of it."); and the time element is used 
effectively to convey a sense of menace.  My favorite moment is when 
Williams and his colleague are alone in a workshop trying to determine 
the cause of the rocks' growth, unaware that it is starting on a major 
scale all around them.  It's too bad the film didn't work more of these 
ironies into the story - for example, the fact that the technology 
they're using to find a way to defeat the monsters is all mineral-based 
(at one point an early victim is kept alive for a while in an iron 
lung!).  The science is just as specious here as in other genre pics, 
but at least this time around it sounds convincing.  Pretty much 
overlooked, but just as deserving of attention as some of those other SF 
'classics' that were around at the time.

