Title
Review for Suspect (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Detective novels tend to have the detective who goes out on his own to
solve a crime.  That works find in books because the author can say in text
what the detective is thinking.  And what the detective is thinking is
important to the plot.  In film you usually are told what the detective is
thinking in one of two ways.  Voice-over first-person narration was popular
in the 1940s detective films.  It may even have become cliche.  (A comedy
currently running on cable called EAT AND RUN would be the final coffin nail
for the voice-over if it was any better known.)  The other approach is to
send someone around with the detective who may or may not be a detective
also.  Holmes had Watson, Smith had Petrie, Chan had Number One Son, Nick
had Nora.  The more interesting the relationship, the better.
     SUSPECT is a mystery/courtroom drama worthy of the old PERRY MASON
show, but the gimmick is that the detective pair cannot be seen together.
Kathleen Riley (played by Cher) is a public defender appointed to the case
of a derelict accused of murder.  Eddie Sanger (played by Dennis Quaid) is a
juror with a quick and logical mind who finds he is better at defending the
derelict that Riley is.  Sanger has sufficient has sufficient reason to
disqualify himself as a juror and have a substitute replace him, just as
would happen if he had appendicitis.  That would free him to help defend the
charged man, which is clearly where his heart is.  But that would mean there
would be no story here.  Instead he and Riley sneak around and she agonizes
over the ethics of the situation.
     The narrative line of SUSPECT is a little unusual.  It begins with four
widely separated plot strands that take a little while to wind together.  So
the opening is, perhaps, confusing or intriguing, depending on your point of
view.  There is a completely extraneous subplot of Sanger lobbying for dairy
price supports on Capitol Hill, which broadens his character a little but
could easily have been trimmed from this unusually long film.  The final
scene of the film, intended to lighten the proceedings, is miscalculated and
is out of character for the serious lawyer Cher plays.
     Cher is supposed to be a competent lawyer in an unusual role for her.
She does better by the role than does the scriptwriter, who has her overlook
some very basic aspects of the evidence, leaving Sanger to point them out to
her.  Along those lines, this is the third film I have seen in about a month
in which a defense lawyer unexpectedly tosses an object to a defendant to
establish left- or right-handedness.  Quaid adds another boyish-enthusiasm
role to a filmography already stocked with them.  Joseph Mantegna, who did
such a superb job in HOUSE OF GAMES is on hand in a less noticeable role as
the prosecuting attorney.
     SUSPECT has a reasonably good plot and some acceptable acting, but some
minor script problems.  Rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Mike Trout
     I caught SUSPECT at a sneak preview last night, so I thought I'd fire off
my opinion.  I can't really describe it without giving away at least some of
the plot, so hit 'n' now if you so choose.  This is a *good movie*.
     SUSPECT is so much like NO WAY OUT it's a little annoying.  It's the same
basic core plot.  A big Washington politico kills a young woman and tries to
cover it up.  Lots of artsy District of Columbia location shots, with the
mandatory Watergate shot and lots of pretty monuments and imposing federal
buildings.  The same feel for power in high places and the misconduct it may
bring.  Although one might suspect that SUSPECT (sorry!:-)) was a direct
rip-off of the success of NO WAY OUT, it's probably just a coincidence since
most of the work on SUSPECT must have been completed by the time NO WAY OUT was
released.  
     As much as I liked NO WAY OUT, I think I like SUSPECT even better.  In NO
WAY OUT the emphasis seemed to be on the convoluted plot line.  In SUSPECT the
emphasis is on the characters.  And the characters work better.  Cher
accomplishes an astounding performance as the public defender called in to
defend a deaf and mute derelict accused of murder.  Her characterization of the
overworked, underpaid P. D. has never been done better.  She brings a
tremendous amount of nervous energy into her character, yet shows excellent
subtleties and complexities.  I identified with her from the beginning.  I
think she showed up Kevin Costner in NO WAY OUT.
     Unfortunately, Dennis Quaid as one of the jurors was disappointing.  His
character does some incredibly bizarre and dangerous things, and we never quite
feel his motivation.  Actually, he *does* have a motivation; he's trying to get
into Cher's pants.  At least that's all I could determine.  Early in the film
we see that Quaid's character is a lobbyist for the dairy industry who will
stoop to any sleazy methods to advance his cause.  There's potential for an
interesting character there, but Quaid keep his character weak.  About all he
does is grin and smirk.
     To this film's credit, there are *no* sleazy sex scenes.  In fact, there's
no sex at all.  It was a *very* refreshing change to sit through a mainstream
Hollywood film without the mandatory sex scene.  We see Quaid take a
congresswoman to his apartment where they *start* to remove clothing--but
there's an immediate fadeout.  Quaid also visit's Cher's apartment and some
kissing begins, but the scene ends so quickly we don't know if it went beyond
kissing or not.  That's it.  It made me think that the sex scenes in NO WAY OUT
were just an added attraction that may have added little to the movie.  Sure,
they were some of the steamiest and best sex stuff Hollywood has produced in
years, but would NO WAY OUT have been a weaker film without them?  Probably
not.
     SUSPECT has excellent supporting work, which I thought was a bit weak in
NO WAY OUT.  Liam Neeson, John Mahoney, and Joe Mantegna did terrific jobs.
Sorry I can't match names with faces (first date--didn't want to stay for the
credits :-)).  The deaf-mute derelict was good although a bit overdrawn in
parts.  The hostile judge couldn't have been better, and Cher's co-worker
should have had more screen time (as should have the deaf-mute derelict).
     SUSPECT is sort of a "hybrid" film, as it incorporates both the
politcal-thriller aspects and standard courtroom drama.  While NO WAY OUT was
set in the back halls of America's intelligence community, SUSPECT is set in
our judicial system.  This makes SUSPECT a little more identifiable, a little
more understandable, and makes the whole film flow like melted butter.
     SUSPECT seems to be one of the first mainstream Hollywood films to deal
with the homeless issue in any detail.  A lot more could have been said, but at
least this film shows us the tip of the iceberg.  After watching SUSPECT, we
are a tiny bit more aware that millions of perfectly normal Americans are
living in cardboard boxes and eating out of dumpsters.
     Some faults:  there's a overuse of the "make the audience jump with a loud
noise" technique.  You expect this in a thriller, but it happened at least a
half-dozen times, often for no reason other than just to keep you jumpy.  And
some of the scenes are too predictable.  You *know* the judge is going to kill
himself when he takes out the shotgun.  You *know* that Cher is going to be
attacked every time she's in some dark hallway.
     SUSPECT's director Peter Yates deserves a lot of credit for keeping this
one in line.  These political-murder-thrillers can get pretty hokey at times,
but SUSPECT moves like a Swiss watch.  Although the film is long (about two
hours) it drags only in a few short spots.  Suspense levels are superior to
those in NO WAY OUT.  The more I think about it, the better I like this film,
and the worse NO WAY OUT looks.  I'd give it three stars--maybe three and a
half.
     For another perspective, the person I was with thought SUSPECT was "okay
but not really all that good."  She felt the predictability factor was
excessive enough to be *very* annoying.  I don't think she felt the suspense
levels I did, and wasn't as thrilled with the pacing as I was.  She did like
the lack of the mandatory sex scene.  Of course, she did say that NO WAY OUT
was "one of the best films I've ever seen."
  --  Michael Trout (miket@brspyr1) =-=-=-=-=-=-= UUCP:brspyr1!miket BRS
Information Technologies, 1200 Rt.  7, Latham, N.Y.  12110  (518) 783-1161

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SUSPECT (1987) is an involving film, but one that is peppered with
actions that are either implausible or at least highly improbable.  If
your ability to suspend disbelief is strong, you will probably find
yourself enjoying some of the courtroom drama and thriller aspects of
the film - numerous flaws and all.  None of the acting is great, but it
is fairly compelling, and director Peter Yates (from THE RUN OF THE
COUNTRY) knows how to make entertaining films.
     In SUSPECT, a Washington DC judge commits suicide and his
secretary is killed.  A homeless person Carl Wayne Anderson (Liam
Neeson from ROB ROY) is accused of killing her for the nine dollars in
her purse.  Anderson is assigned to overworked public defender Kathleen
Riley (Cher).  Anderson attacks and hurts her as well as some of the
guards.  Soon however, they find out he is "deaf and dumb" and a
Vietnam vet with a troubled past.  He never learned to sign since he
had no one to talk to.
     The show switches to the capital where lobbyist Eddie Sanger
(Dennis Quaid from THE RIGHT STUFF) does everything including sleeping
with a Congresswoman to get her vote.  Sanger is called to be on
Anderson's jury.  Although he tries to get off, he is unsuccessful.  In
a show full of unbelievable actions, he falls for Riley and starts
investigating the case on his own.  He meets with her on the sly to
share his ideas on how to approach the case.  Sure.
     Meanwhile, Riley is being stalked by a religious fanatic and
homeless person.  He threatens to kill her with a knife.  Making her
life equally miserable is a Republican judge, Judge Matthew Helms (John
Mahoney from PRIMAL FEAR), who for some mysterious reason wants the
trial over quickly with no delays no matter how valid Riley's reasons.
Yes, this show is quite predictable.  If a Hollywood screenwriter makes
a point of labeling someone a Republican, the wardrobe department might
as well have him wear a black hat through the rest of the picture.
     The music by Michael Kamen is sappy.  Whenever the director needs
extra tension, and Eric Roth's script can't provide enough, Yates turns
to the composer to crack up the violins.  Actually, the script gets
almost laughable at points.  After complaining about not seeing a movie
in a year and not being able to have a kid because she is too busy to
date, Riley laments, "I spend all of my day with murders and rapists,
and what's really crazy, I like them."
     Even with the ridiculous script, I managed somehow to like the
performances by Cher and Quaid.  One of my favorite small actors Joe
Mantegna (from HOUSE OF GAMES) plays prosecutor Charlie Stella.  As for
Neeson, this is one of my least favorite of his films.  His performance
in it does nothing for me.
     I could probably write an article just on the flaws of the show.
Among those not already mentioned are the fact that Riley somehow
immediately knows that Anderson is left-handed.  She also talks to him
expecting to be heard when she is not looking at him.  Since he doesn't
read lips and can't hear, this makes it a little difficult.
Nevertheless, he seems to be able to hear part of what she is saying
anyway.
     Typical of the show, the ending comes out of left field.  A fun
show to watch in parts, but one where they feel the audience is not
smart enough to see through all of the ridiculous contrivances in the
plot.
     SUSPECT runs a little long at 1:58.  It is rated R for some
violence and a little bad language.  It would be fine for any teenager
and maybe kids a bit younger.  This is a somewhat enjoyable but
frustrating show where there are just too many unbelievable parts for
me to be able to recommend it.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
