Title
Review for Race the Sun (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     If the idea of hearing "Rocks You Like Hurricane" played during a
racing scene doesn't gag you, then this is probably the film to see.
Halle Berry (who gets top billing!) and James Belushi star in this
dopey, feel-good family drama about a group of underprivileged Hawaiian
high-schoolers who design, build, and race a solar-powered car.  First,
in competition in Kona, and, then, as part of the 2000-mile, six-day
World Solar Challenge in Australia.
     Inspired by the true story, RACE IS SUN is amiable enough.  Adults
may fidget, but their kids won't mind the undercooked characters or the
sparse scientific detail.  (With seemingly no background, the class
builds a solar car.  Just like that!) The scenery is quite nice, and, as
honest happy endings go, any non-violent film that causes an audience of
kids to erupt into cheers is probably worth the stock it's printed on.
Now, if only someone could explain the odd resemblance, of late, between
James Belushi and Steven Seagal...
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Dr. David Rezachek
This movie is a highly fictionalized account of the exploits of an Hawaii 
high school (Konawaena Intermediate and High School on the Big Island of 
Hawaii) in the 1990 World Solar Challenge in Australia.
The most disappointing and offensive part of this movie was the way the 
writer denigrated the contributions of the sponsors.  Without the 
considerable contributions and efforts of the sponsors and program 
organizers, Konawaena's participation in the Hawaii solar car program 
(the Ka'ahele La ["Tour of the Sun" in Hawaiian] Interscholastic 
PV-Powered Vehicle Competition) and the 1990 World Solar Challenge would 
not have been possible.  None of these sponsors or individuals were 
acknowledged for their contributions to this effort.
Herb Squires, who is billed as one of the co-producers of this movie, was 
the one individual most responsible for the ultimate demise of the Hawaii 
solar car program and one of the few individuals who made money off the 
considerable efforts of others.
The movie is marginally entertaining and not worth the price of 
admission.  Wait for the video, if you feel you must see it.
For those who are truly interested in a factual account of the Ka'ahele 
La Program and Konawaena's participation, I am in the process of writing 
a book.  The tentative title of this book is "Winning at Any Cost."  
I plan to publish this book both in hard copy and on my own personal web 
page.
