Title
Review for Protector, The (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chris Casino
Cast: Jackie Chan, Danny Aiello, Roy Chiao, Bill Wallace, Kim Bass, Saun
Ellis.
Crew: Music by Ken Thorne, Produced by David Chan, Written and Directed
by James Glickenhaus.
If you likened Jackie Chan and guys like Steven Seagal, Jean-Claude
Van Damme, Stallone and Schwarzenegger to drinks, Jackie Chan would
be a well perserved, ice cold can of V8 juice while the rest of
those guys would be a bunch of eight day old expired milk.
That goes ditto when you compare Chan's writing and directing style
with that of the director of this film, The Protector.
And when James Glickenhaus attempted to make him into an
Asian Dirty Harry, the end result is totally wrong.
Jackie plays Billy Wong, a tough, unstable (!) New
York City (!!) cop who gets in trouble with his
Captain. He is partnered up with Danny Garoni
(a wasted Danny Aiello), and they are sent to
Hong Kong after the wealthy Laura Shapiro is
kidnapped by Triad drug smugglers. That's the plot in
a nutshell, and to be frank, the plot sucks.
It's a mistake to make Jackie Chan into Clint Eastwood
because the whole appeal of him is he's different than
all these American guys who say three words (badly)
and kill five hundred people. He's not a typical
action hero. He's an ordinary man fighting to protect his
friends, and that's the way life is. Movies like this
are not the way life is. Here we have swearing,
nudity, loads of bullets, etc. None of which can usually
be found in an actual Jackie Chan movie.
If the producers had hired Jackie's old pal John Woo to rewrite the
script and give the story depth, soften Billy Wong's
character (as Jackie Chan later did in the Asian version, which 
I intend to look for to see if it is as good as I've heard)
and direct the film, it might've been halfway decent.
With Glickenhaus sitting on the director's chair,
the film's only saving grace are one or two decent fight scenes.
John Woo would've let Jackie control the action
scenes like he should and, a good writer like him
might've come up with a better plot.
Someone else once said the worst part of the movie
was teaming Jackie with Danny Aiello. While I agree
that they should have teamed Jackie up with a
character actor closer to his age so the male
bonding aspects were a little more
realistic (I just don't buy a thirty-one year old
Asian kid and a fifty-four year old Italian guy
rubbing elbows), I don't think you could leave Aiello
out entirely. I would've hired someone Jackie's
age to be his partner and had Aiello be the main villain.
I also happen to feel they should've let Jackie be his
usual comedic self here because American audiences
had never seen a kung fu comedian before at the time,
and maybe if they did, he would've broken through here
a lot sooner.
Jackie Chan's frustrations with the movie led him
to make POLICE STORY. I have since seen that,
and I don't have to tell you which of these two
I would pick if I had to. I was never bored for one
minute watching that movie.
After POLICE STORY, I watched RAMBO. I thought to myself,
"What an injustice. Asians have action stars like Jackie
Chan who has some actual screen presence and would
bend over backwards for their audiences while 
we're stuck with guys like this who most likely only get roles
because they blackmail executives!"
