Title
Review for Jack (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     JACK is Francis Ford Coppola's unusual homage to childhood.
Writers James DeMonaco and Gary Nadeau borrow an overused plot device,
the adult in a child's body, to conjure up the terrors and joys of
being ten years old again.  Penny Marshall's BIG staring Tom Hanks did
this so much better.  The script, is so much more intelligent in BIG
and the acting there is believable.  In fact, if you want to see a
excellent show about kids around the preteen age, WELCOME TO THE
DOLLHOUSE is still in the theaters and is ten times better than JACK.
     In JACK, Karen (Diane Lane) and Brian Powell (Brian Kerwin) have
their first baby.  Jack (Robin Williams) comes early during a costume
ball.  Watching Brian get his tin woodsman suit through the metal
detector at the hospital is funny.  Does your hospital have a metal
detector?  But I digress.  Many of the gags in the show do work.  Most
however are nothing more than recycled bathroom humor jokes you can
find in any low budget kid's movie like PORKY'S.
     Soon Karen and Brian find out that their son has cells that are
growing at four times the normal rate and that when he is ten, he will
have the body, but not the mind or maturity, of a forty year old.  The
show then jumps to Jack at age forty when he is ready leave his home
schooling by Lawrence Woodruff (Bill Cosby) and go to a classroom full
of kids his age albeit not his size.
     Immediately one of the fatal flaws of the show becomes obvious.
Robin Williams does little more than a low key version of his comedy
routine.  It is so reserved that it is only infrequently funny, but
most of all it is not believable.  He acts more like he is six, but
mainly it is just Robin Williams doing his shtick.  I did not buy it
for a minute.  Having said that, the show manages to be funny some
times and poignant others.
     We have a sixty pound seven year old with limbs like tornadoes
when asleep.  When he has a bad dream and jumps in bed with us, it is
not easy, but it is nothing compared to the similar episode in JACK.
Imagine a two hundred pound man and his teddy bear taking a flying leap
to jump between you and your spouse.  This scene really worked as did
the one where the losers invite Jack to play basketball on their side.
     Many of the scenes are sensitive and touching.  The best of these
is the scene where Jack falls for his teacher and can not understand
why she can't be his date to the dance since they are the same size.
Gosh, it would be so easy since his mom would be happy to provide
transportation.
     The best piece of dialog in the picture comes in preparation to
the classic essay question.  Jack, looking very sad says, "What do I
want to be when I grow up?  Alive."
     Way too much of the show is either gross, in poor taste or both.
The boys eat concoctions of worms, spaghetti, toothpaste, you name it.
This scene looks like one of those now illegal fraternity hazings.
     The boys engage in contests of who can let off the worse spelling
gas, and then they set it on fire.  They even get Bill Cosby to join in
on this "fun" of theirs.
     Sometimes sexual relations are treated with respect or in good
humor in the show, but usually not.  There is a scene in a bar that is
in poor taste.  Most unbelievable is a scene where one of the kids in
Jack's class tells the teacher that he wants to be a gynecologist when
he grows up.  She is then stupid enough to ask why, and he answers
because of you.  Think he gets sent to the principal?  Oh no, she just
smiles politely at him as if those sexual references are just fine in
her fifth grade class.
     Although this is a sad show with many flaws, it manages to have a
life affirming ending.  Don't give up on the picture as most of the
critics have.  It does have it moments.
     JACK runs 1:53.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual references and
innuendo.  There is very brief nudity but no sex, violence or bad
language other than the bathroom humor.  The show would be fine for
most kids six and up, but I can not figure out the target audience.
This was a show we were going to skip, but Jeffrey (age seven) wanted
to see it.  He gives it one thumbs up, but one thumbs sideways for
having kissing in the movie.  The sexual references might as well have
been in Lithuanian since they went right over his head.  I can not
bring myself to recommend the picture, but there are some interesting
parts.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jim Maguire
JACK
Starring : Adam Zolodin, Fran Drescher, Bill Cosby and Robin Williams. 
Directed by : Francis Ford Coppola.
TIN CUP
Starring : Kevin Costner, Rene Russo, Don Johnson and Cheech Marin. 
        Comebacks. They mean something. A comeback can be better than
it would be if the director or the star of the movie wouldn't have had
two good back-to-back films.
        Both Ron Shelton (COBB) and Francis Ford Coppola needed a
comeback. Coppola needed one because he hasn't made a good film in
ages, all the way back to APOLOCALYPSE NOW. Shelton, whose disaterous
COBB made my top 5 worst films of the year, looked like it was made by
a wild crazy lunatic who had no idea on the subject of filming. They
both put forth movies now, TIN CUP for Shelton, and JACK for Coppola.
It would seem that Shelton, whose name is not as catchy in Hollywood as
Coppola's, would have a long way to come. But, Coppola panicked at the
last second, and threw some hypier-sad fluff at us.  Shelton played it
cool, and therefore his movie just works. It works on every level.
        Speaking about comebacks, need I mention Kevin Costner and Bill
Cosby. Costner hasn't made a good film since DANCES WITH WOLVES, and he
hasn't made anything thrilling, (not counting pictures with budgets
over 150 million) since FIELD OF DREAMS, and even then he had to use a
character actors help in James Earl Jones. With bombs like WATERWORLD
and THE WAR, Costner HAS BEEN blown out. He's nothing in the Hollywood
arena.  He only got in this film because of Shelton, who worked with
him on BULL DURHAM. Bill Cosby, who never can explore much in any
character, needed some variety to boost his upcoming ONE FOOT IN THE
GRAVE based on the British comedy. They both freeze out here.
        JACK is about two parents who have a baby, and find out that he
is ageing four times too fast. So, by the time JACK is ten, he'll have
the body, and the body organs of a forty-year old. He's tutored by Bill
Cosby, who's the only real reason this film is close to surviving.
Cosby's very charimatic, surprisingly subtle, and if anything, cool.
Of course, who else to play the forty year old that Robin Williams.
Williams is in the middle of a great stretch of his career, playing
characters that are totally centered around their comic tension, and
nothing around sentimentality. JACK fails for this reason.  Williams
yells and screams, and looks and sounds like a ten year old Jodie
Foster in NELL. So, Williams shouldn't be there. He's wasted his talent
playing someone with too much well, character, that he ends up losing
the character. Was this supposed to be an Oscar attempt for Williams?
Was this supposed to bring him to the top? THE BIRDCAGE did that. I
expected everything that was in MRS. DOUBTFIRE, THE BIRDCAGE, and
JUMANJI combined. That was a high expectation, but I got none of it.
Also, Williams doesn't play JACK right, either. Does your ten-year old
child crawl into a slide underport and ask her teacher if she wants a
gummi-bear? Does he jump up and down, get scary dreams and leap into
your bed at night. Jack eventually meets a friend. How nice, Jack gets
a friend. Adam Zolodin daftly plays 'the friend' role, with his very
ditzy mother played by Fran Drecsher. The movie's real arrogance is
that it actually expects us to laugh, cry and get touched. So much for
that idea.

JACK : D+
The review above was posted to the
rec.arts.movies.reviews newsgroup (de.rec.film.kritiken for German reviews).
The Internet Movie Database accepts no responsibility for the contents of the
review and has no editorial control. Unless stated otherwise, the copyright
belongs to the author.
Please direct comments/criticisms of the review to relevant newsgroups.
Broken URLs inthe reviews are the responsibility of the author.
The formatting of the review is likely to differ from the original due
to ASCII to HTML conversion.

Related links: index of all rec.arts.movies.reviews reviews


Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Robin Williams, Diane Lane, Jennifer Lopez, Brian Kerwin, Bill
Cosby, Adam Zolotin, Fran Drescher.
Screenplay:  James DeMonaco, Gary Nadeau.
Director:  Francis Ford Coppola.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Once upon a time, Francis Ford Coppola was one of the most revered
directors in the world, the creator of classic films like THE GODFATHER,
THE GODFATHER PART 2 and THE CONVERSATION, part of an American renaissance
of the 1970s which included names like Scorsese, Spielberg and Altman.
Then came films which politely could be called ambitious failures -- ONE
FROM THE HEART, THE COTTON CLUB, TUCKER: THE MAN AND HIS DREAM -- and
mixed critical reception for his third GODFATHER film and BRAM STOKER'S
DRACULA.  It has been four years since DRACULA, more time to wonder if
Coppola could once again summon that special something.  What he has
summoned instead is JACK, a frustrating patchwork of slapstick and
sentimentality in which almost everything feels forced.
     JACK begins with expectant parents Karen (Diane Lane) and Brian
Powell (Brian Kerwin) receiving an unexpected surprise at a costume party:
Karen goes into labor, despite being only ten weeks pregnant.  However,
the baby she delivers appears to be full-term, leading doctors to conclude
that he has a genetic anomaly which causes him to age four times faster
than normal.  Indeed, when Jack Powell (Robin Williams) is ten years old,
he looks like a forty year old man, and is kept at home to be instructed
by a tutor (Bill Cosby).  But Jack longs for the company of other
children, and finally his parents allow him to enter the fifth grade.
Naturally, he is treated as a freak by his classmates, but when he is
accepted by a boy named Louie (Adam Zolotin), Jack begins to learn what it
means to have friends.
     At least that's what I think he learns.  One of the reasons JACK
feels so muddled is that it is a film without a clear sense of who its
vibrant character is.  In films of this type, where someone who is
"different" teaches those who are "normal" some Valuable Life Lessons(TM), 
the main character usually isn't that character, but rather the catalyst
who inspires others to change.  Those others might be Jack's classmates,
who come to accept and even to love him, and Louie gets a heartfelt and
inspiring speech to share those feelings.  At other times it appears that
Jack is supposed to be the character who is meant to change; he too gets a
heartfelt and inspiring speech.  Diane Lane doesn't get a heartfelt and
inspiring speech, just plenty of heartfelt looks to tell us that she is
learning to be less protective of Jack.  There is no law which states that
only one character in a film can change, but we have to know with whom we
are meant to identify, and Coppola spends so much time being heartfelt
that he fails to provide a definite protagonist.
     That leaves JACK as a message film in which there is no clear
message.  According to Louie's speech, it is that we should all remain
kids at heart; according to Jack's speech, it is that we should live each
day to the fullest.  JACK will quite naturally inspire a great deal of
comparison to 1988's BIG, but BIG was a pure fantasy which never felt the
need to underline its lessons.  Coppola and screenwriters James DeMonaco
and Gary Nadeau try to incorporate scenes of boys-will-be-boys playfulness
(and who among us hasn't been initiated into a club by lighting our bodily
gases or eating disgusting food mixtures), as if to tell us "we're just
having fun here."  That might be easier to accept if they hadn't also
overwhelmed simple moments like Jack calculating his mortality with the
uberdramatic voice-over, "What do I want to be when I grow up?  Alive."
     JACK's ace-in-the-hole would seem to be never-quite-grown-up Robin
Williams in the lead role, but there is something about his performance
which feels uncertain.  Admittedly it is an extremely challenging part --
he's playing not just a 10-year-old, but a maladjusted 10-year-old -- but
Williams more often seems to be acting like a 6-year-old, just a step away
from the baby-talk character he often used in his stand-up comedy
routines, while his 10-year-old co-stars often act like they're 16.
Williams is a sharp, quick-witted performer, and he always seems to be
struggling when he's asked to play whimsical (remember TOYS, or BEING
HUMAN?).
     Coppola certainly knows how to make a good-looking film, with some
clever touches like shots of Jack's light-up sneakers.  But JACK usually
comes off as sentiment without sense, and comedy without a foundation.
Once upon a time, Francis Ford Coppola appeared to know all there was to
know about making movies.  Now, he doesn't even seem to know JACK.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Last seen making trashy vampire movies, Francis Ford Coppola
directs this low-powered, light-hearted drama about a boy with the body
of an adult.  Sound familiar?  This time the magic is medical:  an
infant who is growing at four times the rate of normal.  Cut ahead to
age ten and Jack Powell, played by Robin Williams, looks like your
average forty-year-old adult.  (Or, with those hairy arms, your average
forty-year-old lumberjack.) Jack is a boy in a suburban bubble.  He's
tutored at home, his mom doesn't work, and he's given everything he
wants, *except* the chance to play with kids his own age.  So what
happens?  Jack Goes to School, where he experiences a bunch of new
things, from alienation to acceptance to, finally, awareness about
himself and his condition.
     Though ultimately unsuccessful as a message movie-- the moral of
the story is...  people get old?  Well, duh-- JACK is endearing enough.
And entirely recommendable.  Given plenty of room to act his age, Robin
Williams delivers a performance that is warm, funny, and far from
ingratiating.  No Oscar baiting here; not in a movie featuring such
frivolity as fart lighting.  (Suggested story idea for CHAIN REACTION 2:
Keanu Reeves spends two hours fleeing his own flatulence.  Sorry.) The
pokey pacing, however, makes for a bit of a long sit.  As does the
occasionally gushing sentiment and the ever-dawning realization that the
story isn't going anywhere in particular.  Except, perhaps, as fodder
for the next Mel Brooks spoof.  (Suggested title: LARGE.) With strong
supporting work from Bill Cosby, Fran Drescher, and Michael McKean.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Zak Forsman
Directed by FRANCIS FORD COPPOLA
Written by JAMES DEMONACO and GARY NADEAU
During the 1970's, Francis Ford Coppola had brought us THE GODFATHER, THE
CONVERSATION, THE GODFATHER PART II and APOCALYPSE NOW. All were nominated
for Best Picture and the two GODFATHER films each won their Oscars.
Coppola made these back to back to back to back. They are arguably some of
the best films that ever came out of American cinema. Then in 1980, with
the release of ONE FROM THE HEART (the straw that broke the camel's back)
Coppola began a decade long run of mediocrity. He stopped writing his own
work and the scope of his pictures narrowed. Not that a film's scope is a
determinant of quality, he co-wrote the screenplay for RUMBLE FISH which
is probably his best film during the 1980's, but Coppola was proving
himself a master of the epic film. Only in 1990 with the release of THE
GODFATHER PART III did he prove that he hadn't lost his screenwriting
touch--he just wasn't using it. PART III was rightfully nominated for Best
Picture but lost out to the unfortunate Year of Kevin Costner. After that
he made BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA which is only recently gathering a cult
following. Now in 1996, he brings us JACK.
Jack Powell, played by Robin Williams, is ten years old. However, because
of a mysterious Hollywood disease, he grows at four times the natural
rate.  Because of this he was born, fully developed, after a two month
pregnancy and now looks like a forty year old man. His parents overprotect
him. They hire him a tutor, Bill Cosby, so that he doesn't have to go to
school. Eventually, it is the tutor that insists Jack be allowed to attend
public school and meet kids his own age. They decide to give it a shot and
the story continues from there.
Too often the written word, something the audience experiences indirectly,
is a film's weakest link. The scribes for JACK, James DeMonaco and Gary
Nadeau, have written scenes that are both effectively comical and
touching, but the film is best when words are put aside and Coppola begins
telling a bit of story through his mastery of visuals. The dialogue is at
times uninspired and predictable, and that's unfortunate. However, there
are plenty of great moments created by Coppola and Robin Williams that
keep the film afloat. And with the closing of the film, we are brought to
tears--at least I was.
For example, Francis Ford Coppola directed a scene in JACK where Robin
Williams watches a butterfly spring from a cocoon. The scene is full of
wonder and the inherent symbolism is more than apparent. Later, presumably
the same butterfly lands on Robin's windowsill. He picks it up and tries
to set it free, but it dies in his hands. Neither of these scenes contain
any dialogue and more is said about JACK at these times than any other.
This is the work of a great director. Coppola also makes great use of
time-lapse photography and another similar effect that involves a sunbeam
moving across the room during a regular motion shot. These are my favorite
moments in the film.
Robin Williams does an equal--if not better--job of playing a child in a
man's body than Tom Hanks did in BIG. The difference is Williams'
character suffers from intense psychological difficulties once he begins
to realize how quickly his life will end. It's a thoughtful performance by
Williams.  It's also an inspiring one. The rest of the cast is fine. All
the kids are great and even Fran Drescher is good. Bill Cosby is sweet,
but again, the keys to the film's success are Williams and Coppola.
While Coppola was shooting GARDENS OF STONE, his eldest son was killed in
a boating accident. Just a few months later, Coppola's granddaughter was
born. She will never know her father first-hand. The film is dedicated to
her. I can see why Coppola chose to do this film. And although the writing
wasn't up to snuff, I can't deny that I watched the credits through teary
eyes. 
Ratings are based on the four-star system.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robin Williams, Diane Lane, Brian Kerwin, Jennifer Lopez, 
      Adam Zolotin, Bill Cosby, Fran Drescher 
Director: Francis Ford Coppola 
Producers: Ricardo Mestres, Fred Fuchs, and Francis Ford Coppola 
Screenplay: James DeMonaco & Gary Nadeau 
Cinematography: John Toll 
Music: Michael Kamen 
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures 
     It strikes me that there are certain similarities between JACK and 
PHENOMENON.  Both use relative innocents as their central characters.  
Both attempt to attract a mature audience.  And, most importantly, both 
offer drama-based alternatives to the relentless action films that have 
come to characterize the summer of 1996.  However, while PHENOMENON 
failed because of poor scripting, JACK is an unqualified success.  If 
there's going to be a sleeper hit this summer, JACK is a reasonable 
candidate.  This feel-good motion picture is intelligently written and 
expertly directed -- qualities which many similar movies cannot boast.  
Cross BIG with FORREST GUMP, and you get an idea of where JACK's appeal 
lies. 
     The premise for JACK, although seemingly simple, is riddled with 
potential problems -- nearly all of which the script not only addresses, 
but answers without a whiff of condescension.  Jack is born when his 
mother is only ten weeks pregnant.  The doctors are immediately aware 
that something strange is going on.  Eventually, they arrive at an 
explanation.  The child has an internal clock that's ticking four times 
faster than usual.  So, by the time Jack turns ten, he appears like a 
40-year old man (Robin Williams). 
      Until the fall of his eleventh year, Jack has been taught by a 
tutor (Bill Cosby).  But, after careful consideration, his mother (Diane 
Lane) and father (Brian Kerwin) agree that he should give public school 
a try, despite children's' propensity for name-calling and finger-
pointing.  So, one morning, Jack ventures into Nathaniel Hawthorne 
Elementary School to meet his fifth grade teacher, Miss Marquez 
(Jennifer Lopez), and his classmates. 
     The script for JACK, credited to James DeMonaco and Gary Nadeau, is 
a well-balanced mix of drama and comedy.  It's rarely maudlin, and 
manages to be affecting without heavy-handed manipulation.  The film has 
an excellent grasp of what it's like to be in fifth grade.  Jack endures 
all the painful isolation of a "different" child, but, gradually, as he 
makes friends (by dominating schoolground basketball games and offering 
to buy PENTHOUSE magazines), he begins to fit in.  It's perhaps an 
idealized vision of elementary school, but there are enough aspects of 
reality not to jolt our suspension of disbelief. 
     One of the most difficult issues JACK has to deal with is the title 
character's rapid aging.  If he looks like he's forty at ten, that means 
he'll be lucky to live past twenty.  When his teacher asks him what he 
wants to be when he grows up, Jack's answer is succinct and poignant:  
"Alive."  Mr. Woodruff, Jack's tutor, describes him this way:  "You're a 
shooting star amongst ordinary stars... A shooting star passes quickly, 
but, while it's here, it's the most beautiful thing you'll ever want to 
see."  The movie never shies away from confronting Jack's mortality. 
     Robin Williams is entirely believable as a ten-year old.  He has 
all the mannerisms and vocal inflections perfected -- whining when he 
doesn't get his way, pulling at his shirts, adjusting his pants, and so 
forth.  It's almost as if he regressed back into childhood for the 
duration of filming.  (Then again, has Williams ever really grown up?)  
The only recent movie where an adult so perfectly emulated a child was 
BIG, and, indeed, JACK has much in common with the Tom Hanks feature, 
both in terms of subject matter and broad audience appeal.  Williams 
brings a lot of humor to his portrayal, but, with Francis Ford Coppola 
in control, the comic's eccentricities are kept carefully under reign, 
and this results in a near-perfect performance. 
     The supporting cast is surprisingly solid.  Diane Lane, Brian 
Kerwin, and Fran Drescher are not known as strong actors, but each is 
equal to their secondary roles here.  Bill Cosby, playing a fifty-
something man with a lot of child inside, steals several scenes.  
Jennifer Lopez has a touching moment where she is forced to turn down 
Jack's offer to accompany him to a school dance.  And Adam Zolotin is 
good as Louis, Jack's best friend. 
     JACK has something to offer just about everyone.  It's good-
natured, funny, heartwarming, and capable of being viewed on more than 
one level.  Children will relate to JACK differently than their parents, 
although, with its "soft" PG-13, the film isn't for the very young.  
With the release of COURAGE UNDER FIRE a few weeks ago, and now JACK, 
this summer's theatrical options are brightening.  For Robin Williams, 
don't be surprised if his name is mentioned early next year when Academy 
Award Nominations are given out.  JACK deserves that sort of 
recognition. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
