Title
Review for Ethan Frome (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Liam Neeson, Patricia Arquette, Joan Allen
Director:  John Madden
Producer:  Stan Wlodkowski
Screenplay:  Richard Nelson (based on the novel by Edith Wharton)
Music:  Rachel Portman
Released by Miramax Films
     When we first meet Ethan Frome (Liam Neeson), he is a broken man
hobbling around town.  The new preacher takes an interest in him and
soon learns the tragic tale of Frome's life.  Years ago, as a younger
and more hale man, Ethan married Zeena (Joan Allen), perhaps
mistakenly, as "compensation" for her giving up part of her life to
nurse Ethan's mother.  Zeena, however, is a sickly woman and becomes
susceptible to almost every kind of illness.  When she proves unable to
adequately keep house, she calls on a poor cousin, Mattie (Patricia
Arquette), to come to help.  What Zeena cannot foresee is the
attraction that develops during the course of a year between her
husband and Mattie.
     While Richard Nelson's script for ETHAN FROME is faithful to the
overall tone and general storyline of the novel, there are some
differences.  The identity of the character probing into Ethan's past
has been changed.  In the book he is an engineer; in the film, a
preacher.  The other substantial alteration involves the eventual depth
of Ethan and Mattie's relationship.
     The plot is not intricate.  It contains elements of many
genres--mystery, drama, and romance--but none of these are overplayed.
In many ways, the strength of ETHAN FROME comes largely from its
essential simplicity.  There are no convoluted subplots to muddy the
waters and no large gallery of characters to keep us wondering who this
person or that person is.  We are given an opportunity to focus on
three people living one story.  We understand very quickly who they are
and what's going on.
     The greatest asset of ETHAN FROME, however, and the most essential
to successfully transferring the story from the written page to the
screen, is the acting.  Liam Neeson, an actor of ability, is
astoundingly convincing in this role.  Everything about him, from his
mimicking of the injured man's walk to the pained facial expressions in
numerous close-ups, shows how in touch he was with the role he was
playing.  Neeson took a serious reduction in pay to play the title
character and, as an audience, we are forever grateful for that.
     Patricia Arquette is not the most famous of the Arquettes, but her
performance here is more sincere and heartfelt than anything Rosanna
has ever done.  She has an expressive face.  There are scenes between
her and Neeson where dialogue is not needed.  An unlikely couple they
might be, but the chemistry between them works.
     Joan Allen has the role of the antagonist: a shrill, unpleasant
woman eaten away by sicknesses of the body and soul.  The creative team
behind the movie attempted to make Zeena less obviously wicked than she
is in the book.  Admittedly, they succeed in providing excellent
motivation for her nastiness, but the audience doesn't develop much
empathy--or sympathy--for her.  She is still the villain.
     ETHAN FROME is a deeply moving film.  Much of its power comes from
an unwillingness to hurry events along.  Everything is done
slowly--each scene takes its time to unfold.  Even so, the running time
of the movie is no longer than that of an average film, despite the
fact that its content is far from "average".
     This is not a movie for children.  Even though it is free from all
profanity, nudity, and overt sex, ETHAN FROME is not a good family film
because, frankly, those of a younger age will find it dreadfully
boring.  The picture is adult in nature, because it takes a mature
outlook--as well as a suitable attention span--to allow yourself to
become immersed in the magic that director John Madden has woven with
the help of a superlative cast.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The young Reverend Smith (Tate Donovan) in 1993's ETHAN FROME 
leaves his cosmopolitan Boston to take up his new post in a cold, 
isolated New England town.  A generous man, the Reverend gives a job to 
the town's pariah, Ethan Frome.  Ethan, a cripple who shuffles with a 
terrible limp, has one injured arm, and slumps to one-side like a 
hunchback, is a mysterious man who lives in the most remote cabin in the 
village.  People part like the Red Sea when he comes walking by.
     Shown in flashback before the accident that maimed Ethan, we learn 
Ethan's story.  Ethan was married to a woman, Zeena, who had "just about 
every sickness known to mankind."  After five years, Zeena arranges for 
their young and attractive relative, Mattie Silver, to come to live with 
them so she can take care of Zeena.  Slowly Ethan begins to fall in love 
with the warm and lively Mattie, whom the cold and distant Zeena 
resents.
     Liam Neeson, in a tender and understated performance, plays Ethan.  
A man with a promising future as an engineer, he has to give it up and 
his dream to move to Florida when he gets tied down with a sickly wife 
and an uncompleted education.  Liam gives a carefully constructed 
characterization of a long-suffering man who has relegated his life's 
ambitions to his wife's needs.
     In a spirited portrayal of Mattie, Patricia Arquette shows her as a 
simple girl swept away by the romance of the situation.  In close 
confines with a handsome married man, whose wife is a hypochondriac and 
a constant complainer, Mattie is naturally tempted.
     Joan Allen, who plays the weak and sickly better than almost 
anyone, is Zeena, Ethan's insufferable wife.  Allen's Zeena is extremely 
easy to hate and despise.  Zeena is so irritating that even the most 
fervent anti-adulterer will empathize with Ethan's need to abandon her 
and run to Mattie for love and companionship.
     Director John Madden from HER MAJESTY, MRS.  BROWN has just the 
right delicate hand not to overwhelm the subtleties of the story, based 
on the Edith Wharton novel.  The sad and bitter tale set in a bleak but 
lovely countryside has graceful Rachel Portman music to accompany the 
images.  
     The handsome cinematography uses the snow-crusted landscapes to 
maximum advantage.  The snow becomes both the most beautiful and the 
most frightening aspect.  Freezing cold, it makes Ethan's Florida dream 
palpably desirable and yet far removed from any possible reality for 
him.
     A tragedy that turns on events as small as a broken vase ends soon 
after the flashback gets to the dramatic recollection of the accident.  
Even when you know it is coming, it still takes your breath away.
     ETHAN FROME runs 1:50.  It is rated PG for mature themes and would 
be fine for kids 10 and up although they would probably need to be 
teenagers to be interested.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Tim Voon
Starring: Liam Neeson, Patricia Arquette, Joan Allen
Director: John Madden
Producer: Stan Wlodkowski
Screenplay: Richard Nelson (based on the novel by Edith Wharton)
Edith Wharton must be the mistress of sexual angst. THE AGE OF INNOCENCE
carried such enormous, buried sexual tension, intricately suffocated
beneath layers of silk and corsets, that one can not get an erection
without hurting themselves. With ETHAN FROME, the issue of forbidden
love once again pops its curious head.
Times are harsh and the winter is bitterly unforgiving, like most of the
townsfolk when it comes to ETHAN FROME (Liam Neeson). A young pastor
arrives in town and with genuine Christian charity, extends his hand in
friendship to the crippled, outcast Frome. The movie opens like Emily
Bronte's WUTHERING HEIGHTS. Frome like Heathcliff has a tragic story to
both hide and to tell. The viewer is then taken on a fascinating journey
leading to this man's demise. Ethan Frome was once married to a sickly
woman called Zeena (Joan Allen), whom he did not love. In the background
of this loveless marriage, is the presence of a young, beautiful girl
called Mattie (Patricia Arquette), and this is their story.
I can not say I enjoyed the ending, which came as a shock more so than a
surprise. Wharton is renown for her depressing tone and style of
writing, so the morbid finale is at least in keeping with her character.
Once again, a large amount of unreleased sexual tension is generated
between Mattie and Ethan. The feeling is wonderfully heightened by the
presence of a frigid wife and winter; the bleakness of life and love,
forcing these two characters into each other's arms. Even when the
tension is finally released, the lovemaking is silenced to the hush of a
flame flickering nervously on a shallow wick.
