Title
Review for Blob, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Shawnee Smith; Donovan Leitch; Ricky Paull Goldin; Kevin Dillon &
Billy Beck
The Blob is the remake of the 1960's classic (a term that I use very loosely
to define the original) about a really mean glob of goop that takes out
anything that gets in its way. Now the original version has the virtue of
cheesy special effects which give it a kind of nostalgic campy feel. The
fact that Steve McQueen was the star of the film doesn't exactly hurt it
either. Fast forward to the late '80's. Steve McQueen isn't in the remake
(this might have something to do with the fact that he had been pushing up
daisies for years). Nor is there any Hollywood heavy hitters in the lead
role. That is unless you count Matt Dillon's brother Kevin as a Hollywood
heavy hitter. The other thing that works against this new Blob is that
special effects technology has improved dramatically since the original. The
only things you need now to have great special effects in a movie are deep
pockets. It looks as if the produces of the new Blob had a couple of holes
in their pockets. The special effects in this movie are cheesy, like the
original's. Unlike the original, they don't look campy, they just look
cheap. One bright spot in the movie from a purely sexist point of view is
Shawnee Smith. She is very attractive and can actually act, which is more
than I can say about some of her costars.
In terms of plot, a little ball of pink goop falls from the sky. Seems this
goop was an experiment that was being housed up on a satellite. Anyway, the
pink stuff has a taste for humans. The more people it absorbs, the bigger it
gets. And it isn't the friendliest goop on the block either. Anyway, it
attacks this little town and it's up to the attractive local teenage
population to stop it. Not really, but that is how it seems.
This version attempts to recapture the camp of the original. As I've already
said, this new version of The Blob comes off more as cheap, badly acted, and
badly written than campy. In the years since this film was made none of the
cast have gone on to greatness. Although, star Shawnee Smith had a very tiny
role in Armageddon. The reason that we have never heard of any of them again
is quite simple -- they all stunk out loud. Although some of the film's
smaller roles are filled with some actors that, while not big stars, are
doubtless people that you will recognize from their supporting roles in
other movies and TV shows. It also appears that the producers of The Blob
tried to compensate for the lack of a special effects budget by making the
scenes in which the Blob makes meals of the townsfolk as gory as possible.
Sadly, it doesn't work very well.
If you want to see a big ball of goop terrorize a town, then I would say
that you should skip the remake and rent the original. (Although that isn't
so hot either.) This newest version is seriously lacking in any redeeming
qualities.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When the original BLOB came out in 1958, it was a film that was in some
respects ahead of its time.  Not that it was a virtue, but it was one of the
first science fiction films that put teenagers not only at the forefront as
the main characters but also made them the clearest thinkers of the film--a
device to cater to a recognized teenaged audience even then.  Also the film
was made by an independent production company but released by a major--in
this case Paramount--a practice more common today than in the 1950s.  One
thing that was not 1980-ish about THE BLOB was the special effects.  At that
time most often special effects were expected only to help tell the story,
not to be visually believable necessarily, much in the way that little is
really visually believable in a marionette show.  So, like many of the
science fiction films made when science fiction films were hitting their
stride but special effects had not yet hit theirs, THE BLOB is getting a
nominal remake in the special-effects-conscious 1980s.
     I say a "nominal" remake, because there are some major twists to the
story not in the original film.  Perhaps Jack Harris--who produced the
original and co-produced the remake--felt that the original story was a
little slow and simplistic for modern audiences.  However, the major
"innovation" is one that has been done many enough times that a straighter
remake would have made for a more original film overall.  Many of the
incidents of the original film occur in the remake but in different ways.
Shawnee Smith plays Meg Penny, who has seen what the amorphous alien can do,
but nobody believes her.  The police look at the mostly-consumed body of one
of the victims  and assume absurdly enough that it is local rebel Brian Flag
(played by Kevin Dillon) who killed (and ate?) the unfortunate after a
disagreement between the two.  I assume some sort of congratulations should
go to screenwriters Chuck Russell (who also directed) and Frank Darabont for
figuring ways to take the plot of a 30-year-old film and fill it with 1)
motor vehicle chases, 2) sex, 3) another retread of the condom-buying scene
from SUMMER OF '42, 4) heavy armaments, 5) an anti-government social
statement, 6) whiz-bang special effects, and 7) rock music.
     And whiz-bang special effects they are.  The original shapeless glop
from outer space did little but roll.  The new incarnation also shakes and
rattles.  It does all kinds of disgusting gooey things that seem to have
been inspired by the effects of John Carpenter's THING.  Also, the
filmmakers of the new BLOB know how to create some atmospheric photographic
effects.  So which is the better film?  Well, if they are seen back-to-back
(which effectively I did), I would say that the original pales next to the
remake.  That only proves that the remake would have been a memorable film
in the 1950s--if it had not been banned for what then would have seemed like
too much sex and totally absurd levels of violence.  But the original will
remain the classic because it stood out from the pack.  The remake is just
one more of the same kind of film.  Rate it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
