Title
Review for Net, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Matthew Beckwith
     THE NET is a realistic thriller that's refreshingly understated.
>From the first minutes of the film, when you meet the likeable
Angela Bennett, a beautiful introvert addicted to her computer, who
would rather stay home eating a pizza than go out on a date, through
the conspicuously non-cybernetic middle of the film, reminiscent of The
Pelican Brief, to the high-tech ending, in which the protagonist
programs an internet search in seconds to identify the mastermind
behind the terrorist attacks on presumably secure computer systems, THE
NET keeps you on the edge of your seat.
     Extra effort was taken during the making of this film, it is
obvious, to make it a quality work.  The protagonist's psychological
make-up (including a history of psychotherapy, an abandoning father,
and a mother with Alzheimer's disease) is carefully sketched out for
us, making her an intriguing character.  Subtle editing decisions were
made, such as a computer-generated image of flowers which become real
flowers, and an ant's-eye view of a carousel horse interposed in the
middle of a chase scene.
     The acting of all the characters in the film (including,
surprisingly enough, Dennis Miller's) is competent, studied and
professional.  Sondra Bullock does a superb job in her role.  Ken
Howard introduces the film in a cameo showing just the right amount of
authority and anguish for his tragic character.
     As a computer programmer and physician, I would have preferred the
film's makers to have taken a bit of extra care in avoiding technical
inaccuracies.  It is unlikely that simply hitting the escape key would
undo the receipt of an email which has already been sent, and viruses
(though quite powerful) generally do not give people back their lost
identities.  A nurse tells the protagonist that her friend has been
intubated, but in the next scene the patient is talking; this would
have been rather difficult if he had been on a ventilator (which the
word "intubated" implies).
     In a time of slam-bang thrillers with little character development
or subtlety, THE NET is a refreshing, edge-of-your-seat film with a
great deal of intrinsic quality.  I highly recommend it, both to those
who are computer-literate, and to neophytes in this ultra-networked
society of ours.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995 
U.S. Availability: wide release 7/28/95 
Running Length: 1:58 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, implied sex, violence) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Dennis Miller, Jeremy Northam, Diane Baker, 
      Wendy Gazelle 
Director: Irwin Winkler 
Producers: Irwin Winkler and Rob Cowan 
Screenplay: John Brancato and Michael Ferris 
Cinematography: Jack N. Green 
Music: Mark Isham 
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures 
     Welcome to cyberspace, the newest locale for the action-adventure 
film.  Borrowing heavily from Alfred Hitchcock and John Grisham, 
director Irwin Winkler reduces a potentially-fascinating premise to the 
spearhead of a routine thriller.  THE NET starts off strong but finishes 
weak, and if not for the presence of actress Sandra Bullock, who graces 
nearly every scene, this movie might have been a snoozer. 
     For the third picture in a row (the other two being SPEED and WHILE 
YOU WERE SLEEPING), Bullock's simple, understated portrayal is 
noteworthy.  She draws the audience's sympathy like a magnet.  No matter 
how silly the plot contrivances get, we still have a vested interest in 
the fate of the main character.  This isn't just good acting -- it's an 
example of something far more rare and potent:  genuine screen presence 
and appeal. 
     Bullock's Angela Bennett is an introverted computer analyst.  She 
sits at her keyboard, doing all her work by phone and modem.  When she 
needs to eat, she uses the Internet to order a pizza.  The only time 
Angela gets out of the house is when she goes on a vacation to Mexico, 
and even then, she has her laptop with her.  However, right before 
heading south of the border, Angela comes into possession of a disk 
containing information vital to the successful criminal activity of a 
group of cyber-bad guys, the Praetorians.  They know she has it, and 
will stop at nothing to get it back. 
     While relaxing on a Mexican beach, Angela meets the dashing Jack 
Devlin (Jeremy Northam), a fellow hacker with the style and charisma of 
James Bond.  Unfortunately for Angela, he also has a gun, which he plans 
to use on her.  She escapes his clutches, but by the time she gets back 
to the United States, she discovers that the Praetorians have used their 
computer know-how to change her identity.  Suddenly, her name is Ruth 
Marx and she's wanted by the police.  Her mother (Diane Baker), 
afflicted with Alzheimer's disease, can't confirm who she is.  Only her 
ex-lover (Dennis Miller) recognizes her, and he thinks she's having a 
nervous breakdown.  In the meantime, someone else claiming to be Angela 
Bennett (Wendy Gazelle) has taken over the real Angela's job and life. 
     The first hour of THE NET is engaging, but the movie runs into 
trouble slightly past the midpoint.  The kernel of originality pops, and 
we're subjected to a number of run-of-the-mill chases.  For the last 
forty-five minutes, it seems that Angela is always fleeing from someone 
with a gun.  As the quotient of traditional thriller cliches to 
innovative elements grows, THE NET becomes progressively more mundane, 
and the final resolution is too facile to be satisfying. 
     THE NET can be seen as a cautionary tale to those who believe that 
complete reliance upon computers is a good thing.  Twenty years ago, 
this script would have been science fiction; today, significant portions 
are grounded in reality.  No computer security system is foolproof, and 
there is great power available to those who know how to tamper.  In THE 
NET, Big Brother isn't only watching; he's taking action as well.  It's 
too bad the movie gradually loses its awareness of this ominous danger.  
I guess car chases are easier to film. 
     In the final analysis, however, Sandra Bullock is the trump card, 
and she keeps THE NET interesting.  While this film lacks the impact of 
a truly gripping thriller, it gives us a protagonist to root for and 
stick with, no matter how familiar certain aspects of the plot are.  
Fascination with the Internet may be the motivation for entering a 
theater showing this movie, but Bullock is the reason to stay to the 
end. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Christopher Null
     This just goes to show that not only can Sandra Bullock not act,
but she can't even pick decent projects, either.  Sucked from the
Hollywood buzzword list like a bottom-feeder looking for sludge, THE
NET is trite idiocy that is socially irresponsible and irredeemable.  I
puked out loud.
     I honestly can't believe a movie like this was made.  Basically,
it's the story of Angela Bennett (Bullock), a superstar computer hacker
who runs across something she isn't supposed to, then finds her
identity erased, her friends killed, and herself hunted down.
Obviously a rush job to beat the other impending computer movies to the
market, THE NET is one plot hole after another, with technological
impossibilities filling the space between.
     If you think for one second that Sandra Bullock is believable as a
systems analyst who hasn't left her house in four years, you probably
aren't mentally capable of reading this review.  I mean, she's got an
awfully nice body for someone who sits on her butt 24 hours a day.
     The story and acting are pathetic, the only exception being
comedian Dennis Miller, whose five minutes of screen time are more like
a welcome intermission than a part of the film.  Unfortunately, it's
much too little, too late.  THE NET is simply horrible in every
way--the writing isn't clever, the jokes are unilaterally flat, the
sound effects are silly (a wooden *carousel* horse actually brays) and
the "romance" scenes are funny because they're so pitiful.  Director
Irwin Winkler (NIGHT AND THE CITY, 1992) isn't exactly on a winning
streak here, either.  As Miller's character puts it in the film, "I'm
not buyin' the whole package."
     The sad thing is that a movie vaguely similar to THE NET was made
rather well in 1992 as SNEAKERS.  Unfortunately, the producers of this
film decided to make a "serious picture" about the dangers of a fully
computerized society, ripping off the message of SNEAKERS, but
forgetting to satirize it like that film did.  I pray that no one takes
this movie as a serious warning.  The last thing we need in this
country are more paranoid technophobes.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Columbia)
Directed by    Irwin Winkler
Written by     Irwin Winkler, John Brancato and Michael Ferris
Cast           Sandra Bullock, Dennis Miller, Jeremy Northam, Diane Baker
MPAA Rating    "PG-13"
Reviewed at    General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh (25JUL95)
     Calling all technophobes!  Though slower than a 486 with only 4K
of RAM, Irwin Winkler's well-titled thriller benefits from a honest
performance by Sandra Bullock (WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING). Her plucky
charms recall Julia Roberts, especially in a scene were evades a killer
by dressing up as a fireman.  Bless her heart.  She's so busy trying to
act like a computer geek (yeah right) that she doesn't even think to
change her appearance after being listed as a fugitive in a police
computer system.  Sigh.
     There really isn't much of a reason to recommend connecting to THE
NET.  Though the absence of any Windows 95 references is a definite
plus, the plot is Swiss cheese, the techie stuff is far-fetched, and
there's precious little screen time actually devoted to the art of
hacking.  (There is a car chase, though!)
     As recent Washington legislation can attest, the time is ripe for
a movie to further fuel the fears of a computer-based culture.  Too bad
that this classic "wrong man" premise flubs on the logic.  How can we
be afraid of hackers who act as dumb as Sandra Bullock's character??
     Beverly Hills remains an easy target as writer/director Amy
Heckerling (FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH) takes aim at their high
school sect.  There's really only one joke here--that, duh, these kids
are too spoiled to have a single clue between them--but it's a good
joke that's both casually and confidently milked for a solid ninety
minutes.  Nothing hilarious, just *very* amusing.
     Alicia Silverstone (THE CRUSH) leads an appealing cast of teens
that includes Stacey Dash, Brittany Murphy, and Jeremy Sisto.  The
adult actors could have more to do, though.  The usually tart Wallace
Shawn, for example, is awfully wishy washy here.  Inconceivable!  Then
again, where else this summer can you find jokes about SPARTACUS and
2001: A SPACE ODESSEY butting heads with Beavis and Ren & Stimpy??
     Caught this one on video.  Writer/director/producer/star Ezio
Gregio's 1994 spoof is actually worth a rent (with fast-forwarding) to
catch Dom DeLuise's brief-but-delicious performance as Dr. Animal
Cannibal Pizza.  The veteran comic actor is in top form.  The rest of
the movie is a patchwork rework of PSYCHO and SILENCE OF THE LAMBS,
with more than a little sifting through the files of POLICE SQUAD!
Billy Zane stars as, ahem, FBI Agent Jo Dee Fostar.  (And that's one of
the better jokes!)
     With Larry Storch, Phyllis Diller, Rip Taylor, Bubba Smith, Martin
Balsam, John Landis, Mel Brooks, John Astin, and Shelley Winters.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
We've got a hot little commercial commodity in Sandra Bullock. "Good, that's
good." Yeah, and we've got this burgeoning new technological creation called
the Internet revolutionizing people's lives and changing the way they live,
right? "Yeah, yeah, and...?" Don't you see? Glamorous Ms. Hollywood actress
playing the little Ms. Loner character that everyone could identify with, in
a film based on a technology which more and more people are beginning to
fear?!? "It's brilliant !!!!". Green light.
PLOT:
Very pretty, loner computer programming girl gets caught up in a fight for a
sacred disk. She has it, the bad guys want it. As she struggles to lose said
bad guys, she ultimately loses her identity, her reputation and her past, as
these computer pirates erase her whole life via the new technologies
embedded in the Internet.
CRITIQUE:
See Sandra Bullock type real fast on a computer. Cute. See Sandra fall upon
a massive conspiracy to launch unexpected havoc onto the world. Not so cute.
See Sandra run away from the bad guys. Nasty. See Sandra run some more. Even
nastier. Hmmm.....oh yeah, and there she goes running again. Exciting, eh?
Not really, but you get the picture. Close to two hours of Sandra running
along, finding a place to hide for a few hours, and typing some more. It
gets to be a bit repetitive, but you don't know the half of it. She has this
friend see, and he's well, he's not known by the bad guys, and he's gonna
help her out, you know, I mean, he's her only friend, and oops, oh no...how
did that happen? Oh well, back to running, I suppose.
But there's tension, right? I mean, a film like this one sounds like it
could really grab you by the eyelashes and rip your interest veins right
outta you, huh?  Well, yeah, I suppose there is some tension. I mean,
I had to worry every time she ran away from the bad guys, cause I was never
sure if they were gonna catch her or not, and heck, what about her poor
friend, I mean, who knew what would happen to him? One-two-three. Can we all
count that high? Yes? Well, then you've solved the dilemma of this
screenplay (Which apparently took up to five guys to develop???) It connects
all the dots from A to Z, and leaves nothing to the imagination. The musical
score? Standard. The bad guys? Standard. The conclusion...the directing?
Standard, standard! I guess this movie wouldn't really hurt you if you were
dying and looking to kill some time before you knock, knock, knocked on
Heaven's door, but then again, it might just make your journey a little more
painful. If you're really interested in this film's valid premise, and
technology is really starting to scare the beejeezus out of you, well then
go check out ENEMY OF THE STATE (7.5/10), and enjoy a smarter script and a
wider array of stars. See Will Smith run. See Jon Voight run after him. Oh,
happy-happy, joy-joy! Now let's watch THE NET again. There's Sandra typing
so quickly. And running. Run Sandra, run!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Sandra Bullock replaced Demi Moore for the role in WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING
(7/10), and Lori Petty for the role in DEMOLITION MAN (7/10), opposite Sly
Stallone himself. She is allergic to horses, and was voted "Most likely to
brighten up your day" by her high school classmates. She's also a huge fan
of Dr. Seuss, and wrote and performed her own song "Heaven Knocking On My
Door" in the 1993 film THE THING CALLED LOVE (8/10).
There are no less than four members of the Winkler family in the cast of
this film. Good for you, Irwin, everybody needs a day job, right? :) Irwin
Winkler is better known as a producer of such great films as GOODFELLAS
(9.5/10), RAGING BULL (7.5/10) and ROCKY (8.5/10).
Screenwriters John Brancato and Michael Ferris went on to write the superb
thriller THE GAME (8/10) in 1997.

Author
Rose Bruf
Over internet zijn niet zo denderend veel films gemaakt, dat moet u
toegeven. Ter compensatie heb ik de enige -die ik ken- twיי keer gezien. En
voor u de begrippen 'ik', 'film' & 'twee keer' nog eens in dezelfde zin
ziet vermeld, hebt u mijn logboek al lang uit. In ייn woord is 'The Net':
boeiend, zowel letterlijk als figuurlijk. 
Alles begint -zoals vele films uit het genre- met een onbekende man (die
even later staatssecretaris Bergstrom blijkt te zijn) die een
onbegrijpelijk telefoontje pleegt, zoiets in de aard van 'Ongelofelijk !Ben
je daar zeker van ?'. Nog geen minuut later pleegt dezelfde
staatssecretaris zelfmoord.
Niet ver daar vandaan is Angela Bennett (Sandra Bullock) druk in de weer;
ze is namelijk bטta-testster (lijkt me trouwens een hיייrlijk beroep) en
heeft net de bug gevonden in een spelletje (dat ik meende te herkennen als
de geregistreerde versie van Wolfenstein 3D vann ID Software, wat de
aftiteling later bevestigde), wanneer je op 'escape' drukt, loopt het
namelijk ten gevolge van een virus vast. ID Software (natuurlijk niet bij
naam genoemd, maar ik wist wel beter) vond het maar vreemd, men had
namelijk net de beveiligingssoftware 'GateKeeper' op het systeem losgelaten
en die had niets geregistreerd... Een etentje op kosten van de baas van ID
Software slaat Angela toch maar af, ze heeft wel betere dingen te doen,
zoals online pizza bestellen en die daarna, samen met haar IRCvrienden, op
te eten. Zoals wel eens kan gebeuren, stellen de chatters elkaar nogal
persoonlijke vragen en in de mening dat ze toch 'onder vrienden' is,
vertelt Angela zelfs hoe haar 'ideale man' eruit ziet.
Na een online boeking voor een vlucht naar Yucatan, krijgt Angela post; een
diskette van haar collega Dale, die -in tegenstelling tot haar- op het
kantoor van hun gezamelijke werkgever Cathedral werkt. In ruil stuurt ze
hem het diskje met 'Wolf 3D-virus' terug. Ze start vlug Dales programma op,
dat in orde schijnt te zijn en het spelletje 'Mozart's Ghost' bevat.
Verbaasd belt ze Dale op, die haar uitlegt dat ze op een bepaalde pagina
rechtsonderaan op het vreemde tekentje 'p' moet drukken, samen met control
en shift. Opeens flitsen tientallen beelden voorbij en soms verschijnt even
de melding 'Verboden toegang'. Dale besluit naar haar toe te reizen, zodat
ze het bizarre voorval samen kunnen bestuderen. De volgende morgen -net
voor ze vertrekt- krijgt ze een telefoontje van haar baas; zou ze Dale niet
willen komen vervangen op het Cathedral-kantoor, want die is omgekomen toen
zijn sportvliegtuigje neerstortte...
Ze weigert en vertrekt slechtgezind op vakantie, maar op de luchthaven gaat
het alweer fout: door een computerstoring worden alle vluchten uitgesteld.
In de cafetaria ziet ze op tv dat de staatssecretaris zelfmoord pleegde
omdat hij aids had. Even later is ze dan toch op weg naar Yucatan, waar ze
op de vooravond van haar vertrek de aantrekkelijke, geniale en oprechte
computerdeskundige Jack Devlin ontmoet. Ze gaan samen uit en tijdens een
wandeling langs de zee wordt haar tas gestolen. Jack loopt de dief achterna
het bos in, om hem daar de tas af te pakken, Dale's disk te stelen en de
dief neer te schieten, na hem bedankt te hebben voor bewezen diensten.
Daarna gaat Jack terug naar Angela en vertelt haar dat hij de dief niet
meer kon inhalen. Om wat te kalmeren maken ze een tochtje met de boot van
Jacks firma.Wanneer hij even weg is, vindt Angela in zijn vest de revolver
waarmee hij de overvaller heeft neergeschoten. Ze ondervraagt hem erover en
dit loopt uit op een ruzie, waarin Jack toegeeft dat hij haar chat
afluisterde. Vervolgens probeert hij haar neer te schieten, maar gelukkig
had zij het magazijn al uit zijn revolver gehaald. Ze schopt hem en hij
raakt buiten bewustzijn, vervolgens ontdekt zij in de kajuit ook nog de
gestolen diskette. Natuurlijk komt Jack weer bij, maar Angela weet net nog
te ontsnappen met een speedboat, die heel erg handig aan de yacht verankerd
zat.
De volgende dag wordt Angela wakker in een hospitaal; een visser had haar
op het strand gevonden. Alles wat ze nog heeft is Jack's portefeuille, die
op een business-kaartje na leeg is en Dale's diskette, die door de zon
vernield is. 
Nog een nieuwsflash: Wall Street werd gehackt en wordt zo snel beveiligd
met GateKeeper.
Omdat ze geen identiteitskaart meer heeft, moet ze bij de Amerikaanse
ambassade een visum aanvragen om Amerika terug in te kunnen. Vreemd genoeg
zijn haar gegevens gekoppeld aan de naam 'Ruth Marx' en blijkt haar eigen
naam niet meer te bestaan. Noodgedwongen tekent ze als Ruth Marx de
aanvraag. Ze is niet weinig verbaasd wanneer ze haar huis leeg aantreft,
iemand die 'Angela Bennett' heette, zou het te koop gezet hebben en de
meubels meegenomen hebben. Ze roept de politie erbij, maar dat blijkt later
toch niet zo'n goed idee geweest te zijn: ze kan niet bewijzen dat zםj
Angela is en alleen maar aantonen dat ze onder een zogezegd valse naam een
visum heeft. De politie checkt 'Ruth Marx' in de computer en ze blijkt een
strafblad te hebben. Op het nippertje kan Angela langs de achterdeur
wegglippen met de mobiele telefoon van een rechercheur. Op straat belt ze
naar Cathedral, want daar hebben ze bewijzen dat zםj bestaat. Wanneer ze
zegt dat haar naam 'Angela Bennett' is, wordt ze direct doorgeschakeld naar
een vrouw die beweert dat zijzelf Angela is. Even later geeft ze echter toe
dat ze liegt en vraagt de echte Angela met klem om haar de disk te geven.
Angela haakt in en belt naar haar ex-therapeut, Alan Champion, en vraagt
hem haar te komen ophalen, waarna ze de draagbare telefoon weggeeft zodat
ze aan de hand daarvan alvast niet meer kan gevonden worden.
Ze vraagt Alan haar moeder (die Alzheimer heeft) over te plaatsen naar een
ander sanatorium, zodat daar alvast niets mee kan gebeuren, en Alan besluit
zijn vriend Ben Phillips, die bij het FBI werkt, om raad te vragen. Hij
leent Angela ook zijn pc.
Even later surft ze naar het internetadres dat op Jack's visitekaartje
stond en logt in met het bijgevoegde passwoord. Ineens krijgt ze het
medische dossier van staatssecretaris Bergstrom op haar scherm, zijn
autopsie toonde aan dat hij niet aan aids leed ! Haar internetverbinding
wordt echter afgetapt en het zal niet lang meer duren voor haar locatie
bekend is...
Ze gaat terug naar haar oude chatroom en zoekt daar de identiteit van de
andere IRCers op; ייn van hen -CyberBob- woont in de buurt en weet iets
over 'p' (hij zegt dat het voor 'Praetorianen' staat). Ze spreken af bij
het reuzenrad, want meer informatie wil hij haar niet over het internet
geven. Op dat moment wordt ze getrackt.
Even later staat Alan voor de deur en ze vraagt hem haar naar het reuzenrad
te rijden. Onderweg krijgt hij opeens een aanval, in het ziekenhuis vertelt
men Angela dat het komt omdat hij allergisch is aan de penicilline uit zijn
medicijnen en dat alles in orde komt.
Wanneer ze aankomt bij het reuzenrad, staat daar niet Bob, maar Jack op
haar te wachten, die haar vertelt dat 'Bob niet kon komen' en dwingt haar
mee te komen. Gelukkig weet ze toch te ontsnappen, maar in het ziekenhuis
krijgt ze het bericht dat Alan overleden is: hij kreeg een insuline-shock.
Maar Alan was geen diabeticus.
In Alans auto krijgt ze een dreigtelefoontje van Jack: hij heeft haar
moeder gevonden. Tot overmaat van ramp wordt ze daarna door de politie
opgepakt; ze wordt ervan verdacht autodievegge te zijn, want Alans wagen is
al een hele tijd als gestolen opgegeven. Wanneer ze haar verhaal voor haar
advocate uiteenzet, stuit ze op ongeloof, want 'het computernetwerk van de
politie is door GateKeeper beveiligd'. Dan ziet Angela in dat er een fout
in GateKeeper zit, die dit alles mogelijk maakt. Ze wordt gek verklaard en
opgesloten; niemand kan bevestigen dat zij Ruth Marx niet is. Toch lijkt
even later de redding nabij; Ben Phillips bevrijdt haar uit de gevangenis
en wil haar ondervragen. Wanneer zij hem vertelt dat Dale's diskette
gesmolten is, voegt hij er even later aan toe 'in Mexico', terwijl hij dat
helemaal niet kon weten. Door toedoen van Angela verliest Ben even later de
controle over zijn auto en ze botsen. Ben is op slag dood en wanneer Angela
uit het wrak klimt, ziet ze Jack (die waarschijnlijk al een hele tijd
toekeek) maar ze kan hem ontvluchten.
Die avond meldt het nieuws dat de enige bank in Chicago die vandaag na een
stroomonderbreking nog open was, beveiligd was door GateKeeper. Het
Pentagon is hiervan zo onder de indruk dat ze besloten hebben om hun
systeem er ook mee te beveiligen, wat veel gemakkelijker zal gaan nu de
staatssecretaris, die erg tegen GateKeeper was, er niet meer is.
De volgende dag gaat Angela naar Cathedral, omdat daar, bij de valse Angela
Bennett, een copy ligt van de diskette waarmee ze haar identiteit terug kan
veranderen. Vanop Dale's computer kan ze het programma niet opstarten;
daarvoor moet je aan 'Angela Bennett's pc zitten, maar ze vindt er wel het
diskette met het 'Wolf 3D'-virus, dat zij hem opstuurde. Met een vals
brandalarm kan ze 'Angela' van haar bureau weglokken en in de
keystrokebuffer vindt ze het passwoord om de applicatie op te starten.
Corrigeren gaat echter niet; daarvoor moet je toegang hebben tot de
mainframe. Opeens komt er een bericht binnen van 'Angela's opdrachtgever.
Ze traceert het terug naar niemand minder dan Jeff Gregg, de uitvinder van
GateKeeper. Ze zet de bestanden op diskette, maar Jack en 'Angela' zien
haar net vertrekken.
Ze wordt achtervolgd tot op een computerbeurs, waar ze een e-mail (met een
copy van de bewijzen) die haar situatie uitlegt naar het FBI verstuurt en
vervolgens steekt ze Wolf 3D in de diskdrive. Dan ziet Jack haar weer en ze
vertelt hem wat zij gedaan heeft. Die zegt dat er geen probleem is; met een
paar aanslagen kan hij dat bericht uit de mailbox van het FBI vegen. Eerst
moet hij natuurlijk uit Wolf 3D geraken en logischerwijze drukt hij op
escape en zo wordt Jeff Greggs hele netwerk gereduceerd tot iets dat nog
het meest lijkt op kikkervisjes. En is Angela terug Angela.
En Angela ontsnapt Jack, die haar achtervolgt tot op het dak van de beurs,
waar hij even later wordt afgegooid, zoals het alle slechterikken
uiteindelijk vergaat.
In 'The Net' zijn de personages niet erg uitgewerkt (behalve Angela  zelf
dan, misschien), maar dat stoort niet: het verhaal is er en het verhaal is
goed. Zoals u ziet, er gebeurt heel wat (tweeכnhalve bladzijde 'korte'
inhoud) en dat moet ook allemaal, want buiten een paar achtervolgingsscטnes
is niets echt misbaar. Opmerkelijk is ook dat het plot samen met de film
begint en er geen opbouw, maar meer een soort van 'uitwerking' is. Alle
gevolgen en reacties zijn wel logisch, maar door het hoge tempo van de film
blijven ze onvoorspelbaar. Beangstigend is ook het hoge realiteitsgehalte
-neemt u het maar van mij aan- het zou kunnen gebeuren. Als freak heb ik de
hele tijd zitten zoeken naar technische fouten, maar ik heb niets kunnen
vinden, behalve dan dat een paar internetshots waarschijnlijk gemonteerd
waren om de snelheid wat op te drijven. Het was duidelijk dat de software
die niet bepalend voor de film was (IRC-programma enz.) niet speciaal voor
de film was geschreven. Wel een beetje vreemd vond ik het feit dat er
MS-producten gebruikt werden en in de aftiteling 'Dank aan Apple' stond -
de samenwerking tussen beide loopt slechts enkele maanden stabiel.
 Zoals dat in films voorvalt heeft Angela net weer dat extra beetje
'kwetsbaarheid': zij is zo'n echte computerfreak die niet buitenkomt (haar
eigen buren herkennen haar niet), dat kan ik nu nog begrijpen, maar dat
haar vader haar heeft in de steek gelaten en haar moeder Alzheimer heeft,
is toch echt weer 'toevallig'. 
Wel goed vind ik dat net de macht van software (GateKeeper, het Wolf
3D-virus) naar boven komt, want...  
'Bijna niemand staat er bij stil, maar aan een computerprogramma wordt
gewerkt, hard gewerkt.
Iedereen associכert computers direct met hardware: een diskette, een
beeldscherm, en hoe ingewikkeld die wel in elkaar zitten. Dat staat niet
meer, niet minder in verhouding tot het begrip informatica dan software.
Weeral een misvatting is het te zeggen dat de hardware van de computer
'denkt', want dat doet de software... de hardware is het omhulsel van de
computer, het hart, de spieren, ... maar de software is de hersenen, en
persoonlijk ben ik nog liever een avatar dan een mongooltje...
Bij software is aan elke pixel gewerkt... uren, als het moet dagen, zijn er
nodig om een detail te richten naar het oorspronkelijke idee van de
ontwerper... ja hoor, elke pixel vertelt zijn eigen verhaal, je moet alleen
maar weten hoe te luisteren.
En als je weet hoe je moet luisteren en je wat tijd hebt, kom je
interessante dingen aan de weet (bv. paswoorden, nieuwe
programmeertechnieken, idees, ...).' 
                (Ik, januari '98, nooit gedacht dat ik dit ooit nog zou kunnen gebruiken)
Wel, ik zou het zelf niet beter kunnen zeggen.
De IMDb meldt me dat er vier films bestaan die 'The Net' getiteld zijn, ze
werden uitgebracht in 1916, 1923, 1953 en 1995. En die uit 1995 krijgt
weeral zo'n PG-13 rating. De film is geregisseerd door Irwin Winkler, hij
schreef ook mee het scenario en was producent. Gemiddelde score: 6.7/10.
Nu ik erover nadenk, merk ik dat ik geen enkele film ken waarin Sandra
Annette Bullock meespeelt, die geen actiefilm of thriller is, zoals 'Speed
(2)' of 'A time to kill', maar daar komt verandering in, want binnenkort is
ze te zien in 'Practical Magic', een film over 2 zusters met magische
krachten. Ze is op 26 juli 1964 in de staat Vancouver geboren en heeft een
opleiding in drama achter de rug. Op school werd ze verkozen als 'Meest
aangewezen persoon om je dag op te vrolijken'. Sandra is 175,5 cm groot en
weegt 59 kg en haar hobbies zijn dansen, bergbeklimmen, Tom Jones &
internet. Het liefst eet ze gegrillde kip. Haar moeder is een Duitse
operazangeres en haar vader een dictieleraar. Ze werd 40 miljoen dollar
betaald voor haar prestaties in 'The Net'.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     With THE NET, Sandra Bullock has once again taken a film that
could have been a complete loser and made it quite enjoyable.  She has
an extremely natural charm that is just incredibly appealing to me.
The main reason that the movie worked for me was that I found myself to
be *instantly* sympathetic towards her.  There are very few actors out
there that are able to project such a high level of instant
likability. (Someone should consider casting her as a villain one of
these times.  I have a hunch such a move would be quite disturbing,
particularly if the character's nature turned out to be a surprise.)
     From a plausibility standpoint, the film is something of a
mixed-bag.  The very basic idea of someone's identity being erased via
manipulation of computer records is presented in a way that isn't hard
to believe.  It is a bit of a paranoid fantasy, but that kind of
paranoia has often been the basis of this type of thriller.  In
reality, the whole idea probably *isn't* that completely far-fetched.
Society has become awfully dependent on computer records and computer
security isn't as tight as we would probably like it to be.
     What is pretty outlandish is the larger plot that is the basis of
the whole situation.  Bullock's situation results when she stumbles on
a conspiracy so sweeping that only Oliver Stone would be likely to
believe it.  Luckily, the story doesn't typically take center stage in
the film.  It is Bullock's down- to-Earth performance that kept me from
thinking too much about the basic implausibilities of the story.
     The film is generally pretty good with the computer-related
details, although it does occasionally spruce things up a bit for the
camera.  The movie does include some unlikely uses of voice synthesis
as well as some screen displays that are more photogenic than they
really need to be (this movie contains yet another example of the
"photogenic computer virus" that seems to be popular in movies right
now).  For the most part, though, the filmmakers manage to get much of
the language right and the computers aren't usually given capabilities
beyond the realm of possibility.  Those of us that are real-life
computer nuts will tend to appreciate the accuracy of the terminology,
even if much of it may go right past many viewers.
     While Bullock's performance is the heart and soul of this film,
the supporting cast is also good.  As the villain, Jeremy Northam
provides an appropriate mix of charm and menace.  The best part of the
performance is that he is able to bring an odd *warmth* to the
character that makes him all the more hateful.  Villains in this type
of film typically have much colder personalities, making Northam's
performance something of a refreshing change.  As the only friend that
Bullock is able to trust, Dennis Miller brings some welcome, although
brief, comic-relief to the film.
     During much of this movie, director Irwin Winkler appears to
believe that he is making a tribute to Alfred Hitchcock.  There are a
few scenes that seem to be taken almost shot-for-shot out of classic
Hitchcock films.  In fact, the whole film really feels like a
modernized Hitchcock movie.  It doesn't quite have the plot ingenuity
that Hitchcock managed, but Bullock's character certainly has all the
makings of one of Hitch's "everyman" protagonists.
     Largely thanks to the extremely welcome presence of Sandra
Bullock, THE NET is one of this summer's most satisfying and
entertaining thrillers.  It should advance Bullock one more step
towards superstardom.

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the beginning of 1996 users of Croatian bulletin boards
services participated in the poll designed to establish
popularity of Hollywood starlets. The winner of this
popularity contest was Sandra Bullock, young actress who had
just became a star by appearing in SPEED. However, Croatian
modem geeks probably chose Bullock because of the interview
in which she had mentioned her own Internet surfing habits.
For the geeks, whole idea of Bullock being "one of us"
nicely corresponded with her down-to-earth "girl next door"
image, most responsible for her popularity. Whether
intentional or not, the aforementioned statement was
supposed to help the ticket sales for THE NET, 1995
cyber-thriller directed by Irwin Winkler.
In this film Sandra Bullock plays Angela Bennett, computer
expert who became so addicted to on-line communication that
she barely leaves her house. One day Dale Hessman (played by
Dan MacKinnon), an on-line friend and fellow computer
expert, sends her a program that seems to allow access to
most secret government and business databases. After
MacKinnon dies in mysterious airplane crash, Angela goes to
vacation in Mexico where she meets suave Jack Devlin (played
by Jeremy Northam), who later turns out to be assassin hired
to kill her. She manages to run back to States only to find
her entire existence literally erased - somebody has
tampered with her files within various government
institutions and replaced them with files belonging to the
convicted felon. Now she is forced to run for her life and
evade both the assassins and police. It becomes clear that
the disk is the key of mystery.
As one of the first Hollywood films to actually tackle new
phenomenon of Internet, THE NET can be forgiven for not
being too successful in this endeavour. Unfortunately,
scriptwriters John D. Brancato and Michael Ferris can't be
forgiven for using the emerging world of on-line
communication as nothing more than an excuse for weak plot,
full of situations and characters that became cliches in
Hitchcock's time. Hollywood's technophobia and exploitations
of popular sentiments against Bill Gates (who is thinly
disguised in the form of movie's chief villain) are only a
backdrop in rather predictable story of a single protagonist
on the run from seemingly omnipotent Bad Guys. There are
plenty of scenes that are completely unneccessary (like
Angela's visit to her Alzheimer- stricken mother), full of
plot holes or simply don't work. Jeremy Northam is terribly
miscast as one of the film's villain. Although her character
looks too good for someone who is supposed to spend days
sitting in front of monitor, Sandra Bullock, on the other
hand, uses all of her charms and talents to make her
character believable and her efforts are at least partially
successful. Her role alone is the only reason why this film
should receive a passing grade, but this is not enough for
recommending this film to anyone except Bullock's fans and
those interested to see how Hollywood treated Internet in
mid 1990s.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Andrew Hicks
        With all the hype about the Internet over the past few years, it 
was inevitable a series of movies exploiting the phenomenon would be 
rushed out before you could say "cybersex." After all, where else in the 
world can you download the theme from SHAFT, harrass "Star Trek" 
freaks and spend hours on end in the "Lacy Lingerie" chat room? Yes, 
I've surfed the Net myself, talking to people with such monikers as 
Maxie ("Like the pads?") and Brown Finger ("For heaven's sake, 
Brownie, wipe the finger off!"), and been asked countless times if I am 
"M or F," to which I always respond, "I'm a sexy MF." It's always good 
to keep a little ambiguity in a conversation.
        THE NET is pretty much a hybid of SNEAKERS and THE 
FUGITIVE, meaning it exploits new technology while keeping the 
traditional chase scenes intact. Its star, Sandra Bullock, can indeed 
carry a movie with her beauty and charm, not to mention significant 
acting skills--not exactly a requirement for movies like THE NET. 
That's not to say THE NET isn't severely flawed, but for much of the 
movie, the premise and chase scene retreads work. Around the second 
half, the small but vital bit of originality runs out and chase cliches 
involving carnival carousels and highway shoulders are needlessly 
thrown in. Then there's the final chase, which directly copies THE 
FUGITIVE's ending--but, of course, having Bullock yell out "I didn't 
kill my wife!" wouldn't work, so alternate dialogue was substituted.
        Bullock plays a computer hacker who stumbles upon some 
secret files one day while visiting the "Ronald Reagan Fantasies" chat 
room. Soon everyone she knows is being killed off one by one and the 
man she meets on her Mexican vacation pulls a gun on her after sex. 
"Okay, fine, we don't _have_ to cuddle," she says to him, but he tries 
to shoot her anyway. She survives that trauma, but upon returning 
homw, Bullock discovers the evil computer wizards (the same guys 
who built a 30-foot statue of Bill Gates) have changed her identity.
        Now the government has her fingerprints, social security 
number and fictional criminal record under a different name. 
Meanwhile, a look-alike has taken her place at work and, since Sandra 
has no real friends (besides her Toshiba laptop) and her mother has 
Alzheimer's (a disease where... oh, I forget), Bullock can'r verify her 
identity. So she sets out on that all-important trek to find an identity, 
literally, with the aid of ex-lover and shrink Dennis Miller, who soon 
leaves the film to be replaced by Kevin Nealon. No, wait, that's what 
happened on "Saturday Night Live."
        The message of THE NET is simple--the computer is our 
friend, but bad people can make it our enemy, particularly since in this 
day and age information about everyone is electronically stored 
somewhere. All Big Brother has to do is push a button here, a 
keystroke there and BAM! you don't exist. And I'm pushing that 
button right now, so be nice to me.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Ann Tschirgi (Ann Tschirgi)
     THE NET had a plot that was average.  The previews gave it all
away.  Angela Bennet's identity gets deleted.  Now I am not one to say
this is no big deal or that this is not creative but I do agree that
this movie dealt with the plot in a pitiful way.  She just *happens* to
have no friends so *nobody* can agree that there was a actual Angela
Bennet.  And there is a sub-plot about a back-door to a security
program and a diskette that would be good enough on its own for a
plot.  But combine the two together and you get a rushed movie.  The
basic parts about Angela running away are similar to The Fugitive and
make up a large portion of the movie.  Also THE NET was a mis-leading
title as the film had little to do with the Internet besides having
Angela send a few files and being on an unrealistic chat program.
     Sandra Bullock does as good of a job that can be expected for a
role in a movie that requires someone to have a "Why me?" expression on
her face joined with screaming "I am Angela Bennet!!"  The actor that
plays the villain is excellent however.  He is charming yet evil
similar to Lex Luthor on the TV show "Lois + Clark: The New Adventures
Of Superman."  Some other roles pull off bad jobs like the actress who
plays the lady who becomes the "new" Angela who just acts like she
hates acting and Angela's mother who has Alzheimer's and seems like she
is deaf and an idiot.
     THE NET has very little special effects.  But what it does have is
average fare.  Like chase scenes and explosions.  The death of the
villain is done in a fake way that makes Angela Bennet seem like
Superwoman.
     This movie is just above average from its acting.  Good to see if
no other good movies are out or if you like Sandra Bullock.  Oddly
enough I found this movie to be a comedy....

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE NET is a thriller about a lonely mole, Angela Bennett (Sandra
Bullock).  Like a real life mole, Angela lives a dark and solitary life
underground, and spends her time boring through things.  Angela is a
software tester who exclusively telecommutes from her home - she has
never been to her office.  Is this the future?  Her room is dark other
than the glow from her monitors.  She hacks her way through programs
looking for viruses and through the Internet looking for ersatz
companionship.
     She stumbles onto a program that has some sort of link to a ring
of cyber-criminals.  The program for some reason can bring up secret
information if the right passwords and magic codes are entered.  The
criminals are disrupting stock exchanges, airports, and banks.  These
are not your friendly hackers either, they kill people Mafia style.
She tangles with them, and they switch her identity to be someone else,
steal everything she has, and generally get her in big trouble with the
law.
     The cat and mouse game between her and the bad guys is the heart
of the story.  She is pursued by Jack Devlin (Jeremy Northam) who wants
something from her and then wants to exterminate her.  She knows no one
since she rarely speaks to anyone.  She turns to her therapist and old
boyfriend, Dr. Alan Champion (Dennis Miller) for help, but she believes
that her salvation lies in her own hands.
     THE NET is an interesting show with many things going for it.
First and foremost is Sandra Bullock, who was so great in SPEED and
WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING, and is so here as well.  The casting of her
was perfect.  She has that reclusive, withdrawn smile and looks like
someone who spends all of their time having an intimate relationship
with a computer while ignoring, shunning, and being almost afraid of
the outside world.  I know people like Angela who are slowly losing all
social graces, spending all of their time on the computer in their
offices or homes, and seem almost taken aback when spoken to as if to
say you can't speak to me.
     A mild suspension of disbelief is all that is necessary to follow
the technology in the story.  As she hacks through the Internet, runs
through IP addresses, does virus scans, etc., much of it seems kind of
plausible.  Don't look too close or you will see the Wizard behind the
curtain.  Go with the flow and believe.  One of the most inaccurate
parts was actually the most fun.  I liked seeing a visual virus so that
the data melts in front of your eyes much like a real virus might
attack human flesh.
     If you notice, she has full-sized computers and laptops of all
types in her room, but she uses her Mac for the serious stuff reserving
the PC to order pizza over the Internet.  As someone who worked at
Apple on the precursor to the Mac, the Lisa, and someone who stills
uses a Mac at home and at work, this made me smile.
     The plot is fun to follow even in its most predictable parts.  The
script by John D. Brancato and Michael Ferris creates a highly
interesting story full of technobabble.  Where it falls down is in the
depiction of the villain.  He is too suave and not sufficiently scary.
Also, Angela is painted into such corners with nowhere to turn, that
the plot frequently has nowhere to go.  The director (Irwin Winkler)
should have had Angela show more emotion if they didn't give her more
possible exits or people to turn to.  I think having a set of good cops
that she was trying to link up with would have improved the script.
     THE NET runs 1:58, but does not feel that long.  The pacing by
editor Richard Halsey is good.  The movie is rated PG-13 for a little
bit of profanity and non-gory violence.  It would be fine for kids over
say 9.  I recommend the movie to you as a nice little thriller, and I
award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Joan Ellis
     Although THE NET sells itself as a hip thriller and master of the
Internet, it is really just warmed over soup. It has none of the charm
or eye-popping wonder of JUMPIN' JACK FLASH, by which even the ignorant
among us were held in thrall to the mystery that unfolded on the then
unfamiliar monitor.
     We wait longingly to be pulled into the excitement, to care about
the people and the cause, but director Irwin Winkler cannot make a
thriller of a script full of holes. Midway, we know we've been taken.
It's just a recycled chase film with Cyberspace aspirations. The
filmmakers are telling us that something diabolically clever is going
on on-screen, but we are unworthy of knowing the details.
     Maybe it's not quite that bad. Sandra Bullock makes a fine heroine
of Angela, a computer expert whose specialty is fixing other people's
systems. She's a solid presence to be trusted, a vulnerable person we
can root for. Somewhere out there, in a clever program called "Mozart's
Ghost," she tangles with "The Iceman," a cold, smart hacker who stays
one step ahead of Angela throughout the confusion.
     The Iceman, a.k.a. Jack Devlin, is an old-fashioned stalker with
newfangled weapons. The battlefield is familiar:  the open sea, dark
stair wells, a crowded convention floor with a villain on the loose.
The centerpiece, of course, is the endangered woman. Instead of the
secret codes or microfilms of yore, it's a disk that she guards.
     Jack wants that disk, and to get it, he erases Angela's identity
both on the computer and in the real world. It's a good premise, the
worst extension of our fears of the computer world.  During all this we
begin to understand that national security is somehow just as
endangered as Angela. Bring us in, Irwin Winkler!  But he doesn't. The
stakes are high, but what are they?
     When an audience isn't made part of the game, everything on-screen
turns dull. This is a flat and lazy movie. Can you believe you will see
yet another car approach a yawning drawbridge, another chase through a
whirling merry-go-ground?
     Watching Angela order pizza by computer while she solves software
dilemmas to a good musical score is a promising beginning. But Jack,
while properly scary in his evil, is a stalker whose footsteps we fear
without knowing why he hates our heroine. Sandra Bullock and Jeremy
Northam are let down badly by their scriptwriters and director, who set
them adrift in the debris of an undefined plot.
     Although there is periodic suspense, how can we be really scared
when we don't understand the enemy?  The unfrocking of the mastermind
in the final frames carries no punch because we never wondered who he
was in the first place. By now you must be asking about the cause of
all the murder and mayhem. What was on that crucial disk?  We still
don't know, and that's the problem.


Author
Ed Powell
     Going into this movie, I thought it was just going to be another
film that's trying to cash in on the "Information Superhighway" buzz,
and overglorifies computers and the Internet.
     When I left disgusted 45 minutes later, that view hadn't really
changed.
     The story of the film is about a professional computer program
beta-tester, virus-healer, web-surfer, and all-around computer hacker
(played by Sandra Bullock), who gets hold of a computer program that
gets the user into restricted areas of the Internet.  Some group
somehow finds out about this program, and nearly gets the disk from the
character played by Sandra when she vacations in Cancun.  She manages
to keep the disk, but the group starts to make her life unlivable, by
changing around her police record, DMV records, selling her house (?),
etc., etc., etc., ... all by using computers, of course.
     It seems to me that the writers forgot that life is not an episode
of "Max Headroom."  The writers also seem to have forgot that what
personal information that IS stored on computer (police records, IRS
whatnot, DMV, just to name the few that are on the top of my head), YOU
CANNOT READ, NEVER MIND CHANGE, THAT DATA BY USING THE INTERNET!!!  And
even if you could, THERE WOULDN'T BE FANCY-SCHMANCY GRAPHIC INTERFACES
FOR DOING IT!!!
     You see, most government agencies do something smart (for a
change).  They make damn sure that any vital computer data is protected
by the most hacker-proof method around: no network or modem connections
to the computer, period.
     To make a long section short, the plot, story, and writing suffer
from two incurable problems: unbelievability and stupidity.
     As for acting, fairly average all around.  Sandra Bullock
portrayed a sterotypical hacker with little social skills
well ... although I do not think that this role was well suited for her.
     I can't say much about design.  It looked as if this movie was
shot completely on location, with little set building whatsoever.
     I can't say much about special effects either ... other than Sandra
Bullock in a bikini .  I suppose that you could group the computer
screens into the effects group, and they suited the movie well ... but
that isn't a compliment.
     Irwin Winkler (any relation to Henry?  Inquiring minds want to
now), who directed this cinematic trainwreck, looks like he was
trying to overdramatize the film.  Many shots were not well suited for
the action.  Perhaps he should take a refresher course in basic
directing.
     Overall, this movie sucked.  At least the first 45 minutes of it
did.  As a MSTie*, I have watched many a bad movie, and I think I could
recommend this one to be added to the stack of material to be made fun
of.  Don't waste your money on this.  I think I'd rather see 'Batman
Forever'.
Produced by Irwin Winkler and Rob Cowan, directed by Irwin Winkler.  A
Columbia Pictures release.
* A MSTie is a fan of the brilliant TV show 'Mystery Science Theater 3000'
(shown on Comedy Central).  In a nutshell, MST3K takes bad movies, and has a
guy and two 'robots' sitting in an orbiting movie theater, talking back to
the film and generally making fun of it.  It's a great show ... you should
watch it.

Author
Allan Toombs
A Cyber-Nightmare (Full Discussion With Plot Details)
     I approached THE NET with some trepidation as the vanguard of what
looks to be a deluge of Computer/Internet/VR films Hollywood has in
store for us.  Also if you consider TRON, WARGAMES, and JUMPIN' JACK
FLASH, as it's forebears THE NET could have been just another gee-whizz
hacker romp.
     I'm delighted to report that THE NET is a full-bodied intelligent
thriller that keeps the technology to a minimum and adrenaline levels
high.  The plot again by incident or design is a classic Hollywood
three act.
     Act 1 - Sets up the nightmare, Angela Bennett (Sandra Bullock) is
a bright semi-freelance computer professional working from home,
hanging out on IRC channels but happily without a boyfriend.
Specializing in anti-virus and debug she receives a beta of a
multimedia promo for an awful Wayne and Garth type band called "Mozarts
Ghost."  There's rogue code in the disk but she has just booked a
holiday. Her boss here becomes the first to die in a bizarre
night-flying accident. On the beach she meets the charming Mr. Devlin
(Jeff Northam) and here I began to wonder if this was going to be a him
and her on the run together movie. However it soon becomes apparent
that Devlin is as deadly as he is attractive. The scenes on board his
boat are tense and shot with clarity. Narrowly escaping with her life
Angela's dingy crashes.
     Act 2 - The nightmare begins when she wakes up in a cheap Mexican
hospital without passport, ID or credit cards. At customs control she
is told her social security number makes her Ruth Marx. Still a little
bewildered from the crash and desperate to get back home she signs this
new name. On arrival she finds her car has gone and her house is
stripped of all her possessions and up for sale. When she makes a scene
for the police they check on her ID.  Down the street in a car Devlin
accesses Ruth Marx's file and adds a few wanted for narcotics and
prostitutions. So begins a chase in which Ms. Bullock uses considerable
wit and courage to evade an organisation that effectively deprive her
of any financial/social identity. What they are after is the disk of
'Mozarts Ghost' which contains their comms software and surety that
copies have hot been stashed anywhere on the Internet. In the end she
is imprisoned and speaking to her attorney she sounds like a sad
delusional paranoid raving about super-powerful conspiracies. She calls
her mother who in an clever, novel twist suffers from Alzheimers.  Act
2 ends in the pits of depression as she realises that even her mother
cannot remember her as Angela Bennett.
     Act 3 - Is how our heroine hits back but you really need to see
the movie here. Let me say that it is well executed and Ms. Bennett uses
her considerable intelligence to spread confusion in the enemy's camp.
     Indeed for Sandra Bullock this film is a triumph. THE NET
heroine is a sort of female FUGITIVE at times and any man who helps
her meets an invisibly organised death. Indeed there is a grim contrast
here between the suave, simmering, handsome Devlin who kills without
compunction and the rather literally named Albert Champion a ditched
lover she turns to out of sheer desperation since he is middle-aged,
self-satisfied and subtly obnoxious with a tinge of pathos. As her
supporter he provides the voice of the anti-conspiracist but ultimately
falls foul of a series of medical "mistakes" engineered by manipulating
computers. Sandra Bullock confidently guides the character of Angela
Bennett between the extremes of ball-breaking paranoid(eg. Sigourney
Weaver at the end of Aliens) and wimpering victim (just about anything
with Goldie Hawn). Indeed she has something of an everywoman quality
that compels the audience into identifying with her. I was up there
running with her every step of the way.
     In some ways the film indicts her original semi-reclusive
lifestyle as it is very apparent in Act 2 how few non-Net friends she
has and that the neighbours can't tell her from Eve. After watching
THE NET you might find yourself giving the keyboard a rest and
chatting to next door with a newfound earnestness. The powerful message
of the film is that if we rely on credit-cards for identity we don't
need real people. That is until the day the credit-agency fouls up.
Very 'get involved', very Clinton and absolutely on the button.
     But I hear you cry what of the hardware? Well you won't catch
any howling goofs in this field as most computers are unspecified
PowerMacs/PowerPcs. All graphics front ends used are obvious mock-ups
to make type clearer and the on-line characters more colourful. To
begin with Angela uses a speech synth for the other IRC users however
we soon rely on her speaking all type to give it life, a dramatic
device that works very well. I think the point here is that the precise
look and feel of the technology is irrelevant. There is something of a
near-future feel to the film (without being science-fiction) so maybe
there are bulletin-board/IRC's with glorious technicolour icons. Look
out for Gregg Shaw, a technocrat we only see through TV news, who bears
an uncanny similarity to Bill Gates, an evil twin perhaps. May I also
commend the scriptwriter for not forcing a 'we meet at last Ms. Bennett'
type scene between Bullock and this character.  If you're going to have
remote-control conspiracies then it's right to keep them faceless. This
also keeps what could have been quite a confusing plot simple as the
cast is compact.
     However before I give the impression this is a cyberpunk film
let me emphasise that THE NET is first and foremost a thriller
featuring set-piece chases that Hitchcock would have been proud of. By
inverse compliment I can see this kind of cyber-nightmare scenario
becoming an easy staple for lesser film-makers in years to come.
Computers are pivotal to the plot but do no more than in other 'lost
identity' movies. In this respect there is nothing innovative about THE
NET but it is a pumping, classy thriller firmly footed in the 1990s
and worthy of serious discussion.
