Title
Review for Only You (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Ben Hoffman
     So what if it is only a romantic fairy tale, a comedy, the kind
they used to do in the 1930s?  Maybe that is what we need right around
now after so many heavy films, something we can just sit back and enjoy
and laugh and not worry about whether or not anything up on the screen
could possibly happen.  If you are in the mood for that, this is you
movie.
     Marisa Tomei is so pretty in a non-Hollywood way, so wholesome and
lovable that you just wish you could hold her in your arms and live
happily ever after.  When, as Faith, she meets up with Peter (Robert
Downey Jr.) another handsome, non-grunge, and he needs only one glimpse
to fall completely in love with her, we are delighted for them.
     When Faith was a child, her Ouija board came up with the name,
D-A-M-O-N B-R-A-D-L-E-Y, as the man she would one day meet and marry.
Now, grown up, Faith visits a Fortune Teller who sees in the crystal
ball the name, Damon Bradley; Faith realizes this can be no mere
coincidence.  But she is about to be married to a podiatrist.  And when
her fiance's old school friend, on his way to Venice, Italy, phones to
wish her well, and HIS name is Damon Bradley, well!
     Her sister-in-law and best friend, Kate (Bonnie Hunt), is having a
problem with her husband's infidelity so when Faith says she absolutely
must go to Venice in search of Damon Bradley, Kate takes off with
her.   There they meet Peter, a shoe salesman,  who pretends that he is
Bradley ... and the fun really starts with many twists and turns and
one delightful surprise following another.
     Rounding out the cast are Joaquim De Almeida, Fisher Stevens,
Billy Zane, Siobhan Fallon, John Benjamin Hickey and Adam LeFevre.
     Written by Diane Drake.  This is her first produced screenplay.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Marisa Tomei, Robert Downey Jr., Bonnie Hunt, Joaquim de
Almeida, Fisher Stevens.
Screenplay:  Diane Drake.
Director:  Norman Jewison.
     Ingredients: one lost shoe found by a handsome suitor, a gypsy
selling roses, a street corner saxophone player, a carriage ride,
beautiful Italian scenery (including canal boats in Venice), the moon,
the stars, and a version of the title song by Louie Armstrong.  Oh, and
a reference to ROMAN HOLIDAY.  And a nice-but-uninspiring guy for the
heroine to throw over.  Have I forgotten anything?  It doesn't appear
that the makers of ONLY YOU have.  It is packed to bursting with
everything that a Hollywood romance is supposed to have--except any
connection between its stars.  As a result, its agonizing cuteness
becomes all the more agonizing, and the hole at its center positively
gapes.
     ONLY YOU stars Marisa Tomei as Faith Corvatch, a lifelong romantic
who was told as an adolescent (by a Ouija board and a fortune teller)
that she is destined to marry someone named Damon Bradley.  Fourteen
years later, she is preparing to marry someone *not* named Damon
Bradley, a podiatrist named Dwayne.  All that changes when Faith gets a
call from an old friend of Dwayne's named ... Damon Bradley.  With best
friend Kathy (Bonnie Hunt) in tow, Faith races off for Italy on the off
chance that she might meet the man who is her destiny.  Then she does
meet a man (Robert Downey Jr.) who sweeps her off her feet and
re-introduces her to romance--only his name may or may not actually
be Damon Bradley.
     There is a trend which has developed in film romances in the last
couple of years (including SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE and, to a certain
extent, FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL) which has made me wary of them
even before they appear.  They are no longer about romances which
blossom between real people in the course of actual interaction;
instead, they are the worst kind of pop fairy tales, selling
infatuation with a romanticized ideal as true love.  Marisa Tomei and
Robert Downey Jr. end up together (and please, no one try to tell me
that I'm spoiling anything by revealing that fact) because that's the
way it has to end.  Not because these characters learn anything about
each other that would make them want to learn more, and not because
they seem right for each other.  For most of the film, their
relationship is based on self-delusion and lies.  However, since it's
all accompanied by carriage rides and flowers and beautiful Italian
scenery, it passes for a love story.  And that's fairly sad.
     Equally sad is that there is a supporting story to ONLY YOU which
is infinitely more interesting and touching, and might have made for a
movie I would truly have enjoyed.  Bonnie Hunt gives a winning
performance as Kathy, a woman whose marriage to Faith's loutish brother
Larry (Fisher Stevens) has left her wounded and bitter.  "I married a
liar," she says at one point.  "Why?  Because I married a man."  Her
tentative romance with a smooth-talking Italian (Joaquim de Almeida of
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER) is the one thing in ONLY YOU which rings
true, and watching her struggle with her feelings about her marriage is
genuinely affecting.  Unfortunately, the story isn't about Kathy, and I
just didn't care about Faith's quest for Damon.
     Individually, as performers, I generally like Marisa Tomei and
Robert Downey Jr.  Both usually appear very natural on screen, and
Downey in particular shows the potential to be a solid, charming
romantic leading man.  In ONLY YOU, however, his lovable rascal is
completely one-dimensional, and the script's attempts to justify his
behavior don't sell.  Tomei has it even worse, directed by Norman
Jewison to a teeth-aching level of adorableness, but that's just
indicative of how everything in ONLY YOU is pitched:  lay on the syrupy
score, emphasize Sven Nykvist's cinematography, throw in romantic
signifiers by the dozen.  What it all adds up to is a film so
mechanical you can almost hear the gears grinding.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Faith Corvatch (played by Marisa Tomei) has known since she was a
girl who the right man for her was.  Both a Ouija board and a fortune
teller has told her that the man fated to be her great love was someone
named Damon Bradley.  She has looked for Bradley all her life.  She has
become infatuated with the idea that fate has chosen a mate for her, if
only she can find the elusive Mr. Bradley.
     Eventually she has to give in to the inevitable and find someone
else.  Her fiance, a podiatrist, is not the most romantic choice for a
husband, but Damon Bradleys do not show up every day.  But a few days
before her marriage her husband gets a phone call from a friend on his
way to an international flight to Venice.  The friend's name is Damon
Bradley.  Faith rushes to the airport, but not in time to intercept the
man whom fate has intended for her.  Her only chance to meet the man
promised to her by fate is to go with her best friend Kate, and fly to
Venice to chase down Damon.  After a journey from Pittsburgh to Venice
the fates finally arrange for her to run into Damon on the streets of
Rome.  Damon (played very winningly by Robert Downey Jr.) fall into
each other's arms, love at first sight.  Then Damon makes an admission
about himself that will change their relationship entirely that will
change Faith's mind about him.  Damon will have to prove he really is
the man that the fates have intended for Faith.  For more--far too much
more--information about the plot twists, see the trailer running in
theaters.
     Norman Jewison directs as well as co-produces hoping, possibly,
that the colorful Italian characters and soundtrack music will capture
some of success of his MOONSTRUCK.  That film was about older and,
frankly, better drawn and more interesting characters.  Here the
attempt is not to so much to define characters but to but to create a
very light piece of froth somewhere between SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE and
ROMAN HOLIDAY--elements borrowed from both are present--and take
advantage of warmly romantic Italian settings and seductive music,
particularly "Some Enchanted Evening" from SOUTH PACIFIC.  Sven
Nykvist's camera captures romantic scenes so that they feel romantic
without being overly Hallmark-ish.
     Marisa Tomei plays her role brash but with more of a fragile
quality than her Oscar-winning role in MY COUSIN VINNY.  Robert Downey
Jr. as her possible perfect romantic mate is a trifle bland but winning
enough to have the audience rooting for him to win her a second time.
More personality is vested in Bonnie Hunt's witty Kate.  Hunt's Kate
seems more than a little like the sort of character Stockard Channing
plays.  Rounding out are the cast Fisher Stevens and Joaquim De Almeida
as Kate's husband and would-be lover.
     This is one Norman Jewison film that will not make much of a
splash, but it is competent and pleasant.  Give it a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Marisa Tomei, Robert Downey Jr., Bonnie Hunt, 
           Joaquim De Almeida, Fisher Stevens, Billy Zane
Director:  Norman Jewison
Producers:  Norman Jewison, Cary Woods, Robert N. Fried, 
            Charles Mulvehill
Screenplay:  Diane Drake
Cinematography:  Sven Nykvist
Music:  Rachel Portman
Released by TriStar Pictures
     One of the most important elements of any romantic comedy is that
mysterious, unquantifiable quality referred to as "chemistry."  Some
couples have it; others don't--that's a simple fact of films.  How
well the leads work together often determines whether a movie is
successful or not.  In the case of ONLY YOU, Norman Jewison's latest
production, actors Marisa Tomei and Robert Downey, Jr. don't fully
connect.  There are times when the embers start to smolder, but a fire
never ignites.
     This is another love story about fate (remember SLEEPLESS IN
SEATTLE?), with Tomei's Faith (an appropriate name) having a Ouija
board experience at age eleven which convinces her that her destiny is
someone named Damon Bradley.  Days later, a carnival fortune teller
reinforces this belief.  So, when as an adult of twenty-five only ten
days away from an unpromising marriage, Faith answers a phone call from
someone named Damon Bradley, her life is turned upside down.
     Accompanied by best friend and sister-in-law Kate (Bonnie Hunt),
Faith climbs aboard an airplane and follows Damon to Venice, and then
on to Rome, where she tracks him from hotels to restaurants, always
getting close, but never close enough.  Then, when she's about ready to
give up hope, coincidence crosses her path with that of a charming
stranger (Robert Downey Jr.) who casually informs Faith that he, in
fact, is the man she's looking for.
     As is the case with almost every motion picture in the genre,
originality is not ONLY YOU's strong suit.  Everyone going to the movie
knows what's going to happen in the end--the only question is whether
the path leading there will be more enjoyable than insipid.  In this
case, it is, but there's a lot missing as well.  ONLY YOU is
entertaining without being exceptionally accomplished.
     The storyline has the advantage of including several minor twists
designed to play upon the audience's expectations, and the rewrites of
Diane Drake's script offer an alternative explanation for those who
resolutely refuse to acknowledge the existence of destiny.  Amidst all
the requisite formulaic situations, there are moments of surprising
cleverness.
     Unfortunately, Tomei and Downey appear less made for each other
than their characters supposedly are.  The two never come across as a
great--or even less-than-great--screen couple.  WHEN HARRY MET SALLY,
THE CUTTING EDGE, and even this summer's IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU (to
name a few) all worked to some degree because it's easy to accept that
the lead characters fall in love.  In ONLY YOU, that
impossible-to-define connection is weak.
     One of the problems may be that Downey isn't in the first
forty-five minutes of the film and when he finally appears, things seem
to be rushed.  Or it could be that Marisa Tomei's Faith is so focused
on destiny that she never has an opportunity to develop a personality.
Especially compared to her friend Kate, she is flat.  Tomei's energetic
performance merely makes her hyperactively flat.
     With her short hair, the lead actress bears a striking resemblance
to a young Audrey Hepburn.  The effect is obviously intentional, as
shown by the inclusion of a scene at the "Mouth of Truth" that echoes
ROMAN HOLIDAY (Downey does a great vocal imitation of Gregory Peck).
     Some will doubtlessly compare ONLY YOU to Jewison's most popular
romantic comedy, MOONSTRUCK.  Similarities, however, are mostly
superficial.  MOONSTRUCK forged living, breathing characters from a
keen script.  ONLY YOU doesn't do nearly as much, nor is its source
material as impressive.  Despite some underlying ideas about forging
one's own destiny, this is a essentially a light, inoffensive movie
that will appeal to those who aren't seeking more than a bubbly
romance.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Hey, you want just to have some fun at the movies?  Tired of
message movies that require deep concentration?  Exhausted from
watching your heroes battling explosions and run-away buses in action
flicks?
     I have just the ticket for you.  ONLY YOU is a romantic comedy
that is easy on the brain, will provide many moments of laughter, and
will leave you with an inner happiness that, gosh, life really is
great.  Moreover, there is a built-in guarantee with this movie.  If
you end up hating the movie, it is at least a ** travelogue.
Seriously.  Italy never looked so lovely.
     ONLY YOU's plot setup involves a mystery.  A young woman whose
first name is Faith (Marisa Tomei) is about to be married, but when she
was only 11 a Ouija board told her she would marry someone else called
Damon Bradley.  I love the choice of the character names.  Through
various circumstances she and her sister (Bonnie Hunt) are launched off
to Italy just before her wedding day to find Damon.  Well, he shows up
played by Robert Downey Jr.
     There are actually two romantic plots - one for each sister and
tons of comedy along the way.  I laughed out loud numerous times.  The
script is bright and funny.  I thought the movie worked slightly better
as a comedy than a romance, but I did like both of the romances.  I
must admit, however, that I liked how one of romances ended, but not
the other.
     One of my favorite lines has Faith telling her friends about her
engagement.  They asked if he got on his knees for the proposal, and
she says, "no, but he turned down his beeper."  Since my wife spends
time in almost every movie we go to reading the messages she gets on
her pager, this line really hit home!
     The mystery as you may have guessed is who exactly is Damon
Bradley?  Please suspend disbelief on entering so you can have a lot of
fun.  The mystery is pretty lightweight but does take some tricky
turns.
     The casting of Tomei was absolutely perfect.  A sweeter, prettier
and more innocent actress you would be hard to find.  I thought Downey
might not be up to the part, but he played it as perfectly as did
Tomei.  I found myself particularly intrigued by the Hunt character
although her romance was supposed to be a sideshow.
     Finally, the camerawork and the gorgeous settings in Italy were
...  well, wow!  Many linkages too to older movies, but I am never very
fond of that cinematic technique.
     I have no complaints.  It did all that it could for its genre.  I
liked it as much as I expected to like LOVE AFFAIR, but did not.  I
ended up liking LOVE AFFAIR about as much as I expected to like ONLY
YOU which wasn't very much.
     ONLY YOU runs a nicely edited 1:48.  It was basically a G show,
but was rated PG.  I think anyone older than 8 might be interested in
it.  I recommend it to you and award it ***.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: October 29, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     So what if it is only a romantic fairy tale, a comedy, the kind
they used to do in the 1930s?  Maybe that is what we need right around
now after so many heavy films, something we can just sit back and enjoy
and laugh and not worry about whether or not anything up on the screen
could possibly happen.  If you are in the mood for that, this is you
movie.
     Marisa Tomei is so pretty in a non-Hollywood way, so wholesome and
lovable that you just wish you could hold her in your arms and live
happily ever after.  When, as Faith, she meets up with Peter (Robert
Downey Jr.) another handsome, non-grunge, and he needs only one glimpse
to fall completely in love with her, we are delighted for them.
     When Faith was a child, her Ouija board came up with the name,
D-A-M-O-N B-R-A-D-L-E-Y, as the man she would one day meet and marry.
Now, grown up, Faith visits a Fortune Teller who sees in the crystal
ball the name, Damon Bradley; Faith realizes this can be no mere
coincidence.  But she is about to be married to a podiatrist.  And when
her fiance's old school friend, on his way to Venice, Italy, phones to
wish her well, and *his* name is Damon Bradley, well!
     Her sister-in-law and best friend, Kate (Bonnie Hunt), is having a
problem with her husband's infidelity so when Faith says she absolutely
must go to Venice in search of Damon Bradley, Kate takes off with
her.   There they meet Peter, a shoe salesman,  who pretends that he is
Bradley ... and the fun really starts with many twists and turns and
one delightful surprise following another.
     Rounding out the cast are Joaquim De Almeida, Fisher Stevens,
Billy Zane, Siobhan Fallon, John Benjamin Hickey and Adam LeFevre.
     Written by Diane Drake.  This is her first produced screenplay.
