Title
Review for Carry On Up the Jungle (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Graeme Huggan
   What many have called 'one of the lesser Carry on movies', this spoof 
on Tarzan movies is all about the expedition in search of a long-lost son 
and the rare oozalum bird. 
   Lady Evelyn Bagley (Joan Sims) lost her husband and her son many years 
ago in the jungle. She decides to return to that same jungle area to try 
and find out what happened to them. Also on the expedition are Professor 
Inigo Tinkle (Frankie Howerd) and Claude Chumley (Kenneth Connor) who are 
in search of the oozalum bird. Aiding them is expert hunter and poacher 
Bill Boosey (Sid James) and local guide/ head of tribe Upsidasi (Bernard 
Bresslaw). 
   After searching for days in the blinding sun, they find the oozalum 
bird and also have to escape from a gorilla. Furthermore, they lose 
Bagley's assistant June (Jacki Piper) who decides to stay with her new 
found friend 'Tarzan' (Terry Scott). When Lady Bagley catches sight of 
him one night, she knows that he is her long-lost baby!
   Before she can acquaint herself with him, the whole expedition is 
captured by an all-woman tribe Aphrodisia led by Tonka (Charles Hawtrey) 
who decide to use the men to further populate their tribe. When Lady 
Bagley discovers that Tonka is her long-lost husband and Tonka falls from 
power, their only hope of escape is to be rescued by Tarzan and June!
   There are good performances from Joan Sims as the upper-crust lady on 
expedition and Frankie Howerd as prude Inigo (a part originally meant for 
Kenneth Williams, but due to his work commitments, was given to Howerd). 
Valerie Leon is entertaining as Leda, the eventual leader of Aphrodisia, 
and Terry Scott and Jacki Piper's partnership works well. On the other 
hand, Sid James' part is useless as is Kenneth Connor's part as Chumley. 
They are only in the movie to make up the number of regulars. 
Furthermore, Bernard Bresslaw suffers in the mundane part of Upsidasi. 
The small part of Tonka is well-suited to Charles Hawtrey. As leader of 
an all-woman tribe, he is hilarious. Similarly, the flashback to when he 
got lost in the jungle with little 'baby-waby' is very amusing. However, 
apart from a very very brief appearance at the start, he does not enter 
the movie until after sixty minutes duration.
   This Carry on suffers from some very poor parts and some weak 
performances (Connor and James). There are very poor production values as 
the whole film was made in the Pinewood studios and so the jungle looks 
terrible. The oozalum bird is ridiculously tacky and cheap! The jokes are 
getting very repititive by this stage and the absence of so many regulars 
(due to the need for only the characters of Bagley, Tonka, Tarzan and 
Tinkle) illustrates how basic the story is. Even so, this Carry on is 
entertaining and is not the worst of its kind.
