Title
Review for Nature of the Beast (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1995) *1/2 - C:Eric Roberts, Lance Henriksen, Brion James.
A Victor Salva Film. Victor Salva. Hmmm. Why does that sound so familiar to
me? Victor Salva. Nope, I can't quite place it.
We learn early in the film that there are two criminals on the loose. One
has stolen money from the mob, and one is killing everyone he comes into
contact with, calling himself "Hatchet Man". He's called "Hatchet Man"
because he likes to chop up his victims into little tiny pieces using his
hatchet, obviously. The two main characters (the two only characters really)
meet up and drive around the desert, stopping in hotels and diners along the
way. Roberts, as an intense drug addict, feels as though he has bonded with
businessman Henriksen (who for some reason wears a really fake looking
padded stomach to make it look like his character has a pot belly), and will
not let him wander from his site as they travel through the desert in
Henriksen's new company car, each alluding to the fact that they know who
the other person is.
"The Nature of the Beast" is a letdown, and it seems that writer/director
Victor Salva has no idea how to make a film, whoever he is. One big mistake
with the film is the casting. Eric Roberts is perfectly cast in his role of
the shady, dusty drifter, but Lance Henriksen is not the right man for his
character. You see, the script depends on the fact that this character be
played by an actor who can portray a bewildered business man-type character
and Henriksen has played one too many psychos in his career to be able to
revert back to this kind of part. He seems demented from the beginning of
the film, which makes you start to think more along the lines of the
"surprise" plot twist, which if you have only a thimble full of brains
you'll be able to figure out.
Victor Salva. Wait! I know! He's that guy who worked with the "Rat Pack"
films along with Sinatra and Dean Martin! Oh, no that was Henry Silva. Hmmm,
well who is this Victor Salva guy?
It's during the last twenty minutes or so when the film completely falls
apart. The "surprise" that you already know and are completely ready for, is
just presented on screen casually with no attempt to make it a startling
revelation. Then at one point, Henriksen has gotten so sick of Roberts' drug
use that he ties him to a chair, injects him with a mix of heroin, cocaine,
and alcohol and then watches him die. He then buries him and goes about his
business. Now about six hours later, Roberts digs his way out of his grave,
perfectly ok. He then confronts Henriksen and starts confessing to him that
he's the devil and well, you can't kill the devil now can you? But, maybe he
is the devil and then again maybe not. Needless to say, none of it makes any
sense. And the final confrontation makes you care about the outcome just
like if you were watching a serial rapist and a child molestor fight each
other.
Child molestor! That's it! Victor Salva is that guy who was convicted of
molesting the child star of his previous film "Clownhouse!" I knew I knew
his name. His crimes are the reason I will never watch "Powder", because
there are much more talented directors out there who aren't working who HAVE
NOT BEEN CONVICTED OF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT WITH LITTLE BOYS and who deserve the
opportunity to work much more than this twisted pervert. Man, I wish I had
put things together before I sat through this mess.
Lance Henriksen is credited as "Creative Consultant" during the end credits
of the film. He must have thought up the idea of the fake stomach.
Have A Question Or Comment? Email Me At chuckd21@southeast.net
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.
