Title
Review for Funny Girl (1968)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In one of his Broadway shows Jackie Mason would pull this
shtick.  He'd tell us of his friend, let's call him Sam, who was
brought up in a poor Jewish enclave in New York and who
became a successful entertainment lawyer.  "Venn he vas vit his
friends," Jackie intoned, he vould tuck luck mih--'Suh, tell me,
Hoib, yoh daughter, she getting merried soon, nu?'  But when his
phone rang in his Park Avenue office, he'd answer,
'Hellooooooooooooo, yeeeeees, this is Samuel Farbstein, what
can I do for you?'"  
   By all rights Fanny Brice, born likewise in a poor Jewish
enclave on New York's Lower East Side, then rising to become
an entertainer, might have switched from an ethnic accent to a
bland inflection.  Yet somehow she never really possessed a
trace of Yiddish in her voice.  Ironically she was called by Florenz
Ziegfeld upon to acquire the very accent that her audience
assumed she had in the first place.  At least that was the case in
real life and real life was exploited to a great extent by Isobel
Lennart in fashioning the undistinguished book to the musical
play "Funny Girl," which opened at Broadway's Winter Garden
Theater on March 26, 1964 and which was adapted to the big
screen four years later.  There is never any doubt that Fanny
Brice is not a Park Avenue WASP and one need not be
Professor Henry Higgins to figure out her roots in the largely
Jewish Lower East Side of New York in the early part of the 20th
Century.   While Julie Styne's songs, most notably "People" and
"Don't Rain on My Parade," are striking and in no way try to copy
the songs that Fanny Brice actually used while she was a
Ziegfeld Follies star, "Funny Girl"  does not approach the greatest
of the all-American wonders like "Oklahoma," "My Fair Lady,"
and "South Pacific," and you'd therefore not expect to see even
revival-hungry Broadway jumping at the chance to try once
again.
   But Columbia Pictures has had no problem in restoring the film
print for moviegoers to enjoy,  opening to a public at summer's
end.  This "Funny Girl" can benefit not just the nostalgic buffs but
many young people who may be familiar enough with Barbra
Streisand--for whom the musical and the movie were made--but
who long for the chance to see her in her first Oscar-winning role. 
(She tied with Katherine Hepburn that year.)  Critics who saw the
1964 musical agreed that Ms. Streisand easily met the comical
genius of Fanny Brice and repeated their accolades once again
when the movie opened, and it is indeed a pleasure to hear
Barbra's uniquely mellifluous tones once again as she performed
at the age of twenty-six.  Watching her dominate virtually every
scene with her commanding personality, one can almost see
Barbra Streisand herself, afflicted with mediocre vehicles during
the 70s, pestered by criticism of megalomania and accusations
that she had been a tyrant interfering with every detail on the set.
   "Funny Girl" is the story of a young woman, Fanny Brice
(Barbra Streisand),  who is raised on Henry Street on New York's
Lower East Side, who has  internalized the opinions of those
around her that she is not beautiful and yet is fiercely determined
to have a life on the stage. After ignoring a director's order firing
her from the set of a small burlesque-type production, she
appears on roller skates and turns what is supposed to be a
straight dance performance into a pratfall-filled comic romp, to
the great pleasure of the audience.  After receiving the romantic
attentions of an aristocratic and well-connected gentleman, Nicky
Arnstein (Omar Sharif), she is auditioned by Florenz Ziegfeld
(Walter Pidgeon) and hired as a major singer for the Ziegfeld
Follies.  Ignoring the script, she turns a serious finale about the
joys of being a bride into a comic spin in which she appears at
the altar in the final stages of pregnancy.  About to be fired for
insubordination, she is saved when she receives five curtain
calls. Much of the second half of the story deals with her up-and-
down relationship with the shady Mr. Arnstein, a man who
motivates her to sing "People" with tears of joy, "Don't Rain on
My Parade" in rebellion against her detractors, and in one of the
rare instances in which her mouth is shut to listen to Nick sing
seductively to her "You Are Woman."  A particularly surprising
scene occurs during what looks like a serious performance of the
ballet "Swan Lake" but concludes as a comic send-up by Ms.
Streisand--who reportedly rehearsed for three months for that
scene alone.
   Like "Apocalypse Now Redux," this film has gone through a
careful restoration, in this case taking the original negative, used
almost 300 times, replacing almost one-fifth of the original, and
repairing the remainder in a process that took three years to
complete.  The six-track stereo masters, somewhat disintegrated,
were digitally restored and remastered and a Dye Transfer
printing process used to restore color.
   What emerges still looks its age.  Some of the washed-out
color could remind you of revived movie musicals such as "Meet
Me in St. Louis."  But perhaps that is one of the charms of the
rejuvenation.  We want to see modern technology bring to life
what otherwise would be impractical to show to today's audience
who are not diehards loving to see the fragmented silents at
places like New York's Museum of Modern Art. Yet the faded
colors lend an pleasant, old-fashioned look to the project, which
is desirable.  I don't think anyone sees "Funny Girl" to hear Julie
Styne's music, although "People" is one of the great classics of
the American musical theater.  They say that anywhere in the
world, you can address an envelope simply "Barbra" and it would
get to the correct recipient.  That should give you the reason this
"Funny Girl" could conceivably draw an audience to its theaters
and away from some of the more modern but paradoxically far
more tired productions of the summer.
Rated G.  Running time: 155 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
