Title
Review for Jing ke ci qin wang (1999)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Pedro Sena
FILM TITLE:  The Emperor and the Assassin
Failed love stories, are something else. When told in ways that make it even
bigger, it's another. And then there are lines like "the face that launched
a thousand ships to sea", which the story of this film closely resembles.It
is a time when soothsayers, and many others have predicted, and expected,
that what is today China should become one nation, one empire. But there
were five or six major provinces that were extremely independent and they
would fight many an alliance, or such an act, if they themselves did not
feel that they had the right to unite the whole area. Ying Zheng, is now the
emperor of Qin, and he is making an attempt to unite the rest of the
provinces into one empire.
What one did not expect, or have any idea of, is that this film maker has
turned himself into a veritable David Lean, with incredibly well designed
shot sequences, and artistic outlooks that are not always, if ever, found in
films at all. The sumptuousness and carefully detailed shooting sequences,
and cutting of this film, along with its grandeur, is an amazing thing to
see. This is a great film, at when it comes to the technical side of things.
As mentioned in a previous review of another Chen Kaige film, I felt that
the daring shooting style that Christopher Doyle employed in Kaige's
previous film was going to take what was predominantly an acting exercise,
into another area. The film stakes were being raised then, and films like
"The Emperor's Shadow", "Temptress Moon" were exercises in that direction.
What I did not imagine when I said that, was that it was not only about the
acting, but just about everything else in the film. It comes to mind
immediately the one thing that I believe really stands out in this work, and
it is the music of Zhao Jiping. Like those that glorified the great films of
Cecil B. De Mille and David Lean, this man has been allowed a chance to let
the music also add to the mix, and the results are fascinating. In "The
Emperor's Shadow", this was quite evident, and the director Chen Kaige had
no qualms about allowing the music to take over the film and lead us, when
needed. In this film, the continuity is sacrificed some, into chapters,
because the story elements jump so much, but the music allows us to forget
all that and blends the various sections beautifully ... I am inclined to
think that the directorial direction to use fades between sequences was not
exactly needed, but the film works as it is. Still the same story, but the
other view points and opinions need to come into play to make sure that we
have a whole film in the end. The end result is a five part story, that
takes a look at the very first Emperor in China, and what he had to do to
get there. it was a magnanimous ideal then for the Emperor ... likewise for
the film.
 The young Emperor and Lady Zhao had been friends for some time. He ahs
always loved her, but she has always been very independent and there are no
indications in this film that there had been anything between them beyond
friendship. At the start, Lady Zhao wants to simply be worthy of being a
part of the court ... no doubt getting a lot of flack from other nobles as
to why she is there in the first place. What turns out to be her attempt to
make herself a valuable part of the Emperor's life, all of a sudden turns
into a one sided love story, that helps Qin become the Emperor, but at the
same time lose his beloved, whom he wants for a Queen. But this is not
really her wish, and apparently has never been. And this is the quandary
that the young Emperor faces from day one, until he eventually is able to
accomplish his assigned task ... whatever the price. The price may be that
he had to become a ruthless murderer to do it, and that this was not what
the woman he loves wanted. She is a foreigner in his court after all, but as
children, these things do not matter.
 Eventually an assassin is found, and this man, is the one that Lady Zhao
takes a liking to. he has pretty much renounced the part of his life that
once had made him a great killer. It only took a young blind girl to show
him what he could not see. And he could not save her from herself. Her
courage alone stands out, and forces a change in his life. This change, as a
recluse and worker at various odd jobs, eventually leads him to a local hang
out where he shows his strength -- and is noticed by Lady Zhao who happened
to be coming by at the moment. Jing Ke, eventually becomes the man hired to
kill the Emperor Qin, but the irony of it all, is that he has made up his
mind not to kill the Emperor with a sword at all, but merely to show him
something that the Emperor has hid from for a long time, which has been
hinted at, and is finally shown in the end ... he may not even be the
legitimate owner to the power he has. Even as Jing Ke makes his attempts in
the end to kill the Emperor, they seem theatrical and not intentional, and
he finally gives in and allows the Emperor a moment of hollow victory ...
something that he has experienced already with Lady Zhao. What he doesn't
know is that Jing Ke and Lady Zhao have been friends/lovers (not clear), and
when she finally comes to claim the body of her hero Jing Ke, the Emperor is
now shown as a man that has killed to get to the top, and lost everything
else that his heart could ever want, specially his only love. Above all,
these people have held on to the secret that he may not be the legitimate
ruler, now that he is the Emperor.
 Stunning films usually balance out the acting, the sets, the music, and
everything that they have, that will show in the screen. The acting free for
all that was evident in "Temptress Moon" is visible here in that it is now
controlled and beautifully worked with. No longer are the main characters
strictly a symbol of an old Noh styled theater and tradition that had marled
the earlier Chinese and Japanese art forms. These are now full fledged,
solid actors and actresses that really explode in your screen and help make
a good film great. And it takes a director with a vision, and a desire to
accomplish this, to be able to unite such a conglomeration of forces. Chen
Kaige has dome that and then some.
 Magnificent film, while also a bit of a historical facet on China. While I
am of the opinion that it is sad that the only films that can be made in
China are these historical pieces, the over all tone to this reviewer is
that this film is showing undertones that the government in China is brutal
and obviously lacks the "love" to be a beloved person. The Emperor may
become the Emperor, but he will no longer be remembered for his deeds and
his works. Take notice Chinese leaders, and allow these artists to speak
their minds freely, instead of under the breath of a history long past and
gone. These arts will be remembered and foster more about ... sadly, all we
can do with this history is create a film. In this case a magnificent film,
with the qualities that most of us really appreciate.
4 of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena, Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 2000. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN (Jing Ke Ci Qin Wang) (China, 1999) *** 
1/4  Directed by Chen Kaige. Written  by Wang Peigong and Kaige. 
Photography, Zhao Fei. Editing, Zhao Xinxia. Production design  Tu 
Juhua. Music, Zhao Jiping. Produced by Han Sanping, Shirley Kao and 
Satoru Iseki. Cast: Gong Li (Lady Zhao), Zhang Fengyi (Jing Ke), Li 
Xuejian (Ying Zheng, King of Qin), Sun Zhou (Dan, Prince of Yan), Lu 
Xiaohe (Gen. Fan Yuqi) Wang Zhiwen (Marquis Changxin) and a cast of 
thousands.  A Le Studio Canal Plus/Pricel/Shin Corp./NDF presentation 
of a New Wave Co./Beijing Film Studio production. A Sony Classics 
release. In Mandarin with subtitles, 161-163 minutes. R (violence and 
gore)
Unless you are a fiercely militant member of the BBNMM group (Bring 
Back the Ninety Minute  Movie), you can not only endure but enjoy 
this long film. Enjoy visually, that is. "E & A" 's top award for 
production design at Cannes '99,  was deserved. The sets and 'scapes 
-- as well as the photography and the mass movements -- are 
breathtaking.
If you are a scholar of Chinese history, this story, climaxing in 221 
BC, may thrill you for its subject. It may also get you going 
pointing out liberties taken with history, inaccuracies, inventions 
or fictionalizations--but I wouldn't worry about that. Few moviegoers 
outside China are specialists. College-age film students in 2000 AD 
have little historical memory, not to mention knowledge. This, in 
spite of the abundance of historical programs on TV. Ignorance of 
even major events of the 19th century often finds an  astounding 
alibi in "that was before my time."
The convoluted story centers around the efforts of Ying Zheng, the 
King of Qin.  After centuries of turmoil, Qin and six other kingdoms 
(The Seven Warring Kingdoms) were China's main subdivisions. (The 
film deals wit four of them.) Ying is obessed with unifying them 
under his rule, or in less polite terms, of conquering them. His 
methods are ruthless. He also plots with his lover Lady Zhao for 
skullduggery which would give him  "legitimate" cause for attacking 
the most powerful of the other kingdoms, the neighboring Yan. The 
trick is to make of Lady Zhao what, in today's parlance we might call 
a mole or a double agent who would arrange for a professional 
assassin in the pay of Yan to attempt murdering Ying, thus clearing 
the way for the latter's invasion of the kingdom of Yan.
This is the main thread of a tale so complex that it requires printed 
explanations on the screen. It includes a great many atrocities as 
Ying evolves from idealist to tyrant; a betrayal of Lady Zhao by her 
regal lover; her falling in love wit the assassin Jing Ke; the 
newfound scruples of the now-retired killer; and many other twists, 
events and characters, plus a host of warriors.
This is epic filmmaking that melds Hollywood spectaculars by C.B. De 
Mille, other lavish historical films ("Ben-Hur," "Spartacus," etc.), 
crowd scenes a la Sergei Eisenstein, certain Kurosawa movies, even 
some Italian epics made in the early 1900s. It is impressive. It is 
splendidly photographed. It is color coordinated (oh those Chinese 
reds! Colors that is, not Reds).
Much pomp and many circumstances have made "E & A" the most expensive 
Chinese film ever. It was three years in the making. Its first 
test-screening, in Japan, was of about 3 hours (180 minutes.). The 
next cut was down to 160 minutes.  A third went down to 140 minutes. 
The fourth and final one, went back up to 161 minutes. Curiously, it 
was not shot, as it should have been, in 70mm widescreen.
The film was partly financed by sources outside China, notably French 
ones. The actual cost has not been divulged, but calculated guesses 
range, in US Dollars,  from 10 to 30 million. Even at the top figure 
the movie is amazingly cheap by European standards, dirt-cheap by 
American standards. I would guess that its Hollywood cost would be 
close to 200 million.
Chinese labor and other costs are so low that I can also guess that 
given the right political and trade circumstances, there would be a 
spate of movies filmed in China by foreign interests.
The director is Chen Kaige who, along with Zhang Yimou is today the 
super-star of the so-called Fifth Generation of China's filmmakers. 
This is the seventh feature by Chen who skyrocketed to international 
renown with his fifth, "Farewell My Concubine," the co-winner of the 
1993 Cannes Festival along with Jane Campion's "The Piano."
For the beautiful and talented actress Gong Li (Lady Zhao) this is 
her third film with Chen. Her debut was in "Red Sorghum" (1987) which 
was also the directorial debut of Zhang Yimou. I don't know when 
those two became "an item," but they worked together in all the other 
six Zhang features between 1989 and 1995: "Codename Couguar," "Du 
Jou," "Raise the Red Lantern," "Qiu Ju," "To Live," "Shanghai Triad." 
Then they separated, both in real life and in films.
"E & A" is said (but no one seems to know the specifics) to have 
employed 300,000 extras ( I suspect set-builders are included in this 
figure) and many thousands of Red Army soldiers. Many lavish and 
detailed interiors and exteriors were constructed. Ying Zheng's 
palace was conserved as an attraction for visitors, a show place. In 
another show place, Beijing's Great Hall of the People in Tienanmen 
Square, the movie was projected in 1988 to three thousand guests, 
probably a first of its kind in China. Chen, who had not always been 
the darling of censorship, was not criticized. Ying, the King, then 
Emperor of the film, is by tradition one of China's great heroes. 
Eventually however, the Chinese media were critical of the 
unflattering presentation of Ying.
There is also a debate about Ying the Unifier and Mao that other 
Unifier. The two are often compared. However, some people feel (but 
director Chen Kaige evades the question) that the movie is an 
allegory for Mao's Great Leap Forward.and his catastrophic Cultural 
Revolution.
With its enormous stress on visuals and often melodramatic twists and 
turns, there is no real room left for the analysis of characters. The 
performances are good. They include the principals as well as some 
supporting parts such as a charming blind girl whose family the 
assassin had destroyed, and a canny, effeminate Marquis . He is the 
Queen Mother's lover, wily, role-playing and the exact opposite of 
what is called in computerese WYSIWYG (what you see is what you get).
The various illustrations of "power corrupts; absolute power corrupts 
absolutely" are points made vividly. And the impermanence of tyranny 
(think Hitler, Stalin ...and Mao) is a post-scriptum in the film, as 
one learns that the King became Emperor, but only for fifteen years.
PS.  Ying Zheng was responsible for the Great Wall of China. It is 
also his tomb, at Xian, that is guarded by that huge, famous 
collection of terra cotta soldiers.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Steve Rhodes
Beautiful, baffling and boring.  THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN by Chinese
director Kaige Chen (FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE and TEMPTRESS MOON) uses
mainly claustrophobic interior scenes to tell the bloody story of
Chinese unification in 221 B.C.  Long episodes of palace intrigue are
enacted so slowly that you'll swear the projectionist must be running
the print at half speed.
Periodically, we get a breath of fresh air, as the picture moves
outdoors for a few fast, battle sequences.  After these brief respites,
we head back inside the palace walls so that the protagonists can
proclaim various awkward platitudes that they usually don't mean, since
everyone appears to be part of some cabal.  The characters, whose
motivations remain largely an enigma, strut around, periodically
breaking into laughter in strange bits of bravado.
The King of Qin (Xuejian Li) wants to crush the other six Chinese
kingdoms and form a single country under his rule.  He -- surprise! --
isn't such a nice guy.  Among his more despicable acts are having two
young boys, his brothers, crushed to death, lest they become rivals to
his throne.  The audience has to endure this and other acts of horrific
violence.
As the scheming Lady Zhao, Gong Li plays the woman who hires an assassin
(Fengyi Zhang) to kill the King of Qin and thereby stop the slaughter of
the other kingdoms.  The script by the director and Peigong Wang uses
chapter headings to delineate the various parts of the narrative, but
the opaque story makes for one long, confusing history lesson.
Fei Zhao's lush cinematography and Jiping Zhao's sweeping music are so
striking that you'll wish that they'd been saved for a more compelling
motion picture.  Their presence in this film is actually
counterproductive, as the tendency to fall asleep during the long, dull
passages are only accentuated by the dreamy music and the gorgeous
visuals.
The obviously ambitious film really has very little to say.  This brings
me to my rule for directors.  If you have little to say, don't take
forever saying it.  Instead of taking almost three hours of the
audience's time, trim your film back to the standard length of one and
half to two hours.  Your picture will be more focused so that your
audiences are more likely to appreciate it, and, if they don't, they
won't get mad at you for wasting so much of their time with a film
that's badly in need of more editing and better pacing.
THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN runs 2:40.  It is in Mandarin with English
subtitles.  The film is rated R for language and strong violence and
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, February 4.
Locally, it will be playing at one of the Camera Cinemas in the San Jose
area and one of the Landmark Theaters in the Palo Alto area.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/81c3df2014250f48882568650020730c?OpenDocument
THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN: A film review by Athan Bezaitis
Copyright Filmcritic.com 2000
THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN sets a new standard for quality of
production.  The story, costumes, sets, music, and performances all have
such a powerful authenticity that after watching it, I felt like I had
just lived through a two-thousand year old episode of Chinese history.
Director Chen Kaige's (YELLOW EARTH, TEMPTRESS MOON) film lives up to
its billing and is a worthwhile success (not to mention the most
expensive Asian film ever produced).
Set in third century BC, THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN is the story of
Ying Zheng (Li Xuejian), leader of the Kingdom of Qin, whose goal is to
conquer the six other kingdoms of China and merge them into one unified
land.  To accomplish this objective, he embarks upon a horrific reign of
terror and brutality against all who stand between him and his destiny.
In an attempt to aid Zheng's conquering of China, Lady Zhao, (Gong Li)
his lover since childhood, devises an intricate fake assassination plot
against him, which, when "uncovered," will provide him with a legitimate
excuse to invade the neighboring kingdom of Yan, his greatest obstacle
to unification.  When Zheng betrays her trust and invades her homeland
of Zhao killing thousands including innocent children, she turns against
him.  As part of the original scheme to be in exile in the kingdom of
Yan, she encounters Jing Ke (Zhang Fengyi), a great warrior and former
assassin.  They fall madly in love and she attempts to convince him,
along with The Prince of Yan, to kill the King of Qin before he becomes
Emperor and continues his tyranny.
The story is a bit confusing because so much is lost in the translation
from Mandarin, but pay close attention, and you'll be able to follow
along.  What I found most enjoyable about the film was its character
portrayals within the context of a historical deconstruction.  From the
assassin, Jing Ke, to the power-hungry Ying Zheng, the emotions and
reactions are surprisingly humanistic, and I could easily relate, even
though the plot takes place two thousand years ago, and is part of a
civilization totally different than our own.  For example, Jing Ke is an
assassin who is able to recognize the wrong in killing through the power
of love and rises against King Zheng.  Also, Lady Zhao is a woman who,
in her naiveté, believed that a benevolent leadership under a united
emperor would stop the bloodshed that the people of China had faced for
hundreds of years.  These endearing characters, most of which are
fictional, blend in perfectly with the historical setting and add the
much-needed element of passion into the dramatic mix of the story.
THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN is not to be missed.  It breaks from the
typical American mold with its slow developing plot and strenuous length
(over two and a half hours), but captures the quality of the finest
homegrown products reminiscent of BRAVEHEART or DANCES WITH WOLVES.
Indulge yourself in an in this epic rendition of a tumultuous episode of
ancient Chinese history.
4 stars ****
Starring:  Gong Li, Zhang Fengyi, Li Xuejian, Sun Zhou, Lu Xiaohe, Wang
Zhiwen, Chen Kaige, Gu Yongfei, Zhao Benshan, Ding Haifeng
Director/Writer: Chen Kaige
Producer: Satoru Iseki, Shirley Kao, Philip Lee
Screenplay: Wang Peihong
MPAA rating: R
Year of Release: 1999
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     From the beginnings of film one of the highest goals of cinema has
been to transport the viewer in space and time to see something he
would never be able to see otherwise.  I suppose that might be why most
of my favorite films are either fantasy films or historical--the two
genres are linked.  To some extent both appeal to the same kind of
people.  And of particular interest are the great spectacular scenes of
history involving thousands of people: the exodus from Egypt, the
Oklahoma land rush, the Zulus besieging Rorkes Drift, the Battle of
Austerlitz, that sort of thing.  The noblest goal of cinema is to act
as a time machine to make us eyewitnesses to those events of world
history really worth seeing.
     But film is a business and one has to be able to shoot epic scenes
where extras will work for an affordable amount.  One place where labor
is cheap is in heavily-populated China.  Yet until now Chinese
historical films have been very personal films shot in medium close-up.
The sweeping events of Chinese history have been too expensive to film,
so generally have never been used as the subject of films.
     It has been foreign filmmakers who have recognized that
inexpensive labor in China give the potential for filming the huge
scenes in Chinese history.  In 1987 Steven Spielberg filmed the rout of
Shanghai for EMPIRE OF THE SUN and Bernardo Bertolucci filmed the
grandeur of the Forbidden City for THE LAST EMPEROR.  At long last the
Chinese themselves, in conjunction with French and Japanese investors,
have seen the potential they have to paint history on the grand scale.
And if epic history could be made about the last Emperor, what better
choice could there be than telling the story of the first Emperor?
That would be Ying Zheng, one of history's true larger than life
characters.  At age 13 he inherited control of the Kingdom of Qin.
This was 245 B.C.E., about the same time Hannibal was born.  He took
seven warring kingdoms and forged them into a single empire.  Though
his reign was a short one he was responsible for the two greatest
artifacts of Chinese history, the Great Wall of China and the huge
terra cotta army of soldiers he had buried with him to protect him in
the next life.  He also burned all but the most innocuous of books to
have greater control of his subjects' minds and so that Chinese history
would start with him.
     In THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN, Ying Zheng (played by Li
Xuejian) comes to power as a boy of thirteen in 245 B.C.E. with
a dream of unifying the seven warring kingdoms under one benevolent
emperor.  [Actually historical opinion is that he inherited rather
than originated the dream and that all the conquering but a few
mop-up operations had been done by his predecessors.]  His childhood
sweetheart, now his concubine, Lady Zhao (Gong Li) joins him to aid
him.  Ying Zheng wants to conquer the Kingdom of Yan without
appearing to be the aggressor.  Lady Zhao has a plan to get them to
make the first move.  She will appear to be a prisoner escaped from
Ying Zhang fleeing to Yan.  There she will convince them to send an
assassin to attempt to kill Ying Zhang.  But the King will be ready,
kill the assassin, and use the incident as an excuse to destroy Yan.
     The story centers on the story Ying Zheng (whom we should know
will succeed in the end if we are up on our history) and on his
assassin Zhang Fengyi as Jing Ke.  Each is sympathetic is his own way.
Ying Zheng wants to end 550 years of warfare and create an empire he
expects to run for the good of his people "with grain growing
everywhere."  Jing Ke was a great assassin, now guilt-ridden over the
deaths he has caused.  He wants nothing to do with killing again, but
is being manipulated for another job.  The style is a real change of
pace for director Chen Kaige who experiments with bits of style
borrowed from samurai films, Hong Kong action film, Japanese historical
epics, and Italian Westerns, bringing them all into perhaps the most
entertaining film to come from the People's Republic of China.  Not all
the battle scenes are as exciting as they might have been staged, but
considering the source they always beat the expectation.
     Clearly there is much more of a "give the public what it wants"
attitude than we have seen previously coming from the PRC.  If this
film is successful and that attitude catches on, it can only be healthy
for the Chinese film industry.  This is a film gives the audience a
history lesson and has them enjoy getting it.  The one problem being
that with most of the rest of the world knowing so little Asian
history, they probably will not know where fact leaves off and fiction
begins in this story.
     Films from China are usually edifying experiences.  For once we
have one that is also fun.  I rate THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN 8 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Chen Kaige's (Farewell My Concubine) latest film has a lot going for
it.  This gorgeous, sweeping epic is reportedly the most expensive Asian
film ever produced.  It won a technical award at the Cannes Film
Festival.  And it reunites Kaige with his Concubine and Temptress Moon
star Gong Li, one of Asia's greatest actresses.  But despite this, The
Emperor & The Assassin is still a tough sell because of its running time
and its subject matter – a nearly three-hour film about political
turmoil in 3rd century B.C. China.  And it ain't in English either.
Doesn't exactly scream crowd-pleaser, does it?
According to history, there was a 200-year period of unrest between the
many kingdoms that composed China.  There were seven major territories,
with the strongest, called Qin, ruled by Ying Zheng (Li Xuejian, The
Blue Kite).  Ying was fixated on the unification of the Chinese
territories so that he could rule the cohesive land as its first
Emperor.  He destroyed everything he viewed as a potential obstacle,
slowly conquering the other kingdoms and eventually realizing his goal.
But Ying died only one year into his reign, and his Qin dynasty
dissolved within nine years, leaving the original Emperor a casualty of
his own ambition and voracity.
The film, which is divided into five acts, focuses on Ying's attempt to
defeat China's other states without appearing ravenously bloodthirsty.
His concubine, Zhao (Li, Chinese Box) hatches a brilliant scheme
involving a phony assassination attempt on Ying, whose attempted
elimination would appear to be the doing of Yan, a neighboring kingdom
that has proven to be the biggest hurdle for his plans to integrate the
country.  But in the process of setting up the assassination, Ying
learns something about his ancestry that causes him to go unhinged,
killing anyone that could either know or find out his secret, as well as
turning against Zhao's native soil (which, just to be confusing, is also
called `Zhao').
Zhao, horrified at Ying's actions, is forced to support the Prince of
Yan (Sun Zhou), intending to make the phony assassination attempt on
Ying into a very real threat.  In Yan, she meets Jing Ke (Zhang Fengyi,
The Blue Kite), an ex-killer who returns to his brutal ways in order to
help Zhao.  The double-crossing is reminiscent of Shakespeare, while the
surprise heritage is suggestive of Star Wars.
Kaige's direction (he also wrote the script with Wang Peigong),
especially of the intensely gruesome battle scenes, is tremendous.
Cinematographer Fei Zhao (Sweet & Lowdown) bathes the film a warm light
and Li delivers her best performance in years.  Costumes and design
teams add to a top-notch production.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN (JING KE CI QIN WANG)
   There is no one so insufferable as a reformed smoker or a
rehabilitated alcoholic.  He becomes an immovable force, a
man consumed with a lust for changing the bad habits of
others.  The assassin in Chen Kaige's sumptuous feast of a
movie, Jing Ke (Zhang Fengyi), is a hit man who has killed
many people for money. Now, customarily in areas of China
during the Third Century B.C., an assassin would be hired to
wipe out an entire family.  When in the process of doing just
this, something happens that causes Jing to think about a
career change.  He becomes appalled with the idea of taking
human lives and consequently furious at those who do so,
whether they be contract killers or heads of government who
lead their people to war.
   This theme is just one of the elements of the complex,
multi-plotted drama, "The Emperor and the Assassin," which
is said to be the most expensive film ever produced in Asia. 
Its cost of $15 million might be considered chump change in
Hollywood, but given the hundreds of disciplined extras
involved in the lively and gory battle scenes, the money
raised from sources like Taiwan, Japan, and a consortium in
Europe was well spent.  Considering the lavish banquet for
the eyes, does the movie--by the director of the erotic and
exquisite "Farewell, My Concubine"--pass muster as drama? 
Alas, only partly.  For while director Chen Kaige appears
influenced by Shakespearean histories and in particular by
Akira Kurusawa's epic film "Ran," the romance between his
leading lady and the titled assassin and between the woman
and the emperor seem more influenced by Plato than by
Eros. What's more, the staging is so diffuse that we often
lose sight of the central focus, which should be on the
characters in the ancient romantic triangle while we try to
follow the Machiavellian machinations of some very ambitious
people.
   Based on actual historical documents from the Third
Century B.C., at a time that Hannibal was preparing for war
against far-away Rome, "The Emperor and the Assassin" pits
two dogmatic forces against each other.  The Emperor of
Qin, Ying Zheng (Li Xuejian), has been mandated by his
ancestors and by heaven (he thinks) to unite the seven
kingdoms of China under his rule.  China was divided into
seven dominant kingdoms: Qin, Han, Qu, Wei, Zhao, Qi, and
Yan, with Ying concentrating his attention on Han, Zhao and
Yan.  To drum up a pretext for invading Yan, he has his
lover, Lady Zhao (the great Gong Li), travel to Yan to hire an
assassin, who would journey to Qin. When the plot to
eliminate the emperor is uncovered, the emperor would be
free to invade Yan, gaining the untroubled backing of his own
people and of some of the kingdoms to the south.  But the
killer had become sickened when a pretty, blind teen commits
suicide just after a wipe-out of her family, and becomes
devoted to destroying people who remain like the former Jing. 
That pits him seriously against the emperor, whose armies
have been ordered to kill, kill and kill and even to bury
children of one of his enemy kingdoms alive.  The plot is
complicated by an attempted coup at the hands of the
previously smiling Marquis Changxin (Wang Zhiwen), who
serves the emperor graciously and subserviently.  
   The 161-minute movie is divided into two parts so diverse
that you could cut the story with a sword.  The more involving
segment is a series of beautifully staged battles involving
hundreds of warriors on both sides.  They attack with shields
in mechanical discipline like the soldiers of modern
computerized video games and, in fact, could have been
refugees from movies like "Robocop" and the latest of the
Jean-Claude Van Damme series.  Defenders atop their
castles ply their attackers with stones while the assaulters, in
one pulse-racing incident, roll what resembles a huge bowling
ball into the castle door, breaking it down like a SWAT team
from the LAPD.  Some of these segments are so boldly
filmed that if Kurusawa were alive today, he'd be
influenced mightily.  Chen Kaige uses state-of-the-art
technology in filming his campaigns but for some puzzling
reason did not shoot the work with wide-screen lensing.  
   When the time comes to make love and not war, you'd
think that this movie and the 1993 "Farewell, My Concubine"
were directed by two different people.  "Concubine," which
also featured the wonderful and gorgeous Gong Li, was also
about a Chinese warlord period, but there the focus is
squarely on the pugnacious 52-year relationship of two male
childhood apprentices in the Peking Opera.  By contrast,
when Chen focuses here on his three principals, we long to
return quickly to battle.  You'd never know that Lady Zhao
and Jing had fallen deeply in love, though the way Chinese
showed their emotions before the first millennium might
explain this in part.  Nor are we convinced when the emperor
begs his great love not to leave him, recalling their childhood
days when, both hungry and cold, they romped happily in the
haystacks.  If the dialogue seems pedestrian (even though
the performers often speak their lines with effectively
stentorian and highly stylized timbre) live with the translator. 
Still, since the long movie never really drags despite its flaws,
"The Emperor and the Assassin," makes for a solid spectacle
that would cater to an audience that might find the also lavish
"Anna and the King" too dated and too tame.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 161 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
