Title
Review for Neon Bible, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

NEON BIBLE, THE (director: Terence Davies; cast: Gena Rowlands (Aunt
Mae), Diana Scarwid (Sarah), Jacob Tierney (David, at age 15), Denis
Leary (Frank), Leo Burmester (Bobbie Lee Taylor ), Frances Conroy (Miss
Scover), Peter McRobbie (Reverend Watkins), Drake Bell (David, at age
10), 1997)
An old-fashioned type of coming-of-age film, shot by the
Englishman,Terence Davies (Distant Voices, Still Lives). It is adapted
from a semi-autobiographical book written as a teenager in the '50s, for
a national literary contest, by John Kennedy Toole. It tells of a
Southern boy named David (Tierney) and of his growing up poor and
uneducated in the '40s in a rural and backward area. And, the strange
hold his harsh father (Leary) and tender mother (Diana) have over him.
It also tells about his meaningful relationship with his visiting Aunt
Mae (Gena). She is a former actress/singer. They all try to provide him
with enough different insights so this gentle soul can find his own way
in the world.
When this slow-moving film works, and it often does, it is artistically
and subtly satisfying to behold, as it spins its simple story in
flashback. David is seen alone in the opening shot riding away from town
in a train, going somewhere unknown.
The next time we see him, is in flashback, as he was as a 10-year-old
(Drake), hoping for a Christmas snow, but getting rain and magical
looking icicles on his porch, instead. What perks him up, is the
ebullience of his Auntie Mae, who does not fit into this Bible Belt
region. She prefers to dress and act in the style of her showbiz past,
and is therefore loudly chastised for her appearance and sinful
attitude. When one lives in such a place, where conformity counts for
everything, then one either tries to fit into town or leaves. To stay
and fight the locals will only ensure you of a most unpleasant time.
Because the aunt and David are different from the locals, this leads to
their closeness and dependence on each other. But they are forced to
change as their lives change, and this is what affects the sensitive
David the most. He is not ready for these changes. David grows up as a
loner (unable to communicate with his racist and scornfully pious
father, who is also a wife beater). He, is also, unsure of himself with
girls and with the making of friends his age. He goes to work full-time
at the age of 15, in a pharmacy, and seems to be going nowhere fast.
Sarah gets overcome with the misery and dull routines of her life. We
see her lose a grip on reality while she is attending one of those
religious revival meetings. Soon afterwards she becomes a basket case
worried about how the family will get by with her husband unemployed
from his factory job, and has to be taken care of by Aunt Mae. Aunt Mae
will meet a local musician and team up with him professionally and
romantically, and soon leaves town with him. That leaves David with no
choice but to quit his job and take care of his mother, or else she
would be taken away to the mental hospital, something he is dead-set
against. This leads to the tragic event that causes David to get on the
train and hightail it out of there.
All this drama is played out quietly.The camera focuses in for the
longest possible time without moving: on the local scenery, on Sarah
hanging out the laundry, on the homefolks going about their business, a
KKK meeting his father takes him to, Aunt Mae singing "My Romance"
slightly off key; and, in the background, we can hear a radio speech by
FDR, an episode from Gang Busters, music such as "Dixie" and "This Old
Rugged Cross" and "Chattanooga Choo Choo", being sung by the locals. We
become absorbed in the national and local events taking place during
that time period and see how it influenced the youngster growing up.
The film ends abruptly and magnificently, without a summation of what
might happen to David. The train David is on is crossing the countryside
in early dawn, framed against an optimistic sky of varying shades of
yellows, oranges and pinkish blues.
How this child grew up during that period of transitional Southern
history, in a climate of racial bigotry and Christian hypocrisy, in a
family with obvious economic, psychological, and cultural problems, sets
the mood for this dramatic story. It is this child's insightful look at
the world and at himself, and what changes him and forces him to grow up
before he is ready to, that makes it a special film.
The cinematography was beautifully done. Gena Rowlands was impressive in
a very subtle performance. Jacob Tierney as David, gave his character
softness and breath in a laconic performance. The only problem I have
with his performance, is that since this is his life story being told,
he seems to be too emotionless. I found that hard to fathom; if it was
me on that nighttime train, alone, going to who knows where, as my brief
life passes before me, I would have certainly been more animated about
the situation I was in.
This film is not Davies' best film, it was too dull at times for that;
but, it is a solid film, an honestly done effort that was
well-researched and presented. It offered an interesting observation
about the rural south, that is often filmed, but most of the time, it is
done with less tact than how it was done here and with less of a real
artistic touch.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus's World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE NEON BIBLE is a innovative film by Terence Davies, who did the
acclaimed DISTANT VOICES, STILL LIVES.  THE NEON BIBLE has a highly
confusing narrative but with much technical brilliance underneath.  It
is a hard picture to describe since it is a collage of images from a
boy's past.  These brief snippets of his recollections are glued
together with a massive infusion of old time songs ("The Old Rugged
Cross", "Chattanooga Choo Choo", "Tara's Theme", "Dixie", and many
others).
     The plot, to the extent there is any, has to do with David (Jacob
Tierney at age 15 and Drake Bell at age 10) being on a nighttime train
while visualizing his past.  The movie is shown in flashbacks.
     His mother Sarah (Diana Scarwid) is close to being sent to a
mental institution.  His father Frank (Denis Leary) is a factory worker
who has lost his job.  Staying with them is his high spirited Aunt Mae
(Gena Rowlands).  Aunt Mae is a mediocre singer who lives in the
memories of her theatrical career and longs to return to the stage.
Although it is by a British director, it is set in a Southern United
States Bible Belt town in the 40s.
     The acting is passable.  Leary, who specializes in overacting,
this time is in control in his small part.  Rowlands is the best of the
lot, but below average for her.  Scarwid is over the top and not
believable.  My biggest problem is with Tierney who approaches the
character of David with such detachment.  Rarely does he waste time
showing any emotion and yet, this is David's life we are seeing so you
would expect more animation.  Quite a boring performance.
     The dialog by the director, based on the novel by John Kennedy
Toole, is sparse and eclectic.  Many scenes have little or no dialog.
It is the sort of show that has you staring for a long time trying to
figure out where the show is going and why.  I did not know the show's
length and actually thought it was ending after half an hour.  After
one hour into the show, the picture begins to make some sense, but
never comes together.  At the end, I found myself thinking what a mess,
but yet there are many magical and special parts of this disappointing
movie.
     Let's not waste any more time on what is wrong with THE NEON
BIBLE.  There are technical aspects so special that were they in a
better film, they could have been spectacular.
     First and foremost is the wonderful camera work and cinematography
by Mick Coulter (GREGORY'S GIRL, LOCAL HERO, COMFORT AND JOY, and FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL).  Let me cite just three examples.  When they
want to age David by five years, he stands with his back to the camera
while facing a large moon, and in the translucent moonlight, he is
slowly morphed into a boy five years older as if they were using
time-lapsed photography.
     Second, the scene transitions frequently start high up, like in
the stars, and then move down slowly into the scene like a memory might
start in your subconscious and then slowly form.  Editor Charles Rees
deserves some of the credit too for the magical transitions.  Third, in
the scene at night of a revival all of the people's faces are lit by
gaslight as if God's radiance is the source instead.
     In the press kit, Davies discusses the look of the film.  Whereas
in his last two shows he used a special lab process to desaturate the
color, this time he went for a full saturation.  Since the show is
about memories he wanted the lighting "to be rich or accentuate the
chiaroscuro."
     The sets by Christopher Hobbs (EDWARD II) are accurate and
evocative of the small country towns of the south.  I especially liked
the Nehi drink signs on the stores.  This is a grape drink I remember
drinking as a little boy in the south.  You could get one of those for
a nickel and for fifteen cents more you could have a hamburger too.
     The dialog, when there is any, does have a few good lines.  The
most thought provoking is David's, "If you were different from anybody
else in town, you had to get out.  They used to say in school, 'you
have to think for yourself,' but you couldn't do that in town.  You
have to think what your father thought and that was what everybody
thought."
     I will be happy if someday writers describing the south of that
era will not feel obligated to include a Ku Klux Klan scene as this one
did.  I grew up in the south just after this time, and I never saw a
KKK rally in my entire life, and I don't know anybody that ever has.
Yes, they happened, but they were fairly rare.  Writers should not feel
obliged to include them, especially as the scene here is superfluous to
the story.
     THE NEON BIBLE runs 1:31.  I do not believe film is rated.  There
is no sex, nudity, or bad language that I can remember.  There is a
mild amount of violence.  Except for a single brief violent scene, it
would probably get a PG rating.  As it stands, I think it is PG-13
material.  The show will bore most kids, but any kid over say 8 or 9
should be able to watch it.  I sat there with my mouth agape in most of
the show so I certainly can not recommend it, but for its technical
brilliance I do give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
