Title
Review for Princess Bride, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Clark Quinn
     I admit it, I was skeptical.  I also was hopeful.  This paradox came about
by having read the wonderful book THE PRINCESS BRIDE by William Goldman and
being unable to imagine that it could be turned into a successful movie,
capturing the humor, wonder, the *magic* of that book.  Why, then, was I
hopeful?  Well, the screenplay was written by the same William Goldman who
also wrote the screenplay for one of my all-time favorite movies, BUTCH CASSIDY
AND THE SUNDANCE KID.  And the director was Rob Reiner, who has an apparently
flawless record with THIS IS SPINAL TAP, THE SURE THING, and STAND BY ME.  With
mixed feelings, I went to see a sneak preview of the movie THE PRINCESS BRIDE.
     For once, my optimism was richly rewarded and my cynicism was sent
snivelling back under its rock; this is a near-perfect movie.  The movie
captures, as did the book, an unabashed affection for heroic fantasy, touched
with a soft spot for True Love, and retaining a deft appreciation for humor.
Witty, warm, and still exciting, this movie captures the magic that seems so
elusive in today's bottom-line oriented movie making.  Of course, there is more
than just a good screenwriter and director behind this success.  As I have
gleaned from an interview with Norman Lear and Rob Reiner in the Calendar
section of the Los Angeles Times, and an excerpt, published on the net, from a
cinema magazine, this is definitely a labor of love by the principals.  Rob
Reiner fell in love with the book and has been trying to make it for many
years.  William Goldman wrote the screenplay for the book and fought to regain
control of it so that it could get made.  Norman Lear produced the money for
the movie when Rob Reiner was having trouble obtaining it, with no strings
attached.
     Enough about the history, how about the movie?  Well, most of the casting
is nearly perfect.  As the mysterious and heroic protaganist of the story,
newcomer Cary Elwes is perfect.  Capturing the necessary secure confidence,
self-effacing humility, and romantic fervor, Elwes *is* Wesley.  I didn't
recognize Mandy Patinkin as the murdered swordmaker's son, Inigo Montoya, until
part way through the movie.  He just about stole every scene he was in.  In
fact, my favorite scene in the movie is the duel between these two on the brink
of the Cliffs of Insanity.  Similarly well cast was Andre the Giant as the
strongman, Vizzini (?); Chris Sarandon as the wicked Prince; and Christopher
Guest as the evil advisor to the prince.  From there the casting was only a
little less effective.  I wish I could be more enthused about the heroine.
Another newcomer, Robin Wright is beautiful enough as the milkmaid-turned-
princess, Buttercup, but she seemed to lack some magic sparkle.  I may be
picking at nits, but I confess that I thought her a tad wooden.  Another
niggling problem was the casting of some of the bit parts.  For reasons I can
only guess at, a number of cameos were filled by (to greater or lesser extent)
well-known characters.  By and large, these failed (for me) to capture the
requisite gentle, subtle humor that characterized the rest of the movie.
Wallace Shawn, as the Sicilian, was particularly strident and unconvincing as a
masterful schemer.  Peter Cook, as the Bishop, added a jarring note to the
wedding scene.  Billy Crystal and Carol Kane, as the semi-retired miracle
worker and his wife, added a less distracting note, but their scene still
retained a touch of schtick.  To end on a cheery note, Peter Falk as the
grandfather and the boy who played the sick grandson, in the story surrounding
the story of the Princess Bride, were both excellent.  In fact, I was
pleasantly surprised at the understated job Falk turned in as the grandfather
slowly arousing the interest of the originally sceptical child.
     The rest of the movie stood out, too.  The scenery and cinematography were
not noticeably awkward, a frequent problem in fantasy movies.  While you had to
be aware that some of the settings (such as the infamous Cliffs) were not real,
there was none of the usual artificial look about places like the Swamp of
Fire.  If I do not notice the scenery too much, if the scenery is an integral
part of the movie, I consider it a success.  The same holds true for the music.
With my tin ear, the only time I notice the soundtrack is when the music
strongly contrasts with what I would expect in a scene.  In one recent movie I
kept wondering, "Why are they playing this creepy, somethings-gonna-happen
music in the middle of the denouement?"  While this may be damning with faint
praise, Mark Knopfler's score certainly didn't intrude on the scenes at all.
You'll have to read another review to find out more about how effective the
score was.
     The screenplay, as I should have expected, was wonderful.  As was noted in
the excerpt on the net, large amounts of the dialogue were lifted from the
book.  The rest of the dialogue seemed to aptly mesh with the atmosphere that I
waxed so enthusiastic about at the beginning of this review.  My only
hesitation is that I saw this at a sneak preview in our large auditorium, which
has a murky sound system, so that I missed some of the dialogue, particularly
of Andre the Giant (who had some good lines).  Similarly, the pacing of the
direction was superb.  There were no flat spots, no rushed action.
     All in all, I think that THE PRINCESS BRIDE is a must see.  While I will
have to see it again before I confer upon it the status of a classic, I will
give it a strong 3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  I may well give it a 4 after a
second viewing.  -- Clark
Starring: Cary Elwes, Robin Wright, Chris Sarandon, Christopher Guest,
          Mandy Patinkin, Andre the Giant 
Screenplay: William Goldman
Music: Mark Knopfler
Director of Photography: Adrian Biddle
Editor: Robert Leighton
Executive Producer: Norman Lear
Producers: Rob Reiner and Alexander Scheinman
Director: Rob Reiner
Clark N. Quinn
clark%ics@sdcsvax.ucsd.edu 
OR {ucbvax,decvax,akgua,dcdwest}!sdcsvax!sdics!clark.uucp  

Author
Ellen Eades
     I went to see THE PRINCESS BRIDE at a sneak preview in Seattle on Saturday
night.  Admittedly, I went with extremely high expectations--perhaps the
highest I have ever had for a movie--due to positive reviews and the presence
of some extremely talented people on the movie credits.  It is perhaps to be
expected that I was not *completely* delighted with the movie; but that is more
because, due to time constraints, so much was left out, than because anything
was seriously screwed up.
     It is, indeed, a very, very enjoyable film.  I would give it a solid 8 on
a scale of 1-10, with previous 9s being STAR WARS, LA BAMBA, and CASABLANCA,
LABYRINTH another 8, and ROMANCING THE STONE and LADYHAWKE a 7.  (Now you know
what I like, so you can adjust your perceptions accordingly ;-) )  The dialog is
crisp and the costuming is appropriately colorful, just this side of silly
(real fairy-tale stuff, not historically accurate medieval rags and
linsey-woolsey :-) ).  The music was slightly jarring, though--I found that I
noticed it just a bit more than I like in a movie, and the final song,
"Storybook Love," playing during the credits, was frankly awful.  I admit that
I have little experience rating direction, but I think that, as far as I could
tell, it was very good.
     In general, though, I liked it a lot, and will go back to see it again at
least twice.  It is extremely light-hearted unabashed romantic silliness, which
I think is just fine.  As a swashbuckler movie, it leaves a little to be
desired--the swash and buckle are somewhat uneven--lots in the beginning and
end, little in the middle--but the characterization, as noted before, is
*excellent* : Buttercup really does have "hair the color of autumn" and Westley
really does have "eyes like a sea before a storm," Inigo and Fezzik are
excellently cast, and Rugen is wonderfully slimy.  I found Wally Shawn as
Vizzini the Sicilian somewhat jarring because much of his character was
eliminated--he's not telepathic, for example, in the movie, nor was he a
hunchback, and the comic elements were emphasized more than the "dizzying
intellect."  Billy Crystal and Carol Kane as Max and Valerie were enjoyable,
although I found that I really would have liked to see Buttercup's parents and
the Princess Noreena of Guilder, three characters the movie leaves out
entirely.  The King and Queen of Florin had much smaller roles in the movie, as
well.
     The settings were great, with one exception.  On-location scenes in
Ireland and England were wonderful.  However, the duel on the top of the Cliffs
of Insanity was, just a little too obviously, filmed on a sound stage.  I found
the transition from that to the real-location scenes following a little bit
weird.  
     General conclusion:  It was great.  Go see it.  You will almost certainly
like it.  I have minor quibbles, but that's IT.  Definitely one of the top two
movies of the year for me.
     My one quibble is with the extent in which the movie was true to the
spirit of the book.  Spoilers follow, so be warned.
     In general, the movie is much, much more light-hearted than the book.
Westley's deaths, both the first and the second time, are treated more
seriously in the book--Buttercup's reaction to the first death is handled with
more tragedy in the book, and little Billy's reaction to the second death is
explored in more detail in the book.  I found that after the second death in
the movie, I was in a state where I was convinced he would come back (Forget
for a moment that I read the book  and *knew* he would come back) and wasn't
taking it as seriously as I did in the book, when I was beginning to get
worried after the second death that he really was dead.  Additionally, a lot of
William Goldman's sniping in the book is gone--sideswipes at his wife, his
editors,  his publishers--and so the undercurrent of black humor is missing.
THE PRINCESS BRIDE the movie is much more a fairy tale than THE PRINCESS BRIDE
the book, which was almost a satire at many points.
     Also, I disagree with the person who stated that the dialog followed that
in the book almost exactly.  This really isn't so to the degree I had hoped.
Part of the problem is that THE PRINCESS BRIDE the book is able to utilize long
descriptive passages by Goldman and THE PRINCESS BRIDE the movie has to show
these scenes rather than allow one to imagine them.  A lot was left out, for
example, of Buttercup's early years.  We are completely at a loss to understand
how Buttercup met Prince Humperdinck and married him--a few lines of voiceover
between Westley's death and Buttercup's presentation to the people of Florin is
all we get.  Inigo Montoya's story *is* well done; he tells it to the man in
black essentially as it was in the book, but Fezzik's is left out entirely.
The whole Snow Sand episode, which I found one of the most exciting in the
book, is difficult to reproduce on film, so all we see is Buttercup falling in,
Westley diving in, and the two of them emerging.  I *wish* Princess Noreena of
Guilder had been left in!!
     The part I feel most ambiguous about (no wonder) is that the ending of the
film is completely different from the ending in the book.  Now, I realize that
a fairy tale movie ought to have a fairy tale ending, but I really miss the
sense of "HUH?!"  I got at the end of the book.  It was fun to be completely
misled that way.  The ending of the movie, while sweet and happily-ever-after
nice, simply does not give you that feeling.  (Those of you who feel that the
way the book ended was complete and absolute heresy *will* like it, though!)

Author
Simon Doherty
Any director who can make films as diverse as Misery, This is Spinal
Tap and The American President deserves kudos for variety.  Rob Reiner
has displayed as much range as anyone around, and what's more his
films are always entertaining.  Here he turned to the fantasy genre,
and again came up with a winner; a film that will genuinely be enjoyed
by both children and adults.
The story: A boy (Fred Savage) is ill in bed so his grandfather (Peter
Falk, of Columbo) comes to read a book to him: The Princess Bride.  It
is this book that makes up the bulk of the film.  Robin Wright plays
Buttercup, a girl who finds True Love with her farmhand Westley (Cary
Elwes).  However, Buttercup hears one day that Westley has been killed
by pirates, and so she submits to Prince Humperdinck's (Chris
Sarandon) desire to marry her.  After she is kidnapped, though,
Westley comes to rescue her.  He later has the help of Mandy Patinkin
and Andre the Giant, playing a master swordsman and ... a giant.  To
be fair to Andre, he displays an acting ability that far surpasses the
standards usually seen in the WWF, and he doesn't let the film down in
the slightest.
I first saw this movie when I was about ten, and I absolutely loved
it.  It had it all; a mysterious hero, fantastic sword fights, an oily
villain and giant monsters.  It was the kind of film that we would
re-enact countless times on the playground, after prolonged arguments
over who got to play whom.  I truly wished that I was Westley, almost
as much as I wished I could be Marty McFly.  Few things could be
cooler than being able to sword fight, although being able to play
Johnny B.  Goode is one of them.  It's a rare movie that captures a
kid's imagination so completely.
Now, at the cynical, world-weary age of 18, it's still great fun to
watch.  The film retains the best aspects of the fantasy genre while
also gently satirising it.  The scenes between grandfather and
grandson are well observed and stay the right side of sentimental.
There's also amusing cameos from Mel Smith and Billy Crystal, and
unfortunately an unamusing cameo from Peter Cook (It's basically him
talking with an exaggerated lisp).
Who would I like to be now?  Hey, I'll be an ill kid if it means Columbo
is my grandfather.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One of the advantages of being a proficient and successful writer is
that you can write what you like and do not have to worry that this idea is
too silly and readers will laugh at it.  One of the advantages of being a
proficient and successful director is that you can make the kind of films
you like and do not have to worry that the idea is too silly for audiences.
William Goldman has written such successful books as NO WAY TO TREAT A LADY,
MAGIC, MARATHON MAN, and SOLDIER IN THE RAIN.  So when he decides to write a
book-length fairy tale, his publisher knows he can pull it off.  And when
Rob Reiner, who was not much of an actor but as a director of three films--
the worst of which was as good as THE SURE THING--wants to direct it, he
isn't going to have too much trouble getting up the mazuma to make a fairy-
tale movie.
     Princess--are you ready for this?--Buttercup (played by Robin Wright)
is to be the unfortunate bride of Prince Humperdinck (played by FRIGHT
NIGHT's Chris Sarandon).  But the only man she has ever loved was the callow
youth Westley (played by Cary Elwes of LADY JANE) who was killed off-screen
by a notorious pirate.  Buttercup would like revenge on the pirate and she
isn't too fond of her fiance either.  And speaking of revenge, Inigo Montoya
(played by Mandy Patinkin) would like some against the six-fingered man who
killed his father.  They could get revenge together but unfortunately
Inigo's current job involves him and two friends, including Fezzik the giant
(played by Andre the also Giant) kidnapping and murdering Buttercup.  Then
there's the little boy who would rather play videogames than listen to his
grandfather's story.  Yeah, well, he's in there too.
     It is hard to find fault with as well-meaning and enjoyable a film as
this offbeat fairy tale.  The real problem is that the characters are flat
so that one is never really drawn into the story.  Reiner can create
characters we like and believe, and had he done it here the film would have
been just about perfect.  As it is, the story feels a little thin and too
short for its material.  Something is wrong when the only one likable
character is played by a quarter-ton of professional wrestler.
     Beyond that all I can say is this is the most fun you will have in a
film for quite a while.  I could tell you why this fractured fairy tale is
fun, but most of what is fun catches you off-guard.  I couldn't convey the
fun and I'd probably ruin the gags.  Rate the movie a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.
