Title
Review for Wonder Boys (2000)
Number of Reviews
28

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Michael Douglas is not getting any younger.  In Wonder Boys, he plays an
English professor from western Pennsylvania.  He wears a woman's
bathrobe, is never seen without an effeminate red scarf, and has
old-lady glasses like Sally Jessy Raphael.  His character is
middle-aged, rumpled and sad, but I'm not even sure this is acting.  To
think that this guy knocked up Catherine Zeta-Jones is as disgusting as
it is perplexing.
Douglas (A Perfect Murder) plays Grady Tripp, who, in addition to being
an English teacher, is a successful novelist that hasn't been able to
finish the follow-up to his critically acclaimed success from seven
years ago.  And when I say he isn't able to finish it, I mean he isn't
mentally able.  Grady has several thousand single-spaced pages typed but
is no closer to the ending than when he began.
Grady also has a few other things going on his life.  His wife just left
him and he's hot for one of his students (Katie Holmes, Dawson's
Creek).  Terry Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr., Bowfinger), his editor, is
on his way into town to read the book that Grady assured him was
finished.  Grady's girlfriend (Frances McDormand, Madeline), who happens
to be the Chancellor at his unnamed university, is pregnant despite the
fact that it's been a while since she's slept with her husband (Richard
Thomas, John-Boy Walton), who happens to be the Chairman of the English
Department.
As if that isn't enough to occupy his mind (and yours), Grady and an
awkward student named James Leer (Tobey Maguire, The Cider House Rules)
spend a day on the run after they accidentally kill the Chancellor's
dog.  As things begin to spiral out of control, you can't help but think
about a younger Douglas going through similar situations in Falling
Down.  The actor also provides the gravelly narration for the film,
which is told in the first-person through his character.
Wonder Boys is the first film Curtis Hanson has directed since his
amazing adaptation of L.A. Confidential.  It offers further proof that
anyone can direct a really great script.  Not that he's a bad director
or anything - in fact, there are several nice hand-held camera shots
from interesting angles in the film, while cinematographer Dante
Spinotti (who worked on Confidential and The Insider) gives the picture
a warm, rich look.  The film was shot on location in western
Pennsylvania, and Carnegie-Mellon University was used for the school
shots.
The script was adapted from Michael Chabon's novel by Steven Kloves
(Flesh and Bone).  Kloves' script follows the book pretty closely, but
for time's sake, he is forced to leave off a great scene where Grady
takes James to his in-laws' for Passover dinner.  The acting is pretty
solid all around, but the casting is a little goofy.  In the book, Grady
and Terry were supposed to have met in school, implying that they're
close in age.  Douglas and Downey, Jr. are over twenty years apart in
real life.
The best part about the film is the amazing soundtrack, highlighted by a
new Bob Dylan song (`Things Have Changed') recorded exclusively for
Wonder Boys.  There are three other Dylan songs included in the film,
along with numbers from Buffalo Springfield, John Lennon and Van
Morrison.  Standouts include Leonard Cohen's `Waiting for the Miracle,'
which you may remember from Natural Born Killers, and Neil Young's `Old
Man,' which, while laughably appropriate, is remarkably poignant in the
film.  This is the first `must-have' soundtrack of the year.
Curiously, the title of the film is never explained  it's the name of
the book that Grady is writing in Chabon's novel.  So if you walk out
thinking you missed something, you really didn't.  Just some money and a
little bit of your time.
1:52 - R for adult language, minor sexual content and drug/alcohol use

Author
Christopher Null
     I have no idea what "wonder boys" are.  I assume it's one of many
questions that are answered in the novel but which go ignored in this
film adaptation.
     As it turns out, it doesn't really matter who the WONDER BOYS are.
The film has enough substance and, especially, ribald and dark, dark
humor to carry it despite a few minor flaws like this.
     A very deep character study, WONDER BOYS revolves around Pittsburgh
professor and novelist Grady Tripp (Douglas), now struggling with his
second novel, which has stretched into 2,600 pages and years in the
making.  Daytime, he teaches writing to the likes of James (Maguire) and
Hannah (Holmes), while attempting to hide his affair with the (married)
University Chancellor (McDormand) and keeping his unfinished novel from
the grubby hands of his editor (Downey).
     Grady's relationship with the talented (yet nearly sociopathic)
James becomes the focus of the picture, is Grady tries to coax the
hidden writing talent out of James, all while they take a wild ride
together through a Pittsburgh winter storm.
     The depth of character development in WONDER BOYS defies any hack
film critic's two-paragraph description of them.  Suffice it to say that
WONDER BOYS is often deep and invariably quite funny, especially if
you're a fan of black comedy.  Case in point: The film really gets going
when James kills the blind dog that is attacking Grady's leg.  I never
knew a dog's carcass could be so funny, and I'm something of an animal
lover.
     That said, WONDER BOYS is no KINGPIN.  This is a sophisticated
movie for a sophisticated audience.  The cast is universally
outstanding.  It's especially good to see McDormand in a good role
again, and Douglas and Maguire turn in very memorable performances,
redeeming them both for some recent, lackluster pictures.
Director: Curtis Hanson
Producer: Curtis Hanson, Scott Rudin
Writer: Steven Kloves
Starring: Michael Douglas, Robert Downey Jr., Katie Holmes, Tobey
Maguire, Frances McDormand, Richard Thomas, Rip Torn
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
WONDER BOYS (director: Curtis Hanson; screenwriter: Steven Kloves/novel
by Michael Chabon; cinematographer: Dante Spinotti; edited by Dede
Allen; cast: Michael Douglas (Grady Tripp), Robert Downey Jr. (Terry
Crabtree), Katie Holmes (Hannah Green), Tobey Maguire (James Leer),
Frances McDormand (Sara Gaskell), Richard Thomas (Walter Gaskell), Rip
Torn (Quentin Morewood), Richard Knox (Vernon Hardapple), Jane Adams
(Oola), 2000)
Curtis Hanson has come up with a lovable screwball comedy to direct,
about academia in inclement Pittsburgh, for his follow up to his
successful "L.A. Confidential." It is Adapted by Steve Kloves from
Michael Chabon's 1995 novel. The film works as far as developing the
floundering character of the unstylish middle-aged writing professor,
Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas), who after success with his first novel,
has developed what others on campus think is writer's block. It has been
seven years since he published something new. He cannot finish the
manuscript for his next book - which now numbers more than 2,600
single-spaced typewritten pages.
The film also conveys a cozy feeling for campus life for would-be
writers and for faculty members who live on campus. But it suffers when
its story about an aspiring writer and his faculty adviser begins to
lose any sense of proportion. In the end, it becomes indulgent and ties
things up much too neatly to be taken seriously as drama.
The film revives an old story about the wily writer who is
over-the-hill, no longer a 'wonder boy,' but someone going through the
motions of teaching and writing, only to have a young student, James
Leer (Tobey Maguire), breathe new life into him. It is a familiar story,
but told with great charm here and with sharp observations of how these
academia types talk to each other and interact.
Professor Tripp is in the midst of a hectic weekend: his wife left him;
his mistress, the college chancellor, Sara Gaskell (Frances McDormand),
tells him that she is pregnant by him, and can't decide whether to keep
the pregnancy or not; his flamboyant New York editor, Terry Crabtree
(Robert Downey Jr.), shows up for the college's annual Wordfest literary
event with a tall transvestite date and wants to see Grady's new
unfinished book, as he is desperate to show his New York bosses a hit
novel. The manic editor steals every scene he is in. Tripp's most
talented student is the allusive James Leer, who is both suicidal and a
compulsive liar, who, despite having his work heavily criticized by
fellow students, ends up having his manuscript published by Crabtree and
also has a gay fling with him. Then, there's a dead dog in the
professor's car trunk that belongs to the chancellor's husband, the head
of the English department, Walter (Richard Thomas); and, the professor's
nerves are so shot, that he is constantly smoking  marijuana. A lot went
on during the professor's weekend, a most memorable one for him, as he
went around Pittsburgh with James and Crabtree. But, what he was really
doing, was searching to find out if he found true love and what was
wrong with his writing.
The theme of "Wonder Boys" -- is conventional  -- it is about the
author's self-development. The script is snappy, the actors are pleasing
to behold, the photography, mostly shots of Pittsburgh in the midst of
snow or a torrential downpour, is bleak-- but it interestingly sets the
tone for the film's playful story. The idea for the film was a good one,
but something gets stuck here, preventing the film from taking a chance
and becoming a bold story, one that it could have easily become if it
made that choice and knew what to edit and what to add.
Off campus, Grady Tripp has a young attractive student of his, renting a
room in his house, Hannah Green (Katie Holmes). She is distinguished by
her red cowboy boots which she always wears, the obvious crush she has
on Tripp, and that she is a stereotype for the attractive girl in class
who will try anything to further her career. Here, her attentions are
flirted with but not fulfilled.
Quentin Morewood (Rip Torn) is the popular writer who is a guest of the
college's for the Wordfest. He is known by his friends as Q, who cranks
out books on a regular basis, is rich and famous, and is the envy of
more talented writers who are not as successful as he is.
Also dragged into the story are an interracial couple who add some
slapstick scenes, enlarging the quirky flavor of the film. Oola (Jane
Adams) is a sweet waitress in a bar that the college people frequent.
Her husband, a James Brown look-alike, who is falsely called Vernon
(Knox) by Grady, turns out to be the real owner of the car driven by
Grady. It is taken back by Vernon unceremoniously from in front of
Tripp's house. But Grady returns to the car to retrieve the knapsack
left there by Leer, because it contains the black, fur-collared sweater
that Marilyn Monroe wore when she married Joe DiMaggio, which Leer
impulsively stole from the bedroom vault of Walter's (Walter's a
collector of such memorabilia for his upcoming book), that was the night
Leer shot Walter's blind dog as it was attacking Grady. Those scenes
were amusing in the way those old-fashioned comedies of the 1930s and
1940s were.
The film had a warm and fuzzy feeling to it. It had some good Bob Dylan
tunes in the background. It had a tolerant feeling for odd characters,
potheads, thieves, writing students, gays, interracial couples, and
adulterers. It was a return to liberalism movie, bucking a trend of a
lot of new films to be more conservative or more extreme in their
unconventionality. In any case, it was good to see a film about some
older people with a sense of humor, a bit of romance in them, who are
able to loosen up a bit. This does not make it a great film, but it was
diverting and had a certain sophistication to it that should attract an
older audience, one more perceptive about the advantages of a higher
education. To the film's credit, it keeps its focus on Tripp as someone
who is mixed-up, but who is still trying to be a decent teacher and help
those under his tutelage.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Highly reminiscent of NOBODY'S FOOL, WONDER BOYS is another look
at a life unable to move forward--as if stuck in the snow of the cold
snowy town where the character lives.  Both the town and the character
seem to have seen better days.  But while Paul Newman's character never
achieved any greatness in NOBODY'S FOOL, Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas)
at least superficially appears to be living a constructive life that
only now is falling apart at the seams.  Tripp was at one time a great
novelist.  People were inspired by the novel he wrote years ago.  But
his next novel, now about 2600 typed single-spaced pages, gets further
and further from having its plots tied up.  Like the novel, Grady just
wanders.  And things are falling apart.  His wife has just left him and
returned to live with her parents.
     In the meantime he still is teaching Creative Writing at a
Pittsburgh university.  But Grady knows that he can teach no more than
the mechanics of writing.  He is a man who for a living gives useless
advice to others while leaving no advice to himself unignored.  He is
powerless to turn students into great writers, but at least he can
still recognize when one of his students is a great writer.  In this
case he recognizes that divine spark in James Leer (Tobey McGuire), an
innocent young writer who seems to have the spark of greatness.  Grady
will discover that James perhaps is not so innocent as he appears.
     WONDER BOYS is directed by Curtis Hanson from a screenplay by
Steve Kloves, based on the novel by Michael Chabon.  Hanson's last film
was the beautifully textured L. A. CONFIDENTIAL.  That film marvelously
captured the post-war feel of Los Angeles.  Perhaps WONDER BOYS does as
good a job of capturing the academic community in Pittsburgh, but even
if he does, who cares?  His academic world is populated with strange
characters and Grady himself is an anachronism of the 1960s.  He smokes
pot and leads a Bohemian life-style in a large ugly old house such as
one frequently finds on Eastern campuses.  Grady carries on an affair
with Sara (Francis McDormand) the university chancellor and wife of the
head of the English Department and Grady's boss (Richard Thomas, who
seems typecast after THE WALTONS to play literary types).
     This weekend is Wordfest, an annual event at the university when
one-time good writers and their fans get together to admire the sound
of their own words.  It seems at first as if we are to take it
seriously, but it takes one sharp giggle form Leer to make us realize
that we are really seeing a convocation of emperors without clothes.
The head of the English department has revenge against Leer, misreading
the title of Leer's novel to make it sound banal.
     Through most of the film the very randomness and unpredictability
of the plot gives it a realistic tone.  Unfortunately unlike Grady's
novel, clearly someone realized that the ends had to be tied up and a
fairly contrived incident toward the end of the film shakes Grady from
his status quo.  But until then Grady is really afraid to let his life
move on.  He is a coward.  While he has an obvious paternal side,
caring very warming for Leer, he is afraid of parenthood.  Having
proved himself once he exaggerates the effort necessary for the next
step in order to avoid taking it.  It is better to look like he is
attempting a huge feat than to actually proceed and risk failure.  In
this way he can have failure imposed on him by others.  The is a very
different character for Michael Douglas than those he has played
before.
     In spite of the disappointing contrived-seeming ending, WONDER
BOYS does ring true as a picture of the academic literary community.
I rate it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Ron Small
Author: iysmall@aol.com (Ron Small)
Starring: Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, Frances McDormand, Robert Downy J.r,
Katie Holmes, Rip Torn, Jane Adams, Richard Thomas
In WONDER BOYS Michael Douglas plays an aged writer\professor with such
lived-in naturalism that I believe it may be his best performance. Ever since
WALL STREET, Douglas has spent the greater part of his career playing
variations on the shark in a suit Gordon Gecko character he personified in the
mid-80's. In those performances he tended to exaggerate the vehemence of
cutthroat businessmen, with much frothing at the mouth while projecting all his
bad intentions to the world. You'd think such a man would keep his evil wrapped
tightly underneath a good-natured veneer, but from Gordon Gecko to Nicholas Van
Orton, Douglas played the role straight and out in the open. In WONDER BOYS his
performance isn't showy or a tour de force, it's simple yet truthful.
He embodies Grady, a craggy old writer with a predilection for pot and pink
bathrobes. Grady instructs a writers workshop while working tirelessly on a
follow up to the novel that put him on the map. When we first encounter this
curmudgeon in the midst of his workshop, we hear his sardonic narration on the
soundtrack as students bombard one of their own with unfair criticisms. Grady
points out, in his narration, that they only do so out of jealousy. Their
target is the very writerly named James Leer (played by the always understated
Tobey Maguire), a student full of potential and one whom Grady develops a mild
affection for.
Leer is the kind of youth who seems to mechanically block out emotions. He
speaks in an intellectualized monotone with just a hint of dry wit around the
edges. He's portentous and gloomy, as if modeling himself after the great
depressed writers, though his act is a little too calculated. He reminds me of
the self-imposed outcast film director, Jim Jarmusch (DEAD MAN, GHOST DOG).
Whenever I happen to catch Jarmusch in an interview I see the man speaking in a
toneless manner (the monotonous drawl supposedly masking depth or contempt for
his interviewer), exclusively dressed in black, and with his spiked hair dyed
snow white. Leer is similar, a guy who equates quirks with depth.
Tobey Maguire fits well in the role. With his round, sweet-eerie face he
resembles Bud Cort from HAROLD AND MAUDE. But unlike Cort, Maguire is easier to
warm up to; he's a messed up kid reaching for artistic credibility. Katie
Holmes plays Hannah, a beautiful, talented writing student just itching to get
in Grady's pants. This is a plot line I had trouble with. Douglas, in his old
age, is beginning to resemble Jerry Springer, a man who has actually paid for
sex on numerous documented occasions. At first I found it extremely difficult
to believe that someone as beautiful as Hannah would desire Grady (maybe it's
because I'm jealous, and wish Holmes was throwing herself at me, after all I
may just be a lowly internet critic but at least I still have all my teeth),
then I think of Douglas's real life companion, the breathtaking Catherine Zeta
Jones. Seeing those two together looks a lot like a kidnapping. Suddenly my
mind has shifted from the task at hand (that being reviewing this completely
wonderful movie) and I'm pontificating on why the hell Jones would desire
Douglas. There is a movie in there somewhere.
Grady, rather chivalrously if you ask me, resists the charms of Hannah for Sara
Gaskell (a droll Frances McDormand), who is his age, but also married to
another professor. Okay, maybe not so chivalrous. There is a great line in the
film spoken by Douglas about Sara where he says, "She was a junkie for the
printed word. Lucky for me I manufactured her drug of choice".
Robert Downy J.r plays a bisexual editor who makes his entrance with a towering
transvestite on his arm. Downy has mastered the gleefully dry hyper articulate
wit of many a hipster intellectual. He's arrogant but completely likeable in
his utter arrogance. The actor is perfectly cast here, and remains a joyous
movie presence somewhere between a typical Tom Hanksian comic leading man and
edgy character actor. I wish WONDER BOYS had more of him.
Searching for a plot among the elements of WONDER BOYS would be pointless, for
it meanders through its running time, but that's part of its charm. And maybe
I'm a bit biased towards the film because it takes place in a haven of literary
academia, a place I'm greatly fond of, and a place rarely explored in American
cinema. Everyone has a sub-genre (be it war films, westerns, dance movies) that
they happen to be privy to. I'm privy to films about literary types i.e. those
individuals enthralled by the written word, and if you are not so inclined it
may be wise to knock my above grade down about half a notch.
The direction by Curtis Hanson is more akin to a European film with its
leisurely pace and situations that grow from the characters, rather than
generic mapped out story points. Sometimes the dialogue is too clever, but
that's a problem I wish I found with films more often. Another minor quibble is
that early on the film seems a bit too introverted, like its characters, but as
the story progresses it begins to open up.
For me WONDER BOYS works as subtle drama because of its insight into artistic
types, and as a low-key comedy for its chuckle-worthy throwaway gags. The gags
are like those in the great Robert Altman (M*A*S*H, THE LONG GOODBYE) movies,
where jokes exist as asides on the fringes, like jokes in life often do. The
broader comedy such as the killing of a blind dog, and incessant smoking of
marijuana isn't ineffective but not nearly as memorable as the little things.
Curtis Hanson, who before his last film, LA CONFIDENTIAL, toiled about with
exploitation fare like LOSIN' IT (an early Tom Cruise sex comedy) and THE HAND
THE ROCKS THE CRADLE, has graduated to more meaningful films. He directs WONDER
BOYS in an appropriately dour style, the comedy coming from the false gloom his
characters put up. The morose crooning of Leonard Cohen would seem an odd song
for the background of any party, but in a WONDER BOYS party, it fits.
The film is like a piece of literature put up on the big screen. It's the
cinematic equivalent to a good read, novelistic in its approach with themes
rarely found in American movies. Many will find it slight, but I found much to
savor among its subtleties.
 http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 The pressure's on Curtis Hanson directing his first picture
after the highly acclaimed L.A. Confidential. Adapted by Steve Kloves
from Michael Chabon's 1995 novel, the theme here revolves around a
middle-aged author who is creatively paralyzed after having published
a successful novel seven years ago. Although it is not explained in
the movie, a 'wonder boy' is someone who has experienced great success
early in life and then has to face the fear and insecurity of living
up to himself.  Michael Douglas plays the cynical, dissolute college
professor who cannot finish the manuscript for his next book - which
now numbers more than 2,500 single-spaced typewritten pages - as he
spends a picaresque "Wordfest" weekend frantically juggling his newly
pregnant mistress, a suicidal student, his visiting editor, the corpse
of a dead dog, and a fur-trimmed jacket that once belonged to Marilyn
Monroe.  Frances McDormand is his romantic interest; she's the college
chancellor who's married to the head of the English department. Tobey
Maguire is a gifted but deeply troubled writing student who catches
the eye of Robert Downey, as Douglas's flamboyant editor from New
York.  Katie Holmes is a seductive young student with a crush on
Douglas, and Rip Torn is successful, self-satisfied pop-culture
writer. Set in wintry western Pennsylvania - superbly photographed by
Dante Spinotti - it's a screwball, character-driven story whose
eclectic inhabitants are wacky, weird and whimsical. And the memorable
soundtrack includes Bob Dylan's new song, "Things Have Changed."  On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Wonder Boys is a sly, darkly
humorous 7 - aimed at an intelligent, sophisticated audience.

Author
Sean Molloy
This is the kind of film that hits close to home.  Not because I've
ever hobnobbed with literary greats, not because I've ever had
best-selling novelists for friends and college professors, not because
I've ever killed a man's dog and carried it around in my trunk for the
weekend.  Even though I've never met any of the characters in director
Curtis Hanson's latest film Wonder Boys, I feel like I know them all.
Some folks would call them quirky - I call them real.  Their lives
seem honest and true, and there's a wealth I can find in common with
what these people do, say, think, and feel.
Curtis Hanson's last picture, the brilliant L.A. Confidential, was a
stylish modern film noir which struck a powerful mood and was largely
story-o-centric.  Wonder Boys is a sudden shift in gears for Hanson,
as it's quiet, funny and bittersweet, concerned mainly (and wisely)
with its people rather than its plot.
Michael Douglas plays English professor Grady Tripp in what is easily
one of his best performances.  Even a self-proclaimed Michael Douglas
hater among our film-going group whole-heartedly agreed, adding that
for once he wasn't playing someone rich, unhappy, or both.  Grady
teaches writing to a class full of would- be novelists and editors.
He tells them to focus, instructs them find their voice, implores them
to know their goals... then he returns to his cluttered home to smoke
some weed and work on his 2611-page second novel, seven years in the
making, which he hasn't got a clue how to end.
Grady has been through two marriages, and the third is about to end.
We never see his wife, we only hear about her and guess that she was
probably right to step out on this man that's never really given her a
second thought.  A fourth relationship - this one with Sara, the
chancellor of the university he teaches at (played by Fargo's most
excellent Frances McDormand) - is already underway and has been for a
while, and we sense that Grady's attention will doubtlessly wander
away from her before too long as well.
So when it seems as if Grady is going to take a troubled and brilliant
student named James (Tobey Maguire, one of my favorite actors these
days) under his wing, it comes as no surprise that he chooses to pass
him off as someone else's problem when he become too bothersome.
Grady Tripp is a guy who can't practice what he preaches - he can't
find his focus, he has no idea what his own goals are.  He calls James
a wonder boy, but we know that Grady is exactly the same, someone
who's just been plodding along in his life, someone who still needs to
find himself and, inevitably, grow up.  "You teach us that writers
need to make choices," one of his students (Katie Holmes) tells him
after reading an overwhelmingly detailed section of his latest novel.
"It reads like you didn't make any."
We know from the get-go that by the end, Grady is going to figure out
his life... or at least figure out how to figure it out - but what
makes Wonder Boys special is the journey there.  None of the
characters are drawn in broad, stereotypical strokes - they all have
refreshingly real, complex feelings, both sexual and philosophical.
It would have been easy to make Grady's editor Terry Crabtree (Robert
Downey Jr.) your standard Hollywood gay man - instead, Terry is a
drawn as a guy who's completely comfortable with the fact that he
doesn't understand whatever the hell it is that drives him.  Tobey
Maguire's James cries when jackets look too lonely.  He carries a gun
and is a brooding and compulsive liar, not because of some past trauma
or horrible childhood, but because he chooses to be that way... he
likes it in the dark.
Wonder Boys reminds me of a less goofball version of Rushmore, a great
and mostly overlooked movie that came out about a year ago.  Aside
from being in part about teacher/student relationships, both films are
about characters who are struggling to grow up, realizing they were
fighting the battle only once it was finished.  Both feature peak
performances from stars that a lot of folks believed were past their
prime - Bill Murray in Rushmore, Douglas in Wonder Boys.  Both fill
the role of the requisite "coulda-been-a-contender" February movie
released just after the announcement of the Oscar nominations - too
late to be considered for this year, too early to be remembered next
year.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) WONDER BOYS is the kind of movie that makes a little
blip on the timeline of your life without actually changing its course.
As interesting or well told or charming as it may be, it's safe and pat
and unchallenging. You can leave the theater in the same emotional state
as when you went in.
Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, and Robert Downey, Jr., lead a literary
ensemble through Michael Chabon's story. Douglas plays Professor Tripp,
who teaches English at a university in Pittsburgh. James (Maguire), one
of his best creative writing students, is always moody and depressed.
Downey plays Terry, Tripp's editor who has come to town ostensibly for
the university's "Wordfest" weekend, but also to check on Tripp's
long-overdue latest book.
The detailed, twisty story in WONDER BOYS takes place over a single,
eventful weekend. A dozen little developments add to the comic chaos.
James shoots the dog of Tripp's mistress and steals her husband's
Marilyn Monroe memorabilia. Terry's transvestite girlfriend decides to
abandon a tuba in Tripp's trunk. A strange man jumps out in traffic
claiming that Tripp has stolen his car. Tripp's pretty young boarder
gets a crush on him and starts reading his unfinished novel.
In a small way, WONDER BOYS is reminiscent of MAGNOLIA. Both deal with
complex plots and big casts of characters. Both involve many conflicts
coming to a head, all within a short time span. But where MAGNOLIA was
grand and almost melodramatic, WONDER BOYS is small and almost mundane.
Like MAGNOLIA, the ensemble acting in WONDER BOYS is very good. Douglas
is clearly the central figure, but none of the other actors seemed
intimidated or too deferential. All the characters had their own, clear
motives; they didn't solely exist as foils for Douglas' Tripp. The
characters were lively and well-rounded, and the actors looked like they
were having fun. 
WONDER BOYS has many good qualities, but I couldn't shake the feeling
that it was a tempest in a teapot. The goings-on at an English
department in Pittsburgh seemed a world away. The department was so
small and close-knit that I never felt like I could know these people;
I'd never be allowed into their clique. Their little problems, amusing
as they were, held no meaning or relevance. Had I never met these
people, never known what happened to their lives on this particular
weekend, at that particular university, I never would have noticed; I
never would have cared.
It may not be completely fair to pan WONDER BOYS for not being grander,
more melodramatic, more meaningful. After all, I try to enjoy every film
on its own terms. This one set modest goals and achieved them very well. 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE LONG WEEKEND or CAMPUS CONFIDENTIAL
WONDER BOYS (2000) *** Directed by Curtis Hanson. Written by Steve 
Kloves, from the novel by Michael Chabon. Photography, Dante Spinotti 
.Editing, Dede Allen. Production design, Jeannine Oppewall. Music, 
Christopher Young ( "Things Have Changed" written and performed by 
Bob Dylan). Produced by Scott Rudin and Hanson. Cast: Michael Douglas 
(Grady Tripp), Tobey Maguire (James Leer), Frances McDormand (Sara 
Gaskell), Robert Downey Jr. (Terry Crabtree), Katie Holmes (Hannah 
Green), Rip Torn (Q), Walter Gaskell  ( Richard Thomas), Richard Knox 
(Vernon Hardapple), Jane Adams (Oola), et al. .A  Paramount release. 
112 minutes. R. (drugs)
"It's a puzzlement" as the King of Siam would tell Anna. And some 
movies can be bigger puzzlements  than others. More films than one 
suspects need a second viewing, so that the past, seen again and 
recollected in tranquility, might result  in a really valid opinion. 
Ideally that viewing should come days or weeks or months later, but 
of course this comes too late for the first, hot-off-the-press 
review. That's where retrospective judgments come in.
The great majority of viewers have given "Wonder Boys" a warm 
welcome. I add my voice to theirs, but it cannot be as categorical as 
most. My margin of error is larger than usually.
The movie has interesting makers. Director Curtis Hanson has made 
some ten pictures (since 1972)  including "Bad Influence" and "The 
Hand That Rocks the Cradle" before vaulting to fame for his  1997 
"L.A. Confidential." Writer Steven Kloves had scripted three : 
"Racing with the Moon" (1984),  "The Fabulous Baker Boys" (1989)  -- 
both very good -- and "Flesh and Bone" (1993) which I don't know. 
Neither Hanson nor Kloves seems to be in a hurry. "Nice," as Onslow 
might say in "Keeping Up Appearance."
The cinematographer, the production designer, the editor ( the 
legendary Dede Allen, resurfacing after many years) are among the 
best.
The actors are notable and cast with originality. Michael Douglas, 
the male lead, has never been simpatico. Clark Gable always was, 
Harrison Ford always is, but Douglas has a kind of ego-centered face 
that's an asset in some roles but not in others.
Tobey Maguire, now 25, is a major wunderkind of the last decade. So 
is  Katie Holmes, now 22, the revelation of "The Ice Storm" (which 
also starred Maguire) who went on to TVs  "Dawson's Creek,"  the 
appealing, offbeat "Go" and the fiasco "Teaching Mrs. Tingle. "
Talented in idiosyncratic ways is Frances McDormand , known as the 
winner of the Best Actress Oscar in "Fargo" but not for many other, 
remarkable appearances. In "Hidden Agenda" for instance.
What first struck me about "Wonder Boys" is that it has no pretty men 
and women,  except for Katie Holmes (but who knows what she'll look 
like in fifteen years?) And what struck me as the movie progressed 
was that Michael Douglas, in a non-simpatico role, paradoxically has 
our sympathy, if you follow my drift.
The plot rather convoluted. I have not read the source book but 
reliable persons tell me that the script follows it well and does not 
betray it.
At the tall tale's center is fifty-something Professor Grady Tripp, 
played by 56-ish Douglas. He teaches creative writing at a college 
in Pittsburgh, where the picture was shot, using many Carnegie-Mellon 
sites.  Some eight years ago Tripp had huge success with his first 
novel. Since then he's been working on his next one. Seized by 
post-mid-life crisis, plus the fear that comes with  the pressure of 
following a tough act (his own book), unable to make decisions, Grady 
Tripp keeps writing a mammoth, single-spaced manuscript, He is on 
page 2611.
Adding to his state of mind is an overkill of other factors : his 
third wife just left him; his lover of five years, Sara Gaskell 
(McDormand) who is the Chancellor of the school, tells him she is 
pregnant by him. Her husband Walter Gaskell  ( Richard Thomas) is the 
ingratiating head of the English Department hence Tripp's boss. 
Unkempt Grady is a kind of outdated hippie who is partial to pot, 
wears rumpled, probaly smelly clothes, has dishevelled hair and 
sometimes looks like something the cat dragged in.
The events take place over the long weekend of "Wordfest," the 
school's annual literary shindig that brings to campus writers, 
agents, publishers, some of them weird, as are certain other 
attendees.  "Wordfest" 's host is Walter Gaskell. For a reception in 
the Gaskell house, he has purchased Lafitte-Rotschild wine, 
improbably so, since it is so pricey that only a few football coaches 
might afford it. That's just part of the film's improbabilities, 
which can be simultaneously part of its appeal-- the story being a 
kind of semi-affectionate blackish comedy.
Its alternate title might have been "Campus Confidential" an expose 
of Academe's private face which seems to be an insider's report but 
in fact is not. Yes, campuses are not exempted from what the Romans 
used to call "hankium-pankium." Yes, strange people (professors, 
students, staff and others) do strange things. Yes, many 
campus-dwellers can be caricatured. But it seldom happens that 
matters are as pronounced, even blatant, as in the movie. Its 
authenticity is often questionable.
Among the facts and/or developments are: Sara's pregnancy 
(decisions, decisions); cute, intelligent, promising writer Hannah, 
one of Grady's students, rents a room at his house (the third Mrs. 
Tripp, never seen, has her own house in the burbs) and would love to 
start something with Grady, who could be her grandfather and wisely 
takes no action. (The crush is flattering to the quinquagenerian but 
hormonally unlikely). There is the  aside of a  black dude whose car 
he claims Grady has taken. (It's there for farcical absurdism though 
at the end this gets worked into the story).
What rules the set-up is the person of James Leer (Tobey Maguire), 
another brilliant writer from Grady's class. Wonderboy James gets 
somehow involved (don't ask) in the big reception, where a new and 
very odd relationship is created between him an the other "wonderboy" 
(at 50-plus?) Grady. Peculiar developments follow. Among them James's 
shooting dead (with what he had claimed was a toy pistol) Professor 
Walter Gaskell's blind dog which hates and attacks Grady --who will 
limp for th rest of the picture; the theft of a valuable Gaskell 
memento, a jacket worn by Marilyn Monroe at her wedding with Joe 
DiMaggio; the improbable carrying around the dead hound, for days, 
inside the trunk of Grady's car.
More complications that raise eyebrows.  Grady's editor, the creepy 
Terry Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr.) now on the professional skids, 
comes to the colloquium with a towering transvestite played by 
Michael Cavadias of the rock group Bullett. Terry is taken with James 
(with whom he eventually sleeps) while counting on James's and 
Grady's books-to-be to save  his career. (I wonder how Downey, in 
jail off and  mostly on  since 1996, has managed to be in about 10 
films since 1997!!!)
James is undeniably a huge talent, we are told, though we never have 
any real proofs of it. James, a sophomore I think is  morose, 
near-catatonic,  with all sorts of mysteries, secrets and 
peculiarities.His character  is pushed to such extremes that these 
also push away one's interest in James.
It was Gertrude Stein who said that she prefers normal people over 
abnormal ones, "because the normal ones are so much more interesting."
I'll modify this by "eccentrics can be appealing; weirdos seldom are."
James is a congenital liar, a fabulator who keeps inventing his past, 
an occasional thief, a smoker of Grady's cannabis. I suppose that 
those traits mean that he's a genuine writer.
Moreover, James is a savant on matters cinematographic. When it comes 
to Hollywood facts and trivia he has a bottomless memory. Early on he 
recites a list of actors who  killed themselves, with precise dates 
of their suicides. He could win millions with movie trivia  such as 
"Marilyn was small but most people don't know it." It's unreal, even 
if film history teachers would love to have James clones in their 
classes. And it also reminds me of what philosopher Henri Bergson, 
the 1927 Nobel winner for literature,  said around 1900: "Memory is 
the intelligence of imbeciles."
The movie is hellbent on throwing the viewers off-balance,on 
depicting weirdness at all costs,whether arbitrarily open --as 
in-jokes-- or as cryptic allusions. Even fleeting details are 
commandeered, such as Sara's car, a white vintage French Peugeot DS, 
already rare in the 60s and 70s USA. Does this intend to connect to 
the older, hippie days  for the benefit of sharp-eyed cognoscenti and 
deconstructionists? Yet over and above throwaway bits, irritations 
and such, the movie does have its big share of fun, human comedy and 
near-slapstick. If ever a film needed a follow-up screening, this is 
it.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Wonder Boys (2000) 
Rated R; running time 112 minutes
Genre: Dramedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0185014 
Official site: http://www.wonderboysmovie.com/  
Written by: Michael Chabon
Directed by: Curtis Hanson
Starring: Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, Frances McDormand, 
Robert Downey Jr., Katie Holmes, Richard Thomas, Rip Torn 
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamswonderboys.html
As a movie critic, I take copious notes (yes, it's pretty tough to do in 
a darkened theater, but I manage), even though I rarely use them for my 
reviews unless it's been awhile since I've seen the movie in question.  
Usually, I refer to my notepad to pinpoint an interesting bit of action, 
or as a reminder of what the movie is trying to "say".
In the case of this movie, it didn't help.
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below):
Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas) is a creative-writing professor, constant 
joint-smoker, and burnt-out writer whose current wife (of many previous) 
left him a few hours before he finds out that his girlfriend, university 
Chancellor Sara Gaskell (Frances McDormand) is pregnant--a fact that 
"would greatly surprise" Walter Gaskell (Richard Thomas), Sara's 
husband.  As if that wasn't enough, one of his students, Katie Holmes 
(Hannah Green) has a crush on him; another student, James Leer (Tobey 
Maguire) has the potential to be a top-notch writer, but is...a bit 
off-kilter; and Terry Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr.), his book editor, is 
pressing Grady to finish his second novel.  Oh yeah: I shouldn't forget 
Walter's blind dog Poe, who doesn't like Grady, much to his demise.
The Upshot:
That's pretty much the storyline, I reckon.  But throughout my copious 
notes, I seemed to keep noting, "so what's this story about?"  I still 
don't know.  This, my friends, is Not A Good Thing.
I've been wanting to see this movie from the first time I saw the 
trailers for it.  And from the storyline, it reads like--in the right 
hands--it could be a pretty funny comedy.  With the pedigree the movie 
had going for it--Douglas has been known to be funny in a movie or two; 
McDormand was wonderful in "Fargo" and could certainly tickle a funny 
bone on her own; Maguire, great in "The Cider House Rules" and 
"Pleasantville" would be, if nothing else, a decent straight-man; and 
in-between prison terms, Downey has the acting chops to be capable of 
greatness--from all that, I would've sworn that those were the "right 
hands".  So wha' happened? 
Two things, I think: first, contrary to the misleading trailers, "Wonder 
Boys" was not an all-out comedy.  True, it had some humorous moments, 
but for the most part, it was much heavier on the "drama" part of the 
"dramedy" equation.  Second, it seemed more literary (for lack of a 
better term) than most movies; while some of that can be attributed to 
the movie being about writers, I wouldn't be surprised if writer Michael 
Chabon was more a novelist than a screenwriter.   Strangely enough, that 
particular attribute didn't work in this movie's favor: perhaps because 
I've become so accustom to movies being written as movies as opposed to 
being written as literary stories, the "feel" of this movie didn't click 
for me.  In fact, it wasn't until the ending that it seemed like a 
movie-movie.  And strangely enough, that scene felt out of place.
While I think it would've done better as a comedy than as the thick, 
somewhat dragging Social Statement (of what? I still ask) that it was, 
"Wonder Boys" still had its moments--most of which were populated by 
Robert Downey Jr. in a performance that actually angers me.  It angers 
me because he was so naturally good--something rare in actors these 
days, especially younger actors--that it only highlights the mess he's 
made of his personal life: last I knew, he was in prison for, basically, 
stupidity (something about not fufilling probation terms for his 
habitual drug abuse).  When he's on his game, I'd take Downey over a 
dozen DiCaprios, any day; Robert acts circles around Leo and his posse.  
Just as his costar in "Cider", Charlize Theron, did in "Reindeer Games", 
Maguire disappointed me here.  His depressed (and depressing) James did 
not suit him well; his boyish face betrayed his scripted lines, and the 
bizarre storyline he was involved in, just wasn't working.  As for the 
rest of the cast, Douglas' uncanny resemblance to "Mrs. Doubtfire" threw 
me for a loop at first--and Grady's whole makeup (constant marijuana 
smoker, non-committal boyfriend, "blocked" writer who refuses to 
acknowledge his block) didn't do much for me.  I was never sure what The 
Point was with him (unless it was to say that Drugs Make You Look Bad.  
If so, that was a long way to go to make a weak point).  It was 
refreshing, though, to see what happened between Hannah and Grady; as 
much as I liked "American Beauty" (which has a comparitive situation 
between an older man and younger girl), it was nice to see Holmes play 
Hannah's attraction to Grady, in a non-dysfunctional manner.
I'm still at a loss to know what purpose Quentin "Q" Morewood (Rip Torn) 
played; maybe his Important Scenes were left on the same cutting-room 
floor that Thomas' "Outraged Husband" scenes surely were left on (which 
would be the only explanation I can see for not further exploring the 
dynamic that must have existed between Walter, Sara and Grady).  But 
perhaps that's another movie--the movie that I would've preferred to 
watch way more than this one.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
In one of the many "huh?" moments that seem to be generously scattered 
throughout this flick, a Little Richard-lookalike takes issue with Grady 
having possession of his vehicle, and Does Something About It.  I'd be 
tickled pink if someone could explain what that whole subplot was about 
to me, so I can stop going, "huh?".
Bammer's Bottom Line:
...and continuing on with our "Just Say No" theme for the week 
("Reindeer Games" having led us off), "Wonder Boys" serves as a strange 
vehicle for Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, and Frances McDormand; they 
each seemed out-of-place in this trippy tale.  But "Just Say No--NOW!" 
Poster Boy Robert Downey Jr. was brilliant, as he often is when he puts 
his mind to it.  And where has Richard "John-Boy" Thomas been all these 
years, anyway?
"Wonder Boys" (rating: yellowlight): 
I still Wonder about them thar Boys--and about why Downey insists on 
derailing his career.  There's nothing more galling to me than wasted 
potential, and he has it in spades.

Author
Scott Renshaw
WONDER BOYS
(Paramount)
Starring:  Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, Frances McDormand, Robert
Downey Jr., Katie Holmes.
Screenplay:  Steve Kloves, based on the novel by Michael Chabon.
Producers:  Scott Rudin and Curtis Hanson.
Director:  Curtis Hanson.
MPAA Rating:  R (drug use, profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  107 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Wildly flawed though it may be, WONDER BOYS has one thing going for
it you just can't take away: a dead dog. Call me a sick puppy if you must
-- in a cinematic environment where you can litter a landscape with human
corpses but God forbid the plucky pooch doesn't make it to the final reel
intact, it's refreshing to find a film with the nerve to off Fido. You
learn something about a film-maker's willingness to take you somewhere
different via these small touches, and they're the kind of small touches
WONDER BOYS sends spilling all over the screen. An inexperienced police
officer leaves his squad car in neutral and watches it begin rolling down
the street. A dead ringer for James Brown chases our protagonist's car,
jumping butt-first onto the hood. A pregnant waitress named Oola wears a
jacket worn by Marilyn Monroe on the day of her wedding to Joe DiMaggio. 
And so on.
     If there had been something more cohesive at the center of WONDER
BOYS, it could have been one of those minor classics of tics and quirks
like THE FRESHMAN. Instead, it's a rambling, shambling, often endearing
mess of a movie about a Pittsburgh English professor named Grady Tripp
(Michael Douglas). The author of a much-praised novel, Tripp has spent
seven years working on the epic follow-up, going through nearly as many
wives as reams of paper in the process. As the university begins its
annual literary conference, Tripp contends with plenty of troubles. His
latest wife has just left him, his long-time lover and university
chancellor Sara (Frances McDormand) is pregnant with his child and his
agent Terry Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr.) is pressuring him for the novel. 
On top of it all, Tripp has to play chaperone to James Leer (Tobey
Maguire), Tripp's most gifted writing student but also his most messed-up.
     The aforementioned oddball touches probably give you a good sense for
WONDER BOYS' unconventional tone, but the film's unconventionality
actually goes a bit beyond that. Director Curtis Hanson (L.A. 
CONFIDENTIAL) and screenwriter Steve Kloves (AWOL from the big screen
since FLESH AND BONE in 1993) give the story a pacing that can best be
described as unhurried. It's almost as though the filmmakers treat 
everything as though it's seen through the eyes of Tripp, whose fondness
for the ganja cannot be overstated. Douglas, who has never been shy about
taking on characters with an unpleasant side, gives a good-natured
performance as a guy who becomes ever-more-dilapidated over the course of
the film. It's an odd sort of comedy that's based on watching a man fall
apart while he slowly figures out he needs to pull himself together.
     All those moments in such a leisurely, unpretentious package should
have added up to first-class fun, but somehow WONDER BOYS never quite gets
there. More to the point, it doesn't leave you with the impression that
first-class fun was the object in the first place. The story keeps
flitting back to Tripp's indecision regarding whether to attempt a
reconciliation with his wife or commit to Sara, eventually reaching a
resolution that involves Tripp's final choice. Suddenly you're left with
the sensation that WONDER BOYS was really about a 50-year-old adolescent
just learning how to grow up, which leaves you wondering why development
of Tripp's character was so haphazzard. It's one thing to enjoy a casual
story about the exploits of a casual character. It's a bit more
frustrating when you realize something serious was supposed to come out of
it.
     It's particularly frustrating when nothing about the first 90 minutes
of the film suggests any of the characters were meant to be taken
seriously. That's not to say it's not enjoyable to spend time with them;
Downey, McDormand and Maguire all craft convincing characters. There's
just not enough weight to WONDER BOYS for it to support a moral to the
story. The relationship between Tripp and Leer is resolved to abruptly,
the relationship between Tripp and his affectionate student tenant (Katie
Holmes) isn't developed at all and the Tripp/Sara connection always feels
too nebulous for its ultimate resolution to matter. It's possible to spend
most of WONDER BOYS grinning at its nonchalance, its goofiness and its
small pleasures. Once you reach the end, you may be wishing that a film
with the nerve to kill the dog also had the nerve to resist the tidy
happily-ever-after of the man who learns What Really Matters.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   I'm a lifelong New Yorker, but only by the force of
circumstance.  Oh, New York is a fine place to spend your
life, probably the world's most exciting city.  But I had other
things in mind, at least from the time I began college studies
in a small Massachusetts town.  The campus looked exquisite
in the winter, and just outside, the sidewalks featured traffic
lights that pedestrians could actually control by pushing a
button.  Many of the teachers lived on a long, winding street
called Professors' Row: this is where I would spend my
career, pipe in mouth, leather patches on my sleeve, a
golden Labrador Retriever to put me through my paces when
I wasn't counseling students or grading papers or attending
the many parties thrown by the deans and by colleagues. 
This was not to be, however, but now, decades later as I
observe Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas) on the screen in
virtually every scene for nearly two hours I realize that the
pleasures and sorrows of life are not geographical but within. 
As sketched in a shaggy-dog novel by Michael Chabon,
adapted for the screen by Steve Kloves and directed by 
Curtis Hanson ("L.A. Confidential"), Tripp is the college
instructor who (for all we know) I could have become.  Not
the guy who is absolutely at ease with himself and his calling
but one who gets himself into situations that evoke both
humor and pathos, Tripp is a 50-ish guide to students in his
advanced writing seminar whose mid-life crisis comes to a
head on one agitated, winter weekend in Pittsburgh.
   Tripp is observed in Chabon's reasonably short novel with
dry humor and sly wit as a man who--like so many other
writers (Tennessee Williams, Edward Albee, Arthur Miller,
Norman Mailer)--is going downhill, though in his case his
decline is not only a professional one.  Having scored an
award from PEN just seven years earlier, he has not
published another work.  As he is on the 2,000th-odd page of
a humongous piece of fiction, another scribe on campus
nicknamed Q (Rip Torn) has knocked out yet another book,
as he has been doing regularly every 18 months.  Why the
writer's block?  Something is happening psychologically to
trip him up.  He has regular fits, sometimes even falling on
the floor in a faint.  Marijuana is his crutch and when he pops
codeine pills after being bitten around the ankle by a big blind
dog, we suspect he uses them for other than medicinal
purposes as well.  
   Hanson's film is not about the profession of writing,
however, but about the relationships of a wonder boy, a guy
who will prove that you're never too old to grow up.  His
epiphanies occur during a week that publishers are on
campus to look at and perhaps buy some of the output of
both faculty and students and, in fact, Tripp's own publisher,
Terry Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr.) has joined him and has
also met with a suicidal, compulsive liar who is in Tripp's
class.  The depressive student, James Teer, is played with
awesome veracity by the highly talented Tobey Maguire ("The
Cider House Rules"), this time as a young man who is the
professor's most promising student and as the publisher's
promising sexual attachment for the weekend.
   "Wonder Boys," takes place during the time that its
principal character is in a funk because his wife had just left
him, a student with a crush (Hannah, played by Katie
Holmes) is coming on to him, and he is looking to strengthen
his bond with his mistress, Sara (Frances McDormand), who
is the chancellor and the wife of the English chairman. 
Events which are to shake him out of his long-term funk
occur in just a few days: 1) Young James has shot the
English chairman's blind dog, allegedly to defend the
professor who has been attacked by the big hound; 2) Sara
has announced that she is pregnant from Tripp and is
determined to make a decision about the baby within her; 3)
James has stolen Marilyn Monroe's coat, which she had worn
to her wedding with Joe D.  
  Some incidents are wacky, some are serious.  The movie's
most notable attribute is its pacing.  Curtis Hanson, known for
his ability to move around a multiplicity of characters in his
"L.A. Confidential," refuses to appeal to a potentially broad
audience.  He keeps the plot moving along at his own
lingering velocity, thereby avoiding making a Buston-Keaton
style picture out of the zaniness.  He hints at a possible affair
between student Hannah and Tripp but keeps the two apart
throughout.  He has us wondering how Tripp's affiliation with
Sara will turn out, given the humorlessness of Sara's
husband who is Tripp's overseer.  
   All this is commendable.  Unfortunately what should have
been a story well told to an appreciative audience of indie-
lovers who also adore their indies to be framed with a
commercial-sized budget is simply murky, torpid, and
confused.  The chemistry between the chancellor and the
professor is missing: we miss any feeling that something is at
stake.  Tripp's life has been on hold for so long that he
appears to have lost real desire to make changes, to do
something for himself that could alter his listlessness.  Yet
the film is cast with awe-inspiring faculty.  Douglas, wonderful
as the overly calm executive in "The Game" who is
challenged by life-threatening risk; super as a the high-
powered broker in "Wall Street" who knows that greed is
good; is simply majestic this time in his first role with real
comedic undertones.  With long hair, scruffy beard, and
overbearing glasses, he meanders through his role with
absolute sincerity.  He is a man with whom many others his
age could identify. Tobey Maguire is the metaphoric young
and bright depressive whose stories might make others in his
class want to kill themselves and he too engages in activities
on that fateful weekend that might make genuine corrections
in his life.  Robert Downey Jr. saves an otherwise
lackadaisical film with his unique brand of wily, comic acting
in a film that looks more like an notion than a well thought-out
comedy-drama.
Rated R.  Running Time: 112 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Scott Hunt
Review by Scott Hunt.   Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Wonder Boys shambles along with the somnambulistic intensity of someone
who's taken far too much cold/flu medication. Suddenly nudged by the
thought that a point needs to be made, it concludes with a far too pat,
Hollywood ending. There are many satisfying moments of whimsical farce
and it avoids many a cliché, but the film rushes its resolution,
dulling its potential impact. Shining through the haze is an impressive
performance by Michael Douglas.
Douglas plays Grady Tripp, a university English professor caught in the
paralyzing grip of career inertia. Tripp is a "wonder boy", a prize
winning published author, who must now produce a second, equally
dazzling work. In a nice twist, rather than suffering from writer's
block, Grady is afflicted by something even worse. He can't seem to
finish his latest novel, which has bloated to 2000 plus pages and
continues to grow with the ludicrousness of a 50's B-movie monster.
There are other nice spins on traditional movie formulas and
characters. Grady is confronted by his girlfriend, Sarah (McDormand),
that she is pregnant. She also happens to be the university's
chancellor. She's also married to the head of the English department.
Ouch. Sexy, bright student Hannah (Holmes) rents a room in Tripp's
house. She would be just as happy sharing not only Tripp's room, but
also his bed. The cliché thing would be to have a passionate, graphic
sex scene between them. It doesn't happen. Morose, pensive student,
James Leer (Maguire), is a cipher. Grady finds a kindred talent in the
boy but rather than seeing a bit of himself in James, he sees a bizarre
flip side. James is a compulsive liar, obsessed with celebrity deaths,
and fiercely observant. Did I also mention he kills Sarah's husband's
dog and commits theft while at a university function? These events are
set against the backdrop of a literary weekend being held at Tripp's'
Pittsburgh based college.
Tripp is a chrysalis, wrapped within the insular cocoon of academic
life. He floats through a marijuana-shrouded fog, making half decisions
about his life. The film is about his journey into light. Or deeper
into darkness. Leer helps goose Grady into action.
Much time is spent on the relationship between Tripp and Leer. Grady
has an uneasy attraction to the boy's talent, soured slightly by a
touch of envy. Leer is indeed talented, quickly writing his first novel
as Tripp still trudges through his. As the two go through adventures
together, there is no ultimate feeling of satisfaction with Leer. By
making Leer such a compulsive liar, we aren't allowed to empathize with
his downfalls and triumphs. We never learn what makes him who he is. He
ends up being a walking collection of idiosyncrasies made flesh.
Along with the pressure exerted by Sarah , Hannah and James, two other
characters help push Grady along. A reflection of Grady's impotence
comes in the form of Rip Torn as  Q, a fellow writer. Q is able to
crank out a new novel every year and a half. Q has long ago bought into
his own hype. At one point, he addresses an assembly by starting with
the sentence, "I am.....a  writer". He bellows such a simple sentence
with an  aggrandizing self-satisfaction that border parody, but
maintains reality, by no small means through the dry, comedic skill of
Torn.
Terry Crabtree (Downey, Jr.), Tripp's agent, has also descended upon
the campus. Crabtree wants a look at Tripp's long promised novel. Drag
queen date in tow, Crabtree finds himself sucked into Leer and Tripp's
misadventures. Despite the external trimmings of Downey's flamboyant
character, Downey manages to tamp down the outrageousness of Crabtree
and give him a real earthiness.
In contrast to the zaniness involved in a many of the movie's other
situations, the film is a character study of Grady. His fuzzy wall of
indecision is pummeled by one ludicrous, yet believable, event after
another. Douglas comes across as sweet, confused, prideful...and
scared. For all his standing and bluster, he is still an 18 year-old
college kid trying to cope with events seemingly beyond is
comprehension.
There is a slow pacing to the first half of the movie. For me, a bit
too slow. Amusing insights are given into academic life and situations
are promisingly set up to be resolved, but suddenly everything is tied
up in a neat little bow. There is a key moment where Tripp is involved
in a situation where his life hangs in the balance. I kept thinking the
brave choice would be to take the hard route and not warp what had been
a intelligently written movie and shoehorn the ending so as to please
the masses. Alas, it didn't occur. Heaven forbid a character not be
allowed to walk off into the metaphoric sunset. Wonder Boys is a tasty
meal marred by sickeningly sweet dessert.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Curtis Hanson. Screenplay by Steve Kloves, based on the novel
by Michael Chabon. Starring Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, Robert Downey
Jr. Running time: 114 minutes. Rated AA. Reviewed on March 19th, 2000.
A quiet, understated character piece, "Wonder Boys" is the sort of movie 
which, when recalled afterward, seems more like a dream than something 
actually experienced. Slow-moving but never plodding, funny and original 
without being absurd, it is a pleasurable journey through one man's 
personal struggles.
Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas) is a University of Pittsburgh English 
professor who wrote a critically-acclaimed novel seven years ago and 
hasn't published anything since. Most people think Tripp is washed up, 
but the truth is that his new novel just isn't finished yet; it is now two 
thousand single-spaced pages long and counting. Tripp, whose wife has 
just left him, is having an affair with the university chancellor, Sara 
Gaskell (Frances McDormand). Sara's husband Walter (Richard Thomas) is 
the head of the English department and hence Grady's boss. Tripp's most 
promising student is James Leer (Tobey Maguire), a dour and eccentric 
youth held in disdain by most of his classmates. The lone exception is 
Hannah Green (Katie Holmes), who is also boarding with Grady and is 
clearly interested in taking their relationship beyond the academic.
The movie takes place during WordFest, a weekend-long writers' convention. 
The Gaskells host a party to kick off WordFest, during which Sara reveals 
to Grady that she is pregnant. Going outside for a draw, Tripp 
(aptly named, given that he spends most of the movie under the 
influence of drugs, both prescription and otherwise) encounters James, 
standing in the backyard with a gun he insists is just a fake. The two 
sneak upstairs to have a look at Walter's collection of memorabilia. 
When Grady is attacked by the Gaskells' dog, James shoots it dead. At a 
loss, Tripp ends up lugging the canine corpse around in his trunk until 
he can figure out what to do about it.
All this is just set-up for a sometimes harrowing, always amusing odyssey 
through the streets of Pittsburgh and the problems which plague Grady's 
life. He finds himself having to deal not just with the end of his 
marriage and the complication of his affair, not just with the dead dog 
and a stolen piece of Walter's collection, not just with editor Terry 
Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr) whose own job is riding on the publication of 
Tripp's new novel, but with the enigma that is James Leer. James isn't 
just a writer; the entirety of his behavior is one big creative process 
(at one point, intoxicated, he begins narrating out loud) and it is 
impossible to take anything he says or does at face value: the 
fake-gun-that-isn't is just the tip of the iceberg of James' fantasies 
and deceptions.
"Wonder Boys" is a smart movie that understands its characters and takes 
the time to develop and explore them fully. Written by Steve Kloves from 
the novel by Michael Chabon, it is populated by believable individuals who 
make believable choices, not ones dictated by stereotypical Hollywood 
expectations. For example, both Terry and James are clearly not strictly 
heterosexual, but when they finally do end up in bed together, it is 
dealt with almost offhandedly. The event is just a natural development of 
both characters, and the script does not grind to a halt to exploit it. 
Nothing in "Wonder Boys" feels staged or melodramatic; realism seethes 
from its characters, their relationships with each other, and the 
decisions they make.
But perhaps this is all to be expected. "Wonder Boys" is a movie all 
about making choices and the consequences of avoiding them, and a film 
with such a theme lives and dies on the conviction of its characters. Grady 
has spent the past half-decade evading decisions, and it has cost him his 
marriage. Here, then, is the story of how he comes to rise above his 
personal apathy and seize control of his life. Nowhere is this theme of 
making choices more clearly illustrated than with Grady's epic novel. Even 
Hannah, Grady's potential new love interest, finds it impossible to 
finish, but not because it is poorly written. On the other hand, Hannah 
thinks it is beautiful, but she tells Grady, "you didn't make any 
choices": Grady has not found the will to leave anything out of the text, 
and as a result it has ballooned to mammoth proportions. The manuscript's 
final fate depicts another important fact about decisions: that sometimes 
they're made for you, not by you.
The movie's dialogue is sparkling throughout, and there are plenty of 
laughs, many of them derived from the film's frank view of reality. 
Surprisingly for a movie which muses on so deep a theme, "Wonder Boys" 
has many of the elements of a screwball comedy, complete with mistaken 
identities and misplaced valuables. But the screwball elements are always 
in service to the overall plot, complementing it rather than fragmenting 
the film. As a result, "Wonder Boys" is appealing and enjoyable on a 
number of different levels.
The acting is uniformly excellent. Douglas finds just the right note as 
the harried Grady, portraying him as confused and aimless without making 
him seem weak. Maguire, always a quiet, reserved actor, is a perfect fit 
as James -- he is quirky, inspired and fragile, all at the same time. 
Amongst the supporting cast, Richard Knox gives a hilarious performance 
as a man who claims to be the real owner of Grady's battered car.
For a movie about choices, "Wonder Boys" makes all the right ones. It is 
smart and well-acted, and the top-notch script finds a good balance between 
drama and comedy. Although its sheer placidness may work against it in such 
a crowded box office, it should not be overlooked. This may be one of the 
first Oscar contenders of the year 2000.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/WonderBoys.html

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, Frances McDormand, Robert
Downey Jr. Directed by Curtis Hanson. Rated R.
Wonder Boys is a quirky little comedy, eccentric almost to the point of
inaccessability. It succeeds as an unorthodox Michael Douglas vehicle --
 this is his first un-Gordon-Gekko role since 1995 -- but it would have
worked better if the writer tried less to be risque and harder to be
funny. The movie is still a winner, in it's own breezy, lighthearted
way but for director Curtis Hanson, made famous by the far more
heavyweight L.A. Confidential, this is hardly something to write home
about.
Douglas plays Grady Tripp a struggling writer and English professor
who, in middle age, has descended into a world of his own. He teaches
his classes almost in a trancelike state, smokes pot and works on his
second novel -- his first, published decades ago, was a runaway hit.
His new one is up to 2600 pages with no end in sight. But Grady doesn't
care. He just keeps on writing in the hopes that maybe in the distant
future, he'll be able to do something with it.
Meanwhile, Grady has an affair with the college's chancellor (Frances
McDormand). He finds out that she is pregnant -- presumably with his
baby. He seems too submerged inside his own mind to care or do anything
about this development. His whole life seems to change in inexplicable
ways, however, when a student named James Leer (Tobey Maguire) enters
the scene. James is an aspiring writer who may or may not be good, a
liar and an altogether difficult person. And yet Grady finds himself
connecting with James for reasons he is unsure of.
Most of the laughs in this movie stem from the script's bizarreness
rather than its cleverness. There are times when the film tries to be
weird just for the sake of being weird. The past few months have been
peppered with unusual scripts, but the outstanding ones have blended
the bizarre with the original while maintaining a sense of purpose. You
can't have insanity without reason.
Still, Wonder Boys is a winner because Grady is such a lovable lug. He
is so lost and so confused that our hearts go out to him. Douglas, in a
wonderful performance, milks this quality for all it's worth. It's fun
to watch him transform from the contemptuous, greedy tycoon that he
played in his last three movies to the veritable puppy dog he is here.
Sometimes, we just want to reach into the screen and pet him on the
head.
The supporting characters are much less approachable, though they're
often funny. Maguire's James Leer, especially, remains a cipher. There
are many attempts to humanize him, but he always remains too quirky and
too contrived for us to believe that he is real. This is not to berate
Tobey Maguire, who does the best he can with the script and turns in an
amusing, if not an affecting performance.
By the end, Grady Tripp has completed a journey and undergone a
transformation. We're with him every step of the way. Sort of. The
trouble is that none of the supporting characters matter. They're all
there to propel the plot along, to act as forces in Grady Tripp's life.
They have no human qualities. I suppose that was the intention: to a
man so utterly stoned as Grady, hardly anyone around him would have
human qualities. Still, I wished for more than one interesting
character. After all, even the most interesting element will get tiring
after a while, if there is nothing to back it up. Fortunately, Wonder
Boys runs a mere 112 minutes.

Author
Walter Frith
Cast - Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, Frances McDormand, Robert Downey Jr.,
Katie Holmes, Richard Thomas, Rip Torn.
Directed by - Curtis Hanson.
Written by - Steve Kloves based on the novel by Michael Chabon.
Produced by - Curtis Hanson and Scott Rudin.
(Rating) > Motion Picture Association of America - R (Restricted) / Rated R
for language and drug content.
(Rating) > Ontario Film Review Board - AA (Adult Accompaniment) / Rated AA
for
mature theme.
Running Length - 112 minutes.
Distributor - Paramount Pictures.
A lot of what plays out in 'Wonder Boys' resembles what happens when you
tinker with a jack-in-the-box.  Things pop up unexpectedly, and for the
film's characters, sometimes in a pleasing manner and sometimes not.  The
film brings up the stereotype that has followed many writers around their
entire lives.  The booze, the womanizing, the drugs, and their sometimes
whacked out personality that have inspired such great works in the literary
field and the whole film is a merry-go-round of hilarious pop culture with
redemption as its true message.
Set mostly in Pittsburgh, Michael Douglas gives his best performance in
years, probably since his Oscar winning turn for best actor in 1987's 'Wall
Street', as a seemingly washed up college professor named Grady Tripp who
teaches writing but can't teach himself how to get his own life in order.
He carries on an affair with two women from opposite ends of the spectrum.
One is with a student named Hannah Green (Katie Holmes) and the other is
with the institution's Chancellor, Sara Gaskell (Frances McDormand).
Plaguing Grady is the fact that he has promised his long time editor Terry
Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr.) that he would have a book completed for him in
time for their next meeting when Terry flies in from New York City.
Bothering Grady further is a writer named Quentin "Q" Morewood (Rip Torn),
who cranks out a novel every eighteen months which causes Grady to be
extremely jealous.  One night at a party at the Chancellor's home, Grady
comes face to face socially with one of his students named James Leer (Tobey
Maguire).  James is the deadpan weirdo that most of his class have come to
despise.  He writes obtuse material that is somehow absorbing, shocking and
funny and carries his writer's technique into his real life.  He often makes
things up, such as the fictional town that he says he's from, as he goes
along to tell others about his life and it all seems incredibly plausible,
the mark of a successful writer.....I suppose.  At the party, James gets
into some serious mischief involving a jacket that used to belong to Marilyn
Monroe, a vicious blind dog that meets with the discharge from a firearm and
the fact that he has dragged his beloved professor through all of it at the
same time.  The after math of this bizarre social gathering is sort of what
makes 'Wonder Boys' the entertaining film that it is.  It starts off rather
slowly but propels itself like fireworks when it finally gets going.
For the average movie person with upstanding tastes, 'Wonder Boys' is a film
that may be hard to focus on.  Don't think that the title means all the
characters are WONDERful in terms of their upstanding traits.  You have to
accept its moral abyss in order to enjoy it.  The characters are all
fractured inside somehow by life's twists and turns.  The sex, the downbeat
feeling that shows why few smile in this film and the messed up activities
at times resemble a frat party and all the while you somehow want to be in
on the action which is strangely seductive.
Curtis Hanson, who directed and co-wrote 1997's 'L.A. Confidential', does a
complete 180 here in brilliant fashion.  The material in 'Wonder Boys'
couldn't be more different.  'L.A. Confidential' was a hard boiled, hard
nosed and hard edged film about police corruption with zero tolerance for
humour while 'Wonder Boys' relies entirely on humour, sometimes the kind
that feels like you've hit your funny bone on something hard but with so
many wonderful performances on the plate, why leave anything on it.  One of
the most intriguing scenes has Douglas on the phone with the Chancellor's
husband (Richard Thomas), telling him that he's in love with his wife and
all the while acting stone faced through it.  For reaction purposes, one of
the most difficult challenges for an actor is to do a successful phone
conversation as you have to act like you'll never know what you'll hear and
Douglas pulls it off superbly.
More importantly than that is the performance of Tobey Maguire.  He upstages
Douglas at many points and to do this to an Oscar winning actor, is a
marvel.  It's probably the best upstaging from a young performer on a
veteran since Juliette Lewis did it many times to Robert De Niro in 1991's
'Cape Fear'.  This is Maguire's breakthrough role as performances in
'Pleasantville' and 'The Cider House Rules' have sort of warmed him up for
his first truly spectacular role and this is it.  He and Douglas could be
Oscar bound next year for these truly human performances of candour and
sharp wit.  'Wonder Boys' is hardly conventional film making.  It's genius
layered with sensational off beat characters who are the real wonder!
A film must receive a three star rating or higher to be eligible for a
recommendation.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review will be posted to 
http://www.moviereviews.org/wonder_boys.htm on the evening of February 
24, 2000.---
Watching Wonder Boys is somewhat akin to viewing the last two-minutes of 
a football game where your home team simply cannot muster the needed 
points to emerge victorious. The players, Michael Douglas, Tobey 
Maguire, Frances McDormand, Robert Downey Jr. and Katie Holmes, all 
maintain hometown-hero status with solid efforts. Unfortunately though, 
the game has run so long that your attention fades in and out and those 
last few passes reek of disparity as the quarterback tries to force 
something that simply doesn't work.
Grady Tripp (Academy Award Winner Michael Douglas) is a college 
English professor who finds his life in shambles as his wife leaves him, 
he struggles with a 2611-page unfinished novel and carries on an affair 
with the chancellor (Academy Award Winner Francis McDormand). His 
solution: dope.
James Leer (Tobey Maguire) is one of Tripp's students. His writing is 
ridiculed by the class, his personal life is dark and mysterious but his 
potential proves to be unlimited with a new book he has written. His 
solution: carrying a gun.
Terry Crabtree (former inmate Robert Downey Jr.) is a down-and-out 
homosexual editor seeking success and a new sexual partner. His 
solution: Tripp's book and Leer's body.
So, to recap, we have a lot of dope, a murder weapon, an unfinished 
novel, a finished novel, an affair and a group of characters with 
problems. Throw in a hood-jumper (Richard Knox), a wise student (Katie 
Holmes), Marilyn Monroe's wedding coat, a dead dog, a Howard Johnson 
parking lot and a forgotten backpack and there's plenty happening in 
the confusion-dominated football game.
Despite being given the opportunity to express a panoply of emotions in 
his self-discovering character, Michael Douglas always makes the 
conservative call and consequently fails to rouse up the crowd even if 
he is getting the job done adequately. Francis McDormand and Tobey 
Maguire both seem to go the extra yard, however. McDormand has an 
ordinary quality that is rare among actresses today- probably the reason 
for her Fargo Oscar- and she reaffirms acting competence here. Maguire 
confirms that he is to the depressive seeking enlightenment what Jack 
Palance is to the old western cowboy. With Pleasantville and The Cider 
House Rules as previous evidence of this trait, the 25 year-old actor is 
Hollywood's newest typecast thanks to this role that is practically 
made for him.
Wonder Boys first hits trouble with the Tripp/chancellor relationship. 
In a film with an otherwise interesting set of plot circumstances, the 
old boy-likes-girl-who-questions-affection-for-boy-untill-boy-
accidentally-does-something-indirectly-affecting-her-and-is-afraid-to-
tell-but-ultimately-she-confrontes-him-with-forgiveness is a tad too
textbook for the film. Ditto the other major development in their
relationship, or, to speak more properly, in her womb.
The movie's plot loses steam well before the fourth quarter even 
begins and things aren't helped by a desperately forced ending that is 
even more textbook than the aforementioned relationship.
This year, hundreds of millions of people looked on as the Super Bowl 
came down to 36 inches. Hopefully not even a fraction of those people 
will subject themselves to this production that sets itself up for a 
hopeless fourth and long and doesn't have 30-second Budweiser spots to 
tide the audience over.

Author
Jonathan F Richards
Movies     Jonathan Richards, Santa Fe (NM) Reporter
    Like the insatiable plant in "Little Shop of Horrors," Grady Tripp's
second novel sits by his old IBM Selectric typewriter demanding to be fed.
And feed it he does.  He's well into his third thousand manuscript pages
(single spaced), and the end is no closer at hand than it ever was.  Grady
(Michael Douglas) has the opposite of writer's block.  He can write.  He
just can't stop.
     Curtis Hanson's laconically-paced screwball comedy of letters (adapted
from Michael Chabon's novel) covers a pivotal weekend in Grady's life at the
western Pennsylvania university where he is a tenured professor of English.
His young wife has just left him.  His mistress (Frances McDormand),
university chancellor and wife of his department chairman (Richard Thomas)
has just told him she's pregnant. One of his students (Katie Holmes) rents a
room in his house, but would like to get closer to the master bedroom.  His
editor (Robert Downey Jr) is in town, ostensibly for Wordfest, the college's
annual book business symposium, but really to get his hands on the
manuscript, which is now seven years overdue.  His best creative writing
student, James (Tobey Maguire), is a pathological liar and possibly suicidal
depressive who carries a loaded pistol.  It is not the best of times for
Grady.
     This the first movie for Hanson since his hugely successful L.A.
Confidential, and it shows his versatility (Hanson gets around
stylistically; he also made The River Wild and The Hand That Rocks the
Cradle).  It's not entirely without violence - there's a bloody ankle, and
more of the lethal indignities to dogs popularized by There's Something
About Mary - but Hanson, working from a witty screenplay by Steve Kloves
(writer/director of The Fabulous Baker Boys), shows an assurance with comedy
that builds from character.
     The cast is terrific.  Douglas gives Grady the wry, worn intelligence
of a well-thumbed paperback on self-knowledge.  Maguire, a seriously
underestimated actor, shoots beams of sly wit through James's moody
darkness.  McDormand serves a crisp tossed salad of clear-eyed judgement and
sympathetic patience.  Rip Torn is memorable as a pompous author who turns
out a book a year, and begins his keynote address to Wordfest intoning
"I...am a writer."  And Downey, as always, is brilliant.
     There's sex, drugs, and even a little rock 'n roll with a new Bob Dylan
song, "Things Have Changed", on the soundtrack.  There are plenty of laughs,
and only a few aimless patches before the movie rounds into its home
stretch.  Then it lumbers through a series of endings that feel too
calculated, trite, improbable, and self-consciously finishy - you can almost
feel the blank sheet being rolled into the typewriter and the writer
muttering "last page.."  It's too bad, but it's not a deal-breaker.  Wonder
Boys is a lot better than a February move has any right to be.

Author
bob bloom
Wonder Boys (2000) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Michael Douglas,
Tobey Maguire, Frances McDormand and Robert Downey Jr. Written by Steven
Kloves. Directed by Curtis Hanson.
 It's the weekend from hell for Grady Tripp.
 The English professor, who teaches a writing workshop, begins his day
with the knowledge that his wife has left him.
 His book editor is flying in from New York for the weekend to check on
the progress of Grade's novel, one on which he has been working for
nearly seven years and - at 1,262 pages - is not yet complete.
 He is informed by his lover, Sara, the chancellor of the university,
that she is pregnant.
 And his best student, James Leer, shoots and kills the pet dog
belonging to Sara's husband, Walter. On top of that James steals
Walter's most prized possession, the jacket worn by Marilyn Monroe the
day she married Joe DiMaggio.
 Plus, some nut case is stalking Grady, claiming that the professor's
car - given to him in lieu of money owed - is actually a stolen vehicle.
 If all this sounds like the makings of some depressing melodrama, you
couldn't be more wrong.
 "The Wonder Boys" is a intelligent, witty, adult comedy, the first
really memorable movie of the year.
 It features fine acting, interesting characters and a literate script.
 The cast is headed by Michael Douglas as Grady Tripp. He's a sort of
throwback to the 60s, a disheveled, pot-smoking professor,
self-centered, to some extent unfeeling and uncaring about how he treats
others.
 Douglas smoothly captures the writer's knack for self-involvement.
While Grady is an intelligent man, he is seems to blithely go through
life unaware of how his actions, intentionally or unintentionally, hurt
others.
 It is Douglas' best performance in years.
 Tobey Maguire plays James Leer, Grady's prize student, a young man
living in a continuous state of depression who turns out to be a
brilliant writer and whose outward appearance and mannerisms hide a
sensitive soul.
 Maguire's James seems to be a pathological liar, but in reality is a
young man who has created his own fantasy world in order to cope.
 Maguire, as he did in "The Cider House Rules" and "Pleasantville,"
demonstrates why he is one of the best young actors to emerge on the
screen in the past couple of years.
 Oscar-winner Frances McDormand is vulnerable, yet determined as Sara,
who - though she loves Grady - decides to forge her own future with or
without him.
 Robert Downey Jr. gives a sly, charming performance as Terry Crabtree,
Grady's exasperated book editor. Terry had made his reputation by
bringing Grady's first novel, which was eventually an award-winning
work, to his publishing house, and is desperate for his friend's
follow-up in order to restore his reputation and retain his position.
 The script by Steven Kloves ("The Fabulous Baker Boys") is
sophisticated and deftly captures the cadence of milieu of academia and
the book world.
 The wit is clever, the situations - though exaggerated - seem true to
life.
 Director Curtis Hanson, in his first outing since his critically
acclaimed "L.A. Confidential," keeps the proceedings moving at a steady
pace. There is no dead space in "Wonder Boys," as Grady jerkily
progresses from one crisis to another without missing a beat.
 Life is messy, appears to be the movie's message, and we do what we can
to sort through the clutter and make the best of what we have and what
is offered to us.
 "Wonder Boys," though, is no messy movie. It is a heartfelt, somewhat
dark, but ultimately uplifting character study of one man trying to
rediscover his true self.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
In the next book written about cinematic voyeurism, a chapter must be
dedicated to the most sickeningly self-indulgent plot point of them
all: meet your character on the worst day of his life. With `Wonder
Boys', writer Steve Kloves (`Fabulous Baker Boys') and
director Curtis Hanson (`L.A. Confidential') have used the
infamous setup as a platform for an offbeat, entertaining film that
features a wonderfully deadpan comic tone.
Our protagonist, Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas), is a drug-addled
Pittsburgh writing professor with a lot on his mind. Firstly,
there's his love life. His wife has just left him, and his affair
with the school chancellor (Frances McDormand) has turned into an
unwanted pregnancy. Now he finds himself pressured into the hardest
act for a middle-aged man: commitment.
Then, there's his literary life. It's been seven years since
Grady's masterpiece `The Arsonist's Daughter', and he
hasn't written a novel since. This turns out to be a crucial
problem since Grady's literary editor, the smarmy homosexual Terry
Crabtree (Robert Downey, Jr.), is in town for the university's
annual Word Fest. As we soon learn, Grady has used these past seven
years to work on an untitled, 2000+ page magnum opus, which involves
`horse genealogies' and `dental records' In other words,
things can't get much worse for Prof. Grady Tripp.
That evening, Prof. Tripp attends the Word Fest opening reception,
held at the home of Sara Gaskell, the aforementioned pregnant
chancellor. While the professor snoops upstairs, he is attacked by the
Gaskell's beloved blind dog, who is then shot to death by James
Leer (Tobey Maguire), a bizarre student of Prof. Tripp. A few minutes
later, Grady and James are fleeing the scene in a car with a dead dog
and a transvestite's tuba (don't ask).
Like `American Beauty', `Wonder Boys' is a black comedy
about a mid-life crisis, and the success of this kind of film often
rides on the viewer's belief in the protagonist's
suffering. Michael Douglas' role in the film is as difficult as
Kevin Spacey's role in the superb `Beauty'. Douglas'
character is so apathetic to suffering that, on paper, a few of his
responses would be truly unbelievable. But Douglas brings such soul to
the role that he makes Grady Tripp come alive; turning us on to his
character without adding sentiment. In `Wonder Boys', Michael
Douglas gives a performance that is likable and genuine, and in a
perfect world, where even February films could compete for the Oscars
(imagine that), he would be in the running for an acting award. After
years of playing nothing but slimy rich guys, Douglas has finally come
into his own.
`Wonder Boys' also features a superb supporting cast which
includes Katie Holmes (`Teaching Mrs. Tingle'), Academy Award
Winner Frances McDormand (`Fargo') and the incarcerated but
unstoppable Robert Downey Jr. (`Less Than Zero'). However, the
kudos must go to Tobey Maguire (young star of `The Cider House
Rules' and `Pleasantville'), who showcases some nice
chemistry with Michael Douglas.
Curtis Hanson's `Wonder Boys' is a worthy follow up to his
classic corrupt cop saga `L.A. Confidential'. The two films
couldn't be more different in tone and manner, yet Hanson's
swift hand gives each its own distinct flavor. Cinematographer Dante
Spinotti, who also worked on `L.A. Confidential' (as well as
`The Insider'), sometimes uses a hand-held camera, which gives
the picture a life-like quality. Bob Dylan has also recorded a new
song for the film; his first new music since his Grammy winning
`Time Out Of Mind' album.
`Wonder Boys' is, of course, not without its flaws. The dialogue
is often bogged down by intrusive voice-over narration, and a couple
awkward scenes towards the end fall flat. Also, the interesting title
is never explained, and I believe it was lost in the translation from
book to film.
But `Wonder Boys' real problem has nothing to do with the
film itself. It is Paramount's marketing strategy, which has been
noticeably weak for such a strong film. The poster and trailer are
each dull as dirt, not giving a clue as to what the film is about. So
`Wonder Boys', a well-written film about writers, will have to
get by on the sheer power of word-of-mouth. See `Wonder Boys',
enjoy it, pass it on.
B+ Akiva Gottlieb Critical66@yahoo.com http://pictureshow.8m.com

Author
Mark O'Hara
Talk about a Sophomore Slump - it's taken Grady Tripp seven years and over 
2600 single-spaced pages, and he still doesn't have a second novel.
The first novel by Tripp (Michael Douglas) was "Arsonist's Daughter," 
supposedly the winner of the PEN Award.  So the literary community eagerly 
awaits a new effort.  Of course Grady's life as a writer in contemporary 
America almost demands that he be a college professor.  Hence the setting in 
a fictional Pittsburgh university.  Unfortunately, the film gets many 
aspects of college life wrong.  I can understand novelist Michael Chabon and 
screenwriter Steven Kloves sketching a fiction writing workshop in which the 
students are petty and personal.  But the ones I've been through have always 
had a camaraderie and atmosphere of willingness to help:  yes, there's a 
certain amount of ignorance of purpose, but never the pure vitriol heaped 
upon the person and talent of James Leer, played by Tobey Maguire.  And in a 
forum of open critiquing of stories, the professor doesn't have to call on 
students who raise their hands.
Still the world of writing commands our attention well.  The inbred politics 
is also captured believably.  It seems Grady's young wife has just this 
morning left him; not that it matters much, as the marriage has been tainted 
by Grady's affair with the Chancellor of the college where he teaches.  Dr. 
Sara Gaskell (Frances McDormand) is pregnant, and it's not with the child of 
her husband Walter (Richard Thomas), who is also the chair of the English 
department and Grady's boss.  To add to the complications of academia, we 
see a gathering of writers and various hangers-on at the Gaskell household.  
There we also watch the development of more characters, among them Terry 
Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr.), Grady's agent from New York, and Crabtree's 
transvestite pick-up Antonia/Tony.  Add to this the fact that Walter 
Gaskell's blind mastiff hates Grady, growling and ultimately chomping on the 
hero's calf.
Director Curtis Hanson handles characterization swiftly with his solid cast. 
  The film's opening and middle are stronger than its closing, due mainly to 
the situations - wacky and moving - into which the characters get 
themselves.  We hear a good deal of one-liners that are so crazy they smack 
of reality. And we get a top-notch performance from Michael Douglas in the 
lead role.
Douglas has superior timing and a natural ease on the screen.  His character 
operates, however, under the burden of stereotype:  he's rumpled and 60-ish, 
and even though he's been living in his body and his life for a long time, 
he's yet to get it right.  (Doesn't this sound like Donald Sullivan, Paul 
Newman's character in "Nobody's Fool"?)  Still Douglas does a remarkable job 
in causing his character to be sympathetic, especially considering his 
character is not a very good role model for students: he drinks, smokes 
expensive marijuana, and often loses his tact in personal conversations.  He 
also looks on as a student of his backslides into immorality and crime.  
Finally, he is beset by fainting spells that hit him at random times, making 
worse his status as a wounded man.  Still, we like the guy, especially as he 
careens comically out of the safe orbit of the tenure-track.
Tobey Maguire is at his most inscrutable in "Wonder Boys."  I've not seen 
him particularly excitable in a performance, but here he is low-key almost 
to a fault, his character a good writer but otherwise a morally reckless 
liar.  Let's hope many more solid scripts come Maguire's way; apparently he 
is taking a hiatus currently, in a patient quest for quality.
Frances McDormand is good in everything she does.  Here she is 
underutilized, though, as the chief executive of the college, and we do not 
get more than a glance of the husband whom she is betraying; we are 
supposed, I guess, to dislike Richard Thomas' character simply because he 
doesn't care for Grady.
The other female role is played by Katie Holmes.  Her Hannah Green is also a 
star student of Grady's; we hear Grady tell another novelist, "Q" (Rip Torn) 
that Hannah has already published two stories in the "Paris Review."  
Enamored of Grady, she rents a room in his house and ends up giving him some 
metaphorically significant advice.
"Wonder Boys" has many faults - the random-feeling ending, the lack of 
consequences for reprehensible behaviors - that make it fall short of 
greatness.  But it is definitely a good film.  With a momentum built through 
Grady's inability to make decisions and through a few wacky twists of plot, 
the story finally shows that serious losses are sometimes necessary to keep 
one from taking life too seriously.


Author
Steve Rhodes
Professor Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas) is having writer's block.  It
has been 7 years since his big novel was published to critical acclaim,
and he's still working on his next novel.  Right now he's stuck on page
2612.  It was going to be a modest 200-page affair, but he has somehow
lost control.  Could it be that he's been chain-smoking pot the whole
time?  Nope, that can't be it, he claims, since he was stoned while
creating his last book.
Curtis Hanson's WONDER BOYS, scripted by Steven Kloves and based on
Michael Chabon's novel, is an eclectic collection of quirky characters
and incidents that never amount to anything.  Like a RUSHMORE-LITE,
WONDER BOYS is set at a school in which many bizarre little incidents
occur.  Unlike RUSHMORE, WONDER BOYS forgets to be funny.
As the story opens, Grady's young wife has left him, which is something
that she and other wives of his have done before.  With a worn face like
a well-read novel and with a tendency to pass out, Grady doesn't exactly
seem the type that would attract a series of women, but he does.
To make matters worse, Grady's mistress, the University's chancellor
(Frances McDormand), announces that he has gotten her pregnant.  Her
husband (Richard Thomas) is the head of the English department and
Grady's boss.
In town for the school's annual writers' festival is Grady's editor
(Robert Downey Jr.) who hopes that Grady's novel is finally finished.
The story heaps on strange little episodes and quirky characters like
planting masses of seeds in the garden with the hopes that some of them
will germinate, but few do.
Also in the story are two of Grady's students who stay with him.  One
(Tobey Maguire) is a brilliant novelist and accomplished liar, and the
other is a gorgeous girl (Katie Holmes) with a major crush on Grady.
There's also a dead dog in Grady's car trunk and a stolen dress that
once belonged to Marilyn Monroe.
One scene has a character flipping the dial on the television.  Sadly,
you realize that what's on the tube is more interesting that the movie
itself.
The predictable story has old-fashioned writers who eschew computers,
preferring typewriters instead.  Grady doesn't make any copies of his
tome.  Any guess what will happen in one of the scenes?
The movie spends the whole time setting up the plot.  When the ending
credits roll, you realize that it was never able to get in gear.
I must confess that I have a personal hang-up about comedies.  If they
aren't funny, I have trouble liking them, no matter how well cast they
are.  And there aren't many laughs in the rambling WONDER BOYS, or any
characters worth caring about.
WONDER BOYS runs 1:48.  It is rated R for language and drug content and
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Wonder Boys (2000)
Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, Frances McDormand, Robert Downey Jr.,
Katie Holmes, Richard Thomas, Rip Torn, Philip Bosco, Jane Adams,
Richard Knox, Michael Cavaias. Screenplay by Steve Kloves, based on the
novel by Michael Chabon. Directed by Curtis Hanson. 112 minutes.
Rated R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"Wonder Boys" represents a dandy twist on a relatively new genre, the
coming-of-middle-age story. Generally, films of this type (the
outstanding "American Beauty" is a fine example) focus on men beaten
into numbness or despair by the crushing weight of time, responsibility
and social conventions. When some unusual event jerks them into
awareness, they respond by rebelling against the norm, desperately
trying to recapture the vitality of youth. After colorfully acting out,
usually by aping behaviors straight out of "Animal House," they
eventually learn valuable life lessons that help them put their world in
a better perspective.
Things are different for English professor Grady Tripp (Michael
Douglas). In his cozy academic cocoon, he never had to grow up in the
first place. A celebrated author, Grady smokes dope almost constantly,
regularly bangs his boss' wife and enjoys reverential treatment from his
students and the college staff. Still, he is an unhappy man. As the
story begins, his wife has left him and his girlfriend, Chancellor Sara
Gaskell (Frances McDormand), has just announced she is pregnant with his
child.
Once the wonder boy of the literati, Grady has become crippled by the
success of his novel. The follow-up is long overdue and many secretly
believe he is suffering from writer's block. In fact, the exact opposite
is true. Privately, he cranks out a dizzying number of pages for his
latest, a massive tome that makes "War and Peace" look like a pamphlet
by comparison. Terrified that the book won't live up to its predecessor,
Grady continues writing as a way of avoiding completion, and
examination, of his work. Unfortunately, his editor is about to arrive
for Wordfest, the university's annual literary festival, and Grady knows
the heat is on.
But wait, that's just the beginning. Within a few hours, Grady will find
himself dealing with a gifted (and very freaky) student who may be a
pathological liar, the police, a furious gent with James Brown hair, a
stolen jacket once worn by Marilyn Monroe, and a dead dog. And you
thought your weekends were hectic.
Adapted by Steve Kloves from Michael Chabon's 1995 novel, "Wonder Boys"
is the first movie for director Curtis Hanson since his magnificent
"L.A. Confidential," and it shows the filmmaker in excellent form.
Gliding from humor to poignancy with the greatest of ease, Hanson has
crafted a smart, sophisticated feature that will delight mature
audiences. While the wacky elements are occasionally laid on a bit
thick, this is a movie to treasure. Adding to the enjoyment is the
timing of its release  how often do we get quality adult fare in the
middle of winter?
The casting for "Wonder Boys" is impeccable. After playing so many oily
rich creeps that the very mention of his name makes me shudder, Michael
Douglas gives possibly the best performance of his career as the
rumpled, aging man-child. Whether the scene calls for laughs or
heartache, Douglas' line delivery and affect is dead on, without a
moment that seems forced. Grady is a mess, but a lovable one, and
Douglas deserves great praise for his work.
As James Lee, Grady's most talented, and disturbed, student, Tobey
Maguire is perfect for the role. I've grown tired of Maguire taking jobs
where he is required to do little more than flash his odd kewpy-doll
smile and act inscrutable, but in this context, that's exactly what is
called for and Maguire plays off Douglas superbly. Still, I hope that
Maguire starts selecting parts that demand a wider range of expression.
Also, it would be nice if he spent some time outdoors, because there are
coma patients whose skin has more color than this kid.
The supporting actors are just as good. Robert Downey Jr. is delightful
as Grady's editor Terry Grabtree, mixing flamboyance and functionality
with grand style. Downey's ongoing drug problems have made him a
national punchline, and this film is yet another reminder that he is one
of the finest actors working today. Hopefully, Downey will conquer his
personal demons and get back on track soon.
As Chancellor Sara Gaskell, Frances McDormand is compelling, although
she doesn't get a lot of screen time. The same holds true for "Dawson's
Creek's" Katie Holmes, who still manages to make a big impression while
serving as a strong stabilizing presence in the midst of all the
madness. Richard Thomas and the dynamic Rip Torn also appear, but,
sadly, both are given scant time in the film.
In addition to its stellar cast and rich storyline, "Wonder Boys" also
boasts a hell of a soundtrack, including a memorable new Bob Dylan song.
Because this is a tale of humor mixed with substance rather than the
typical flashy Hollywood fare, it would be easy for "Wonder Boys" to be
overlooked by filmgoers. Don't make that mistake. Regardless of your
age, this coming-of-middle-age story has something for everyone. If you
want winter to consist of more substantial fare than formulaic crap like
"Reindeer Games," here's a chance to put your money where your mouth is.

Author
James Sanford
         There's nothing about Michael Chabon's popular novel "Wonder
Boys" that screams "movie material." Its lead character is an English
professor, not a cop or a scientist. In place of a plot, Chabon simply
lays out the events from one bizarre weekend, including an accidental
murder (of a dog), a robbery (of a jacket that once belonged to Marilyn
Monroe), the breakdown of two marriages and lots of drug-taking.
On top of that, most of the characters are either writers,
editors or college administrators, not exactly the kinds of professions
that make for exciting viewing.
Smartly, when director Curtis Hanson and screenwriter Steve
Kloves ("The Fabulous Baker Boys") were putting together the film of
"Wonder Boys" they didn't try to impose a storyline or goose the action
quotient. Instead, they've simply taken most of the book's essence and
transferred it lovingly to the screen. Kloves' adaptation is so
faithful, in fact, that even the Alfred Stieglitz portrait of Georgia
O'Keeffe hanging over student Hannah Green's bed -- a throwaway
descriptive detail in Chabon's novel -- turns up in the movie.
 What also surfaces is one of Michael Douglas' strongest
performances of the past decade. As an actor, Douglas has always been
strongest when playing disturbed (and often disturbing) men, as he did
in "The War of the Roses," "Falling Down" and, unforgettably, in his
Oscar-winning turn in "Wall Street." And Grady Tripp, the focal point of
"Wonder Boys," has plenty to disturb him.
 On the personal front, his wife has left him and his 20-year-old
boarder Hannah (Katie Holmes) seems anxious to take her place.
Meanwhile, Sara (Frances McDormand), the chancellor at the Pittsburgh
college where Grady teaches, has just told Grady she's pregnant with his
child. Plus, there's the matter of James Leer (Tobey Maguire), the
spooky, gifted young writer who has seemingly attached himself to Grady.
         Professionally, Grady is in a funk because it's been seven
years since his last novel and he can't come up with an ending to his
sprawling new manuscript, which now stands at 2611 typewritten,
single-spaced pages. That worry is compounded by his old friend and
editor Terry Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr.), who's told Grady his job at
the publishing house is hanging by a thread and could disappear if the
new book is not a major success.
 All these major and minor crises collide in the course of 72
hours and the quiet chaos they bring is beautifully orchestrated by
Kloves' script and Hanson's smooth, easygoing direction. There's
flintiness as well as warmth in McDormand's Sara, while Holmes brings
her usual earthy radiance to Hannah. In Maguire's tricky eyes you can
see the wheels of James' slightly warped mind grinding away. Only Downey
seems slightly flat.
 "Wonder Boys" can best be described as a lighthearted dark
comedy which never pushes too hard in either direction. Like many a lost
weekend, it's frequently puzzling while it's going on but surprisingly
pleasant to look back on. James Sanford

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie news, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I was suspicious about this film's rave reviews before going to see because
it centered mostly around a writer going through a rough period of his life,
and imagined that most critics' love for the film stemmed from their
inevitable ability to relate with the protagonist, rather than the film's
actual merits as a good ol' fashioned dose of entertainment for Joe Q.
Public. Well, I'm happy to report that my suspicions were mostly unfounded
and that, as a writer, I was able to relate stronger to the main character,
but more importantly, as a movie watcher, the film was wholly entertaining
and consistently gratifying.
PLOT:
A teacher whose career as a writer peaked with one successful novel suddenly
falls upon a couple of extremely unlucky days. First, his wife leaves him.
Then, his mistress tells him that she's pregnant. And to top all that off,
his eccentric editor comes to town looking for his latest novel, a book
which he seems to have been working on forever. All the while, the man also
has to deal with a brooding, young student of his who's loaded with
potential but very difficult to get a handle on.
CRITIQUE:
Inspirational. It's been quite some time that a movie was actually able to
make me feel refreshed after a viewing, or simply nudge me into revisiting
my own life under a different source of light, but this movie did just that.
A great film featuring some notable performances all around, an excellent
script which manages to simultaneously entertain and motivate those who fear
that their best days are far behind them and enough interesting characters,
plot twists and surprisingly, laughs, to gently embrace any willing audience
member. I'll be honest and tell you that I was barely intrigued by this
film's trailer, and basically just expected to be bored with the life and
times of a hack writer currently undergoing a mid-life crisis, but boy, was
I ever wrong! This movie didn't bore me for one second, in fact, it only
took a few minutes for it to wrap me entirely within its cozy shell of
wintertime and real-life characters. Their problems seemed genuine, their
reactions all engaging, their emotions running deep and leading to more
questions, a wonderful film to decipher and enjoy.
But besides its inspirational undertow, which drew fuel from the sparkplug
talent of a younger writer opening the eyes of an older, worn man, it was
this film's natural sense of irony and consistent humor that made me love it
so much more. Excellent performances from Michael Douglas and Tobey Maguire
also helped elevate this movie to its superior level, as well as the solid
supporting cast led by the always strange Robert Downey Jr. (whose career
seems to have taken off ever since he went to jail), Katie Holmes and
Frances McDormand. Easily one of Michael's least stock and sincerely layered
performances in years. Of course, it goes without saying (but I'll say it
anyway) that the director of the film is also to be given a lot of credit
for having the capacity to bring this interesting small tale to the big
screen, elevating the level of his cast's talent and giving the film an
absorbing feel and satisfying finale. Please don't go see this movie
expecting to be bombarded by inspiration, because this film is more likely
to invigorate if you enjoy watching good movies about intriguing, real
people with various vices, simply trying to live through their difficult
moments with a general sense of aloofness and determination.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film includes the last role that Robert Downey Jr. played before
returning to jail on drug charges. Robert claims that it was his father who
introduced him to the arena of drugs, when he offered him a marijuana joint
at the age of 8. Good parenting, ol' chap!
Tobey Maguire's first big-screen role was in 1993's drama THIS BOY'S LIFE
starring his present-day buddy Leonardo DiCaprio. Tobey began acting only
after his mother offered him $100 in high school for him to take drama
instead of home ec. The rest as they say...is history. Tobey has acted with
Katie Holmes before in the 1997 drama ICE STORM (6/10).
Did you all know that director Curtis Hanson, who now commands respect after
his Oscar-nominated and critically acclaimed film L.A. CONFIDENTIAL used to
direct shlocky thrillers? His reign before L.A. CONFIDENTIAL included THE
RIVER WILD, THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE, BAD INFLUENCE and THE BEDROOM
WINDOW.
Actress Frances McDormand is married to writer/director Joel Coen, of "Coen
Brothers" fame.
This movie is based on a book of the same name by Michael Chabon. The novel
was transformed to script by Steve Kloves, a director in his own right.
Steve has directed movies on his own, including the Michelle
Pfeiffer-starring THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS back in 1989, and 1993's FLESH AND
BONE starring Meg Ryan.

Author
Michael Redman
For many people, procrastination isn't a problem to overcome, it's a
high art. We'll do just about anything to put off a task. When the
deadline for this column nears, it's the only time during the week 
dishes get washed and the bed made and laundry done and plants watered and...
Eventually, hopefully, sometimes, there's a breakthrough and we actually
get down to work. Amazingly it's almost always easier than we dreaded
and after finishing, that sense of oppressive apprehension melts away.
And then, the next time, we do it all again.
English professor Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas) is a master. Seven years
ago, his first book was a hit. He's been working on his second -- a
short 200-page piece -- since then. Fearful that he can't live up to the
first, he can't bring himself to finish it. No writer's block, he's
nearing 3,000 pages with no end in sight.
Now he's having a particularly difficult day. The college's annual
writers conference is bringing in accomplished novelists reminding Tripp
that other people are finishing _their_ books. During the first day, his
wife has left him, his married girlfriend informs him she's pregnant and
his agent is in town with a six-foot transvestite in tow.
By the evening, our besieged writer is driving though the snow-covered
streets of Pittsburgh with a suicidal student beside him, a stolen
jacket that Marilyn Monroe wore on her wedding day in the back seat and
a murdered blind dog stuffed in the trunk. This could be a pivotal point
in his mid-life crisis.
There's a lot to like about this movie. There are no huge explosions,
shattering glass or computer-generated dinosaurs to distract from the
very real human issues. Grady is caught up in the curse of people who
accomplish great things early in their career. In the world of "what
have you done for me lately?", he knows his second book has to be better
than his first. Instead of finding out, he drifts, comfortable in the
insular cocoon of academic Peter Panhood.
He doesn't have much of a life and neither does his star pupil James
Leer (Tobey Maguire). James may be suicidal and psychotic. Certainly
everything that comes out of his mouth is a lie. He makes up a past of
working clash anguish because the truth of wealth and comfort just isn't
interesting enough.
As the weekend progresses, they are both forced to fully engage life.
That's the question they must face: comfort or real experiences?
The film takes some interesting chances. Non-traditional relationships
are presented as matter-of-fact. Extra-marital, gay, interracial,
professor-student: here they aren't judged, merely choices.
The actors are all first-rate. Douglas triumphs, playing against type as
he spends most of his time disheveled, unshaven and clad in a pink
women's house robe. Maguire's disengaged alienation works perfectly
here. Robert Downey Jr. as Grady's agent livens up his scenes.
Director Curtis Hanson ("L.A. Confidential") makes a few missteps. The
women are underused. Frances McDormand does a good job of her limited
role of Sara, Grady's married lover but we never understand much of who
she is. The chemistry between the two of them is non-existent which
makes some of the ending unconvincing.
Katie Holmes is a student with a major crush on the professor, but her
character goes nowhere. We never even see Grady's exiting wife.
This is very much a guy's film. The varied relationships between the men
are much more convincing than any of the others. Grady's alternating
mentoring and rejection of James is the centerpoint of the film, not him
and Sara.
As the boomers age, expect to see more mid-life crisis films to catch
the attention of that demographic. Eventually it'll probably become
cliche, but right now we've got a winner.
I'll finish this in a second. Right now I have to grab some paint. I
noticed some trim in the other room that needs a little touch-up.
(Michael Redman has written this column for so long that he's made
mid-life crisis a career choice.)
[This appeared in the 3/2/2000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]
-- 
mailto:redman@bluemarble.net
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
David N. Butterworth
        If, as the saying goes, you're only as good as your last picture,
then the pressure on "L.A. Confidential" director Curtis Hanson must have
been enormous.  That 1997 film was nominated for nine Academy AwardsŽ--a
tough act to follow indeed.  Which might explain why Hanson has spent three
years bringing his next project to the silver screen.
        That project is "Wonder Boys," a film based on the novel by Michael
Chabon and adapted by Steve Kloves ("The Fabulous Baker Boys").  Ironically
(or not), its central character, cynical college professor Grady Tripp
(Michael Douglas), is also someone who has had to deal with high
expectations.  His first novel was a runaway best-seller, but that was
seven years ago now and the promising author's follow-up is, even at 2,500+
single-spaced pages, far from finished.
        To top it all, Grady's wife has chosen to walk out on him (again)
on the same exact morning that his editor, Terry Crabtree (Robert Downey,
Jr.), is flying into town to find out what's going on with Grady's latest
work-in-progress.  "It's pretty much finished," lies Grady when asked about
the status of his manuscript.  "I just need to tinker with it a bit."
        "Did he ask you about the book?" asks Sara Gaskell (Frances
McDormand), Chancellor of the Pittsburgh university where Grady works, wife
of the English department chairman, to whom Grady reports, and Grady's
mistress, currently with child.  Grady's child.  "Yes."  "Are you going to
tell him?"  "No."
        You'd think Grady Tripp's life was complicated enough but in his
English class there's a suicidal young writer called James Leer (Tobey
Maguire) and a pretty young thing called Hannah Green (Katie Holmes) to
whom Grady rents a room in his house.  And faster than an exasperated Grady
can say "Well, you could have just pulled him off me!" there's also the
Gaskell's now-deceased dog to contend with, two bullets to the midriff
courtesy James' "cap" gun.
        Douglas dominates the film with this kind of sardonic humor and the
support provided by Maguire, McDormand, Holmes, and Downey, Jr.
(especially) is second to none.  Unfortunately, these engaging performances
do not make for a completely satisfactory whole: "Wonder Boys" is a
scattershot affair that bobbles along episodically but doesn't quite gel.
Although undeniably funny, the film is often times extremely bleak in its
tone and in its delivery: these are people who have difficulty connecting
and no amount of pat Hollywood ending--wonder boy gets wonder girl--can
eliminate that.
        The trailer for this film is wonderful and Hanson would have done
well to have employed the talents of the individual(s) who pieced it
together.  For all of its pacing problems, however, "Wonder Boys" is still
worth seeing for Douglas' controlled and highly entertaining performance as
Grady Tripp.
        The only remaining question is whether three years was too much
time, or too little, for Hanson to take making it.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Curtis Hanson.
Cast: Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, Robert Downey Jr., Frances McDormand, 
Katie Holmes, Michael Cavaias, Richard Thomas, Rip Torn, Jane Adams, Richard 
Knox, Philip Bosco. 
2000 - 112 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and mild violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, February 26, 2000.
The life of Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas) is at a standstill, never pushing 
forward because he is afraid to commit to everything in his life. A English 
professor at a college in Pittsburgh, Grady wrote one acclaimed novel seven 
years ago, but has since kept his readers waiting for a sophomore effort. He 
has been writing a second novel, all right, but he still hasn't completed it, 
and is currently on page 2611. Grady smokes marijuana almost continuously, 
and when not in school, is rarely seen without wearing his bathrobe. 
Recently, he has been carrying on an affair with the school's chancellor, 
Sara Gaskell (Frances McDormand), despite them both being married to other 
people. Such behavior is used, in essence, because he is always attempting to 
shield himself from the world, and from the reality that he is a 50-year-old 
who still hasn't come-of-age.
That compelling, if not terribly fresh, idea is at the center of "Wonder 
Boys," directed by Curtis Hanson (1997's "L.A. Confidential"), and written by 
Steve Kloves with a surprising literacy and intelligence that is rarely 
conspicuous in today's Hollywood-made features. Set over an eventful weekend 
in which an annual literature festival is in full swing at the campus, 
Grady's life seems to be unraveling more and more by the second. At the 
start, his wife leaves him, and although she has walked out on Grady before, 
she always came back. Taking time to be alone for a few fleeting seconds 
during her party, Sara tells Grady that she is positive she is pregnant, and 
it has to be his child. Sara, an independent, fair-minded woman, makes it 
clear that she loves him, but isn't going to let her whole life pass her by 
as she waits for him to make up his mind on what he wants.
Things grow more complicated with the appearance of Terry Crabtree (Robert 
Downey Jr.), his editor, eager to get ahold of his latest writing opus, who 
is in town for the weekend and has a thing for picking up various people, the 
latest of which is the alluring Antonia Sloviak (Michael Cavaias), whom 
everyone but Terry realizes is a transvestite. Stepping outside for a smoke 
at the party, Grady discovers his unusual, but highly gifted student James 
Leer (Tobey Maguire) with what he says is a cap gun in his hand. James, whose 
writing is ten times better than all of his fellow students' will ever be, is 
constantly put down by his classmates (who are obviously jealous), yet takes 
their comments to heart and has settled into a depression. That is only the 
beginning of an unconventional bond that forms between Grady and James, both 
of whom need someone to wake them up to their realities, and a string of 
eccentric plot threads that involve a murdered pooch; the coat Marilyn Monroe 
wore the day she was married; the scholarly Hannah Green (Katie Holmes), one 
of Grady's students, who rents a room in his house and unmistakably has a 
crush on him; and the erratic Vernon Hardapple (Richard Knox), who 
mysteriously is stalking Grady, with his fresh-faced, pregnant girlfriend, 
Oola (Jane Adams), in tow.
Structurally, a very laid-back bittersweet comedy, one is never quite sure 
where "Wonder Boys," based on the novel by Michael Chabon, is headed because, 
ultimately, there is nowhere for it to go. This is not necessarily meant as a 
criticism, although it does give the picture an occasionally uneven tone, but 
rather a distinct observation, because the film has little to do with "plot," 
and almost everything to do with Grady Tripp, an insecure man without a clue 
to what he wants from anything. Wandering around rather aimlessly from one 
scene, and character, to the next, what remains the focus is Grady, as 
everyone around him acts as little more than instigators biding their time 
until he discovers within himself what he wants to make out of the rest of 
his days.
Almost everything is dependent on Michael Douglas' central performance, and 
he genuinely impresses. Getting rid of all of his previous characters' 
somewhat similar pretensions, Douglas has crafted a memorably vivid film 
character in Grady Tripp, and always makes him completely likable and 
understanding to those around him, a refreshing twist that keeps his role 
from becoming a cliche.
Tobey Maguire, who has made a career, thus far, in playing young, understated 
everybodys, takes a giant step forward this time with his most eccentric 
role, to date. His James Leer is a peculiar individual, a college student who 
loves writing and has a sort of obsession for trivia about deceased movie 
stars. One never gets a complete sense of who James is, but that is 
appropriate because James is clearly unsure himself, although there is no 
doubt in anyone's mind that, with his writing expertise, he is destined to 
become a published author soon down the road.
In supporting roles, Robert Downey Jr. is a standout, even more so than 
usual, and it is performances like this that make you wish he would lay off 
the drugs and get his own life together, not unlike Grady. His portrayal of 
the dedicated and loyal, if perverse, Terry Crabtree is right on the money, 
and the gentle, if slight, relationship that forms between him and James, who 
begin to sleep with each other, is one that isn't given much screen time, but 
has a sort of oddball affection about it. After all, like everyone, Terry is 
only looking for love, but by pursuing one fling after the next, he simply 
has a strange way of searching.
It is nice to see Frances McDormand in a high-profile movie once again, and 
she proves that she is so very good, it doesn't matter that Sara is 
underwritten. McDormand single-handedly pulls the viewer into the character 
and gets them to care about what happens to her, and the fate of her 
relationship with Grady. The same holds true for Katie Holmes, as Hannah, who 
is only given a handful of substantial scenes, but is excellent in each one. 
With 1997's "The Ice Storm" (also starring Maguire), 1999's "Go," and now 
"Wonder Boys," Holmes is sure to stick around for a very long time, choosing 
interesting projects and notable supporting roles that wisely distances her 
from her "Dawson's Creek" character. Last, Michael Cavaias, as Antonia/Tony, 
makes a brief, but nonetheless exceptional, turn that, in each one of his 
scenes early on, steals the attention away from even Douglas and Downey Jr.
Technical attributes that should be pointed out include cinematographer Dante 
Spinotti, who paints the film with gorgeous visual strokes of the bleak, 
wintry Pittsburgh landscapes, while the soundtrack, which features such great 
artists as Bob Dylan, Neil Young, John Lennon, and Van Morrison, is perfectly 
realized.
"Wonder Boys" may not be perfect (for example, I wish the ending had led up 
to a little more than there is with some of the characters), but director 
Curtis Hanson has crafted an assured, well-made piece of work that shows just 
how smart a studio picture can be. And in Grady Tripp, he and screenwriter 
Kloves have created an unforgettable screen character. Grady may not be a 
faultless human being, but in his gradual emotional transformation from a 
child into an adult, and in his willingness to live the way he wants to at 
any given moment, he is remarkable. Like his pupil James Leer, he is a wonder 
boy, indeed.
