Title
Review for Hachigatsu no kyoshikyoku (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
This is a story that relates to a sensitive subject in Japan, and America.
And how some people have dealt with it all.  The subject
is Hiroshima and the bomb.
While the bomb went on to get Japan to surrender, it did make a mark in its
people, a mark that still lingers today, if the story is any
indication.  But its effects, other than the terrain, have almost
disappeared, with the exception of the elder generation, who may
not only have seen the blast, but also experienced it first hand.
And the story is related to that event.  The parents have gone to Hawaii to
visit the elder mother's ailing brother.  And the grand mother is
basically the babysitter.  And the children, want to go to Hawaii, where
they seem to see a better life and fun.  And one of the
ailing man's children is an American, who will inherit the family's fortunes
and large plantations.  This does not sit well with the
elders, but it seems an opportunity for the rest of the family for better
jobs and pay.
But the main thrust of the story is not the family situation, but the grand
mother's state, in the aftermath of the explosion, which
she saw amidst the mountains.  It has affected her since, and did kill many
of her family and friends.  She spends most of her time
isolated, and in quiet prayer and meditation, and the only things she can
talk about are the events, then, and how they felt about
them.
And this film becomes a chronicle of a generation that suffered much pain,
and has had to withstand inner anger for an enemy
for 50 years. These feelings, are still there, but smoothed out by the
economic situations between the country and the world.
The film is strictly about the details of the event, and how the grand
mother works with them.  And a powerful example it
is of what war can do to a populace.  The mother is not angry  at the
Americans, although she has some misgivings about her
brother's American son.  But she doesn't take it too personal, since she is
getting on, and she is much too tied up in the
event itself.
An excellent film, with some beautiful acting, Akira Kurosawa still uses his
own theatrical symbols, rather than revert
to special effects.  The old lady sees the explosion, and also thinks that
an eye has been watching them ever since.
Worth seeing.  Although very literary in content, the film, still, is a
wonderful look at a generation that lost much of its
strength, because of the bomb.

Author
Frank Maloney
     RHAPSODY IN AUGUST is a Japanese-language film by Akira Kurosawa.
It stars Sachiko Murase, Hisashi Igawa, Richard Gere.  It is written by
Kurosawa, based on the novel "Nabe-no-Naka" by Kiyoko Murata.  English
subtitles.  Rated PG for mature themes.
     Akira Kurosawa at 81 is establishing his career in a vigorous and
creative old age, like the Japanese painter whose artist's name became
"Old Man Mad About Painting."  Last year a lot of us went to KUROSAWA'S
DREAMS, thinking it would be sensei's last hurrah.  Fortunately, we
youngsters were wrong again.
     RHAPSODY is about the way humans forget about painful memories and
the importance of remembering and conquering that pain.  Pain in this
case is in the form of the atomic bombing of Nagasaki, as remembered by
an old woman Kane (Sachiko Murase) and as discovered by her children and
grandchildren.
     The grandchildren are the narrative focus of the film.  They are
stuck with spending the summer at an old-fashioned farm over the
mountain from Nagasaki.  Granny's been invited to take them to Hawaii to
meet the American branch of the family, including Richard Gere (the
first American to be cast in a Kurosawa film).  She refuses because her
husband died that day 9 August 1945.  On a shopping trip to Nagasaki,
the kids in their American t-shirts discover memorials to the bomb and
its victims.  For the first time, the horror of that day comes home to
them.  Kane's children treat the story as bad manners that might offend
their new, rich American connections.  Gere flies to Japan to apologize,
not for the bomb, but for not ever thinking about how his uncle might
have died, no never thinking about it.
     The scene between Gere and the grandmother is only one of many
wondrous moments in this film.  His performance, which occupies less
than a third of the film, is warm, effortless, mostly in Japanese.
Indeed, sensei himself says the film is about human warmth, feelings,
kindness.  And I would add justice.  In the end, Kane has committed a
unkindness herself and the final scene of her expiation is remarkable
for its visual quality and for the audacious sound track that
accompanies it.
     Murase as Kane is the soul and emotional and moral center of the
movie.  Her frail tiny body, with its beautiful face like a mask, burns
with a fiery fear and compassion.  That final scene, unforgettable as it
is, is only one of many, for example, Granny "visiting" her fellow
survivor, or Granny eating a bean, that continue to burn vividly in my
memory.
     The children are charming, but not quite real.  They come closest
to being mere stick figures that exist only to announce the sensei's
message.  For better or worse, Kurosawa-san is an artist who is willing
to take a chance, even with telling us what we need to hear.
     As a film maker, sensei has eschewed the lavish costumes and period
charm of RAN and segments of DREAMS to produce what might be the
definitive Japanese film.  He sticks to medium- and low-camera angles
without closeups, long static scenes, and intimate human interactions
(as Jeff Shannon pointed out in his review in the Seattle P-I).
     To anyone who thinks he or she can sit through a very non-Hollywood
film, I recommend RHAPSODY IN AUGUST most highly.  Pay what you have to,
it's for a good cause.
