Title
Review for Music From Another Room (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Matt Williams
Is love at first sight possible?  The romantic comedy, Music From
Another Room would like you to believe so.  However, it doesn't make a
very convincing argument.
Danny (Jude Law) has met his true love.  It happened when he was five
years old...he helped to deliver a newborn named Anna Swan, and knew
that one day they would marry.
Flash forward many years.  Danny accidentally stumbles across the Swan
family again and sets about integrating himself into their lives.  The
mother of the family (Brenda Blethyn) remembers him, but the rest of the
family is not so sure of his intentions.  Particularly when his feelings
for Anna become known.
Anna (Gretchen Mol), you see, has grown up and is now engaged to be
married to Eric (Jon Tenney).  She has also turned out to be rather cold
and remote.  Why Danny spends the entire movie chasing after her is a
complete mystery.
At least Anna's family is more interesting, in a contrived sort of way.
Her sister Nina (Jennifer Tilly) is blind and fearful of the world.  Her
brother Billy (Jeremy Piven) has some fidelity issues with his wife.
And her sister Karen (Martha Plimpton) is a shameless feminist.
In the entire movie, Nina is the most interesting character, although
her storyline never pans out in a believable way.  Jennifer Tilly is
able to endow her character with the spark of life that is absent from
Anna.
Music From Another Room is painfully overwritten.  The stilted dialogue
that fills the film is nothing anyone would actually say.  But that's
ok...hardly any of the film's scenes are believable anyway.  The film's
script is definitely its weakest link.
So that leaves us with characters we don't care anything about,
blabbering nonsense, all the while doing incredulous things.  Hardly an
auspicious set of ingredients for a romantic comedy.
None of the cast give terribly endearing performances.  Jennifer Tilly
and Jude Law are the standouts in a rather uninspiring collection.
Music From Another Room tries to be a light and whimsical romantic
comedy, with a little dysfunctional family humor tossed in for topical
spice.  However, while not a complete disaster, it's rarely comic and
hardly romantic.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Nikki Lesley
Starring: Jude Law, Gretchen Mol, Brenda Blethyn, Jennifer Tilly.
Once you've seen the first ten minutes of this movie (or even the
preview), you know exactly what's going to happen. This seems
to be the curse of the romantic-comedy. Of course, this doesn't
always have to be a bad thing - sometimes getting to a known
end can be heaps of fun - but a movie has to work a lot harder to
overcome this. 
First, if I know that Danny (Jude Law) and Anna (Gretchen Mol)
are going to end up happily ever after from the get-go, why will I
keep watching? Since it's at the very beginning, we're not at a
point yet where I really care about these characters. The only
possibility is that the journey is going to be novel in some way,
filled with interesting characters and strange events. 
Charlie Peters seems to have understood this point and filled
Music From Another Room with a cast of zany characters who
have eccentric hobbies/careers. Danny is a restorer of mosaics,
Anna's sister-in-law regularly draws a gun on the family at the
dinner table, Anna's father continually talks about the mating
habits of different animals, the wisdom dispensing Austrian
family that takes Danny in, the people at the night club, Anna's
mother with her magically reappearing and disappearing disease
- the film is filled with a plethora of quaint or just plain strange
characters. 
Unfortunately turning a room full of odd beings into an
interesting, amusing movie rather than into a room full of
lunatics is a fine line to tread and the director seems to be
wearing Doc Martens. To take just one point, what is the story
with the sister-in-law and the gun? Her gun wielding antics
start out mildly amusing but quickly become psychopathic: and
there's not much humour in that. 
Music From Another Room isn't a bad movie. In fact, there are
quite a few amusing moments and almost all of the
performances are good enough. It's just another predictable
romantic comedy with not much to recommend it, especially not
it's "I'm-so-hip" self-referential dialogue. Throughout the movie,
people make references to the fact that things are happening just
as if they were in a movie such as when Anna talks about the
typical romantic comedy where the interesting foreigner comes to
enlighten the up-tight female lead. Being a predictable, cliched
movie is bad enough but admitting it doesn't make it any better! 
Some sort of change of direction would have made this a more
interesting movie: perhaps have Danny, in trying to woo Anna,
fall in love with Nina (Jennifer Tilly) or have Anna realise that she
has been up-tight till now but now she needs to go off to
experience life, not settle down with Danny. Something, anything
to get Music From Another Room out of the predictability rut. 
Pleasant storyline, amusing moments, attractive people: clearly a
fine choice as a rainy afternoon video. Just be warned that you'll
have the song Truly, Madly, Deeply by Savage Garden on your
brain for the rest of the day. 

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Charlie Peters.
Cast: Jude Law, Gretchen Mol, Jennifer Tilly, Brenda Blethyn, Jon 
Tenney, Martha Plimpton, Jeremy Piven, Jane Adams, Vincent Laresca.
1998 - 104 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed November 30, 1998.
"Music From Another Room," a drama written and directed by Charlie 
Peters, assembled an astonishing cast of gifted actors and then, alas, 
chose to do very little with them.
The prologue introduces us to Danny, a young boy visiting his father's 
friends for Thanksgiving, who helps Grace Swan (Brenda Blethyn), the 
mother of the household, give birth after she suddenly goes into labor. 
The baby is named Anna, and once she is born, Danny, all of five years 
old, takes one look at her and pronounces that he is going to marry her. 
Switch forward 25 years, Danny (Jude Law) returns to his home after 
being away in London for his childhood, only to meet up with the Swan 
family once again. Anna (Gretchen Mol), now a beautiful, but uptight 
young woman, is engaged to marry Eric (Jon Tenney), and she pretty much 
spends her time taking care of her family, particularly Grace, who is 
now very ill, and her older sister, Nina (Jennifer Tilly), who is blind 
and apprehensive about going outside. To get close to the family again, 
Danny agrees to read the novel, Anna Karenina, to Nina for her, all the 
while trying to win Anna's heart, even though she believes it isn't fate 
that once again brought them together.
"Music From Another Room," had such a brief run in theaters that if you 
blinked, you missed it, and I can somewhat understand why it was snubbed 
by its studio, Orion. It is an extremely bland romance between two 
characters who aren't the least bit interesting, and whom have no 
notably good scenes together. Luckily, almost all of the supporting 
characters are appealing, which really does lead you to wonder why the 
romance had not been scrapped and the rest of the characters be the 
focus. Nina, by far, is the most complex character, and is given the 
most delicate, sweet subplot, as a blind woman who doesn't like to get 
close to people she doesn't know, until one night she does meet her soul 
mate, a devoted, kind man named Jesus (Vincent Laresca). Jennifer Tilly 
is an effervescent as always here, and maybe even a little bit more, 
because, for once, she was not playing a dense, flighty bimbo, but a 
more fully-realized person. Martha Plimpton is also a standout, and 
given precious little screentime, as Karen, another one of Anna's 
sisters, who is a feminist involved in an amateur acting troupe called, 
"Actors Without Dicks." Finally, Jane Adams, currently starring in Todd 
Solondz's art-house hit, "Happiness," made an impact as Irene, the wife 
of the Swan family's son (Jeremy Piven), who is constantly going to 
therapy.
What do all of these fascinating supporting characters tell us? Well, it 
tells us that director Peters must have been on autopilot not to 
discover what a potentially good film he had, only to ruin it with the 
central storyline, which just clangs of sappiness and cliches. Both Jude 
Law and Gretchen Mol are not bad actors, and it is not their faults that 
their roles were inadequately written. 
What ultimately saves, "Music From Another Room," from being a total 
washout, aside from the supporting players, were several very nice 
scenes, many of which came at the end. One truthful moment that might, 
perhaps, be the best scene that I have ever seen Tilly in, has her 
character of Nina telling Anna, the sister she has always heavily relied 
on, that she doesn't need her anymore. 
What makes, "Music From Another Room," so frustrating is how, with its 
impressive cast, a worthwhile film could have very, very easily been 
made. All that the director would had to have done was to let the classy 
actors show their stuff, instead of placing them in such a lame story. 
To me, this is the worst thing that can be done by a director, 
especially with all of the promise it clearly holds. In fact, it's 
nearly downright criminal.
