Title
Review for Butch and Sundance: The Early Days (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
     How do you make a sequel to a film in which the two lead
characters have been gunned down in a shootout?  The answer, as 20th
Century Fox figured, is to make it a prequel.  Fox obviously felt there
was more dollar potential to be milked from their 1969 hit BUTCH
CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID (a winner for stars Paul Newman and Robert
Redford), but it was another ten years before Allan Burns took up the
reins as scriptwriter and delivered this modest, good-humored western.
Realizing that it would be impossible for "name" stars to replace
Redford and Newman, the producers opted instead for relative newcomers
William Katt and Tom Berenger, who had previously featured in a dozen
films between them.  The result is enjoyable on every level--Laszlo
Kovac's location photography, easygoing performances by Katt (Sundance)
and Berenger (Cassidy), and the tidy directing job undertaken by
Richard Lester.  While THE EARLY DAYS has Lester's sure touch, it
doesn't look like a "typical" Lester effort--I suspect he decided to
forego his usual edgy, improvisational choreography after seeing
dailies of Kovac's beautifully photographed scenery.
     As the title suggests, the story is little more than a series of
adventures, recounting the meeting of Butch and Sundance and the start
of their friendship/partnership.  From scene one, however, you won't be
able to shake the feeling that Berenger is not trying to play the part
of Cassidy as much as he is trying to persuade us that he is Newman.
Wisely, the beginning of the film concentrates on his character so that
by the time Sundance appears we have accepted Berenger in the Cassidy
role.  We can enjoy watching their escapades once their rapport has
been established because this time, at least, we know that they will
not die.  And the screenplay thankfully avoids the trap of resorting to
Plan B: "When audience knows lead characters are in no danger, provide
loved ones or long-time friends to kill off in tragic manner."  Lester
and Burns come up with many quirky spins on familiar standards (this is
the only western I've seen with ski-ing in it!), including the bank
holdup, the gunfight, and, of course, the train robbery.  Most
redeeming feature of THE EARLY DAYS is that it does not try to be a
phoney epic or copy scenes of the film that spawned it, as most sequels
generally tend to do.  Lester similarly avoids making it nostalgic or
sentimental.  Film, like its predecessor, ends on a freeze-frame -
otherwise it resists any ironical in-jokes pointing to the 1969
production.  It exists on its own terms.  Favorite moment:  Cassidy's
hastily-invented nickname for the as-yet-unnamed Sundance.  Supporting
players include Brian Dennehy, Jill Eikenberry and Peter Weller
(introduced as La Force, their nemesis of the earlier film).
