Title
Review for Citizen X (1995) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael Turton
Citizen X (1995)(Color) (TV)
Directed by: Chris Gerolmo.  Starring:Stephen Rea (Burakov), Donald 
Sutherland (Fetisov), Max Von Sydow (Bukhanovsky) and Jeffrey DeMunn 
(Chikatilo).
Rated "R" for violence and violent themes
Reviewed by Michael A. Turton
Reviewer's Rating: 4.5/5
        A cache of corpses is discovered in a forest. An inexperienced 
forensic pathologist suddenly finds himself in charge of the pursuit and 
capture of one of the century's most prolific serial killers.  So opens 
_Citizen X_, another fine offering from HBO.
        _Citizen X_ tells the story of the pursuit and capture of Andrei 
Chikatilo, who murdered at least 52 people during a decade-long killing 
spree in Russia.  Working train stations in his area, Chikatilo picked up 
drifters, targeting young people under 17, and took them to secluded places 
to kill them and dispose of the bodies.  
        The emotional force of this movie lies not in its depiction of yet 
another dull manhunt for a serial killer winding down to its foregone 
conclusion, but in its portrayal of the evolution of the relationship 
between the dedicated but bureacratically inept pathologist Burakov 
(Stephen Rea) and the urbane, influential Fetisov (Donald Sutherland), a 
colonel in the State Militia, each of whom elects to fight the cruel 
indifference of the Soviet system in his own way.   Both actors push the 
envelopes of their limited acting range, culminating in the emotional 
climax of the film, a deeply moving scene in which Fetisov, after nine 
years of guiding and protecting Burakov, tells the latter how much he and 
others have come to admire him.  Complementing the fine work of these two 
is Von Sydow, who has a small but highly significant role as the 
eccentric psychologist who finally gets the killer to confess.  Jeffrey 
DeMunn contributes a strong performance as Chikatilo, a killer whose banal, 
working-class life is almost impossible to reconcile with the outre 
savagery of his crimes.
        The film, shot in Hungary, has a grimy, realistic atmosphere which 
conveys the brutality and pathos of life in Soviet Russia through the 
appalling austerity of its sets and the references to deprivation and 
suffering, such as when Burakov appeals for a bigger apartment ("we've been 
waiting seven years") or when he expresses wonder that Fetisov was able to 
drop off a ham at their home.  "A whole ham?" he asks in disbelief.  For 
the real villain of the piece is not Chikatilo, who is as much as force of 
nature as a tornado or an earthquake, but the indifference of the system 
which Burakov must fight every step of the way in order to cope with this 
calamity which has been dropped in his lap.
        If the film has any weaknesses, they are at the end, where we learn 
the fate of Chikatilo, but not of the main characters Burakov and Fetisov. 
The pace is steady and the directing and camera work competent.  Although 
we see the killer at work again and again, and watch as Burakov becomes 
more and consumed by the case, the movie is never allowed to degenerate 
into a mere face-off between two men whose obsessions bring them into 
conflict with one another.  The understated script (Rea's character often 
says nothing during major events in the film) is excellent, leavened with 
the kind of sardonic humor that men develop when they beat their heads 
against the wall for a decade. 
