Title
Review for Pi (1998)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by Darren Aronofsky
Starring Sean Guilette, Mark Magolis, Benny Sheckman, Pamela Hart, Samai
Shoaib
    "Personal Note: When I was a kid my mother told me not to stare into the
sun, so when I was six, I did.  The doctor's didn't know if my eyes would
ever heal.  I was scared, alone in that darkness, but slowly, light began to
creep through the bandages. But something in me changed that day.  That day
I had my first headache."
    Thus bgegins Darren Aronofsky's 1998 independent trek into the surreal
Pi, an incredibly complex and ambigous film filled with both incredible
style and subtance.  To get an idea of the director in case you have never
seen him before, imagine the cinematography originality of Jim Jarmush's
Stranger than Paradise mixed with the perfect dialouge of Kevin Smith's
Clerks and the bizarre and cryptic storyline of David Lynch's Eraserhead.
Any surprise that all three of the aforementioned films are black and white?
It shouldn't be.  Pi uses an 8mm for the majority of its duration and film
in a grainy black and white, giving the impression that you are watching a
nightmare.
    The first large challenge of reviewing this throughly intriguing movie
is describing its plot.  Max Cohen (Sean Guilette) is a brilliant number
theorist.  He has three assumptions about the universe, one of which is that
all things have an underlying pattern, an order.  The hypothesis that he
creates out of this is that he can predict anything, given enough variables
and knowing the underlying pattern.  His place to test this hypothesis: the
stock market.  In his search for answers in the stock market, he discovers a
216-digit number that seems to be the key to it all: it predicts Black
Monday.  Jewish mystics (Ben Shenkman) believe it to be the real name of
God.  Market manipulators (Pamela Hart) believe it to be the key to a
fortune.  A brillaint mathematician (Sol (Mark Margolis)) believes it to be
a bug caused when a computer becomes conscious in the instants before it
dies.  Max is quickly launched into a world so paranoid it makes the
Orwelian works of Andrew Niccol look safe.
    Max is also plauged by headaches.  These headaches, strong enough to
force him unconscious at regular intervals, have him taking a cocktail of
painkillers in order to subdue.  As he creeps closer and closer to the
answer, the headaches increase in their intensity.
    I think the best way to interperet this massively cryptic film would be
as a single man's search for peace.  Through the movie, Max is gripped by a
violent obsession with numbers and a complete phobia of social interaction.
He constantly shuns the advances of his neighbor Devi (Samai Shoaib).  He
finds himself unable to take a break from anything and, as a consequence,
finds himself inside of a complete nightmare.  The only way to get away from
this nightmare is to give up the one thing that has been his lifelong
passion: numbers.
The suspense of the film is helped along with an elecritc score by Clint
Mansell, a soundtrack that keeps you on the edge with its razor-sharp notes.
Also helping is the cinematographer Matthew Libatique, who gives us an
infectious feeling of paranoia with the black and white film and the
constant use of an unsteady camera to show the fast movement of Max.
    The film, although making numerous references to number theory, is
fairly easy to understand with no mathematical knowledge: not to say that it
doesn't help to know how to add and subtract.  What is difficult is to view
this film without a mind seeking to be intrigued, because, if you don't want
intrigue, you shouldn't be watching Pi.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
PI (director: Darren Aronofsky; cast: Sean Gullette, Mark Margolis, Ben
Shenkman, Pamela Hart, Stephen Pearlman, Samia Shoaib, 1998)
PI is an earnestly written and directed, low-budget black & white shot
sci-fi film that is made for intellectuals, but shows them in a
depressing light. It is about a mathematically gifted intellectual
(Gullette) and his obsession as a computer freak with predicting the
exact performance of every stock; and later on, when he meets an Hasidic
numerologist (Shenkman), he is intrigued to find out if a string of 216
digits is the mystery number that will reveal God's true name. This
curious story also concerns the price he must pay for his relentless
pursuit of knowledge: He shuns people and lives stoically and suffers
from poor mental and physical health. His severe anxiety attacks bring
on frightening illusionary visions that require him to ply himself with
an assortment of drugs. The attacks he gets on the NYC subway are
particularly horrifying, such as being followed and seeing a brain on
the subway platform.
Pi is the mathematical symbol for the ratio of the circumference of a
circle (3.14). Its number has served  the public well for generations.
But our hero is rebellious of this symbol's status quo in society. For
him, the mystery of numbers are the most important thing in his life;
more important than being happy. Gullette's life is wrapped around three
principles:1) math is the language of nature, 2) all things can be
understood through numbers, and 3) there are patterns in nature.
Gullette's life comes apart when evil Wall Streeter brokers wish to use
his knowledge for their profit and  Hasidim wish to use his knowledge to
access God. He terms himself a Jew who doesn't believe in religion. He
considers his search as pure science, and has no interest in making a
profit off his knowledge or in knowing God. But his pursuit of knowledge
misses a fundamental point: His mentor and former professor at Columbia
(Margolis), share a mutual interest in such data derived from numbers.
They play GO and discuss the problems they run into in their work after
Gullette's computer crashes and he loses his valuable data on the
numbers he is working on, the professor tries unsuccessfully to warn him
of the dangers of getting too absorbed in his work, so much so, that he
reaches a point where he can't see the obvious. Margolis futilely shouts
out that he should go home and relax, and take a bath: that he thinks
too much, he should learn how to act more intuitively.
The flaw in this intellectualual characterization of Gullette, is that
the director chooses to end Gullette's vision and search, by saying it
is not so bad that he took out a piece of his brain because of all the
problems he was having, now he can experience the ordinary things of
life. Aronofsky did not take a stand to point  out what he clearly meant
by that; that is, unless he believes it is better to be self-satisfied
and rational than someone who goes all the way in his pursuit of genius.
What is clear, is that Aronofsky blames science, just as much as he does
capitalism and religion for the way the world is in turmoil.
This is Aronofsky's first feature, something he won best director for at
the Sundance Film Festival. It is good to see that a film that is so
cerebral and difficult to make can so popularly be received by selected
audiences and most critics. But this being said, the film's popularity
still scares me: I think it is popular for the wrong reason. This film,
in retrospect, might be viewed as an anti-intellectual film since it
emphasizes that Gullette is more appealing when he is not completely
absorbed in his intellectual pursuit. Just as the film's merits are easy
to praise, the film's flaws are easy to find fault with. Aronofsky has
his protagonist retreating sophomorically into passivity in lieu of his
quest; this flaw should not be overlooked, it so seriously challenges
the film's main character from establishing who he is and from our
understanding of what is really being said about intellectuals. I think,
it should have been emphasized, that it is irrelevant that the
protagonist is an intellectual, because he could be any personality type
and that would not alter the fact that he was going through a nervous
breakdown, and in essence, that is what has happened to Gullette, who is
just marvelous in this very complex role, in a film that gives off a
rich aroma of intellectual pursuit, but cannot digest the full
intellectual and mystical meal it has cooked.
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Redman
It is the hope of every man, woman and child on the face of the planet that
there is something out there, somewhere, that makes sense of life. If we could
only discover the secret of the universe, everything would fall into place.
Shamen throughout the ages have searched for that arcane answer in varied
places: drugs, alcohol, religion, the occult, sex, isolation. Those who are
afraid of learning the truth use the same methods to hide from it.
Maximillian Cohen (Sean Gullette) has been looking for a way to put chaos into
order all of his life. Now he may have found it.
Pi is the number that represents the ratio of a circle's circumference to its
diameter. 3.14... and on into infinity, the number has no end. Just like the
circle itself, just like the universe. It's connected to the never-ending
golden spiral: the pattern of shells, fingerprints, sunflowers and the our
galaxy itself.
When Max was a child his mother told him not to stare into the sun. Of course
he did. When his vision returned he was a changed person. He has devoted his
existence to staring into his sun: mathematics. Forsaking virtually all human
contact and every other aspect of his life, he's looking for the numerical
formula that explains everything. He even ignores an apparent invitation from
the attractive woman next door for more intimate contact.
This film's mad scientist lives completely surrounded by his computer. Not
just any computer, this machine is an entity unto itself. Pieces of it are
everywhere. Ribbon cables snake up the walls to shelves on the other side of
the room. Stacks of electronic stuff reach the ceiling. Max's claustrophobic
apartment is like a scene out of "Brazil" with an amphetamine drip.
When a bug -- the machine is infested with ants -- causes a chip meltdown, the
printer spits out a 216-digit number. At first Max dismisses it as garbage.
Then he becomes involved with a group of Hasidic Jews who are using Kabalistic
mathematics to decode the Torah trying to discover the true name of God which
happens to be a 216-digit number. Vicious Wall Street businessmen are after
him because this number can predict the stock market. His mentor mentions a
216-digit number that he found while investigating the nature of pi.
Max's obsession seems to have lead him to the truth and now everyone wants
what's inside his head.
"Pi" is a difficult to watch. The frantic pace of the grainy high contrast
overly-exposed black and white visuals is hard on the eyes. The harsh
electronic score sets the audience on edge. It all works perfectly to
illustrate Max's slide into insanity.
Director Darren Aronofsky has achieved a miracle. With a budget of a mere
$60,000 raised by asking friends for $100 each, he created a singular vision
of obsession that won the Sundance Best Director award.
Obsession may be one way to truth, but staring into the face of god can also
burn out your vision. As the film demonstrates, there are some secrets that
most of us would rather not know.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and, if you excuse
him, he's going out to stare into the sun for a while. You can stare into the
electrons at Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 10/15/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Greg King
All of a sudden, movies like Good Will Hunting and Cube have
made mathematics and mathematical theory both exciting and sexy.
First time feature writer/director Darren Aronofsky uses complex
mathematical theories as the basis for the plot of Pi, his ambitious,
but off beat and unsettling low budget thriller.
Highly strung number theorist and computer whiz Max Cohen
(Sean Gullette) sees patterns everywhere in nature.  He is obsessed
with discovering a code that will crack open the secrets of the stock
market.  His holy grail is the 216 digit number that will supposedly
unlock the secrets of the universe.  Max refuses to heed his ailing
mentor (Mark Margolis), who warns him of the folly of pursuing his
quest.  Somehow his search brings him into contact with a shadowy Wall
Street firm that want to use his expertise, and some renegade Hassidic
Jews who want to unlock the centuries old key to their religion.  They
believe that Max's research will enable them to see the face of God.
Gullette, who shares a screen writing credit for the film, gives an
unnerving and edgy performance that captures the desperate and
disturbed air of this unusual protagonist.
Pi is not an action thriller, despite a chase sequence filmed
with the stop motion style of photography championed by Chris Doyle
and Hong Kong cinema.  Rather, this is a challenging and cerebral,
paranoid sci-fi fable for our times.  The film raises a number or
questions about our soulless contemporary society and its obsession
with technology.  Pi also deftly mixes complex mathematical concepts
with religion, but the film risks becoming inaccessible.  Aronofsky
seems to become too clever in exploring the film's intelligent yet
complex themes, and he does not hand out easy answers.  His
deliberately allusive structure and elusive images will potentially
alienate many within the audience.
          Much of the film takes place inside Max's cramped, over
crowded apartment, where he hides from the real world behind his
locked door.  This gives the film a claustrophobic feel.  The banks of
computer equipment that line his apartment also lend something of an
otherworldly feel to this environment.  Aronofsky also imbues the film
with an uneasy air of paranoia.  Matthew Libatique's cool, sparse
black and white cinematography evokes the look and feel of the film
noir of the 50's and '60's.

Author
James Berardinelli
     PI, the letter, is a character in the Greek alphabet roughly 
equivalent to the English "p."  PI, the mathematical notation, is 
commonly used to represent the ratio of the circumference of a circle to 
its diameter.  PI, the movie, is Darren Aronofsky's debut feature (and 
the winner of a directing award at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival), an 
independent science fiction thriller that combines questions about God 
and infinity with the personal struggle of one man to regain control of 
his life.  
     PI is actually the second low-budget, no-effects science fiction 
movie I have seen this year.  The other, Hilary Brougher's THE STICKY 
FINGERS OF TIME, will be released by Strand Releasing during the Fall.  
I must admit to liking the approach embraced by PI and STICKY because 
the monetary limitations have spawned creative scripts with unique 
solutions.  Without ILM and a $100 million budget to fall back upon, 
film makers who venture into this arena must be prepared to truly engage 
the minds of their audiences instead of relying upon a DTS sound system 
and state of the art visuals to generate oohs and aahs.  
     PI is the story of Max Cohen (ably portrayed by Sean Gullette), a 
computer geek with a genius for mathematics.  Socially, Max is 
completely inept.  Aside from occasionally showing off his arithmetic 
abilities to a girl who lives in his apartment building, he avoids all 
human contact, including any interaction with his attractive next door 
neighbor (Samia Shoaib), who shows an interest in him.  Max lives by 
three basic principles: (1) mathematics is the language of nature, (2) 
everything can be represented and understood through numbers, and (3) 
there are patterns in nature.  His objective is to use his home-built 
supercomputer, Euclid, to analyze the patterns in the financial markets 
to predict the exact performance of every stock.  During the course of 
his studies, he encounters a mysterious string of 216 digits, and, when 
a Jewish numerologist (Ben Shenkman) becomes aware of this, he confides 
in Max that "the pattern in the Torah is 216 digits," and this discovery 
may hold the key to unlocking God's true name.  Max, who doesn't believe 
in God, is more interested when his mentor (Bark Margolis) reveals that 
he once encountered a "bug" of 216 digits when he was investigating pi.  
     Max's mathematical brilliance comes at a price, however:  he has 
frequent, debilitating headaches and seizures that send him into a 
bizarre state of consciousness.  During those episodes, he encounters 
people who stalk him then disappear, and, on one occasion, he discovers 
a brain lying on the ground in a New York City subway station.  The key 
to Max's genius and pain appears to be a mark on his skull, and, perhaps 
in order to eliminate the one, he must sacrifice the other.
     Although the plot of PI is eccentric (even for a science fiction 
effort), Aronofsky's message is actually quite simple:  life does not 
fit into neat patterns, and complete control is impossible.  Oddly, this 
is also the underlying premise of the two JURASSIC PARK movies, proving 
that certain concepts are universal.  However, the central theme is only 
one of many fascinating subjects tapped into by the screenplay.  For 
example, Max's quest to use numerical patterns to model every aspect of 
the universe reveals some interesting facts about the Hebrew language.  
(In Hebrew, all letters have a numerical equivalent.  The number for 
"man" is 3.  The number for "woman" is 41.  41+3=44, which is the number 
for "child.")  In addition to all of its intellectually-stimulating 
aspects, PI also works as a character study of an obsessed individual 
whose single-minded goal blinds him to everything else, including 
health, friendship, love, and even sanity.
     Aronofsky elected to shoot the film in black-and-white, which lends 
a dream-like atmosphere to all of the proceedings. PI transports us to 
a world that is like yet unlike our own, and, in its mysterious 
familiarity, is eerie, intense, and compelling.  Reality is a fragile 
commodity, but, because the script is well-written and the 
central character is strongly developed, it's not hard to suspend 
disbelief.  As the movie draws to a conclusion, it perhaps becomes a 
little too ambitious in trying to unify all the great questions of 
existence.  At that point, PI slides with only limited success into an 
exploration of metaphysics and spirituality.  Nevertheless, I prefer 
movies that take risks like this, even when they're flawed, to those 
that try for a safe, formula-driven resolution.  So, while I didn't 
necessarily buy everything that transpired in the final fifteen minutes, 
I was surprised by much of it, and Aronofsky never lost my attention.  
For anyone who wants a movie to feed their intelligence and imagination 
more than their eyes and ears, PI is a solid choice.  It probably 
deserves 3.1416 stars, but since my scale doesn't support that, I'll 
round it off to three.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
STARRING:   Sean Gullette, Mark Margolis, Ben Shenkman, Pamela Hart
DIRECTOR:   Darren Aronofsky
WRITERS:    Darren Aronofsky, Sean Gullette, Eric Watson
RATED/YEAR: R/1998
        "Pi," the highly-touted debut film from writer/director Darren
Aronofsky, is the second movie in as many months to draw me into its
embrace, dazzle me with flashes of brilliance, then fumble the ball so
badly in the final act that many of my positive vibes were squashed.
("Snake Eyes" was the other, for those of you keeping score.)
        Max Cohen (Sean Gullette) is a mathematician driven almost to the
point of madness by his passion for science.  He firmly believes that the
entire universe is governed by the laws of math, and that these laws
leave traces of their presence in every aspect of reality; as such, if
one can decipher the code, one would then be able to predict anything and
everything: the way creamer will swirl around in your coffee cup, the
shape of snowflakes, the price of stocks, the secrets of creation... even
the true name of God.
        With assistance from his friend and mentor Sol (Mark Margolis),
Max is attempting to find and decipher this code.  One afternoon, while
processing Max's latest mathematical theory, his computer crashes and
blinks a 216-digit number on the screen.  Max is aghast at the loss of
his data, but as he begins to examine the strange numerals generated by
the crash, other possibilities occur to him.  The fact that this number
has exactly 216 digits is especially interesting, since his friend Lenny
(Ben Shenkman), another mathematician, firmly believes that the true name
of God is a 216-character string, numerically embedded in the Torah.
        The first half of the film, dealing with the construction of
the plot, is fascinating.  I'm not a stupid person, but my knowledge of
mathematics does not extend beyond some basic trig; as such, I found the
simple, concise way in which the script explains complex math theory to
be exceptionally well-done.  The details were JUST complicated enough
that I had to concentrate, but never so difficult that I got left behind.
A film that actually made me THINK!  What a pleasant surprise!
        Unfortunately, writer/director Aronofsky is unable to sustain the
sparks of brilliance he shows in the first part of the story.  After
setting up such an intellectual premise, he unfortunately allows the
second half of his film to generate into "Conspiracy Theory."  Max gets
chased a lot (See Max.  Run, Max, run), and a lot of evil people slap
him around for a bit inbetween the sprinting sessions.  Then Max is
confronted by Rabbi Cohen (Stephen Pearlman), who begs Max to give him the
number, explaining that "his people" need it to find the sacred chest
which was initially used to carry around the original Ten Commandments.
Huh?  Is this "Pi" or "Raiders of the Lost Ark?"  Why not throw in the
Holy Grail or Atlantis while we're at it?
        In addition, the final quarter of the film is basically a re-
telling of Arthur C. Clarke's famous short-story "The Nine Billion Names
of God," in which (surprise!) a mathematician helps a religious
organization decipher an ancient text to unearth the true name of the
One Deity.  The last scenes of "Pi" seem like such an obvious rip-off of
Clarke's story that I can't believe (1) there has not been a lawsuit over
it, and (2) no one else has noticed it, considering that the tale is one
of Clarke's most famous short works.
        But the first half of "Pi" is so intelligent and believeable that
I'm willing to cut it some slack.  Aronofsky has injected some excellent
touches into the movie.  First of all, the film is shot in black and
white, which, although done for budgetary reasons, gives a certain
dramatic flair to the production that color could not have generated.  The
acting is consistent and quite strong.  Max is clearly a man obsessed:
apart from a single chair, there are no pieces of furniture in his
apartment.  Every niche is filled with scribbled calculations and computer
equipment; in fact, during one scene I noted that Max's home resembles
nothing so much as the interior of H.A.L., as seen in "2001: A Space
Odyssey" (another Clarke reference, incidentally).  The music (primarily
techno) fits the mood well, and Matthew Libatique's cinematography is
truly groundbreaking.
        The film also teases the entire sci-fi genre; whereas most
directors would've filled Max's apartment with high-tech computer
equipment that would be outdated six months after the film came out,
Aronofsky has chosen a "retro" appearance for the production.  Look
closely: Max's Supercomputer Interface looks suspiciously like a
Commodore PET, with parts from other equally obsolete systems tossed in
for good measure.  It's a nice jab at contemporary sci-fi.
        Aronofsky has crafted a remarkable film for cinematic pocket
change (the entire movie cost around $100,000... or 1/2000th the budget
for "Titanic").  Had the tone remained cerebral, we may well have had
one of the year's best films; as it stands, this slice of "Pi" is
occasionally tasty, but not particularly filling.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.

Author
Joy Wyse
Pi is the name of a mathematical term used primarily in determining the
area or circumference of a circle.   As well as I can remember from my
high school Math class, Pi = 3.1416__and on and on.
In the movie, Pi, Max Cohen spends much of his life carefully locked in
his small apartment, surrounded by computers and other electronic gadgets.
 He is trying to find some unknown mathematical equation.  Coming into his
life is a former teacher, and a group of Hebrew men on a religious search
for a missing 216 digit "word".
The film is in black and white, and it jumps from scene to scene with no
rhyme or reason.  At one point I felt that I was watching "Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy"  without the humor!  I couldn't tell if Max ever
solved his mathematical problem, but I know that I didn't figure anything
out.  It's still a big puzzle.
No, I don't ever want to see this again, not even on late night
television.  The very best I can give it is a D.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In Franis Coppola's 1986 movie "Peggie Sue Got Married"
Kathleen Turner is transported to her past.  With a knowing
air she notifies her algebra teacher that she found his subject
to be useless, just as she had predicted.  Darren Aronofsky
has another idea.  In the bold, Kafkaesque film "Pi," his
nerdish hero not only finds abstract mathematics relevant: it
dominates his life to such a degree that only a lobotomy could
free his mind from this obsession.  As a renegade
mathematician, Max Cohen (Sean Gullette) has worked for
ten years to prove his epic hypothesis that there is a pattern
to everything which can be reduced to numbers.  More
specifically, he has been trying to outfox the stock market by
documenting its configuration and by doing so to be able
to predict any stock's price on a given day.  His research
draws the attention of two groups as diverse as New York's
Hasidic community and of high-level stockbrokers, equally
intent on gaining access to the code (which they are certain
he has broken) and willing to use bribery and violence to
secure the concealed information.
   Using reverse-image black-and-white film to give the entire
drama a nightmare ambiance, photographer Matthew
Libatique almost literally gets right inside the distressed head
of this mathematician, Max Cohen (Sean Gullette), who
dominates the entire brief movie with his geek-like demeanor. 
Calling himself a private person but in reality a hermit who
simply does not want to talk to anyone but his old
teacher Sol Robeson (Mark Margolis), Max has holed himself
up in an ant-infested flat in Chinatown and has turned away
almost all human support.  Not even the seductive neighbor
Devi (Samia Shoalb) can get through his triple-locked door:
she must content herself with leaving the samosas she
regularly prepares for his meals outside. 
   "Pi" is so claustrophobic and obscure that its very indistinct
nature is its greatest strength.  Any computer geek who
knows how swiftly time passes when wrapped up in a game,
a calculation, an attempt at creative writing, can relate to
Max's more extreme predicament.  Max is tormented on the
one hand by a Hasidic Kabbalah scholar, Lenny Meyer (Ben
Shenkman), who believes that Max has uncovered nothing
less than the 216-letter name of The Divinity Himself; and on
the other hand by an aggressive Wall Street executive, Marcy
Dawson (Pamela Hart) who is satisfied that Max's
216-number code will divine the prices of stocks for decades
to come.  His only recreation is the game of Go, which he
plays with his equally cryptic old friend, Sol Robeson (Mark
Margolis), who cites Archimedes and can do not better than to
advise Max to "take a bath."
   Following two other movies with strongly Jewish themes to
open this year--Boaz Yakin's "A Price Above Rubies" and
Sandra Goldbacher's "The Governess"--writer-director Dareen
Aronofsky's "Pi" creates a vivid and humorous portrayal of a
streetwide Hasidic Jew, a sham pal who invites Max to
"c'mon, we'll hang out" while determined to pump his fellow
tribe member for information that would hasten the
appearance of the Messiah.  While laying tefillin on the
secular man who is "not interested in religion," he explains
poignantly that the practice brings us closer to God, and to his
credit he will use Max's intelligence for a more noble purpose
than Max's other counterfeit compatriot, who wants only to
makes gobs of money.  
   Aronofksy's frenetic pacing is well served by Oren Sach's
rapid editing and Clint Mansell's rap music, which keep the
film moving along at breakneck speed, a cerebral movie
which paradoxically generates visceral suspense.  We wonder
how the drama will end, whether Wall Street or Williamsburg
will ultimately receive Pi's golden apple.  Most of all we get to
care about poor Max who, after a decade of fruitless research
is driven to hallucinatory insanity just as victory is within his
reach.  You hope that this mad mathematician will learn one
of the great lessons of pop song: "Oh, it's fine to be a genius
of course,/ But keep that old horse before the cart./ First
you've gotta have heart."
   Eureka!  This movie is the ultimate portrayal of the numbers
racket--a slice of pi that as sci-fi fantasy really does cut it and
makes us hunger fort desserts in store as a sequel to this
promising debut by Mr. Aronofsky.

Author
Yosha Bourgea
YO BOB GOES TO THE MOVIES
This weekŐs question: What are the limits of knowledge, and why?
ItŐs been said that knowing the nature of your fear reduces its power.  
Conversely, then, the less you understand about what frightens you, the more 
frightened you are.  And accordingly, if what youŐre trying to do is frighten 
someone, you should reveal as little information as possible.
Hitchcock knew this when he made _Psycho_, but he blew it in the last two 
minutes of the film by allowing the psychiatrist to explain Mother BatesŐ 
motivations.  Spielberg knew it when he made _Jaws_, but donŐt tell me there 
wasnŐt a letdown after the shark finally appeared.  
These two master directors understood the mechanics of fear, but they were 
operating within the classic, Aristotelian parameters of a story: beginning, 
middle, end.  Frighten the audience out of their wits, yes, but donŐt send them 
home without a resolution.
Now, however, in a popular culture that is increasingly hyperkinetic, jaded, 
self-referential, fragmented, paranoid and cynical, it is not only possible but 
advisable to dispense with the old model of entertainment.  Why bother with a 
resolution when your audience wonŐt stop flipping channels?
No one understands this better than Chris Carter, the man behind TVŐs hugely 
popular and widely imitated ŇThe X-FilesÓ.  Ask even the most hardcore fans of 
the show what itŐs all about or where itŐs going, and youŐll get an evasive 
answer at best.  The series has been humming along for years now, and while 
Mulder and Scully continue to discover tantalizing bits of information that 
_appear_ to build upon each other, they are really no closer to the truth than 
when they began.  Obviously, if they did arrive at any sort of conclusion, the 
show would lose its power to fascinate.  
So the conspiracy continues, and whether weŐre chasing or being chased, itŐs 
always just around the corner, always a fleeting shadow.
Enter Darren AronofskyŐs _¸_, a thoroughly postmodern thriller in which nothing 
is resolved but much is suggested.
Max Cohen is a sociophobic recluse obsessed with the meaning of numbers.  We 
learn that he is a mathematical prodigy who graduated college at age 14 and is 
able to multiply and divide large numbers in his head.  He lives alone in a 
triple-bolted apartment with his computer, Euclid, where he searches for 
patterns in the complex math of everyday life: leaves on a tree, the spiral of a 
seashell, the flow of the stock market.  Periodically, he suffers from splitting 
headaches that he fights with handfuls of pills; the headaches stem from an 
incident in his childhood when he stared into the sun and went temporarily 
blind.
_¸_ is the story (if story is the right word) of MaxŐs pursuit of a mysterious 
216-digit number that everyone wants him to identify.  It would be unfair to say 
what the number represents, but even if I did, it wouldnŐt really explain 
anything--just as the number itself, when it is finally discovered, is only a 
string of digits.  What matters, what keeps the audience fascinated, is the 
pursuit--or as Max says, Ňthe spaces between the numbers.Ó
The film is shot in black and white, establishing a mood of claustrophobic 
surrealism reminiscent of David LynchŐs _Eraserhead_.  Sometimes images are 
sharply defined (a smashed mirror, a power drill, MaxŐs face in close-up) and 
sometimes edges bleed into each other (the dark beards of Hasidic Jews, the 
stark white columns in a subway).  
As in a dream, we get the feeling sometimes that weŐve been here before, we even 
know whatŐs about to happen, but thereŐs nothing we can do to stop it.  And 
because the movie was made in the late Ő90s, we are subjected to some graphic, 
disturbing imagery that would have been neither possible nor appropriate in 
HitchcockŐs day.  But if youŐve watched ŇThe X-FilesÓ or seen _ThereŐs Something 
About Mary_, youŐre probably more prepared than your parents would be for the 
sight of a human brain being poked with a pencil.
Nevertheless, there are plenty who will walk out of _¸_ feeling disgusted and 
frustrated, asking themselves: Why, why, _why_ was this necessary?  Why the 
graphic violence, why the self-destructive vibe, why the endless search for the 
unattainable?  And there will be those who leave the movie despairing for the 
nihilistic glory of Generation X.
I canŐt answer the ŇwhyÓ questions; ask Aronofsky.  The most I can say is that 
while I understand the disgust and frustration, I also understand what it is to 
grow up in a time when the concept of resolution, of answerable questions, is 
itself suspect.  The byword of our times is Ňinformation,Ó the byphrase is Ňtoo 
much information,Ó and I applaud _¸_ for having the courage to consider the 
limits of knowledge. 

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
How the heck can I describe the visceral experience that is "Pi"?  It is
a film I thoroughly enjoyed, but I recognize it contains too many
elements that will intimidate those used to, say, more traditional fare.
I can only hope that a movement will begin, whereas individuals will
resist the temptation of the bland, assembly-line studio product, and
try for something totally unique and delectable.
The Greek letter "Pi" equals the ratio between the circumfrence of a
circle to its diameter.  Since this is something learned by
tenth-graders, and most movies are made on a fourth-grade level, it
should be expected that its core audience is limited.  But even for the
mathematically deficient, Pi is less about mathematics as it is a study
in obsession, a visual representation of madness.  It is "Eraserhead"
meeting "Taxi Driver" with some "Wall Street" and "Yentl" thrown in for
good measure.
It's protagonist, Maximillian Cohen, believes that mathematics is the
true language of nature, and that every action in the world, no matter
how random, is intricately ordered and patterned.  Given this thesis,
why not use this knowledge to try to predict the stock market?  Such
research draws attention from some shady investment banker types.
Although Max is an agnostic Jew, his faith more accurately reflects that
of an "atheistic Calvinism".  Even so, he draws the attention of Lenny
Meyer, a Kaballah Jew, who explains that the Hebraic language is numeric
and replete with symbolism, perhaps with the key to the meaning of life.
Curiously, Max joins their sect, only to find that even they have
ulterior motives.
Still with me?  There's more.  Max's computer, which occupies most of
his apartment, crashes, leaving behind a printout of random numbers.  Or
are they?
And Max suffers from chronic headaches.  And hallucinations.  And drugs.
And nosebleeds.  And he spends far too much time isolated in his
apartment.  And I'm still not sure what he does for a living.  And he
may be going a little... mad.
Hello?  Still there?  Try this. The film was made for an astonishing low
budget ($60,000), in a glaringly strong black and white.  And is
pulverized by a hypnotic, techno-soundtrack.  This film screams, "Cult
movie!"
Rarely does the majority of the moviegoing public go to a movie to,
gasp, learn something. This audience may be intimidated by the apparent
dryness in _Pi_'s plot.  It's anything but.  First timer Darren
Aranofsky gets a lot of mileage out of his limitations.  The picture is
one of the most mesmerizing claustrophobic creations ever put to
celluloid.  The cinematography is stunning, the editing is superior, and
there are fantastic close up images that we take for granted: a
trembling thumb, an ant on a microchip, a dismembered brain.  He
deservedly won the director's prize at Sundance this year.
It's not impossible to make a good film based on mathematics (Good Will
Hunting, The Spanish Prisoner, heck, even Jurassic Park).  But rarely
has a film been so engrossed in its own world, that you feel immersed in
an entirely new reality.  There's a lot of interesting ideas in _Pi_,
coupled with some of the most breathtaking imagery and editing I've seen
in a long time.  Sean Gullette, playing Max, has a strong, eerie
presence, and Ben Shenkman adds wonderful color as Lenny.
I have two problems with the film.  There is this glaring gaffe where
Max walks down a subway platform, where he is initially at the 50th
Street station, and winds up at the exit for Prospect Park (only New
Yorkers will catch that).  And, oh yeah, the ending is a tiny cop-out.
But these issues are microscopic in comparison to the greatness of this
movie.  Search it out.  Now.  Go to the latest showing. Please.  Trust
me.   I double-dog dare you.
Nick Scale:   9 (if you're interested in mathematics, theology, stocks,
board games, New Yorkers, philosophy, and non-conventional film-making).
        7 (if not).

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Darren Aronofsky
Cast:  Sean Gullette, Mark Margolis, Ben Shenkman, Pamela Hart
Screenplay:  Darren Aronofsky
Producers:  Eric Watson
Runtime:  84 min.
US Distribution:  Artisan Films
Rated R:  violence, language, disturbing images
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
When I was in high school, I was a math nerd.  I wasn't as bad as the
real Math Nerds, but I was close enough.  I sat quietly in calculus and
got As (though only once did I earn the highest score on an exam).  I
really liked math, and I was good at it.  I thought of things in terms
of math, in terms of equations and numbers, and my thought process was
logical and straightforward.  I was also a pretty boring person back
then.  I am, however, overstating the importance of math in my life,
because now, in my third year of college, I'm an English major. 
But I still gaze upon math with a certain level of affectionate
remembrance.  Perhaps that is why I greatly admire Pi, Darren
Aronofsky's visually masterful tribute to math nerds.  This is an
engaging, profound film -- it strings us along in a whirl of
mathematical madness, and then concludes with a fascinating hypothesis
about the nature of the universe around us.  It's a film that feels new
and original, a thriller that doesn't have gun shots or car chases, and
a suspense piece that never regresses into inanity or stupidity.  
The main character is an odd, introverted math nerd named Max Cohen
(Sean Gullette).  He works on finding patterns in the stock market. 
Over time, however, the numbers get to him, and he becomes obsessed with
finding a pattern that connects all the contents of the universe.  His
journey begins one night when his computer spits out a 216-digit number,
and then crashes.  Max, distraught from losing all of his work, falls
into depression, and periodically goes into seizures during which he has
to take pills and give himself injections.
It turns out that there are many people after this 216-digit number,
and they're all trying to get Max to give it to them.  A group of Jews
(led by a numerologist played by Ben Shenkman) need to find a word for
God that is 216 letters longs.  And a crazy lady (Pamela Hart) wants the
number to understand the stock market more clearly.  Max needs to
confide in his former math professor (Mark Margolis), but his professor
just tries to deter him from his path because he knows what lies at the
end of it.  
There's not a moment in Pi that isn't fascinating in its bizarre,
surreal way.  Aronofsky's visual style is shockingly straightforward;
the film was shot in grainy black and white, with blaring contrasts, and
the result is a stark picture that always drips with desperation. The
sets are small and claustrophobic, and often too dark to see clearly. 
This is not a flaw, but an appropriate stylistic choice -- Aronofsky
succeeds in making Max's world unique and horrifying, and he does this
to prove his point.  
The story is fantastic and original; I've never seen a film about math,
and it's not likely that I will see another one any time soon. 
Aronofsky takes the story in the right direction, by searching for the
connection between math and nature.  He also does his story a great
service by developing the main character, and by finding an actor as
capable as Sean Gullette.  Gullette makes up for inexperience with
determination and energy, and delivers one of the most inspired
performances I've seen this year.  It can't be easy to play a character
so detached from what we all know is reality.
Pi revolves around mathematical concepts, but don't let that keep you
from seeing the film.  It doesn't pander to math nerds -- it makes its
points clearly without going overboard with terms and concepts.  
The film was made with just $60,000, but it never seems low-budget.  In
fact, by comparing it to a $115 million creatively bankrupt film like
Godzilla, Pi proves that a good script should cost a lot more than
special effects.  Perhaps, with a larger budget, Pi would not have been
as good -- I can see how this story could have been ruined by special
effects.  Instead, we have an idea-driven science fiction film, one that
is both unique and well-developed.  I shouldn't tell you why the film is
so satisfying at the end, but I will say one thing:  understanding
Aronofsky's theme takes nothing more than a brief shot of our heroic
math nerd calmly looking into the clear sky.   

Author
Kevin Patterson
I think it's pretty safe to say that few films nowadays feature an
isolated, obsessed math whiz as a lead character, and even fewer put such a
character in a suspense film in which theoretical mathematics and Jewish
mysticism figure prominently into the plot. Darren Aronofsky, in his
feature-film debut PI, does both, crafting a surreal psychological thriller
of considerable intelligence that examines the paper-thin line between
genius and insanity.
The main character of PI is Max Cohen (Sean Gullette), a recent college
graduate who seems to have turned his apartment into a theoretical
mathematics laboratory. Complex computer machinery is everywhere, set up by
Max to perform calculations designed to predict the performance of the
stock market. Max believes that literally everything can be explained by
distinct mathematical patterns, and it is his ambition to discover them. He
is extremely private and not very friendly: when someone knocks at the
door, he usually looks out the peephole and pretends not to be home until
they go away. He is also beset by cluster headaches, for which he is
constantly popping pills and self-administering steroid injections, in
quick, mechanical motions that seem to have become disturbingly routine.
Lately, his headaches have become harder to control, occasionally causing
him to pass out and experience strange nightmares that are not too
different from his everyday life.
Part of Aronofsky's achievement in PI is the filming technique he uses to
get the audience to identify with Max, who would probably be played as a
one-dimensional arrogant jerk by most filmmakers. The film is shot in a
grainy black and white, and its soundtrack is full of ominous buzzes and
whirrs. The cutting is often rapid, with the film sometimes sped up during
Max's narration in which he states his theories about nature and
mathematical patterns. There are also numerous close-ups on the machinery
in Max's apartment and on complex number charts. The total effect of all
this is to make the film seem like a cross between an old "Outer
Limits" episode and a "Nova" special, and the audience is swept up in the
sense that Max might really be close to some amazing discovery and isn't
just some insane crackpot.
Max's already strange lifestyle takes a turn for the stranger when his
program suddenly locks up and spits out a 216-digit number. Soon
afterwards, he finds himself being pursued both by Jewish Cabalists, who
think the number might be the numerical equivalent of the ancient Hebrew
name of God, and by Wall Street types who think Max may have actually found
the mysterious pattern in the stock market. Max, reflecting on the fact
that there are some mathematical patterns which are known to have curious
applications in nature, decides that he may well be onto something and goes
after it with increasing rigor, all the while becoming more paranoid as the
audience is left to wonder which of the on-screen events are real and which
are delusional fantasy.
The problem, of course, is that once you get into such strange notions as
trying to find a single pattern to the entire universe, the line between
scientific breakthrough and delusional fantasy becomes increasingly hard to
draw, and this more than anything else is the central concern of the film
and the message underlying Max's descent into obsession and paranoia. As
Max's former professor (Mark Margolis) points out, it isn't hard to pick a
pattern--any pattern--and decide you're finding it everywhere you look. And
if Max may be prone to delusion, then what of the investors and the
Cabalists? Are they visionaries on the verge of an earth-shattering
discovery, or are they just hacks whose pursuit of knowledge has spun out
of control?
PI eventually makes its way to an ending that, while effective on a
symbolic level, seemed a little hasty and dramatically incomplete. But
overall, I would have to say that PI is one of the more uniquely satisfying
experiences I've had at the movies lately: it's fascinating to watch, and
leaves the audience with ample food for thought (I'm pretty sure this is
the first time I've come out of a movie wanting to do research on Jewish
mysticism). It's a remarkable debut for Aronofsky, and personally I can't
wait to see what he does next.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In contemporary popular art, there's a very fine line between sheer
brilliance and head-smacking pretentiousness.  It's a line most visionary
film directors flirt with on a regular basis, to the point of tying said
line into the occasional sheepshank knots.  It almost seems as though, for
all their periodic misfires, film-makers like David Lynch, Terry Gilliam
and Stanley Kubrick have no choice but to take you places no one else can
or will take you.  Every true film lover relishes the moment of discovery
when a film suggests the emergence of a challenging new voice.  You
suspect that even though the film you are watching may not be great, the
creative mind behind it could be.
     Darren Aronofsky's debut feature PI may not be a work of pure
originality -- the echoes of Lynch's ERASERHEAD are too distinct -- but I
can virtually guarantee you won't see anything else like it this year.
The subject, amazingly enough, is theoretical mathematics, centering on a
reclusive math savant named Max Cohen (Sean Gullette).  Max lives in a New
York apartment on the verge of swallowing him whole, a jungle of wiring
and circuitry powering his supercomputer Euclid.  His obsessive goal is
proving that there is a mathematical pattern in every complex system, a
theory he tests by attempting to develop a perfect method for predicting
the behavior of the stock market.  Euclid responds to Max's programming by
spitting out a 216-digit number, a number Max initially believes to be
useless.  That's before his mentor (Mark Margolis) drops oblique hints as
to the number's relevance, before a Hassidic scholar (Mark Margolis)
suggests that the number is the key to understanding the mind of God, and
before a group of homicidal stock brokers seem prepared to do anything it
takes to get their hands on the number.
     At its core, PI is an Icarus fable of a man reaching for knowledge
beyond his capacity to handle it, with a side order of cyber-era isolation
cautionary tale.  Aronofsky uses voice-over narration effectively to get
us inside Max's seizure-wracked head (with superb musical assistance from
Clint Mansell of Pop Will Eat Itself), showing us the world as an
actualized paranoid fantasy viewed through a self-imposed cage of
computers.  PI might have been a frighteningly engrossing character study
if only Sean Gullette had been able to match the intensity of the
material.  His Steven Wright-as-computer geek demeanor suggests a typical
socially-challenged nerd more often than a man spinning into madness;
though he didn't need to bug out his eyes and foam at the mouth, he did
need to place Max close enough to the edge for us to see the bottom from
there.  Gullette's competent but distant performance lowers the stakes of
PI's twisted conspiracy theoretics.
     It's only when you step back from the narrative of PI that you
realize what a singular universe Aronofsky has created.  Yes, he does
stretch too hard at times to achieve his Lynchian vibe -- grainy
black-and-white photography, a mysterious sticky substance, blinding
flashes of light and a brain covered with ants do not necessarily a
profound statement make.  But who else would construct a psychological
thriller around large number theory, Wall Street and the Kaballah?  Who
else would create visuals as distinct as Max's techno-organic apartment,
or make an audience squirm so violently at the do-not-try-this-at-home use
of a certain power tool?  And who else has demonstrated the cinematic
instincts to turn a scene of a man writing down numbers into something
more tension-packed than a dozen Hollywood chase scenes.  The most obvious
antecedent may be Lynch, but even Lynch's hypnotic images have rarely been
this kinetic.  Though Aronofsky may have been limited by finances,
available talent or technical constraints, he has created a work which
leaves you hungry for what he could do next.  PI is the creation of that
one film-maker in a hundred who seems unlikely to make movies by the
numbers.

Author
Matt Williams
Darren Aronofsky makes his directoral debut with this uneven paranoid
thriller, Pi.  It's filled with plenty of new concepts and ideas, but
also with a healthy dose of pretension.
Max Cohen (Sean Gullette) is a brilliant mathematician on the borders of
madness.  He theorizes that since mathematics is the language of nature,
everything can be comprehended purely and completely on the basis of
numbers.  The key to understanding is to find the patterns that underlie
everything.
To confirm his theories, Max builds an archaic/state-of-the-art computer
system to crunch numbers on the stock market.  Once he discovers the
key, he should be able to predict stock prices at will.  But things
don't work out as smoothly as he plans.
He keeps running into a peculiar bug, one which may have caused his
mentor, Sol (Mark Margolis), to give up mathematics completely.  In
addition, he is being hounded by a rabid Wall Street exec (Pamela Hart),
as well as Lenny Meyer (Ben Shenkman), a man who believes Max's number
crunching can lead to the understanding of God.
Aronofsky has talent.  It's not every writer-director who could combine
topics as diverse as Fibbonacci numbers, phrenology, Kabalah, Chaos
Theory, numerology and Go into a single coherent (if not terribly
accurate) film. Plus, he is able to go a long way on a low budget,
producing some striking cinematography as he goes.
However, despite all of that, Pi fails as a film. There are two stories
in the film (Max and his theories, and Max and his descent into
madness), but neither one is satisfactory.  The former is implausible,
strains credibility, and is ultimately pointless.  The latter is more
interesting at times, but while it certainly gets disturbing at times,
it's all style and little substance.
Part of the problem rests with Sean Gullette.  As the lead character, he
is rather bland (particularly as a "mad mathematician").  None of the
actors in the film give stellar performances, but in an introspective
storyline, Gullette's performance is key, and not quite up to par.
Pi is stylistically interesting, but empty overall.  There's a thin line
between genius and incomprehensible madness. The film falls solidly in
the latter camp.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Among my fanatical ticker tape-worshipping friends, there's one who
   happens to share the same philosophy espoused by the central character
   in Darren Aronofsky's darkly original PI: the entire stock market can
   be reduced to nothing but a series of patterns which, through
   analysis, will produce information to accurately forecast future
   behaviour.  (An example of the mentality involved: if the stock price
   goes up like this, and then down like that, and then sharply up this
   way, it then will go *this* way.)  While I freely admit that I know
   less than nothing about the market (knowledge check: prices up --
   good; prices down -- bad; most of the time, at least) and hence really
   couldn't comment with any authority, it's always nonetheless struck me
   as an incredibly naive oversimplification of an astonishingly complex
   system (and besides, if it were that simple, no doubt somebody
   would've already figured it all out).  The difference in this case is
   that while my colleague (an otherwise assuredly realistic individual)
   truly believes in this in and of itself as a valid forecaster, PI
   uses this ideology as a device with which to investigate its
   character's psychosis.  It's also vastly more convincing with its
   argument.
   "Mathematics is the language of the universe," insists genius
   protagonist Maximillian Cohen (Sean Gullette) in a cool, mantra-like
   voice-over which repeats throughout the picture.  Since nature can be
   expressed in numbers, and there are patterns everywhere in nature, he
   reasons with eminent logic that finding the patterns will allow him
   to predict anything -- the ups and downs of the stock market, how
   many games the Yankees will win this year, the flavour of jam I'm
   going to put on my toast tomorrow morning.  Obsessed with finding the
   proverbial key to the universe, Max lives in paranoid, self-imposed
   solitude in a seedy NYC Chinatown apartment, single-mindedly toiling
   away with his monstrous homemade computer system.  Sullenly withdrawn
   and plauged by debilitating migraines, the elusive pursuit of a
   mysterious 216-digit number his machine spits out one day is driving
   him into madness.
   The story, then, is basically an eccentricity, but it's a clever,
   astute eccentricity, perceptively zeroing in on the modern mistrust of
   mathematical reductionism; in an age where a dominant societal phobia
   is one's individualism being replaced by a series of numeric
   identifiers, Max's all-consuming penchent for numbers at once creates
   a lingering, unsettling mood.
   It helps matters that he's not a particularly likable protagonist.
   All attempts of friendliness from neighbours are curtly rebuffed by
   Max, a spindly, neurotic-looking individual who hasn't the time to
   indulge in pleasantries.  For a film which puts its lead character
   front and center (Mr. Gullette appears in virtually every scene), PI
   takes a refreshing and effective approach in avoiding conventional
   aesthetics; because of our ambivalence with Max, we're not so much
   avidly rooting for him to triumph with a moment of epiphany as we're
   following him through this plot with a sense of mixed dread and morbid
   fascination -- it's more disturbing journey than quest.
   Still, we do care about Max's fate.  Teetering on the edge of
   dementia, he winds up being pursued by two different groups which want
   to pick his brain, both fronted by deliciously perky, resolutely
   cheerful representatives with inevitably duplictious intentions.  As
   we know, in films where paranoia is a dominant element (see THE
   TRUMAN SHOW's Laura Linney character), or for that matter, in real
   life, it's always the ones who never stop smiling at you and are
   overly friendly that are the ones of which to be wary.
   PI, a film that addresses patterns, itself intentionally adheres to an
   identifiable pattern cycle -- headache scene; important revelation or
   bit of plot development; pill-popping montage; hallucinatory nightmare
   (with decidedly Cronenberg-esque undertones -- few other directors are
   as equally adept in bridging unsettling concepts and body-themed
   horror); nosebleeding reality.  The repetitiveness, far from being
   tedious, is effectively maddening; more than anything, the picture
   aims to get under our skins and take in events from Max's
   claustrophobic perspective.
   In this regard, it wildly succeeds due to Mr. Aronofsky's striking
   direction.  It's a rarity that a film so completely immerses itself
   into a protagonist's warped perspective of his surrounding, and high
   contrast black-and-white cinematography combined with constant usage
   of extreme close-ups lend a heightened sense of paranoia to the
   proceedings.  (In some scenes, the stark composition in conjunction
   with the lumbering approach by Mr. Gullette make his character
   curiously resemble a latter-day Max Schreck, from NOSFERATU.)  Using
   savage, jittery lensing and rapid cuts to create a sense of
   disorientation, the picture is often dizzying to behold, and Max's
   effective isolationism is emphasized by shots from the so-called
   Snorri Cam, which keep him in plain focus while the environment races
   by in blurred bursts.  PI's raw, aggressive visuals are reminiscent of
   David Lynch's early work (in particular, ERASERHEAD).
   The film's sinister tone splashes onto the screen immediately with a
   dazzling opening credit sequence ably backed by a sly electronic
   score by Clint Mansell, and gradually increases in intensity.  Still,
   amidst all its Kafkaesque qualities and overall dispassionate mood, PI
   does occasionally display a sense of humour.  At one point, Marcy
   Dawson (Pamela Hart, great fun) entices Max with the offer of an
   invaluable treasure: a one-of-a-kind ... computer chip.  "Isn't it
   beautiful," she coos.
   A showcase for Mr. Aronofsky's technical virtuosity (made for
   $60 000, it's since gone on to capture acclaim at the 1998 Sundance
   Film Festival), PI is an intriguingly cerebral story which,
   ironically, is perhaps the most purely visceral film of the year.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"...a first screenplay unaccompanied by a powerful agent or industry
 sponsor is generally a pathetic fetus of a film, nothing more."
                               - Andrew Sarris

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
Max, a reclusive mathematician (Gulette), sifts through the dataflow 
of the financial markets looking for a unifying pattern.  His 
computers misbehave and break down, he suffers a series of terrifying 
psychotic attacks and two separate groups pursue him: a group of 
stockmarket brokers and an enigmatic clan of Talmudic scholars ...
"Pi" is possibly the best science-fiction film of the year.  There are 
those who might argue that it isn't SF - hair-splitting in my opinion 
- but even then, "Pi" is possibly the best psychological thriller of 
the year.  Loopy, paranoid, daring and unnerving, it may herald the 
arrival of a major new directing talent.
It is also another entry in the extremely low budget film stakes.  (To 
get the tried cliches out of the way: "young filmmaker ...  couldn't 
get backing ...  shoestring budget ...  masterpiece ...  one in the 
eye for Hollywood ...  blah, blah ...")  To my mind, this is both 
irrelevant and important for the movie viewer.  Relevant, because (of 
course) budget does have an impact on the look and effectiveness of 
the final problem.  Although director Aronofsky makes excellent use of 
washed out B&W footage and found locations, at times the jerky camera 
and shadows conspire to make the action hard to see.  Conversely, low 
budget films are important for they stand in contrast to the resource 
gobbling Hollywood behemoths, and remind us of all the films that 
aren't getting made because of ridiculous budgets and star salaries.  
(Is "Titanic" 2000 times better than "Pi"?  Is "Out of Sight" 20 times 
better than "Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels"?).
Max's beliefs are not so far removed from those scientists working in 
complex systems, and the Platonic idealism of Roger Penrose and Paul 
Davies.  (Indeed, some years ago a group of complexity theorists set 
up a company to look for and exploit patterns in the stockmarket.)  
Maths is pure, maths is reality.  Everything happens because of maths.
If only life was like maths, predictable and comprehendible.  If only 
we could understand the maths of life ...  Max is a king in his own 
world but, like so many savants, at a disadvantage outside of it.  At 
the mercy of mental illness, tormented by the sounds of lovemaking 
coming through the thin walls of his apartment, frustrated by fallible 
hardware, he tries to extend maths to rule over the rest of the world.
It's a intense portrayal of a paarnoid and claustrophobic life.  And 
thankfully the script has the courage to avoid portraying Max as a 
freak genius.  Although maths is easy to him, we see him working 
at it, spending his life trying to understand and grasping for the big 
questions.  I can't think of another movie that has had the guts to 
portray science as long hard work.  Actually, "Pi" may be the one of 
the most scientifically hip movies to ever be made.  There are passing 
references to childhood experiments with potatoes and iodine, 
antfarms, the golden ratio and cellular automata.  Perhaps I speak 
from a biased perspective, but it's great to see these things 
acknowledged.
There are those who would argue the premise of "Pi" is ludicrous.  
(Here I must be circumspect to avoid giving away the plot.)  Mileage 
will vary of course, and towards the end "Pi" starts going off the 
deep end, but this argument seems a little churlish to me.  Did people 
really expect a movie to suggest a plausible and revolutionary 
discovery in mathematics?  All science fiction "fakes it" to make a 
story work, which it will as long as the lies are consistent and not 
too outrageous.
The cast asides from Max do well, from the his tormented teacher 
(Margolis) to his his sensual neighbour (Shoaib).  A driven and 
compelling movie, "Pi" is good value on every level.  [****/mustsee] 
and a childhood electronics kit on the Sid and Nancy scale.
--
Paul-Michael Agapow (p.agapow@ic.ac.uk), Biology, Imperial College
"We were too young, we lived too fast and had too much technology ..."

Author
Matt Prigge
Writers: Darren Aronofsky, Sean Gullette, and Eric Watson
Starring: Sean Gullette, Mark Margolis, Ben Shankman, Pamela Hart, 
Stephen Pearlman, Samia Shoaib, Ajay Naidu
Made for about the same amount of money that I earned during an entire 
summer break slaving at Radio Shack, "Pi" is an incessantly cool-looking 
paranoiac thriller, all the more interesting because it's budget was so 
excrutiatingly low (as I've already mentioned). Like a German 
Expressionist Film from the 20s, it nearly takes pride in the lack of 
resources it has, and creates a unique-looking world from what 
technology it has, meaning stark, unrealistic black and white 
photography, lots of shadows and pale faces, and a story that relies 
more on visuals and crazy images than entities like acting and plotting. 
In fact, the way it's shot is as appropriate as the way this year's "The 
Celebration" was shot: that Danish film gave a feeling of hidden home 
video, and this film puts us directly into the mind of its protagonist, 
a brilliant mathematician, Max (Sean Gullette), whose sanity wanes as 
the film progresses. The plot - about Max trying to find patterns in the 
stock exchange and therefore predict it - is not nearly as important as 
what the film's main theme is: that knowledge is a crutch, and the more 
you know, the more in danger you are.
With balding hair and a world-wearied facade, Max lives a lonely life, 
but doesn't seem to mind completely since his entire apartment is packed 
with computers and machines. At the top of this cluttered mess is a 
standard stock market scrolling marquee that ominously reveals the 
information that he needs to know to complete his work. The people we 
meet are either loners themselves (a wise older man whom he plays chess 
with, played by Mark Margolis), those out to profit from his knowledge 
(a woman who works for a brokerage, played by Pamela Hart), or 
well-meaning neighbors (an Indian woman, played by Samia Shoaib, who 
seems to have a sweet crush on him). The main plot kicks into gear 
immeadiately, as he runs into a seemingly friendly Jewish scholar (Ben 
Shankman) who piques his interest in finding what may be the Name of God 
from the Rosetta Stone. According to him, God has as many numbers as the 
project he's working on. Max begins working on all of these, and slowly 
passes over the brink of sanity, just as those who would profit from him 
begin to become more and more belligerent (if you've ever wanted to see 
irate and deadly Jewish scholars, have I got a movie for you...). But is 
this all part of his growing insanity, this film seems to question, as 
it shows off more and more crazy sequences, like a creepy scene where 
Max stumbles onto what seems to be a human brain in the subway.
Filled with manic imagery and a great techno soundtrack, "Pi" should be 
an absolutely astounding motion picture, like the two films it's been 
compared to, Orson Welles' "The Trial" and David Lynch's "Eraserhead," 
both which feature many of the same elements of stark black and white 
photography, extensive use of chiaroscuro lighting techniques, and a 
paranoiac overtone. But "Pi" doesn't completely deliver. The way it's 
made is superb, and I have no doubt that Darren Aronofsky's future in 
film will be a promising and exciting one, just from the way he directs 
this film. But it just needs a better script. The story of Max is 
interesting, but it's hackneyed with an interesting but way too simple 
theme, that being that too much knowledge alienates us and drives us 
into insanity. It's almost a pity that it deals with this direclty on 
the surface and doesn't let itself become free and complicated: all the 
plot elements, while interesting, are only there to serve the theme, and 
it becomes less of a human story. When you think of either "The Trial" 
or "Eraserhead," you not only remember the complicated storylines and 
numerous themes, but you also remember the lead characters, respectively 
the irate but guilty Joseph K. (played by Anthony Perkins) and the 
lonely-to-a-fault Henry Spencer. Max, while interesting and greatly 
played by Sean Gullette, is still nothing much more than a catalyst to 
bring about the theme.
In fact, by the end, looking back on the plot, I was wondering if this 
was all there was. If this wasn't told the way it was, it'd be a totally 
forgettable albeit somewhat effective thriller (somewhat referring to 
the amount of horror that Jewish scholars and rabbis on your trail bring 
about). But it is told in a great fashion. Aronofsky is effective with 
his shot designs and camera movements, and his look has that of a 
nightmare, as if it was the world from the POV of a slightly deranged 
and cut-off genius, and we are quickly and effortlessly sucked into 
Max's world, and feel the pain and horror that he witnesses, like the 
way "The Trial" and "Eraserhead" are directed. And this world is as 
fresh and unique-looking as those two films. He's so effective that you 
soon ignore the plot, and concentrate on the hypnotic visuals that are 
being presented to us, so that later on you don't recall the potentially 
frightening elements of the plot but rather the insanity of the film's 
look. Great ending too; in fact, an unforgettable ending, just like the 
design of the film, but while you can't forget the images, do you even 
remember what it's about?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Robert McLachlan
A film by Darren Aronofsky, starring Sean Gullette.
Winner, Directing Award, Sundance Film Festival.
Maximillian Cohen is riding hunched up on the New York subway,
cradling a black go stone in his hand. It's a circle. Pi r^2.  The
empty go board, its rules unseen, represents the blank universe; a
played game, its state. The empty board becomes strangely appealing:
clean and symmetric, large enough to suggest an infinite lattice, yet
finite, truncating its symmetry to a groupoid. Its cells are not quite
square, the game tree is complete. Why break that symmetry? A go
master once spent five of his ten hours contemplating the empty board.
Once in play, the rules don't determine the structure.  But like the
islands of order in our sea of increasing entropy, there are
patterns. Maximilian is looking for that emergent structure. He's a
mathematician.
In the small field of films featuring mathematicians -- only
Hollywood's _Good Will Hunting_ and _Jurassic Park_ and the touching
Italian _Death of a Neapolitan Mathematician_ come to mind -- Pi is a
winner.  It's a movie of ideas, with intersecting streams from Rudy
Rucker on cyberpunk, Jorge Luis Borges and Umberto Eco on conspiracies
and hidden meaning, George Steiner on prodigies and obsession (maths,
music, and chess) and Nabokov on chess and madness, all up there in
high-contrast grainy black and white with a cool electronic
soundtrack.  Hey, _I_ spent three years obsessed with go, _I'm_ a
mathematician, _my_ teacher had a stroke just like Max's. This is my
movie!  Plus, I'm seeing it in Berkeley, where the streets are filled
with real crazy people, partly crazy people who've read too many
popular science books, and Fields medallists, in equal
proportions. That fat guy next to me with sweaty feet is probably Ted
Kaczynski's brother.
That stroke -- there's a suggestion that Max's teacher stumbled on
something hidden in mathematics that humans just weren't meant to
know. Some kind of Godel sentence that fused his mind. Now Max, who
wants to model the stock market on a home-built supercomputer that
fills his apartment (shades of the Chudnovsky brothers), is getting
close also. His full-complex migraines and extensive self-medication
don't help much either, although perhaps the pre-fit euphorias spark
creativity. He's getting close, and Wall Street devils and Hasidic
angels want a piece.  The Hasids bail him out, but they want the
number in his head -- the Name of God. Max realizes that it's not the
number itself that's important, it's its meaning, and the number was
given to _him_.
This Name-of-God stuff could be seen as traditional science fiction,
or one can read the whole Kaballah sequence as a figment of Max's
imagination: religious and persecution mania triggered by
overwork. These things happen. This is a film about doing science,
meaning, and mania. After all, where does meaning reside? It's partly
intrinsic, and partly (lest mathematics degenerate to a list of
consequences of axioms) imposed by us. To do science, you have to
believe in it and give it meaning; worse, it's usually difficult and
likely to fail.  Occasionally you have to suspend your critical
faculties and just push ahead with some weird idea. You have to hang
on to it and not let go. The Pythagoreans believed all was number, and
lo, all _was_ number. The potential rewards are great, but there's a
risk of becoming a crackpot, or of starting to see too much meaning
and too many connections -- mania.
The maths in this film is pretty simple: the stock market time series,
the digits of Pi, Archimedes' spiral and the golden ratio. I think
that's much better than hiring experts to fill blackboards with the
latest jargon. Coincidences and connections and hidden patterns _are_
the stuff of mathematics. And, although it may give the field a bad
name, some mathematicians really do study the digits of Pi.  The Name
of God lends a suggestion of weird science. But think of Godel
undecideability, nonstandard real numbers, even standard reals
supporting things like the Mandelbrot set, multidimensional string
theory, infinite state quantum computing,... A suggestion of weird
science is allowed.
Pi is Aronovsky's first film, the traditional low-budget debut.
I hope he hasn't used up all his ideas. I can't wait for his next one.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Susan Granger
Darren Aronofsky won the Director's Award at the 1998 Sundance
Film Festival for this low-budget, black-and-white cinematic calculus
which explores the meaning of life through numbers. Sean Gullette
plays a renegade math genius with a troubled genealogy that goes back
to Dr. Frankenstein. Caught between blinding flashes of brilliance and
equally blinding migraine headaches, he searches his home-built
super-computer, named Euclid, for a formula that will reveal a
numerical pattern within the chaos of the stock market. He's obsessed
with finding a unifying order in everything - from the cream spiraling
in his coffee to the infinite possibilities in his weekly board games
with his mentor, Mark Margolis. His research makes him popular with
rabid Wall Street analysts as well as with Orthodox Jewish cabalists
who believe that he has stumbled upon a 216-digit number that will
reveal God's first name. "The Torah's just a long stream of numbers,"
he's told by Ben Shenkman, a Jewish numerologist. "Some say it's a
code, sent by God."  What does the title mean? When the Greek
mathematician Archimedes couldn't calculate the answer to a difficult
problem, he gave up and retired to his bath where, in repose, the
solution - the mathematical notation used to represent the ratio of
the circumference of a circle to its diameter - suddenly came to
him. What does dense, tormented Max discover? A secret everyone is
willing to kill for. Despite its wobbly, hand-held photography and
grainy texture, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pi" is an
eccentric, cerebral 7, concluding that life doesn't fall into
predictable patterns and complete control is impossible.  It's an
imaginative, intellectually stimulating feature-film debut for this
promising writer/director.

Author
Kevin W. Welch
Max Cohen is a paranoid loner in a small apartment jammed to the
gunwales with sophisticated homebrew computer equipment. As such,
hešs both more likable and more dangerous than a gun-obsessed
wacko like Travis Bickle. For, unlike Travis, Max isn't looking
for respect, or a girl friend, or money. He's looking for the
meaning of life, which, based on a reasonable set of assumptions
that he postulates and repeats over an over, he is pretty sure
exists. He almost had me believing it.
Max is a pretty smart guy with a Ph.D. in number theory from
Columbia University. He looks for patterns in pi, which famously
has none as far as anyone can figure (until Max, that is). He
applies these patterns to understanding the stock market. He's
not interested in the money, of course; he just wants to
understand the underlying structure.
Max is also a pretty sick guy. When he was a kid he stared at the
sun for several minutes, resulting in temporary blindness and a
permanent susceptibility to devastating headaches. He does what
he can to treat them but they won't go away, and they plague his
work. He's Icarus, of course, and the movie makes sure that you
catch the reference.
Pi is director Darren Aronovsky's first feature. It's low, low,
budget--filmed in a harsh, overexposed black and white which
portrays Max' state of mind quite well. There are no effects in
Pi, just images, all of them disturbing. The streets and the
apartments look cramped, ugly, dirty and dangerous (and really,
the movie implies that you are much safer on a New York subway at
2.00 a.m. than in Max' apartment at high noon). The music is an
insistent techno dance soundtrack that complements the gritty
visuals, giving the movie a reckless driving energy. Together
they effectively portray Max as a lonely, focused man living a
very dangerous life.
Unfortunately, Max is being chased. By people, for one. It seems
that he came upon a 216 digit number when his computer blew out
during a critical analysis of stock market fluctuations. He
tosses away that number in frustration, but certain people want
it--a cartel of stock market investors, for one, who think that
number holds a key to the rise and fall of share prices. Max is
also chased by a group of Jewish mystics looking for the name of
God. Max resists both groups at first but then gives in. The
financiers give him a military grade computer chip as big as your
fist. The Kaballists show him that the Torah is really a long
string of numbers. (Max gets hooked when he finds the Fibonacci
sequence in the Hebrew words for father, mother and child). Max
decides to give both sides what they think they want.
The human bad guys here are not especially convincing. The leader
of the cartel comes off mostly as cranky and out of sorts, and
Orthodox Jews are not typically a group a screenwriter will go to
when the desired effect is heavy menace. Yet there is something
else out there that is really scary, and its mixed up with that
216 digit number (which Max commits to memory). That's what Pi is
all about at the end.
There are a couple of ways to read Pi. On the one hand, it works
as pure science fiction. It's not billed as such, but director
Aronovsky seems to have read a fair amount of the stuff; I saw,
or thought I saw references to Dick, Van Vogt, Gibson, Stephenson
and a whole raft of others. As sf, Pi is straighforward but
scary, with few special effects and relatively straightforward
violence. Pi is idea-based sf.
If you donšt like the science fiction reading of the movie, Pi
also works as a study of paranoid obsession. A paranoid sees
patterns everywhere. So do conspiracy theorists, religious
mystics and stock market players. A lot of these patterns do
exist, as mathematics shows. When you take these clean patterns
from number theory to everyday human behavior, you risk becoming
a kook. If you can't take a break from this sort of thing (as
Max' old graduate advisor suggests) you become a dangerous kook,
if only to yourself.
