Title
Review for No Escape (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     NO ESCAPE is a non-stop action flick in the Steven Seagal genre.
You get to witness lots and lots of people dying many different
horrible deaths in front of your very eyes.  Especially popular are
impalements, but decapitations are also quite the rage.  Actually, I
like some of these extreme action movies, but only if there is a fast
paced story behind it all as in DIE HARD or UNDER SIEGE and only if you
can care about the people.  NO ESCAPE had neither of these attributes.
     NO ESCAPE is set in the year 2022 in an island prison run by an
evil big business.  Can you imagine a Hollywood movie where a big
business was not evil?  Oh well, I digress.  There are the bad
prisoners, called the outsiders, and the good prisoners, called the
insiders, on the island.  Ray Liotta, making an attempt at a good guy
for a change, is one of the insiders and hence gets to kill dozens and
dozens of outsiders in various horrible ways.  The chief of the
outsiders is played by Stuart Wilson, and he is given dialog where he
utters one joke after another.  The jokes manage rarely to be funny
however.  The script by Michael Gaylin, Joel Gross, and Richard Herley
was full of nonsense laced with failed attempts at humor.
     The major failing of the movie is that of the director,Martin
Campbell, and the script writers.  They have made characters that you
do not care if they live or die.  The movie consists of one battle
after another with many chases through the forest.  Maybe if they had
edited it down to 30 minutes, it would have worked as a "Twilight Zone"
episode, but 1 hour and 58 minutes was way too long.  It was done by
the same producer as ALIENS 3 which was a huge turkey after two great
ALIENS episodes before #3.  ALIENS 3 also happens in an ugly prison in
the future that looks like the past.
     The sets here were cute if a bit ridiculous.  Prisons in 2022 it
turns out will look a lot like 13th century China complete with
costumes for warriors of that era.
     My biggest disappointment was with Ray Liotta.  He played one of
the scariest ex-cons ever in Jonathan Demme's Something Wild and has
been excellent in many other shows since, e. g. , GOODFELLAS and
UNLAWFUL ENTRY.  In this movie, he is, well, boring.  His performance
was that of ROBOCOP but without ROBOCOP's humor.
     Don't waste your money.  Pass NO ESCAPE by.  I give it * since it
was not a bad show just a monotonous one.  It is rated R for all of the
above mentioned gory violence.  It is probably okay for older teenagers
if they feel like they have to see it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Among the names of the cast and crew that are supposed
attract the audience to the films, producers are usually
least used. However, there are some exceptions. One of them
is Gale Anne Hurd, former spouse of James Cameron and
producer of ALIENS. Her name on the credits was reason
enough for the author of this review to actually watch
ESCAPE FROM ABSOLOM, 1994 futuristic prison thriller,
directed by Martin Campbell.
Those who had watched FORTRESS, 1993 film by Stuart Gordon,
would find some familiar scenes in the beginning of ABSOLOM.
The year is 2022 and prisons became the profitable business.
Former Marine Captain John Robbins (played by Ray Liotta)
had killed his general and got sentenced to life in maximum
security, state of the art prison called Leviticus. However,
after ofending the sadistic warden (Michael Lerner), Robbins
finds himself dumped on Absolom, small Pacific island from
which there is no escape. The prisoners like Robbins are
left to fend for themselves, and Robbins soon finds two
factions - savage, barbaric Outsiders led by brutal Marek
(Stuart Wilson) and peaceful, idealistic Insiders led by
Father (Lance Henriksen) who want to redeem their past sins
by making the island their private utopia. After a while,
Robbins would use his military talents to help Insiders in
their struggle against Outsiders.
ESCAPE FROM ABSOLOM is just another proof that producers, no
matter how good their reputation is, can't guarantee quality
of the film in the absence of talented or, at least capable,
writers and directors. Screenplay by Michael Gaylin and Joel
Gross, based on the novel PENAL COLONY by Richard Herley,
has a rather weak and hardly plausible concept - heartless
futuristic society, who had shown no concern for the
wellbeing of prisoners, still ready to spend billions on
keeping them in supertechnological chains instead of simply
killing them. However, unlike FORTRESS who had the similar
flaw, this film offers quite a different feel. Instead of
supertechnology, we have society brought down to good old
post-apocalyptic savagery, in many ways reminding us of MAD
MAX and LORD OF THE FLIES. For some time, it looks like the
film might leave the audience with something to think about
- nature of evil and violence, but then it all boils down to
predictable and cliched prison break subplot. Thankfully,
there is always enough hand- to-hand combat to make us
forget the actual plot. The actors are mostly fine - Liotta,
although not a real action hero, is believable as killer
turned into nice guy; character actors, mostly British, are
also superb. However, Stuart Wilson as chief villain is
almost laughable, proving again (same as in LETHAL WEAPON 3)
that he lacks adequate charisma for such task. Action scenes
are adequately directed by Martin Campbell and also there
aren't any female characters to slow down the action with
unnecessary romantic subplots. This film mostly is
watchable, but then, as many other similarly forgettable
action films, everything culminates in predictable yet
unbelievable and lame finale. After such finale, most of the
viewers would feel cheated, even if they hadn't got high
hopes before watching this bellow-the-average Hollywood
genre product.

Author
James Brundage
Written by Michael Gaylin and Joel Gross
Based on the novel "The Penal Colony" by Richard Herley
Starring Ray Liotta, Lance Henrickson, Stuart Wilson, Kevin Dillon, Michael
Lerner and Ernie Hudson
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 Ah, the wonderful world of mediocrity.  That chasm between good and bad in
which so many movies exist.  You know where I'm talking about.  It is that
place where a movie is entertaining despite the fact that it is terrible.
That place where it has a message but you don't care.  The place where it
drifts aimlessly between the fine line between a good movie and a B movie.
 Ironically, No Escape falls into the chasm of mediocrity and seems not to
be able to escape from it.  Instead, it is rather like a crab in a crab
basket: its own competitive nature pulls it back in.
 No Escape tries to be both a drama and an action film.  In order to do
this, it sets itself on a place called Absolom, an island prison some thirty
years in the future where two groups constantly compete against each other
for control of their jail.  Looking at the highly beautiful island, I can't
fathom why anyone would pick this place as a prison but they did.
 The story follows Robbins, ex Marine Force Recon who ends up in prison
after shooting a CO.  Being Ray Liotta, everyone is expected to root for
him.  I merely sit the film out.  Having a high aversion to authority, he
pisses the warden at the regular prison off and is sent to Absolom, the
island where no one wants to go.
 Let's perform a reality check here.  With an island that beautiful, thirty
years from now it's going to be Club Med.
 But, back to the review, Robbins is sent into Absolom where he quickly
encounters Merek, the villain of the story who is a psychopathic fascist
leader of The Outsiders.  Of course, having that same damn aversion to
authority, Robbins kills several people while escaping from Merek and, after
falling a thousand feet and landing in the water (on his back), he
miraculously survives and is taken in by a group of kinder, gentler people
known as The Insiders.  The Insiders run a socialist system, good of the
whole, etc. Their leader is called The Father, and is played by Lance
Henrikson, who's old enough that they should have called him The
Grandfather.
 Everyone dreams of freedom but excepts their new life.  Tensions boil
between the insiders and the outsiders.  War erupts.  Ray Liotta saves the
day.
 Lifted off of the pages of a sci-fi book, No Escape is your classic
W.W.I.I. metaphor: Fascism versus Socialist and Democratic systems.  There
are spies, betrayals, and, of course, the Americans win in the end.  As I
said, it contains a message but no one, including me, cares.
 The movie goes slowly for an action movie because it gets caught up in the
pseudo drama of the moment.  It tries to form characters, tries to form plot
twists, and fails.
 However, the small bits of character that it contains are enough to
maintain your attention for roughly two hour running time that is, along
with the action sequences.
 Yeah, No Escape is one of those movies you can just sit back and not really
enjoy.  It is a solution to boredom, a show of mediocrity.  It is in the
chasm, that void of movies that we will all watch if they're on.
 It is in the chasm, my friends.  Down at the bottom, leaning towards the
bad but still edible.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Dumb dud of an SF action epic that tries to crosbreed prison movies
and far-future post-apocalypse, and fumbles both.
The title NO ESCAPE aptly describes the feelings of an audience condemned to
watch the movie in question. This is the first movie I've seen that tries to
crossbreed a Barton Maclaine prison picture and MAD MAX. While I could give
them points for being original, those points get yanked immediately back for
rampant stupidity.
It is the future. Ray Liotta plays a prisoner who has been condemned to the
kind of maximum-security facility that some of my more outspokenly
right-wing friends would no doubt have approved of. There, he clashes with
the (predictably) sadistic warden, and winds up being sent to Absolom.
Absolom is a jungle island with two major populations: The Insiders, a kind
of craft-guild village led by Father (Lance Henriksen), and Marek's Men, a
bunch of bloodthirsty Mad-Max-style headhunters led by -- who else? -- Marek
(Stuart Wilson). A clash between the two forces is inevitable, with Liotta's
character being in the midst of it all.
The movie brazenly ignores so many things it's appalling. Why were these
slave labor camps built in the first place, since they aren't visibly
profitable in any sense? What's all the hoopla about keeping them a secret
from spy satellites? Why is it that the slave camps never seem to get much
in the way of work done? And so on. It's plain there was never a moment's
thought at the script level to really dealing with any of this; the movie
eists as a series of action set-pieces, each only peripherally linked to the
next. It's also got a monumentally huge cheat of an ending -- it doesn't
conclude; it just stops dead, as if the final scenes were not filmed.
Ray Liotta is a good actor and I enjoy him in just about anything. In this
movie, he's a cut above the average hunk of beefcake used by most filmmakers
to absorb bullets; he can actually *act*, although the character he's given
to portray is a thin and uninteresting one. Lance Henriksen looks
approprately weathered and haggard (when has he *ever* looked young?), and
Stuart Wilson as Marek is appropriately in-your-face and loud. But the movie
doesn't care to equip these people with much to do except stumble through
the contrivances of the plot.
The movie sure *looks* impressive; they spent some fairly hefty money on the
set design and pyrotechnics. The producer was Gale Anne Hurd (THE
TERMINATOR, ALIEN NATION), and she's been known to stand behind some fairly
innovative projects that deal with the fantastic. NO ESCAPE is not one of
them.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
MPAA Rating  "R"  (presumably for v-i-o-l-e-n-c-e)
"Prisons have become big business."
      - Title card explaining imprisonment in the year 2022.
     Cross MAD MAX with LORD OF THE FLIES and you've got the idea behind 
NO ESCAPE, a lousy prison-in-a-jungle pic. from producer-who-knows-better 
Gale Anne Hurd (ALIENS, THE ABYSS).
     The story introduces Robbins (Ray Liotta), a Marine captain con-
victed of murder and sent up the river and across the ocean to an island 
penal colony with no guards and one rule: stay alive. This "resort 
community" is controlled by two warring factions: the savage Outsiders 
(led by soft-spoken Stuart Wilson) and the peaceful Insiders (led by 
softer-spoken Lance Henriksen). But Robbins, who has a genetically 
traced problem with authority, doesn't want in on either..
     For about thirty minutes, NO ESCAPE is the perfect tonic to a sans 
action spring. The locales are lush, the premise is punchy, and Liotta 
is the last action hero we'd expect to be engaging. The man can act 
and his early scenes with Wilson, who plays the lively leader of the 
Outsiders, have a nice, lazy charm.
     Watch a staged fight between Robbins and "Ralph, our director of 
athletic activities" for a friendly nod to RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK.
     Once our hero goes outside the Outsiders (and inside the Insiders), 
the plot machinery grinds to a halt and NO ESCAPE becomes just that. 
Robbins spends the rest of the film seeking salvation in a ramshackle 
village that looks a little too much like GILLIGAN'S ISLAND to be 
taken seriously.
     There are a couple of brief battles to break up the monotony, but 
director Martin Campbell doesn't do very well with any more than three 
people fighting at one time.  He's better than, say, Kevin Reynolds, 
but not the *best* talent to effectively tingle the testosterone.
     The gore is pretty good, though. Watch for a dandy beheading and a 
*great* impaling.
     NO ESCAPE stars no women (!) and, considering the number of men 
shown in close quarters, could use a stronger sexual subtext to be 
believable. But this is Hollywood and Gale Anne Hurd *already* has a 
pretty large set of cojones.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Ray Liotta, Lance Henriksen, Stuart Wilson, Kevin Dillon, 
           Ernie Hudson, Michael Lerner 
Director:  Martin Campbell 
Producer:  Gail Anne Hurd 
Screenplay:  Michael Gaylin and Joel Gross based on THE PENAL COLONY 
             by Richard Herley 
Music: Graeme Revell 
Released by Savoy Pictures 
     The science fiction/action arena is littered with entries of
varying quality, from the pulse pounding excitement of ALIENS to the
plodding and ill-conceived SPLIT SECOND.  NO ESCAPE, the latest
offering from mega-producer Gail Anne Hurd, falls somewhere in
between.
     Set in the year 2022, when the prison system has become big
business, NO ESCAPE opens with the incarceration of Captain J. T.
Robbins (Ray Liotta) in Leviticus, a maximum security prison for
unredeemable offenders.  The Warden (Michael Lerner) is a sadist who
delights in fiendishly vicious punishments and sends his worst
prisoners to the escape-proof island of Absalom, where savagery is the
norm and survival the sole objective.  It doesn't take long before
Robbins, a man who steadfastly refuses to take orders or acknowledge
authority, offends the Warden enough to warrant a one-way journey to
Absalom.
     If elements of NO ESCAPE sound vaguely familiar to those of last
year's FORTRESS, don't be disturbed.  This movie is far more
watchable.
     Most of the script, which is based on Richard Herley's THE PENAL
COLONY, is reasonably intelligent--or at least it doesn't astound with
its lack of intelligence.  The biggest plot problem is the existence of
Absalom.  It's never made clear exactly what the prison island's
purpose is, or how it was established.  Not that this is the only
"detail" glossed over by NO ESCAPE.
     Of course, many of the explanations could have been snipped from
the final print.  It's clear that the editors went to work on NO
ESCAPE.  Even at a two hour running length, it has all the marks of a
pruning job.  In most cases, especially the action sequences, this has
been expertly done, but it's apparent that a fair amount of what was
committed to film didn't make it to the screen version.
     The first half hour is reminiscent of a futuristic THE FUGITIVE in
that it doesn't give the viewer much opportunity to catch his or her
breath.  During the final three-quarters of NO ESCAPE, bursts of action
occur, but nothing--not even the climactic battle--rivals the opening
for generating tension.
     Ray Liotta might seem an odd choice for an action hero.  After
all, he doesn't have Schwarzenegger's biceps, Stallone's monosyllabic
speech patterns, Van Damme's accent, or Lundgren's woodenness.  In
fact, Liotta is an actor--and a pretty good one at that.
Nevertheless, despite this apparent "disadvantage", he's reasonably
convincing.  I think it's the steely eyes and no-nonsense expression.
It certainly isn't the few obligatory (and lame) one-liners he's forced
to utter.
     Development of Captain Robbins' character is spotty, and the movie
arguably might have been better had he remained ambiguous.  Before we
know his background, he's fierce and intimidating.  Learning the truth
serves to diminish him.
     The supporting actors, as is often the case, vary from good to
bad.  Lance Henriksen, who is making a career appearing in these sorts
of films, is merely adequate, as is Ernie Hudson as a mirthless
head-of-security.  Michael Lerner is miscast as the nasty Warden--his
sneer isn't good enough.  Far better is Stuart Wilson, who steals far
too many scenes from Liotta and everyone else, as the deliciously evil
Satan of Absalom, Merak.  The worst performance belongs to Kevin
Dillon, whose whiny, poorly-realized Casey should have been excised
from the screenplay.
     Filmed in Australia, NO ESCAPE boasts gorgeous scenery, and it's
easy to accept Absalom as a lush hell.  The special effects are
believable, although not plentiful.  And those members of the audience
who don't like rats will have to close their eyes during one very
creepy scene.
     NO ESCAPE is effective, but not superlative.  The more you think
about it, the less it holds together, but this is not a motion picture
designed to withstand careful scrutiny.  Put simply, NO ESCAPE is meant
to be an escape and, as such, it meets all the necessary requirements.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
