Title
Review for Devil's Own, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Michael Redman
The situation in Ireland often reminds me of the old Buffalo Springfield
song "For What It's Worth": "There's something happening here, What it
is ain't exactly clear, There's a man with a gun over there, Telling me
I got to beware...There's battle lines being drawn, Nobody's right if
everybody's wrong." 
Whether you favor the wearing of the green or the orange, it's difficult
to uphold your side's atrocities as morally justified or as anything
other than politically justified.
As IRA hero (or terrorist depending upon your political leanings)
Frankie McGuire says "If you're not confused, you don't understand." 
McGuire (Brad Pitt) may recognize that the situation is  foggy, but out
of the necessity of being a soldier at war, he must be single-mindedly
dedicated to his job. Friends may fall by the wayside, he may endanger
innocents, but for the warrior, the goals always justify the means.
Across the ocean, New York Irish cop Tom O'Meara (Harrison Ford) is a
bird of a completely different color. For him, the law is the prize his
eye is on. He plays only by the rules and refuses to lie or cheat in
order to punish the wrong-doers. Of course men not being perfect and
this being a movie, O'Meara faces his personal dark night of the soul
where he must decide which is more important: truth or loyalty.
Make no mistake. There is no doubting who the film says has the better
life. O'Meara's reward is a lovely family in a safe friendly
neighborhood; McGuire's is friends with bullet holes in their foreheads.
When McGuire (traveling as Rory Devaney) is placed in the O'Meara home
by a friend of the family who is a secret IRA fundraiser, the two form
an instant attachment. The cop has three daughters and is grateful that
there is someone else in the house who "pees standing up". The
fugitive's fisherman father was killed in front of him for being a
suspected Republican sympathizer by a hooded gunman when
Devaney...err...McGuire was a young child. The son and da each never
had, it's a match made in a star-crossed heaven.
Pitt's character is posing as an Irish immigrant working on a
construction site, but in reality he's working on a boat that he'll take
across the Atlantic loaded with stinger missiles to even the fight in
Northern Ireland.
The two actors reportedly didn't get along on the set, but that doesn't
show up on the screen. Ford, one of the finest actors of our time, and
Pitt, who can no longer be dismissed as just another pretty boy, have a
dynamic chemistry together.  When they're together in a scene, you can
feel the forceful tension.
The minor downfall of the film is in its lengthy but essential
characterizations of the secondary characters. Far too much time is
spent in demonstrating O'Meara's idyllic family life in Brooklyn. We get
the concept about a half hour before director thinks we do.
Once this is out of the way, the movie takes off. There are very few
black and white ways of looking at the Irish situation and there is an
equal scarcity of good guys and bad guys (except for a particularly
sadistic arms dealer and, of course the British government) in the film.
On opposite sides of the fence, O'Meara and McGuire are both heroic
figures willing to make personal sacrifices for their cause. There's no
way to root for only one and they can't both triumph.
As Frankie McGuire explains "Don't look for a happy ending. It's not an
American story. It's an Irish one."
[This appeared in the 4/3/97 issue of the "Bloomington Voice",
Bloomington, Indiana. Michael Redman can be reached at
mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE DEVIL'S OWN ** 1/4  Directed by Alan J. Pakula. Written by David Aaron
Cohen, Vincent Patrick, Kevin Jarre. Story by Jarre, Photography, Gordon
Willis. Editing, Tom Rolf, Dennis Wirkler. Production design, Jane Musky.
Music,James Horner. Cast: Harrison Ford, Brad Pitt, Margaret Colin, Ruben
Blades, Treat Williams, George Hearn, Mitchell Ryan, Natascha McElhone,
Paul Ronan, Simon Jones, et al. A Columbia release. 112 min. Rated R
(violence).
How pretty the Irish countryside, how sad Belfast, how cruel the troubles
of Northern Ireland, how disappointing this movie! Yet it begins with one
catchy bang then a sequence with a host of bang bangs.
First, Brad Pitt, as 8-year old Frankie sitting at the dinner table with
his loving family, right after grace witnesses a masked man shooting the
boy's father dead. Years later, in the early 1990s, there's a battle royal
between now grownup Pitt plus other IRA activists -- soldiers  or
terrorists depending on who is speaking-- and British forces in civvies and
uniforms,  armored cars, tanks and helicopters. It's kinetic carnage, deja
vu but well shot (no pun). Pitt escapes through a back door of the housing
area's warren.
Frankie, with almost two dozen killings to his credit, is sent on a mission
to the US where a big sum raised by Irish-American IRA sympathizers  awaits
him. He is to buy missiles and take them back home to blow up British
helicopters.
Bearing a counterfeit passport, Frankie lands at the Newark airport and
goes on by car through cityscapes. These are cold and dreary compared to
the green of Ireland, though the New York skyline impresses the young man.
Posing as "Rory," an immigrant construction worker, Frankie is housed in
the home of Irish-American police Sergeant Tom O'Meara (Harrison Ford) who
has a pretty wife and three pretty daughters. Ford, 54 when the film was
made, may be too long in the tooth for such a young family. That's a minor
point. What his Tom is, is a) a model cop; b) a sweet, non-violent family
man; c) a pacifist; d) not an IRA lover; e) entirely unsuspecting of
"Rory"'s identity; e) as honest as the day is long; f) Harrison Ford who
can still be something of an Indiana Jones when duty calls.
Notes. (a) and (b) are also underlined by Tom's nice behavior when after a
chase on foot he releases a temporary catch. Also by his disgust at
partner-buddy Edwin Diaz (Ruben Blades) for a shooting that was not called
for.  (e) is partly explained by Mrs.Meara being a working mother, and by
the house whose modesty spells Tom's honesty. Had he been a taker of bribes
or "mordidas," Mrs.M might have been a full-time mother and the house
fancier.
We're not talking out and out cliches here, but the next thing to them.
Hollywoodian ideas are floating around: 1) to pair two popular icons,
heroes and hearthrobs, one young,one older,thus spanning all male and
female audience ages; 2) to have the two men bond, the fatherless terrorist
and the son-less cop; 3) to keep Frankie's deception going until the
already bonded men have their confrontation. This begins at minute 77 of
the film.
What we get is three movies in one, coexisting in discomfort: a thriller, a
bond-film (not James) and an anti-violence picture. The latter is rather
heavily stressed in a confirmation sequence where the priest asks youths to
renounce the Devil. Too pat.
The movie had gotten a negative rap in the press, especially when, while it
was shooting, Brad Pitt griped in print about the incoherent, formless
script. He then called it  "the most irresponsible bit of film making -- if
you can even call it that -- that I've ever seen."  Although the PR people
played this down, along with the reported bad blood between Pitt and
Harrison, the fact remains that the movie was being written and rewritten
while it was being shot. This might sometimes be an asset in the hands of
certain independent filmmakers but it is seldom a good sign for studio
pictures
Ah, Hitchcock. Why is it that on a thousand topics discussed, he regularly
comes to mind because of his mastery, and specifically in this case,
because he had his films precisely mapped out before the cameras started
rolling?
"The Devil's Own" ("own" what?) may have good intentions, may have wished
to get into moral and psychological problems. It merely skims them. Its
obligatory elements keep it a prisoner of itself. A short list, not in
chronological order so as not to give away the plot too much:
1) There are several pretty women around. At least they are natural lookers
rather than model-beautiful.
2) There's an awkardly sketched out love affair between Pitt and little--
known Natascha McElhone. Her looks remind  me of Meryl Streep's.
3) There is a mano a mano fight, as in typical Westerns.
4) The obligatory villain is Treat Williams,the seller of the missiles. A
smoothie, he owns three bars. His villainy is telegraphed. By Irish
standards pub owners may be respectable, but by Hollywood standards, bar
owners are often fronts for the underworld -- another cliche.
5) Frankie, who had never been out of Ireland, knows from the start his way
around New York and vicinity better than residents of 20 years know their
way around Kalamazoo.
6) The American shooting scenes (and I mean real firepower) have Pitt most
improbably outgun and vanquish the villain and his henchmen.
7) Even more outrageously, when he does this, Pitt is already on the run,
has managed to get rid of his handcuffs  in a jiffy, to keep an appointment
on time and to make a money-bag explode! If America were to import a bunch
of Frankies, they could cut down our crime rate 50%.
8) Extreme outrageousness. The Stinger missiles are to go to Ireland on a
near-wreck of a tugboat that Sean, Frankie's childhood friend, already in
New York, has been somehow fixing.The two fellows continue to scrape,
restore and refit it. The boat,  the Sean character  and the passage of
time are not explained. Apparently only the two men will be the boat's
crew. With my limited nautical knowledge I can't swear that crossing duo or
solo the Atlantic on a tugboat is out of the question, especially after
Frankie finds himself Sean-less. Yet my feeling is like what Sam Goldwyn
used to say: "This is not only impossible, it cannot be done."
Does all this amount to a bad movie? Oddly, no--just a forgettable one.
Between the charm of Harrison Ford, the appeal (to many) of Brad Pitt, good
performances, fine production values and photography, a nice Irish score
(but when non-Irishy it gets characterless-generic), a few good scenes and
the overall camouflage of defects, this is not a dull, irritating film. But
it isn't good either.

Author
Paul Miller
This is definately a movie that has been through a lot even though it
just started out at the box office just 2 days ago.  Brad Pitt publicly
denouced the film because of its numerous script rewrites and plot
changes.  Well, in the end ....
The Devil's Own starts with Frankie (Pitt) as a small boy.  A mysterious
masked man enters, shoots his father, then leaves.  Flash ahead to 1992.
Apparatly Frankie is now IRA.  He has vowed to revenge his fathers death
by killing as many British army members as possible.  One problem, it
seems that every british soldier is after him now.
He leaves to go to the US.  A judge (I believe that the judge had IRA
ties although they never really say) hooks Frankie now called Rory up
with a NY police officer (Harrison Ford).  He finds something that leads
directly into Frankie past....
Anyway, you want more details...pay $5 and go see the movie.  I did.
Nonetheless, the movie starts out very slowly once we leaves Ireland but
picks up in not too long.  I think however, they could've done more with
the background between Frankie and the judge because you never really
understand that, you just know that they are together in some way.  I
also think that more could've been done with the relationship between
Frankie and the women (her name escapes me....).
I still liked the movie and am glad I went to see it, but it still
could've been better.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Catholic Northern and Protestant Southern Ireland have been engaged in
a monstrous killing civil war for longer than one can remember. (Some
800 years!)  Northern Ireland wants to be separated from England but
the latter is not about to allow that and so have supplied troops to
quell the guerrilla warfare in which the North is engaged.  It is
difficult to reconcile that both antagonists are Christians and yet
hate each other to the point where they kill without qualms.  Frankie
McGuire (Brad Pitt) is a Northerner responsible for the death of many
British soldiers as well as Irish citizens. How the British would love
to capture him!  Frankie's whole life has been devoted to killing as
many of the enemy as he can.  As a youngster, he saw his father shot
to death at the dinner table just as he had finished saying Grace.
Back in New York City lives Tom O'Meara, an honest, dedicated cop
whose mission in life is to make  New York City a peaceful place and
who believes he himself must practice peace in order to live up to his
credo.  When someone recommends that he take in as a boarder a young
newly-arrived Irish immigrant he does not hesitate nor does he inquire
about his background. .  . The young man is Frankie who has taken on a
new name, Rory Devaney.  He is in NYC to get money from supporters so
that he can buy bigger and better weapons to smuggle back to Northern
Ireland.
Tom and Rory hit it off immediately.  Tom has never had a son, only
daughters: Bridget, Morgan and Annie (Julia Stiles, Ashley Carin and
Kelly Singer.)  Sheila (Margaret Colin) is his lovely wife;  Edwin
Diaz (Ruben Blades) is his sidekick and chauffeur in the police car..
Billy Burke, (Treat Williams) is a vicious arms dealer.
When Tom's home is invaded by masked gunmen, where he and his wife
seemed about to be killed, the gunmen suddenly leave.  Tom, looking
over the torn upholstery, the open drawers, realizes the invasion was
because someone was searching for something. . . and he discovers the
something is money in a bag belonging to Rory.  He now realizes Rory is
not who he thought and a confrontation takes place.
The film is a dandy thriller.  What I did not like is that it takes
sides rather than letting the movie speak for itself.  I am reminded
of the excellent BATTLE OF ALGIERS, with the Algerians trying to drive
out their French imperialists.  When the leader of the guerrillas is
caught, he turns out to be a cultured person.  "How," he is asked,
"could you let women carry bags with bombs into theaters, dance halls,
ice cream parlors?"  To which he replies, "If we had your planes, your
bombs, your army and navy and tanks, we would not be using ladies,
either."  That is what this film fails to show and that is its
weakness..

Author
Brian Rohan
Engaging Characters and Strong Acting Almost Make Up
For a Plot That Goes Nowhere, Fast 
THE most surprising thing about The Devil's Own is certainly not the
plot, which in terms of predictability often places somewhere between
sunrise and taxes. Instead, the greatest surprise is the very fact that
this rumored Hollywood disaster, this IRA version of Heaven's Gate, a
film which seemed destined to become known as MacIshtar, is actually
not that bad after all. With two weeks to go before its March 26th
release, The Devil's Own has long been considered dead on arrival.
Reports of the film's demise have been widespread, beginning with the
shooting of the film in New York last summer and climaxing dramatically
in late January with public denunciations by one of the film's two
leading men, Brad Pitt.
"Twenty pages of dogshit," was Pitt's recollection of the Devil's Own
script, as told to Newsweek.
"[The Devil's Own] was the most irresponsible bit of filmmaking -- if
you can even call it that -- that I've ever seen. I couldn't believe
it. I don't know why anyone would want to continue making that movie."
In addition to Mr. Pitt's complaints were the howls of Hollywood
journalists, horrified by The Devil's Own many delays, script rewrites,
and most of all, budget figures.
"The budget has soared from an estimated sixty million dollars to
ninety million," reported The New Yorker, almost four months and surely
another few million dollars ago, in November. The gossip columnists'
condemnation of director Alan Pakula's spending habits were such that
one would think the money was theirs. Haven't there been plenty of
on-set disasters which turned out to on-screen classics? What about
Apocalypse Now? Wasn't that film also a mess before it was recognized
as a great?
Yes, but of course that hardly means there will be a Hearts of Darkness
made about The Devil's Own. The IRA thriller is a greatly flawed mess
in search of an ending. It will most definitely be slated by the
critics and will be very lucky to break even. But as stated above, it's
not our money....
THE film begins in 1972 in a rural cottage outside Belfast, where we
see young Frankie McGuire listening to his dad, who is saying Grace.
The potatoes are still warm when the door is kicked in by men in
balaclavas, guns blazing. Frankie's eyes are frozen as his father --
whom we hear later was some form of republican sympathizer -- is gunned
down by the unidentified gunmen.
The incident is all young Frankie needs to become, within the next 20
years, the most feared of IRA weapons. A closed-door strategy meeting
among security force officials reveals as much -- the adult terrorist,
McGuire, must be brought down at all costs, the troops are informed.
Just as the 1972 killing of his father was all McGuire needed to forge
a life of mayhem, so too is that life of mayhem all the British Army
and Northern Ireland police need to custom-order the assassination of
McGuire. A policy of shoot-to-kill is put into effect.
As the twenty something McGuire, Pitt is a quietly seething force. With
the confidence and bravery known only to leading men, McGuire is a
daredevil in Belfast fire-fights, though all around him his IRA buddies
are shot to bits. "Where's Frankie McGuire?," hisses a menacing British
army agent, immediately recalling the "Where's Sean?" mantra of an
earlier IRA movie, 1992's Patriot Games.
Unlike Patriot Games, the IRA man in The Devil's Own is portrayed as
justified in his actions and decent in his intentions, although his
mission is ultimately more important than the human lives of even those
close to him. Frankie McGuire is shown to have friends and also to have
affection, but he'll gladly detonate both if the need arises.
This is evident when we next meet McGuire, on a missile-purchasing
mission in New York, in the spring of 1993.
"Isn't this crazy?," says McGuire's increasingly unsure IRA buddy,
played by Paul Ronan. "Us trying so hard to bring missiles over there,
and them only waiting to shoot us?"
Phelan makes a brief attempt at talking McGuire out of it all:  peace
is in the air; we'll only be killed and forgotten; and besides, isn't
New York a wonderful place? But McGuire, as determined as any Hollywood
heavy, brushes him off and sets out to buy some missiles.
Alan Pakula, the Devil's Own director, obviously felt it necessary to
justify his IRA character's actions even beyond the 1972 death of
Frankie McGuire's father. McGuire is shown entering Newark Airport on
February 23, 1993, a date which is surely no coincidence. In real-life
-- but not mentioned in the movie -- the date is exactly three weeks
after the first-ever U.S.  visit by republican leader Gerry Adams. It
was a grim time for Northern Ireland supporters of the IRA, which would
not declare a ceasefire for several more bloody months, on September
1st. In February, there were many within the IRA who were urging peace,
leading to the ceasefire six months later, but (the fictional) Frankie
McGuire was surely not one of them.
"If we could only take one of them down," laments McGuire, referring to
the flocks of Army helicopters over Northern Ireland. "Then we'd get
them to listen."
(Obviously, the Devil's Own screenwriters did their homework in this
regard -- judging by the real-life busts of IRA gun-running missions
over the past two decades, surface-to-air missiles has been a
priority.)
McGuire appropriates the name of 'Rory Devaney' (though for some reason
he doesn't bother with a disguise or even a haircut) and enters a
familiar network of sympathetic Irish Americans. Chief among them is a
wealthy and powerful judge, played by George Hearn, who is involved in
a 'Project Children'-type effort connecting wayward and unemployed
Irish youths with generous American families. New York Police sergeant
Tom O'Meara (Harrison Ford), as a favor to his old friend the judge,
allows 'Rory Devaney' to crash in the basement of his suburban home.
Unknown to the O'Meara family, the judge is something other than a
benevolent Project Children type and 'Rory Devaney' is more than an
unemployed youth in need of a start. The judge provides a sack full of
fresh hundreds, and it's McGuire/Devaney's job to convert them into
dead helicopters.
It is in the O'Meara household that Devil's Own has its finest moments.
Harrison Ford plays a veteran cop in a house full of females -- his
wife, Sheila, (played by Margaret Colin) and their three daughters,
aged approximately five, eleven and perhaps fourteen. The three
daughters immediately fall in love with this mysterious
basement-dweller with the funny accent, providing some genuinely
touching domestic scenes, thankfully free of Hollywood cutesiness.
Sergeant O'Meara's high school-aged daughter is mortified when the
youngest child asks 'Devaney' at the dinner table whether he has a
girlfriend. The tension is delightfully real; tellingly, the drama over
corned beef and cabbage is much more effective than that which takes
place later, over Stingers and AK-47s.
As the Provo-beneath-the-stairs, McGuire moves quickly in acquiring the
goods. A plan is hatched to buy missiles from a shadowy Irish American
businessman, Billy Burke (played by Treat Williams), who toasts dead
Fenians in his shamrocked Manhattan saloon (locals will recognize the
set as the historic Old Town tavern). It is evident from the beginning
-- especially to Frankie McGuire -- that Billy Burke's loyalties are
closer to his own wallet. Without getting into specifics and giving
away too much of the plot, trouble begins when the visiting IRA men
fall afoul of the local Irish American mobsters. Frankie McGuire is
loyal to a fault, but his mobbed-up ethnic cousins are as reliable as
the weather.
Thus also begins the unraveling of the relationship between McGuire and
Sgt. O'Meara. There is much for O'Meara to question at this point in
his middle-aged life: the sudden realization that his NYPD partner --
played by Ruben Blades -- as well as the Irish kid in the basement, are
something other than what was advertised. The NYPD angle is merely a
distraction though, as O 'Meara copes with the newly-discovered
identity of the son he never had. It is here that the bottom starts to
fall out of The Devil's Own. Sgt.  O'Meara's loyalties and motivations
are all over the place, as if, well, as if they were taken from several
different screenplays.  The movie stumbles on to an end which is, at
best, anti-climactic, but not before Alan Pakula's production allows
the audience a little bit of fun.
For instance, there is the emergence on U.S. soil of a British Army
agent, identified by Harrison Ford's character as a member of the
S.A.S., or Special Air Service. In a characterization which will surely
make the London tabloids howl in protest, this character is slightly
less charming than Darth Vader. We have already seen him coldly
assassinate an already-wounded member of Frankie McGuire's IRA unit in
Belfast, and it is made clear that he is in the U.S. to do the same to
Frankie McGuire.
"We have already gotten everyone else in his unit," explains the SAS
agent, suggesting that McGuire's unit has resisted the rest of the
IRA's move toward peace. Sergeant O'Meara, although he disagrees
strongly with armed republicanism and is repulsed when he learns of
McGuire's involvement, nonetheless decides not to help the British
agent. This leads to a memorable confrontation between the snarling spy
from London and the narrowback cop from Brooklyn.
"What exactly is your relationship to Frankie McGuire?," snarls the
agent. "After all, you are Irish, are you not, Sergeant O'Meara?"
O'Meara, livid at the implication, shoots back incredulously, "Yeah,
but so's Cardinal O'Connor."
Politically, The Devil's Own is likely to cause plenty of
problems overseas. There is no mention of Frankie McGuire's
unionist-minded neighbors, which must have seemed okay to
the screenwriters since Frankie McGuire seems to care far
more about military revenge than he does political ideals
(concepts such as partition or re-unification are never
discussed). The only unionist-type we meet in the entire movie
is the above-mentioned SAS agent. As regards the history of
American involvement in IRA matters, the film is more
accurate and understanding than any of Hollywood's other
recent IRA thrillers (the main ones being Patriot Games and
1994's Blown Away). Bits and pieces of the plot resemble
events in a number of real-life gun-running operations: the
early
1980s Valhalla operation out of Boston, for example, as well
as
the numerous attempts at buying Stingers over the past fifteen
years. More importantly, the character of Sergeant O'Meara
points to a depth previously unseen for his stereotype -- the
character is Irish American, somewhat sentimental, and is also
a blue-collar member of the New York City police force. Yet
this does not make him a de facto supporter of the IRA. At the
same time, neither is O'Meara blindly condemning of the IRA.
Harrison Ford's character, while disagreeing strongly with
armed republicanism, states how he understands the
anger-fueled motivations of republicans like McGuire. "Can't
they get the bastards?" O'Meara asks Frankie, referring to the
men who killed the senior McGuire, in 1972.
"They are the bastards," responds Frankie.
There's no other way but to hit them back, asserts McGuire,
and although O'Meara does not agree, he understands. Such
complexity of character, acted by a seasoned, affable
professional such as Harrison Ford, make The Devil's Own
stand out above its IRA-themed predecessors.
Unfortunately, it is not enough. The movie's characters are
eminently engaging for the first 60% of the film, before the
plot
is pulled from beneath them like a rug. The film's ends with a
dud, when it clearly needed a bang, and is ultimately less
than
satisfying.
Which begs the question: it is possible for the Hollywood to
make a meaningful, character-driven IRA-themed story and
simultaneously deliver a sophisticated thriller? The jury is
still
out on that one. For better or for worse, the real-life
material
which inspires stories such as The Devil's Own will be around
long after this movie has gone to video.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Not as contrived as it might have sounded, this drama uses Brad
Pitt and Harrison Ford to good effect in a story that works emotionally
despite slight lapses of logic.
I had been led to believe that THE DEVIL'S OWN was a ridiculous botch of a
movie, mostly no thanks to a number of severely negative reviews that
focused in on the trouble-riddled production of the movie; apparently, Ford
and Pitt were lured into the movie with a script that was reworked
significantly during preproduction. I gritted my teeth and checked it out
anyway. To my surprise, THE DEVIL'S OWN turned out to be a good movie -- not
a towering success, but an effective and remarkably intelligent film about
two ethics in collision.
Brad Pitt plays a young man who entered the IRA at an early age, after his
father was killed in front of his eyes by masked gunmen. In a police raid,
he kills a number of British police and soldiers, but manages to escape, and
makes his way to the United States under the wings of a judge who
specializes in "assisting" IRA members. Pitt's character is out to snare a
cache of Stinger missiles and return home. Ford plays the Irish cop who
Pitt's character is provided a place to stay with.
The movie strives for emotional authenticity and gets it right most of the
time. The early scenes with Ford's character's family, for instance, are
right on the nose. Ford's character has had three daughters and no sons, and
an emotional bond forms between him and Pitt's character. Also, the cop's
partner is explored in a subplot which comments strongly on the cop's
ethics: He hates the fact that the world drives you to do terrible things in
the name of so-called higher goods which are mutable. And this, of course,
will put him directly in Pitt's character's path.
There are some moments where logic is strained, but the movie never strikes
a wrong note emotionally. That's where it works best, when it tests the
heartstrings of everyone involved and sees what happens. Pitt's character
respects the cop's integrity, but he is, after all, a soldier in a war, and
cannot simply drop everything and retire. There's also some violence, but no
more than needed to move the story forward: there is an exchange of gunplay
at the very end, for instance, but it's not the deciding factor of the
story. To the degree that the movie strove to avoid emotional cliches, it
works very well.
THE DEVIL'S OWN is not the best movie with either Pitt or Ford, but it is a
solid one, and touches on a few points that make it a worthwhile time. And
has more sense than to try and solve everything with a bullet.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Harrison Ford, Brad Pitt, Margaret Colin, Ruben Blades,=20
      Treat Williams, George Hearn, Natascha McElhone
Director: Alan J. Pakula
Producers: Lawrence Gordon, Robert F. Colesberry
Screenplay: David Aaron Cohen & Vincent Patrick and Kevin Jarre=20
      based on a story by Kevin Jarre
Cinematography: Gordon Willis
Music: James Horner
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     The advance word on THE DEVIL'S OWN was, to put it mildly, not=20
good.  About a month ago, Brad Pitt went public with some extremely=20
damaging statements about how, if he hadn't possessed an iron-clad=20
contract, he would have bailed out on the production long before its=20
finish.  Then there's the fact that Columbia Pictures delayed the=20
opening from late last year (during pre-Oscar nomination prime time) to=20
the dreary wasteland of March, supposedly as a result of awful preview=20
screenings.  With these bits of knowledge spinning in my head, I was=20
ready for a disaster.  But, while THE DEVIL'S OWN isn't going to win any=20
"best of=85" contests, it's not nearly as bad as I had been led to=20
believe.
     Oh, there are problems, and some of them are fairly serious.  But=20
the movie as a whole isn't a complete and utter waste of time.  I didn't=20
leave the theater wringing my hands about having lost an evening.  Part=20
of the reason THE DEVIL'S OWN is endurable is because, in spite of=20
various script deficiencies, both of the stars -- Pitt and Harrison Ford=20
-- have an undeniable screen presence.  And, while star power can't save=20
a sinking movie, it can at least keep it afloat longer.
     THE DEVIL'S OWN begins in a rousing enough fashion, with a short=20
prologue set in 1972, then a flash-forward twenty years to a police=20
action in Belfast.  Frankie Maguire (Brad Pitt), a member of the=20
provisional IRA with more than 18 murders to his credit, is a wanted=20
man.  When the British army, aided by the local police, corner him in a=20
warehouse, he and his compatriots fight back, and the result is a=20
bloodbath.  Frankie escapes to the U.S. with the assignment to buy=20
stinger missiles from an arms dealer (Treat Williams) and bring them=20
back by boat to Ireland. =20
     Frankie's "host" in the United States is IRA sympathizer Peter=20
Fitzsimmons (George Hearn), who sets him up with a bed and bathroom in=20
the suburban house of NYPD officer Tom O'Meara (Harrison Ford).  Tom is=20
a prototypical "good cop" -- he doesn't lie, cheat, steal, or take=20
bribes, and puts the love of his wife (Margaret Colin) and children=20
above all else.  He and Frankie, who's now going by the alias of Rory=20
Devaney, become friends.  Of course, Tom doesn't know about Frankie's=20
terrorist background.  In fact, he doesn't suspect that there's anything=20
sinister about his guest until a group of armed, masked men break into=20
his house and threaten to kill his wife.
     For much of its running length, THE DEVIL'S OWN works as a passable=20
thriller.  Certain plot elements (including many of the details=20
surrounding the missile deal) border on preposterous, but that often=20
goes with the territory in films of this genre.  The best parts of THE=20
DEVIL'S OWN are the quiet moments, such as when Frankie and Tom are=20
talking, or when Tom is spending time with his family.  There's also an=20
effective subplot that forces Tom to examine his moral outlook on life=20
when his partner (Ruben Blades) accidentally shoots a fleeing suspect in=20
the back. =20
     Unfortunately, THE DEVIL'S OWN goes downhill fast in the final half=20
hour.  Suddenly, it's as if every significant character in the film has=20
undergone a frontal lobotomy.  Otherwise-intelligent men start doing=20
extremely stupid things, and the entire "dumbing-down" process becomes=20
frustrating to observe.  The final scenes are solid, but the stuff that=20
leads up to them is a problem.
     As is always the case in a film featuring the IRA, murky Irish=20
politics are addressed, although veteran director Alan J. Pakula (ALL=20
THE PRESIDENT'S MEN, PRESUMED INNOCENT) does his utmost to make THE=20
DEVIL'S OWN approach these thorny issues in a non-judgmental, evenhanded=20
fashion by depicting good and evil on both sides.  The most interesting=20
facet of the political side of the script is how Irish views are easily=20
distorted in America, an ocean away from the strife and violence.  It's=20
easy to classify oneself as a "patriot" when all that's on the line are=20
a few dollars.
     Pitt and Ford do credible jobs as Frankie and Tom.  Despite his=20
character's brutal, bloody past, Pitt manages to capture our sympathy,=20
in large part because, aside from the killings, Frankie seems like a=20
likable sort of guy.  Ford, in a role that's a far cry from the cocky=20
Han Solo, recalls Jack Ryan, the protagonist of PATRIOT GAMES and CLEAR=20
AND PRESENT DANGER -- a hero whose armor is just a little too shiny. =20
Supporting players include Margaret Colin (INDEPENDENCE DAY) as Tom's=20
wife, Natascha McElhone (SURVIVING PICASSO) as Frankie's girlfriend, and=20
a nasty Treat Williams as a gunrunner in a suit. =20
     While THE DEVIL'S OWN doesn't do a spectacular job of fulfilling=20
the promise of its cast or its complex politics-and-guns premise, it is=20
nevertheless reasonably well-paced.  The less intently you watch this=20
movie, the greater the chance that you'll be pleased by it. =20
Unfortunately, if you're paying attention, it won't take long to notice=20
that very little of the last act holds together.  That sort of high-
tension, mind-numbing climax makes it difficult for me to retain more=20
than token enthusiasm for the production as a whole.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Walter Frith
Columbia Pictures was quite upset with Brad Pitt recently when Pitt made
statements to the media that 'The Devil's Own' was one of the worst
filmmaking experiences he had ever had.  Pitt later recanted those statements
but the cat was already out of the bag and while this motion picture isn't
really all that bad, it does have large plot holes and one dimensional
characterizations.
A terrorist in the IRA (Pitt) escapes justice in Northern Ireland in 1992
where he is hunted for the deaths of twenty four people.  The people he's
been involved in murdering are a combination of police officers and British
soldiers and Pitt flees to America where he makes connections to take up
residence with a family headed by Harrison Ford who is a New York City police
officer.  Pitt passes himself off as a landed immigrant with a construction
job to go to so the family never learns at first what the true objective of
his visit is.  His true objective while in New York is to purchase military
hardware, mostly missles from and arms dealer (Treat Williams).  Ford's
family is dragged into the chaos which erupts as Pitt becomes the target of
many of his enemies.
The movie's psychological profile of Pitt's involvement in terrorism stems
from the fact that as a boy of eight, he witnessed the murder of his father
by an intruding gun man one evening as his family was sitting down to dinner.
 Ford's character has an attack of conscience on two fronts.  One by helping
bring Pitt in to the authorities alive once Pitt's cover is blown and the
other involves Ford lying to protect his partner (Ruben Blades) who is being
investigated for shooting a robbery suspect in the back.  
Director Alan J. Pakula ('All the President's Men', 'Sophie's Choice',
'Consenting Adults') uses silence in many scenes to make the picture's
atmosphere more powerful without disruptive music or loud action sound.  Brad
Pitt and Harrison Ford have some good moments on film together but 'The
Devil's Own' lacks plot and character development wide enough for the movie
to justify its running time of almost two hours courtesy of screenwriters
David Aaron Cohen, Vincent Patrick and Kevin Jarre based on Jarre's story.
 It does have a convincing story about clandestine terrorism gone awry but
looks too much like the studio was trying to use big name stars to rake in
the dollars when stars of much less notoriety could have pulled it off.

Author
Chuck Dowling
The Devil's Own (1997) *1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Harrison Ford, Brad Pitt,
Ruben Blades, Treat Williams. Written by: David Aaron Cohen, Vincent Patrick
and Kevin Jarre. Directed by: Alan J. Pakula. Running Time: 107 minutes.
"The Devil's Own" has every reason to be a good film: a good cast, a good
premise, and a respected director. But what it lacks is much more important:
logic, interest, and entertainment.
Despite his second billing, Brad Pitt stars as a IRA terrorist who is
brought over to the United States (thanks to a corrupt judge) to purchase
guided missiles to help with the war in Ireland. Now as the movies begins,
we learn that Pitt has killed more than 20 people. Then we get to see him
blow a few more away. And we are supposed to like this guy? The film sure
wants us to, making Pitt seem warm and fuzzy. The film has already reached
its first problem, and only 10 minutes have elapsed. Terrorists are not our
friends, no matter how attractive they may be considered to be.
The corrupt judge moves Pitt into the basement of Harrison Ford, a New York
City cop with a wife and three daughters. In movie time, it seems as though
Pitt has only lived there one week, but we are supposed to believe that
these two men have somehow bonded. I never bought it, and the film has
achieved it's second problem.
Pitt attempts to buy these missiles from a stereotypical bad guy with no
personality (Treat Williams). Of course something goes wrong with the deal,
and FINALLY, an hour into the film, the plot starts to begin. Williams sends
bad guys to find the money, which is hidden in Ford's home. As they are
searching, Ford and his wife arrive home. The three men attack them. Now,
after that settles, Ford is understandably angry at Pitt for bringing this
into his home. He sets out to bring Pitt to justice.
During the film's yawn-inducing first hour (where I actually became
fascinated by my watch for about 10 minutes, before remembering that there
was a movie going on), we keep seeing scenes of Ford being a cop. Why? To
justify his top billing? To give him something to do is most likely. Then he
gets involved in a mind-numbingly overused subplot about his partner (Ruben
Blades) killing a suspect by accident. Also, the film completely gives away
the ending during its first hour, when Ford confesses to Pitt that he's
never killed anyone. Hmmmmm.
During the second hour, Ford's character is obviously angry, as he should
be. Yet no matter what Pitt does, he can't bring himself to hate him. This
is a major flaw. You've got a terrorist who's ruining a cop's life yet still
presented as squeaky clean, and the cop chasing him who seems to be angry at
everyone else BUT the terrorist. There's never any conflict in the film, and
conflict is what DRIVES a suspense-thriller.
"The Devil's Own" (and what is the title referring to?) reportedly cost $95
million to make. $95 million! And for what, to see Harrison Ford shoot Brad
Pitt? Come on. Like I said, my watch was more interesting. [R]
--Chuck Dowling  
--Chuck's Movie Reviews -- http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     THE DEVIL'S OWN cost a reported $90-100 million to make.
Ordinarily that is of little interest to me as a viewer since I pay the
about the same ticket price to see it as to see a little inexpensive
independent film.  But it should be noted that this is not a subject
matter that requires a big budget.  Whatever was good in this film was
done far more intelligently but on a television budget in the British
made-for-TV thriller HARRY'S GAME (1982).  With the exception of bigger
(but not more realistic) action scenes THE DEVIL'S OWN offers little
that HARRY'S GAME did not.  (For all I know there may be other equally
good thrillers on this subject from the BBC that just never made it to
this country.  But I do notice that the previous Harrison Ford IRA-
related film, PATRIOT GAMES, borrowed the music of HARRY'S GAME in
apparent homage.)  Perhaps the real virtue of THE DEVIL'S OWN is a
moderately even-handed approach to the politics.  These days it seems
unusual to have a major action film which covers politics and which
does not make it obvious which side is right and which is wrong.
Leaving audiences to wonder about which side to be on in a conflict is
not generally thought to reflect well at the box-office.  It is only a
minor touch in THE DEVIL'S OWN that the story does not come right out
and take sides.  It is the most refreshing touch that it is left to the
viewer to decide.  Perhaps the writers, and there were at least four,
felt that pushing one point of view was not really crucial to tell the
story.
     At a young age Frankie McGuire (to be played as an adult by Brad
Pitt) saw his beloved father gunned down at the dinner table by masked
Protestants.  Two decades later Frankie is an IRA terrorist who has
killed more than twenty people and British Intelligence is trying
desperately to stop him.  Frankie's next project involves stinger
missiles and he has to go to New York to buy them with a large satchel
of money.  A sympathetic judge finds lodging for Frankie at the house
of honest cop Tom O'Meara (Harrison Ford).  Tom, glad to have another
male in a house full of women, has no idea of who Frankie is or what he
is really doing.  The two men are each interested in the other's
country and culture, each surprised at what he discovers.  They begina
friendship that the viewer knows can only end only in violence.
Violence is key word and not all of it is over Northern Ireland
politics.  But the even-handedness in treating these conflicts even
extends to partially justifying a halfworld-ish bar owner and arms
dealer played by Treat Williams.  This is a film of many different
conflicts in which nobody is entirely right or wrong.
     This admittedly is a minority opinion, but Harrison Ford is not a
particularly expressive or charismatic actor.  In spite of his
popularity he has a limited acting range and does not project much
personality beyond weariness.  The same can be said of many other
actors, but few of his repute.  Pitt carries his role with a thick, at
times impenetrable Irish accent, that is reasonably convincing.  Their
friendship could easily devolve into a simple father-and-son
relationship, but it is more complex than that with Ford playing the
innocent compared to the generally more worldly and certainly more
experienced Pitt.  The cinematography by Gordon Willis creates mood by
matching the darkest moods of the characters with dark murky scenes in
Ulster and in New York.
     THE DEVIL'S OWN is more sophisticated and intelligent than most of
the action films in the theaters these days, but this expensive
production is still not up to what the BBC can do on a skittles and
beer budget.  There was little on the screen to justify the enormous
cost of the film.  Still, I rate THE DEVIL'S OWN a high +1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Alan J. Pakula is a director with a somewhat uneven track record.
His last film, THE PELICAN BRIEF, was a bomb, but others have met with
great financial and critical success.  Although he garnered an Oscar
nomination for ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN, his SOPHIE'S CHOICE might be
even better known.  I am a special fan of one of his lesser recognized
works, the thriller CONSENTING ADULTS.
     As is popular these days, in his latest film, THE DEVIL'S OWN, he
examines the Northern Ireland troubles.  He takes a different approach
with most of the story occurring in the United States.
     (Someday, I would like to see a film from the British perspective.
Here we are told from the IRA that the British do not really want
peace, "They say the word peace, but at the end of the day, all they
want is surrender."  All of the films I have seen start with the
assumption that the British are oppressing the people of Northern
Ireland, hence the birth of terrorism as a natural and inevitable
outgrowth.  There are two sides to every issue.  It would be refreshing
to hear the other.)
     The screenplay by Kevin Jarre and Robert Mark Kamen tells the
story of two lives.  In one, Tom O'Meara (Harrison Ford) is a hard
working police sergeant in New York City.  Although getting a little
old to chase crooks, he still gives it his best shot.  Ford looks so
out of breath that you begin to worry that he may have a real-life
heart attack.  More than just an honest cop, Tom goes out of his way to
be fair to thieves and to his fellow officers.  His partner Edwin Diaz
(Ruben Blades) will test this loyalty.
     As O'Meara's name implies, his ancestors came from Ireland.  Back
in the old country, we meet Frankie the Angel (Brad Pitt).  His father
was gunned down in cold blood in front of Frankie's eyes when the lad
was just 8-years-old.  Frankie was hardened by this experience and soon
became one of the IRA's most notorious killers.
     Early on in the film we have a gun battle between the British
soldiers and the IRA terrorists.  Although the sequence bears
remarkable resemblance to the house-to-house battles in France during
World War II, the lighter-weight, automatic weapons, the sound effects
editing, and the fast choreography of this part makes it the most
successful aspect of the film.
     Soon Frankie flees Ireland.  In America these two people of Irish
blood will have their destinies intertwined into a life and death
struggle for each.  That destiny forms the fabric upon which Pakula
creates the film.
     The movie has three acts plus the Irish prologue.  The first takes
the time to get to know the O'Meara family.  We learn the minutia of
living a middle class existence in Brooklyn and the day-to-day life of
a Manhattan cop.  Since Frankie, now known as Rory Devaney, comes under
false pretenses to live with the O'Meara family, we learn that he has
his tender side too.
     All too often, films do not take the time to adequately setup the
characters.  In this show, we have just the opposite problem.  It
seemed that the show might run out of time before they ever got to the
action.  The slow first act ran over an hour whereas half that time
would have been ample.  If the people had been more interesting, I
would love to have stayed the full hour in this act, but these were
pleasant but not particularly compelling characters.  They were
strangely devoid of emotion.  When they should have been angry, they
got pensive instead.
     The second act makes the picture.  Brad Pitt struts his stuff and
shows off his acting talent.  His assignment is to buy Stinker missiles
from an Irish-American gangster named Billy Burke (Treat Williams).
Williams, playing a one dimensional slimeball, demonstrates that, when
there is money is to be made, some opportunist will turn up to sell
whatever is in demand.  Burke, a full-time saloon keeper and part-time
arms merchant, would sell to both sides if the profit was right.
     The preposterous final act is mercifully brief.  In a plot
contrivance, things are wrapped up all too neatly.
     The show has many extra delights.  The Irish music is lovely.
Megan Natascha McElhone from SURVIVING PICASSO plays Frankie's would be
sweetheart Megan.  My favorite character is that of New York Judge
Peter Fitzsimmons (George Hearn).  The judge entertains the upper crust
of society, has a lavish house and servants, and, at the same time,
supports the IRA's gun running.  The judge is oblivious to the
contradictions in his behavior.
     "Don't look for a happy ending, Tom," advises Frankie.  "It's not
an American story.  It's an Irish one."  You can see the film and see
if you think it is a happy ending or not.  Personally, I would have
preferred a bit more ambiguity.
     THE DEVIL'S OWN runs about two hours.  It is rated R for realistic
violence and for some profanity.  It would be fine for teenagers.  (One
dad had his 8-year-old son with him at the screening.  I wondered and
worried about how the child must have viewed the film's opening scene
where a father just like his is murdered at the family dinner table.
How long will the boy's nightmares last?)  I admired Brad Pitt's acting
and the strong second act enough to be able to recommend the picture,
but it could and should have been much better.  I give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Nick Schaden
        "The Devil's Own" has plenty of good movie elements: smooth acting,
reputable actors & well orchestrated action sequences.   It's almost a
crime to see "The Devil's Own" fall so far flat on its back with it's
sappy, predictable and harshly failed plot.
        Frankie McGuire (Brad Pitt, complete with long hairdo and phony Irish
accent) as a young child watches his daddy get blown away by British
supporters.   Naturally Frankie devotes his life to revenge and becomes
a terrorist working for the IRA.   Suddenly (apparently to show how
tough Frankie is) we see a huge shoot-out sequence where IRA terrorists
blow away around 30 cops during an ambush, with much of the carnage done
by Frankie himself.   Such is the most inherent problem with the movie:
it tries to be something it isn't.   Through much of the drama it seems
that director Alan J. Pakula is shooting for the audience to feel
sympathy for Frankie, to really put a personality behind the cold
blooded IRA killer, to show reasons and motivation (good or bad) for
Frankie's actions.   But as noted above, seeing the cold blooded work
that Frankie does and continues to do throughout "The Devil's Own" makes
the audience have no sympathy for the man.   Maybe Frankie could have
been in the IRA but not a trigger man, maybe we could see more footage
of horrible acts that we're inflicted upon Frankie to "justify" his
savageness.  Nevertheless, no matter how much "sappiness" and
dramaticism that director Pakula throws at us, I can't feel sympathy for
a person that in return for his father's murder turns around and murders
thirty of the enemy in cold blood.
        Major plot problems aside, the movie has a few aces up its sleeve.   
Brad Pitt fulfills his acting role well, and Harrison Ford (as Tom
O'Meara, a "Ward Cleaver" honest NYPD cop that fights within himself
over Frankie's plight) does an excellent job.   In addition, the tension
and plot does have its bright spots.   However, by the somewhat
predictable end to "The Devil's Own" I had a rather sour taste left in
my mouth, seeing yet another movie fall from being a winner to simply
being average.  

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Harrison Ford, Brad Pitt, Margaret Colin, Ruben Blades, Treat
Williams, George Hearn, Natascha McElhone Director: Alan J. Pakula
Screenplay: David Aaron Cohen & Vincent Patrick and Kevin Jarre based on
a story by Kevin Jarre
Why does an Irish tale need to have a sad ending, when Irish jokes carry
such moronic light heartedness? Probably because the IRA is no Irish man
joke or simple laughing matter. Yes, this is a sad tale indeed. When a
Irish lad (Brad Pitt) watches his father murdered before his eyes, he is
forced to choose between forgetting or fighting back. In his world gone
mad, he chooses to fight and exists only to strike again. In his living
nightmare there are no winners or losers, only an ever rising death
count. Revenge has an insatiable thirst for blood.
The boy grows into a man, and the man becomes a soldier in the Irish
Republican Army. His journey leads him to the land of opportunities,
where he must purchase weapons of warfare with which to hurt the enemy.
Under the pretence of immigration, he finds board with the family of
Irish policeman, Thomas O'Meara (Harrison Ford). Here he finds the
father he lost, but can they remain friends? A fox cannot befriend a
hound, as one is governed by the laws of instinct and the other by man.
So the hunt begins, and the chase is intense, but we always know how the
hunt will end.
So let me lighten this sad tale with an Irish Joke or two.
Why did the Irish man build a boat?
So he could carry some missiles across the Atlantic to blow up the
British.
What did the Irish cop do with his bad conscience?
He shot a friend through the heart.
Okay, okay so it's not very funny, but I'm not in the mood. Fine
performances from a brooding Brad Pitt and ageing Harrison Ford, in this
sad tale of Irish sorts. Anyone for some after dinner mints?

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Columbia)
Starring:  Harrison Ford, Brad Pitt, Margaret Colin, Ruben Blades, Treat
Williams, Natascha McElhone.
Screenplay:  David Aaron Cohen & Vincent Patrick & Kevin Jarre.
Producers:  Lawrence Gordon and Robert F. Colesberry.
Director:  Alan J. Pakula.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence)
Running Time:  107 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     You can bet that Sony Pictures executives have spent plenty of time
in the last few weeks hoping that there is, in fact, no such thing as bad
press.  Rumors of on-set tension have been swirling for months, production
delays bumped the film from its higher-profile fall '96 release date, and
reports had the budget creeping into the $90 million range.  Then, in a
Newsweek interview, Brad Pitt took a few shots at the mid-stream script
changes on his upcoming film THE DEVIL'S OWN, inspiring the kind of spin
control usually seen only on the teacup ride at Disneyland.  Pitt's
comments were surprising in an era when stars are generally obliged to
swoon over their latest project, but it may be even more surprising to see
the end product of the process which frustrated him so.  THE DEVIL'S OWN
is an uncommonly thoughtful suspense film with a razor-sharp performance
by Pitt, proving that Pitt's standards may be considerably higher than
anyone else's in Hollywood.  If anything, it is the missed opportunities
for even more detailed characterizations which end up disappointing.
     Pitt plays Frankie McGuire, a native of Northern Ireland with a
haunted past and a challenging present.  A man who watched as a young boy
while his father was gunned down as a Republican sympathizer, Frankie has
become a notorious IRA terrorist wanted for several bombings and murders.
With superior government firepower threatening to overwhelm them, the IRA
sends Frankie to the U. S. to purchase black market missiles for their
effort.  Aided by American friends, Frankie comes to New York under the
name Rory Devaney, and is put up in the home of unsuspecting veteran cop
Tom O'Meara (Harrison Ford).  Rory soon becomes close with the O'Meara
family, but they are all put at risk when complications develop in the
transaction with arms dealer Billy Burke (Treat Williams).  Soon two men
with differing concepts of duty will be set not just against a common
enemy, but against each other.
     THE DEVIL'S OWN clearly wants to establish a father-son dynamic
between Tom (who has three daughters but no sons) and Rory, and it works
primarily because it never strains too hard to make the point.  The
bonding between them is casual and un-dramatic -- a game of pool here, a
snippet of conversation there -- and director Alan J. Pakula trusts the
actors to establish a connection without resorting to trite dialogue or
inappropriate outbursts of emotion.  These are two quiet, determined men
who simply seem to like each other and enjoy each other's company.
     We like them, too, and for quite a while both of them are the heroes
of THE DEVIL'S OWN...until Pitt kicks his performance into another gear.
Though the film's opening scenes show Frankie in a gun battle with
government troops in Belfast, we come to believe that the soft-spoken man
in New York is the "real" Frankie/Rory.  That man is as fictional as
"Rory Devaney," however, the man Frankie might have been if he had lived
another life.  He turns utterly ruthless when his back is against the
wall, and Pitt gives him the weariness of a man who cannot afford the
luxury of a conscience.  Pitt plays the anti-hero to Ford's more
conventional square-jawed hero, and it is hard to choose sides between
them.  It is a unique conflict for a Hollywood film, a struggle between
two people whose moralities were determined by their circumstances, and
who both believe firmly that they are in the right.
     In a film with such an unconventional struggle at its center, it is
all the more jarring when conventional formula elements rear their ugly
heads.  Obligatory psycho-villain Treat Williams gets to ooze malevolence
and serve up severed heads; obligatory romantic interest Natascha McElhone
gets to be gorgeous and supportive of Frankie.  There is a distracting
sub-plot as well, concerning the involvement of Tom's partner Eddie (Ruben
Blades) in the shooting of a car thief, which serves only as yet another
reminder that Tom is honest, hates violence, and believes in the letter of
the law.  When THE DEVIL'S OWN begins to resemble low-rent DIE HARD
clones, it drifts.
     Those occurrences are relatively rare, however, because THE DEVIL'S
OWN doesn't move the way you expect suspense thrillers to move.  The
action sequences are infrequent but emphatic, with a premium placed on the
patient establishment of character.  Still, there is a moment late in THE
DEVIL'S OWN (during a climax reportedly re-shot just a few months prior to
opening) which may be an example of what Pitt was complaining about to
Newsweek.  In that scene, Tom suggests that he never wanted to be a cop, a
sub-text which appears out of nowhere and might have given more depth to
the character throughout the film.  There are certainly instances where
THE DEVIL'S OWN feels like the product of a script-by-committee, but the
star power of Ford and Pitt in an intriguing relationship guides it over
its rough points.  I could only hope to be subjected to more "troubled
productions" like this.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Frankly speaking, any $90M movie starring Brad Pitt and Harrison
Ford should be more exciting than this one.  Whatever the Hell the title
means, the plot is deceptively simple:  an Irish terrorist (Pitt) takes
refuge in New York City and moves into the basement of an unsuspecting
beat cop (Ford) and his family.  And then the latter finds out about the
former.  To the credit of director Alan J.  Pakula and however many
writers went without mention, this movie doesn't take the easy way out.
The hoary cliches are kept to a minimum, the violence is terse and to
the point, and each character is given a fair amount of breathing room.
So, what's the problem?  Well, it just ain't exciting enough.  THE
DEVIL'S OWN never reaches the emotional heights suggested by either the
story *or* the star power.  Sure, there's some suspense.  And an in-
triguing moral conflict.  And the slight pleasure of seeing Indiana
Jones as the father of three girls.  But when we get down to brass
tacks, and the characters have to confront each other, there's just not
enough punch to their punches.
Mike Legeros - Movie Hell
legeros@pagesz.net - http://www.n-vision.com/hell/

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alan J. Pakula
Writers: David Aaron Cohen,Vincent Patrick, and Kevin Jarre
Starring: Harrison Ford, Brad Pitt, Magaret Colin, Reuben Blades, Treat 
Williams
For months before its release, we all heard about feuding betwixt the 
leads on the set, and how the budget skyrocketed to a reported 90 
million bucks.  First off, I have absolutely no clue what the spent 90 
million bucks on.  The leads would cost roughly 35 million or so, then 
maybe 15 for the rest of the film, bringing it to roughly 50 million, 
which is about what it grossed at the box office anyway.  But where did 
the other 40 million go?
Secondly, what idiot thought this depressing and suspenseless film would 
gross over 90 million?  Just because Harrison Ford and Brad Pitt were in 
it doesn't guarantee a huge box office draw.  I could have told you 
that, and I'm not even a film student yet.  In "Seven," we were drawn 
into the complex and creepy-ass storyline that flowed nicely and was 
depressing in that kind of good way.  And "12 Monkeys" was so complex 
that you couldn't help but be intrigued.  "The Devils' Own" is 
not a bad film, but it's so messy that it almost is.
Now, the big news on the set was that the two leads were fighting over 
who had the biggest part.  Now it seems that neither one and the film 
seems totally screwed up with who really is the big protagonist.  Of 
course, I'll go with Ford because he's not as complex and is rather easy 
to figure out, so we obviously associate with him.  But Frankie the 
Angel (Pitt) is a complex man who is a killer by nature because he saw 
his father killed at a very young age.  He has never really been able to 
deal with it, and has no problem with popping a cap in someone's ass.  
But there are times when it's basically a role of the die where the 
scene's center is at.
The story tells how Frankie escapes to America after a big IRA thing 
goes bad, leaving some of his pals dead and another one going to America 
with him.  Frankie has a bunch of stolen money with him, and is sent to 
live with a near-retired cop (Ford), and his nice family (mom played by 
ID4's Margaret Colin, who has no real part but is just there).  Frankie 
seems like a nice guy, and he is.  He gets along great with the family, 
and Ford pretty much loves the guy.
But little does he know about his violent past and the fact that he and 
his bud are dealing with some baddies in New York (led by Treat 
Williams, who is still aiming at that big comeback).  The baddies 
eventually cause some harm to Ford's family (or near harm, anyway), and 
Ford finds himself on a personal mission to bring Frankie in, who is 
being persued by the American police, some Irish police, and the New 
York baddies.  But the ending is anti-climactic and depressing, ending 
on the note (that is pushed in our face by Pitt) that "this isn't an 
American story; it's an Irish one."
The whole film is mis-led.  It has no clue what the point of it is.  Is 
it to just end on a down-note?  Is it to present an interesting 
comparison between two interesting characters?  Is it to just cash in on 
the double bill of Ford and Pitt?  It seems to be all of these, and 
because of this, it just fails.  The Ford/Pitt characters are 
interesting, but who is the story about?  It can't be both, it just 
doesn't work out.  We care about both, although they both do things that 
aren't with their characters.  And the ending is just confused.
But the film is not bereft of goodness.  In fact, there are several good 
things that almost save the flick.  The acting is very good, especially 
by the two leads.  Ford is, and will probably always be, awesome.  Pitt 
steals the acting show, but not with his "authentic" accent, which is 
occasionally Irish, but sometimes not very comprehendable (one time he 
says "They killed my dad in front of us" and it sounds a lot like he 
said "They killed me dad fungus.")
But in the end, the film is bogged down by its confused problems, like 
pacing and concentration of the film.  It almost has ADD which regard to 
what it's about.  Give this flick some ridlin and it would probably be a 
masterpiece.  The film is not bad because it shouldn't have been given 
that huge of a budget, but really because it seems the two stars had a 
bit of egotisticism they couldn't deal with and screwed up what could 
have potentially been a really great flick.
P.S. What in the hell does the title have to do with?  Anyone got a clue 
out there?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
