Title
Review for Prince of Tides, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Andrew Chia-Tso Ku
     Earlier this week, there was a screening of THE PRINCE OF TIDES on
campus.  I may be accused of being a dutiful cog in Columbia's marketing
plans, but I thoroughly enjoyed the movie.  This is a well crafted,
big-star "mature" romance of the sort that has become increasingly rare
in the youth-dominated movie market.  It features a remarkably
full-bodied performance by Nick Nolte, who is in every scene (except for
flash-backs).  Nolte is one of those actors who do consistently
excellent and subtle work movie after movie (I'd include Gene Hackman
and Jeff Bridges in this category) and consequently have been taken for
granted.  This movie will probably go a long way towards bringing him
the attention he deserves.  He delivers the sort of juicy performance
that will probably be remembered when award time rolls around.
     Before going any further, I should mention that I have *not* yet
read Pat Conroy's novel, but apparently from press releases, Conroy is
very happy with the movie (he co-wrote the script).
     This is the second movie Barbra Streisand has directed and THE
PRINCE OF TIDES clearly establishes her as one of the most thoughtful
and meticulous directors working in the confines of the populist
Hollywood style.  The story unfolds at a comfortable pace and the tired
cliches inherent in this genre (I'll get to them later) are overcome by
the emotional honesty and conviction that she and her A-list cast
(including Kate Nelligan, Blythe Danner, Melinda Dillon, Jeroen Krabbe)
and especially Nolte invest in their roles.  (I would have liked more
of Melinda Dillon -- she's basically a plot device to set the narrative
in motion -- but in the paltry few minutes she's allotted, she does
wonders.)  Streisand herself gives a muted performance in the less showy
role of Nolte's quasi-psychiatrist and lover (nevertheless, it's a cut
above  Ingrid Bergman's impersonation of a psychologist in SPELLBOUND);
appropriately, Streisand keeps her "persona" in check.
     It's smart of Columbia Pictures to be previewing THE PRINCE OF
TIDES this weekend: the movie, which should have the broad audience
appeal of other domestic dramas like TERMS OF ENDEARMENT or ORDINARY
PEOPLE, probably needs word of mouth to attract audiences beyond
Streisand's usual constituency.
Plot-related criticisms follow.  (spoilers)!
     In general, I thought the movie suffered a bit from
overexplicitness.  The abusive/psycho-sexual goings on between the young
Tom and his parents were very uncomfortable to watch and the penultimate
flashback (the gang rape) was almost unbearable (although I realize that
that was partly the point) and having Nolte relate *some* of those
scenes to Streisand would have been just as effective.  The presentation
of the flashbacks (and their content) felt exceedingly reminiscent of
NUTS.  The use of narration was handled fairly skillfully, but at times
it seemed redundant or gumshoe-y (and at the end was laughable:
"Lowenstein, Lowenstein....")
     I found the scenes of pastoral bliss near the end of the movie too
protracted; I wonder if it was a bow to audience expectations or a
chance for Streisand to photograph herself in soft focus.  And I could
have done without the subplot involving Streisand's son.  Having to win
over a rebellious adolescent has become such a cliche in movies and
television that I'm pretty sick of them.  Nolte's good humor helped me
through those scenes (Streisand's son is competent but not spectacular
in the role).  Finally, I thought Streisand's conception of her
character was too rosy.  Except for choosing a bastard of a husband,
this woman is *perfect*!
     All in all, THE PRINCE OF_ IDES is very satisfying and enjoyable;
I hope Streisand gets some credit for getting it made (and made so
well).  For guys whose SOs are trying to get them to go, there are far
worse ways of spending two hours :-)

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
PRINCE OF TIDES: sweeping movie with big themes and big-star romance
Plot/kickoff: Tom Wingo (Nick Nolte), an ex-football player and English
teacher in South Carolina, goes off to New York City to help his sister
Savannah by telling her psychiatrist Dr.  Lowenstein (Barbra Streisand)
his family history.  Characters/acting:  Streisand is believable, though
I wonder if her character's actions were entirely ethical.  Nolte's best
role yet, though one scene seemed a little forced (maybe the script's
fault).  Fun appearance by George Carlin as Savannah's neighbor; Blythe
Danner plays Tom's wife, though she doesn't get to do too much (see
MR. & MRS. BRIDGE for her best); I also liked Lowenstein's surly teenager
as played by Jason Gould, Streisand's and Elliot Gould's son.
Cinematography/FX:   Ahhh, the South.  Beautiful shots of coastal
Carolina that made me want to visit Charleston (my college town) again.
Violence:  Not too gory, but there are some upsetting scenes
Skin/situations:  oh, some kissing, bodies in bed, nothing new or wild
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES:  a warm, intimate tale of love between friends
past and present
Plot/kickoff:  a timid housewife (Kathy Bates) meets an old woman
(Jessica Tandy) at a nursing home in Alabama.  As the old woman recounts
stories about Idgie (Mary Stuart Masterson), Ruth (Mary Louise Parker)
and other memorable characters from her past, we see the friendship
between the women in the present grow, and Bates' character undergo a
transformation.  Characters/acting:  Masterson was natural, true and
real, a rare performance that makes me want to see her other movies.  I
wish I knew more people like her character in real life.  Many fine
performances by those who played other minor characters of the past.
Tandy was enjoyable, and Bates was good for the most part (though I
thought her timidity at the start was a little forced)
Cinematography/FX:  Ahhh, the South.  Not lush like PRINCE OF TIDES, but
whoever shot this knows how to make you feel like you're right there
(and I don't mean just by using close-ups).  The rural Old South
sequences certainly seemed accurate.
Violence:  Some, upsetting, but not big-scale or bloody
Skin/situations:  None, except maybe some implications
Analysis:  There are quite a few similarities between the two movies:  secrets
from the past revealed through a sequence of memories mixed in with interesting
goings-on in the present, a strong Southern element in both movies, a little
audience manipulation (not enough to spoil things), and some more I won't get
into, to avoid spoilers.  The difference is in tone.  PRINCE OF TIDES showed
how people can become whole by dealing with the past.  FRIED GREEN TOMATOES
showed people whose courage and strength came from having good friends to lean
on, laugh with, and fight for.  I recommend both - but my guess is I'll want to
see FRIED GREEN TOMATOES again sooner than PRINCE OF TIDES.

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE PRINCE OF TIDES is a film directed by Barbra Streisand, based
on a novel by Pat Conroy.  It stars Nick Nolte, Streisand, Blythe
Danner, Kate Nelligan, and Jason Gould.  Rated R for violence and sexual
situations.
     THE PRINCE OF TIDES is the fourth Pat Conroy novel to be translated
into film: CONRACK (1974), THE GREAT SANTINI (1979), and THE LORDS OF
DISCIPLINE (1983).  None of the previous efforts have satisfied Conroy's
fans for various reasons.  News that La Streisand had acquired rights to
the novel for her latest vehicle was probably not greeted with universal
rejoicing.  Streisand's efforts at auteur have resulted in stylized
histrionics and overweening ego in the past.
     Much to my relief and surprise, Streisand has created a good movie,
maybe not a great movie, but one that is eminently watchable.  She steps
back and lets Nick Nolte carry the film, although it is true that she
has made her role as New York psychiatrist Susan Lowenstein more
prominent than it is in the novel.
     Pat Conroy co-wrote the screenplay with Becky Johnson,
concentrating on the New York love story.  They cut out the adult
character of Luke, the Prince of Tides himself, who now appears only as
a juvenile in flashbacks.  They cut the complicated Southern past in
general as well as the poetic sense of place of the Carolina tidelands.
The characters of the women are also downplayed, the mother Lila (Kate
Nelligan) and the wife (Blythe Danner).
     Instead, what we get is a skillful and engrossing series of
flashbacks, a passionate love story, a couple of shocks, a wonderful
bitch fight between Nolte's Tom Wingo and Jeroen Krabbe as Lowenstein's
horrible, world-famous-violinist husband.  We also get a chance to see
Jason Gould, the son of Streisand and Elliot Gould; Jason turns out to
be a very likeable performer, btw.
     And most of all, we get an very touching performance by Nolte as
Tom, the self-protecting, deeply troubled husband/son/brother.  The
movie is mostly about his unfolding from his foetal crouch, his
blossoming into full humanity.  Nolte never looked handsomer and his
acting is detailed, sensitive, fearless, subtle, and moving.
     It would be easy to dismiss PRINCE OF TIDES as another installment
in the cycle of yuppie redemption flicks, or a pop-psych feel-good
psychobabbler.  I say if you give Streisand half a chance, if you can
forget about YENTL and NUTS, you will be rewarded with a thoroughly
satisfying entertainment, even at full ticket price.

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Nick Nolte (Tom Wingo), Barbra Streissand (Susan Lowenstein),
Blythe Danner (Sallie Wingo), Jeroen Krabbé (Herbert Woodruff), George
Carlin (Eddie Detreville)
Directed by: Barbra Streissand, Written by: Pat Conroy and Becky
Johnston, based on the novel by Pat Conroy
Rated R by the MPAA for strong language, violence, sexual situations,
and rape
Something must be said about THE PRINCE OF TIDES.  It is very possibly
the most mysterious of any Oscar nominated film ever made, because it
also one of the worst films ever made.  It is a triumph of horrible
storytelling, ugly images, questionable acting, horrendous directing and
unrelentingly terrible writing, and to appreciate it on any level is
nearly to question one's sanity.  The "glory" of the film is its failure
- very rarely is such a spectacular failure made that nothing can redeem
it.  In the more recent annals of bad films, many have been the major
releases that, unfortunately, fall back on special effects in place of
an actual story or good characters.  But THE PRINCE OF TIDES doesn't
have such comforts, and, as a result, fails on every level imaginable. 
Perhaps something can be stated about Nick Nolte's acting, but then, how
hard is it to play a stereotype of a tough southerner?  Do we celebrate
Judd Hirsch for his stereotypical Jewish role in INDEPENDENCE DAY
(1996)?  No, we celebrate him for his success as a comedian in "Taxi,"
and his acting in ORDINARY PEOPLE (1980).  This movie is as dull as it
is insulting.  A failure of epic proportions.
The plotline is ripped right from the worst of soap operas.  Sallie
Wingo is having an affair.  Tom Wingo's sister tries to kill herself. 
When he goes to visit her and meets her psychiatrist, Susan Lowenstein,
it's discovered that Susan's husband is also having an affair.  So Tom
and Susan have an affair together, which is clearly not only the
not-quite-professional thing for Lowenstein to do, but also totally
disregards the well-being of her son.  That son, incidentally, in
another painfully contrived subplot, is being taught to play football by
Tom, who becomes the boy's surrogate father.  We come to find out that
Tom, his sister, and his mother were all raped by escaped convicts when
he and his sister were children, another soap-ish, and downright sick,
turn of events.  Not only does this serve no real purpose in the
storyline other than to make the audience feel ill when they have to see
flashbacks of it, but it also makes little sense.  How did these three
men escape?  What location did they escape from?  How far did they go to
reach the Wingo house?  Why did they choose to break into that
particular house but none of the others along the way?  Streissand
doesn't know, or care.  She's more interested in making the worst
episode ever of "One Life To Live" than in telling a good story.  Yawn.
Nearly all of the roles here are stereotypes.  It's mildly amusing to
see George Carlin play a flamboyantly gay man in one of the most
anti-typecasting roles ever seen, but that's just another stupid
character/stereotype to toss on the fire.  No one is really notable,
because everyone is so one-note.
What is Streissand's message?  She portrays the affair of Lowenstein and
Wingo as a glorious thing.  These two married people don't love each
other in any sense, but comfort one another with sex, and Streissand
finds that beautiful.  As vomit-inducing as that sounds, it seems to be
a Hollywood trend to try to destroy the institution of marriage. 
Marriage is often portrayed as a trap, where spouses are purely evil men
(or women) who frequently cheat and have no redeeming qualities (like
Lowenstein's husband, Woodruff, is here), and act as an obstacle to
having free sex with anyone who's willing - all of whom, of course, are
better than the spouse.  Even excellent films, like TITANIC (1997), can
fall part way into this trap.  Why does this happen so much in movies? 
Is it because marriages so rarely last in Hollywoodland?  Do they want
to try to justify their multiple spouses, torrid affairs, encounters
with prostitutes, etc?  Streissand's portrayal of the glories of
extramarital affairs is a solid slap in the face to marriage and married
couples, and Streissand herself deserves a solid slap in the face in
return for this infuriating effort to strike down an institution that
the world holds dear using nothing but her ego and lack of morality as a
weapon.
Incidentally, since this was the first of her films that I've ever seen,
I had never actually seen the full extent of her egotistical nature -
until now.  Look at the direction in this film - in every shot in which
she appears, she zooms in on her face, her legs, her chest.  She makes
herself shine for the camera, trying to flaunt her sexiness to the best
of her ability.  Sadly, she doesn't realize that she's not sexy at all -
and, in fact, isn't terribly attractive, at least nowhere as near as
much as she thinks she is.  Especially by the Hollywood standards that
she seems to be holding so dearly.  It was considered a snub when she
wasn't nominated for best director for this movie.  I have to wonder
why... if James Cameron had made himself the star of Titanic and zoomed
in on nothing but his face in every shot, would it be as well-loved as
it is?  I would have to doubt it.
When it's all said and done, and the cheating couples have all finally
returned to their spouses (in a rather uncelebratory fashion, sadly),
Barbra Streissand's THE PRINCE OF TIDES is enough to make you sick. 
Today, we complain that Hollywood makes so many hollow blockbusters that
have nothing but loud explosions and big special effects to guide them. 
But I'd gladly trade this piece of gutter trash for any one of those. 
If you have the poor sense to watch it on video, take heart in the fact
that, when it's finally over, you can rip it from the VCR, declare
"Sermon over," stub out your cigar on the tape, and chuck it out the
window.  Maybe, if we're lucky, it'll sink back into the hell from
whence it came.  
