Title
Review for Eyes of a Stranger (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
If we told you that this film is a horror movie starring Lauren Tewes
(Julie from The Love Boat) and a very young Jennifer Jason Leigh as Tewes'
deaf and blind little sister, you'd probably moan a little bit while your
eyes rolled into the back of your head. Certainly, when we rented this
film for 99 cents, we weren't expecting much.
That's why it was a nice surprise to be treated to the supsenseful,
above-average horror flick that Eyes of a Stranger turned out to be. While
not cinematic history by any means, Eyes is a good piece of entertainment
for horror buffs and manages to avoid some of the classic problems that
plague the genre.
Tewes plays Jane, a local newscaster in Miami, where a new serial killer
has begun to take the lives of young women. Before we learn that Jane is
our main heroine, however, we are treated to a couple of grisly death
scenes. The killer's modus operandi is familiar by now: he rings them up
on the phone, tells them that they're about to die, and then viciously
rapes and murders them. In the first murder scene we witness, a woman is
not only victimized, but is greeted by the sight of her boyfriend's head
floating in the aquarium first. Eyes of a Stranger owes a lot to makeup
and effects artist Tom Savini for some solid, shocking images.
Jane is extremely concerned about the killer, and with good reason: her
younger sister Tracy was assaulted when they were both children. For some
unknown reason, Tracy went blind and deaf as a result. Now they live in an
apartment together, much to the disappointment of Jane's attorney
boyfriend, who wants to start living with Jane. Jane, meanwhile, is so
distracted by the events that she starts to rant during the nightly
broadcasts, to the consternation of the show's producer.
One night, Jane notices one of her neighbors perform a strange ritual in
the parking garage. He changes his shirt and disposes of the old one,
which has mysterious stains on it. This begins her quest to discover if
this man, whose apartment is across the courtyard from hers, is indeed the
killer. If she's right, then she'll gather evidence to expose him. If her
producer thought she was nuts before, this clinches it.
Eyes of a Stranger works because Jane is neither completely stupid nor
helpless. She sets upon a course of action and completes it, although her
insistence on getting complete proof of the killer's identity before
reporting him seems a bit silly. One anonymous phone call to the police
and her troubles could be over, but Jane prefers to break into a scary
murderer's apartment to search for clues. Fortunately, she hands the
evidence over to someone who can actually check up on it.
The climax of the film comes in one of the more imaginative endings to a
horror film we've seen in some time. In a scene reminiscent of Rear
Window, Jane looks into her own apartment from the killer's during one of
her clue-finding missions and sees... the killer! His method of
terrorizing Tracy is downright creepy. Thankfully, the screenwriter also
gave Tracy some guts as well, but we refuse to give away much more.
Suffice it to say that the ending gives Savini sufficient opportunity to
display his makeup prowess.
Above all, we were thankful that Eyes of a Stranger managed to give its
characters some common sense. Unlike most horror films even today, the
protagonists in Eyes know when to hide, when to watch, and most
importantly, when to run like hell. No one goes to investigate the strange
noise while in full possession of the knowledge that the killer is near,
and no one tries to attack the killer when it's not absolutely necessary.
And that's a bit of a relief, really.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews.
