Title
Review for Steal This Movie (2000)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Jerry Saravia
I do not know much about Abbie Hoffman or his Yippie days back in the 
counterculture era of the 1960's but I know they must have been far more 
troubling and chaotic than the simplistic treatment provided in this film. If 
it were not for two key performances by Vincent D'Onofrio and Janeane 
Garofalo, I would have dismissed "Steal this Movie" as a foolhardy and empty 
film biography. 
D'Onofrio is Abbie Hoffman, the imaginative, creative political force of the 
60's who began as a civil rights activist in the South and worked his way 
into the anti-war movement, with particular attention paid to the Vietnam War 
and his staunch defense against it displayed in front of the Washington 
Monument. He made headlines for conjuring up absurd events such as the 
levitation of the Pentagon or his throwing dollar bills at New York Stock 
Exchange workers. It was performance theatre designed to provoke a response 
in the population about America's capitalist system. 
None of this would mean much unless we saw the man behind the imagination. 
Hoffman robs a bus in ridiculous Western attire and meets Anita (Janeane 
Garofalo), who comes to his "Free Store" to get back her stolen jacket. She 
is intrigued and fascinated by him, and they eventually get married and have 
a son. However, J. Edgar Hoover and Richard Nixon are after Hoffman and 
invade his privacy with FBI surveillance. It gets so hot that Hoffman leaves 
his family and goes underground, finally giving an interview in the late 
1970's and exhibiting a bipolar disorder. He also meets and falls in love 
with Johanna Lawrenson (Jeanne Tripplehorn), and Anita eventually grows to 
accept the double life Abbie has lead. 
"Steal This Movie" has a fragmented narrative and visual style, thanks to the 
tired cliche of the reporter interviewing the subject about his past 
victories and losses. This cliche began with "Citizen Kane" and has been used 
in everything from "Lenny" to "Chaplin" and beyond. It may allow for some 
experimentation with narrative but it can also give the idea that we are 
merely watching glimpses of the biographical subject without getting too 
close. That is what happens with "Steal This Movie," which glides from one 
event to the other giving it a disconnected flow - it is like watching a 
"Biography" segment complete with badly used, pseudo voice-overs from Nixon 
and Hoover.  
D'Onofrio is a revelation as he gives a beautifully modulated performance of 
extreme highs and lows, showcasing Hoffman's improvisational delivery in 
nearly everything he does yet also showing a man living in paranoia and fear 
about his family, friends and foes and his insular life. Janeane Garofalo 
also gets a chance to develop an empathetic and compassionate side to Anita, 
who also has her doubts about Hoffman's other lover and his insularity yet 
she deeply loves him. 
"Steal This Movie" is nothing extraordinary and the film limits Hoffman's 
struggle and paranoia to that of a mere outcast, a shadow of the man who made 
people listen to his view on the world. Still, the 60's scene is thrillingly 
depicted (complete with typical tunes in the soundtrack) and there are shades 
throughout of Oliver Stone's "Born on the Fourth of July" in its view of how 
of the young revolutionaries were not always taken seriously by the 
conservatives. The only difference is that everyone paid attention to Abbie 
Hoffman. 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
STEAL THIS MOVIE! tells the story of the famous Chicago 7 radical, Abbie 
Hoffman.  (The title is guaranteed to strike the same terror in the 
hearts of video store owners when the movie makes its way to video that 
Abbie Hoffman's book, "Steal This Book!" did years ago for bookstore 
owners.)  The unabashedly one-sided movie by director Robert Greenwald, 
a friend of Abbie and Anita Hoffman, is a lucid and intriguing tale of 
perhaps the most famous of the Vietnam War protestors.  Freed from any 
pretense of objectivity, the fast-paced movie creates a flattering story 
as the late Abbie Hoffman might himself have told.
As the movie starts in 1977, a highly paranoid Abbie has been hiding 
underground for 5 years.  "5 years, 17 cities, 10 jobs," is how Abbie 
describes it to David Glenn (Alan Van Sprang), a reporter who promises 
to tell his story without revealing his whereabouts.  We quickly 
flashback to Abbie's heydays, when the world was his stage and his 
outrageous behavior was his not-so-secret weapon to popularize his 
causes.  "Dull is deadly", Abbie explains as the rationale for his 
outlandish theatrics.
Vincent D'Onofrio turns in an energetic and endearing performance as the 
charismatic, smart Abbie Hoffman, a self-described "long-haired, 
revolutionary freak."  We witness Abbie enjoying life, family and sex.  
Janeane Garofalo, as his wife Anita, and Jeanne Tripplehorn, as his 
lover and friend Johanna Lawrenson, play the women in his life.
The strong supporting cast includes Donal Logue, who appears in every 
other movie this summer and in various sizes from his Pillsbury Dough 
Boy in THE TAO OF STEVE to his more modest size this time as Stew 
Albert, Abbie's best friend.  Kevin Pollak does a nice turn as Gerry 
Lefcourt, Abbie's savvy and tolerant lawyer.  Representing Abbie, who 
turned his most famous trial into a ludicrous circus, was a supreme 
challenge for a lawyer.
Bruce Graham's bright script, based on books by Abbie and Anita Hoffman 
and by Marty Jezer, is funny and insightful.  "If you don't like Abbie's 
mood, wait a minute," Anita tells Johanna about Abbie, who was 
eventually diagnosed as a manic-depressive.
Ever the philosopher, Abbie's mouth is a shotgun of ideas.  "The problem 
with liberals is that they see all sides to every argument, which leads 
to paralysis," he claims.  "You aren't fighting the [Vietnam] war to 
save democracy," he says.  "You're fighting this war to save Wall 
Street."
The movie does a marvelous job of authentically capturing the look and 
mood of the period.  And the old anti-war songs really rock.
The movie dichotomizes the people in Abbie's life into either friends or 
enemies, with the former being the world's good guys and the latter 
being the bad.  The police, especially the FBI, are uniformly depicted 
as little better than the Gestapo.  Too often, films with strong 
political agendas present us with false alternatives rather than 
admitting that they are really only telling one side of the argument.  
STEAL THIS MOVIE! works precisely because it stays strictly true to its 
opinions.  You may not subscribe to them, but you'll understand them 
much better after seeing the picture.  And you'll gain fascinating 
insights into the life of someone you may have never even cared about 
before.  But, most of all, you'll have a high old time while reliving 
one of our nation's more turbulent eras.
STEAL THIS MOVIE! runs a lively 1:41.  It is rated R for language, drug 
content and some nudity and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Michael Dequina
        Just about one thing separates _The_Cell_ from a pulpy thriller
you'd find premiering on late night cable or your local video store.  But
it's that solitary difference that not only makes it special, but a
cinema landmark or sorts--the visionary imagination of director Tarsem
Singh.  In the hands of this music video veteran and first-time feature
director, a by-the-numbers story becomes the incidental backbone of one
of the most visually arresting films of recent memory.
        Writer Mark Protosevich obviously enjoyed
_The_Silence_of_the_Lambs_, for much of _The_Cell_'s story particulars
mirror those of the Oscar-winning film.  There is a young woman (Tara
Subkoff) trapped in a specialized prison in a dog-loving serial killer's
(Vincent D'Onofrio's Carl Stargher) lair--in this case, a glass cell that
is timed to incrementally fill with water, ultimately drowning the
prisoner.  There is an intelligent, resourceful young woman (here,
psychologist Catherine Deane, played by Jennifer Lopez) who must find out
the location of the latest victim before it's too late.  The high concept
twist?  Stargher is quickly captured, but soon comatose--and the Hannibal
Lecter whom Catherine must consult with is Sargher's own unconscious
mind, by way of a futuristic technology that enables her to enter the
dangerous world inside the killer's head.
        The sci-fi spin is intriguing, but not much else Protosevich
comes up with is.  For a film that is a psychological thriller, the
psychology is dismayingly simplistic.  In her exploration of Stargher's
mind, Catherine uncovers the root of his psychosis, and it's nothing
particularly shocking, if not completely predictable.  There is also a
fleeting reference to an incident in Catherine's past that is implied to
have factored in her career choice as child psychologist.  The heady
issues that are addressed are obvious and shallow.
        But when speaking of Singh's final, finished film, complaints
such as these are almost moot.  _The_Cell_ is a clear, classic case of a
director's vision invigorating standard material.  The film moves at an
effectively erratic pace: action in the real world moves fairly swiftly,
but once it's in the world of the mind, the pace becomes more languid,
befitting the surrealism of dreams.  It is in this latter realm that the
film really soars.  Dream worlds in movies are nothing new--witness the
oeuvre of David Lynch or, for a less highfalutin example, the
_Nightmare_on_Elm_Street_ series--but the visual ideas put forth by Singh
are spectacular and unique; there's an atmosphere of excess that hasn't
even been reached in Lynch's famously bizarre work.  Tom Foden's
production design and Eiko Ishioka's costumes are gloriously outré, one
standout being the garishly frightening look of the "demon" Stargher and
his "throne room."  Also adding immeasurably to the mood are Paul
Laufer's grainy yet vibrant cinematography and the CGI work by visual
effects supervisor Kevin Tod Haug.
        For all the film's flights of fancy and the script's derivative
nature, _The_Cell_ maintains a foothold in reality through the cast. 
Lopez is convincingly, appealingly smart and vulnerable as the headstrong
heroine; Vince Vaughn is effective in the by-the-book role of FBI Agent
Peter Novak; and D'Onofrio manages to make a lasting, eerie impression in
a very dialogue-light role.  The smaller roles surrounding the lead trio
are all played by familiar, reliable actors, such as Dylan Baker,
Marianne Jean-Baptiste, and Pruitt Taylor Vince.
        It has been said that it's not what you have, but what you do
with it, and that statement applies to Singh and _The_Cell_.  As written,
the film is not terrible, but just average; as executed, _The_Cell_ is,
to use a cliché, something that truly hasn't been seen before.
        D'Onofrio has a lot more lines--and more of a character to work
with--in _Steal_This_Movie_, Robert Greenwald's biography of legendary
'60s activist Abbie Hoffman.   D'Onofrio plays Hoffman, who is best
remembered as the flamboyant leader of the Chicago Seven, a protest group
that stood trial for inciting riots at the 1968 Democratic National
Convention.  This, as well as Abbie's retreat to the underground in 1974,
are the key moments in Greenwald's decades-spanning film, which uses a
flashback framework where a reporter for _Newsweek_ (Alan Van Sprang)
interviews loved ones (Abbie's wife Anita, played by Janeane Garofalo),
associates (Abbie's lawyer Gerry Lefcourt, played by Kevin Pollak), and
Abbie himself for a piece sometime in the '70s.
        Aside from Anita--and to a lesser extent Gerry and Johanna
Lawrenson (Jeanne Tripplehorn), the woman with whom Abbie hooks up while
underground--the background players in _Steal_This_Movie_ are barely
developed.  When the Chicago Seven stands trial, the presence of the
other six are barely noticeable, and we don't get to see exactly how some
relationships with key cohorts deteriorated.  However, this being a film
of Abbie Hoffman's story, this isn't too troublesome.  Greenwald (through
his energetic, sometimes anarchic, direction) and D'Onofrio (through his
charismatic performance) bring the man to vibrant life--emphasis on the
word "life."  Aside from the requisite "what happened" text card, the
film doesn't go near the circumstances surrounding his death, which is
perfectly in line with this engrossing film's intent: to be an
inspirational story about standing up for who you are and what you
believe in.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Norm Schrager
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/44ee0afe56d911ba88256948007e88f5?OpenDocument
In case you were wondering, no, Steal This Movie! is not an adaptation
of activist Abbie Hoffman's Steal This Book, his 1971 how-to manifesto
about beating the system.  Now that would've been a creative film. 
Instead, it's a take on two other books, Hoffman's Letters from the
Underground and Marty Jezer's Abbie Hoffman: American Rebel, combining
to form the biography of America's most notorious and ego-driven
radical.  Unfortunately, Steal This Movie! is neither notorious nor
radical, and while showing off a talented cast in some lively sequences,
it tramples down some tired old trails.
As played by the ferocious Vincent D'Onofrio, Hoffman, in short, was a
lunatic.  A smart, ambitious, caring, vigilant lunatic.  (Actually, he
was eventually diagnosed as bipolar.)  His group of free thinkers and
anti-establishment yippies performed shockingly funny acts, some
resembling performance art, all in the name of rights and equality. 
Director Robert Greenwald takes us along into Hoffman's world:  the band
"holds up" a city bus, taking people's clothes and then giving them away
to those in need, and chucks dollar bills on the floor of a stock
exchange to watch everyone grovel.  Hoffman meets his wife-to-be Anita,
keeps up the anti-war cause, and realizes that he'll probably be a
lifelong organizer.
Greenwald is doing his best Oliver Stone impersonation.  He stands
firmly on the side of the yippies to the point of preachiness, he
intercuts actual protest footage with grainy, hand-held, tight shots of
the actors and atmosphere, and he plays with hokey cinematic tricks done
better on The X-Files, such as cutting to a black-and-white surveillance
shot of a scene, and superimposing a fake FBI file name on the screen. 
There is indeed someone out there, and Greenwald just never lets us
forget it.
To add insult, the framework of the movie actually mimics Citizen Kane! 
A writer is travelling to visit the people that knew Abbie, trying to
get to the bottom of the Abbie Hoffman story!  If this is the only way
that Greenwald and screenwriter Bruce Graham can think to tell the story
non-linearly, they should borrow from something a little less
ambitious.  There's even a shot of the writer peering down a long hall
at the FBI, with stacks and stacks of boxes bearing down upon him, the
secret to Abbie's paranoia hidden somewhere -- probably in a box marked
Rosebud. 
Steal This Movie! is eventually nothing more than a better-than-average
TV movie -- ironic since most of Greenwald's work has been TV --  but
with a great cast.  The players, led by the sometimes touching
D'Onofrio, are the pulse and reality that make the movie bearable and
even fun.  Independent mainstay Kevin Corrigan is Jerry Rubin, The Tao
of Steve's Donal Logue (in his 29th movie) is Stew Albert, and in an
underwritten and wasted role, Kevin Pollak is Abbie's lawyer, Gerry
Lefcourt.  All are believable and natural, in spite of the script, but
Janeane Garofalo makes it all worth watching, again.  She plays Anita
Hoffman as wide-eyed, resilient, pragmatic, emotional, and she nails it
all.  Garofalo has shown her chops with comic and romantic dialogue, but
this movie finally gives her the chance to put all her talents out
there.  She makes some daring choices that highlight Anita's love and
sympathy, and many times, this is Garofalo's movie.
This movie, with its added schlock of timely pop hits throughout,
ultimately feels like it should be on NBC during sweeps.  You'd think a
story about subversiveness and freedom would be a little more daring as
a film.  Go for the cool cast.  Then see if you can steal your seven
bucks back.
Director: Robert Greenwald
Producers: Robert Greenwald, Jacobus Rose
Writer: Bruce Graham
Starring: Vincent D'Onofrio, Janeane Garofalo, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Kevin
Pollak, Donal Logue, Kevin Corrigan, Alan Van Sprang, Troy Garity,
Ingrid Veninger, Stephen Marshall, Keith Jones
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lions Gate Films
 Director: Robert Greenwald
 Writer:  Bruce Graham, based on books "To America with
Love" by Abbie and Anita Hoffman and "Abbie Hoffman,
American Rebel" by Marty Jezer
 Cast: Vincent D'Onofrio, Janeane Garofalo, Jeanne
Tripplehorn, Kevin Pollak, Donal Logue, Kevin Corrigan, Alan
Van Sprang, Troy Garity, Ingrid Veninger, Stephen Marshall,
Joyce Gordon, Bernard Kay
   For the past couple of decades in America, we bear
witness to a traditional assumption turned upside down, the
supposition that parents as a whole are more conservative
than their kids.  Stare with disbelief at yuppies who
concentrate more on their cell phones than on the people
they are with, their brunches at the Odeon, their trips to
Jamaica and their Gucci loafers, and you can believe that the
young no longer try to push their aging parents to the left. 
Quite the contrary.  What the majority of this country's
population find difficult to accept is that life here was not
always so complacent, a desire to make a bundle was not
always the principal object of students in college, and a belief
that politics was a job to be left strictly to the bureaucrats was
not always the nation's creed.  Believe it or not, kids, politics
was not always just the subject of editorials in the good gray
Times, which debated American intervention in Nicaragua
and the Gulf as though these were issues meant to be
studied for a good grade on a midterm.  During the late
1960s and early 1970s, the Vietnam War propelled a large
segment of the nation's young people into taking active and
dangerous stances, getting themselves surveilled, stomped
and otherwise harassed by agencies of the Johnson and
Nixon administrations.
   Abbie Hoffman, arguably the most colorful of the nation's
protesting youth and founder of the Youth International Party
or Yippie! was an unlikely candidate for the honor of turning
many of the sixties' flower children into political activists.  A
nice Jewish boy from Worcester, Massachusetts, Hoffman
was born in 1936, got his Bachelor's from Brandeis
University, got arrested in Mississippi for registering Blacks
during Freedom Summer, and sold the products of poor
people's coops in Mississippi two years later in a crafts store
in New York City.  Best known for his rejection of American
corporate culture, he and some pals threw money from the
visitors' gallery of the Stock Exchange in 1967, causing a riot
as the traders scrambled for the cash.  During an anti-war
demonstration, he led 50,00 people to surround the Pentagon
to try to levitate the building by their psychic energy.  When
the Yippies held a so-called Festival of Life at the 1968
Democratic National Convention while protesting American
involvement in Vietnam, violence led to arrests which in turn
led to the Chicago Seven Trial--whose principal image was
that of Black Panther defendant Bobby Seale, bound and
gagged to a chair for disrupting the court.  When Hoffman
was arrested for selling cocaine and faced a life sentence, he
disappeared for six years, and became an environmental
activist under the false name of Barry Freed.
   Does what you just read sound exciting?  Moving?
Poignant?  Maybe not.  But in the hands of Robert
Greenwald, who directs "Steal This Movie" (ironically with the
financing of hedge funds on Wall Street), the story of Abbie
Hoffman and his influence on American politics becomes
everything that the printed word lacks.  While the picture is
unabashedly pro-Hoffman and pro- just about every activity
entered into by him and his friends and followers, it deserves
to be seen by a large audience for bringing the man's
endeavors to glorious life, conveying not only the excitement
of the anti-war protests but even more important the price
that Hoffman paid in loneliness--in the tremendous emotional
pain that the man went though when he was unable to see
his wife and child for six years except for brief periods of time
under a pseudonym.  The misery which literally drove him
crazy is conveyed in such a trenchant manner that we can
understand what made Hoffman take chances by letting down
his guard and in ultimately revealing his actual identity to his
child while still in hiding.
   Abbie Hoffman, who died by suicide in 1989 and is
portrayed by Vincent D'Onofrio, would have been pleased by
the casting.  D'Onofrio, who is eight inches taller than the
activist, is better looking and speaks more eloquently than the
guy he's portraying, successfully adopting Hoffman's native
New England accent.  Director Greenwald takes us to
Hoffman in the late seventies, showing the fugitive from
justice as he contacts a magazine reporter by pay phone,
hoping that a compassionate article would allow him to return
to society without serving time.  From that interview,
Greenwald cuts to the key points in the man's life, beginning
with his meeting on a bus with his future wife, Anita (Janeane
Garofalo).  
   The energetic, even charismatic Hoffman proves to be a
brilliant organizer, gathering thousands of like-minded young
people to a march on the Pentagon in opposition to the
Vietnam War.  These actions lead to the consequent
surveillance set up by the J. Edgar Hoover's FBI on him and
his friends in the leadership of the Yippies, particularly Jerry
Rubin (Kevin Corrigan), Tom Hayden (Troy Garity), Abbie's
wife Anita, and his lawyer, Gerry Lefcourt (Kevin Pollak). 
Photographer Denis Lenoir adds verisimilitude to the
proceedings by injecting grainy, newsreel-type pictures into
the movie to give the story the feel of a documentary.  A
large segment of the movie deals with Hoffman's utterly
romantic meeting with Anita, who joins him in activities such
as the anti-war demonstrations during the 1968 Democratic
National Convention in Chicago, the bliss of their union
marred by Hoffman's eventual bonding while on the run with
the Swedish-American beauty, Johanna Lawrenson (Jeanne
Tripplehorn).
   At times, however, Greenwald seems to be talking down to
his audience as though he were filming a lesson for a high-
school social studies class while throwing in high drama to
come across to an adolescent audience as cool.  On the
whole, however, Greenwald--and his producer Jon Avnet--
made the right decision by eschewing a talking-heads
documentary and going with this penetrating and lively biopic
(however one-sided) on an ordinary fellow who made a name
for himself in the sort of youthful political activism that seems
all but dead today.
Rated R.  Running time: 108 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Despite the best efforts of campaigns like Rock The
Vote, most of today's 18+ youth demographic choose not
to vote in presidential elections.  Who can blame
them?  Since the demise of the hippies in the 1970's,
anarchists have become less and less visible, and
youths are, for the most part, disillusioned from the
future of their country.  A film like Steal This
Movie, however, is inspirational enough to make youths
politically aware, proving that protest can be a means
to make change.
Steal This Movie retells the true story of Abbie
Hoffman (Vincent D'Onofrio), the outspoken anti-war
revolutionary who took to the streets and helped shape
the bustling American "make love not war"
counterculture of the late 1960's.  Hoffman had a true
passion for social justice.
We first meet Abbie in the late 1970's.  He has been
hiding (for reasons that are later disclosed) from the
government for many years, but is allowing a
journalist to interview him about his life as an
activist.  Through a series of flashbacks, a light is
shone on one of America's most outspoken historical
figures.
Steal This Movie focuses mainly on two aspects of
Hoffman's life.  The first is the infamous riot at the
Chicago Democratic Convention and the trial that
followed.  Hoffman was a member of the "Chicago 8",
along with men like Jerry Rubin (Kevin Corrigan) and
Tom Hayden (Troy Garity, Hayden's son).  Some have
referred to it as the true "trial of the century."
The film is also about Hoffman's relationship with his
wife, Anita (Janeane Garofalo), and the interesting
predicament they find themselves in when Abbie is
forced to go into hiding.  Anita stays unbelievably
faithful to her husband, even after he moves in with a
new girlfriend (Jeanne Tripplehorn).
In many ways, Steal This Movie is hampered by a low
budget.  In a few opening scenes, a boom mic is
clearly visible at the top of the screen, and often
the flashback scenes seem a bit awkward because of the
lack of period detail.  But the real Anita Hoffman
told director Robert Greenwald that a truthful film
about her husband couldn't be made under the studio
system, and after watching this compelling, inspiring
biopic, it's hard not to agree.
Steal This Movie is being released in Los Angeles a
day after the 2000 Democratic Convention.  This is
unfortunate, because, had the film been released a
couple weeks earlier, I think we'd see a few more
rebels eager to take to the streets and fight for a
cause. 
-Akiva Gottlieb 
http://www.pictureshow.8m.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 STEAL THIS MOVIE! (director: Robert Greenwald; screenwriter: Bruce
 Graham/based on "To America With Love: Letters From the Underground"
 by Abbie and Anita Hoffman and "Abbie Hoffman: American Rebel" by
 Marty Jezer; cinematographer: Denis Lenoir; editor: Kimberly Ray;
 cast: Vincent D'Onofrio (Abbie Hoffman), Janeane Garofalo (Anita
 Hoffman), Jeanne Tripplehorn (Johanna Lawrenson), Kevin Pollak (
 Lefcourt), Donal Logue (Stew Albert), Ingrid Veninger (Judy Albert),
 Kevin Corrigan (Jerry Rubin), Alan Van Sprang (David Glenn), Stephen
 Marshall (Louis Wertzel, Agent Green), Troy Garity (Tom Hayden);
 Runtime: 108; Lions Gate Films; 2000)
A look back at the 1960s Yippie radical-leader Abby Hoffman, tracing his
involvement in the protest issues of the time, his marriage, and life
underground. It meant well, showing the charismatic Abby in the best
possible light as the '60s prankster symbol of anarchistic, ecstatic,
anti-establishment revolution, but this cliché biopic failed to be
emotionally involving, it had no craziness to it... and...its false
sense of piety to its subject ruined the whole point of the film.
I read Hoffman's Steal This Book! when it first came out, swiping it off
an establishment bookstore, and found it to be childish,
self-promotional drivel, telling of such things as how you can get a
free meal in a restaurant by putting hairs and insects on your dish just
before you finish your meal.
The film, adapted from two books -- Abbie and Anita Hoffman's "To
America With Love: Letters From the Underground" and Marty Jezer's
"Abbie Hoffman: American Rebel,"  was two goody-goody in its approach to
capture either the mood of the changing times or the manic-depressive
mood swings of the unabashed publicity hound, who thought of himself as
a hippie organizer. Admittedly, making a film about the '60s (in this
film Abbie's starry-eyed days were between 1967-70) is not easy to do
because of the problem of making a satire about what was a satire to
begin with, but this film was so poorly scripted, directed and acted,
that it is worst than most films about that era. It succeeds only as a
muddled attempt to bring to light some of the illegal practices the FBI
and CIA imposed in trying to eliminate the leftist movement in this
country.
Abbie tells his story to an alternate press reporter of no reputation
(Alan Van Sprang), in 1977, who works for an unnamed publication, as
Abbie, always working the media, wants to get out his side of the story
while on the run. The story awkwardly unfolds via flashbacks and
voice-over, which our reminders of what happened, how he was forced to
live as a fugitive, taking menial jobs, living a lonely existence,
becoming increasingly depressed, and frequently changing locations as
paranoia set in.
Hoffman (Vincent D'Onofrio) met his future wife Anita (Janeane Garofalo)
when as a prank he held up a NYC bus dressed in cowboy garb and robbed
only articles of clothes to give to his Free Store. He performed
guerrilla theater throughout his heyday of protests for civil rights and
antiwar: He held a rally at the Pentagon to exorcise its evil spirits
and placed flowers inside the soldiers' rifle barrels while calling for
them to join him; he got married in Central Park, sending out
invitations to strangers with marijuana cigarettes enclosed; he threw
dollar bills onto the New York Stock Exchange floor, upsetting the
trading activities; he nominated a pig for president on the streets of
the 1968 Democratic Convention; he made a mockery of the Chicago Seven
trial-by dressing up in judicial robes and asking the jurors if they
ever heard of Janis Joplin, and comically making fun of the witless
judge throughout the trial; he upset many people by dressing up in the
American flag and desecrating it during demonstrations. As a result of
all the publicity he got, he became the most recognizable person in the
counter-culture movement, yet he still couldn't make a living.
After the film runs through a laundry list of all his radical
accomplishments and tells of his relationship with Jerry Rubin, which
turned sour after Chicago. The film shows him getting busted in a
cocaine raid because of his naiveté, not believing he could be so hated,
that the government will not cease in its efforts to ruin him. He
chooses to go underground in 1974 rather than face a possible long
prison term. He lived on the run under various disguises for the next
seven years as "Barry Freed." He even became an environmental activist
in his upstate New York community, honored by Senator Moynihan for his
efforts to save the St. Lawrence. After being separated from his wife
and child, and living with a mistress (Jeanne Tripplehorn), he was glad
to accept in 1980 -- what his lawyer Gerald Lefcourt (Kevin Pollak), who
defended him for no fee throughout all his troubles, was able to get for
him -- a deal with the government, whereby he surrendered to them and
spent a short stint in prison. Nine years later, he died, as a probable
suicide.
D'Onofrio who is a big man does not physically resemble the much smaller
Hoffman and his odd Boston accent sounded artificial. He does bring an
energy to the role, but it seems misplaced as he seems to have made the
one thing Abbie had going for him, a real sense for comedy and wit, seem
nonexistent, as the script is so self-serving to him and his lawyer,
that it made the whole project stink. The only thing D'Onofrio does
well, is try and steal this movie for himself. All the other roles were
flatly played and had no impact on the film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lions Gate Films
 Director: Robert Greenwald
 Writer:  Bruce Graham, based on books "To America with
Love" by Abbie and Anita Hoffman and "Abbie Hoffman,
American Rebel" by Marty Jezer
 Cast: Vincent D'Onofrio, Janeane Garofalo, Jeanne
Tripplehorn, Kevin Pollak, Donal Logue, Kevin Corrigan, Alan
Van Sprang, Troy Garity, Ingrid Veninger, Stephen Marshall,
Joyce Gordon, Bernard Kay
   For the past couple of decades in America, we bear
witness to a traditional assumption turned upside down, the
supposition that parents as a whole are more conservative
than their kids.  Stare with disbelief at yuppies who
concentrate more on their cell phones than on the people
they are with, their brunches at the Odeon, their trips to
Jamaica and their Gucci loafers, and you can believe that the
young no longer try to push their aging parents to the left. 
Quite the contrary.  What the majority of this country's
population find difficult to accept is that life here was not
always so complacent, a desire to make a bundle was not
always the principal object of students in college, and a belief
that politics was a job to be left strictly to the bureaucrats was
not always the nation's creed.  Believe it or not, kids, politics
was not always just the subject of editorials in the good gray
Times, which debated American intervention in Nicaragua
and the Gulf as though these were issues meant to be
studied for a good grade on a midterm.  During the late
1960s and early 1970s, the Vietnam War propelled a large
segment of the nation's young people into taking active and
dangerous stances, getting themselves surveilled, stomped
and otherwise harassed by agencies of the Johnson and
Nixon administrations.
   Abbie Hoffman, arguably the most colorful of the nation's
protesting youth and founder of the Youth International Party
or Yippie! was an unlikely candidate for the honor of turning
many of the sixties' flower children into political activists.  A
nice Jewish boy from Worcester, Massachusetts, Hoffman
was born in 1936, got his Bachelor's from Brandeis
University, got arrested in Mississippi for registering Blacks
during Freedom Summer, and sold the products of poor
people's coops in Mississippi two years later in a crafts store
in New York City.  Best known for his rejection of American
corporate culture, he and some pals threw money from the
visitors' gallery of the Stock Exchange in 1967, causing a riot
as the traders scrambled for the cash.  During an anti-war
demonstration, he led 50,00 people to surround the Pentagon
to try to levitate the building by their psychic energy.  When
the Yippies held a so-called Festival of Life at the 1968
Democratic National Convention while protesting American
involvement in Vietnam, violence led to arrests which in turn
led to the Chicago Seven Trial--whose principal image was
that of Black Panther defendant Bobby Seale, bound and
gagged to a chair for disrupting the court.  When Hoffman
was arrested for selling cocaine and faced a life sentence, he
disappeared for six years, and became an environmental
activist under the false name of Barry Freed.
   Does what you just read sound exciting?  Moving?
Poignant?  Maybe not.  But in the hands of Robert
Greenwald, who directs "Steal This Movie" (ironically with the
financing of hedge funds on Wall Street), the story of Abbie
Hoffman and his influence on American politics becomes
everything that the printed word lacks.  While the picture is
unabashedly pro-Hoffman and pro- just about every activity
entered into by him and his friends and followers, it deserves
to be seen by a large audience for bringing the man's
endeavors to glorious life, conveying not only the excitement
of the anti-war protests but even more important the price
that Hoffman paid in loneliness--in the tremendous emotional
pain that the man went though when he was unable to see
his wife and child for six years except for brief periods of time
under a pseudonym.  The misery which literally drove him
crazy is conveyed in such a trenchant manner that we can
understand what made Hoffman take chances by letting down
his guard and in ultimately revealing his actual identity to his
child while still in hiding.
   Abbie Hoffman, who died by suicide in 1989 and is
portrayed by Vincent D'Onofrio, would have been pleased by
the casting.  D'Onofrio, who is eight inches taller than the
activist, is better looking and speaks more eloquently than the
guy he's portraying, successfully adopting Hoffman's native
New England accent.  Director Greenwald takes us to
Hoffman in the late seventies, showing the fugitive from
justice as he contacts a magazine reporter by pay phone,
hoping that a compassionate article would allow him to return
to society without serving time.  From that interview,
Greenwald cuts to the key points in the man's life, beginning
with his meeting on a bus with his future wife, Anita (Janeane
Garofalo).  
   The energetic, even charismatic Hoffman proves to be a
brilliant organizer, gathering thousands of like-minded young
people to a march on the Pentagon in opposition to the
Vietnam War.  These actions lead to the consequent
surveillance set up by the J. Edgar Hoover's FBI on him and
his friends in the leadership of the Yippies, particularly Jerry
Rubin (Kevin Corrigan), Tom Hayden (Troy Garity), Abbie's
wife Anita, and his lawyer, Gerry Lefcourt (Kevin Pollak). 
Photographer Denis Lenoir adds verisimilitude to the
proceedings by injecting grainy, newsreel-type pictures into
the movie to give the story the feel of a documentary.  A
large segment of the movie deals with Hoffman's utterly
romantic meeting with Anita, who joins him in activities such
as the anti-war demonstrations during the 1968 Democratic
National Convention in Chicago, the bliss of their union
marred by Hoffman's eventual bonding while on the run with
the Swedish-American beauty, Johanna Lawrenson (Jeanne
Tripplehorn).
   At times, however, Greenwald seems to be talking down to
his audience as though he were filming a lesson for a high-
school social studies class while throwing in high drama to
come across to an adolescent audience as cool.  On the
whole, however, Greenwald--and his producer Jon Avnet--
made the right decision by eschewing a talking-heads
documentary and going with this penetrating and lively biopic
(however one-sided) on an ordinary fellow who made a name
for himself in the sort of youthful political activism that seems
all but dead today.
Rated R.  Running time: 108 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
