Title
Review for Ressources humaines (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Louis Proyect
"Human Resources" has the distinction of being not only one of the finest
movies ever made about the labor movement, it is also unparalleled in its
ability to explain and make concrete issues that barely receive attention
in the print media, such as "just-in-time" production techniques.
College student Franck (Jalil Lespert) has returned home for a summer
internship at the factory where his father Jean-Claud (Jean-Claude Vallod)
has worked for thirty years. His parents are proud of him, the first member
of the family to rise above their class. When he comes downstairs in a
stylish navy blue suit for his first day in the Human Resources department,
his parents can only beam at him.
As soon as he steps foot in the factory, he learns that his new class
status is a mixed blessing. While his father is showing him how his spot
welding machine works (this is the kind of job I held briefly 22 years ago
"colonizing" a factory in Kansas City), the foreman walks over and bawls
him out for wasting time. This is the first lesson in the young man's
education into the class realities of the factory, as opposed to what he
learned in management science at college.
As in intern, Franck is assigned to prepare a report on the feasibility of
a 35 hour week. Since this is at a lower pay rather than something like "30
for 40", it will be a hard sell to the factory workers, who remain
suspicious of the bosses after 22 of their number were laid off in the
previous year. Throughout the movie, the bosses are always warning the
workers that unless they are profitable, the factory will have to shut down.
When the boss (Lucien Longueville) drives Franck home in his luxury sedan
(classical music plays on the car radio), the intern proposes a plan that
will make the 35 hour week more acceptable. If a referendum is held at the
plant, he is sure that the workers would go for the plan since the union
would not be part of the deliberations, especially since management will be
formulating the questions. Everybody knows that the way poll questions are
constructed has a lot to do with the outcome. (Eg., "Do you favor
continuation of Vietnamization in order to achieve a long-lasting peace?"
versus "Are you for precipitous withdrawal from Vietnam that would leave
the country at the mercy of the Communists?")
The boss buys into the plan and makes it clear to Franck that he has a
future in the conglomerate that owns the factory. Unfortunately, his
immediate supervisor in the Human Resources department views Franck's
discussions with the big boss as an attack on his own position in the
pecking order and warns him not to step out of line again.
Caught between two worlds, he catches flak from both sides. At a bar with
old friends from high school, an offhanded remark is interpreted by one of
them as snobbery. After Franck's internship is finished, he will go back to
Paris with the rest of the rich people while they are stuck in their
factory jobs. A drunken Franck lunges at his accuser in anger, but their
friends separate them. At this point we begin to surmise that some of the
anger is self-directed. While he has the outward appearance of a manager,
he is still part of the working class.
When the union local at the factory hears about the referendum, they storm
into the personnel office led by a middle-aged shop steward (Danielle
Mélador) who is a member of the Communist Party. She is one of the most
memorable characters in the film, who represents the collective class
memory of the people she serves, including Franck's submissive father who
loathes the idea of standing up to the bosses. In confrontation after
confrontation, she never gives in an inch. Interestingly, the choice of a
female in this role gives the Director and Screenwriter Laurent Cantet an
opportunity to show how sexism weakens the working class. Before it has
become clear what ulterior motives lie behind the seemingly reasonable
referendum, her union comrades tend to view her a shrill and irrational, an
"old witch" so to speak. Perhaps she is an old witch, but only in the
original sense of the word: a wise woman who lives by her own rules.
As it turns out, the referendum was to be used as a wedge to introduce a
whole series of labor-saving measures that would allow the factory to be
downsized by 10, including Franck's own father. When he learns of this plan
by accident, he decides to throw his lot in with the factory workers and
reject the class that had been making overtures to him.
"Human Resources" is brilliantly written, directed and acted. It is playing
in NYC right now at a Loew's on Broadway and 45th street, an unusual locale
for an art film. It very well could be appearing in large cities around the
United States. Not only is it worth tracking down, it is a film that could
be used instructionally in college classes along with other classics like
"Salt of the Earth".

Author
Jon Popick
Laurent Cantet's Human Resources is an interesting working-class drama
set in a small French town where most of the citizens are employed by
one factory.  Home from a Parisian college, Franck (Jalil Lespert, Sade)
lands a summer internship in the factory's personnel department.  His
father (Jean-Claude Vallod) is proud of his son, but Franck's friends
see him as a sellout.
Franck quickly finds himself in the middle of a battle between
management and the union.  At issue is the implementation of a 35-hour
workweek, an issue vehemently despised by the union but hailed by the
bosses as an end to the factory's financial troubles.  In an attempt to
appease both sides, Franck suggests a referendum be given directly to
the factory's employees, drawing the ire of the union and their
firecracker representative, Danielle Arnoux (Danielle Mélador).
Franck is caught between a rock and a hard place.  He has strong ties to
the blue-collar community (his dad has been a factory employee for 30
years), but at the same time, he wants to please his new bosses, and
even feels a twinge of embarrassment about his working-class roots.
Human Resources is about Franck's internal struggle, which is akin to
Bud Fox's ordeal in Wall Street.
The only professional actor in Resources is Lespert – the rest of the
cast were actual factory workers found in the town Resources used as its
gloomy backdrop (it's the town upon which the sun forgot to shine).  The
film was co-written by Gilles Marchand, who penned the America-bound
French blockbuster, Harry, He's Here to Help.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Shooting Gallery Series
 Director: Laurent Cantet
 Writer:  Laurent Cantet, Gilles Marchand
 Cast: Jalil Lespert, Jean-Claude Vallod, Chantal Barre,
Veronique de Pandelaere, Michel Begnez, Lucien
Longueville, Danielle Melador, Pascal Semard
   My civics teacher taught me that America is a classless
society and I believed him until I graduated from high school
and took a temp job in a large coffee processing plant in
Brooklyn's Greenpoint section.  My seventeenth summer was
not a romantic one.  My job was to type reports, send bills,
do general office work.  Everyone had lunch in the company
cafeteria and there I got my awakening.  All the blue-collar
workers sat on one side on the large mess hall, the white
collar people on the other.  I was naive and asked my new
summer pal why this was so in 100% of the cases.  He said
vaguely that this was not a matter of snobbery.  It's just that
those who got coffee on their hands had little in common with
those who--absent the wonderful aroma of the cheap blended
coffee--could have been working in a dress factory.  Maybe. 
I think now that snobbery was involved.  In the 1950s you
were a snappy piece of work if you wore a white shirt to the
job and came home with barely a ring around the collar. 
Imagine how I felt later on in my career when I discovered
that the gulf between the executives and the white collar
workers was even greater!
   Europeans are not so innocent.  The Continent has always
been divided by class and in Laurent Cantet's striking film,
which was shown at New York's Museum of Modern Art New
Directors/ New Films series as well as at film fests in
Thessaloniki, Torino, Sundance, and San Sebastian, a
twenty-one year old business school graduate gets an on-the-
job education that his graduate studies will scarcely duplicate. 
"Human Resources" sometimes looks like a docu-drama
composed by a militant union, but at its heart it's the story of
a permanent rift between a father and son caused ironically
by dad's own dedication to his son's education and need to
give the boy a life he did not have the opportunity to live.
This is the theme that gives the work its altogether human
measure.
   Opening on a family scene in a provincial French town,
"Human Resources" hones in on young Frank (Jalil Lespert),
ready to take his first serious job in life--as a management
intern in a large factory that welds machine parts.  Sporting a
finely tailored suit on his first day, he is escorted by his dad
(Jean-Claude Vallod), who has worked in that same plant for
thirty years, to the human resources head (Pascal Semard)
and then to the chief of the factory (Lucien Longueville), who
takes paternal interest in the lad and soon fills him with
promises of stellar references.  Notwithstanding, Frank does
not get a swell head, in fact, because his father works in the
plant and he comes from a working-class background, he
holds a sympathy for the ordinary factory hands and is
amused and almost enthralled by the tough talk of the
Communist union boos, Mrs. Arnoux (Danielle Melador). 
After innocently distributing a referendum to tabulate workers'
opinions on a proposed thirty-hour week, he is stunned by a
letter he finds in the private computer of the personnel
manager, a letter that ultimately leads the plant to strike.
   As dramatic and often amusing as the details of
employment are, the real hub of the picture is Frank's conflict
with his father.  On the one hand the boy is appreciative of
the chance he is given to pursue a degree in business
administration.  On the other hand he harbors a long-standing
resentment of his father's social class, actually disgusted that
the man has meekly gone to work, standing up, bent over a
machine that punches up some metal slabs.  In fact, when
the old man expresses pride in his efficiency with his
machine--which treats as though it were his baby--Frank is all
the more repulsed.  The entire film builds up to a staggering
climactic scene in which the young man fiercely lets out all
his repressed rage at the father.  The look on Jean-Claude
Vallod's face throughout the diatribe is the single key
highlight of the entire story.
   What is particularly astonishing is that Jalil Lespert in the
role of young Frank is the only professional actor in the
piece.  To director Laurence Cantet's credit, the rest of the
cast perform credibly and with heartfelt emotion as though
they were indeed going through the torments themselves. In
fact, Danielle Melador as the fiery Mrs. Arnoux really is a
union leader and Lucien Longeuville is in fact an executive.
   The picture made me look book once again in disgust at a
scene I witness from time to time.  Whenever the local
Macy's department store (formerly A&S) had conducted a
strike on Fulton Street in my Brooklyn neighborhood, I would
witness scores of similar working-class people march right
past the pickets, through the revolving doors, as though the
folks holding the signs and fighting for their economic lives
were not their brothers and sisters.  Since I have personally
been on--and in fact led my fellow public high school
teachers--in five risk-filled strikes during my teaching career, I
have a feeling of camaraderie with my fellows in the working
class--and call us teachers middle-management or what you
want, we are indeed working class.  I remain repulsed by the
unkind choices made by ordinary people to patronize stores
that are the scenes of labor disputes.
   In "Human Resources," Frank is in dire straits. 
Sympathizing with labor while knowing he will never work like
them with his hands and on the other hand educated to be
part of management, he will spend his days in conflict, unable
to climb down his metaphoric fence to take a stand on one
side or the other.  How poignant the old union song, "Which
side are you on/ Which side are you on."  
Not Rated.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
Director: Laurent Cantet
Writers: Laurent Cantet, Gilles Marchand
Cast: Jalil Lespert, Jean-Claude Vallod, Chantal Barre
Not Rated, 100 minutes
Some areas of the earth are just naturally bleak. These places where color 
seems nonexistent and life is pretty much the boring same are a favorite 
setting for movies, especially for the French. A place like this is the 
perfect environment for which to talk for an entire picture. This seems to be 
Laurent Cantet's idea for a perfect production. The location of "Human 
Resources" is most certainly less than cheerful, as is life for the people 
there. The provincial town has a few dejected joys, but activity mainly 
centers around a factory in town. The factory is one of many that some giant 
corporation has in towns like these, but something radical is about to 
happen. 
Franck (Jalil Lespert) returns from studying business in Paris to this place 
of doom. His father (Jean-Claude Vallod) has been working at the local 
factory, that puts workers under very harsh conditions, for thirty years. 
Franck takes an internship there in the human resources department. Here he 
learns the darker side of the establishment, and how poorly upper management 
treats employees. When Franck puts together a survey asking for the opinions 
of lowly personnel, it's twisted by the boss into something negative for the 
slaves of mechanism oppression. So Franck and a union leader must stand up 
for the rights of the working townspeople, while Franck himself must work out 
some issues with his estranged father. 
Using non-professionals, Cantet has created an intelligent work of 
simplicity. At times it seems better suited as a play, it's that much of an 
actor's piece. With the obvious lack of lighting and technicals, the film 
even teeters into Dogme 95 territory. The camera work is quick, plain, and 
clean, and the script's the obvious leader here. With excellent pace, it 
provides room for some comfortable improvisation, and has a clear goal. Most 
importantly, it knows when it's about to become boring. Kudos go to director 
Cantet and Gilles Marchand for this great screenplay.
When the camera first sees Franck's father working away at his station, the 
work seems OK. He puts a small nut onto a large piece of metal that gets 
welded on a revolving machine. It was only until I realized he had been 
performing this task for the last thirty years did any of the movie sink in. 
This measly operation, and small others, were all a large group of people had 
to do for their entire lives. They have no fun family get-togethers, and no 
wild drinking parties. The very existence of life rises and falls with the 
machine. Life in the offices is no better. Nearly every wall in the building 
is glass to eliminate privacy and increase productivity. Someone is always 
watching.
When right to work gets taken away, there is nothing to fill the void. 
Mistreatment and corruption squandered; the message of "Human Resources" is 
loud and clear. People are aimless and without purpose when they have no 
work, and when unions get bypassed, there is nowhere to turn. Continuing in a 
universal cycle, this happens all over the world. Only when that realization 
comes to pass does this wonderful, important, and depressing film blare all 
with an unflinching certainty. Not one moment seems fake or unreal. This is 
an actual family with real problems, and there are no actors. That is truly 
the mark of quality.
http://cinemaparadise.homestead.com/mainpage.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Bruce Paltrow.
Cast: Paul Giamatti, Huey Lewis, Gwyneth Paltrow, Andre Braugher, Scott 
Speedman, Maria Bello, Angie Dickinson, Lochlyn Munro.
2000 - 113 minutes
Rated R (for brief violence, profanity, and sex).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, September 16, 2000.
A road picture about three different sets of people traveling to Omaha to 
perform in a $5000 karaoke tournament, Bruce Paltrow's "Duets" is an offbeat 
and occasionally quirky little movie that, like all successful ensembles, 
gradually builds upon its energy, depth, and momentum the further we get into 
it. We not only grow to care about the characters and what they mean to each 
other by the conclusion, but we also realize that director Paltrow's and 
screenwriter John Byrum's purpose was so much larger--so much more honest and 
telling--than spinning a story solely about karaoke hopefuls. All six of the 
central characters are looking for that one special thing that will make them 
happy. Ultimately, not all of them fully find what they are looking for, but 
they discover things about themselves, and the world, that make them somehow 
wiser--more assured, less confused and lonely.
Switching between three subplots that inevitably converge at the karaoke 
contest in the conclusion, "Duets," like last year's wonderful "Go," never 
loses track of any of its characters, nor does its energy falter. Todd (Paul 
Giamatti) is a disgruntled traveling salesman tired of going unappreciated 
and ignored by his family who snaps one day and, while supposedly going out 
for a pack of cigarettes, simply keeps on driving. While in a New Mexico bar, 
Todd is egged on by a beautiful local to try his own hand at karaoke singing, 
and to his disbelief, loves it. Soon, Todd has met the good-hearted Reggie 
(Andre Braugher), an ex-con just released from prison and with a curiously 
shady past, who becomes both his traveling companion and good friend.
When singing extraordinaire Ricky Dean (Huey Lewis), who hops from karaoke 
bar to karaoke bar across the nation, slyly hustling others and making good 
money off of it, learns of the death of a past close relationship, he drives 
down to Las Vegas for the funeral, and in the process, meets his daughter for 
the first time. A wide-eyed, sweet-natured showgirl, Liv (Gwyneth Paltrow) 
decides to follow Ricky to Omaha to spend time with him, hoping to build a 
relationship with her remaining parent.
Finally, cab driver Billy (Scott Speedman), an idealistic young man who, at 
one point, wanted to become a priest, has just discovered his girlfriend has 
been cheating on him. Wallowing in self-pity at a local bar, he meets Suzi 
(Maria Bello), a singing hopeful who doesn't have any money, but knows how to 
use her sexuality to get what she wants--including a ride to California from 
Billy. Along the way, they catch word of the karaoke contest, and set out for 
a detour to Omaha themselves.
Handling separate storylines all at once is a risky undertaking in film, with 
the possibility of a certain vignette overpowering the others, or worse, 
coming off as uneven without anything of interest to say or do. Director 
Bruce Paltrow (whose only other feature film has been 1982's "A Little Sex") 
smoothly handles the frequent plot transitions and portrays all of the 
characters as children--that is, lovingly and with a sharp eye for detail. 
Sort of like a slightly less ambitious Robert Altman ensemble (think 
"Nashville" set in the world of karaoke, rather than country music), this is 
not supposed to be a criticism, but simply a fair comparison between a 
smaller-minded and more intimate motion picture, rather than a sprawling epic 
with twenty-some main players.
The cast is talented and fully believable--each one making a lasting 
impression, including the brief supporting appearances by such actors as 
Lochlyn Munro (2000's "Scary Movie") and Angie Dickinson. Paul Giamatti, 
arguably the center of the film and the character which receives the most 
screen time, is touching and acceptably off-kilter as Todd, a man who says he 
is tired of the American Dream, and wishes to do nothing but live the rest of 
his life the way he wants to live it. Andre Braugher is perfectly cast as 
Reggie, who wants to get his troubled life back together, and never expects 
to meet someone like Todd at the turning point in his own life. Giamatti and 
Braugher perform a showstopping version of "Try a Little Tenderness" that is 
as exciting and full of life in its three minutes than this weekend's action 
picture, "Bait," is in its entire two hours.
Scott Speedman (TV's "Felicity") shows a genuine spark of charm that has 
previously gone unnoticed for him, and he proves that he could very well have 
a prosperous future career in films. Maria Bello (2000's "Coyote Ugly") is 
possibly the least developed of the six protagonists, but is still given 
ample material to work with, and does a mean performance of "Sweet Dreams Are 
Made of This."
Kudos to director Paltrow for realizing that, since the film revolves around 
karaoke clubs, and hinges on the success or failure of depicting such a 
world, it would only be truthful if the musical numbers were performed in 
full. Each of the numerous songs are vibrantly brought to life by the 
performers, all of which, aside from Braugher, used their real singing 
voices. A particular surprise is Gwyneth Paltrow (1998's "Shakespeare in 
Love"), the biggest name in the cast and the daughter of the director, who 
turns out to be extremely talented as a singer, as well as an actress. 
Paltrow's Liv is a different, interesting character for her--more childlike 
and innocent, less refined. Her rendition of Kim Carnes' "Bette Davis Eyes" 
is delightful, and her climactic duet with her father, played admirably and 
with an added dose of tough realism by Huey Lewis (1993's "Short Cuts"), in 
which they both somehow come to terms with their newfound relationship 
through the words of Smokey Robinson's "Cruisin'," is one of the most 
indelible film moments of the year. 
"Duets" rarely goes for cheap laughs (although it does get many genuine 
ones), obvious melodrama, or out-of-the-blue plot twists, and like real life, 
develops in an authentic fashion. An unforeseen event does occur in the 
picture's final minutes and uncovers the many hidden truths behind the film's 
true reason for being. "Duets" is not about who gets the girl, or who wins 
the big tournament, or who will go on to become professional singers. It 
would like you to believe it is, at first glance, but it isn't. It's a motion 
picture about a group of characters--everyday people like you or me--who find 
redemption and personal gratification where they least expect to. "Karaoke is 
a way of life," someone says early in the film. This film proves that the 
same goes for human yearning, dreaming, and affection.
