Title
Review for Vengo (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz
Set in Spain, Vengo is a standard mob story with a highly artistic
twist.  There isn't much of a plot, and what there is isn't that
important.  It is simply a frame within which to explore the culture of
some vibrant Spanish gypsies.  In fact, the actual "talkie" scenes
almost become too much of a distraction from the rich portrayal of the
community.
In Vengo, there are two warring families whom you can't tell apart until
they are yelling at each other.  You connect with Cacao (Antonio
Canales) because he is followed throughout the film.  He is charismatic,
even in arrogance.  Everyone loves and obeys him, somewhat at a
distance, as his daughter recently died.  He is the guardian of his
nephew because his brother shot a member of the Caravacas family, which
wants blood for blood, like any Godfather movie, while Cacao tries his
best to make peace.
Cacao spends time with his family, throwing parties with hired bands,
making sure his retarded nephew has a good time.  In between are moments
with those in charge of the Caravacas family, building a slow, poignant
path to revenge.  Every once in a while a few comedic notes are thrown
in as the older women of the village clean up after the youngsters.
Luckily the plot development is repetitively simple so that all of the
characters have room to be sympathetic.  There isn't an annoying "good
and evil" perspective placed on the viewer.  This film is not about
picking sides in an argument or making morality calls.  It's simply an
age-old dilemma of how one family deals with loss and another family who
must grudgingly accept responsibility for it.
But the music and dancing are the key roles in Vengo.  Between the
variety shown and the pride taken in skill and passing down of
tradition, it's easy to become mesmerized with the culture.  A nice
added touch is that men take as much pride as women in being able to
evoke physical grace.  And though the dancing does have a sexually
alluring quality, it is not the reason for participation.
It can be difficult to grasp the lyrics because they are only partially
subtitled.  This is unfortunate for outsiders who know little about
gypsy life because it's impossible to guess at the inspiration for such
emoting performances.  At least the emotional expression of the singers
provides an easily sympathetic intensity that evokes an understanding
about how attached the music is to tradition.  You can assume that for
every major change in their culture, there is a song to go with it that
is passed down from one generation to the next.
Gatlif has managed to utilize an old, almost boring, plot structure to
respectfully portray a culture much overlooked.  He obviously loved his
subject and the way in which it was filmed provides a contagious
appreciation for a people often misunderstood.
Director: Tony Gatlif
Producer: Tony Gatlif
Writer: Tony Gatlif, David Trueba
Starring: Antonio Canales, Orestes Villasan Rodriguez, Antonio Perez
Dechent, Bobote, Juan Luis Corrientes
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
`Vengo' is a concert movie from which a vendetta plot keeps trying to break
out.  When it faces the music, it dances.  When it wanders into plot, it gets
hopelessly lost.
It's not that the plot is so complex.  You've got two clans of Spanish
gypsies who keep killing each other; and forgive and forget are not words that
you'll find in your English-to-Gypsy dictionary.   Caco (Antonio Canales) is the
head of one clan, and the rival Caravaca family wants the blood of his brother
for having killed one of theirs.  The brother is hiding out in Algiers, so
they're willing to settle for his son Diego (Orestes Villasan Rodriguez).  It
appears the Caravaca clan may have killed Caco's beloved daughter.  She's dead,
anyway, and Caco makes many grieving visits to her grave.  Caco realizes the
futility of this never-ending cycle of retribution, and wants to find a way to
end it; but the Caravacas are implacably bent on revenge.  
Caco's nephew Diego, on whom he dotes,  has something that could be
cerebral palsy.  It causes him to lurch when he walks and contort his mouth when
he talks, but he does not seem to be mentally handicapped – the things he says
makes sense, and would fit perfectly well into the mouth of an ordinary
sensitive young man.  Rodriguez plays him with energy, but I never had any
trouble believing that it was an actor putting on the trappings of affliction. 
Canales, who is a celebrated flamenco dancer in Spain, drags around as Caco with
the weight of the world on his shoulders, and doesn't get to do a lick of
dancing, which is like casting Elvis in a musical in a non-singing role.  It can
be done, but what's the point?  Canales is an arresting-looking man, but you're
more aware of what he's not doing than what he is, and you keep waiting for that
flamenco boot to drop.
Aside from Caco and Diego, it's pretty hard to figure out who anybody is in
this vast and wild assortment of darkly-dressed gypsy clansmen, and harder still
to care.  What we do care about is the music.  Director Tony Gatlif ("Latcho
Drom", "Gadjo Dilo") has enlisted the talents of some of the great contemporary
flamenco artists: Tomatito, Sheikh Ahmad al Tuni, La Caita, Gritos de Guerra,
and La Paquera de Jerez.  If he doesn't have much of a feel for story, he does
have a gut sense of what the music is about, and the alertness to step aside and
let it rip.  Sitting around in bars singing, breaking into dance on a flatbed
truck, the musicians seem to live the music which springs spontaneously out of 
centuries of intense feeling – rage, laughter, passion, cruelty, anguish, love,
and death. It's raw, it's transfixing, and it feels completely authentic, a
music not shaped for the cabaret or the concert hall, but protected and
preserved for the cathartic release of the people who make it.  With his bona
fides in the gypsy world, Gatlif has been able to persuade some of these
reclusive and limelight-shunning artists to venture out into the glare of lights
and camera, and has caught something remarkable on film.
The movie looks good.  Gatlif and cinematographer Thierry Pouget set a
handsome screen, with barren desert vistas of Andalusia, and dark, shadowy night
clubs and back alleys of Seville.  The uninspired storytelling and hackneyed
plot don't really matter so much, except that they take up our time and tax our
attention.  The story came to him, Gatlif says, after a night of tossing and
turning: `I slept little, and in the morning, everything was clear…I knew that
vengeance was what the film was about.'
He's got a great handle on the music.  Maybe next time, with a bit more
sleep, he'll get the rest of it worked out.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Cowboy Booking International
 Director: Tony Gatlif
 Writer:  Tony Gatlif, David Trueba
 Cast: Antonio Canales, Orestes Villasan Rodriguez, Antonio
Perez Dechent, Bobote, Juan Luis Corrientes, Fernando
Geurrero Rebollo
   "Vengo" is a tale of death, despair, drunkenness, murder
and revenge in the province of Seville in southern Spain.  If I
had not been to the region of Andalucia--one of the many
homes of the world's gypsies for hundreds of years--four
times already, I'd have been inspired enough by this movie to
be on the next evening's Iberia flight.  Why?  Because I like to
be surrounded by death, despair, drunkenness, murder and
revenge?  Not quite.  What provides the inspiration for this
movie, even its motif, is not the plot and not even the
characters, but the music.  Yep.  Some stories are plot driven,
some character driven: this is music driven.  And my oh my
oh my, what music!  Do you like flamenco?  And have you
seen flamenco singers and dancers only in touristic spots like
the Meson Flamenco in Madrid rather than in the roadside
taverns in Andalucian towns like Moron de la frontera and
Utrera and in Daniel Pohren's famed finca espartera?  Then
you're in for a special treat because watching "Vengo" is like
seeing a story that takes place in Rio, except that instead of
worrying about the plot and characters, the filmmaker takes
you to the Carnival.
   But I won't get carried away.  The movie is not perfect for
the very reasons mentioned: its music is just about
everything; it's story is as melodramatic and contrived as
director Tony Gatlif's 1998 French-Romanian production
"Gadjo Dilo--about a young Frenchman hoping to track down
a folk singer who is "adopted" by a village of gypsies.  In
short, "Vengo" is not just a product placement for southern
Spain's most exciting region of Andalucia but a nationalistic
cri de coeur for the culture of the gypsies.  The tight-family
structure, however, is the cause for sadness as well, because
the people who inhabit Mr. Gatlif's film (mostly
nonprofessional actors but some quite professional-sounding
singers, dancers and instrumentalists) are committed to seek
personal, family vengeance--forget about going to the courts--
for spilled blood.  
    The viewer who attends a screening of "Vengo" cold,
knowing nothing about the movie, will wonder what the heck
is going on, because straight away we're in the company of
some passionate looking and fervent people from North Africa
who appear to be performing spontaneously before a crowd
of people standing by, not necessarily paying to hear a
concert.  We're eased into the story which centers on
handsome Caco (Antonio Canales) who is the leader of his
gypsy clan.  His brother has for reasons unknown killed a
member of the derisive Caravacas clan (who grow their hair
even longer than do the members of his own group), and is
hiding out somewhere in Morocco to avoid the obligatory
vengeance of the Caravacas.  Caco has more problems.  His
own daughter has died.  He visits the young woman's shrine
daily and spends the rest of his time drinking and partying in
an attempt to forget her, and what's more he displaces his
love for his daughter onto his brother's mentally challenged
son, Diego (Orestes Villasan Rodriguez).  He sure loves this
unfortunate young man, and Diego loves his uncle.  When
Caco hears from the grapevine that the scuzzy Caravacas
folks, unable to locate the murderer, will settle for killing
Diego, Caco becomes even more despondent.  Thankfully for
the audience, instead of showing his despair by crying, he
parties all the more, and we're treated to more Flamenco! 
Guitars, beautiful women singing their hearts out and dancing
up a storm, and a bevy of soldiers and citizens clapping their
hands in the required convention of palmas fill the
Cinemascope screen lensed by Thierry Pouget, who casts all
of the Andalucian scenes with an appropriate sepia tint.
   Take the melodrama in stride (pretend this is an opera, the
kind of thing that would be pure soap were it not for the
glorious music), and you'll dig "Vengo."
Not Rated.  Running time: 90 minutes.  (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
