Title
Review for Body Heat (1981)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
Hollywood movies are full of different stereotypes, but one
of the most noticeable regards the lawyers. Such stereotypes
are probably the result of deep-rooted view of the legal
profession among ordinary people in USA. Lawyers are always
portrayed as slimy, rich bastards that not only make a
living by twisting justice and common sense, but become
rich, powerful and dark invincible pillar of American
society. The only exception lies in movies that take quite
an opposite view by portraying lawyers as noble individuals
ready to fight the system for the sake of common, and often
completely helpless man. Very few movies actually try to
portray lawyers as ordinary human beings, with all the
normal strengths and weaknesses (with the exception of
television, that usually takes real life more seriously than
Hollywood). BODY HEAT, 1981 directorial debut by famed
screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan, is one of them.
The plot of the movie is loosely based on DOUBLE INDEMNITY,
1944 film noire by Billy Wilder and one of the most
celebrated movies of the classical era. Kasdan, who also
wrote the screenplay, sets it in Southern Florida and turns
its protagonist into lawyer, instead of insurance agent. Ned
Racine (William Hurt) is an attorney who works in small
town, and whose pool of client is very small due to his
notorious incompetence. Racine, on the other hand, hides his
bad luck by cocky demenour and mostly successful womanising.
The latest of his romantic conquest is Matty Walker
(Kathleen Turner), extremely attractive, emotionally cold,
but sexually insatiable woman. Before he knows it, Racine
falls in love with her, and the only obstacle to their
perpetual bliss is Matty's husband Edmund (Richard Crenna),
local businessman with shady connections. After accidentally
meeting the man and seeing him as the arrogant bastard,
Racine devises the plan to kill him. After the murder Matty
would collect the inheritance and later live with Racine
happily ever after. Both of the lovers agree on the plan and
kill Edmund. However, after the killing things don't go that
smoothly for Racine. Damaging evidence starts popping up in
the hands of the local law enforcement, and Matty doesn't
seem to be as forthcoming about her plans.
In the current debate between those who are for and against
the Hollywood practice of re-makes, the pro-remake side
would probably case by using BODY HEAT as its argument.
Lawrence Kasdan very cleverly used the old film noire
formula, yet he also set in an familiar environment and used
the new techniques and plot twists that would make this film
original not only by its look. First of all, he emphasised
the heat as a metaphor for the atmosphere of moral
corruption and decay that engulfs the movie protagonists and
their surroundings. Racine is portrayed as immoral
character, but he is hardly an aberration from the rest of
society; his only crime is his own stupidity, that allows
him to get caught. The heat in the movie is also an metaphor
for sexual lust, and Kasdan here uses almost all the
liberties of mainstream Hollywood in order to portray it as
depraved as possible (it is implied that Racine and Matty
did break anti-sodomy laws in their relationship); yet his
portrayal is very subtle compared with some "erotic" films
of the same nature, so BODY HEAT remains as a shining
example of the subtle use of erotica. The movie also can be
seen as a really ironic twist on popular American beliefs;
the lawyer, who usually screws over common men, is the one
who gets screwed over at the end.
The characters of the movie are extremely well-drawn.
William Hurt, who was considered to be one of the hottest
WASP-stars in the early 1980s, was perfect in his role of a
man who is on the outside epithome of virility, but utterly
weak and stupid on the inside. But the real show stealer is
Kathleen Turner in her debut role - her sexy look and
seductive deep voice, in contrast with her cold and
calculating personality, made her a most impressive femme
fatale for many years to come; Hollywood had to wait for
Sharon Stone in BASIC INSTINCT to enjoy the sinister
man-eater of similar calibre. The other actors are also more
than fine; Ted Danson as Racine's friend, equally but much
smarter colleague (although his tapping sequence seemed a
little bit redundant); J.A. Preston as a policeman whose
friendship towards Racine doesn't prevent him from doing the
right thing; Richard Crenna as incarnation of rich
businessman's arrogance. But the best side role is one made
by young Mickey Rourke as petty criminal who seems to have
more common sense than his supposedly smarter and more
educated lawyer.
The other artists contributed to the BODY HEAT too. John
Barry's melancholic and jazzy tunes were perfect for such
erotic film noire set in a hot locations of Southern
Florida. But the movie's photography by Richard H. Kline was
slightly uneven - in the night, red and orange colours were
dominant, but the daytime scenes look too bright, especially
those set in interiors. However, despite those small flaws,
BODY HEAT remains one of the best directorial debuts in
Hollywood history, and probably the best film noire ever
made in previous decade.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  MYSTERY STREET (director: John Sturges; screenwriters: Sydney Boehm/Richard
Brooks/from a story by  Leonard Spigelgass; cinematographer: John Alton; editor:
Ferris Webster; cast: Ricardo Montalban (Lt. Peter Morales), Sally Forrest
(Grace Shanway), Bruce Bennett (Dr. McAdoo), Elsa Lanchester (Mrs. Smerrling),
Marshall Thompson (Henry Shanway), Jan Sterling (Vivian Heldon), Edmon Ryan
(Hartley), Betsy Blair (Jackie), Wally Maher (Tim Sharkey), Brad Hatton
(Bartender), Ralph Dumke (Tattooist); Runtime: 93; MGM; 1950) 
An engaging film noir directed by John Sturges, set around the Boston area and
making good use of Harvard College, the surrounding dark Boston streets, and the
Cape Cod area. The film was superbly shot in B & W by John Alton in a
semidocumentary style. The film goes into detail of the murder of a tawdry
blonde B girl Vivian Heldon (Jan Sterling) from the time she threatens a married
man she's having an affair with to give her money for her pregnancy until her
murder. The man, Hartley (Ryan), an architect, is descended from one of Boston's
oldest families, and lives on Hyannis Port. She phones him from the hallway of
her rooming house, where she writes his number on the wall, as her snooping
landlady Mrs. Smerrling (Elsa Lanchester), the one she owes overdue rent to,
sees her write the number and overhears that she's in a jam and snickers. 
In her workplace bar, "The Grass Skirt," Vivian is agitated that she's been
stood up by Hartley and decides to take a drunk at the bar, Henry Shanway
(Marshall Thompson), on a ride in his yellow Ford to Cape Cod. When he sobers up
after they reach a Cape Cod diner and complains that he has to be at the
hospital to see his pregnant wife, she steals the car leaving him stranded on a
dirt road late at night. When she meets Hartley to get her money, he instead
shoots her and jettison's the car in the nearby bog while he throws her nude
body in the ocean. It's not until about three months later that her skeleton is
found on the beach by a bird watcher. 
Lt. Pete Morales (Montalban), of Portuguese extraction, a local cop who never
worked a murder investigation before, becomes suspicious of the death and brings
her remains to a forensic expert at the Harvard Department of Legal Medicine,
Dr. McAdoo (Bennett). Working only with the skull and photos of all the missing
women in the area reported on the date the murder took place, they uncover that
the skeleton is Vivian Heldon. They later on learn that she's been shot and was
three months pregnant. 
When Pete does the leg work of the investigation he finds out from the bartender
at her workplace that she met the guy in the yellow Ford, and gets the name of
the car owner through the insurance files. When he pays Henry and Grace Shanway
(Forrest) a visit, Henry lies to him by saying he doesn't know the dead girl and
that his car was stolen when parked in front of the hospital. Pete determines
that Henry is lying and is probably the killer as he gets reports from witnesses
linking him to Vivian. From the bartender and a tattooist outside her workplace,
he gets a description of the guy in the yellow Ford he saw her leave with and
from the sneaky landlady, he learns that Henry came by the rooming house a day
after he reported the car missing. From the one who reported her missing, a
tenant in her rooming house, Jackie (Blair), he finds out about the call she
made to Cape Cod. This puzzles the detective, who pays Hartley a visit but can't
find the gun at his place because the landlady visited Hartley just before him
and stole the gun from him. Her plan was to blackmail him. 
Warning: spoiler to follow in next paragraph. 
With the arrest of Henry on circumstantial evidence, Dr. McAdoo believes he
might be innocent and tells Pete that they must find the gun to be absolutely
sure. This leads to an exciting climax in search of the gun, as the wrong man
gets cleared of the crime by the fervent efforts of Pete Morales. It culminates
in a chase through the Boston train yards to apprehend Hartley. 
The performance by Ricardo Montalban was subtle and very much a winning one,
while Elsa Lanchester stole the film with her portrayal of being a most
despicable, uncaring, lying and cheating rat, someone capable of perjury and
blackmail all in the name of greed. It's a solid film noir effort, which was
also able to get in some comments on social consciousness between the ethnic
Montalban and the snobbish bias the elitist Edmon Ryan portrayed. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
