Title
Review for Road Scholar (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Andrei Codrescu is a Romanian-born Jew, a fact that explains many
aspects of his personality.  His acerbic sense of humor is a survival trait
when one lives in a background radiation of anti-Semitism from both the
neighbors and the government.  It also trains one to expect the worst and
hope for the best from institutions and the bureaucracy running the country.
At the same time, having come to the United States and finding conditions
better, he clearly likes this country and has an affection, if somewhat
bewildered, for Americans.  And he sees America as an outsider.  Because of
these different perspectives, he has become a commentator on National Public
Radio's "All Things Considered."  In ROAD SCHOLAR Codrescu brings these
perspectives to bear on various aspects of American life seen during a trip
across the country.
     ROAD SCHOLAR is not so much a film as a news magazine in cinematic
form.  It is supposedly inspired by the book ON THE ROAD by Jack Kerouac,
but it is closer in form to a stringing together of segments of "Charles
Kurault on the Road" or "Jean Shepherd's America."  It is also comparable to
Michael Palin's short television series "Around the World in Eighty Days"
and "Pole to Pole."  Codrescu drives from Manhattan to San Francisco
commenting on the passing parade.  He visits Ellis Island and comments on
the immigrant experience.  He also visits a Romanian restaurant, where his
compatriots make up for years of extreme poverty in the old country by
eating pornographically large cuts of meat.  He is served a steak so long he
has to fold over the end so that it does not drag on the table.  Detroit and
its hard times remind him of Romania.  In Chicago (if I remember correctly)
he visits a sausage factory and discovers a new sensuality in the packing of
sausages.  Also in Chicago he visits a McDonald's restaurant exactly as they
were when they were first open.  It is an educational exhibit for McDonald's
Hamburger U.  Codrescu mixes in a private war between the city council and a
junk artist who is half burying a car in her yard.
     Westward he continues to report on New Age crystal religion and a
healing shrine in New Mexico, and a drive-up window in a kitsch matrimonial
chapel in Las Vegas.  We visit Biosphere II, a sealed and totally self-
contained community to which inhabitants have exiled themselves for two
years.  This is supposed to prove people can live in similar confines in
space, though presumably in space there will not be a constant stream of
tourists to chat with at the windows.  Codrescu dubs Biosphere II a
"Disneyland for the Millenially Disabled."  According to Codrescu, America
seems to be discovered over and over again and never definitively.
Definitive discovery seems to have eluded Codrescu also, but at least his
commentaries and slices of life are never dull.  I rate this a +1 on the -4
to +4 scale.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Time and again, someone tries to discover America and its nether regions, 
hoping to make the definitive cultural statement about this country. The 
problem is that no one can make the definitive statement when America 
continually grows from one year to the next. Even the state I live in, New 
Jersey, is full of stories and historical backgrounds, going back several 
decades and centuries (read the cult magazine "Weird N.J." for a better 
perspective). The narrator of the film "Road Scholar" even states how times 
have changed in America in the last twenty years. "Now Spanish is spoken as 
much as English," the narrator observes. 
The narrator is Andrei Codrescu, a Romanian-born Jew who became an American 
citizen in 1981. He is best known as an NPR commentator for the program, "All 
Things Considered," and is a well-known poet. He is witty, urbane, sarcastic, 
and shrewd. Andrei uses his satiric prose and poetic sensibilities to come up 
with his own interpretation of America by way of a cross-country road trip. 
He gets a driver's license, and is off in a cherry-red '68 Cadillac 
convertible to explore America. Andrei comes up against a community of 
Christian Communists in upstate New York, accustomed to poverty on the 
margins despite a profitable business; New Age mysticism, religious militant 
groups and Native American habitats in New Mexico; the virtually empty, 
economically ravaged city of Detroit; homeless, crack-addicted Haitian 
immigrants in New York City; last-minute marriages in Las Vegas (including 
drive-thru marriages!); a Vietnamese author in San Francisco who is aching to 
go back to his homeland; an artist who lawfully places a car in her lawn 
proclaiming it as a piece of art; and so on. 
"Road Scholar" has enormous fun in arriving at these different locales and 
points of interest in America, and it is continuously absorbing in 
investigating different patterns of life. My major complaint is that certain 
vignettes could have benefited from more screen time, such as the Detroit 
artists who place shoes and sneakers on the streets as a reminder of people 
who once populated a sparsely populated, poor neighborhood. There is also too 
much time invested on New Mexico mystics and healers - I used to live in 
Santa Fe and have had enough exposure to them. They are pure "kitsch," as 
Codrescu often refers to certain aspects of life or to the Statue of Liberty. 
Other moments show the loss of innocence in America, as in the traveling bus 
of peace-loving denizens who want to bring back the 60's free love ideals and 
such without benefit of drugs. I also found a strangely melancholic passage 
in the depiction of lost dreams in Detroit. One example is the movement of 
Motown sound from Detroit to the big leagues and how it affected an entire 
community who felt the music was theirs. In fact, the Detroit section of the 
film is the most astute as one gathers understanding of how America can let 
go of one of their cities in times of economic hardships. 
If this were just an ordinary documentary about America in the 90's, it would 
have worked just fine with its look at people of different nationalities. 
Alas, using Andre as a witty commentator on the scene enlivens the 
proceedings enormously - he is sometimes sardonic but he also identifies with 
most of the people, particularly the immigrants who came to this country in 
hopes of fulfilling their dreams. Some did, and many did not. Andre became a 
poet and wrote books, and was allowed to have the power of freethinking 
without getting arrested. His story is just as insightful, and proves just as 
entertaining. He also recognizes, as reminded to him by the late poet Allen 
Ginsberg, that America is "an Indian thing." For a relatively fast-paced, 
inspirational tour of America, you can do no better than "Road Scholar." 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com
