Title
Review for Simon Birch (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Ryan Davis
        I saw Simon Birch in a basically sold out theater, on a Sunday
afternoon.  When the movie was over and the audience was exiting, I didn't
hear one negative comment, and I didn't have any to offer.
        Simon Birch is primarily about the friendship of two twelve year old
boys, Simon (Ian Michael Smith) and Joe (Joseph Mazzello), and what destiny
holds for both of them. Simon is a dwarf, who was not supposed to last
through the night after birth due to a weak heart. Surprisingly, he does, and
now constantly reminds everyone that he is a living miracle.  Simon thinks
God has a plan for him, a purpose for his life, and his condition, he just
doesn't know what.  Joe is an illegitimate child(referred to both comically
and dramatically throughout the film as a bastard), who's mom (Ashley Judd)
won't tell him who his father is.
        Simon has more than just dwarfism as a problem, the people in the town
don't really like him, because he isn't "natural". Even his own parents don't
care about him, and are disappointed they didn't have a "normal" son.  He is
also  harassed in church by the local pastor, Rev. Russell (David Strathairn)
and Simon's chain smoking  Sunday school teacher played by Jan Hooks. The only
person, other than Joe, that really cares for Simon is Joe's mom, who he also
looks up to as a mother.
        It would be just Simon's luck, that he would accidentally kills Joe's
mom, something you are told at the beginning of the movie.  Joe, now
motherless as well as fatherless, feels the need to find out who his real
father is. With the help of Ben (Oliver Platt), the local drama teacher and
Joe's mom's current boyfriend(before her death) , he will attempt to locate
his dad and get in a little trouble on the way. Most of this trouble is laugh
out loud funny, although not all of it is. Simon will also look for God's
plan for him, although he loses a little faith along the way.
        Starring in the first (and last) five minutes of the film is
Hollywood's newest dramatic actor, Jim Carrey. Jim plays the adult version of
Joe and does a impressive job starting the film off, and then tying it up just
right. This is the first character Jim has played that is not over the top in
anyway, and he does a commendable job.
        Simon Birch is written and directed by Mark Steven Johnson, this is his
first film as director, but he has written several films, including the Grumpy
Old Men series.  He does an outstanding writing and  directing job here, the
film's structure is flawless and its flows together perfectly. The dialog goes
from extremely funny to morose without missing a beat.
        The cast is excellent. Joseph Mazzello gives the stand out
performance. Joseph is outstanding for someone of any age, not alone someone
who just turned 15. Ian Michael Smith, in his film debut, has such a strong
physical presence that you believe he is Simon without any hesitation. Other
great performances are turned in by the rest of the supporting cast.
        I loved this movie, it is far and away one of the best films I have
seen all year. Take your whole family to see Simon Birch, it is a magnificent
film- An American Masterpiece.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        "You're already a bastard; you may as well be an enlightened
one."  Such is the advice twelve year-old Simon Birch offers to his
best friend Joe Wenteworth, but the remark is not a flippant one: Joe
was born out of wedlock and has never learned the identity of his
father, a fact for which he is mercilessly ridiculed by his schoolmates.
Simon knows how he feels.  Suffering from a rare form of dwarfism, he's
so incredibly tiny that the members of his Sunday School class fling
him around like a medicine ball whenever the teacher steps outside the
room.  Since both boys are basically outcasts, they've developed the
kind of deep, fiercely loyal friendship reserved only for those who
have no one else to turn to.
        "Simon Birch" is a remarkable film.  Loosely based on John
Irving's novel "A Prayer for Owen Meany," the story follows a year in
the life of these two unusual friends, allowing us to witness their
intense devotion to each other.  The film works best when tiny Simon
(played with warmth and zest by Ian Michael Smith) and Joe (played as
a child by Joseph Mazzello and as an adult by Jim Carrey) are simply
being kids.  One of my favorite scenes is their charmingly naive
discussion about breasts, which takes place on a dock early in the
story.
        The film is episodic in structure, divided into a number of
separate but interrelated tales.  Most interesting are the stories
involving Joe's quest to discover the identity of his father, and
Simon's constant disagreements with the local church officials.  A
devout Christian who believes that God has a special plan for him,
Simon takes exception to the bland, uninteresting services performed
by Rev. Russell (David Strathairn), leading to some hilarious confron-
tations.  These scenes provide a touch of religious satire completely
unexpected in a film of this type.  A paraphrased example:
        The cast is very good.  Ian Michael Smith is entertaining as
Simon, and young Joseph Mazzello (who you may remember as the little
boy from "Jurassic Park") is excellent, traversing the widest emotional
arc of any character in the film, and always making us believe him.
Jan Hooks from "Saturday Night Live" turns in a thankless performance
as the slimy "holier-than-thou" Sunday School teacher, Miss Leavey.
Ashley Judd and Oliver Platt are pleasant as Joe's mother and her
boyfriend, and have a sweet screen chemistry together.  And Jim Carrey
is fine in his second consecutive dramatic role, though he isn't really
the star: his primary function is to provide the movie's "Wonder
Years"-style narration, though he does appear onscreen during the
opening and closing scenes.  Only David Straithairn (Rev. Russell)
seems unsure of how to play his part.  After leaving the theater, I
found that I still didn't understand him... and considering that much
of the film's final scenes revolve around him, that's unfortunate.
        But "Simon Birch" is a lot of fun, maintaining a sweet,
innocent tone for most of its two-hour running time.  One disappointing
event occurs at roughly the film's two-third mark, however: Simon
plays Baby Jesus in the church's Christmas padget.  Now that's fine: as
a deeply religious young man, Simon is certainly capable of performing
the role.  But during this scene, Simon exhibits behavior totally
against his character, for no discernable reason.  I won't reveal what
he does, but it causes the entire film to screech to a halt while we
witness what basically amounts to five minutes of "Home Alone"
outtakes.  It just doesn't make sense, and is a jarring change of tone
from the rest of the story.  See if you don't agree.
        And yes, the rumors are true: the film has a tremendously sad
ending, with two of our most likeable characters dying over the course
of the movie.  If "Titanic" caused you to reach for a hanky, be warned:
you may need to bring two this time.
        But "Simon Birch" leads us through its plot with great joy and
exhiliration; I found it impossible not to be moved by little Simon
and his irresistable pluck.  Although clearly influenced by "Stand By
Me" and "The Wonder Years" (with just a hint of "Forrest Gump"), Mark
Steven Johnson has created a thoroughly enchanting movie which can be
enjoyed by all but the most stone-hearted.  I was surprised by how much
I liked it.  Bring the whole family, but don't forget the tissues.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
SIMON BIRCH
Cast: Joseph Mazzello, Ian Michael Smith, Ashley Judd, Oliver Platt,
David Strathairn, Dana Ivey, Jan Hooks, Jim Carrey
Director: Mark Steven Johnson
Screenplay: Mark Steven Johnson suggested by "A Prayer for Owen Meany"
by John Irving
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 and half stars
"Time is a monster that cannot be reasoned with," says one character in
Simon Birch, and that quote sums up much of the meaning of this film -
but there's more to it than that. Simon Birch grasps one extraordinary
character and shapes him in a good-natured and solidly made film.  It is
a film with meaning and significance, and one that uses emotion to keep
its audience interested.  For the most part, it works like a charm.
Simon Birch is an involving and gratifying experience, one that tunnels
its way into your heart and leaves you feeling uplifted.  The only
significant flaw in the production is its stark simplicity - the
storytelling here is straightforward and obvious, but compelling
nonetheless.
During the film's opening scene, we know that it will not end entirely
happily from the sight of a young boy's gravestone.  Simon Birch (Ian
Michael Smith) is the smallest delivery in the history of the Gravestown
Memorial Hospital, pronounced a miracle by doctors.  Simon is physically
stunted but intelligent and witty - during church he interrupts the
sermon: "If God's made the church bake sale a priority, we're in a lot
of trouble."  Simon's best friend is Joe (Joseph Mazzello), and together
they strive to answer the questions that plague their lives.  For Joe,
the disclosed identity of his father lies somewhere in the town, and
Simon firmly believes that he is an instrument from God who will, one
day, become a hero.
The film would have succeeded more on a dramatic level had it taken a
greater focus on Simon's personal life.  His parents neglected him since
birth, ashamed at how society considers him a freak and oblivious to the
incredible person he has become.  But I guess that is another story.
Simon Birch is really about the friendship between two very different
people, and young actors Ian Michael Smith and Joseph Mazzello bring
that friendship to life.  Smith especially is incredible in his first
film role - his performance is the most unique act you'll see this side
of Roberto Benigni.  The supporting cast is also splendid.  Ashley Judd
makes a believable homely mother to Joe, and Jim Carrey has a small but
special part as Joe's adult, present day self.
Simon Birch is simplistic in formation and unashamedly sentimental, yet
it deserves to be respected and admired for its insights into the human
endeavors of faith, devotion and friendship.  Director Mark Steven
Johnson (who wrote Grumpy Old Men and its sequel) paces his film well,
and at no point does it become boring or intimidating.  It is an honest
and good-natured relationship study with clarity and precision.  A
lovely little film that wears its heart on its shoulders, Simon Birch is
a charming journey to the heart of one of societies lovable misfits, and
a "normal" boy whose life will be altered forever thanks to a small,
"meaningless" outcast.


Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: September 11, 1998
Starring: Ian Michael Smith, Joseph Mazzello, Ashley Judd, Oliver Platt,
David Strathairn, Dana Ivey, Jim Carrey
Directed by: Mark Steven Johnson
Distributed by: Buena Vista Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG (language, emotional thematic elements, an accident
scene)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/simon.htm 
In some regards, making a movie is like trying to stretch a rubber band
as far as you can without breaking it. Try too hard, and it snaps; but
too much reservation means someone else will come along and pull it
farther. In SIMON BIRCH, Director Mark Steven Johnson shows us just how
to master the technique: he takes advantage of caution and poise, but
also risks his movie with a few bold steps. In the end, he's not only
holding an unbroken band, but he makes the audience appreciate the
lengths he went to direct such a fine feature. 
There's no doubt about it: the film that Johnson has crafted is rich. He
chooses for his setting the quaint town of Gravestown, Maine - leaves
turn bright orange in the fall, the grass is a lush green, pure white
snow falls in the winter, and the sky goes on forever. The characters
continue that turn: our two leads are Simon Birch (Ian Michael Smith)
and Joe Wenteworth (Joseph Mazzello). Simon is the smallest baby ever
born within the records of the local hospital, and by age twelve he's
only two feet tall. Joe is the bastard son of Rebecca (Ashley Judd), and
by age twelve he's ready to know who is father is. Naturally, the two
outcasts become good friends and share many adventures together, from
disrupting Sunday school to doing community service to playing Little
League baseball. 
In a wonderfully executed performance by Ian Michael Smith, Simon Birch
is convinced that he's God's instrument, and there must be a reason he's
so small. Joe doesn't quite buy it, but he sticks by Simon; the two
tough it out through the worst of times and are each other's only true
friends. Early on, the two meet up with Ben Goodrich (Oliver Platt),
Rebecca's new boyfriend, and although the bond isn't immediate, Ben and
the two boys develop a liking for each other. Both Platt and Judd give
solid performances that lend their characters a deep likeability. The
audience cares about them as much as they do about Joe and Simon, a
testament to the acting jobs of both. Finally, Jim Carrey gives a cameo
as the adult Joe in the present day, and his few minutes here are
relatively more impressive than his entire performance in THE TRUMAN
SHOW. 
Mark Steven Johnson's sense of drama and writing is fantastic. The
script is loosely based on John Irving's novel, A PRAYER FOR OWEN MEANY,
but it's so far off the source material that Irving actually requested
the credits be changed from 'based on' to 'suggested by.' Along those
same lines, it's almost unfitting to compare the two; Johnson uses
tension, humor, atmosphere, and suspense to create an original drama of
Forrest Gumpian proportions. By no means has he developed a project of
similar popularity - GUMP made over 300 million dollars while BIRCH
ought to pass out of sight in a few weeks - but the winning idea remains
the same. SIMON BIRCH is a different look at a different life, and one
that will most likely be studied in film school classes in decades to
come. In the present, however, it's an enjoyable little picture that
everyone ought to take a look at.

Author
jksalisbury@my-dejanews.com
I looked back this week, at some of the reviews that I've written lately, and
I noticed a theme.  I had something bad to say about most of them (save
Return To Paradise), and it caused me think. Am I really to hard and critical
on movies, have I become that embittered old grown up that I always dreaded
when I was younger, or are the movies really just not that good.  Were my
expectations set too high?  All of these thoughts were rattling around in my
head as I entered the theater to see Simon Birch.  Let me just say that my
faith has once again been restored in the cinema, and its power.  Restored,
by a movie about pure, honest, true and real faith in the human spirit, and
the power of belief. Restored by a story about a boy who personifies faith in
its purest, most real and true form.
I really don't want to waste too much time analyzing this movie, because my
words really can't do justice to the effect and power this movie possesses.
Plain and simple, it is an emotional ride.  It is funny, heartwarming,
touching, inspirational, dramatic, smart, and real.  It contains all those
aspects, and yet does not become bogged down in any one of them to point of
overkill.  The movie knows the perfect recipe, and just how much of each to
throw in and make you feel it.
The story is simple and fairly secondary here. It is based upon a story
called "A Prayer For Owen Meany". A smaller than average boy faces the trials
and tribulations of life, with his one true friend, and an undying faith in
the fact that "God has a plan for him".  So strong is his faith, that his
maturity level and manner of speaking reach well beyond his 12 years.  The
characters are the real stars here, and each is pulled of flawlessly, down to
the smallest (no pun intended) role.  I always respect a movie so good, that
it can draw everyone together, and bring out the best in even the smallest of
roles.        Jan Hooks, as a put upon chain-smoking Sunday school teacher (a
Saturday Night alumnus who shows some promise in a sarcastically comic turn),
David Strathairn as the local minister, seemingly with a heart of gold, but a
deeper agenda (I've liked a lot of his work, he is an underrated, and
underused character actor), Ashley Judd, who I've liked since Time To Kill
(and not just because of her looks, but because of the sweet, yet sensual
power that she brings to every role) and even Oliver Platt, who I've taken to
task in a few roles (why Dr Dolittle..oh why Ollie), but here, he tones down
his manic comic talents, and comes across, and sweet, charming, even a bit
eccentric, but with a very big and caring heart.  However, the stars of this
movie, are the younger talents, Mazzello, and newcomer Smith.  Mazzello
(wonderful in "The Cure" and recognizable from Lost World) adds a powerful
dramatic touch to his youthful innocence, and ascent into puberty.  He is
like a million other kids you see in the summer, riding bikes, fishing,
swimming and playing baseball, ignorant to the world outside their own, and
committed to those closest to him.  I hope he takes on other roles, and grows
into his wonderful potential.  That brings me to Smith.  I am not sure what
exactly his background, and medical condition is (I cant remember, but I know
it's something), but he fits this role, as if he lives it, everyday.  You
feel like you are watching a camera on his life, because he does things, and
reacts, so naturally, and honestly, that if he's acting, it's one of the best
performances in years.
I never thought I would hear myself uttering the phrases "best movies" and
"Jim Carrey" in the same sentence. But alas, I must. Although Carrey doesn't
play a major part in this movie (narrating, and basically opening, and
closing the story), he is still showing me that maybe he is trying to take
the Robin Williams turn, and be taken seriously as an actor. His narration is
crisp, and effective, and his onscreen moments are emotional, seemingly
honest, and heartfelt.
Faith, and fate. The two words look similar, and are sometimes, as believed
by Simon, linked. But, as this movie so eloquently portrays, most have a hard
time believing in one, if not both. The prospect of them being linked
together is simply preposterous in the minds of these Doubting Thomases. The
strength of faith, whether it is in religion, or yourself, is an inner
quality that only some of us can grasp. A strong powerful knowledge that,
although you cannot see it, is there, wrapping you in it's loving arms, and
carrying you. Carrying you on a predestined journey, the plan that the
strength of your faith has built. The requirements to continue this journey
are simple. Just believe. Sounds very simple, but for those who need to see,
hold and touch, it can be very difficult. Simon Birch believed, and he tries,
in the best way he knows how, to make others feel his faith and believe his
fate. Whether he succeeds, or fails, depends upon the person, because Simon
knows, and believes, if you choose to as well, you can indeed do anything, no
matter the obstacle. See this as soon as possible, it will give you hope,
strength, faith, inspiration, a smile, and make you leave the theater a
different, maybe even stronger person, for having met Simon. Thank you.
($$$$1/2)
For more of my views, and reviews, visit Reel Ramblings @
http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside/comingatt.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "Simon Birch" (Hollywood Pictures)
From the day he was born, Simon Birch was different. No bigger
than a baby bird, doctors predicted he would never last the night. But
he did. Then they said he would never last a week. But he
did. Eventually, Simon grew into a little boy, fortified by the
staunch belief that God had made him small for a reason, that God not
only had a special plan for him but that he was going to be a hero.
His story is related by a narrator, Simon's best friend as a child,
now grown-up. We only see him twice - at the beginning and at the end
- but it's this character, played with incredibly sensitivity by Jim
Carrey (who curiously gets no screen credit) that bookends the
narrative. Veteran screenwriter and now first-time director Mark
Steven Johnson has created a cinematic fable, suggested by John
Irving's "A Prayer for Owen Meany."  Since the story begins in a
graveyard in Gravestown, Maine, by the tombstone of "Simon Birch," we
know that the pivotal character died at the age of 12, so the only
dramatic tension revolves around when, where, and how this tragedy
occurred.  The problem with the structure of the film is that it's so
obviously melodramatic and manipulative. In the title role, Ian
Michael Smith, who is afflicted with a rare enzyme disorder, Morquio
Syndrome, compensates for his "vertical challenge" with a truly
magical display of talent. And Joseph Mazzello delivers a truly
remarkable performance as Simon's best friend (the young Jim Carrey)
whose single mother, played by Ashley Judd, refuses to reveal the name
of his father, thus providing the curious boys with an ongoing
mystery. Oliver Platt and David Straithairn provide stalwart
support. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Simon Birch" is a
charming, poignant 7.  It's a wonderful, heartwarming story.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
SIMON BIRCH
Cast: Joseph Mazzello, Ian Michael Smith, Ashley Judd, Oliver Platt,
David Strathairn, Dana Ivey, Jan Hooks, Jim Carrey
Director: Mark Steven Johnson
Screenplay: Mark Steven Johnson suggested by "A Prayer for Owen Meany"
by John Irving
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 and half stars
"Time is a monster that cannot be reasoned with," says one character in
Simon Birch, and that quote sums up much of the meaning of this film -
but there's more to it than that. Simon Birch grasps one extraordinary
character and shapes him in a good-natured and solidly made film.  It is
a film with meaning and significance, and one that uses emotion to keep
its audience interested.  For the most part, it works like a charm.
Simon Birch is an involving and gratifying experience, one that tunnels
its way into your heart and leaves you feeling uplifted.  The only
significant flaw in the production is its stark simplicity - the
storytelling here is straightforward and obvious, but compelling
nonetheless.
During the film's opening scene, we know that it will not end entirely
happily from the sight of a young boy's gravestone.  Simon Birch (Ian
Michael Smith) is the smallest delivery in the history of the Gravestown
Memorial Hospital, pronounced a miracle by doctors.  Simon is physically
stunted but intelligent and witty - during church he interrupts the
sermon: "If God's made the church bake sale a priority, we're in a lot
of trouble."  Simon's best friend is Joe (Joseph Mazzello), and together
they strive to answer the questions that plague their lives.  For Joe,
the disclosed identity of his father lies somewhere in the town, and
Simon firmly believes that he is an instrument from God who will, one
day, become a hero.
The film would have succeeded more on a dramatic level had it taken a
greater focus on Simon's personal life.  His parents neglected him since
birth, ashamed at how society considers him a freak and oblivious to the
incredible person he has become.  But I guess that is another story.
Simon Birch is really about the friendship between two very different
people, and young actors Ian Michael Smith and Joseph Mazzello bring
that friendship to life.  Smith especially is incredible in his first
film role - his performance is the most unique act you'll see this side
of Roberto Benigni.  The supporting cast is also splendid.  Ashley Judd
makes a believable homely mother to Joe, and Jim Carrey has a small but
special part as Joe's adult, present day self.
Simon Birch is simplistic in formation and unashamedly sentimental, yet
it deserves to be respected and admired for its insights into the human
endeavors of faith, devotion and friendship.  Director Mark Steven
Johnson (who wrote Grumpy Old Men and its sequel) paces his film well,
and at no point does it become boring or intimidating.  It is an honest
and good-natured relationship study with clarity and precision.  A
lovely little film that wears its heart on its shoulders, Simon Birch is
a charming journey to the heart of one of societies lovable misfits, and
a "normal" boy whose life will be altered forever thanks to a small,
"meaningless" outcast.


Author
Michael Redman
Faith is a wondrous state of being. Sure knowledge without the benefit of
facts runs the risk of being misplaced but it is a remarkable comfort.
Oddly enough, even in these cynical times, we are a nation of believers.
Everything's going to get better. A better life is just around the corner.
Although the programmers working on it say that it's impossible, we believe
that the Y2K bug will be fixed in time. Despite the evidence of history and
Henry Kissinger's observation about power being the ultimate aphrodisiac, we
are shocked to find that the President has human foibles.
Religious faith in our individual destiny is a different matter. Confidence
that there is a design for our life is a rarity. Simon Birch (Ian Michael
Smith) is convinced that God made him the way that he is in preparation for
his ultimate fate, "I don't need proof. I have faith."
As a twelve-year-old boy just over three feet tall, Simon's faith in his
predestination is either his way of dealing or precognition. Something of an
outcast in 1964 Gravestown, Maine and parented by two people who ignore him,
he sticks to his conviction. God has a plan for him: he's going to be a hero.
Simon's best friend Joe (Joseph Mazzello) also doesn't fit the New England
small town mode. The illegitimate son of Rebecca Wentworth (Ashley Judd) who
refuses to reveal his father's identity, Joe is Simon's confidante and the two
are inseparable. When Rebecca virtually adopts Simon, the boys are like brothers.
Most of the story revolves around their church. Simon gets in trouble for
arrogantly challenging the minister in matters of doctrine, not co-operating
with his nervous uptight Sunday school teacher and copping a feel from the
Virgin Mary as he lies in a manger during the Christmas pageant.
When he does get his chance to shine, tragedy occurs. Because his strike zone
is minuscule, Simon's baseball coach has never allowed him to swing and he is
always walked to first. When the coach wants to go home early, he tells him to
try for a hit, hoping for an easy out. Simon connects with the ball but with
disastrous results.
Midway through the film, Rebecca is no longer available to the boys and they
turn to her suitor Ben Goodrich (Oliver Platt) for guidance in their searches
for Simon's destiny and Joe's father. Ben has worked his way into the boys'
hearts while trying to win that of Joe's mom.
The movie almost works. Like personal favorite "Stand By Me", the tale of
buddies growing up in a small town features kids with winning personalities.
Unfortunately, like "Stand By Me", it's a lot like "Stand By Me". There's even
a fat kid vomiting at a public event.
There are a few strong moments here. Joe's understanding of how a dead
person's existence disappears in bits and pieces from the still-living is
touching. Simon's faith is inspiring. Their friendship is poignant.
The biggest flaw is that everything is proclaimed in advance. There's no
foreshadowing here, it's foreannouncing. The film is framed as a flashback by
bookends featuring Jim Carrey in a small part as the adult Joe. His first
appearance reveals two important plot developments that come later. His
voice-over throughout the movie constantly tells us what is about to happen.
It's all so obvious that a woman in the row behind me was "Oh no"-ing for a
full minute before the climax of a key scene.
Judd (sibling and daughter of the country singers) and Platt are the
liveliest people in the film. She is vivacious, has a likable way and is
pleasant to watch. Platt is one of those actors you've seen in minor roles in
dozens of movies and is easy to warm up to. Unfortunately Rebecca disappears
halfway through and the movie is poorer for it.
Although it's obvious that this is Smith's first role, he and Mazzello are
excellent as the two friends. Their amiable friendship makes it even more
grievous that the film is flawed. Director Mark Steven Johnson isn't willing
to let them win us over, he has to be manipulative about it.
The film is loosely based on John Irving's "A Prayer For Owen Meany". It's so
loose that not only is the title character's name changed, but the credits
read "suggested by" the novel.
It's a bit confusing as to whether this is a story about two friends, one of
whom just happens to be a dwarf or if it's about someone who is "differently
abled" who happens to have a good pal. Just when I was admiring the story for
treating Simon as a regular human being, a scene would pop up where the
audience's heartstrings were tugged at based primarily on his size and awkward
movements. This is a fine line and to give Johnson credit, he mostly succeeds
at getting us to accept Simon as a boy rather than a freak.
Childhood is amazing. Films like this could allow us to revisit those times
we've left behind. Growing up is so full of awe and limitless possibilities
that it doesn't need a heavy-handed director to make us to appreciate it.
(Michael Redman as written this very column for over 23 years and sometimes
feels like his inner child is taking over. So there. Email your boy- and
girlhood misadventures to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 9/10/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Matt Williams
Simon Birch is a film loosely based on John Irving's novel, A Prayer for
Owen Meany. Names, dates, plot elements and places have been
changed...so fans of the books should be wary going in.  It may not be a
faithful adaptation, but with an open mind, it's a charming little film
in its own right.
The titular character is a diminutive twelve-year-old in a small Maine
town during 1964.  Despite his small stature, Simon has a big heart.  He
means to do well, even though he's constantly getting into trouble.  The
doctors claimed it was a miracle that he is even alive, so Simon
believes God has put him here for a purpose.
His best friend is also the film's narrator, Joe Wentworth (Joseph
Mazzello, and Jim Carrey as an adult).  Like Simon, Joe is somewhat of
an outcast in the small community.  He was born out of wedlock, and his
beautiful young mother (Ashley Judd) has steadfastly refused to reveal
to anyone the identity of his father.  This is a question which haunts
Joe day and night, and he has begun his own private search for his dad.
The action all takes place over one fateful year in the lives of Simon
and Joe. They have adventures, make new friends (notably Joe's mom's new
beau, Ben Goodrich (Oliver Platt)), and at least try to stay out of
trouble under the watchful eyes of Reverend Russell (David Strathairn)
and Miss Leavey (Jan Hooks).
There are times when the film nearly gets bogged down in its own
sweetness, but it is usually saved by some smart dialogue and good
delivery by Ian Michael Smith. Both he and Joseph Mazzello quickly
establish an easy, believable rapport that is crucial for the success of
the film.  The two young actors are a credit to the film.
Unfortunately, the same can't be said for Jim Carrey's bookending
narration.  Not only does his small cameo smell of a casting gimmick,
but it is unnecessary and actually spoils two crucial plot twists later
on in the film.
It may be for that same reason, but several of the "sad" moments in the
film are strangely unmoving.  The pivotal misuse of foreshadowing
undercuts any dramatic tension in these scenes.  Moments which are
intended to be deeply touching are instead dispassionate.
Still, that's not to say the film is a failure...far from it.  The
central story of friendship is strong enough to carry the weight of
Simon Birch on its own.  Add to that a nice little portrait of small
town life in the 60s, and several funny moments, and you've got a good
little film, just like Simon himself.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SIMON BIRCH ** 1/2  Directed and written by Mark Steven Johnson, suggested
by the novel łA Prayer for Owen Meany˛ by John Irving.Photography, Aaron E.
Schneider. Editing, Betsy Heimann. Production design, David Chapman. Music,
Marc Shaiman. Cast: Ian Michael Smith (Simon Birch), Joseph Mazzello  (Joe
Wenteworth), Ashley Judd  ( Rebecca Wenteworth), Oliver Platt  (Ben
Goodrich), David Strathairn ( Rev. Russell), Dana Ivey ( Grandmother
Wenteworth),  Beatrice Winde (Hilde Grove), Jan Hooks ( Miss Leavey ), et
al. A Hollywood Pictures release. 113 minutes. Rated PG.
In older days, when handkerchiefs (small squares of cloth) were in common
use, many films where sentiment predominated were called "a two-hankie," "a
three-hankie" movie, etc. Today, how many paper tissues will absorb the
lacrymosity of "Simon Birch"'s audience is debatable, but use of Kleenex (a
registered trademark) will and does occur among several viewers, as does a
hush during certain sections of the film.
This isn't all bad. Any picture that touches hearts, even those of
salesgirls (a sexist expression from older eras), can nowadays come as a
relief from screen brutality, gratuitous action, catastrophes, spectacular
special effects and the like, all at the expense of rational thought or
natural feelings.
That's the bottom line for "Simon Birch," which comes from a book by John
Irving -- said to be his most popular in the U.K.--but do notice the
credits above. They state "suggested by the novel," which distances the
movie from the printed work far more than " from the novel." Irving himself
apparently demanded this, as well as the change in the title.
This is the first film directed by Mark Steven Johnson, a Minnesotan in his
early thirties who scripted   Grumpy Old Men , Grumpier Old Men, Big Bully,
and the yet unreleased Frost (or Jack Frost). The task of writing a
scenario from any John Irving book is daunting; translating Irving's mix of
fantasy, realism, humor and seriousness, points of view and strategies into
a motion picture is no piece of cake. (Two Irving novels have already been
made into films, The World According to Garp, and The Hotel New Hampshire.
A third, The Cider House Rules, is in pre-production).
Mr. Johnson opted for simplification, modification and selectivity --for
example he cut out the original's sections about VietNam. The story that's
left is about Simon, who, we learn right from the start, lived from 1952 to
1964 in a small New England town. The son of hardy stock (symbolically, his
father is in the granite business), he was the tiniest child ever born in
the local hospital. He suffered from a genetic flaw called Morquio's
Syndrome which results in dwarfism.
We meet Simon when he is about 12, fully grown at three feet and one inch.
He is played by 11-year old sixth-grader Ian Michael Smith (b. Chicago, in
May 1987), in his film debut. It is worth quoting the press information
which, as a rule, hypes things up, but here is really fascinating. "Ian
lives near Chicago with younger brother Brian, his mother , who has an MA
in music education and has been a high school band and orchestra director,
and his father, a management consultant and former stage actor with a BA in
political science and a Master's in foreign language teaching." Ian Smith,
a top student who reads a great deal, has many interests, is learning piano
and trumpet, etc. etc.
In the film, Simon's diminutive size finds its other extreme in an
amazingly precocious, intelligent brain and, to use a much-abused epithet,
a truly unique disposition. The boy, fully aware of how he is seen by
others, as a freak or a toy, a pet, the object of games at his expense
(though not really cruel ones), takes it all in with equanimity, tolerance,
humor, even self-mockery. He appears to be philosophical about his unusual
physique and, indeed, something of a mystic who believes that God created
him for some mysterious special purpose and that He plans for Simon to
become a hero some day.
Simon closest friend is a boy his age, his constant companion Joe
Wenteworth who towers over him. Joe too is different from the other
townspeople. He was born out of wedlock to the beautiful Rebecca, after she
had a brief encounter with a stranger. Rebecca, ever charming, poised and
good-humored, has never revealed the identity of Joe's father, not even to
her mother ( Grandmother Wenteworth), a local and rather patrician widow
who allies a mock-serious mien with genuine kindness. When, years ago,
Grandma's black maid Hildie lost a leg, the senior Mrs. Wenteworth, having
hired a replacement maid, also engaged a second one, to take care of
Hildie, who became her friend and companion to both ladies' dying days.
Simon's parents are left unexplored in the movie though it is obvious that
they consider the boy as an unwelcome presence. Not much is said about the
Wenteworth group, yet is abundantly clear that, with Simon in tow, they
constitute a lovable circle for us and a circle of eccentrics by local
standards.
I speculate that the change of name from the novel's Owen Meany to Simon
Birch is no choice out of a hat. Most probably "Simon" is an ironic joke
about "Simple Simon," since this Simon is anything but simple. "Birch" may
have to do with the resilience and the bending of the tree. Whatever the
symbolism, Simon is a complex creature whose rich language and reactions
keep astounding us. His comments and repartee are way beyond his age. For
example, he wonders why Rebecca does not reveal to Joe his father's
identity: "You're already a bastard. You might as well be an enlightened
one."
Simon occasionally may sound like a child, but more often like an adult,
whom some might call smart-alecky.  In Sunday school class and at church
services he is a thorn in the Reverend Russell's flesh  as he argues,
reasons, contradicts with impeccable logic and a vast knowledge of the
Bible. At some point there is even a duel of Biblical quotes between the
child and the preacher.
There is also, in the boy, a layer of sexuality that comes out in speech a
la John Irving. And, if I remember correctly, at one point Simon mentions
to Joe his physical attraction to Rebecca, over and above his love for the
young woman whose affection, kindness and understanding of Simon make her
his surrogate and (in today's sense) virtual mother.
The story is framed by a serious Jim Carrey, as the now adult Joe, who,
without projecting his teeth, narrates the start and the end of the tale --
a tale that I shall not even hint at except to say that Simon's search for
his purpose on this earth and Joe's search for his father come to fruition.
It's a colorful, original story but it also moves too slowly, even gets
sluggish and heavy-handed at times, has unclear elements, lays it on thick
--"it" being characterizations, events, a saccharine and/or inappropriate
music score, excessive colorfulness, predictable bits, etc.  Above all one
is being constantly manipulated at the level of emotions. The movie, which
is too long, too often pushes pathos into bathos.
Yet, each time I began to twitch and get bored, I reminded myself that,
after all, this picture does go against the grain of the no-think cinematic
excesses that engulf us and that  this is something to be thankful for; and
that Ian Michael Smith's extraordinary performance makes up for filmic
weaknesses.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Curtis Edmonds
Movies cheat, everyone knows that.  There's a whole industry dedicated
to special effects, the smoke and mirrors filmmakers need to create
whatever illusions they need to tell their story.  However, we've gotten
so used to looking at the visual effects that sometimes we forget the
other tricks of the Hollywood trade.  Simon Birch has no visual
gimmickry to speak of.  The only special effect used is not a model or a
CGI bluescreen computerized image but an idea -- the idea of destiny.
Unlike giant cruise ships or frothing tyrannosaurs, destiny is cheap.
All you have to do is write the script so that you tip the audience off
to what's going to happen.  It's called foreshadowing -- and if
foreshadowing were eyeshadowing, Simon Birch would look like Tammy Faye
Bakker.
The movie starts off in a graveyard, (in a town called Gravestown, no
less) with narrator Jim Carrey standing over the graves of his mother
(Ashley Judd) and his childhood friend Simon Birch (Ian Michael Smith).
You would think that would be enough to inform us of the fate of the
characters, wouldn't you?  Well, you'd be wrong.  When the time comes
for the mother to die, it's set up by more earnest, serious narration
(yes, it's that Jim Carrey) and an agonizingly tedious slow motion shot
of the errant foul ball that hits her in the head and kills her.  In
fact, it's so slow that the dimmer members of the audience could be
heard to say, "Hey, that lady's gonna get hit in the head with that
baseball."
And if the clunky foreshadowing of the plot weren't enough, we are left
with the character of Simon Birch.  Simon is a tiny little boy, with
thick Coke-bottle glasses, hearing aids, and a whiny, annoying voice --
"like strangled mice", we're told.  He is the movie's chief
standard-bearer for the idea of destiny.  He tells everyone that he is
God's chosen instrument, and that God has destined him to be a hero.  He
is called on to make oracular pronouncements from time to time -- he
tells poor Oliver Platt that he doesn't think he has long to live, just
as if he's read the script.  Predictably, this attitude gets annoying.
In fact, I could start the next twelve sentences with the word
"predictably", because so much about the plot is predictable -- and
what's not given away in the storyline is given away by the narration or
the background music.
Having said that, it's still possible to make a good movie that's
predictable, just as it's possible to enjoy a trip to somewhere you've
been a thousand times.  Simon Birch ends up being a decent movie, even
if it can't overcome the limitations of its script. The heart of the
movie is the relationship between Simon and his best friend Joe (Joseph
Mazzello).  They're both very gifted actors who happen to be under
voting age.  When you think about it, it's a little odd.  You have
big-time Hollywood producers forking over millions of dollars to make a
movie and placing their trust in two kids who can't drive.  The best
thing about Simon Birch is that Smith and Mazzello prove that they're
worthy of such trust.
The first thing that I noticed about Smith was that he wasn't on the
movie poster.  The poster depicts a small baby being held out of a pool
of water by two disembodied hands.  Smith is about 3 feet tall, with
teeth jutting out at ninety-degree angles, and while he's no poster boy,
we're constantly reminded that he's "cute, like a little doll".  And he
is cute, the audience likes him, and that goodwill is enough to carry
him through some very odd moments -- such as when he stands up in church
and asks, "What do coffee and donuts have to do with God?"  Smith does a
superb job in a role that would be difficult for an actor of any age.
Mazzello's part isn't as showy -- he's basically a nice kid getting
picked on by life.  (It's sort of like a Wonder Years episode where Fred
Savage's mom dies.)  On the surface, there's not a lot of emotional
depth to his character -- but what there is, he brings out.  Mazzello
does himself proud in his first major leading role
In comparison, the adult parts are drab.  Ashley Judd is luminous as the
doomed mother, but she's not onscreen long enough to make any kind of
impression.  Oliver Platt is the designated Good Guy, and he's given
little to do other than be good.  Only David Strathairn makes any kind
of impression as the erring New England minister.
If life is, as Forrest Gump tells us, like a box of chocolates, Simon
Birch is a Hershey bar.  You know what you're going to get -- but it's
good and sweet and something of a guilty pleasure, and can be enjoyed
for what it is.
Movie Reviews: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Curtis+Edmonds
Hollywood Stock Exchange: http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"Tabasco sauce is to bachelor cooking what forgiveness is to sin."

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
"They don't make 'em like that anymore!"  That's what the true movie fan
will say and only a true cynic who is angry at the world, blaming it for
all of their personal failures will hate this film as it is nearly
impossible to truly dislike a film like 'Simon Birch'.  This film is
brimming with childhood innocence and coming of age and has enough light
hearted humour to fill the context of a two hour motion picture.  The
film plays like poetry.  It has its highs and it has its lows and I
don't mean that in terms of quality but in terms of emotion.
Based on 'A Prayer for Owen Meany' by John Irving, 'Simon Birch' has
within it a true story of optimism when life hands you a setback.  The
point of this film can be easily missed as it strives for its entire
running time to tell a story of how friendship can have no boundaries,
only commitments.
Ian Michael Smith is Simon Birch.  He's a twelve year old boy who has a
birth defect of inadequate growth.  He's an absolutely spirited human
being and for a boy of twelve, he has the wisdom and attitude of someone
three times his age.  He and his best friend, another 12 year-old played
by Joseph Mazzello ('Jurassic Park'), go about their everyday lives in
Gravestown, Maine in 1964.  Simon is a boy who isn't truly happy.  Wise
in the many ways of the world for a boy his age, Simon's parents neglect
him.  Never truly loving him for who he is but disappointed by the way
he was born.  It is a stigma many children suffer from.
Joseph Mazzello plays Joe Wenteworth, and his mother, portrayed by
Ashley Judd, is the town's live wire.  A beautiful and down to earth
woman who gave birth to Joe out of wedlock and refuses to name who his
father his.  In many ways, she acts as a substitute mother for Simon.
Making sweaters for him when it's cold, showering him with a kind word
and making him feel he's as good as anyone in the town are her assets
and she is the best character in the film.  I would like to see Judd
receive an Oscar nomination for this role as her character is the
emotional anchor of the film, even though she isn't in it as much as we,
who like this film, would enjoy seeing her.
One thing I would like to point out about 'Simon Birch' is that it is
flawed but very mildly.  There are traces of 'Stand by Me', 'Forrest
Gump', 'The Sweet Hereafter' and 'Made in Heaven' to be found but the
film's mild lack of originality is compensated by terrific performances
and a story that will be mistaken by many as manipulative when it's
really about one thing, humanity.  We are treated at the beginning of
the film to the somewhat surprising appearance of Jim Carrey who plays
Joe Wenteworth as a man in the present day, visiting friends of the past
and is the film's narrator.
Other major characters in the film are Oliver Platt as a suitor of Joe's
mother who Joe eventually grows fond of and David Strathairn who in many
ways plays the film's most enigmatic character.
I was stunned to see that many of the things that Simon and Joe go
through actually happened to me as a youngster and as many who see the
film will testify to, it is a film that brings back happier times in
one's life and is a film many can relate to.  People in many regards
don't go to the movies to be lectured to but 'Simon Birch' is the
perfect film to take children to as both an entertainment value and as a
lesson of life.
The film is written for the screen and directed by Mark Steven Johnson
who wrote both 'Grumpy Old Men' movies and 'Simon Birch' is a film that
will not be entirely appreciated for the moment but will be better
cherished a decade or more down the road.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
(this address will change in October 1998...details to follow)

Author
Greg King
SIMON BIRCH (PG).  
(Hollywood Pictures/Buena Vista International)
Director: Mark Steven Johnson
Stars: Joseph Mazzello, Ian Mitchell Smith, Oliver Platt, David 
Starthairn, Jan Hooks, Ashley Judd, Jim 
Carrey, Dana Ivey
Running time: 110 minutes.
Last year we had two films about killer meteors heading
towards earth, and two animated films looking at the secret world
inside an ant colony.  This year we have two similar films exploring
the unique friendship that develops between two twelve year old
outcasts, one suffering from genetic birth defects, the other obsessed
with his father.
Adapted from the novel A Prayer For Owen Meany, written by
John Irving (The World According To Garp, etc), Simon Birch is a
touching tale of a childhood friendship that leaves a lasting
impression.  This moving but overly saccharine story also shares many
ideas and themes with the upcoming The Mighty.  It's unfortunate that
the decidedly inferior Simon Birch is being released locally before
that far more powerful, inspiring and genuinely moving film.
Writer/director Mark Steven Johnson (best known for writing
the two Grumpy Old Men films) has made numerous changes to Irving's
sprawling novel, but has retained its spirit and flavour.  Set in
1964, the film focuses on one crucial year in the life of the
eponymous Simon and his best friend Joe Wenteworth (Joseph Mazzello,
from Jurassic Park, The River Wild, etc).
Pint sized Simon (newcomer Ian Mitchell Smith) was the
smallest birth ever recorded at Gravestown's hospital.  A small,
precocious and slightly deformed kid, he is largely neglected by his
apathetic parents and ridiculed by many of the unsympathetic
townsfolk.  Simon believes that he is God's instrument on this earth,
but is impatient about waiting to find out his true purpose.  His
strong faith leads him to constantly clash with the humourless
reverend Russell (David Strathairn), who lacks the traditional
Christian values of tolerance, compassion and forgiveness.
The illegitimate Joe doesn't know the identity of his father,
and his mother (Ashley Judd) goes to her grave with the secret.  Simon
becomes involved in helping Joe search to uncover the identity of his
father, a quest that will change their lives and have devastating
consequences.
As with The Mighty, the two young stars hold their own against
the more accomplished adult performers.  Both Mazzello and Smith
develop a wonderful rapport that enriches the movie, and their
engaging performances provide the film with its solid emotional punch.
Smith delivers a wonderful performance in a demanding role.  He is
likely to have a short film career (pardon the pun), because he
suffers from a rare degenerative disease, and there probably aren't a
lot of roles around for someone with his distinctive stature and
physical size.  (Smith apparently also auditioned for a very similar
role in The Mighty, but eventually lost out to Macaulay Culkin's
younger brother Keiran.)
As usual, the very talented Mazzello is excellent, bringing
intelligence and a sense of compassion to his role.  Jim Carrey
appears briefly as the adult Joe, who narrates this quirky but
engaging tale.  The very busy Oliver Platt delivers a nicely
understated but sympathetic performance as Ben, the drama teacher who
becomes a surrogate father to the orphaned Joe.
Best known as a screen writer, Johnson makes his directorial
debut here, but his direction is occasionally a little flaccid.  The
film seems overlong, and episodic in nature, and could have been
tightened up in a number of areas.  Johnson also seems unsure of his
target audience.  The film includes a number of potentially crowd
pleasing elements - there's tragedy, big emotional moments, and lots
of comedy, especially during the staging of the town's "first, full
contact Christmas Pageant."  As the film is set in the early '60's,
Johnson also uses the almost obligatory soundtrack to help bring the
era to life.
Simon Birch may well be a moving and heart breaking tale of a
beautiful friendship between two pre-pubescent boys, but somehow it
seems phoney and unnecessarily manipulative when compared to the
superior The Mighty.  Unfortunately, local audiences will have to wait
a couple of months before they can compare the two and make up their
own minds about their respective qualities.

Author
Mark O'Hara
I've yet to decide if a movie is good if it makes you cry.  SIMON BIRCH 
gave me at least one all-out belly laugh, during the Christmas pageant, 
and I've thought for some time that a movie is decent if it makes you 
shout in laughter.  But crying?
I did not cry during Forrest Gump's monologue directed at Jenny's grave.  
It was as though the director were lighting up a CRY NOW sign, in the 
same way that television studios light APPLAUSE signs.  The movie did 
not earn our tears, at least in this scene.
SIMON BIRCH made my lip quiver, and I know my daughter was squeezing my 
wife's arm during the scenes that were designed to be gut-wrenching.  
Maybe the answer is here, that if a sequence is "designed" or 
"engineered" to move us, it does not ring true, and therefore does not 
come by our tears honestly.  The taint of artifice.
What's likable about SIMON BIRCH?  It's a buddy movie, two boys who are 
best friends, and it's set in the early 1960s.  So there's an aura of 
nostalgia, a feeling that the action is ensconced in the lost and better 
past.  The main plot hovers about the life of Joe Wentworth (Joseph 
Mazzello), a 12 year-old who does not know who his father is.  For some 
time he has been the butt of jokes and scorn, but his mother has not 
revealed her lover met years ago on the train.  Life-long pal Simon 
Birch (Ian Michael Smith), also 12 but with the eccentricities of 
someone much older, decides he will help Joe find his father.  We are 
also informed of Simon's deep-seated belief that God put him here for a 
purpose, that because of his faith, Simon would cope with his dwarfism 
and overcome people's blindness.  Simon would become a hero.
These two early adolescents quickly endear themselves to the viewer.  
Although their routine is typical - playing baseball, racing to the 
creek for a swim, discussing girls - the script (by Mark Steven Johnson) 
has them perform these growing up tasks with quirky originality.  
Simon's self-deprecating humor is especially charming.  He one-ups Joe 
in physical comparisons, though he goes for the smaller instead of the 
superior.  He accepts playing the Baby Jesus because he is the only 
student who will fit in the crib.  And he rides, perhaps too cutely, in 
a wooden Coca-Cola crate rigged up as a sidecar to Joe's bike.  Though 
their actions and ideas are occasionally unexplainable, both boys craft 
fine performances, causing the audience to feel a range of emotions.
Ashley Judd distinguishes herself as Rebecca Wentworth, Joe's mother.  
Although cast as an ideal - the pretty and caring mom - Judd steps 
around firmly in the role, making it believable.  Part of her importance 
is serving as Simon's surrogate mom, one who cares about the boy - 
unlike his real parents, who permit Simon to live with them but are 
otherwise uninvolved.   Judd's acting might be compared to the product 
of a writer who works hard for transparent prose, or of a dancer who 
works tirelessly for effortless leaps.  It's unfortunate that the story 
calls for Rebecca to appear only in the first half of the film.  
Oliver Platt's role, Ben Goodrich the drama teacher who begins to date 
Rebecca, suffers from acute stereotype.  But Platt manages to make the 
character engaging.  Yes, Joe initially resents him, and Ben tries to 
win the boy over with goofy gifts and behaviors.  But there's a depth 
that Ben's character achieves, especially after Rebecca's character 
departs from the story.  Platt's flat face and nonchalance connects him 
with both Joe and Simon, another surrogate, but the audience is also in 
on the connection.
Like Platt, David Strathairn is a reliable character actor, but the 
script does not fully develop his Reverend Russell.  What we get is a 
lightweight Dimmesdale from The Scarlet Letter, a stiff and rather 
cowardly man whose presence is overshadowed by any character appearing 
with him.  Other supporting roles are well-cast, including Jan Hooks, 
almost unrecognizable, as Miss Leavy, a nasty Sunday school teacher, and 
Jim Carrey as the adult Joe Wentworth, whom we see in the framing tale 
at start and end.
Director Mark Steven Johnson's main accomplishment is the friendship 
among the main characters;  these relationships make us care about them.  
A secondary success is the comfortable mood set up by the beautiful 
camera work, especially in scenes that perfectly evoke fall and winter.  
September was a great month in which to release this film:  the leaves 
and fast-running water throughout the story both add to the imagery and 
cause the climax to reverberate all the more.
If I were to rank SIMON BIRCH by percentile, it would place in the 80's 
- perhaps a "B" picture, but one that is considerably more than half 
successful.  As far as causing tears, I mostly agree with a writing 
teacher who said a good story is one that makes you laugh or cry.  SIMON 
BIRCH affected my family and me, and I'll carry some of its images in my 
mental storehouse of favorites.  Because it meets these criteria, and 
because I cared about its characters, SIMON BIRCH is a good film to me.


Author
Scott Renshaw
SIMON BIRCH
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Joseph Mazzello, Ian Michael Smith, Oliver Platt, David
Strathairn, Ashley Judd, Jan Hooks.
Screenplay:  Mark Steven Johnson, suggested by the novel _A Prayer for
Owen Meany_ by John Irving.
Producers:  Laurence Mark and Roger Birnbaum.
Director:  Mark Steven Johnson.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, profanity)
Running Time: 113 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     At least they prepared me right off the bat, right there in the
credits.  I knew SIMON BIRCH was based on John Irving's whimsically
twisted 1989 novel _A Prayer for Owen Meany_, but I had also heard that
screenwriter/director Mark Steven Johnson had taken great liberties with
the text.  I didn't need to wait long to understand how many liberties,
thanks to an admirably forthright screen credit:  "Suggested by the novel
_A Prayer for Owen Meany_."  Not "inspired by," not "based on," not even
"loosely based on" like the 1995 travesty of _The Scarlet Letter_.
"Suggested by."
     I wish I had known Johnson was taking suggestions, because I might
have offered a few.  I might have suggested that he retain slightly more
than the basic set-up, involving two 12-year-old friends in a New England
Town circa the early 1960s.  Joe Wenteworth (Joseph Mazzello) is the son
of an unmarried woman (Ashley Judd) who has refused to divulge the
identity o fJoe's father; Simon Birch (Ian Michael Smith) was "the
smallest delivery ever recorded in the history of Gravestown Memorial
Hospital," and has remained unusually small.  The two young lives are
connected first by their status as town outsiders, then further sealed
when an errant Little League foul ball off the bat of tiny Simon has
tragic consequences.
     Right about there, all similarity to the source material ends.  Sure,
a few individual details remain, notably a school Christmas pageant which
goes dreadfully awry, but even that element is given an ill-advised twist.
The film's Simon, like his literary counterpart, has a preternaturally
mature sense of existential purpose, an almost arrogant belief that God
intends great things for him.  It makes no sense for that character -- who
schemes in the novel to be the Baby Jesus in the Nativity play because he
thinks only he can do the role justice -- to be turned into a grumpy and
reluctant Christ-child.  It makes even less sense for the Christmas Eve
catastrophe to begin with reverent-beyond-his-years Simon trying to feel
up the Virgin Mary.  Johnson goes for the cheap laughs of projectile
vomiting and pre-pubescent groping rather when he should be trying to
maintain some consistency in his characterizations.
     I don't mean to suggest that SIMON BIRCH is an awful film,
particularly if you walk in like most viewers with no knowledge of
Irving's novel.  Johnson has put together a tremendously appealing cast,
including Judd, David Strathairn, and an atypically slime-free Oliver
Platt (as the kindly suitor of Joe's mother).  The friendship between Joe
and Simon is unique and well-developed, though the more experienced
Mazzello makes first-time screen actor Smith look quite self-conscious at
times.  Even the narration (by an uncredited Jim Carrey, who also appears
as the adult Joe in the film's present-day framing scenes) is under-stated
and amusing.  The first half of SIMON BIRCH is generally satisfying, a
sprightly and quirky reminiscence cast in the autumn tones of Aaron E.
Schneider's cinematography.
     It's the latter half, which diverges most sharply from Irving's
story, that goes most horribly wrong.  The light-hearted, off-beat story
takes a sharp turn into melodrama in heavy syrup, centered around a school
bus crash which should make everyone who saw THE SWEET HEREAFTER thank
Whatever God to Whom They Pray that Mark Steven Johnson didn't get his
hands on it.  The music score (by the ever-cloying Marc Shaiman) begins
reminding us every several seconds that it's time to weep, eventually
building to the orchestral equivalent of yanking out your nose hairs one
at a time.  With its "oh by the way, in case you're a complete moron,
here's the moral of the story" punch line of dialogue, SIMON BIRCH is less
emotionally cathartic than it is emotionally insulting.  Johnson doesn't
just streamline Irving's sprawling narrative, he dumb-lines it, casting
everything in the broadest tear-jerker strokes.  What a waste of a 
singular story to turn it into a trite Hallmark card of a dramatic 
experience.  The power of suggestion sure can make people do foolish
things.

Author
D Lewis
                                SIMON BIRCH
                         Reviewed by Dennis Lewis
     If you had to dab away a few tears at the conclusion of "Titanic,"
you may want to take along a full box of Puffs if you go see "Simon Birch."
     "Simon Birch," which opens nationwide on Sept. 11, is a movie that can
bring a smile to the face of the most jaded viewer -- or tears to the eyes
of the most cynical.
     Simon, the title character, is an exceptionally compact individual.
At birth he was "no bigger than a baby bird," according to the movie
synopsis, and he remains unusually small as he approaches adolescence.
     Simon's best friend, Joe, is a tall, athletic teenager from one of the
wealthier families in the Maine village in which he and Simon live. Yet Joe
feels like an outsider among the other teenagers in his community because
his mother Rebecca bore him out of wedlock (and has never married).
     The two "outsiders" -- Joe, the "town bastard," and the diminutive
Simon -- form a bond that, as it turns out, has enough strength to
withstand the most serious strain.
     Simon has a belief that God made him small for a reason, to fulfill a
special mission.
     One of the movie's key themes concerns Simon's quest for his "special
purpose" in life. The other deals with Joe's search for clues to the
identity of his father, who he believes still resides in their village.
     Joe is played by Joseph Mazzello, whose previous credits include both
"Jurassic Park" and its sequel, "The Lost World."
     Mazzello manages to infuse his character with the blend of maturity and
youthful innocence necessary to generate audience interest in his quest to
identify his father.
     Ian Michael Smith brings a self-reliance to the character of Simon. As
we watch him on the screen, we're not thinking "poor Simon" because of his
physical limitations; rather, we're cheering his pugnacious approach to
life.
     David Straithairn (most recently of "L.A. Confidential") plays the
Rev. Russell, rector of the local Episcopal church, the congregation
attended by Joe's family and Simon. Straithairn's cleric isn't the
charismatic spiritual leader we're used to seeing on screen. Repeatedly we
sense that Russell is trying, but failing, to connect with his
parishioners.
     (Simon Birch is a reunion of sorts for Straithairn and Mazzello -- the
two played father and son in 1994's "The River Wild.")
     Saturday Night Live veteran Jan Hooks, who did a "church lady"-type
character on Ted Turner's TBS Superstation at the beginning of her career
in the early 1980s, is divine in her role as teacher of Joe and Simon's
Sunday School class. Hooks plays her character as a frustrated woman who
possesses a lot of insecurity and just a dash of menace.
     The main cast is rounded out by Ashley Judd, who plays Joe's mother
Rebecca with an endearing charm that never ventures into the saccharin, and
Oliver Pratt as Ben Goodrich, Rebecca's beau, a drama teacher who has a
remarkable knack for child psychology.
     Simon Birch originally began as a project to adapt John Irving's novel
"A Prayer for Owen Meany" to the screen. The resulting script diverted from
the novel to such a degree that Irving requested the film have a different
name.
     One title considered for the film was "Angels and Armadillos," a quirky
name but one with a significance evident to those who've seen the movie.
     Jim Carrey has a cameo in the bookend scenes that frame the movie.
But this isn't a Jim Carrey movie or a "big name" movie; it's a film that
relies on acting and script quality, rather than star power, to attract an
audience.
     If any film this year merits at least one Oscar nomination, it's
"Simon Birch."
                                   Cast
Joseph Mazzello.................................Joe
Ian Michael Smith...............................Simon
Ashley Judd.....................................Rebecca
Oliver Platt....................................Ben Goodrich
David Straithairn...............................Rev. Russell
Jan Hooks.......................................Sunday School Teacher
Jim Carrey......................................Joe as an adult
Source: Internet Movie Database (http://us.imdb.com or
http://italy.imdb.com) and studio Web site for Simon Birch
(http://www.simonbirch.com).

Author
David Butterworth
        A cinematic version of one of John Irving's novels is always cause
for celebration even if, as in the case of "Simon Birch," the treatment is
merely "suggested by," rather than strictly based on, the book.
        Suggested means that Irving, author of the acclaimed "The World
According to Garp," sold the rights to his novel "A Prayer for Owen Meany"
to the Disney machine for $1 million, but wouldn't grant them permission to
use either the title or any of the character names.  That's an odd
decision--Irving claims it's to protect both himself and the novel--but
it's one that doesn't unduly harm the finished product.
        Irving's books are rich and complex works, full of intriguing,
colorful characters.  "A Prayer for Owen Meany" is no exception; it tells
the story of an unusual boy--called Simon Birch in the film version--who is
uncommonly small in stature and possesses a high-pitched falsetto voice,
"like strangled mice."  Simon believes himself to be "God's instrument,"
placed on this earth to somehow effect God's plan.
        Simon is played by Ian Michael Smith, who suffers from a rare
enzyme disorder known as Morquio Syndrome which, among other things,
prevents bones, ligaments, and joints from developing normally.  Smith's
debilitating disease makes him an obvious physical choice for "Simon
Birch"; however, the producers unwisely favored form over function--Smith's
acting abilities are limited at best.
        Another drawback is that in the book, Simon's condition is
described the way Irving describes any of his characters--in careful,
loving detail.  Watching "Simon Birch," however, creates a different
feeling altogether; the audience is forced into a voyeuristic relationship
with the character, surely something Irving would not have intended.
        Simon himself tends to be too cute and irritating, a combination of
Smith's rookie status as an actor and the precocious one-liners he's forced
to deliver, courtesy Mark Steven Johnson, the film's director and
screenwriter.  Fortunately, Simon Birch isn't the real star of the film
that bears his name.  Simon is more of a catalyst, allowing his co-stars to
shape the story, and the actors who fill those roles to turn in outstanding
supporting performances, saving the film from an obsequious, manipulative
destiny.
        First and foremost is Joseph Mazzello ("Jurassic Park"), who is
nothing less than remarkable as Simon's best friend, Joe.  Mazzello turns
in a wonderfully layered performance for a 14 year old, ripe with laughter,
pain, and tears; he is certainly an emerging talent.  Ashley Judd
positively beams in her role as Rebecca, Joe's single mother, and Oliver
Platt is warm and tender as her boyfriend, Ben.  David Strathairn and Jan
Hooks play the town's reverend and Sunday school teacher respectively and
their contributions uphold the high standards set by the others.
        There's even a surprising yet effective uncredited cameo
performance from...  Well, that would be telling.
        Perhaps "suggested by" the novel is the appropriate way to go after
all, since "Simon Birch" only focuses on one chapter, one year, of Simon's
extraordinary life.  The film also changes the book's ending to one that is
more melodramatic, yet necessary given Simon's lot.
        The flavor of Irving's original novel remains, however--the
passions, friendships, and insecurities that come with a change of seasons
to the little community of Gravestown, Maine, and the engaging oddballs,
both big and small, who reside there.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Simon Birch (1998)
Joseph Mazzello, Ian Michael Smith, Ashley Judd, Oliver Platt, David
Strathairn, Dana Ivey, Jan Hooks, Jim Carrey. Music by Marc Shaiman. 
Screenplay by Mark Steven Johnson (suggested by John Irving's "A Prayer 
for Owen Meany"). Directed by Mark Steven Johnson. 113 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars) 
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
After watching "Simon Birch" for the first time, I raced to a bookstore 
and purchased a copy of John Irving's "A Prayer for Owen Meany." I was 
anxious to read the novel for a couple of reasons. First, the 
relationship between the two young boys in the film was so utterly 
charming that I wanted to spend more time with them. Second, the credits 
stated that the movie was "suggested by," rather than "based on," 
Irving's novel, and I wanted to discover why. 
Prior to reading the book, I found "Simon Birch" a delightful, if overly 
manipulative, "Stand By Me" derivative. The story tells of best friends 
Joseph Wenteworth (Joseph Mazzelo) and Simon Birch (Ian Michael Smith). 
Joe is a sweet, unassuming kid who wonders if his radiant mother Rebecca 
(Ashley Judd) will ever decide the time is right to reveal the identity 
of the father he has never known. Shunned by his parents, tiny Simon, the 
"smallest delivery ever recorded in the history of Gravestown Memorial 
Hospital," spends as much time with Joe and his mother as possible. 
Highly intelligent and extremely outspoken, Simon's faith is his dominant 
feature. God made him small as part of a divine plan and, regardless of 
what anyone says, Simon views himself as a miracle and awaits his heroic 
destiny.
"Simon Birch" is set in the same idyllic '60s small-town neverland as 
"Stand By Me." Both films use the same framing device, beginning and 
ending with an adult version of one of the characters reflecting on his 
childhood. In the closing seconds of each film, the adult's reminiscing 
ends when his own son demands attention in the here and now. Both films 
feature a central character who endures parents who treat him as if he 
doesn't exist. Both feature an eye-to-eye encounter with a deer in the 
still countryside. And both include a public event that goes riotously 
wrong, incorporating a barfing fat kid for comic effect.
If only "Simon Birch" had copied "Stand By Me's" score as well. As 
opposed to the wistful, understated orchestral music that accented "Stand 
By Me," Marc Shaiman's score in "Simon Birch" is cloying and overbearing. 
The bullying music is not only annoying, it is unnecessary. This is a 
story with enough oomph to stir emotional reactions without a 
manipulative orchestra nudging us through the film.
Despite its dictatorial score and "Stand By Me Jr." sense of cinematic 
deja vu, "Simon Birch" offers a number of pleasures. The portrait of 
resolute faith is stirring and the story of two best friends on a search, 
one for his father and the other for his destiny, is compelling. The 
central players are particularly well cast. Ashley Judd is luminous as 
Rebecca, a strong, devoted mother with a perpetually sunny disposition. 
Oliver Platt is warm and winning as Ben Goodrich, a beau of Rebecca's who 
acts as surrogate father to both boys. 
As Joe, "Jurassic Park" veteran Joseph Mazzelo gives a terrific 
performance, so strong that he can carry scenes even when his costar's 
inexperience shows. At 3'1," Ian Michael Smith is certainly the right 
size to play Simon Birch and, despite occasional lapses into stiffness, 
he does fine work for a first time actor. Together, the boys are magic, 
captivating as utterly devoted best friends.
Thanks to their winning performances, I found "Simon Birch" appealing and 
moving despite the oppressive score and Mark Steven Johnson's heavy-
handed script and direction. And then I read the book. 
John Irving's "A Prayer for Owen Meany" is remarkable; a rich, complex 
work of art betrayed by Johnson's adaptation. After reading the book it's 
easy to understand why Irving asked the filmmakers to change the names 
and use the phrase "suggested by." Even while making allowances for the 
daunting task of trying to adapt a novel of this scope to fit the 
confines of a feature film, certain of Johnson's decisions are baffling 
at best and infuriating at worst.
Why did he make Simon's parents grim troglodytes who pretend he doesn't 
exist? They weren't that way in the book. Why did he have Joe act sullen 
and standoffish around Ben for much of the film, when in the book he took 
to him almost instantly? Why did he turn most of the secondary characters 
into cardboard cut-outs or leering caricatures? Why did he remove the 
political overtones of the story? Why did he take an opus that spanned 
many years and compress it into one, forcing the invention of a climatic 
scene that feels painfully contrived? And most of all, why did he take 
the Christmas pageant scene, a harrowing, pivotal moment in the book, and 
turn it into a ham-handed farce of barf jokes and horny adolescent 
groping, with Simon exhibiting behavior completely at odds with his 
character?
But enough of that. These are questions that will likely never be 
answered. Maybe they'll make a film of John Irving's "A Prayer for Owen 
Meany" someday. Until then, there's "Simon Birch," a nice little story of 
friendship and faith that manages to charm despite its myriad problems. A 
bit of advice. If you're one of the many fans of the novel, put it 
completely out of your mind before you go to the theater, or skip the 
film entirely and reread the book. And if you haven't read the novel, be 
sure to do so...but for Pete's sake, wait after you've seen the movie. 

Author
Michael Dequina
_Simon_Birch_ (PG) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
Aside from the fleeting presences of big screen talent such as Ashley Judd
and Jim Carrey, there's little in this modest, engaging, yet cloying drama
to distinguish it from, as my guest at the screening said, "a
_Hallmark_Hall_of_Fame_ movie."  "Suggested by" John Irving's novel
_A_Prayer_for_Owen_Meany_ (joining the ranks of Disney's other loose
adaptations of books: _Up_Close_&_Personal, "suggested by" a biography on
late newswoman Jessica Savitch; and, most notoriously,
_The_Scarlet_Letter_, "freely adapted" from the Nathaniel Hawthorne
classic), _Simon_Birch_ tells of the friendship between two very different
12-year-old boys in the 1960s: the tiny title character (Ian Michael
Smith), the smallest delivery ever recorded in his town; and Joe (Joseph
Mazzello).  The two stick together through laughs and tears while at the
same time searching for elusive answers: the identity of Joe's father and
Simon's true purpose as, according to him, "God's instrument."
_Simon_Birch_ features from impressive performances by a glowing Ashley
Judd (as Joe's foxy mother), Oliver Platt (as Judd's boyfriend), and
especially Mazzello and newcomer Smith.  The pair's emotionally charged
scenes are affecting because of their unforced, heartbreaking performances,
and not the often treacly, TV-movie-level writing and direction of
first-timer Mark Steven Johnson, who also overdoes the slapsticky comedy
scenes.  _Simon_Birch_ is a sweet little film, but it may be a bit too
sweet for its own good.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
