Title
Review for Evil Dead II (1987)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: The funniest horror movie ever made; a melange of Dario Argento and
Wile E. Coyote.
EVIL DEAD 2: DEAD BY DAWN is the result of an unstable fusion of Warner
Bros. cartoon slapstick and _giallo_ horror-movie conventions. It's a flick
with the mind of a splatter film and the heart of a Mack Sennett two-reeler.
In plain, non-fanboy language, it's a ton of disgusting fun. Example: A
monster of the undead rises from the cellar, only to have its head smashed
in the trapdoor. Its eyeball pops out and flies into the mouth of one of the
three screaming girls in the movie. GULP.
The plot, what there is of it, is simple to the point of irrelevancy. A
young man and his girlfriend head out to an abandoned cabin for a romantic
interlude, and unwittingly unleash the evil undead. The girl dies horribly
and the man (square-jawed Bruce Campbell) lives -- but as what? Horrendous
mutations strike him like epileptic fits. The dead rise out of their graves
and inflict ghastly punishments and tortures on him. His own hand rebels
against him (and the punishment he exacts on it is howlingly painful).
The majority of the movie is one long, roaring blast of slime, guts, special
effects and ear-drilling sound effects, but it's put together in a way that
gets more than a fair amount of good laughs. EVIL DEAD 2 is most likely
*the* item that started the whole trend of sly, self-referential horror
movies (culminating, of course, in the brilliantly nasty SCREAM), although
it's a lot more freakish and far-out.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  There's more budget than logic to this
     stringing together of off-beat and semi-humorous horror
     scenes.  Creative visual concepts abound and the pace is
     frenetic and that makes up for a multitude of sins.
     I guess in some sense THE EVIL DEAD II is the ultimate horror
film...sort of...I guess.  Well, what can I say?  It does not have much of a
plot.  It has very little acting, no stars, little continuity, and no logic.
But it has action, horror, and black humor in massive doses.  Now, THE EVIL
DEAD II did have some plot.  It was not it's strong suit but it was there.
What THE EVIL DEAD boasted most was wit.  An attacking corpse would be
thrown into the fire.  Then some living person would have a bout of remorse
and pull it out of the fire.  The corpse would look up and politely thank
its benefactor for pulling it out of the fire, then continues to try and
kill the living.  I guess there is some wit in a scene like that and some
willingness to experiment with the horror medium.  The sequel is one strange
semi-horror scene after another.
     The plot is that some professor of some sort has translated the
Necronomicon (of H. P. Lovecraft fame).  He recorded an incantation on tape
and now whenever anyone plays the tape it's Anything-Can-Happen-Day.  A
young couple find the cabin and think it might be an ideal trysting place.
Most of one of them is left the next night when the professor's daughter
shows up with a friend and two rather strange locals.  By that point we have
already seen a beheaded corpse climb out of the ground and do a charming
dance with its head.  We've seen a lot more than that, but that would be
telling.  And we will see a whole lot more, but that, too, would be telling.
     The actors of this piece were, I think, chosen for the terrorized looks
they could get on their faces and for how ghoulish they could make
themselves look.  The script is incredibly contrived, including such touches
as having a bridge that would have cost in the millions that leads to
nowhere but a shack in the woods.  I didn't think boondoggles got that big.
For those who like gore and creative off-beat horror, this one's for you.
As a fan of the latter, though not of the former particularly, I will give
this a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  If you like the bizarre, give it a try.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
"Evil Dead II" (1987) ***1/2 (out of four)
Starring Bruce Campbell, Sarah Berry, Dan Hicks,
Kassie DePaiva, and Denise Bixler
Is Evil Dead II a bad movie? It's full of terrible
acting, pointless violence, and plot holes yet it
remains a cult classic nearly fifteen years after its
release. Explaining why this movie stands out from
others with similar plots (including the original Evil
Dead) is extremely difficult.
`Five people stranded in a log cabin in the middle of
nowhere struggling to survive vicious attacks from 
a variety of ugly, hairy, wart covered monsters.'
`Come on I saw a movie just like that on Monster
Vision last week. Why should I see it again?'
`No Evil Dead II is different, it's funny.'
Maybe I am and maybe director Sam Raimi is as well to
create such an enigma of a movie. His unique execution
is as sarcastic as subtle, as disturbing as it is
hilarious. An example of Raimi's odd approach: a
monster (formerly protagonist Ash's girlfriend of all
people) is cut in half by a chainsaw and a tidal wave
of blood comes from the open wound. Sure it's
over-the-top, but it is so over-the-top that it is
laugh out loud funny; just try watching Ash with a
straight face as he unexpectedly is showered with ten
gallons of blood, staining his face and knocking him
back a few feet. The whole movie is like this, watch
Ash get beat up, watch Ash defeat the monster, watch
Ash get beat up again by another even zanier monster.
The more repetitive and unrealistic the movie gets,
the more amusing it becomes. No matter how sick it may
sound, it is funny to watch Bruce ampbell's Ash get
his butt kicked every five minutes.
And Raimi takes advantage, he has Ash tormented by the
head of his girlfriend, by the body of 
an old lady, even by his own right hand. Like the less
superior Idle Hands, we watch Ash uncontrollably hit
himself over and over again until he is forced to cut
off his own body part. But it doesn't end, Ash now has
to fight his severed hand which now moves with the
same celerity as Thing from The Addams Family. All of
these events, thrown at you from minute one with
roller coaster- like camera movements, at first become
shocking, then inexplicably funny. Raimi expects the
audience to laugh and as the film progresses, he seems
to be enjoying himself even more by borrowing the
classic mirror scene from the Marx Brothers' Duck
Soup, then bringing more characters into the picture
to comically kill them off. With a running time of
less than an hour and a half, Raimi gets away with the
impossible, making a horror film with more gore than
plot and intentionally more laughs than scares. Ending
Evil Dead II with an opening for the third film in the
series, Raimi obviously had a lot of fun making this
movie and couldn't wait to make it's sequel.


Author
John Beachem
Ash (Bruce Campbell) and his girlfriend, Linda (Denise Bixler), travel out 
to a remote cabin in the woods where an archeologist (John Peaks) and his 
wife (Lou Hancock) had been staying. While Ash and Linda settle in, Ash 
discovers a tape recorder on which the professor had been translating his 
latest find, the Necronomicon. When the recorder is played, the professor's 
words wake an evil force in the woods which kills Linda and tries to kill 
Ash. Ash barricades himself in the cabin, blasting anything that comes close 
to the front door with a shotgun. Little does he know that the professor's 
daughter, Annie (Sarah Berry); his colleague, Ed (Richard Domeier); and two 
hill-billies (Dan Hicks, Kassie DePaiva) are on their way. The group first 
thinks Ash killed Annie's parents, but they soon discover the evil force is 
after them as well. Now Ash and the quickly dwindling group have to gear up 
and face the evil forces. Their weapons? A shotgun, a chain-saw, a strange 
bone knife, the Necronomicon, and Ash's wits. They're in deep trouble.
Five years after the release of the first "Evil Dead" movie, Sam Raimi 
brought audiences "Evil Dead II", and motion picture history was made (in my 
opinion anyway). The eternal question facing those who watch this 
magnificent movie is this: what exactly is it? Is it a horror movie? Well, 
it certainly contains horror movie elements. Afterall, blood, gore, ghouls 
and headless girlfriends with chainsaws abound. Yet it can't quite qualify 
as an out and out horror movie because there is also brilliant comedy at 
work here. While the first film had comic elements, it was still a horror 
movie. "Evil Dead II" contains a few comic sequences that have become 
certifiable classics. What really makes "Evil Dead II" strange is that it's 
not exactly a sequel. What do I mean by that? Well, the events of the first 
movie are crammed into the first five minutes of this one, but they're 
changed. In the first movie Ash went to the cabin with his girlfriend, his 
sister, and two friends. In the beginning of this movie he goes with only 
his girlfriend (who promptly dies, leading to one of the funniest scenes in 
the movie). I assume the reason for this is because so few people saw the 
first film, Raimi believed a refresher of sorts would be needed. However, 
rumors that "Evil Dead II" was actually meant to be a parody of the first 
movie have spread.
Five years, three movies, and multiple stage appearances after the first 
"Evil Dead", Bruce Campbell has honed his comic talents to perfection. His 
lines are delivered with sheer comic genius, and his facial expressions are 
second to none. Watch the look on his face when a wave of blood pours out of 
a wall, slams into him, then retreats back into the wall. In the first film, 
Campbell was forced to carry the entire acting load on his shoulders because 
his supporting cast was, well, dreadful. In this installment, the cast 
obviously isn't quite on par with Bruce, but they're all at least tolerable 
(that's probably why some of these people actually went on to careers, uh, 
of sorts). Sarah Berry never went on to anything else, and it's not 
surprising since of the supporting cast members she is far and away the 
worst. She constantly has a look on her face like she's watching the other 
actors closely, waiting for the exact moment when she gets to deliver her 
next line. I hate that. She does have one brief, shining moment though, when 
she goes after Bruce with an axe. Dan Hicks ("Wishmaster") gives quite an 
amusing performance as the hill-billy of the group. My favorite part with 
him is when he screams for Bobbie Joe, who has vanished into the woods. The 
look on his face and his tone of voice are wonderfully pathetic. Ted Raimi 
("Xena: Warrior Princess") shows up, completely unrecognizable as a 
possessed grandmother.
Remember when I said there were a few classic comic scenes in the movie? I'm 
afraid I was understating it a bit. This movie is actually packed with comic 
moments. We get a room full of furniture laughing hysterically (and Ash 
laughing right along with it); a headless girlfriend with a chain-saw 
chasing Ash around; Ash battling his own hand in a three stooges style fight 
(this scene has been mimicked dozens of times); Ash placing a pail on top of 
his severed hand and holding it down with the book, "A Farewell to Arms"; 
Ash getting knocked flying through the forest, spinning head over heels and 
crashing through tree limbs; and dozens more. There's a big laugh every five 
minutes here, plus we also get an obscene amount of gore (that's a good 
thing for me anyway) and a few really good startle effects. Will "Evil Dead 
II" scare you? Maybe if you're eight or nine years old and you still believe 
in monsters under your bed. Otherwise, it's doubtful. "Evil Dead II" isn't a 
scary movie, but it's not meant to be. It's supposed to be campy, fun, and 
highly entertaining; and it delivers on all three counts in spades.
Raimi's direction becomes a bit more restrained in this film, but that's not 
a bad thing, it just shows that his directorial abilities have matured. 
Don't worry, we still get the neat low camera angles, and we still have the 
monster in the woods that tears through them at break neck speed (he's 
involved in another one of the brilliant comic moments, when he chases Ash 
through the house). Yet the camera is a bit more controlled, the action not 
so frantic. Raimi's pacing has also improved, keeping the laughs and action 
consistent throughout most of the movie. In the first movie, Raimi spent 
just a little too long on the build up, and then everything hit us all at 
once. Obviously the fact that the script throws us right into the middle of 
Ash's situation contributes to the lack of down-time in this movie. Joseph 
LoDuca's ("Xena: Warrior Princess") music isn't used too often, but it's 
always appropriately campy when present. "Evil Dead II" runs a frighteningly 
quick 85 minutes. I'd recommend it to fans of the original, fans of cheesy 
"B" horror movies, and fans of Bruce Campbell. For being one of the most 
entertaining horror movies ever made, I give "Evil Dead II" a full five out 
five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
