Title
Review for Screamers (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Peter Weller, Roy Dupuis, Jennifer Rubin, Andy Lauer, 
      Charles Powell
Director: Christian Duguay
Producers: Tom Berry and Franco Battista
Screenplay: Dan O'Bannon and Miguel Tejada-Flores, based on the short 
      story "Second Variety" by Philip K. Dick
Cinematography: Rodney Gibbons
Music: Normand Corbeil
U.S. Distributor: Triumph Films
     Given the poor state of science fiction films over the past few 
years, it's understandable that I approached SCREAMERS with low 
expectations.  After enduring a steady diet of mediocre-to-bad movies 
like STARGATE, PUPPET MASTERS, TIMECOP, STAR TREK: GENERATIONS, SPECIES, 
and others, relief came several weeks ago in the form of Terry Gilliam's 
wonderfully offbeat TWELVE MONKEYS.  Happily, SCREAMERS makes it two 
science fiction successes in a row.  Despite a title that sounds like it 
belongs to a horror picture, this movie is closer to ALIENS than to a 
bloodbath.
     SCREAMERS oozes atmosphere.  It's a dark film that borrows heavily 
from the likes of the ALIEN films, DUNE, BLADE RUNNER, and John 
Carpenter's updated THE THING.  From start to finish, SCREAMERS is shot 
in a manner intended to convey paranoia and claustrophobia.  Set design 
is always impressive, if bleak, and consists primarily of ruined 
buildings and underground bunkers.  Matte paintings of wrecked bridges 
and smashed cities form an ominous backdrop to much of the movie's 
action.
     The film opens with several paragraphs of background text.  The 
year is 2078 and the place is Sirius 6B.  Once a paradise, it has been 
reduced to a radioactive wasteland as the result of mining toxic 
Berynium (the "solution" to Earth's energy crisis) and a war that has 
lasted more than a decade.  Peace may be close at hand, however, and 
it's up to Commander Hendricksson (Robocop himself, Peter Weller) to 
decide the legitimacy of his enemies' appeal for an armistice. 
     Along with fresh-out-of-training rookie Ace (Andy Lauer), 
Hendricksson heads into the wasteland, traveling to the opposition's 
control bunker.  Along the way, he meets several other Sirius 6B 
survivors, all eking out a nomadic existence:  bootlegger Jessica 
(Jennifer Rubin), a woman who wants nothing more than to go to Earth; 
Ross (Charles Powell), the sole survivor of a massacre; and Becker (Roy 
Dupuis), a hardened cynic who prefers killing to asking questions.  
     As these five trek across the surface of Sirius 6B, they encounter 
a new, deadly adversary:  the screamers (so nicknamed because of the 
squeal they make when attacking).  Originally created as "autonomous 
mobile swords" by Hendricksson's side, the electronic, buzz-saw-like 
creatures have evolved, shaking off the yoke of slavery.  With the 
ability to form a human shape and mimic human behavior, little appears 
beyond their capabilities, including infiltrating Hendricksson's small 
group.
     SCREAMERS' story, like its look, owes much to other films.  As in 
ALIEN and ALIENS, there's a lot of hunting through dimly-lit, oppressive 
tunnels and passageways.  One type of screamer bears a resemblance to a 
cross between an H.R. Giger creation and a cybermat from DR. WHO.  Human 
identity, one of the central themes of THE THING, plays a key role in 
SCREAMERS as well.  Since the screamers can replicate human beings, 
there's no telling who can be trusted.  
     The film isn't without flaws. SCREAMERS is so excessively concerned 
with tone and atmosphere that it sometimes forgets about character 
development.  The movie is half over before we start to care about 
anyone, including Weller's Hendricksson.  Also, the philosophical issues 
inherent in the evolution of a new lifeform are entirely ignored in 
favor of action and adventure.  Despite this, the pace is still uneven, 
with slow stretches of wandering across snowscapes and through tunnels 
interspersed with tense battle sequences.  
     SCREAMERS, like TWELVE MONKEYS and THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN, 
emphasizes that science fiction doesn't have to be upbeat to succeed.  
This "sci-fi noir" style has led to a crop of films that hopefully 
heralds a new trend in the industry. If nothing else, SCREAMERS 
underlines an important truth:  you don't need a big budget or big-name 
stars to make this sort of motion picture succeed.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Don Mcclain
Let's be upfront about this - this is one very depressing film. It is 
grim. It is violent. It offers little hope for humanity. It shows that, 
in the year 2078, mankind still possesses his greatest flaws of greed and 
the thirst for power. With that out front let it be said that this is 
also one well-made film. Not a great film, but, a well-made film.
The setting for SCREAMERS is the planet Sirius 6B in the aforementioned 
year 2078. Two forces are battling it out. As usual, it is the haves 
versus the havenots. One side, the haves, is the New Economic Bloc. The 
other side are those that the N.E.B. has abused to mine the precious 
energy ore on Sirius 6B. This side, the havenots, is the Alliance. 
Depending on who you want to believe, the war has been going on from ten 
to twenty years. And it appears everyone has finally tired of it.
In the beginning, a lone figure approaches the heavily fortified bunker 
of the Alliance. Before a few of the Alliance members have their way and 
shoot the intruder on sight, he is efficiently torn into shreds by the 
centerpiece of terror and horror for the film - Screamers. Screamers are 
small, metallic robot-like creations of the Alliance. Their ultimate 
weapon. The Screamers, with their razor-like appendages, can slice a 
human being into pieces in seconds tearing arms and legs from bodies. 
Their name - Screamers - is a nickname derived from the sound made as 
they strike. If one thinks of the terror fomented by the sound of the 
German Stuka dive-bombers of World War II, one gets the idea behind the 
effect. The Alliance creations are quick, effective and numerous. The 
only problem is that they have started thinking on their own and have 
altered the rules of engagement - all humans are now targets. Not just 
the unfortunate souls from N.E.B.
The unfortunate N.E.B. soldier we find out was carrying a message asking 
that immediate peace talks be held. The Alliance leader, Hendricksson, 
though suspicious decides to make his way to the N.E.B. headquarters to 
pursue these peace prospects. The problem is, of course, that to get 
there he has to traverse a wasteland literally crawling with Screamers. 
Talk about unenviable jobs.
Peter Weller is good as the Alliance leader. He has the appearance and 
attitude of a man tired of what can only be described as a sad existence. 
Roy Dupuis, as Weller's N.E.B. counterpart, matches well with Weller's 
Hendricksson. Jennifer Rubin provides the apparently mandatory nudity and 
sexual offering, but, she also pulls off a believable hardened black 
marketer.
The script, based on the Philip K. Dick short-story "Second Variety," by 
ALIEN scripter Dan O'Bannon and Miguel Tejada-Flores provides the 
necessary action and blood-letting. But it does not measure up to the 
apprehensive terror viewers experienced with ALIEN. It is doubtful that 
SCREAMERS will ever be listed at the same level as ALIEN. SCREAMERS is 
more of an action-war film with gallons of gore whereas ALIEN was a 
classic example of science-fiction and horror mixed superbly together.
SCREAMERS is visually striking. It is striking not that there are 
panoramic scenes that will make audiences go "ooh" and "aah," but, in 
that there is a true sense, feel and look of desolation.
There are scenes of total devastation and industrial suicide. As stated 
earlier, this is one depressing film. Perhaps the filmmakers outdid 
themselves in their efforts to make the audience feel the hopelessness 
and depression felt by the protagonists in the film.
SCREAMERS is not the kind of film that will appeal to those who like 
their science-fiction subtle. Or to those who like to have their science-
fiction paint mankind's future as good triumphing over evil and man 
coming to terms with himself ala STAR TREK. Basically, SCREAMERS' vision 
is simply "same stuff, different day." Man still manipulates, still 
abuses and still kills his own in the year 2078. And, in SCREAMERS, we 
discover that his inventions have begun to emulate their creator. A 
violent circle depicted in a violent film. And so very depressing.

Author
Lewis Butler
You thought PUPPETMASTERS was bad?  You thought FRIDAY THE 13th PART 4 was
bad?  How about Alien III?  Guess again sonny-boy, you just hadn't seen 
SCREAMERS yet.  How bad was it?  It was so bad, I laughed.  As a comedy, 
it might have worked.  As a suspenseful sci-fi flick, it stank to the 
rafters.  (-3 on +4/-4 scale).
There's a decent idea buried somewhere in this movie, but it is so obscured
with a laughably predictable plot, poor mattes, and dubious effects that
the end result is a boring movie without even a decent amount of shock
value.  Despite the theatre having the volume cranked to painful levels
(especailly considereding the high pitched "scream" from the title) I found
myself yawning.
Within the first five minutes of the movie anyone with a still connected
frontal cortex will have the entire movie mapped out.  There is no sin
worse in a suspense movie than to be so predictable.
Perfectly good opportunities to build supsense are wasted.  Chances to
build the characters from something more than their cartoonish charicatures
are squandered.  In short, the movie is a waste of time.
How bad was it, really?  It was a little worse than DUMB AND DUMBER.
-- 
Distrubution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
| kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100   |
|      WWW URL      \  ">http://ftp.netcom.com/pub/kr/kreme/kreme.html>  |
| [303/722-2009] Vox \ [303/777-2911] Data                              |
|

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Most of Philip K.  Dick's science fiction deals with paranoia
about reality not being what it seems, or people who are not what they
seem, or just something sinister going on behind the curtain.  Films
that have been based on his writing include BLADE RUNNER, about
androids that look human, and TOTAL RECALL, about a reality that may be
coming off a tape.  Paranoia has its place in SCREAMERS also, though
more in later portions of the film.  The film is based on Dick's 1953
story "Second Variety."
     That original story was set on Earth in a disastrous war with
Russia, but to keep the story current the setting has been moved to the
planet Sirius 6B where the 2078 war is with the "New Economic Block."
The best American weapon is a "screamer," a small robot that attacks
from just under the surface of the ground.  It tunnels with lightning
speed, pops out of the ground, and with the same speed rabidly attacks
with whirling blades and deafening screams.  The Alliance soldiers,
most of whom are Americans, have special devices that prevent them from
being detected by the screamers.  The problem is that screamers have
themselves become intelligent and are creating new varieties of
screamer radically different from what came before them.  And they are
unaware that compatibility with the detection jammers were an important
part of their original design.  The new models attack anybody.
     The original story has been adapted by Dan O'Bannon (a creative
force behind ALIEN) and Miguel Tejada-Flores (writer of FRIGHT NIGHT,
PART II).  The problem with SCREAMERS is that the original story, while
obvious film fodder, just does not have a lot of ideas that have not
already been plundered for other films.  The Dick story itself borrows
much of its paranoia from stories like John Campbell's "Who Goes
There?" which has already been adapted twice to film.  Had SCREAMERS
been made in 1980 it would have achieved classic status.  But the
thrills offered by "Second Variety" are too little and too late--years
late.  Ironically, SCREAMERS will appeal mostly to people in widely
separate groups.  It will seem best to those open to science fiction
action films without much experience with them.  And it will appeal to
super die-hard Dick fans.  The range that stretches between including
most science fiction fans will find too little that is new or
interesting about the film.
     The director is Canadian Christian Duguay, who did most of his
filming on the snowy landscapes of Quebec and in the grungy sets that
are now so cliched for post-holocaust and futuristic stories.  Coming
out at the same time as the releases of CITY OF LOST CHILDREN and 12
MONKEYS only makes the sets look more impoverished than they normally
would.  The only really familiar actor is Peter Weller, who seems to be
majoring in playing stories about paranoia and general weirdness.
     SCREAMERS is a low-budget film that has a few expensive
explosions, but the matte artist simply does not seem to be able to do
convincing work.  This adaptation of Philip K. Dick's "Second Variety"
offers far too little variety from what has come before and comes in
second to far too many films.  Rate it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
Sources for Philip K. Dick's "Second Variety" include:
THE BEST OF PHILIP K. DICK edited by John Brunner
SPECTRUM 2 edited by Kingsley Amis and Robert Conquest
THE VARIABLE MAN by Philip K. Dick
THE YEARS BEST SCIENCE FICTION NOVELS: 1954 edited by Bleiler and Dikty

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1996) ** - C:Peter Weller, Jennifer Rubin.
"Screamers" had so much potential to be a good science fiction film. The
basic story had promise, even though it seems similar to about a dozen
various episodes of "Star Trek". In the year 2078, we have voyaged out into
space and have started to mine other planets for minerals. A dispute erupts
between the miners and the mining corporation and war is declared. The
miners develop a security system of little tiny robots who live under the
sand and attack any living thing that comes near them. Well, soon these
little robots start to evolve and begin to enhance themselves into bigger
mechanisms, ready to attack the people who created them and start their own
race.
Somehow, in one step, these robots evolve from little tiny things into
humanoid robots, able to blend in with other people and fool almost anyone.
That doesn't make sense. There has to be some sort of evolution into
something between the two. The film basically takes place in the desert and
in dirty, lifeless bunkers, two places which are boring locations to tell a
story. And the very last shot of the film is completely ridiculous. Can't a
horror or sci-fi movie just end anymore? Do we always need a little
"surprise" two seconds before the end credits roll? It's getting to the
point that I'm surprised when there ISN'T a little twist in the final
moments. Peter Weller ("RoboCop") does his best with what he's given to do,
but it's just not enough to save this mess.
What had potential to become a fun and tense sci-fi flick, is ruined by poor
writing, a depressingly downbeat tone, and very cheesy special effects. The
lack of good writing can somewhat be blamed on the author of the short story
on which the film is based, Phillip K. Dick, who is also responsible for the
equally bleak and unentertaining "Blade Runner".
Have A Question Or Comment? Email Me At chuckd21@southeast.net
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Joshua McAdams
When adapting a science fiction story to the big screen three
pre-requisites are required: unique alien sets, interesting
characters, and a "hook" that sucks the audience in.  "Screamers",
based on a short work by Phillip K. Dick, appears to have been
assembled piecemeal by the interns at "Deep Space Nine". This film
look so much like low-budget TV sci-fi that I was expecting Patrick
Stewart to make a cameo. "Picard to Enterprise. There's no intelligent
plot here. One to beam up."
Director Chris Duguay, the mastermind behind "Scanners II" and
"Scanners III", made his first mistake when he signed on to this
project.  I mean listen to the plot: It's 2078 on the distant planet
of Sirus 6B where two armies, the NEB (New Economic Block) and "The
Alliance", battle for control of the vital Byrinium mines. The
Alliance commander Hendrickson (Peter Weller) runs a depleted outpost
that is protected by the real stars of this celluloid disaster:
mechanical moles armed with spinning saw blades called "screamers."
When the NEB command sues for peace, Hendrickson and a space marine
make the journey across Sirus 6B's scourched surface to the enemy
fortress. Along the way they discover that the "screamers" have become
self-aware and are independently upgrading themselves into more
effective killers. At the NEB base, Hendrickson teams up with a buxom
black marketeer (Jennifer Rubin) and a couple of soldiers in order to
combat these dreaded subterranean menaces.
Duguay's second mistake is taking this script seriously.  His  attempt
to inject suspense into this farce  reveals just how weak the story
actual is. To cover up this lack of content, he offers us mindless
philosophy, generic romance, and cheesy  point-of-view shots of
"screamers" tearing along the ground at their hapless victims. Duguay
lops a few plot twists at the audience but these are so blatantly
telegraphed he'd have better luck sending them Western Union.
While the premise - technology, if given the chance, will attempt to
destroy it's creator - is a good one, it is demonstrated far better in
the "Terminator" films. Even die hard trekkies would feel insulted by
this offering so it goes to reason that  Joe Movie Goer should be
doubly reluctant to plunk down a hard earned seven dollars for this
drivel.  You'd be better off renting a truely suspenseful sci-fi flick
like "Alien" or "Predator" and steering clear of "Screamers" - it's
nothing to shout about.
