Title
Review for Lord of the Flies (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Eric Schrager
     I've read the book, I've seen the film.  If you've missed out on either
and don't want to hear about them yet, then don't charge into this.
     I've found many of the comments on the new remake of Golding's LORD OF THE
FLIES quite relevant.  Personally, I was thrilled to discover that someone had
remade the film.  Rather film oriented myself, I often read books while trying
to imagine a cinemagraphic approach to them, and (already having seen the
original black-and-white film version) I felt all through reading the novel
that it should by all means be remade.  I liked the original for the most part,
but the novel immediately suggests itself to color.  It's a lush, colorful
island, and modern film could bring many of the aspects of the book to greater
life than the original did.  The original also failed to show sufficiently the
character of Simon, and his visions, and I don't think anyone who saw the first
film could figure out what it was the boys mistook for a "beast."  I, for one,
went to the film with eager anticipation, hoping the book would be rendered
more skillfully and in some ways more faithfully than the first film had.
     My first disappointment was when I was told this would be about modern
American boys rather than British boys of the period, but I reserved judgment.
I watched the film, and saw that much of what I thought was right.  A modern
film *did* bring the island into greater vividness.  Color WAS needed.  And I
must admit that both Simon and the Beast were better explained than in the
first film.
     I must agree with those who hated the Americanization of the film.  I
thought about it as I left the theatre.  What was it about the American academy
cadets that was so inferior to the British upper-class schoolboys?  One thing
struck me immediately: the *language*.  The vocabulary of the American boys is
essentially different, and that hurts the newer film.  For one thing, the
profanity.  I thought the profanity and everything about the American boys'
dialogue was plausible.  As American boys.  But as the characters of LORD OF
THE FLIES, it didn't ring true.  For one thing, modern American children are
too articulate.  The essence of LORD OF THE FLIES, what made the boys'
degeneration possible in the novel, was the inability the boys had to
communicate their fears.  "Things are breaking up," Ralph said, but he couldn't
explain quite *why*.  Piggy, as an American child, was simply whiny rather than
dry and overly intellectual.  But there's something about the American boys
that casts a pall over the degeneration that happens to them.
     For one thing, it isn't complete.  In the novel, the boys actually become
savages, and Golding calls the member's of Jack's tribe nothing else from the
moment Simon is killed until the boys are rescued.  The point-of-view of modern
American children is too sophisticated, too jaded.  There is too little purity
to corrupt.  The mores of civilization don't rule and haunt modern American
boys the way they did British boys of 1960.
     And again, the language.  The writers had to change the basic terms, to
accommodate an American audience.  It was a "monster" in the remake rather than
a "beast," offered "presents" instead of "gifts."  The terms "chief" and
"tribe" were only used half-jokingly near the end, rather than with increasing
seriousness throughout.  It makes sense, Americans don't say things like "gift
for the beast" or "chief of the tribe," certainly not kids.  But those terms
help make the story work, turn Jack's tribe into something actually savage and
nightmarish.  The *chant* was lost in this film.  "Kill the beast!  Cut his
throat!  Spill his blood!"  The build was lost.  In this film, we watch the
kids simply become more-than-normally cruel little bastards.  In the novel,
they become personifications of evil.
     I could go on and on, but I guess I wanted the filmmakers to be *true* to
the book because the book *worked*.  They compromised it.  Making the adult
Captain escape (presumed dead) and become the Beast was, I suppose, about as
plausible as a dead parachutist caught puppetlike in the parachute lines, but
it misses the point.  There *are* no adults on the island of the novel, so far
as the boys know.  And the "Beast" *should* be a puppet, the irony is
brilliant.  The paint!  The boys aren't just putting on cute Indian paint,
they're hiding their consciences behind anonymous masks.  (And why were Sam and
Eric, the twins, such total assholes?  They represented the last bastions of
civilized innocence in the novel.)  Everything was there, it was just
approximated, simplified, condensed, cheapened.  The people who put this
together sadly underestimated the American audience's appreciation of Art for
Art's sake, rather than money's sake.  The book, even thirty years old, even
British, reads beautifully for any reader with the guts to accept the ugliness
it recounts.
     In fairness, I repeat that modern film methods did some beautiful things,
but there's nothing it did well that it couldn't have done better playing truer
to the novel.  Ralph could have been flawed, could have begun to forget what
the purpose of the fire was except for Piggy's prodding.  The conch could have
played the essential civilizing part that it did in the novel, could have been
shattered to pieces by the boulder that killed Piggy.  The pig's head on a
stick could have *spoken* to Simon, confessed that evil is a part of mankind
and cannot be exorcised (Damn, we have modern animation methods and the
*second* movie blows this chance too!).  This film could have *been* LORD OF
THE FLIES.  Instead, it was a rather skillful if overly commercial
approximation of it.
     By all means, see it if you like.  But I can't help but hope that you're
not satisfied with it.  If you are, you've missed much of what makes the novel
great.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Harry Hook
Writer: Sara Schiff (from the novel by William Golding)
Starring: Bathalzar Getty, Chris Fuhhr, Danuel Pipoly
William Golding's "Lord of the Flies" is obligatory reading for the
young student.  So obligatory that I never read it.  I guess that makes
me feel special, but there's something about overly symbolic fables
(i.e. Orwell's "Animal Farm," one of my favorites) that gets me, and I
wish I had.  Of course, I guess I could.  But like most famous novels,
there's a film adaptation that's about half as good as its source.  And
that's precisely what I saw when I watched this on TV impromptu during a
VERY boring Sunday afternoon here at Temple U.
For those who don't know, "Lord of the Flies" is about a group of school
boys who are marooned on an island without any adult supervision (though
there's the pilot, but he's so wounded that he's pretty much insane and
has to be tied down).  The boys need some discipline, so they
democratically elect Ralph (Bathalzar Getty, from "Lost Highway").  But
as things go on, and as they realize that they're really not going to be
rescued in any forseeable future, some become savages, painting their
faces, carrying spears, and running around half-naked, speaking in short
declaritive sentences, like "Cheif brings gift."
The leader of the other clan is Jack (Chris Fuhhr), who is a kind of
asswhole of a kid, who starts off as a bully and proceeds to the totally
evil dictator of what turns out to be a clan of savages, alienating
Ralph and his only friend, Piggy (Danuel Pipoly), who is supposed to be
the wise, overly intellectual kid of them all, who somehow saved his
glasses in the crash.  The climactic ending is obvious, but not
anticlimactic, and, of course, shocking, bringing all the ideas
together.
These characters are all supposed to represent one part of the psyche. 
Ralph is supposed to be the part that is civil and wants law and order. 
Jack is the savage, immature part.  And Piggy, is, of course, the voice
of reason in a increasingly chaotic island (there's also another
character, Simon, who is pretty much not in this film).
And, of course, everything is supposed to be symbolic.  The numerous
misadventures of Piggy's glasses (i.e. it's breaking and being stolen),
causing him to be near blind, is symbolic of him breaking down, and
hoping to be with the other clan.  And the actual "lord of the flies," a
decapitated boar's head is supposed to be a sign of ultimate evil and
horror.  Then there's the "beast," which I guess represents their
gradually declining civility or something.  I didn't read the book, give
me a break, I'm bullshitting here.
Anyway, this is all supposed to happen here in this film...and it does. 
But while apparently in the book, it's supposed to be subtle and we're
supposed to watch the story unfold and think about afterwards...much
like a good novel.  But the director is so paranoid that the Americans
won't get it, so he makes everything in our faces.  This adheres the
story, and makes it seem way too mechanical.  Also, this makes the
symbol less intense.  It's supposed to shock us.  I was just like, "Oh,
he broke his glasses, ho hum."
The acting is also not very good.  While Bathalzar and Fuhhr are merely
passable as the two leads, the guy who plays Piggy can't even complete a
sentence, and he seems to whiny and boring.  I mean, the part where he's
preaching to them (and nearly says, "Why can't we all get along?"), and
some jerks above him push a giant rock onto his head, I was not just
shocked that they've become savages like that, but I was also feeling a
bit of contradiction because I was hoping someone would do that to him
anyway.  The guy can't act, he's annoying, and he's nothing like he
should be.
This whole film is nothing like it should be.  I'm supposed to feel
totally shocked by the story, how these school kids have become the
epitomy of evil.  When they kill Piggy and Simon, they're shown as being
shocked and saddened.  They're not supposed to care (except for Piggy
and Ralph).  And the boar's head is just not as scary as it should be. 
I mean, I didn't even read the book and I was disappointed.
On a positive note, it's not a BAD film.  By the end, I was kinda
feeling depressed, which was probably what the director had aimed for. 
When they killed Piggy, I was hoping someone would just kill those
pricks who did it.  The ending is too short, but the visions we see,
with the forest on fire, and everyone chasing Ralph, who has almost no
chance of survivial except for a little part of deux ex machina, totally
bowled me over.  It was absolutely mesmerizing and almost redeems the
film from a truly bad rating.  And the cinematography is gorgeous, but
seems too much like a film for the rotary travelogue.
This film is wrongly modernized.  The kids swear and talk about "Alf"
(why, in god's name, ALF?!), and there are planes and choppers, and
they're very early American instead of post-war Brits.  What is the
point of this?  To dumb it down?  This modernization just weakens the
story, because even in 1990 there were kids killing kids in our very
American streets.  The scary part of this book is it was written in the
50s and predicted what would be happening now.  This is just like some
"Classics Illustrated" type of spiel, for the kids who don't want to
read the book since there's a movie version of it.  And it's only 90
minutes long, so it will cut down some hours of reading.
But trust me, kids, pick up the damn book and read it, 'cause it's
probably much better than this.  But if, like me, you're bored, and it's
on TV somewhere, it's worth a viewing, I guess.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
