Title
Review for Ran (1985)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Pedro Sena
Nowadays, the only real well known Japanese film maker ( unless you happen
to be in a film department in a major university ) in America, thanks in
part to Steven Spielberg and George Lucas, who went out of their way to make
sure  this man's best work was remenbered and revered.  Must sees include
THE SEVEN SAMURAI, THRONE OF BLOOD ( based on Macbeth ), YOJIMBO, DREAMS,
KAGEMUSHA,  and so many other films,... he is the scourge of Japanese
producers, who wish  to make billions ( not millions ) while this director
just wants to make  critically acclaimed work based on his vision.  Almost
all of his work has been 'stolen' by either Hollywood or Cinecita Roma, who
went out of their way to make garbage remakes of the same story.
Fortunately, the film copyright system forces the flattery makers to thank
the originators with some green
backs for their creativity.  It says a lot for the copycats, doesn't it.???
RAN is based on William Shakespeare's KING LEAR.  And instead of following
the story like Shakespeare, Kurosawa turns his three children loose until
they not only have destroyed themselves, but also everything in sight.  Like
LEAR,  where we actually feel sorry for the main character, this becomes a
tour the  force for the lead actors.  It's only weak spot, in my estimation,
is in the scenes with the FOOL, which tend to lag,... perhaps because his
voice is not specially attractive, or 'soft' enough to seduce you with 'his'
wisdom.  Here, he is a fool breaking down as well, which may explain the
awkwardness.
Much like THE SEVEN SAMURAI, the choreography of the battle scenes is so
intense, and well done, that you can't help feeling you are there.  And you
end up taking sides with the father, and thinking the children are full of
it.  I think this film is more of an 'expose' of the downfall of the feudal
lord system in Japanese society ( specially seen today with their economy
coming down to reality ... the rise of the middle, and fighting, and working
class ) than it is based on the story of King Lear, although the sequence of
'fillers' in between the action is decidedly Shakespeare flavored.  Unlike
the Shakespeare play, the women in this film ( one in particular ) are the
downfall of at least two of the sons.  Brutal too!!!
But it is beautifully filmed, and has country side shots which are breath
taking,... you can even hear the wind golliwog the mountains several times
 which is real folks,... ), has no music per se ( a compliment to Peter
Brook, ??? ), though Kurosawa doesn't always use music, a sore point with
his producers.  Kurosawa likes the silence, and the inherent sound  effects
found naturally.  Story goes that he bumped into the sound effects
accidentally,... and he has kept them.
Akira Kurosawa's other films are worth seeing, if you decide that you wish
to see something which tends to make you think a bit.  If your mode is not
art films, or curiosity in some one else's point of view, then save your
dollar.  But HE is GOOD.

Author
Brian Koller
In 1957, Japanese Director Akira Kurosawa borrowed
from Shakespeare's "Macbeth" for his film "Throne
of Blood".  Nearly three decades later, Kurosawa
returned to the setting of medieval Japanese armies
at war, this time adapting plot elements from
Shakespeare's "King Lear".  "Ran" is the Japanese
symbol for chaos, an apt description of the story:
the disintegration of a family dynasty through ambition,
treachery and war.
Elderly warlord Hidetora Ichimonji (Tatsuya Nakadai)
decides to cede power to his eldest son Taro (Akira Terao).
Middle son Jiro (Jinpachi Nezu) approves, but youngest
son Saburo (Daisuke Ryu) objects, suggesting that the family
will be destroyed by the rival ambitions of the older
brothers.  Hidetora banishes his impudent son, but his
prophecy quickly comes to pass.  Hidetora is turned out
by his sons, becomes lunatic, and hides in the countryside
aided only by court jester Kyoami (Peter) and loyal servant
Tango (Masayuki Yui).  Meanwhile, Taro's wife Kaede
(Mieko Harada) uses Taro and Jiro in her machinations for
revenge against the Ichimonji family, leading to a
disastrous war with Saburo's soldiers and allies.
As in "Throne of Blood", the destructive ambitions of
the warlords are stoked by the schemes of a woman (Kaede).
The battle scenes, the sets, and the cinematography
are all excellent.  Just one complaint: there must
be a hundred warriors shot down from their horses,
but not once does a horse fall.  I am not advocating
cruelty to animals, but medieval marksmanship couldn't
have been that good!
Hidetora has two distinct personalities: the bold,
ruthless warlord, and the lost, cowardly madman.
It is to Nadakai's credit that he plays both roles
well.  His character's wild mane of white hair
perfectly matches his pathos.  The effeminate
supporting character of Kyoami is the most interesting:
the court fool can say things that, if said by others,
would be treasonous.  But it is advice worth
considering.
With the help of the Internet Movie Database,
I did some quick research on Kurosawa.  Sixteen
films that he directed have received at least
fifty votes.  All sixteen films average between
8.0 and 8.9 (out of 10), an extremely impressive
record of consistency.  Kurosawa, who was 75 years
old at film's completion, also edited and co-wrote
"Ran" (with Hideo Oguni and Masato Ide). It was
at the time the most expensive Japanese film ever
made.  It was nominated for four Academy Awards
(unusual for a foreign-language film) including
Best Director and Best Cinematography
(Takao Saito, Masaharu Ueda, Asakazu Nakai).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
RAN, for its 15th anniversary, is being re-released to theaters with a 
stunning new print.  One of the best films from one of the world's 
greatest directors, Akira Kurosawa, who shares the writing credits with 
Masato Ide, Hideo Oguni and William Shakespeare, RAN is based on 
Shakespeare's "King Lear."  Set in 16th century feudal Japan, the movie 
takes its title from the Japanese word for "chaos" or "turmoil."
As the story opens, Lord Hidetora Ichimonji (Tatsuya Nakadai), who is in 
his waning years, surprises his three sons by abruptly deciding to 
retire and leave his kingdom to his eldest son, Taro (Akira Terao).  His 
younger sons, Jiro (Jinpachi Nezu) and Saburo (Daisuke Ryu), will get 
just one castle each, which causes them great consternation.  After a 
nasty confrontation, the Great Lord, as Lord Hidetora is called, 
banishes Saburo for insolence.  This is just the start of many 
cataclysmic rifts in the family.
The Great Lord's Fool (Shinnosuke Ikehata), in a time of rigid social 
mores, turns out to be an extremely important character since he is the 
one person who dares tell the truth without fear of retribution.  In 
contrast to the brash but honest Fool, Taro's wife, Lady Kaede (Mieko 
Harada), is the most duplicitous and malevolent in a story which has no 
lack of villains.  Not a time of subtle leadership, the rulers, 
particularly the Great Lord, bark out their orders with such confidence 
and authority that they seem to be speaking to their entire kingdoms 
without aid of electronic amplification or transmission.
Extensive use of natural sounds and picturesque landscapes offers us a 
serenity that is soon shattered.  Heavy use of dramatic music made with 
flute and drums signals the story's shift from the merely argumentative 
family squabbles to the terror that each side will unleash to crush the 
other.   When the first battles begin, all sound effects and natural 
sounds are removed.  They are replaced by a symphonic score of 
overwhelming intensity.  Suddenly, as this music is lifted, we are 
jarred out of our seats as we are brought into the thick of the battle 
as the rolling thunder of the hoofs of the cavalry and the feet of the 
infantry compete with the crackle of gunfire and the whoosh of the 
arrows.
Magnificent blood reds and royal golds are used on Toru Takemitsu's 
Oscar winning costumes.  One of the most visually striking movies ever, 
RAN had the bad luck to be released in the same year as OUT OF AFRICA, 
which beat it at Oscar time for best set decoration, cinematography and 
direction.  I loved OUT OF AFRICA, but each of these awards should have 
gone instead to another nominee that year, RAN.
Visually and musically audacious, the movie's breathtaking images and 
sounds would suffice to tell the story.  The dialog and incredible 
acting are icing on an already delicious cake.  Of course, one could 
make an argument that it is the look and music that enhances the acting.  
Certainly they have a symbiotic relationship.  Characters stand frozen 
at times and silence fills the theater as we contemplate the next 
actions.
The tragedy, told with grand opera flourishes, is at once intimate and 
epic.  The story flags a bit toward the end and a little judicious 
trimming would have improved it a bit, but that's a minor quibble.  
"We are truly in hell," one is heard to say.  True, but what a 
devastatingly gorgeous hell.
RAN runs 2:40.  The film is in Japanese with English subtitles.  It is 
rated R for graphic war violence and would be acceptable for older 
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Robert Marley
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Marley.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/e8d729e068d7dec888256925005d70ee?OpenDocument
-------------------------------------
The average movie enthusiast has probably heard the name Akira Kurosawa
mentioned with reverence in pretentious film-snob circles or in almost
any film school, but chances are the average movie enthusiast probably
hasn't bothered to ever really watch any of Kurosawa's films, which is a
real shame. For in these films lies the expression of unbelievable
talent - a poetry of motion and color - created and painted by a true
master of the art of modern cinema.  Now in theatrical reissue, casual
moviegoers once again have the chance to see Ran, Kurosawa's
masterpiece, on the big screen.
Kurosawa's closest colleagues addressed him as "sensei," a respectful
and affectionate term meaning "teacher" or "master," and for good
reason: He is without question, the master of Japanese cinema and an
artist whose film legacy spanned 50 years of moviemaking.  He influenced
filmmakers such as Lucas, Spielberg, Coppola, Scorsese and countless
others.  For example, the movie A Fistful of Dollars was really nothing
more than Western remake of the Kurosawa film Yojimbo, and The
Magnificent Seven was a remake of The Seven Samurai.  The Academy of
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences recognized Kurosawa four times in his
career, and Ran has won countless awards, including Best Film from the
esteemed National Society of Film Critics.  The film was Kurosawa's
obsession for more than 10 years and he feared that the movie would
never be made.  When it finally did get financing, it became Japan's
most expensive film ever made at the time.
Ran, which translates as "chaos" or "turmoil," is Kurosawa's meditation
on Shakespeare's King Lear, mixed with the history of Japan's 16th
century Civil Wars, and the Japanese legend of Mori.
At the age of 70, after years of consolidating his empire, the Great
Lord Hidetora Ichimonji (played brilliantly by Tatsuya Nadakai) decides
to abdicate the throne and divide his domain among his three sons.  To
illustrate his demand for family unity, Hidetora shows that a single
arrow can be easily broken, but three arrows held together are strong. 
But the loyalty the Great Lord dreams of doesn't happen and his empire
falls to family bickering and civil war, with the old lord traveling
from son to son in a futile attempt to keep empire and family together.
The film is beautifully well made, with subtle changes in color and
texture as the story progresses.  The characters makeup resembling an
early form of Japanese theater. Epic battles, requiring the use of 1,400
extras and hundreds of horses are shot using a multi-camera technique
that Kurosawa himself developed.  All of these elements combine to
create a feeling of immersion in the story.  And while some of the
battle scenes seem a bit campy by today's standards - with an overuse of
blood that looks more like paint - the overall picture is dramatic,
impressive, and visually stunning.
At 2 hours and 40 minutes the film is a bit on the long side for most
people but it does not deter from the fact that Ran is an incredible
picture worth seeing and talking about.  Whether you really are a
pretentious film snob or just someone who appreciates seeing something
well made, this film is a must-see.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Akira Kurosawa
Writers: Masato Ide, Hideo Oguni, and Akira Kurosawa (based on the play
"King Lear" by William Shakespeare)
Starring: Tatsuya Nakadai, Akira Terao, Jinpachi Nezu, Daisuke Ryu, Mieko
Harada, Yoshiko Miyazaki, Masayuki Yui, Peter
"Ran" opens peacefully, with numerous static shots of gorgeous green hills,
but at the same time there are shots of soldiers waiting for god knows what
and forboding music that starts and stops, creating an eerie, unsettling
atmosphere.  It's still almost tough to believe that by the end, almost all
of the chief characters will die horrific deaths, and thousands of
innocents will be mercilessly slaughtered.
"Ran" is loosely based on "King Lear," the great Shakespeare play about
that point in your life when you look back at everything you've done and
hope to be able to rely on all of it as a backbone for rest and relaxation
in the last years of one's life.  When King Lear looked back, though, he
saw that everything was not well.  In fact, he discovered his justful
arrogance let loose to ignorance, and that all of the horrible things he
had done in his life and all of those things that were the opposite of what
he believed all came to haunt him simulataneously.
Looking at this story, which has been told countless times, it hardly seems
like it needed to be told again, not the least in the form of a classic
samurai melodrama as directed by Japan's greatest director, the
recently-late Akira Kurosawa, who had directed such masterpieces as "The
Seven Samurai" and "Rashomon," amongst numerous others.  But then again,
Kurosawa's films were never mere "samurai melodramas," not even his most
popcorn-y films as "The Hidden Fortress."
Kurosawa directed "Ran" at the age of 75, nearly blind, relying on others
to help him conceive his shots, and allowing for an effortless R rating
with the most graphic, gory violence he had ever done, not even in "The
Seven Samurai."  His reason for directing this was, most likely, out of
fear that he was in fact Lear himself, as is the fear of anyone who has
ever read or seen the play performed before.  With decades of films that
were almost consecutively praised by critics and audiences alike as
masterpieces, perhaps he was fearing that his numerous accomplishments
would give way to haughty arrogance, and that perhaps there were things
going on behind his back that he didn't know.
The story itself deals with an aging Japanese Lord, Hidetora (Tatsuya
Nakadai), who decides at the point in his life when he feels that he has
achieved everything he has wanted to achieve, and that everything is fair
in his land, to finally retire.  He decides to divide his land into three,
shelved out to his three sons, Taro, Jiro, and Saburo (Akira Terao,
Jinpachi Nezu, and Daisuke Ryu, respectively), with the most prominent
lands given in order of age.  In one scene, he decides to demonstrate the
fallacy that this will all work out well by showing them that one arrow can
easily be broken, but when three are together, it is much more difficult to
break.
Sadly, though, Saburo disagrees with his father, and will have no part in
it.  Hidetora, without hardly a pause, banishes his son, as well as anyone
who stands up for him.  But when he tries living with each of his two sons
he still holds in high adoration, he discovers that they have different
plans, and they soon drive him away one by one.  Without any sons to fall
back on, he retires with his army and numerous concubines to Saburo's old
deserted castle, where a ghastly battle occurs over his possession between
his army and the armies of Taro and Jiro, both who now only think of him as
someone in the way and not even as their father.
Joined only by the faithful comic relief, Kyoami, the Fool (played by
Peter...just Peter), and an old assistant, Tango (Masayuki Yui), Hidetora
ends up wandering around the landscape, slowly but surely growing madder
and madder.  But as he loses his sanity, things continue to get worse
around him.  A plot develops after Taro is killed in battle between his
widow, Lady Kaede (Mieko Harada), and Jiro, who begins to control the
weakest brother, and an old wound opens when Hidetora stumbles upon an old
foe who's eyes he poked out when he was a kid.
The entire story has been told many many times before, but it really needs
someone who understands what this story entails.  There are many a
contradiction in the telling of the story, such as the optimism of a good
life's led bringing about a pessimism of everything to come.  Kurosawa has
no doubtedly had these thoughts, knowing the chronicle of his life, and he
ends up telling "Ran" with an understanding of these paradoxes, as well as
with some major opposites.  There are two major battle sequences in this
film, for example, and the way they're handled directly contradict the way
the other scenes are handled.
His battle scenes are gory, gratuitous, unevenly paced, and merciless. 
Most importantly, very little is accomplished in them.  But most of the
film is filled with chamber-like scenes of people talking, but very much
happens.  Take for example a scene where Lady Kaede confronts Jiro about
her husband's death, and during the course of the scene, threatens his
life, seduces him, and totally usurps any power he ever had.  As such, it
takes great patience to watch "Ran," since everything is told at a
leisurely pace, disappointing anyone who thought that "Ran" was just "King
Lear, only with samurais and gore."
But the reason "Ran" really works is because it's a great story that is
told exceptionally well.  Kurosawa's style really works becuase it allows
us to look at the drama of the story.  The reason we should be motivated to
sit through all 160 minutes without a break should not be because every
hour and 10 minutes, there's a really nifty battle scene.  It's because it
transcends all that and really tells the story.  A film is never more
boring when it's filled with shallow characters taking the easy way out of
very dilemna they're charged with.  "Ran" gives its characters numerous
connundrums, and by the end, everything has been dealt with so badly that
it becomes exactly what the title translates to: Chaos.
Watching "Ran," it's easy to see why Kurosawa is so heavily received
commercially and critically: he doesn't bullshit his audience with a style
that ultimately overcomes the story, and he always worries about the way
his characters are handled.  Visually, the design is incredible.  The film
is beautifully shot, and the color scheme in this film is brilliant. 
During the battle scenes, each army is fitted with a certain color, and
when they clash together, it's one of the most breathtaking images ever to
grace the screen.  His story-telling is wonderful: he paces the film slowly
so that all the elements effortlessly come out, and never feel forced. 
Watching Hidetora's life crumble around upon him is simply stunning, and it
could have easily been ruined by direction that was quick and jolting.
I've seen "Ran" twice, once by myself, and another time in a small college
theatre with a crowd who was less enthused than I was about the way the
film was made.  "Ran" holds up for multiple viewings because of the passion
that it is told with.  We can sense the pain Kurosawa has when he tells the
story of Hidetora, so much that he shoots most of everything from a safe
distance, maybe hinting that he hopes we never have to arrive at a point
like Hidetora's, or Lear's.  But when watching this, when we see how he
deftly controls his characters and his scenes, and how everything is told
with the right amount of looseness and structure, then I guess that at this
point, Kurosawa ironically had very little to worry about.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
