Title
Review for Say It Isn't So (2001)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A local boy falls from a local girl who turns out to be his sister. The two
split but the boy later finds out that he might not be her brother after all
and chases after the girl. Of course, by then, the girl is already engaged
to be married to a millionaire dude, and well, supposed hilarity ensues. I
stress the word "supposed"...
CRITIQUE:
There are many films that can be described as "stupid funny", but this movie
is just plain "stupid stupid!" I think it's time to officially christen an
end to the Farrellization of comedic cinema. You know the formula: take one
part dimwitted yet likeable leads, one part retarded or physically impaired
co-stars, add many an over-the-top gross moment (this film features someone
sticking their entire arm in a cow's ass!), plenty of lame songs to kill
time, Lyn Shaye and plenty of animals, and you've got the makings of a
"Farrelly comedy". Well, unfortunately for the kooky brothers, it appears as
though their jig is finally up. Time to give back the keys, boys, let
someone else give it a try. You see, the one element that also needs to be
included in any comedy is well...comedy! You know, laughs, humor...things
that make you go ha-ha! Now here's a movie that starts off with a lame
story, tosses in a super gross joke every twenty minutes, adds more lame
story, features Heather Graham crying a few dozen times, and tries sooooo
very hard to be funny, that's it's actually kind of excruciating to watch
(Oh, so the town is called Beaver, eh? Haha, pretty funny). And didn't Sally
Field learn her lesson with BEAUTIFUL last year? Lady, take a break...your
career radar seems to be malfunctioning. And what about Klein and Graham,
you ask? Well, what can you say? It's pretty obvious to anyone who watches
this movie that both actors are extremely photogenic, but also, sadly
lacking in much depth, personality or charisma. Talent? Well, that's a
toss-up, but I'd say that both actors aren't exactly going for range in
their careers with this one (think Freddie Prinze Jr. and be afraid...be
very afraid!).
But enough putdowns, I mean what you really want to know as a reader is
whether or not there were some genuinely some funny moments in this film,
right? Well, the answer to that question is a resounding "yes"...but with a
qualifier. There were exactly three laugh-out loud scenes in this movie
(hence the 3/10) and a few smirks here and there. The funniest part of the
film was the father with the stroke and Voc-A-Lator strapped 'round his
neck, played brilliantly by the under-appreciated Richard Jenkins. Now
despite that bit being ripped off the SOUTH PARK series to begin with, it
was still pretty funny, but for some strange reason, sadly underused. It
just goes to show how the makers of this film simply did not know what to do
with all this guacamole, as some inexplicably "serious moments" somehow made
it into this movie as well. Did they honestly want us to get into this
lame-ass story? I mean, c'mon fellas, I bought the whole
brother-nailing-his-sister thing, but keep it light, keep it funny and keep
it stupid, but stay away from the serious stuff, for God's sakes...this
ain't the place for that! In the end, the movie simply didn't work for many
reasons, the lack of story, the lack of characterization, the lack of
empathy for anyone in the movie, and most importantly for any comedy...the
lack of laughs! Like I said earlier, there's stupid funny and then there's
just plain stupid, and unfortunately for the filmmakers, which include the
Farrelly brothers (who have made no effort to distance themselves from this
project and therefore deserve some of the blame), this movie is just stupid.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Airplane (9/10) - American Pie (7/10) - Dumb & Dumber (7/10) - Head over
Heels (2/10) - Kingpin (8/10) - Me, Myself & Irene (5/10) - South Park
(9/10) - There's Something About Mary (7/10)

Author
Christopher Null
Another year, another Farrelly brothers production.
This time out, we get American Pie alum Chris Klein and the saucy
Heather Graham in what is undoubtedly the crudest film we will ever
see.  That is, at least until Tom Green takes center stage in Freddy Got
Fingered later this year.
The brain-dead premise of Say It Isn't So has Klein falling in love with
the local beauty (Graham), only later to be told they're brother and
sister.  She runs off to marry another guy, and when Klein discovers
they are not really related, he makes like The Graduate to stop the
nuptials.  What follows is a sad, pathetic procession of jokes about the
"sister slammer" and the poor town of Beaver, Oregon, where much of the
action takes place.
Even some promising supporting players like Orlando Jones and Sally
Field do little but embarrass themselves on camera for an hour and a
half.  Field, who I had hoped would eventually save the movie, is even
reduced to wiping a sandwich on her armpits "for salt."
If that's your idea of funny, you'll be happy to know things degenerate
even further from there.  The movie gets worse and worse until finally
we find Klein up to his elbow in a cow's rear end.  I suppose that will
have to pass for comedy in director James B. Rogers' directorial debut. 
Sadly, he's also on tap to direct American Pie II.  So much for that
promising franchise.
If you're determined to see this movie, I don't figure this review is
going to stop you.  So when you go, you deserve what you get: Sitting
for a few hours among your steaming, seething, loud-mouthed brethren,
all honking their butts off and talking back to the screen as a
paraplegic Jones being beaten with his own fake leg.  Say it isn't so,
y'all.
Director: James B. Rogers
Producer: Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly, Bradley Thomas
Writer: Peter Gaulke, Gerry Swallow
Starring: Chris Klein, Heather Graham, Orlando Jones, Sally Field,
Richard Jenkins, John Rothman, Jack Plotnick, Eddie Cibrian
http://www.sayitisntsomovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
SAY IT ISN'T SO! is another comedic misfire produced by the Farrelly 
brothers (ME, MYSELF & IRENE).  Although there are a few good laughs in 
it, most of the film stays at the crudely unfunny level with jokes about 
a wife who uses her armpits to salt her husband's food and a guy who 
gets his arm stuck up a cow's anus.  "Saturday Night Live" writer Peter 
Gaulke and first-time writer Gerry Swallow also look for sources of 
humor in the repeated theft of the artificial legs belonging to an 
amputee (Orlando Jones) and in the constant humiliation of a stroke 
patient (Richard Jenkins).  First-time director James B. Rogers's next 
film is AMERICAN PIE II.  I can hardly wait.
When we meet animal control officer Gilly Noble, played with 
mind-numbing blandness by Chris Klein (AMERICAN PIE), he is looking for 
the love of his life, one who will produce goose bumps all over his 
body.  When he first lays eyes on the town's new hairstylist, Jo 
Wingfield, who hacks up hair with all of the skill of a drunken barber 
at work on the high seas, Gilly is covered in goose bumps.  Heather 
Graham (BOWFINGER) is fairly wasted as Jo since the script gives her 
little to do other than smile a lot with the intensity and honesty of a 
politician looking for votes.  
Sacrificing more than just his hair to the cause, Gilly works his way 
into Jo's heart and bed.  But -- surprise! -- he turns out to be her 
brother.  And, even bigger surprise, he really isn't.  (These "twists" 
happen early on and have been given away by all of the trailers.) 
The body of the movie has Gilly trying to win Jo back before she marries 
Jack Mitchelson (Eddie Cibrian), the evil philanthropist of the 
close-knit town of Beaver, Oregon.  Working against Gilly is Jo's bad 
mother, played by Sally Field in a performance that is itself quite bad.  
In the spirit of full disclosure, there were a couple of scenes that 
were so surprising and shocking that I did laugh loudly.  The best of 
these involves a dinner table discussion at the home of Gilly's boss.  
It is the show and tell part of the meal that I found so funny.  And 
finally, the ending is cute even if somewhat predictable.  It is also 
one of the few times in which they effectively use Graham's gift for 
innocent sexuality.  
Wait for video and keep your finger by the fast forward button.
SAY IT ISN'T SO! runs just 1:33 but feels longer.  It is rated R for 
strong sexual content, crude humor and language and would be acceptable 
for older teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by James B. Rogers.
Cast: Chris Klein, Heather Graham, Orlando Jones, Sally Field, Richard 
Jenkins, Eddie Cibrian, John Rothman, Jack Plotnick, Lin Shaye.
2001 - 93 minutes
Rated R (for crude sexual humor, profanity, and mild violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 23, 2001.
Misleadingly billed as "From the creators of 'There's Something About Mary,'" 
James B. Rogers'  madcap comedy, "Say It Isn't So," was merely produced by 
Bobby and Peter Farrelly, despite offering up a similar brand of their 
outrageous, raunchy humor. There is one subtle, telling difference, 
however--the Farrelly Brothers can be comic geniuses who know how to build up 
a joke, milking it for all its worth as the laughs escalate, while newcomer 
James B. Rogers is clearly an amateur who is never quite sure how to approach 
the would-be raucous material.
Gilly Noble (Chris Klein) is a starry-eyed dogcatcher in the backwater town 
of Shelbyville, Indiana, who becomes instantly smitten with Jo Wingfield 
(Heather Graham) from the moment he first sees her. Working as a very bad 
hairdresser who almost cuts Gilly's entire ear off in a freak accident, Jo 
and Gilly hit it off and share six months of romance and fun. Bad news comes 
in the form of proof that Gilly's long-lost mother happens to also be 
Jo's--the money-grubbing, white-trash Valdine (Sally Field).
Switch forward sixteen months, Jo has fled to Beaver, Colorado and rekindled 
with millionaire ex-boyfriend Jack (Eddie Cibrian), to whom she is planning 
to marry. When news comes of this, followed by the revelation that Gilly and 
Jo aren't siblings, after all, Gilly heads for Beavers, dead-set on telling 
Jo the truth so they can spend their life together, and he can stop the 
wedding with Jack.
Like 1998's "There's Something About Mary" and 2000's "Me, Myself & Irene," 
"Say It Isn't So" is, indeed, outrageous and raunchy, but it is never very 
funny. The incest jokes that arise in the first half are so plentiful and 
nonstop that it became tiresome almost immediately. It is always obvious 
where the supposed humorous parts are to be, but they usually fall flat, no 
doubt because the editing isn't tight enough, the writing isn't sharp enough, 
and the performances aren't focused enough to warrant success. That isn't to 
say director Rogers doesn't try his hardest (after all, what other movie 
could you possibly see in which a character gets his arms stuck in the rectum 
of a cow by accident); he is simply no more than a novice who would have been 
better to try a less physical, ribald comedy his first time at bat.
The film is also maddening in the way that it is so fervently stuck with an 
Idiot Plot, a term coined by Roger Ebert. One thing is for sure: had the 
characters been just a little smarter, and had Gilly just opened his mouth 
and told Jo, "I'm not your brother," from the beginning, the movie could have 
avoided all of its dumbed-down plot developments and been over and done with 
long before its 93 minutes concluded. Nothing, perhaps, is more frustrating 
than watching characters consistently dodge the words they should be 
speaking, just so the plot can run on a little longer and more complications 
can ensue.
What does work, and is fairly funny, is Orlando Jones (2001's "Double Take") 
as the legless aerial pilot, Dig, who befriends Gilly after he is hit by 
Gilly's car, causing his legs to break off and fly through the air. This 
scene is not only the funniest in the whole picture, but Jones does a 
delightful job of developing a distinct likability for his character.
Chris Klein (2000's "Here on Earth") and Heather Graham (1999's "Austin 
Powers 2"), likewise, share a bewitching chemistry together, and their love 
story works primarily because of the pair's charisma. Every scene they share 
together works very well, and with only a few minutes of screen time devoted 
to their romance before they are torn apart for almost the rest of the movie, 
I believed that they loved each other. In the past, Graham's popularity has 
been a little lost on me, but with her career sure to be heating up in the 
next year (with no fewer than three more movies coming out after this one), 
she has finally hit her stride as an actress. She has been good in the past 
(1997's "Boogie Nights"), but never so radiant on-screen as she is here. 
Klein may be the central protagonist, but it is Graham who is the star.
In an out-of-the-ordinary supporting turn, Sally Field (2000's "Where the 
Heart Is") hams it up as the nasty, greedy Valdine. Field has a field day (no 
pun intended) with the low-rent particulars of the role, but Valdine is such 
a mean woman that every scene with her left a sour taste in my mouth. While 
Field has never quite played a character like this one, she is nevertheless 
slumming it, and is far too good an actress to be wasting her time in such 
throwaway parts.
With a hum-worthy pop/rock soundtrack and a generally fast pace, "Say It 
Isn't So" thankfully never overstays its welcome, but also never is able to 
get out of the hole it gradually digs for itself with every big joke that 
causes nothing more than a lot of eye-rolling. Had "Say It Isn't So" 
abandoned its lewd, naughty roots and tried to just be a sweet romance, it 
might have worked better. Klein and Graham prove that they have exactly what 
it takes to hold up a movie on their own, without masturbation, incest, and 
necrophilia jokes getting in the way.
    - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
      http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The Hollywood Bakery has just concocted a new recipe that's bound to
tantalize the tastebuds of the tasteless throughout the country.  Add one
part American Pie to one part There's Something About Mary, bake for 90
minutes and - poof - out pops Say It Isn't So.  It's crudely funny and has a
story you'll likely forget about halfway home from the theatre.
So's voiceover gives us the important background on its main character as
the film opens.  Gilly Noble (Chris Klein, Here on Earth) was raised in an
orphanage and is currently working in Shelbyville, Indiana's animal control
department.  Despite his loneliness, Gilly still dreads having dinner with
his boss' severely dysfunctional family, which provides one of So's early
shock scenes and sets the pace for the rest of the film's seemingly endless
parade of sight gags.
Gilly becomes smitten with Jo Wingfield (Heather Graham, Bowfinger), a
former Shelbyville resident and hairdresser who has recently moved back to
town.  She's awful at her job, a point driven home in a scene that shows
everything Tarantino left out of Reservoir Dogs.  The two fall in love,
Gilly pops the question, and, shortly after they consummate their
relationship, Gilly finds out his birth parents are - surprise - Valdine and
Walter Wingfield (Sally Field and Richard Jenkins).  That makes him Jo's
brother, if you happen to be a little slow on the uptake.
Long story short, Jo moves back to Oregon (to a town called Beaver) and gets
engaged to a millionaire you know will turn out to be a really bad dude.
Gilly finds out he isn't really Jo's sibling, and the remaining 60 minutes
involves him trekking across the country to win back his true love.  Along
the way, he befriends a pilot who looks like Jimi Hendrix but swears he's
part American Indian (Orlando Jones, Double Take) and falls prey to a series
of jokes involving pubic hair, amputees, parapalegics and bovine proctology.
We're not talking subtle humor, people.  Here's the bottom line - if you
liked Pie and Mary, you'll like this.  If you didn't, stay home and shut up.
With a film like this, you can't expect too much from the actors.  It's hard
to tell if Graham is an airhead or just playing one on the screen.  Klein
comes off a little better, more than making up for the miserable Earth.
Jones logs his best performance yet and steals every scene he's in. Ditto
for Jenkins, but Field gives one of those
is-it-too-late-to-take-back-her-Oscar? performances.  Lin Shaye, a frequent
bit player in the Farrelly films, is surprisingly subdued here.  There's
cameo at the end that's kind of shocking and quite funny.
The gross-out jokes will definitely remind you of Pie and Mary, but the
feeble story is reminiscent of Mary, too.  Think about sad-sack Ben Stiller
(Klein) wooing the beautiful Cameron Diaz (Graham), meeting her wacky father
played by David Keith (Jenkins) and then horribly disfiguring his scrotum
(ear).  Klein was in Pie and is starring in this summer's sequel, and
Jenkins was just in the Farrelly's Me, Myself & Irene.  The similarities to
Pie and Mary extend behind the camera, too.  Director James B. Rogers,
making his debut here, served as the first assistant director on all four
Farrelly brothers' films and Pie (he's also directing Pie's sequel).  And
the Farrellys are producers here, as well.  It's all one, big, sick family.
1:30 - R for strong sexual content (nudity), crude humor and language

Author
Ross Anthony
Like "The Mexican," "Say It Isn't So" tries its hand at genre gender 
blending. In this case, the "American Pie" no-joke-is-too-low, 
male-oriented comedy is injected with a dose of good old-fashioned 
female-oriented love story (about 2 parts the former with one part the 
latter). Even the title chimes like a Freddie Prinze Jr. flick. And like 
"The Mexican," though not rock solid, this film finds a way to 
entertain. 
The picture starts out with a bang. When dog-catcher Gilly (Chris Klein) 
joins his boss for a dysfunctional family dinner, insults are passed 
around the table like appetizers, while topics from sex to 
nipple-piercing comprise the main course of irreverency. You'll probably 
embarrass yourself by laughing at such lowbrow humor. After a strong 
first act in which Gilly falls in love with a lovely, though incompetent 
hairdresser, things simmer to nearly a lull after we learn a family 
secret that makes their love impossible. The enjoyment factor later 
elevates in time for the climax. Will Jo marry the wrong guy in Beaver, 
Oregon? Or will Gilly with the steadfast assistance of loyal friend 
"Dig," find a way to set things right? 
Shameless, the picture finds its humor anywhere it can - often in 
genital areas. In fact, I suspect, one spot too hairy for the censors 
was yanked from the final version. Still, don't let the physical comedy 
eclipse the clever-er one-liners. 
Here are a couple of lines that resonate the funny bone via the skull... 
After Gilly's awkward dining experience with the boss' psycho family he 
suggests, "Maybe you should hire a professional..." The boss responds 
without missing a beat and stone cold serious, "You mean ... hitman?" 
Then after Jo accidentally lops off a chunk of Gill's gill (ear), she 
invites him to dinner, "What are you doing tonight?" 
"Healing mostly." Gill shyly replies. 
There's more where those came from, some too obscene to mention here. 
Though easily missed because of its genre, the picture and lighting 
quality are very very sweet. 
Some gags drop like dead flies, while others are laugh-out-loud 
uproarious. In the end, an above average night at the movies. 
Say It Isn't So. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Chris Klein, Heather Graham, Orlando Jones, Sally Field, 
Richard Jenkins, John Rothman, Jack Plotnick, Eddie Cibrian. 
*  Directed by J.B. Rogers. 
*  Written by Peter Gaulke & Gerry Swallow. 
*  Produced by Bobby Farrelly, Bradley Thomas, Peter Farrelly at 20th 
Cent. Fox/Conundrum Ent. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 
