Title
Review for Out of Rosenheim (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
Seem at the Seattle Film Festival:
BAGDAD CAFE (West Germany, 1987)
Director/Screenwriter: Percy Adlon
Cast: Marianne Sagebrecht, CCH Pounder, Jack Palance, Christine Kaufman
     BAGDAD CAFE is one of those comedies that derives much of its humor from
the strangeness of its characters.  The question I think is critical to rating
such a picture is this: how long did it take for the characters to become more
funny than strange?  In the case of this film, about twenty minutes.
     The Bagdad Cafe is a run-down little cafe that Brenda (Pounder) runs.
It's dilapidated, frequented only by truckers, and home for a number of rather
odd people: Brenda herself, her rather dim-witted husband, her two children
(one is an abandoned father of a little tyke who plays classical music all the
time, while the other is a beautiful teenager whose attentions are favored by
the local bikers, truckers and high school kids), her Indian counterman and
cook.  Then there's the residents of the adjacent motel; a hooker who does
tattoo work on the side, and Jack Palance as a Hollywood drop-out from the
sixties who seems absolutely *delighted* with whatever is going on.
     Into this steps Jasmin (Sagebrecht), a stout Bavarian woman who has just
left her husband during their visit to the United States.  She knows little
English, and her first encounter as she walks down the highway (her American
Tourister luggage wheeling along behind her) is The Bagdad.  Brenda is in a
really bad mood, as her husband just left her (he sits about a half mile away
in a car, watching the Bagdad through binoculars and muttering "Oh, Brenda.")
Due to a number of misunderstandings, it takes Brenda and Jasmin a while to hit
it off, but when they do a bubbly, infectious happiness seems to grasp the
entire group of characters; indeed, one leaves because things are "too
compatible."  From there, this giddiness doesn't threaten to overwhelm BAGDAD
CAFE -- it *does* overwhelm it, slamming it (and the audience) into a grinning
choke-hold for the rest of the film.
     BAGDAD CAFE won the Golden Space Needle Award (I hear you gasp) for best
picture, and it certainly seemed to be a crowd-pleaser; the audience I left
with seemed to be buzzing about how good it was.  I felt it had a slow
beginning and slow ending, but then I'm not as enchanted with unusual
characters (being one myself, I guess).  Palance character was a delight, but
it gets a bit too giddy for my tastes at the end.  Still, a heckuva lotta fun
with a big audience.  Rating: $3.50 or $4 film.

Author
Craig Good
     European directors seem to be fascinated with the American desert.  After
all, there is nothing like it in Europe.  German director Percy Adlon came to
America and made BAGDAD CAFE.  There's been nothing like it on the screen
before.
     This off-center gem discovers what happens when a corpulent German
tourist, played by Marianne Sagebrecht, breaks up with her husband in the
desert of Southern California.  She wanders into the Bagdad Oil and Gas Cafe,
and into the lives of a ill-tempered woman, played beautifully by CCH Pounder,
and her bizarre extended family.  The only name you'll recognize is Jack
Palance as the weird old painter from Hollywood.  Other members of the
menagerie include a tattoo artist who is very popular with the truck drivers, a
son with a bent for classical piano, a daughter who comes and goes with an
assortment of lowlife men, and a boomerang-throwing backpacker.
     BAGDAD CAFE is a film that grows on you.  My relationship with the film
paralleled the relationship of the two women.  At first I hated it.  It started
out so badly that I thought they accidentally projected the second reel first.
Starting abruptly, it was full of gratuitously tilted cameras, staccato edits
and mumbled German.  Oh, brother.  How did I get talked into watching this
movie?
     The first ray of hope was the haunting theme music and a memorable image
of the woman entranced by eerie lights in the sky.  Before I was aware, Brenda,
the slovenly cafe owner, had been won over by the genuine and compulsively neat
Jasmine.  So had I.  Through a series of whimsical and strange vignettes BAGDAD
CAFE worked its magic.  By the end of the movie I was completely hooked.
     This is not mainstream, belly-laugh comedy, but I will be smiling or
laughing about some of the images for a long time.  BAGDAD CAFE is a must-see
for devotees of the off-beat.  If you think a movie just isn't a comedy if it
doesn't have Eddie Murphy in it, stay home.  If, on the other hand, you still
remember scenes from CHOOSE ME or TROUBLE IN MIND you better search this one
out.  Island Pictures, bless them, is distributing, but I don't know how wide a
release BAGDAD CAFE will get.  I hope it comes to a theatre near you.
