Title
Review for Heat (1995)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1995) ** - C:Robert De Niro, Al Pacino, Val Kilmer, Tom Sizemore, Jon
Voight, Ashley Judd, Wes Studi, Mykelti Williamson, Natalie Portman, Jeremy
Piven, Hank Azaria.
Finally, the two greatest actors of our generation, De Niro and Pacino,
appear together in a film (they were both in "Godfather II" but never shared
a scene together). Actually, one could almost argue that they don't share a
scene together in "Heat" either. Their characters have three scenes
together, but the way they are shot, the two never really appear on screen
at the same time, which is a huge disappointment, much like the film itself.
I have a theory about "Heat" and the people who like it. I have seen the
film twice now. The first time I left the theater thinking, "Hmmmm, well
that was pretty good." Here's why. You go into the film with huge
expectations. I mean, De Niro and Pacino! Cops verses bad guys! A heist
movie! How bad can it be? Also, the film is almost three hours long. Well,
there must be a lot of story to tell here. Then, when the film ends, a
triumphant music score plays as you're leaving the theater, making you think
that you've just seen a good movie. So people leave with the impression they
they have just watched a fine motion picture. But, there were many things
that started to bother me the more that I thought about them, so I decided
to give the film a second chance when released on video. And I was right in
my assumptions.
I asked others who had liked "Heat" what exactly it was that they liked
about the film. No one could really answer the question. A friend of mine
told me that the film was all about how people change, which is a ridiculous
statement to me and if you read on you'll understand why.
The rest of this review contains spoilers, so if you haven't seen the film I
suggest you stop reading here.
I have no problem with long movies. As long as a movie is good, it can go on
forever as far as I'm concerned. But "Heat" is unnecessarily long. Countless
subplots are completely unnecessary, and scenes run on forever. For example,
Pacino and his girlfriend have a discussion, and Pacino gets mad and storms
out of the room. The scene should end. But no, he goes to the kitchen, looks
around, stands there and thinks, and then exits. A minute and a half to two
minutes that we don't need to see. And many scenes are like that. Characters
looking at things, reacting to things forever, stuff we just don't need to
see.
There are so many unnecessary subplots here. For the first hour and a half,
every few scenes or so we see this black guy applying for a job, talking to
his girlfriend, etc. What does this have to do with anything? His character
does figure into the big heist at the end, but why is his character worthy
of background info? We don't get any on the characters that we are
interested in. De Niro's a crook, that's all we ever get to know. Tom
Sizemore and Val Kilmer work for him, that's all we know. How do they all
know each other? How long have they been working together? Never explained.
Nah, we don't need to know that, but let's watch this very minor character
cook on a grill at a diner and argue with his boss. Yeah, ok. Then there's
the daughter of Pacino's girlfriend, who towards the end of the film
attempts suicide. Pointless, has nothing to do with anything. No reason we
have to be subjected to that. Her character was only in two other scenes, so
who cares? There are two romantic subplots here and neither of them work
because neither of them are interesting.
Then, there's stuff that just doesn't make any sense. De Niro's character
seems to be very detailed about his work. Everything is planned perfectly
and back-up plans are always ready to go. He knows exactly what he's doing
and where he'll be at all times. Yet for the first heist of the film he's
hired this psychotic to work with his team. And this guy is really nuts.
Obviously he would have some sort of criminal record, something De Niro
would have checked. Also, after the heist the four criminals leave a
resturaunt and proceed to attempt to kill the psycho because he almost
botched the heist, because he's a psycho. So De Niro beats him to the
ground, pulls out his gun and prepares to blow the psycho away as the team
watches. Then a police car drives by, distracting them for about three
seconds. They look down, the psycho is gone. They look around, but in a
period of about ten seconds the psycho has completely vanished without
making a sound. Ridiculous.
"Heat" is by no means anywhere close to being original. There's not one
scene in the film that hasn't been done a million times before. For example,
De Niro and crew are planning the final heist and they know that Pacino and
the other cops are on their trail. So they all discuss if they should
participate or not. When they get to Tom Sizemore, they tell him, "Look,
you've got a wife, a kid, and you have more money than you could ever spend
in a lifetime... don't do this. Walk away now." Sizemore refuses, and they
keep pressuring him, remind him of what he has. So obviously Sizemore is
going to die. It's a ridiculous cliche. And he does. Also, there's a scene
in the film towards the end that if it had stopped there and the credits
would have rolled, I would have been satisfied. It's when De Niro is driving
away with his new girlfriend, smiling because he's finally happy, and when
Pacino and his girlfriend are in the hospital waiting for the daughter to
recover. Pacino tells her that he'll be there for her when she needs him.
This would had been slightly more original because THEN the film would have
been about how people can change. But no, De Niro turns the car around to
take care of some more crime business, and Pacino runs off to catch him. Oh,
so the cop keeps being a cop and the criminal keeps being a criminal. Gee,
I've never seen that before in my life. Groundbreaking.
I place complete blame for this dismal failure on writer/director Michael
Mann. He just had no earthly idea what he ws doing here. He had no control
over Pacino, because every once in a while he would break into his character
from "Scent of a Woman", yelling at times for no reason. He had a nice
trailer put together for the film, and then used different takes in the
actual film itself. But the takes used in the trailer were much better than
the actual takes that were in the film! Val Kilmer's character has maybe
eight lines and spends most of the film wandering around with a weird
expression on his face like his head is empty or something. "Heat" had SO
much potential that the first time you see it, you just can't admit that it
was bad, because you so desperately wanted it to be good. And the truth is
that it's just as bad as everything else, it just has better actors in it.
Please visit my movie reviews web site at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
You'll be glad you did.

Author
Tom McDonald
     It's hard to believe Michael Mann could get two of Hollywood's
biggest living legends and a multi-million dollar budget, and make a
movie that totally collapses on itself.  If you could overlook the
worst on-screen kiss since Sylvester Stallone kissed Sharon Stone in
THE SPECIALIST, the first portion of the movie lives up to the hype.
DeNiro's and Pacino's characters are quickly established as the tough and
professional ... and two guys on a definite collision course.  An
entertaining cat-and-mouse game quickly ensues between DeNiro and
Pacino with the first half of the movie culminating in an entertaining,
but woefully underwritten scene in which the two starts meet face to
face.
     The collapse starts with a bank robbery in which DeNiro and two of
his cohorts kill the entire LAPD.  It's a ridiculous action sequence
that has DeNiro carrying a wounded Val Kilmer through a hailstorm of
magic bad-guy bullets ... ya know, those magic bullets that never hit
the bad guys.  Actually those bullets were flying over DeNiro's head
and ripping holes in the rest of the script, because from that point
on, every character comes down with the syndrome known as "lets not do
what any real person with a brain would do in this situation so we can
film another stupid contrived action sequence."
     A real professional would have shot Kilmer in the head in the
shoot-out and kept going.  Nowhere in the film is the relationship
between DeNiro and Kilmer portrayed as strong enough to warrant such
heroic actions by DeNiro.
     And there is no way in hell DeNiro goes back to the hotel to kill
the really, really, really bad guy.  I mean he's already killed the
really, really bad guy.  He sees that there are cops all over the hotel
waiting for him to go after the really, really, really bad guy.  Would
a smart guy do it.  No.  Would a professional guy do it? Would a
retiring thief with a gazillion dollars and a babe in the car and a jet
at the airport do it ... the same guy who was lucky enough to run into
the entire LAPD on a day when they all had blanks in their little
guns.  NO WAY.  But Writer (I use that term loosely)/Director Mann
would like you to think he would.  Suddenly the professional is not
professional, and DeNiro's character is totally undermined.  Then,
after another totally contrived scene in which DeNiro leaves his
"deer-in-the-headlights" girlfriend standing at the car, there is
another ridiculous scene in which 50 year old Pacino - carrying a ten
pound shotgun - chases 50 year old DeNiro about seven miles around an
airport.  The film finally ...  mercifully, ends in what has to be
the worst choreographed and most uninventive shoot-out in movie
history.
     I won't even go into the details about the stupid subplot with an
ex-con on parole which is so phony its almost laughable.  HEAT starts
out with lots of potential then gets really, really dumb.  So dumb,
that even DeNiro and Pacino cant save it.  Hollywood must think we're
idiots.  Cheers to the guy who wrote this fall's USUAL SUSPECTS.  It
had half the star power, half the fire power, but it had ten times the
script and it was ten times the movie.  I can't believe Michael Mann
looked at the final cut of this film and said "yeah ... let's go with
it." He ought to be ashamed of himself for wasting such potential.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 12/15/95 (wide)
Running Length: 2:52
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, sexual situations)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Al Pacino, Robert De Niro, Val Kilmer, Diane Venora,
      Amy Brenneman, Tom Sizemore, Jon Voight, Ashley Judd, Wes Studi
Director: Michael Mann
Producers: Art Linson and Michael Mann
Screenplay: Michael Mann
Cinematography: Dante Spinotti
Music: Elliot Goldenthal
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers Pictures
     Pacino meets De Niro.  It has the sound of a classic screen moment. 
These actors -- two of the best in the business for more than twenty-five
years -- have previously appeared in the same picture only once (THE
GODFATHER II), but, due to the split-timeline nature of the script, they
never interacted.  Now, in HEAT, writer/director Michael Mann (THE LAST
OF THE MOHICANS) has contrived a cinematic intersection in their careers
("contrived" being the operative word), and the result is,
unfortunately, a colossal disappointment.
     Given the lofty status of its headlining stars, HEAT could have
been the standout film of the 1995 holiday movie season -- but it isn't. 
In fact, not only is it not a great movie, but it's not even an
especially good one.  At best, it's a serviceable cops-and-robbers
thriller with a running time that drags on for about twice as long as it
needs to.  Someone should have told Mann that if he was going to make a
routine movie, he should have kept it to a reasonable length.  I lost
track of how many times I checked my watch during the nearly three
interminable hours it took HEAT to play itself to a predictable
conclusion of a chase scene and a shoot-out.
     There are too many characters, and the script wants to spend time
filling in background for each of them.  The first problem is that all
the character-building information is cliched and uninteresting.  Worse
still, the exposition kills any momentum built by HEAT's best scenes --
the heists.  Some background on the main adversaries -- Pacino's officer
Vincent Hanna and De Niro's bad guy Neil McCauley -- is obviously
necessary, but it all drags. 
     About forty minutes of HEAT is involving.  The rest varies from
humdrum to tedious.  That's not a very good success rate.  The
ballyhooed meeting between Pacino and De Niro (which takes place in a
cafe) should have radiated tension and raw energy.  Instead, it's pretty
average.  Neither of the actors gives a noteworthy performance.  They're
going through the motions, picking up paychecks.  Not that great emoting
would have made much difference.  Mann's script is not meant for
stunning thespian displays.  The dialogue is pedestrian, and, because of
the noticeable lack of intensity, the cafe tete-a-tete might as well
have featured Jeff Daniels and Ed Begely.
     The basic storyline is familiar.  Vincent is a police officer
investigating a series of crimes committed by Neil's group of trained,
experienced robbers.  Now, with the cops closing in, the criminals have
decided to call it quits after one more big-time job.  Meanwhile, both
men -- good guy and bad guy -- are having personal problems.  Vincent's
marriage is falling apart and Neil, after decades of loneliness, has
finally found a woman with whom he connects.  All of these elements are,
of course, brought crashing together for the final act.
     The cast is top-notch, as are most of the performances.  Tom
Sizemore (TRUE ROMANCE) plays one of Neil's right-hand men; Val Kilmer
(BATMAN FOREVER) is another.  In the spouse department, Ashley Judd
(RUBY IN PARADISE) is underused (again) as Kilmer's wife, Diane Venora
is matched with Pacino, and Amy Brenneman plays De Niro's girlfriend.
Also on hand are Jon Voight, Wes Studi, Denis Haysbert, and (in a truly
thankless part) Nathalie Portman (the girl from THE PROFESSIONAL).
     When all is said and done, about the only reason to see HEAT is for
the "big" meeting.  It's not much, but it's all this movie really has to
offer.  There's action here, but it's nothing special, and the long
stretches of banal dialogue and formula plotting mute the impact of the
staccato, bullet-laden bursts of energy.  Another 1995 title might be
more apt for this particular motion picture -- instead of HEAT, try
SMOKE.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Alex Brenner
Directed by Michael Mann
Robert De Niro  Al Pacino  Val Kilmer  Tom Sizemore  Ashley Judd
   Before I proceed, two pre scripta.  Firstly, I am aware that there has
been recently posted another review of Heat, which was largely negative. 
That the tone of this critique is vastly different should not be taken as
a criticism of that article, which contains a few valid points.  Secondly,
this is not a review, nor could it be.  I have not seen the film for a few
months, and thus I am not concerned with minutiae of detail and plot. 
This is, rather, a criticism, and therefore assumes that the reader
possess a ready familiarity with the 'text.'
   'Heat' is often billed as a cerebral action movie, its major selling
points being the unification of De Niro and Pacino, and direction from
Michael Mann, who achieved a notable success in 1991 with the
action-fuelled 'Last of the Mohicans.'  However, the film fails on that
front, and it would be a mistake to judge it on the same basis as pulp
like 'Independence Day.'  It is unquestionably the work of an auteur, and
it attempts to convey what are, for a mainstream film, astonishing depths
of meaning and significance.  Its slow, contemplative pace is more
reminiscent of art European cinema than the Hollywood blockbuster
tradition to which it undoubtedly alludes.
   It would be easy to dismiss the plot as perfunctory.  After all, there
exists no great innovation in its formulaic telling of lawmaker and
breaker mano-a-mano; its use of close encounters and near misses as plot
devices is not going to win praise.  But then, the plot need not be any
more than perfunctory:  its place is to support exploration of the two
protagonists and associated 
themes.  Indeed, the extent of the focus is interesting, for it persists
to the point where the subsidiaries almost become like a chorus.  The
eloquent commentaries delivered by some of the lesser participants are
clearly fulfilling the need for a cementing of imagery.  It is a thing
which can be hard to do on film; Scorsese uses voice-over, for instance,
to explain motivations and desires that might otherwise have to be
tediously run through with action.  Mann is not so explicit, but there is
certainly something of this here.  
   It would almost certainly be a misinterpretation to state that Mann
cast De Niro and Pacino for their box-office pulling power.  It is far
more likely that he wished to aid a vertical coherence in resolution of
theme.  Permit me to explain.  De Niro and Pacino's characters are
disconnected from their peers, and isolated in general - indeed, this
maybe is one criticism that could fairly be levelled at Mann: that these
ideas are somewhat overstressed.  Time and again, we see Pacino failing to
communicate with his family and colleagues, both in a literal and a
figurative sense.  We are told often enough that his marriages have
failed, and then, of course, his daughter tries to kill himself. 
Similarly, De Niro is always picked out from a crowd; we see his face,
focus razor-sharp, over a blur of city lights.  So we see that De Niro is
set apart from society, suggested by plot, dialogue, and images.  However,
this stressing is ultimately not too intrusive.  The two are both unusally
able: Pacino is a great cop, De Niro a great crook, and yet both are poor
at communication, despite their intelligence and instinctive powers of
understanding and empathy.  Beginning to recognise a pattern here?  Mann's
use of De Niro and Pacino enhances his exposition no end, as they are
fundamentally reprising the roles they play in real life.  Thus do we see
themes repeated and enhanced at different levels of the work.  Where there
exists a unity of vision between a poster and subtext, there exists a
coherent, intelligent vision, or so Mann would have us believe.  Of
course, one might take this further, and suggest that Mann is cheekily
making a statement concerning the greatness of his work.  When De Niro and
Pacino finally come together, in the film, in life, the sparks fly.
   If one is concerned momentarily with these themes of seperateness and
isolation, one might be inclined to see the film as a paean to such a
condition.  There is no doubt that Mann reserves a certain reverence for
his two heroes, particularly De Niro.  His portrayal of their genius
speaks of an admiration for men such as these, whose wit, loneliness,
empathetic skills, and inability to relate spring from the same source:
their observation and perception of people, the world, and the ways in
which they work.  There is of course, in this, a certain arrogance, which
is explied at a number of points, like when De Niro casually seduces a
girl, or Pacino at a crimescene, talking down to his lesser
contemporaries.  These men feel a certain aloofness, because they see
repeatedly evinced their superiority over other people, hence, again,
their failure to possess a circle of friends, a condition stemming from
the lack of any desire to associate closely with thos they consider to be
their inferiors.  Strongly implied in all this is a realisation of Mann's
persona, the auteur, in De Niro and Pacino.  I daresay that it would be
relatively difficult to seperate those elements in the heroes which are
Mann's invention and those which are autocharacteristic.  There is nothing
wrong with this, indeed, it is a positive boon.  It is quite clear that
Mann has invested in 'Heat' a good deal of personal anguish; perhaps the
film was conceived as some kind of therapy!  Certainly, there is in 'Heat'
much to suggest a working through of the isolated, intellectual
personality, its implications and weaknesses.
   It is thus a moment of great emotional significance when these two
meet.  Again, the 'cafe' scence was billed as the first scene shared by De
Niro and Pacino, the meeting of two great forces, a comment which may just
as well be applied within the film as without.  Here we see for the first
time a recognition (seeded in the scene where Pacino photographs De Niro
in open space from a crane) of equality, of another person who might be
considered equal.  This resolution might seem akin to the old saw 'Two
sides of the same coin,' and indeed it is.  However, by saying more than
just 'the crook and the cop are two sides of the same coin,' Mann invites
a more plangent evocation of the joys of companionship.  'The crook and
the cop are both sides of the same coin, which is an unusual coin,
possessing several odd relationships with other coins' might be more
appropriate.  Because Mann portrays wonderfully the desolation and pain
that lie at the heart of Pacino and De Niro's worlds, it is altogether
wonderful to see the two united.  It is a testament to 'Heat's' tragic
stature that this scene is agonising rather than sentimental, for one may
choose to see the film also as a story of unrequited love.  After all, the
cafe scene bore strong sexual resonances for this viewer at least.  And if
not sexual, then at least something concerned with love.  For what is love
if is not the apotheosis of your being in another person?  Something along
this line occurs between De Niro and Pacino: Pacino recognises that De
Niro knows him already far better than his wife or child ever will, and De
Niro sees that Pacino understands his motivations and character better
than his henchmen or his picked-up floozie ever will.  The cafe scene
links directly to the final shot, the two holding hands in recognition of
the profundity of their communion, of both the acknowledged inevitability
of the loss, and its sickening futility.  People have complained of 'Heat'
being predictable.  Well, Neil McAuley might say the same: in the cafe
scene there is also an implicit recognition that one of them will be
'taken down' by the other, one consigned to the darkness of death, the
other once more to that of loneliness.  
   This is really the core of the film: an exploration of this mentality,
with all it has to say about the operation of human relationships; it is
an attempt to aestheticise the coldness of self-aware existence, and the
profound satisfaction to be derived from an unqualified respect, and
subsequently, friendship.  Of course, the tragic course of the film never
permits that friendship to blossom, but the hint of their mutual respect
is enough to reveal the concept.  By emoting with such acuity and clarity,
Mann makes a bee-line for the soul, so to speak.  'Heat' is enormously
affecting, because it is accurate: therefore, the enormous pain
experienced by Pacino at the end, a pain, it should be said, tinged with a
funereal, longing, respect, or even love, is also experienced by the
sympathetic viewer.  Its resolution is in some ways a happy one, as the
viewer comes, with Pacino, to recognise the contribution that De Niro made
to Pacino's life, to lend hope, and that Pacino's life will ultimately be
the better for it.  So the film is plangent and mournful, yet, like all
properly resolved tragedy, somehow heartwarming.
   All this would, of course, be for very little, were it not for 'Heat's'
technical brilliance.  That its ideas should be so excellently realised
owes much to the synergy between the various cinematic elements at work. 
Obviously, the main artistic impetus is Mann, the quality of whose
direction can be judged from my earlier comments, but whose script is also
very good.  The cinematography is excellent, ceaslessy portraying a sharp,
blue, cold world, where the surfaces repel all dust.  The lighting
observes superbly the rhythms of the characters, and there is a fine
score.  Special mention must of course go to De Niro, who provides a
performance of subtlety, power, realism and absolute control.  It is his
finest screen moment since 'The King of Comedy,' and stands utterly
unashamed in the company of Vito Corleone, Travis Bickle and Jake
LaMotta.  One thing is for certain: there is no facet of De Niro's
portrayal of Neil McAuley which does not vastly outshine Nicolas Cage's in
'Leaving Las Vegas,' which was in itself, of course, a remarkably fine
performance.  The real blot on the landscape is Pacino, but enough has
been made of the weakness of his performance by reviewers.  It is only
fair to say that he suffers by comparison: he won an Oscar for a
performance, in 'Scent of a Woman,' which was a good bit worse than his
showing here.  However, in comparison to the wonders worked elsewhere, he
does let the side down a trifle.  Is it possible that he thought he was
still on Broadway trying to reach row X?  (It seems that all great films
have an actor who underperforms; 'Taxi Driver' had (that dreadful woman
whose name currently escapes me), 'Bladerunner' had Sean Young.  Make of
this what you will.  )
   That last sentence implied that I consider 'Heat' to be a great film,
and any inference made to that effect would be correct.  It is unusual,
when one goes to see many films, to have one leap out and hit one in the
face with its sheer brilliance, but that is what 'Heat' did.  In my time
as a regular cinemagoer - not, admittedly, all that long - only 'Se7en'
and 'Schindler's List' performed this feat to the same extent as 'Heat.' 
This is not to say that these are the only films that I consider superb,
but they are the only such that I saw first on the big screen.  Of these
elite three, I would say that perhaps 'Se7en' lacks the timelessness or
extreme depth that constitute a genuinely great film.  'Heat,' on the
other hand, does not lack these, which in my opinion leaves it in level
contention with 'Schindler's List' and 'GoodFellas' for best film of the
decade, thus far.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Robert De Niro has been in two crime films released in relatively
short order, each just a bit short of three hours long.  Of the two,
Martin Scorsese's CASINO tells what was for me the more interesting
story of how organized crime lost Las Vegas.  The same critics who
claimed that they had seen before most of what was in that film are
praising the originality of Michael Mann's HEAT.  But HEAT really is a
tale that has been done multiple times before.  It is the story of the
really good cop and the really good (well, proficient) crook and their
long battle of wits and weapons.  Director and screenwriter Michael
Mann draws that story out to 172 minutes by showing with one good cop
and two criminals what being part of that game does to their emotions
and their personal life.  The film begins by showing us several strands
of plot with different characters.  In the first part of the film the
question is what do these people have to do with each other and what is
happening.  It turns out that one of the people we see is a police
detective and the rest are criminals preparing a heist.  Mann
intentionally disorients the audience by showing scenes that the viewer
cannot be expected to understand yet.  They are all part of the story,
of course, but they may not become important or even understood until
much later.  The gang pulls off its heist in spectacular fashion under
the supervision of super-criminal Neil McCauley (Robert De Niro).  It
works nearly like clockwork until loose cannon Waingro (Kevin Gage)
kills a man.  That changes the nature of the crime.  The unflappable
McCauley still knows exactly what are the right things to do, but it is
the beginning of McCauley's problems.  Later when police detective
Vincent Hanna investigates the crime he finds very few clues and the
biggest one is just that whoever did the crime was very, very good.
But Hanna is also good.
     Thus begins the long game of the cat and the mouse as Hanna tracks
down McCauley.  What sets this film somewhat apart from numerous other
films with similar plots is Mann's deliberate pacing.  We get to see
what being a police detective does to Hanna.  His inability to turn off
his work on those rare occasions that he can spend time with his wife
and step-daughter has ripped apart his home life.  McCauley, on the
other hand, claims to allow no relationships in his life that he cannot
break on half a minute's notice.  Mann show us what these tendencies do
to each man as well as to Chris Shiherlis (Val Kilmer), a member of
McCauley's gang.  On a small scale McCauley and Hanna have a private
war complete with impressive arsenals of weapons and clever ways of
tracking down intelligence about the other.
     The script has some serious problems.  We see Pacino called in to
investigate multiple homicides that will *eventually* be tied together.
But it is always the same homicide investigator, Hanna, who is called
to the scene.  Is he supposed to be the only homicide detective in Los
Angeles?  Often the script has the police just seem to be
supernaturally good at their jobs.  And Pacino overdoes the caring
policeman bit just a bit too much.  In one scene that seems to go
over-the-top he grabs and hugs the mother of a murder victim to console
her and prevent her from seeing the victim's body.  It is an emotional
scene but just does not ring true.
     Robert De Niro plays McCauley as smooth and self-assured but given
to explosive violence.  Pacino plays Hanna as edgy and quick-witted and
given to explosive violence.  Michael Mann's direction is stylized with
his usual exaggerated camera angles and his unusual use of color.  And
it too is given to explosive violence.  Probably the best thing about
Mann's previous film, THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS was Wes Studi's
performance as Magua.  Wes Studi, with a face like a corn-grinding
stone, is capable of extremely intense acting.  Here, however, his role
seemed gratuitous and is only of interest in that it was an American
Indian in a role that did not need to be played by an Indian.  It is
nice to see him working and in a non-ethnic role; it is just a pity he
was under-used.
     The set design is of particular interest here.  Hanna's house
seems almost totally drained of color, perhaps to make some point about
the turning off of emotions.  One bad piece of set design has a
character who is basically a book clerk living in an apartment with a
breathtaking view overlooking the city.  A line in the script explains
that the building is run-down but has a nice view.  But I suspect there
are darn few book clerks in Los Angeles with apartments that have views
like that.
     HEAT is a well-told crime story but tells us little new or really
interesting about the lives of anyone one on either side of the law.I
rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(WB)
Directed by    Michael Mann
Written by     Michael Mann
Cast           Al Pacino, Robert De Niro, Val Kilmer, Diane Venora,
               Amy Brenneman, Tom Sizemore, Jon Voight, Ashley Judd
MPAA Rating    "R" (presumably for violence and language)
Running Time   152 minutes
Reviewed at    Mission Valley Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (15DEC95)
      Wow.  Director Michael Mann's epic crime story is an instant 
qualifier for the category of "year's best."  The three-hour tale 
of cops and robbers has been fashioned from the oldest of stories, 
but Mann puts a provocative psychologist twist on it.  He focuses 
on the *inner* lives of two obsessively driven men:  master thief 
Neil McCauley (Robert De Niro) and LA cop Vincent Hanna (Al 
Pacino).  They spend almost the entire movie apart, an irony that 
isn't lost on anyone before or behind the camera.  Pacino and 
De Niro have never shared a scene together, despite starring as 
father and son in THE GODFATHER, PART II.  When they finally meet, 
in the middle of the movie, for an impromptu coffee-shop conver-
sation, it's a quiet moment of impressive magnitude.
     Despite the implications of the punchy title, Mann's extended 
cat-and-mouse chase is not about testosterone-poisoned action 
heroes.  These guys are just out to do their jobs; each more 
methodical than maniac, or so they would rationalize.  They know 
they have a job to do, and that some people might get hurt as a 
result.  (Such as their women-- the wives, daughters, and 
girlfriends that the story poignantly portrays.)  The overall tone 
is cool; perhaps too cool for some.  The dolby-enchanced set-
pieces, the ones most likely shown in the ads, are few and far 
between.  A heavy-artillery shoot-out on the downtown streets of LA 
is something to see, though.  Mann, ever the thinking director, 
allows us to catch our breath.  Just as he allows his characters 
their own moments of silence.
     The superior photography, by Dante Spinotti, is one of the 
many technical credits that deserves Oscar recognition.  As he's 
shown in THIEF, MANHUNTER, and THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, as well as 
in his two TV series "Miami Vice" and "Crime Story," Michael Mann 
is no slouch on style.  Nor on substance.  He's written reasonable 
roles for Tom Sizemore, Jon Voight (!), Val Kilmer, and Ashley 
Judd.  The supporting players are an equally impressive lot.  The 
whammo cast also includes Wes Studi, Ted Levine, Amy Brenneman, 
Mykelti Williamson, Natalie Portman, and Tom Noonan.  And, since we 
*are* in LA, both rocker Henry Rollins and rapper Tone-Loc wander 
through for a scene or two.  
Michael J. Legeros - Raleigh, NC        
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Check triangle.movies for weekly reviews from MOVIE HELL

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I saw this movie in a theater on Christmas day. I wouldn't 
recommend it, not only because movie theaters are filled on Christmas 
with all the losers and lonely people with nowhere else to go (myself 
not included, of course), but also because when it comes to peace on 
earth and good will toward men, HEAT is left out in the cold. It's a 
dark, gritty movie where people are shot point blank with machine 
guns for talking. If only the ushers would do that to noisy theater 
patrons...
        Al Pacino and Robert DeNiro star as polar opposites, Pacino 
the cop and DeNiro the criminal plotting to knock over a bank. The 
two are definite enemies but still have an intriguing sense of politeness 
toward each other, knowing they could have been good friends had 
circumstances been different. Both know and accept the fact that one 
will be triumphant over the other. In one of their few scenes together, 
Pacino pulls DeNiro over on the highway, only to ask him if he wants 
to have a cup of coffee with him. Certainly an unusual relationship 
those two have with each other. When's the last time you saw Batman 
and The Joker eating a plate of nachos together?
        HEAT combines the main story of DeNiro planning his big 
score and Pacino planning to stop him once he figures out what the big 
score is (an important first obstacle to overcome) with other subplots. 
Pacino's wife resents his preference of his work to her, his 
stepdaughter (Natalie Portman from THE PROFESSIONAL, who 
doesn't have any embarrassing Madonna numbers to sing this time) 
wants and tries to kill herself and DeNiro's henchman, Val "Batman" 
Kilmer (when's the last time you saw him sharing a plate of nachos 
with The Joker?), has a wife on the verge of leaving him.
        It's a depressing, pessimistic movie, to say the least, but a 
compelling one. Especially interesting is the plotline that has DeNiro 
meeting and falling in love with a woman. At first I thought his 
flirtation was an act so he could beat her to death with a crowbar once 
he got her alone, but it turns out some criminals can experience true 
love. (Donald Trump's been married twice.) His love for her causes 
complications a little later on, when choices are to be made.
        HEAT is three hours long, at least twenty minutes longer than 
it should be, but you need that length to tell the full story, I guess. 
Even with the lengthy storytelling throughout the movie, the final 
scene between DeNiro and Pacino is over way too soon. And by the 
end, there are still a few unresolved plot points. It's a good movie but it 
could be better, and briefer. A word of advice--don't see it on 
Christmas day.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
and check out the 40+ new reviews since Christmas.

Author
Christopher Null
     I hate to condone the making of 3-hour long movies, but HEAT is one
in which you're not going to fall asleep.  Comparisons to CASINO are going
to be inevitable, with both hitting the 180-minute mark and starring
Robert DeNiro as a crook, but unlike that film, HEAT manages to keep the
interest level high throughout the whole picture.
     HEAT is the instantly gripping tale of a large-scale heist leader and
die-hard loner named Neil McCauley (DeNiro).  As the film opens, he and
his team of brutal, precision thieves (including Val Kilmer and Tom
Sizemore) knock over (literally) an armored car for a stash of bearer
bonds.  On the case is Detective Vincent Hanna (Al Pacino), a troubled,
angst-ridden veteran of the LAPD.  Over the course of the film, McCauley
and Hanna develop a strange sort of kinship, even as McCauley's crimes
increasingly raise the stakes and Hanna's efforts to stop him become more
and more desperate.
     The action builds up for a solid two hours until a nearly
catastrophic "final" bank robbery results in one of the most vivid
shoot-outs ever filmed.  Writer/director Michael Mann (best known for his
work on "Miami Vice") paces the movie well, and he really puts the
audience through the ringer by getting the adrenaline pumping like an oil
well.
     But why is this film 3 hours long, you ask?  The answer lies in
Mann's multidimensional examinations of all the major characters, their
wives, their children, and any other love interests who happen along. 
Thus over the course of the picture, we discover Hanna is in his third
marriage and his wife's ex-husband is a deadbeat.  We learn at length
about McCauley's personal code:  to have nothing in his life he can't walk
away from in 30 seconds flat if "the heat" is coming.  And when the heat
does come, we see how it affects everyone...in depth.  While these
relationship subplots are mildly interesting, they seem completely out of
place in the movie and, in the end, weigh the film down.
     This aside, strong performances by the principals and some excellent
bit parts by players like Hank Azaria, Tom Noonan, Natalie Portman, and
Jon Voight make HEAT a truly memorable film.  Somewhat more difficult to
figure out is Pacino, who takes his over-the-top, in-your-face screen
presence to new heights, becoming almost cartoonish in his archetypal
portrayal of the insanely driven cop.  Altogether, the cast lends a lot of
credibility to what would otherwise be another run-of-the-mill crime
movie.  And while the sometimes hard-to-follow script often demands too
much of the viewer, this film is one that's truly worth seeing.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Rhodes
     HEAT is a action movie of great energy and excellent stunts that
masquerades as an epic.  The plot can easily be summarized as cat
chases mouse, mouse chases cat, and cat and mouse stop to share a cup
of coffee.
     HEAT is a new movie written and directed by Michael Mann (THE LAST
OF THE MOHICANS, MANHUNTER, THIEF, and the TV series "Miami Vice").  It
has fours sets of characters: good guys (cops), bad guys (robbers), all
their families, and the people doing the stunts.  It is an intriguing,
but exhausting movie where only two aspects (bad guys and the stunts)
of the movie work.  It is an interesting movie with lots of action so
most viewers will leave the theater satisfied and yet it has the
potential for much more that it delivers.
     As the show starts, a group of robbers by the names of Neil
McCauley (Robert De Niro), Chris Shiherlis (Val Kilmer), Michael
Cheritto (Tom Sizemore), and Waingro (Kevin Gage) are gathering for an
elaborate but precisely coordinated heist.  They are going to take a
massive pickup truck of the size that is used to pickup semis and ram
it into an armored car.  These are cold blooded killers who terminate
their victims with no remorse and little reason.  The action sequence
here is impressive and the best part is the sound effects - massive
steel on steel impact.  Shades of the DIE HARD series.
     Detective Vincent Hanna (Al Pacino) arrives on the scene soon
after the crime has been completed and the chase is on.  Early on, each
side learns the identity of the other so that the movie consists of
Hanna and company, Detective Casals (Wes Studi), Detective Drucker
(Mykelti Williamson), etc., watching the bad guys and waiting for them
to commit the big one.
     While waiting for the inevitable capture, they get to philosophize
a lot on their roles in life.  Detective Hanna says, "I've got a lot of
angst.  I preserve it, I hold it, it keeps me sharp where I've got to
me."  Neil McCauley explains to Hanna, "I do what I do best; I take
scores.  You do what you do best and try to catch bad guys like me."
Several times during the show McCauley reminds us of his guiding
principle, "Do not get attached to anything you can not walk out on in
thirty seconds flat if the heat comes around the corner."  Shakespeare
this isn't.
     The movie has many an exhilarating action scene full of great
sound effects especially of assault-weapons.  Sorry to say that since
Mann believes he is creating something on the scale of the GODFATHER
sagas, he pads the movie with numerous and superfluous family scenes.
None of them work.  Both sides are married to dysfunctional but
ultimately boring families.  The only point the families seem to serve
is to say that both good guys and bad guys have families to distract
them and that the families on both sides look and act alike.
     The female roles in the movie, Justine Hanna (Diane Venora), Eady
(Amy Brenneman), and Charlene Shiherlis (Ashley Judd), are all poorly
written.  Justine complains to her husband that "I may be stoned on
grass and Prozac, but you've been walking through my life dead."  The
only scenes with a female in it that work are a tragic one that will
tear your heart out when a girl teenager is dying as well as Eady's
tragic expression in a great scene towards the end.
     The robbers are quite well done.  The makeup and the costumes add
to their aura of evil.  De Niro has a sinister goatee and slick black
hair, while his mentor, Nate (Jon Voight), has a pock marked face
reminiscent of the moon and sickly eyes that make him looked wasted as
if he has indeed been dissipated by a life of crime.  The acting by the
robbers is excellent.  De Niro delivers a strong but controlled
performance as do Kilmer and Voight.  Pacino, on the other hand, loses
control emotionally in almost every scene.  The script attempts to
compensate by giving him a plethora of expletives for adjectives with
which to scare the crooks.
     Now we come to believability.  This is where the movie earns its
lowest scores.  Let's take a quiz.  If someone is firing a stream of
bullets from an assault-weapon into your windshield, would drive keep
driving straight into him?  If you are surrounded by hundreds of
policemen and you have to fired constantly for many minutes, would you
never need to reload?  In this case, would you expect to kill scores of
police but get away unscathed yourself?  If you are a cop and a killer
is holding a little girl hostage while spinning around rapidly, would
you shot at him?  If you are a cop, would you push a guy through a
plate glass window to make him talk?  If you were able to answer all of
these in the affirmative, you may have a lucrative career in front of
you in Hollywood.  Give the studio (Warner Brothers) a call now and set
up an interview.  Your fortune awaits.
     The music is bland - made up mostly of pseudo-haunting violin
melodies.  The camera work is good and fast paced in the action
sequences, but it has too many hyper close-ups in the family scenes.
When Pacino's nose covers the entire screen at the local monsterplex,
you feel like you are viewing Mount Rushmore.
     HEAT runs (sometime crawls) 2:51, but there is really only enough
material for two hours.  It is correctly rated R as it is full of
violence with more deaths that you can hope to count.  I do not
remember any nudity, but there was a little sex.  It is suitable only
for mature teenagers.  I liked all of the bad guys and the stunts are
terrific, but ultimately I have to give the movie a mild thumbs down.
It gets ** from me.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
M. Doyle
     PacinoDeNiroPacinoDeNiroPacinoDeNiroPacinoDeNiroPacinoDeNiro.
     Who could fail to be awed?  What could be mightier than the coming
together of these two titanic forces of nature?  Was not the day we
heard these two would be paired in HEAT akin to the day we were told
Jack Nicholson was to play the Joker?  Pacino - the top cop; DeNiro the
chief thief.  What could we expect but a cinematic apocalypse of
galactic proportions?
     Michael Mann must have thought the same thing.  Michael Mann is
the director of HEAT.  He is also its screenwriter.  Michael Mann is
the creator of TV's Miami Vice and the director of several action
movies, including LAST OF THE MOHICANS.  Michael Mann must have said to
himself, "This is going to be my GOODFELLAS.  No.  This is going to be
my GODFATHER.  No this is going to be my GOODFELLAS *and* GODFATHER
rolled into one!"
     Let me begin by saying, Michael Mann is neither Martin Scorcese
nor Francis Ford Coppola.  But I knew that going in.
     The movie started off *fine*.  DeNiro and his crew (which includes
Val Kilmer) knock over an armored car - literally.  It's a brilliantly
hatched and well executed plan.  Pacino arrives on the scene and
catches the scent; the chase is on.  It was what I expected from Mann.
     But then, instead of focusing on the hunt and the heists, he
repeatedly returns to family life scenes concerning Pacino and Kilmer's
characters and an unlikely romance for DeNiro's.  A side plot develops
in which DeNiro's gang makes deals with the guy whose bonds they stole
from the armored car.  More characters are introduced and given
scenes.  Another side plot with a serial killer opens up.  As the
minutes piled up and the footage rolled on, a metronome began ticking
in my head, softly, "dull.....dull.....dull...."
     Don't get me wrong.  There's nothing wrong with a rich plot or
showing a character's family life.  But the bulk of the scenes and the
characters in them were so contrived and the editing so loose and
dragging, I couldn't understand why Mann didn't just stick to the core
story.
     Eventually, we come to the bank job.  The screen that had been
quiet almost since the opening, exploded with automatic weapons and
shotguns.  Glass shattered, cars crashed, people screamed.  It's a
great, climactic scene.  A climax you could go home from and say, "That
was a good movie."
     But it wasn't the climax!  It wasn't the end!  HEAT dragged on for
more than an hour afterwards.  I was writhing in my seat.  At one
point, a cop says, "I'm going to get some coffee and we're going to sit
until this thing is over with." I felt like saying, "Get some for me,
too."  As the credits finally rolled, someone behind me muttered, "That
was so long, DeNiro could have gone to prison in the first scene and
finished his sentence before the movie was over."
     The funny thing is that even though Pacino and DeNiro were the
leads in this movie, they shared only three, maybe four scenes.  One of
those scenes was dialogue; the rest were gunplay.  And in all of those
scenes, you never once see both Pacino's and DeNiro's faces on screen
at the same time.  It is entirely conceivable that these two men never
acted together in making this movie.
     I mentioned Val Kilmer as one of the supporting stars in HEAT.
The rest of the supporting cast seems like a list of every performer
ever mentioned on Film Flicks & Video Pix.  There's Tom Sizemore, John
Voigt, William Fichter, Wes Studi (Magua from LAST OF THE MOHICANS and
the title character in GERONIMO), Hank Azaria (of TV's "The Simpsons"),
Ashley Judd, even Henry Rollins and the guy who played the
knife-throwing hit man in DESPERADO.
     HEAT is two minutes of trailer material and 2 hours and 43 minutes
of filler.  It will be left to a future generation to harness the
combined power of Pacino and DeNiro and put it to constructive use for
humanity.

Author
Chad Polenz
Heat
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, R, 171 minutes [2 hours, 51 minutes]
[crime/thriller]
Starring: Al Pacino (Detective Vincent Hanna), Robert De Niro (Neil
McCauley), Val Kilmer (Chris Shiherlis), Jon Voight (Nate), produced by Art
Linson, Michael Mann, written and directed by Michael Mann.
It's a shame "Heat" is not the fantastic crime movie you'd expect it to be.
It has so much potential to be an epic and exciting  film, especially
considering the all-star cast and the basic plot. But this is where the
problem lies: the film is a bit too epic for its own good as it makes the
common mistake of trying to do too many things at the same time. 
The setting is present-day Los Angeles and the story starts off on in an
interesting way as we see a group of well organized criminals rob an armored
van, not for cash, but for stocks and bonds. But things never go according to
plan in crime films and when one of the thieves slips up, the result is three
unnecessary deaths. 
Quick on the scene is Detective Vincent Hanna (Pacino), your typical movie
'tect who is able to piece together the scene and figure out what happened.
Meanwhile, the criminals, as lead by Neil McCauley (De Niro) and Chris
Shiherlis (Kilmer), are not happy with the situation which continues to go
sour for them when the one who slipped up escapes. At this time the film
delves deeper into the technical aspects of McCauley's mob and Hanna's
investigation, but here is where the major flaws start to occur as the
storytelling becomes much too technical (even a lover of the crime genre like
me could not follow it entirely), and sub-plots involving the main
characters' personal lives are emphasized much more than necessary.
Filmmakers often use confusion as a cop-out to make a story seem epic and
more intelligent than it actually is. Mann's screenplay does this to some
extent as we continue to follow Hanna and McCauley and learn about their
plans, but it doesn't seem like anything is leading to anything else. And
this is symbolic of the film overall - even though details abound, they don't
seem to have much relevance because of a lack of a backstory. Everything
always seems to be one step ahead of comprehension, and when you do catch up
it doesn't seem to pay off.
Humanism is really the center of all crime movies, because without
well-developed and interesting characters, it's hard to sympathize with them
and become involved in the suspense. Pacino and De Niro both give good
performances but their characters seem like they're just going through the
motions. For example, Hanna and his wife and stepdaughter are experiencing a
painful time in their relationship because he's so obsessed with his job he
can't concentrate on anything else (almost the exact same situation occurs
with Shiherlis and his family). Also, McCauley meets a woman whom he falls
for immediately, but there isn't much chemistry nor much definition to their
relationship. Do I have to tell you all of these sub-plots will become
crucial elements at one time or another?
The central plot of the film has something to do with McCauley's efforts to
steal bonds and find the man whose information might be used against him.
However, this is really just a means of setting up a game of cat-and-mouse
between Hanna and McCauley on a grand scale. In retrospect, it's interesting
how common Hollywood elements like melodrama and action sequences come into
play as they do.
Although the story often seems to be missing something, it still manages to
be at least interesting throughout. Many individual scenes themselves are
quite suspenseful and intelligent, especially one involving a conversation
between Hanna and McCauley which works as a violent brawl  of words and
diction. The two know they are enemies but there is a subtle understanding
that each finds the other to be the most challenging opponent they've ever
faced. Yet each believes he is superior and warns the other not to get in his
way.
Even if "Heat" fails in some ways as a realistic, detailed crime story (the
ending proves this),  it still works in other ways as a Hollywood thriller
(the ending proves this). At times I was excited, other times I was bored,
but throughout it all I could see a much better film hidden behind the
collage that is this film. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Shane Burridge
It's almost unbelievable that Robert De Niro and Al Pacino had never played 
a scene together until they appeared in this crime picture by Michael Mann.  
This alone would be enough to earn the film a following, but even if you'd 
never seen these two actors before, HEAT would still make good viewing.  It 
began life as a screenplay written by Mann in the 70s, which was then 
reworked as a TV-movie called L.A. SHAKEDOWN in 1989 and filmed again six 
years later as he had originally envisaged it.
With two veteran players like these it's a tossup as to who plays the cop 
and who plays the bad guy, and in a perfect world Mann would have made two 
versions of this film, with the De Niro and Pacino roles switched (that 
would have been an interesting concept!).  In this version, it's Pacino 
who's the good guy, a cop on the trail of career criminal De Niro, whose 
gang has just pulled off an armored truck robbery.  He's been in the police 
business too long and has seen too much, and De Niro is his polar opposite, 
although just as professional in his approach to his work.  While the pair 
of them reveal their more personal selves to women, they communicate 
primarily in terms of business with their male associates.  It's only when 
Pacino and De Niro meet face to face at the hub of the story that their 
dialogue becomes a meld of both personal and professional, confirming our 
suspicions that each of them has only the other to identify with in this 
world.
Mann's use of neutral colours (all slate greys and chilly blues) and urban 
settings also appear to freeze emotions throughout the film.  He doesn't 
allow any humor to relieve the tension of the film's three-hour running 
time, turning HEAT into a brooding epic of masculinity - the title isn't 
just referring to police and pressure but also to the testosterone powering 
its protagonists.  Pacino and De Niro make pains to show they're in control 
while also being aware that they operate on personal codes that protect them 
from being emotionally vulnerable.  On one hand, they provide each other 
with distraction from the issues of commitment that puzzle and hurt them; 
however they also know that they are helping each other tear their worlds 
apart.  When they're forced head to head, they come out with guns blazing.  
In most other crime films, this shootout would serve as the story's climax, 
but as it deals with the characters' conflict on a superficial, machismo 
level  we don't expect it to be any suitable resolution.  That's why Mann's 
lengthy story doesn't seem overlong - or rather, it doesn't seem 
inappropriate that it's overlong.  Beyond the shootout there must be another 
more intimate - but just as deadly - confrontation.  Mann's precise 
direction (the timing of every scene and cut seems flawless) and investment 
into the hearts and minds of the characters make HEAT something grander than 
the flashy crime films we're most often accustomed to.  Actors who have 
worked with him agree that he's a perfectionist, and here it pays off.
