Title
Review for Jenseits der Stille (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
BEYOND SILENCE (JENSEITS DER STILLE)
Cast: Sylvie Testud, Tatjana Trieb, Howie Seago, Emmanuelle Laborit, 
      Sybille Canonica, Matthias Habich, Alexandra Bolz, Hansa Czpionka
Director: Caroline Link
Producers: Thomas Wobke, Jakob Claussen, Luggi Waldleitner
Screenplay: Caroline Link, Beth Serlin
Cinematography: Gernot Roll
Music: Niki Reiser
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
In German and DGS (German Sign Language) with subtitles
     In addition to having real emotional resonance and dramatic sweep, 
BEYOND SILENCE (JENSEITS DER STILLE) is one of the best-acted motion 
pictures of the '90s.  Inexplicably, despite being nominated, BEYOND 
SILENCE did not win the Best Foreign Language Film Oscar, and it remains 
unclear how widespread its eventual North American distribution will be.  
Regardless, this is a motion picture that, given the opportunity, no 
movie-lover should miss.
     BEYOND SILENCE has the capacity to appeal to a broad range of 
audiences, because the subject material is so rich and multi-layered.  
The film, which takes place in a re-unified Germany, is filled with 
symbolism and thematic depth relating the communications difficulties of 
one family with those of the nation as a whole.  But Caroline Link's 
brilliant character study does not dwell overmuch on these 
intellectually-tantalizing issues.  They are there for those who make an 
effort to seek them out, but the movie exists primarily to satisfy on an 
emotional level.  BEYOND SILENCE truly involves the viewer; the 
characters and situations become so immediate and real that you feel 
like dancing or weeping with the protagonist.
     She is Lara, the sprightly and gifted daughter of a deaf man, 
Martin (Howie Seago), and a deaf woman, Kai (Emmanuelle Laborit).  When 
we first meet her, Lara is a precocious 8 year-old child (played by 
Tatjana Trieb) who is wise beyond her years.  She is devoted to her 
parents, and uses her ability to sign (their language) and speak 
(society's) to translate for them in business meetings.  She frequently 
leaves school early, jeopardizing her own education, to help her parents 
when they need someone to be their ears and mouth.  She is the bridge 
between their realm of silence and the noisy world outside.  Lara 
idolizes her musician-aunt, Clarissa (Sybille Canonica), a red-headed 
clarinet player who is engaged in a long-standing sibling feud with 
Martin.  When Clarissa presents Lara with a clarinet, the little girl is 
enthralled, and immediately sets about learning how to play.  Martin is 
angry, in part because of Lara's infatuation with something he cannot 
understand or participate in, and in part because he is jealous that the 
childless Clarissa is attempting to steal his daughter.  Kai advises 
patience, however, warning that if Martin does not treat Lara gently, he 
risks losing her.
     Flash-forward ten years (the transition, by the way, is seamless).  
Lara (Sylvie Testud) is now a young woman and an accomplished clarinet 
player.  She is so good, in fact, that both Clarissa and her music 
teacher encourage her to study professionally at a renowned German 
conservatory.  Martin opposes the idea, but, with a little prompting 
from Kai, he allows Lara to spend the summer with Clarissa and her 
husband, Gregory (Matthias Habich), in Berlin, where she can prepare for 
the entrance exam.  While there, she meets Tom (Hansa Czpionka), a 
teacher of deaf children, and falls in love.  But tragedy is about to 
strike.
     Filmed with less assurance, attention to detail, and focus on 
character, BEYOND SILENCE could have easily turned into an overwrought 
melodrama or a pathetic "issues movie" championing the cause of the 
disabled.  But director Caroline Link, making her feature debut, keeps 
the film carefully on target, never losing sight of the human element of 
the story.  Lara's complex relationship with her parents and her aunt 
are fully explored, as is the friction between Martin and Clarissa (the 
reason for this is explained in a particularly effective flashback 
sequence).  Most notably, Link draws the audience fully into Lara's 
divided world.  A scene in which she and Tom dance to Gloria Gaynor's "I 
Will Survive" is uplifting and effervescent.  Later misfortunes tug at 
the heart, but without a sense of coldly-calculated manipulation.  
Through everything, Link avoids the slippery and easily-taken path that 
would descend into pure melodrama, allowing a certain joie de vivre to 
imbue the entire picture.  And, as icing on the cake, BEYOND SILENCE 
ends on the perfect note.
     The cast is truly international in composition, and it's a tribute 
to Link that the filming process went as smoothly as it did.  Howie 
Seago, a deaf American actor, gives a powerful performance as Martin, a 
man moved by great passions, not the least of which is his despair at 
being unable to understand the most important force in his daughter's 
life.  Emmanuelle Laborit, a deaf French actress, creates a joyful and 
gentle Kai, the perfect mediator between father and daughter.  As 
Clarissa, Sybille Canonica is a seductive temptress who is driven by an 
intricate series of psychological issues.  
     The most impressive portrayal is split between Sylvie Testud and 
Tatjana Trieb, both of whom play Lara.  Not only are the actresses 
singularly effective, but they fit together so well that the viewer 
never loses sight of the character, not even for a moment, when the 
changeover occurs.  Mannerisms, facial expressions, and even vocal 
inflections transfer from one actress to the other.  Testud and Trieb 
immerse themselves in this role with astonishing results.  Apparently, 
several hundred girls auditioned before Link settled on Trieb, who is 
making her feature debut.  Testud, a theatrically-trained French 
actress, is appearing in her second film.  
     The rumor is that Miramax picked up the rights to BEYOND SILENCE 
not only because they wanted to open the film domestically, but because 
they were intrigued by the possibility of fashioning an American remake.  
The very thought makes my skin crawl.  BEYOND SILENCE is as close to a 
perfect film as I have seen this year, and the acting is nearly 
flawless.  It's virtually impossible that any remake could improve upon 
Caroline Link's film, and very likely that an English-language version 
would cheapen the material (not to mention nullify some of the uniquely-
German subthemes).  Regardless of what the distributor ultimately 
decides, the original BEYOND SILENCE will receive some sort of release, 
and, given the opportunity, it is an experience not to be missed.  
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Joy Wyse
There is much said today about dysfunctional families.   BEYOND SILENCE
shows us a family that truly has that distinction.  The story centers on
the life of a young girl named Lara who is born to deaf parents, Martin
and Kai.  Lara becomes their link to the hearing world, making telephone
calls, and interpreting for them, including the dialogue of romantic
movies for her mother. 
But the story is much deeper than that.  Martin has a sister, Clarissa,
who has another set of problems.  Not only can Clarissa hear, but she is
an accomplished clarinetist.  Her life has been affected by Martin's
deafness, so when she introduces Lara to the clarinet, and music, her
motivation is questioned.
Martin and Kai have another daughter, eight or ten years younger than
Lara, who isn't too interested in becoming another translator, although
she "speaks" the language.
When Lara becomes eighteen, she is torn by the choices that she could or
should make about her life.  Can she pursue her music?  Must she remain as
her parents' bridge to the outside world?  Will she have a life of her
own?  
This movie is so very tastefully done.  It is in German, with subtitles  
It is strange in one scene, where a music professor speaks English and the
subtitles are in English as well.  Because the Main language of the film
is often sign language, it crosses the language barriers very well.
although you can get confused at times as to whether the subtitles are
translating the spoken or the signed words.
There is nudity and sensuality, but it is in no way offensive.   There is
only one word that is even slightly questionable, in German or in English.
Not only is the acting  superb, the lead actors seem to be fluent in sign
language as well.  They are very believable, including the actress who
plays the young Lara.  I kept thinking to myself that this is a movie that
I hope is nominated for best foreign language film, for both "foreign"
languages.
I do want to see this again, especially with my grandson who attends a
school that teaches sign language to hearing children.   I might even buy
this if it comes out on video. I have to give it an A-.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director Caroline Link's German film, BEYOND SILENCE (JENSEITS DER
STILLE), was a nominee this year for best foreign language film at the
Academy Awards.  (It lost to the Dutch film CHARACTER).  Just beginning
to open around the United States, BEYOND SILENCE tells the tender story
of a girl, Lara, whose parents are deaf.
     Extremely well cast and acted throughout, the movie stars Tatjana
Trieb as the 8-year-old Lara and Sylvie Testud as Lara at age 18.  The
two attractive actresses look and act remarkably alike, and they both
bear an uncanny resemblance to Emmanuelle Laborit, who plays Lara's
mother.  Howie Seago plays the handsome father.
     Divided into 2 distinct acts, the movie's more consistent first
part has the younger Lara coping with the challenges of learning to
read in a household where she is the only one who can speak.  Her
parents rely on her for everything, including negotiating on their
behalf with telephone callers.  This places significant pressure on her
young shoulders, which she, nevertheless, manages to put to her
advantage.
     "My reading is improving but isn't perfect yet," is how Lara
translates into sign language her teacher's much more dismal report on
her lack of progress, but her parents never seem to catch on to her
chicanery.  Scenes like these hold much promise, but the timidity of
the director cuts most of them short before they are ever allowed to
develop their full potential.
     After Lara learns to play the clarinet, much to her parents'
chagrin, the movie makes a smooth transition to Lara as an older teen.
She is ready to go out into the world and seek a profession, thanks to
the help of her Aunt Clarissa (Sibylle Canonica), a fellow clarinetist.
     The disorganized second act has many magical scenes which, once
again, the director seems reluctant to allow to come to fruition.  And
as she did in the first part, the director telegraphs her punches.  The
movie's one genuine tragedy is so obviously announced and reannouced
that you get tired waiting for it to happen.
     One lucky day, Lara spies a handsome, signing-man named Tom,
played by the charismatic Hansa Czypionka.  They quickly fall in love
with each other, and she tells him of her hopes for the future.  "Hope
is a widespread fantasy," he admonishes her.  Soon thereafter they are
dancing and signing to a pulsating rendition of Gloria Gaynor's "I Will
Survive."  This scene literally bursts with exuberance.
     This pleasant enough film possesses a promising plot and good
acting but remains adverse to risk taking.  The director leaves out any
tension and smoothes out the rough edges so that the resulting picture
only sporadically rises above the ordinary.
     BEYOND SILENCE runs 1:49.  It is in German and in sign language,
both with English subtitles.  The film is not rated but might be PG-13
for a brief scene of sexuality and would be fine for kids ten and up.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films
 Director: Caroline Link
 Writer: Caroline Link and Beth Serlin
 Cast: Sylvie Testud, Tatjana Trieb, Howie Seago,
Emmanuelle Laborit, Sibylle Caonica, Matthias Habich,
Alexandra Bolz, Hansa Czypionka
   Your parents take care of you during the first two decades
of your life: it's only natural that you'll want to do the best by
them if they become old and frail.  In some cases,
unfortuantely, a child is made to take on too much
responsibility at too young an age when asked to attend the
needs of her vulnerable folks.  "Beyond Silence" is the story
of a child who is compelled to become the ears of her deaf
father and mother.  This German movie--which features two
people who are hearing impaired in real life--deals with
several popular themes: the special world of the handicapped;
the effect a person's impediment has on those who surround
him; the need of the young to free themselves from their
homes and take responsibility for their own happiness; the
subtle ways in which do-gooders actually exploit the souls of
the people they are nurturing.  But few recent films have
treated these themes with the intelligence, the shucking off of
sticky sentimentality, the maturity of this one.  "Beyond
Silence" is a joy from beginning to end, a movie which has no
real villain but whose characters sometimes make you want to
jump through the screen and spend a moment or two
wringing their necks.
   The picture opens on a German winter as eight-year-old
Lara (Tatjana Trieb) watches her attractive and liberated aunt
Clarissa (Sibylle Canonica) skate gracefully on a deserted, icy
pond.  Clarissa and Lara are a mutual admiration society with
symbiotic needs: the older woman is childless and treats the
child as a substitute daughter; the little girl wants ever so
much to be like her beloved aunt.  But the poor Lara must
tend to the needs of her deaf parents Martin (Howie Seago)
and Kai (Emmanuelle Laborit), who depend on her to mediate
in sign language with the outside world--to arrange such
mundane matters as bank loans and interpreting a teacher's
comments on open school night.  A turning point comes in
Lara's life when she receives a clarinet from her musically
gifted aunt.  While Lara is eventually to seek admission to a
prestigious conservatory, her father resents bitterly resents
her attention to the music he cannot hear.  Discreet
flashbacks take us to Martin's youth as he is forced to attend
a concert given by her sister Clarissa, the hearing child who is
obviously favored by their parents.
   Wonderfully acted by the adorable Tatjana Trieb as the
eight-year-old Lara and as the expressive young woman at
the age of eighteen by Sylvie Testud, "Beyond Silence" takes
us through the usual rites of passage as Lara latches on to
the empathetic young Tom (Hansa Czypionka), who teaches
at a school for the deaf and who understands that while Lara
enjoys the time they are spending together, she is deeply sad
inside.  In fact, as Lara later explains her fondness for
klezmer music, "Inside it is joyful and wild, but at the same
time it's not really free."
   Caroline Link's direction gives the movie the woman's
touch, particularly when Ms. Link explores the surprising
conflict which emerges between Clarissa and Lara and
considers the melancholy Clarissa feels despite her outwardly
high-spirited show.  You leave the theater with an insight into
the closed-off world of the deaf, get photographer Gernot
Roll's sparkling shots of Berlin and of the pretty German
countryside, and best of all savor that all-too-rare "German-
light" experience of a movie that seems utterly truthful and yet
consistently entertaining.

Author
E.H. Goh
Countless films have been made involving triumphs of the physically
handicapped or the parents of handicapped children in accepting their
kids. This well made German film turned it the other way round,
chronicling the tale of one with handicapped parents and the
complications involved, or rather, to show how uncomplicated some
things can be when there's understanding, patience and determination.
Lara, a sensible but headstrong girl grew up under the guidance of her
deaf-mute parents. Dysfunctional it may sounds but she had  a
fulfilling family life even if one of her tasks is translating the
dialogues of romantic movies to sign language for her mother. Being the
only ears and voice of the family, she easily took advantage of her
ability much to the disapproval of her equally stubborn father. Their
tension started building when Lara started learning the clarinet and
ultimately excelled in it. Without the ability to appreciate music,
there's difficulty for her parents to understand her dream and share
her success.
Primarily, it is very much a movie exploring the father-daughter
relationship with sibling rivalry in the sideline. The "language
barrier" just invoke various complications which made the resolving of
tensions more difficult. Instead of letting coincidences be the
solution, we get to witness the struggles the characters went through
to understand and forgive one another.
Somehow, the ending do came across a little abrupt as it ended just
after the father took his first step in understanding his daughter. I
just felt that it would more satisfying to affirm his sincerity. Then
again, knowing how stubborn that father was, it must have taken him a
lot of effort to do that. Taking that first step was indeed very
significant and may be all we ever need to know.
Caroline Link's  painstaking research paid off as she manage to paint a
more or less accurate picture of the deaf-mute community. Their
sometimes extraordinary method of doing things does not make them less
human than us, a message gently and effectively put across.  More
painstaking would be the making of the movie as the main players were
required to learn the German sign language. There was also some
communication problems since some of the main cast were deaf-mute by
nature, like the pair playing the parents.
In spite of all that, they still managed to deliver a powerful and
heartfelt piece of drama with quite some occasional and timely humour,
winning worldwide accolades from both the audiences and critics.
-------------
reviews archive http://www2.cybercities.com/~taff/"
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
