Title
Review for Staying Together (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        STAYING TOGETHER reminds me of another small-town-slice-of-life
movie: MYSTIC PIZZA.  STAYING TOGETHER is sort of the flip side of that far
superior film: instead of depicting three young women and their boyfriends,
STAYING TOGETHER follows three young men and their girlfriends.  The movie
also mixes in a strong dose of father-son conflict to stir things up.
Dramatically, STAYING TOGETHER is a mess, but thankfully it partially
redeems itself with its off-beat humor.
        The movie is set in Ridgeway, South Carolina, where three brothers
help their father run the family restaurant, McDermott's Famous Chicken.
The early portion of the film captures the charm and flavor of the town's
leisurely life-style.  The brothers lounge around, get drunk, work a
little, smoke some pot, and generally goof off.  Life is easy and simple.
That is, until their father turns their lives upside down by abruptly
selling the family business.
        STAYING TOGETHER suffers from a wildly inconsistent and sometimes
incoherent script by playwright Monte Merrick.  Merrick definitely has a
knack for creating comic situations.  For example, in one scene, the oldest
brother, played by Tim Quill, makes love to Stockard Channing while she is
on the phone.  Somehow, the movie manages to squeeze laughs out of this
tired gag.
        Unfortunately, STAYING TOGETHER falls apart whenever it shifts
gears from comedy to drama.  The film really lays an egg during the "Big
Emotional Moments," which come fast and furious.  After the uptight father
suffers a heart attack, every twist and turn in the story seems to bring
about an emotional crisis.  None of these scenes rings true because the
characters sound like they are delivering speeches rather than speaking
naturally.  The supposedly touching moments have all the emotional impact
of a calculus lecture.
        Neither director Lee Grant nor the cast is really to blame; the
weak script is just too much for them to overcome.  As far as the
performances go, the real bright spot is Sean Astin, who plays the youngest
brother--a rambunctious 17-year-old.  Astin steals every scene he's in with
his flamboyant charisma.  Melinda Dillon also stands out as the hip
housewife and mother.
        For a movie that leaves you so cold emotionally, STAYING TOGETHER
provides more entertainment than you might expect, but whether it's worth 6
bucks plus parking is another matter altogether.
