Title
Review for That's Entertainment! III (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Wendy E. Betts
     After using all of the most beautiful and spectacular numbers from
MGM musicals in the first two THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT movies, what could
they find to put in a third?  Some backstage shots, rare outakes, and
surprising amount of lesser known numbers that make up in enthusiasm
and novelty what they may lack in style or elegance.  The result is an
enjoyable pastiche that's a special kick for musical buffs.
     THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT III shows numbers from MGM musicals, from the
first filmed vaudeville routines to Elvis Presley in JAILHOUSE ROCK.
Included are rare songs cut from THE HARVEY GIRLS, EASTER PARADE, THE
BANDWAGON and others. Split-screens are used for some interesting
effects: in one number, we see Eleanor Powell dancing on one half of
the screen, while the other shows the number being filmed and sets
being moved around so the camera is always on her.  An even more
effective use of split-screen shows two version of the same dance by
Fred Astaire, revealing the incredible precision of his dancing.
     It seems to be a rule that these movies have to have commentary
more fulsome and tedious than a TV awards show. I found the commentary
for THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT III--done by Gene Kelly, Debbie Reynolds,
Micky Rooney, Esther Williams, Ann Miller, Cyd Charisse, Lena Horne,
June Allyson and Howard Keel--somewhat less annoying than the previous
films, except when it repeats their jokes.  Lena Horne is even
permitted to make a few comments on the racism that interfered with her
MGM career.  But nothing is really allowed to interfere with the rosy
nostalgic glow the movie tries to create, which is tedious but
bearable.  Less bearable are the technical errors in the movie,
primarily Technicolor scenes restored so badly they are literally
painful to watch--surely it shouldn't be that difficult to get a decent
copy of "Fit as a Fiddle" from "Singin' in the Rain"?  Fortunately,
these problems seem confined to the first half of the film.
     Overall, THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT III is pretty much more of the
same. I would have been happy to see less flash and more substance--but
there's no denying, it's a delight to see these wonderful songs and
dances, especially on a big screen.  If you're the kind of person who
dances out the theatre after seeing a musical, don't miss it.
