Title
Review for Sobibor, 14 octobre 1943, 16 heures (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Sobibor, October 14, 1943, 4 P.M. contains no archival footage of the
Holocaust.  Nor does it attempt to recreate the uprising at that
specific Polish extermination camp on that specific date and time by any
means other than that of broad-shouldered, steadfast Yehuda Lerner's
eyewitness account.  The second half of this 95-minute film is almost
entirely comprised of Lerner in close-up or medium shot relaying his
memories of Jewish prisoners staging a hastily planned revolt against
their Nazi captors.  To those who criticize "talking head"
documentaries, Sobibor understands that a documentary is only as
important as the subject being considered.  It feels appropriate and
necessary to linger on Lerner's contemplation, his uncomfortable shifts,
his bursts of defensive sarcasm, a bitter grin in harsh contrast to his
haunted eyes.  To cut away from his face, which reveals so much, would
be to gaze away from a piece of history that must be preserved,
contemplated, remembered.
Planned for inclusion as footage within French director and journalist
Claude Lanzmann's landmark 9-hour documentary Shoah (the interview
footage with Lerner is from 1979), Lanzmann considered the material
important enough to merit its own treatment as a separate feature film. 
Those familiar with Lanzmann will be aware of his astute,
philosophically charged methods: lingering images of streets and squares
of contemporary Poland; long, meditative shots of Sobibor itself, now
decaying and worn over by time; unflinching interviews that run for
prolonged takes, lingering on the heavy silences.
Time is permitted for audience reflection during the exhaustive
translations from Hebrew to French, and one of Lanzmann's masterstrokes
is allowing Lerner to digress without subtitles, only providing
subtitles during the translation.  This may sound lugubrious, even
pretentious, but the interactive effect Lanzmann intends and achieves is
uncanny.  Lanzmann claims to have been offended by the images of
Schindler's List and Life is Beautiful because they simplify the
Holocaust through pictures, perhaps in an attempt to quantify or
understand the unthinkable.  Lanzmann has a different, more challenging,
agenda.  For him, the Holocaust cannot neatly be put into a box of evil
things to be neatly thrown away.  There's no pat moral, no cheap
sentimentality, no answers.  What you choose to do with Lanzmann's time
capsule is a decision for the individual viewer.
In the process of his examination, Lanzmann asks deceptively simple
questions, often in the form of a blunt statement:
Describe [the German you were about to kill].
In his answers, Lerner jokes that the entire plan worked based on the
notion of German punctuality ("We knew that he would be here by 4:00
P.M. exactly!  And that the next German would promptly show up at 4:05
P.M. exactly!")  Grim descriptions of an axe as sharp as a razor blade
or a German soldier's arm hanging under a pile of coats are punctuated
by Lerner's ceaseless smile, his robust exclamations that make his body
shake with vigor, his trembling hand as he smokes a cigarette.  "The
Jews sounded like geese when they were gassed," he says, right before
acknowledging that the Germans kept real geese near the camps to cover
the sound of inhuman screams.
Lanzmann's climax is sure to send some audience members running for the
exit.  There's no visceral shock of footage or photographs of thousands
of corpses piled in a ditch.  Lanzmann fills the screen with dates,
locations, and numbers, then proceeds to read in his thick French accent
how many victims were brought to Sobibor (to die).  "Seex ssousand; two
hondred and forty free; figures unknown; figures unknown; ten
ssousand..."  This goes on for several minutes on end, to the point
where a few people at the New York Film Festival press screening got up
and left.  After running a complete tally, Lanzmann considers aloud that
this makes up over 250,000 victims.  He lets the closing credits roll
over a shot of wind rustling through the trees.  The rest is silence.
Aka Sobibor, 14 octobre 1943, 16 heures.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
