Title
Review for Easy Rider (1969)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Wyatt (Peter Fonda) and Billy (Dennis Hopper) are motorcycle
riding dope dealers, who live on the road.  In the opening
minutes of the film, they score big, buying (and sampling)
coke from a Mexican, then selling it to Phil Spector.  Fonda
rolls the big bills in a plastic tube that he hides in
this motorcycle's gas tank.  Then Wyatt and Billy are on
the road, with the goal of reaching New Orleans by Mardi Gras,
but not in the greatest hurry to get there.
"Easy Rider" is different from most films, before or since.
There isn't that much conversation.  What dialogue exists is
to the point.  The focus is on the cinematography, showing
the open road, its countryside, small towns and their yokels.
Since the pace of the film is slow, we connect more closely
to the characters, making their feelings more real.  As the
bikers hit the road, contemporary rock songs are heard.
Hey, I think this roach is making me crash, man...
Fonda picks up a hitch-hiker, another hippie, who needs a
ride to his commune.  Fonda is sympathetic to the hippie,
while Hopper is suspicious and afraid of robbery.  The hippie
is suspicious too, refusing to be drawn into conversation.
Fonda asks who he wants to be, and the hitcher says,
"Porky Pig."
We find that commune life is better in theory than practice.
The young adults and their feral children live in abject
poverty, trying to grow crops without rain on dry dirt.
There is also a lack of focus, with everyone passing time
idly in small groups.  Fonda has a girlfriend immediately,
and fits in well.  Hopper is again paranoid and wants out
of there.  Fonda, Hopper, and their temporary girlfriends
enjoy a nude swim in a mudhole before our anti-heroes return
to the road.
Hopper and Fonda make the mistake of joining a small-town parade.
There are jailed overnight for "parading without a permit".  The
men in small country towns consistently hate Hopper and Fonda,
and their hedonistic, non-conformist lifestyle.  At the jail,
the hippies meet ACLU lawyer George Hanson (Jack Nicholson, whose
role copped an Academy Award nomination and propelled his
career to stardom).  Hanson is the town drunk, connects with
the bikers, and decides to go to Mardi Gras with them.
Fonda tells Nicholson to get a helmet, and Nicholson shows up
with his high school football helmet.  That night, Nicholson
has his roach, which he forgets to smoke as he entertains
Hopper with a wild tale of how Martians have been integrated
into American society.
The group stops in a small town cafe.  They don't get service,
but get attention from a group of sneering, wise-cracking yokels,
and a group of high school girls who ogle the bikers.  For
their own safety, the bikers decide to split, but unfortunately
for them are covertly followed and later beaten by the yokels.
Nicholson doesn't survive the attack.  
To honor his memory, Fonda and Hopper decide to visit his 
favorite New Orleans cathouse.  Hopper selects Karen Black,
Fonda selects Toni Basil (later of "Mickey" fame), and the
couples see Mardi Gras and drop acid.  There is a lengthy,
surreal drug trip, that works surprisingly well.
The bikers return to the road, but have the misfortune of
being seen by more troublemaking hicks, who drive past them
in their pickup truck and shoot them.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
