Title
Review for Jakob the Liar (1999)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Steve Rhodes
Robin Williams's movies can be easily dichotomized into the brilliant
(AWAKENINGS and MRS. DOUBTFIRE) and the awful (FATHER'S DAY and PATCH
ADAMS).  JAKOB THE LIAR falls firmly into the latter category.
With an extremely underdeveloped script by the director, Peter
Kassovitz, the movie has maybe 10 minutes worth of ideas, which after
almost two hours it stretches way beyond the breaking point.  If it is
supposed to be a comedy, it's not a funny one, not even a laughably bad
one.  And, if Kassovitz intended to make a serious picture, then he
should have created characters that were more than stick figures.
The actors, who deliver uniformly bad performances, all fidget as if the
canteen on the set served only large mugs of strong coffee.  Watching
the actors cavort around is, frankly, rather embarrassing.  The movie is
one that will have you getting better acquainted with your watch.
The plot of the story is that Jakob Heym (Robin Williams) has a radio,
or so think his fellow members of the ghetto in Nazi-occupied Poland.
Actually, Jakob only overheard a single broadcast on a radio belonging
to the Germans.  After that, he begins to make up news reports.
Sometimes he gets his stories all mixed up.  "Technically they're
retreating, but strategically they're advancing," he says of the Russian
soldiers that they hope will come soon to rescue them.
A non-religious Jew, Jakob says that "I know that we're the chosen
people; I just wish the Almighty had chosen someone else," repeating a
well-used line.  For his prevarication, he becomes known as Jakob the
Liar.
Some slightly whimsical music is about as funny as the movie ever gets.
The dialog for the serious parts is leaden ("Who knows more about human
relations than actors and barbers?" asks Alan Arkin's character.)
Overall, the story is so underdeveloped that it's almost inert.
Usually, when Robin Williams fails, it's with shamelessly schmaltzy
acting as in PATCH ADAMS.  This time he makes the mistake of offering
his viewers an almost lifeless character that makes passing the time
while waiting for the ending credits extremely tedious.  Let's hope that
next time will be one of his good movies.  He's due.  No -- we're due.
JAKOB THE LIAR runs a very long 1:55.  It is rated PG-13 for violence
and disturbing images.  Think of the movie, with its scenes of graphic
torture, as an R.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
 "I DON'T HAVE A RADIO!"
Starring Robin Williams, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Alan Arkin, Liev
Schreiber. Rated PG-13.
Robin Williams has the rarest of gifts: the ability to rise above the
most inept material and suffuse it with his irreverent style.
Overwhelmingly, his worst films are pleasantly diverting at worst and
enjoyable at best (with the notable exception of Flubber). So when I,
the one person who has refused to abandon him despite Patch Adams, tell
you that not even Williams can save his latest project, you know it's in
trouble. Jakob the Liar is a confused, muddled little movie; a
generically "uplifting" film with a fundamental contradiction: the
message it delivers is depressing as opposed to inspiring and the movie
doesn't realize it.
Williams plays Jakob Haim, a Jew imprisoned in a Polish ghetto during
World War II. One night he wanders outside after curfew and is promptly
sent to the office of a high-ranking German officer for his punishment.
Jakob gets off easy and he gets to hear approximately 30 seconds of a
radio broadcast. The announcement (in English, but punctuated by a
triumphant "Heil Hitler!") is that Russian troops are only miles away
from Jakob's ghetto. Liberation! he thinks. The next day, Jakob tells
the news to his closest friend, a volatile prize fighter named Misha
(Liev Schreiber), who despite being sworn to secrecy passes the message
along.
Soon, it is a common assumption in the ghetto that Jakob has a radio
hidden in his home -- a crime punishable by death. This is absurdly
false, but the more Jakob tells the people of the ghetto this, the more
convinced they become that he is abreast of the latest developments in
the war that is to decide their fate. The danger, of course, is that the
Germans allegedly have informants throughout the ghetto, and rumors
about the radio can get out and put Jakob in great danger.
In a curiously irrelevant subplot, Jakob finds a 11-year old girl who
has separated from her parents and decides to hide her in his small
home. Apparently he is afraid that she will be discovered, and goes to
great length to make sure of that -- just why the idea frightens him is
never made clear. He and the girl build an uninvolving, generic
relationship that never goes anywhere and is as irrelevant at the end as
it was in the beginning.
The moral of the story is that hope is the best medicine. But Jakob the
Liar forgets that the hope that Jakob brings to his ghetto is false.
Such hope inevitably leads to expectations of its realization and when
those expectations aren't met, the results are far worse than if there
was no hope. That's the film's biggest detriment: it is based on a false
assumption and thus comes off as painfully false. It's never moving
because it doesn't give us anything to be moved by. Jakob the Liar fails
to tug any heartstrings which destroys its purpose for existing.
Robin Williams doesn't inject the film with life, as a matter of fact,
he seems a little out of it, as if crippled by his fake accent. He is
stragely unenthusiastic; his character is one who spreads hope but his
performance is lifeless, hopeless. Not since Good Will Hunting has he
abandoned his signature style to this extent; this isn't the Robin
Williams we know and love. In Good Will Hunting he became a serious
actor and won an Oscar for it. Here, he is more of a wannabe serious
actor; an impostor.
Jakob the Liar will be compared with last year's Life is Beautiful
because it is being marketed as a "Holocaust comedy". It's not a comedy.
It tries, sometimes, but it rarely works. Is it a melodrama? A war
movie? A character study? No, no, and no. Jakob the Liar is the kind of
movie that can't be placed into a category; not because it covers so
many different genres but because it fails at just about every one it
attempts.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
JAKOB THE LIAR (1999) **1/2  Directed by Peter Kassovitz. Written by 
Kassovitz and Didier Decoin, from the novel by Jurek Becker. 
Executive producer, RobinWilliams. Photography,  Elemer Ragalyi. 
Editing,
Claire Simpson. production designer, Luciana Arrighi. Art directors, 
Branimir Babic, Tibor Lazar, Grzegorz Piatkowski (Poland). Music, 
Edward Shearmur. Cast: Robin Williams (Jakob), Alan Arkin 
(Frankfurter), Bob Balaban (Kowalsky), Hannah Taylor Gordon (Lina), 
Michael Jeter (Avron), Armin Muller-Stahl (Kirschbaum), Liev 
Schreiber (Mischa), Nina Siemaszko (Rosa), Mathieu Kassovitz 
(Herschel), Justus von Dohnanyi (Preuss), Mark Margolis (Fajngold), 
Gregg Bello (Blumenthal) et al. A Sony/Columbia Pictures release. 
114 minutes. PG-13.
Jurek Becker (1937-1997) was a Polish Jew born in Lodz --where the 
famous fim school is. He died in Germany. As a child, he survived 
Nazi camps. As an adult, he wrote Jakob the Liar. When this was made 
into the East German movie Jakob der Luegner (1974) by the able 
German director Frank Beyer, Becker provided also the script. The 
film was a well-deserved international success --artistically and 
"humanitarianly" (I don't know about box-office).
The title character is a modest "little man" who, during the 
ruthless Nazi annihilation of the Jews ("The Final Solution") in 
death camps, is in the ghetto of a Polish town. One day, when taken 
outside the ghetto to a Nazi office, he hears accidentally a German 
news bulletin that mentions the advance of the Russian army to a 
town not far from the ghetto. One thing leads to another. The ghetto 
denizens learn of this. They believe, because they want to believe, 
that Jakob has a hidden radio, a strictly "verboten" item punishable 
by the execution of its listeners.
The news raises the spirit of the captive Jews. Jakob becomes 
willy-nilly their regular provider of upbeat items (from the BBC) 
which he invents. These   bring small rays of hope into the ghetto's 
miserable, tragic life.
The current Jakob the Liar is a remake of the older one.  Whether or 
not you know the original, Jakob II is a moving experience of 
suffering and hope. As someone says later in the film, there was not 
a single suicide in the entire ghetto after the "news" started 
coming in. The fake information even contributes to the "better" 
health of Lina, a charming 10-year old whose parents, on their way 
to a death camp, were able to move her out of the train. She becomes 
the housemate of widower Jakob.
The original Jakob, however, was so good that the remake suffers by 
comparison.
Jakob II was directed by Peter Kassovitz, born ca.1938 in Budapest. 
His father and mother survived the death camps. Peter left Hungary 
after the Soviets suppressed the 1956 Hungarian uprising, went to 
France where he worked as a director (mostly TV) and where his son 
Mathieu Kassovitz was born (1967).
Mathieu has acted in many movies and directed 7 features to date, of 
which the best-known (and very goodt) are the Metisse (aka Cafe au 
Lait), La Haine (Hate) and Assassin (s) (sic). The latter has not 
been shown in the USA to my knowledge. Father and son often employ 
each other in their movies. In Jakob II Mathieu plays Herschel, the 
prizefighter in love. And, by the way, the much-talented Armin 
Muller-Stahl (as the famous doctor here) had a small part in the 
1974 Jakob the Liar.
The film was shot entirely in Eastern Europe using good, 
near-genuine locations for its ghetto. Among the Holocaust films, 
Life is Beautiful came out before Jakob II. Making it became a 
reality when Kassovitz wrote to  Robin Williams who, he thought, was 
Jewish.
Williams was approached also because he could provide a combination 
of humor and tragedy. Both co-exist in the movie, with strong doses 
of typical, often black Jewish humor. It is tempting to see the same 
strain in Life Is Beautiful, but Benigni's humor is more Italian 
than "echt"-Jewish.
The thought of Robin Williams in the title role raises apprehensions 
of mugging and clowning, yet the actor controls his tendencies quite 
well, although one can never forget that it is Robin Williams up 
there on the screen. Name performers bring in the public but can 
take away much of the verisimilitude.
That's where the use, as characters, of a platoon of Jewish-American 
thespians. comes in--and where the shoe rubs. The "real" or 
near-real Poles of the earlier film have been replaced by a good 
but, in this context, not really convincing cast. Looks, accents, 
mannerisms are askew. There's an impression of "acting" rather than 
"being."  The thespians may, for some viewers, seem insincere or 
near-caricatural.  This was unintened, of course, so I wonder how 
much comes from the film-makers' lack of familiarity with American 
Jews.
The often self-deprecating Jewish humor includes some worn-out 
vaudeville lines like "If you kill yourself, I'll kill you." And 
overall, the film lacks that unbearable look that has been made so 
tragically familiar from documentary footage (much of it by German 
soldiers) or photographs (some amazingly, secretly made by the 
slaves themselves) of ghetto life, especially the Warsaw Ghetto.
I can't remember if, in the original movie, Jakob, as he does here, 
puts on a fake broadcast from London, with sound effects and a 
Winston Churchill imitation. It is inappropriate, silly, not funny. 
And when Jakob speaks to his friends of coded messages of the BBC, 
such as "the baby is in the bath," this is a major goof. The BBC did 
transmit surreal sentences which had a specific meaning for some 
members of the European Resistance, but there's no way that anyone 
in a Polish ghetto would have any idea that such coded sentences 
even existed.
Yet warts and all, Jakob II can, and even should, be seen.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "JAKOB THE LIAR" (Columbia Pictures)
I suspect that if "Life is Beautiful" had not won last year's
Oscar, this Holocaust film would be more appreciated. Unfortunately,
the similarities are superficially apparent - revolving around a
whimsical, imprisoned Jew who keeps hope alive and shields a small
child amidst the Nazi atrocities. In this adaptation of Jurek Becker's
1969 best-seller by French writer/director Peter Kassovitz, Robin
Williams plays Jakob, the latke (pancake) maker, who lives in a Polish
ghetto. He's a widower who gets caught, allegedly after curfew, and
sent to Gestapo headquarters where he overhears a radio bulletin
indicating that Russian forces are advancing on Warsaw. Cautiously
making his way home, he encounters a ten year-old girl (Hannah Taylor
Gordon), an Anne Frank look-alike, whose parents were taken to a
concentration camp and, sympathetically, shelters her. The next
morning, Jakob is so excited about the war news that he confides it to
one friend who tells another, who tells another, who tells
another. Soon the gritty ghetto is humming, and the assumption is that
Jakob has a forbidden radio on which he heard the broadcast. Suddenly
Jakob becomes a celebrity, a reluctant hero because of his wishful
thinking. "My crowning achievement: latkes and lies," he moans. But
it's this dark joke, a sunny day, and a hopeful rumor that helped a
few doomed Jews survive in 1944. Despite an awkward, indulgent
screenplay, Robin Williams delivers a solid, restrained
characterization, supported by Liev Schreiber, Alan Arkin, Armin
Mueller-Stahl, and Bob Balaban. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Jakob the Liar" is a serio-comic 7. Curious side-note: Kassovitz sent
the script to Robin Williams because he thought Williams was
Jewish. He isn't, but he found the concept intriguing.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Columbia Pictures
 Director:  Peter Kassovitz
 Writer:  Peter Kassovitz & Didier Decoin 
 Cast: Robin Williams, Alan Arkin, Bob Balaban, Michael
Jeter, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Liev Schreiber
   One of the New Yorker magazine's typically unfunny
cartoons last year displayed a patient sitting in his undershirt
across from his doctor, who told the poor man, "There's not
only no cure for your disease, Wilson.  There's not even a
race for the cure!"  No one can accuse the physician of
violating a prohibition against lying.  He told the absolute
truth.  But in this case is that a good idea?  Is it even the
ethical way to deal with the anxious fellow?  The answer to
both queries is no.  By giving the patient no hope at all, the
doc is probably driving him to an even earlier grave, to say
nothing of the making the rest of his attenuated life that much
more miserable.
   There are times that telling an untruth is not only desirable
but necessary, particularly in a grim situation that could
actually lead despondent people to suicide. Such a
circumstance existed on a large scale during World War 2 as
Jews were systematically rounded up by special German
units with the help of their international sympathizers, forced
to remain inside their ghettoes, i.e. particular Jewish
neighborhoods, and ultimately rounded up and sent to death
camps.  While many of the doomed people tried to make a
go of things, others gave up all belief in deliverance, some
going so far as to hang themselves.  "Jakob the Liar," whose
ideas are taken partly from a German production company's
1974 "Jakob der Lugner" which in turn came from a novel by
Jurek Becker, demonstrates the mixed success of lying when
the tactic is used to give hope to despairing Jews living in a
well-guarded Polish ghetto.
   Like Robert Benigni's "Life is Beautiful," Peter Kassovitz's
"Jakob the Liar" is serio-comic.  While "Jakob" is not so
schematically divided into a comic first part and a latter half
that seems to come from a different picture, Kassovitz
maintains a light tone in the earlier scenes, shifting to a
somber mood as the 114-minute film gathers momentum.  As
the title character, Robin Williams sets the tone by imparting
a particularly self-deprecatory bit of Jewish humor in his
opening narration.  A Jewish man who is not particularly liked
by his neighbors asks one known to foretell the future, "When
will I die?"  "I don't know," replies the prescient one, "But you
will die on a Jewish holiday."  "How do you know this?
queries the anxious man.  "Because," his adviser tells him,
"Any day that you die will be a Jewish holiday."  We come to
understand early on that this is the form of malign humor that
has enabled Jews to carry on despite centuries, even
millennia, of persecution.  
   In this wartime situation, as several hundred people in a
Polish town wait and work under Nazi guard until their
inevitable call to the train and to a death camp, suicides are
rampant.  Jakob hits upon an idea as he overhears a radio
broadcast in the Gestapo's office.  Though the censored
German news indicates Nazi victories over their Red Army
foes, Jakob will turn the truth upside down and tell his
neighbors that he has a hidden radio which has broadcast
that the Russian troops are a mere 400 km from the camp
and that all will be saved in a matter of weeks.  Since
possession of a radio means instant execution for its bearer,
Jakob, though not even in possession of one, faces tragedy
should the guards merely think the radio exists.
   The major thrust of the film is the reaction of various
people in the ghetto.  On one side, the cynical
Shakespearean actor Frankfurter (Alan Arkin) pooh-poohs all
thoughts of salvation and wonders whether Jakob has a radio
at all.  On the other side are people like the barber Kowalsky
(Bob Balaban), saved from hanging himself when Jakob
happens upon his shop, who is now filled with hope.  Indeed
the entire ghetto has not filed a single suicide report since
Jakob--and soon thereafter the grapevine throughout the
camp--report stories of successful Russian advances.
   Though a 10-year-old child, Lina (Hannah Taylor Gordon),
perhaps newly orphaned, is introduced to the audience early
on, Kassovitz avoids mining a situation that could have
turned the film maudlin.  To the credit of this director,
Kassovitz manages to restrain the entire troupe save one
man, a prizefighter, and even Robin Williams conveys a
somber, albeit tentatively comic, image.  
   But although Luciana Arrighi's production design conveys
the utter dilapidation of the Jewish living quarters and Edward
Shearmur's musical score hints a klezmer-inspired
combination of joy and foreboding, the claustrophobic nature
of the film makes "Jakob the Liar" look more like a staged
play than an openly cinematic experience.  Given the
exaggerated gestures of some actors--the Germans opening
their eyes wide when surprised and former boxer Mischa's
(Liev Schreiber) running frantically around the neighborhood
like a clown--this production might well have worked better on
a Broadway stage.  As captured on Polish and Hungarian
locations by cameraman Elemer Ragalyi, however, "Jakob
the Liar" is too closed off to provide sufficient air for its
deprecating humor (jokes, such as they are, fall flat), and the
relentless struggle by the hapless people to survive is not
adequately transmitted.

Author
Joy Wyse
Jakob, the Liar, Starring  Robin Williams, Alan Arkin, Bob Balaban, Hannah
Taylor-Gordon, Michael Jeter, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Liev Schreiver.
Directed by Peter Kassovitz
It is not an easy task to dramatize a sad and depressing time in
history.  Last year's Life is Beautiful was able to teach a lesson about
the holocaust through laughter.  Although Robin Williams is noted for his
humor and wonderful characterizations, even he is unable to make this an
enjoyable film.
The Polish Jews depicted are not in a concentration camp, but are
residents of a ghetto where they are deprived of most essentials of life. 
They are contained in their own little space behind walls and barbed wire
fences.
Before the war Jakob Heym (Williams) was the owner of a nice little
restaurant, but lack of supplies has forced him to suspend operations and
he exists in an area above the old eatery.
Kowalsky (Balaban), the town barber, has not received a new razor blade
for years, but he manages to shave Jakob each and every day.  In return,
he was supposed to receive some now non-existent latkes from Jakob.  When
Jakob discovers that the despondent barber is about to commit suicide, he
reminds him of his promise to shave him, thereby postponing the hanging.
The lack of news from the outside world has led to depression for most of
the neighbors.  One day Jakob accidentally overhears a news broadcast that
tells of the Russian approach to their town.  He shares this announcement
with one person, who tells another, then another, and so on until everyone
know about it.  Although it is forbidden to own a radio, they all assume
that Jakob really didn't `overhear' the news.  They are certain that he
has a hidden radio.
There is a subplot involving a young refugee who finds herself in Jakob's
care.  It is she, not a radio that is hidden.
This is a dark movie, not only in content, but also in its
cinematography.  At times it is difficult to distinguish what is going on
in the numerous shadows.  This lack of contrast will only become worse
when it comes to television. 
Robin Williams and everyone else in the cast are very good in their
roles, and basically, it is a good story with an impressive ensemble. 
There is just too much depression here for me.  I don't need that.  I
won't watch it again.  For that reason, I give it a C.

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
I don't get it.  Why all the comparisons between "Jakob the Liar" and "Life 
is Beautiful" when the similarities are superficial?
Benigni's "Life" is a fable full of exaggeration;  "Jakob" is a morality 
play set in a sordidly real ghetto.  Yes, both settings are Holocaust 
Europe, and each contains a child under protective secrecy.  That's about 
it.
Another "it" I don't get is why Robin Williams?  Did director Peter 
Kassovitz feel assured of success when he landed such a popular American 
actor?  Now I like Williams as a comedian, and many of his performances have 
been top-notch.  And, his face is starting to age enough to qualify as the 
mug of a real character actor.  BUT - his performance lacks either the 
scenes or the passion to qualify it as moving.
Jakob is a former maker of latkas and blintzes:  his abandoned café is now 
the basement of his living quarters.  Jakob's wife was murdered by the 
Nazis, and Jakob now works in a detail of other Polish Jews imprisoned 
within their formerly comfortable neighborhood.  When Jakob, chasing down a 
stray sheet of paper to obtain any trace of news, wanders into a forbidden 
zone, he is sent to be punished.  From a German officer's radio Jakob hears 
news of Russian troops just 400 kilometers away.  Luckily Jakob makes it out 
of the office unscathed, but has to sneak home after curfew.  It is now that 
he is obliged to care for a girl - Lina, played by Hannah Taylor-Gordon -- 
who has escaped a train headed for a concentration camp.
All these details create a grim tone, but the capacity for hope arises when 
Jakob saves his friend Kowalsky (Bob Balaban) from suicide with news of the 
Russian advance.  Is the war almost over? is the question countless people 
are soon asking Jakob.  Believing Jakob has a forbidden radio, the men of 
the ghetto are soon pestering him for the latest news - hopefully of the 
impending German defeat.  Jakob soon finds himself creating outlandish 
stories about American tanks and jazz bands, Russian divisions and planes.  
In short, he is a liar.  But doesn't spreading hope justify lying?  Not 
necessarily, Jakob sees when a neighbor perishes in his own attempt to 
spread the news he obtained through Jakob.
As you might expect, the atmosphere of the film is stark.  The set 
decoration is marvelous, suggesting the long period of desperation that 
ghetto dwellers must have experienced.  The characters are careworn, as are 
their shops and streets and infrastructure.  The viewer in turn feels a mood 
of claustrophobia and darkness, a mood very fitting for the plot.
The acting helps to make "Jakob the Liar" a solid enough story.  Alan Arkin 
plays Frankfurter, the former actor and current doubter of the value of the 
radio. As Mischa the former boxer, Liev Schreiber turns in a strong 
performance;  he sketches Mischa with a big heart but loose lips.  Michael 
Jeter (Avron) delivers his lines well, but is woefully underused, his comic 
genius not evoked once.  A similar problem surfaces with much of Williams' 
performance.  Indeed he is turned loose only once, during a scene I think is 
the film's best.  When he can no longer put Lina off about listening to the 
fictional radio, Jakob creates an amazing broadcast, followed by a 
life-affirming dance about the vacant café.  In the end, though, Williams 
seems cornered by a wrong-headed conclusion.
The crux of the problem is the commonplace.  Perhaps Peter Kassovitz failed 
to recognize the need for more scenes like the dance.  I'm not talking about 
dips into farce as we see in "Life Is Beautiful."  I mean just a few more 
scenes that would endear the characters to us to a greater degree. We see 
enough of the ordinary and bleak.  After all, the ending takes a dip into 
magical realism, but is ultimately unsupported by the elements of 
foreshadowing and fantasy that would properly ready us.  The bug is in the 
storytelling, then.
Hope is a thing worth many sacrifices, is one of the main messages we 
understand from the film.  When these souls get back to their former lives, 
it will be because they hoped they would.  It's certainly an important 
theme.  It's just not full of enough humor, even carefully-wrought dark 
humor - to make "Jakob the Liar" an important film.


Author
Jamey Hughton
The Holocaust. A caring soul trying to improve morale around him. And
certain comic undertones during a tragic time. All of these themes are
found in the Oscar-winning Foreign film Life is Beautiful, which put
gifted Italian clown Roberto Benigni in the American spotlight. Fresh
off the heels of Benigni's triumph, another film rolls into theaters
with very similar messages - and a big-name star to guide it.
The title character in Jakob the Liar is Jakob Heym (Robin Williams), a
Polish Jew living in a desolate ghetto in 1944. One night, Jakob hears a
radio transmission that could bring his fellow ghetto-dwellers some
hope: Russians are only 400 kilometers away, and the war could soon come
to an end. Jakob tries to contain his secret, but soon it has leaked out
and gotten terribly blown out of proportion by the other Jewish
residents. He sees that this one little news bulletin has substantially
lifted the group's spirit. And so, he begins to give them hope by
telling false stories about the approaching Russians. All of it is
basically hooey, but the suicide rate is down, and everyone seems to be
more optimistic about the future.
I might as well come out of the closet: I was that guy who liked Patch
Adams. Audiences sure did love the film, but it got some of the worst
critical reception of the year. With Jakob the Liar, moviegoers may be
turned off by the unappealing premise (not to mention the fact that the
subject has already been thoroughly explored). While full of mixed
messages and meaty flaws, this film does manage to balance itself quite
admirably - especially with all of the post-Life is Beautiful pressure.
The atmosphere, as envisioned by director Peter Kassovitz, is
successfully portrays the horror of the Holocaust in an effective and
subtle manner. It's too bad that often during the 2nd act, he doesn't
allow the audience room enough to appreciate all that.
Williams, in a well rounded and laid-back performance, manages to
contain his usual goofiness with style for virtually every minute of the
running time. The few moments in which he truly addresses his funny side
are shared with a 10-year old runaway Jewish girl named Lina (Hannah
Taylor-Gordon). Williams improvises a radio transmission with Winston
Churchill with restrained but hilarious success. The supporting cast,
full of veteran character actors, is easily one of the aspects to marvel
at in Jakob the Liar. Alan Arkin plays the pessimistic Frankfurter, Bob
Balaban is Jakob's timid friend Kowalsky, and Armin Mueller-Stahl is the
wise Professor Kirschbaum. While all of the actors are perfect in their
roles, the surprise stand-out is Liev Schreiber (Scream 2), who plays
the feisty boxer Mischa with spot-on accuracy.
At first, Jakob the Liar moves at such a blistering pace that it becomes
exceedingly difficult to properly accept the surroundings. The gritty,
unattractive look of the Polish ghetto makes it a substantial problem
for any comedy to work. But Kassovitz knows this, and his period dramedy
is certainly filled with more dramatic moments. This is not a Holocaust
comedy with a light touch. If that was the goal in mind, the environment
for Jakob and his companions would be much less bleak & somber and far
more warm & fuzzy. The mood finally starts working in the film's favor
toward the end, when the real issues are dealt with. During these
glorious moments, Kassovitz reaches a degree prosperity that rivals and
even surpasses a few of Benigni's achievements in his film.
Unfortunately, much of Jakob the Liar is too messy and undefined to
match the success of Life is Beautiful. Still, this determined piece of
work is highly respectable. And Williams will return to family comedy
this Christmas when he stars in Bicentennial Man. Hopefully, that
familiar formula will set the talented comedian back on track, with
audiences and critics alike.
Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
JAKOB THE LIAR
(Columbia)
Starring:  Robin Williams, Liev Schreiber, Bob Balaban, Alan Arkin, Armin
Mueller-Stahl, Hannah Taylor Gordon.
Screenplay:  Peter Kassovitz and Didier Decoin, based on the novel _Jakob
Der Lugner_ by Jurek Becker.
Producers:  Marsha Garces Williams and Steven Haft.
Director:  Peter Kassovitz.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, violence, profanity)
Running Time:  114 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There is a scene early in JAKOB THE LIAR that hints at how much
better it could have been.  The scene is set in a Jewish ghetto in Poland
circa 1944, where a one-time cafe proprietor named Jakob Heym is walking
resolutely through the streets, fists stuffed into coat pockets.  To one
side of him, residents scavenge for food in the street; to the other side,
German troops beat a group of Jews.  Jakob, however, never stops moving. 
It's an efficient, effective set-up for the character, who is clearly
nobody's idea of a hero at the outset.  He is a man who has responded to
the horror of his surroundings by withdrawing from them, excising his
moral peripheral vision.
     The set-up is critical because fate will turn Jakob into a reluctant
savior.  After a visit to a German commandant's office and a moment alone
with a turned-on radio, Jakob learns that Russian troops are quite near.
When he brings this first news of the war in years to his fellow Jews,
they become convinced that he must have a radio, which is a punishable
offense in the ghetto.  The good news brings hope to the ghetto; the
everyday specter of suicide vanishes.  A private man of limited creativity
finds himself burdened with creating stories of Russian military progress
just to keep his neighbors alive.
     This promising story of an ordinary person doing the extraordinary is
burdened from the outset by casting:  the "ordinary person" in question,
Jakob Heym, is played by Robin Williams.  I am of the depressing opinion
that Williams is growing less assured as an actor in his "serious" roles 
with every passing year.  Compare his dramatic scenes in THE WORLD
ACCORDING TO GARP and MOSCOW ON THE HUDSON with WHAT DREAMS MAY COME or
PATCH ADAMS, and see how much more mannered he has become (or, at the very
least, how much less sensible at choosing material). JAKOB THE LIAR
depends on the notion that Jakob has to struggle to craft his fictions,
but Williams always looks like he's struggling _not_ to craft them.  When
he improvises a radio address by Winston Churchill for ailing 10-year-old
orphan Lina (Hannah Taylor Gordon), he seems relieved that he can finally
get wacky.
     Oh yes, and then there's that little girl.  Some viewers will
undoubtedly consider the hero's fanciful stories for a young charge too
reminiscent of LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL, but those scenes aren't problematic
because they're familiar.  They're problematic because they're jarring and
distracting, introducing a cutesy relationship into a film that shouldn't
have been about cutesy relationships.  Jakob's character arc may be about
his willingness to act for the benefit of others, but there are plenty of
others without poor little Lina.  Every scene with her feels contrived,
pulling JAKOB THE LIAR away from its central story of hope coming to a
previously hopeless people.
     It is a pleasant surprise to find that JAKOB THE LIAR is a much
grittier production than you might expect from a Hollywood-ized Holocaust,
combining the weighty subject matter with dark humor in some effective
ways.  Director Peter Kassovitz, working from Jurek Becker's novel, crafts
some nice scenes between Jakob and the other townspeople, and draws solid
performances from Armin Mueller-Stahl (as a once-revered doctor) and Bob
Balaban (as a barber drifting into depression).  There are just too many
things going on that prove distracting, whether it's the sketchy romanctic
angle involving Liev Schreiber as an earnest former prizefighter, or
Williams' incongrous presence, or a sweet but utterly irrelevant little
girl.  JAKOB THE LIAR deals with too delicate a subject for such fumbling,
and has too compelling a central character to waste.  And after one
wonderful early scene, you can see the film wasted and fumbled away.

Author
Michael Redman
Sometimes I think that our entire culture is dependent on illusions to
continue functioning. We have commonly held sets of beliefs that exist to
benefit the society but we are convinced they serve the individual.
Working an unfulfilling job all your life so you can pay the mortgage and
retire for five years before you die is a good thing. Security will make you
happy. It's the big lie that most of us buy into. It's a necessary mass
hallucination. Otherwise where would we find people willing to march off each
morning to spend their day in drudgery so we can increase the gross national product?
Most of our time is spent in the illusions we tell ourselves. We need them to
continue. Everything's going to work out fine. If we work hard at something,
we'll succeed. Smoke and mirrors.
Films are definitely illusion. We sit in a dark room and pretend for a while
what's happening in flickering images on a huge white wall is real.
Occasionally it's enlightening. Sometimes, entertaining. But it's never life.
Rather, it's the illusion of life to give us a brief respite from the
illusions of life.
Jakob (Robin Williams) finds himself in the illusion business. Held prisoner
in a walled-off Jewish ghetto in Poland near the end of World War II, he tells
his fellow inmates news from the outside. His stories are lies, but they fill
the community with hope.
As with any good fabrication, they contain an element of truth. During a
chance visit to a Gestapo office, he hears a news broadcast. The Russians are
pushing the Nazi troops back and are only 400 kilometers from the city.
When he tells a friend, the news spreads like wildfire throughout the ghetto.
In the true form of gossip, the story is embellished. Everyone believes Jakob
has a secret radio, an act punishable by death. He sees the effect of the good
news on morale and continues to relay news, but now it's all made up.
It works. The lies create faith. There are no more suicides because rescue is
just around the corner.
Some aspects of the film are well-crafted. The desperation of the people is
apparent as they are subjected to the cruelty of slave labor, starvation,
public  hangings and isolation. The cinematography is claustrophobic and you
feel the limited existence in the ghetto.
As real as some of the film is, it is never engaging. The horrors of the
Holocaust are there, but the story is not.
In order for illusion to work, it has to be invisible. By their nature, movies
are manipulative. Everything you see is designed to make you feel or believe
something. The best films do it without the audience even noticing. Unseen
smoke and mirrors.
When you see the emotional trickery, it doesn't work. That's the problem here.
During the opening credits, Jakob is running down the street chasing a page
from a newspaper blowing in the wind. But not only isn't it real, it doesn't
even look real. The paper isn't being blown by the wind, it's pulled by an
unseen cinematic string -- or it's stuck on the screen by a computer.
And it continues. We can see the artifice. An about-to-be-orphaned little girl
escapes a prisoner train as it moves through town and Jakob takes her in. The
doe-eyed child is convincing as a real person, but never explored. Her primary
function is to remind us that children suffer and we should feel sympathy.
It's too blatant to be effective.
It almost goes without saying that Williams turns in an outstanding
performance. Even in his less satisfying films, he's at least adequate. In the
better ones, he's remarkable.
Somehow his role feels like a betrayal. There are any number of actors that
could have done this role as well as he does. But there is only one Robin
Williams and what he can do is unique and wonderful. He doesn't do it here.
Although we don't need to blindly accept all the lies around us, some of our
illusions serve us well and allow us to continue. The ones we pay money for
should be more convincing.
(Michael Redman has been writing this column for a very long time. His
illusion is that he doesn't have any. Email your lies to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 9/30/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
This week's Y2K article: http://www.indepen.com/
Y2K archives: http://www.indepen.com/y2k.html

Author
Bob Bloom
  Jakob the Liar (1999) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Robin Williams, Alan
Arkin, Bob Balaban, Michael Jeter, Armin Mueller-Stahl and Liev Schreiber
 "Jakob the Liar" unfolds like a Sholemcq Aleichem story: Through a
misunderstanding, an unimportant little man suddenly gains stature and
influence that he neither wants nor deserves.
 However, instead of some turn-of-the-century shtetl in Russia, this story
is set in an unnamed Polish city's Jewish ghetto during World War II.
 Jakob (Robin Williams), like everyone else in the ghetto, lives with death
on a daily basis. People are shot at random, put into cattle cars or commit
suicide.
 Jakob only wants to stay alive and away from the Nazis.
 One night, though, near curfew he is accused of trying to escape from the
ghetto and is sent to the office of a Gestapo official.
 There he hears a radio broadcast and sees a map that pinpoints Russian
troop deployments, indicating they are only 400 miles away and closing fast.
 This information bolsters his spirits, and when he is allowed to return to
the ghetto, he determines to spread the information among his friends, thus
giving them hope.
 But, like the story that is passed around the campfire, changing from
person to person until it is barely unrecognizable, the other ghetto
residents come to believe that Jakob has a hidden radio and begin pestering
him for more news on the war's progress.
 Despite his various protestations, no one believes Jakob when he insists
he has no radio. Situations begin to escalate in comic and tragic turns.
People begin treating him with respect and he becomes a reluctant leader in
the community.
 Jakob seems like a role created for Williams. He is funny, yet subdued as
the circumstances demand. His asides and mutterings to himself are pure
Williams, and that is the flaw in his performance. He doesn't come across
as a poor, simple, scared former potato vendor, but as a big-time actor
doing a star turn with an affected Eastern European accent.
 The movie, directed by Peter Kassovitz with a screenplay by Kassovitz and
Didier Decoin, struggles to blend comedy with the horror of the Holocaust,
while also trying to keep an reverent tone concerning that nightmare.
 They succeed partially. Kassovitz is able to convey the casualness of the
brutality and death the Jews were forced to endure. It seems so impersonal
that it lacks any emotional resonance or shock.
 Despite a strong cast, including Alan Arkin, Bob Balaban, Michael Jeter,
Armin Mueller-Stahl and Liev Schreiber, Jakob the Liar feels cold and
impersonal. The performances by all concerned are good, but a spark,
something to ignite the audience's emotions, is lacking.
 "Jakob the Liar," unlike "Life Is Beautiful" - to which it will be
compared mostly - and "Schindler's List," fails to touch  our hearts and
souls concerning the plight of these unfortunate people persecuted simply
because they are Jewish.
 Like the film's setting, "Jakob the Liar" is cold and gray. It neither
inspires nor shocks. It just sits like a cold, day-old potato pancake.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier. He can be reached
by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
In a Holocaust movie the question is never Is the hammer going to
fall, but When is the hammer going to fall. And who's going to live
through razing the ghetto. Who's going on the train. Before we even
sit down to Jakob the Liar, we already expect these questions to be
answered. It's not all about convention, however: we also expect to
appreciate dignity, perseverance, humility, sacrifice, the whole gamut
of things that made us cry at Schindler's List. And of course, as a
bonus, we get to hate the Nazis some more. The Holocaust movie is one
of the last remaining places where good and evil can be so clearly
demarcated without compromising the integrity of things, one of the
last settings where a black hat unequivocally means 'bad,' a white,
'good.'
In Jakob the Liar, Jakob Heym (Robin Williams)--self-proclaimed
part-time Jew--wears the whitest hat of all. As for story arc, too,
it's a lot like Braveheart, just without all the epic
patriotism. Patriotism is, after all, land-related, and the Jewish
community of Jakob the Liar is by definition landless. But still,
Jakob does more or less organize the resistance, his wife is already
dead (Fisher King?), and there is a torture scene towards the
end. And, people are affecting accents off an on, though it never gets
so careless as Costner's Robin Hood.
It all starts rather thematically, per Forrest Gump, with a
simpled-down man and something floating on the wind. In Jakob the
Liar, it's a newspaper. And Jakob's chasing it, shadow-playing things
to come: how one errant word from him will snowball out of control,
thrust this pancake vendor into the role of a prophet, in a time when
prophet is defined as he-who-has-news of the war. The thing is,
though--as Jakob chasing the newspaper establishes--Jakob doesn't have
the news. His 'radio' is a desperate figment of a collective
imagination. Which is where the Liar part comes into play. Accurate or
make-believe, news for the Jewish community engenders hope, and hope
is rare. So, by piling lie on lie, each more fantastic than the last,
Jakob can keep his (all-star) community afloat awhile longer.
But of course making light of a bad situation can only last so long.
In spite of the welcome humor and Fiddler on the Roof music, this is a
Holocaust movie. Sombre is a word. Inevitable's another. The first
spoken word, is, after all, "Hitler," and every exchange after is,
though often comical, nevertheless weighted, simply by the fact that
this parting could be the last parting. What's particularly effective
with all this, too, is how director/writer Peter Kassovitz subtly
manages to put us in the same position as the Jewish community, via
cleverly keeping the timeline from us, which serves to nullify the
dramatic irony that would have otherwise been operant. In spite of the
history lessons complete with dates, we, like the Jews, have no idea
when this is all going to be over. Meaning that for some tense moments
at the end Jakob the Liar sways between tragedy and comedy, and
doesn't commit itself either way until the closing frames, and even
then--as with The French Lieutenant's Woman--it tries to get the best
of both worlds, both endings. Because it's Robin Williams, too, it
does.
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com
