Title
Review for V.I. Warshawski (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Imagine, if you will, a hard-boiled detective.  You know the kind:
wise-cracking, knows all the angles, good in a fight, heavy drinking, and
hard as nails.  Our private eye may be a slob, but in a tight spot nobody
thinks faster.  Nothing exciting, right?  So far I could be describing
hundreds of different characters from Sam Spade to Mike Hammer to Mannix to
Peter Gunn.  But ... but suppose this private eye is different.  Suppose on
top of everything else our shamus is a sexy woman.  Boy, what an original
idea for a character, huh?  Aren't you utterly intrigued?  If you answered
this question "yes," fine.  You're welcome to V. I. WARSHAWSKI, a pedestrian
made-for-television-grade mystery that was instead made for a theatrical
release.  It would not at all surprise me to see this turned into an equally
pedestrian television series that will last one season and die.
     The film opens with a helicopter view of a bit city (Chicago) under the
credits and that is just about how original the plot gets.  V. I. Warshawski
(played by Kathleen Turner) is on the outs with her reporter boyfriend when
she meets and is attracted to a famous hockey star.  Next thing she knows,
the hockey player has left his daughter on V. I.'s doorstep while he goes
out for an evening on family business.  By the end of the evening he is
dead, and Warshawski has a pesky young teenager on her hands as well as a
murder to solve.
     The V. I. Warshawski novels of Sara Paretsky form the basis of this
story by Edward Taylor and adapted to the screen by Taylor, David Aaron
Cohen, and Nick Thiel.  The screenplay is occasionally witty, milking the
novelty of a sexy woman with very masculine traits for all the humor it can
get from it.  Even more comes from Warshawski's low opinion of the opposite
sex.  And when they are tired of that they play with the novelty of her
name.  Nobody, they suggest, can pronounce a three-syllable name.  Then they
play the T. S. Garp initial game ("What does the V. I. stand for?"  "Very
Inquisitive").  The story and the action are strictly television level.  Had
there been a series of films about this character, this might have made an
acceptable fifth film in the series.  But if this is the first film there is
not likely to be a second one.  I rate V. I. WARSHAWSKI a 0 on the -4 to +4
scale.
