Title
Review for Thirty Two Short Films About Glenn Gould (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
     What I know about classical music, I could explain to you in
ten minutes.  I had never heard of Glenn Gould before I heard of this 
film.  It is possible that with greater background knowledge, I might 
have appreciated THIRTY-TWO FILMS ABOUT GLENN GOULD more... although I 
can't imagine how.  GLENN GOULD is a thoroughly remarkable film 
experience, as confident as it is ambitious, as masterfully realized as 
it is skillfully constructed.  It is difficult for me to conceive of a 
biography which more vividly conveys its subject, in all his complexity, 
and it is easy for me to state that it is the best film I have seen in 
1994.
     THIRTY-TWO SHORT FILMS ABOUT GLENN GOULD is exactly what its
title would suggest:  a series of vignettes examining in various ways the 
life and music of Glenn Gould, the acclaimed and enigmatic Canadian 
classical pianist who died in 1982 at the age of 50.  Gould caused a 
sensation with his unique interpretations of Bach, Schoenberg and others, 
and even more of a sensation when he retired from live performance at the 
age of 32.  Among the thirty-two films (the number taken from Bach's 
Goldberg Variations) are dramatizations of events from the life of Gould 
(Colm Feore), as well as interviews with friends, family and professional 
associates. There are also abstract interpretations of Gould's work as a 
performer and as a composer.
     While each of the thirty-two individually titled segments in
GLENN GOULD is self-contained, it is the manner in which they are 
connected which makes the film so compelling.  "Lake Simcoe," a fairly 
straightforward narrated look at Gould's childhood, leads into our first 
look at Gould the man in "Forty-five Seconds and a Chair."  We only just 
have time to register reaction to Gould before an acquaintance describes 
_his_ first meeting with Gould, and how he turned out to be quite a 
different person from what his appearance might suggest.  Later, Gould 
picks up snatches of conversation while dining in "Truck Stop," then uses 
that experience as an inspiration for his unique radio production "The 
Idea of North."  Despite the changes in perspective and varying film 
techniques, GLENN GOULD never seems fragmented; it maintains an 
unmistakable flow which is rarely anything but gripping.
     It helps that Francois Girard has chosen such a fascinating
subject, but it is Girard's brilliant direction which makes GOULD, the 
movie and the man, come alive.  Girard never tries to pin Gould down, the 
way a conventional biography might; rather, he uses his singular format 
to allow the complicated and multi-faceted Gould emerge slowly.  Although 
he gives up life performance to go into virtual seclusion, he so longs 
for contact that he spends hours each day talking to people on the 
telephone; in fact, the segment "Solitude" might in many ways be 
considered the centerpiece of the film.  Suffering throughout his life 
from high blood pressure and other chronic circulatory problems, Gould 
becomes a virtual slave to his medical conditions, highlighted in "Pills" 
and "Diary of One Day."  And while the dramatized sequences tend to 
present a man of almost other-worldly talent and insight, the inclusion 
of the interviews with real acquaintances of Gould's gives him a 
fundamental humanity.
     There is the occasional misstep.  A few of the sequences seem
repetitive, particularly "Practice" and "Passion According to Gould," 
both of which show Gould's rapture in response to his own music; and "The 
Tip," while amusing, seems somewhat out of place.  I was also less than 
enthralled by the lengthy animated segment "Gould Meets McLaren," and 
"Variation in C Minor," another FANTASIA-like visual representation of 
music.  When the music was separated from the man, I grew impatient.  
THIRTY-TWO SHORT FILMS ABOUT GLENN GOULD introduced me to a fragile, 
uniquely humanistic genius I wanted to know more about, and in a way I 
doubt I'll ever forget.

Author
Steve Rhodes
    Glenn Gould was one of the most enigmatic performers of all time.
He is arguably the most gifted and certainly the most controversial
pianist ever.  At the height of a brilliant career, he retired from
performing at age 32.  He was the H.  G.  Wells of the Information
Superhighway; he believed in the 60s that electronics would
revolutionize the arts and that there would no longer be a need for
live performances.  Moreover, he felt recordings were more egalitarian
since people were not forced to hear what the performer played as they
would in a live concert.
     The movie of his life (he is played nicely by Colm Feore) is
called THIRTY-TWO SHORT FILMS ABOUT GLENN GOULD.  The bizarre title
comes from a innovative script where his entire life is broken into 32
disconnected vignettes of differing lengths - some lasting only
seconds.
     I learned a lot about Glenn Gould from the movie.  I knew he would
hum while performing his music and that you can hear the humming on the
recordings if you listen carefully.  I did not know that he spent hours
of his time on the phone every day.  He loved to talk and did so
incessantly.  He would call people up at all hours and talk to them
about anything and everything.  He even made a lot of money in an
obscure stock by telling everyone he knew, and he knew many influential
people, that a certain famous sheik was interested in the company.
While the oil market was crashing, his oil stock went up 4 fold
overnight.  He did not listen well, but, boy could he ever talk.
     I applaud the script writer for taking a risk, and I enjoyed
learning about Glenn Gould, nevertheless, I can not quite bring myself
to recommend the movie.  Too many of the scenes just did not carry
enough interest for me.  If you go, you will be treated to some
wonderful music however.  THIRTY-TWO SHORT FILMS ABOUT GLENN GOULD runs
about right at 1:33.  It is not rated, but would probably be PG, but I
think only teenagers and older would be interested in it.  I rate it
**.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Pedro Sena
Looking inside the mind of a master musician, or at least composer, is
a difficult thing. The basic problem, which was seen through many other
reviews of this film, is that the consensus becomes one of idiocy,
stubbornness, and a maladjusted person.
Glenn Gould may have been all that, but his style and interpretation
of many classical pieces, is still one of the great achievements in
music in this century.  It is said that there is a fine line between
madness and genius, and the way this film is represented, there is also
a fine line between the directing and the truth.  As a film, it certainly
may not be liked.... the focus is the MUSIC, not the film.  And many
critics will not appreciate this.  But aside from that, what this
film does is what many film makers can not do.  Not only appreciate
the music itself, but also appreciate what it takes for a person to create
what he does.  It takes depth, and understanding.  It takes a lot of
intuition, where film might expect to find understanding and reasoning.
Glenn Gould is not about reason. Glenn Gould is about intuition.  And
this film is no less an exercise than the original inspiration...
certainly a compliment.
In thirty two little pieces, mostly in what we might consider a black
and white MTV style, the life and thoughts of Glenn Gould are sort
of displayed and shown.  There are no attempts to mediate, or define,
just a sort of interview with people that knew him, and just a few
other moments, of acting and directing license.  It creates a collage
where the music is the center of the activity, instead of one
man, something that Glenn states himself.
It is easy to see why this film was a darling of many film centers
and film festivals.  Amidst a more cultured audience, this is a very
nice tribute to a great musician this century. In the wider world,
where only Beethoven is the definition of classical music, the
appreciation of this piece of work is totaly lost.  One must not
only know the music, but also be familiar with different styles of
interpreting it.  Glenn Gould is about creating new visions off
the old, staid piece of music tat we have heard so much.
And, I am glad to say, that the film does the same.
Although, not specially done with audiences and film in mind, this
is quite an achievement, in creative thinking.  Putting together one
of these is almost like throwing things up in the air and picking
them up one at a time.  The final dimention was one of a chronological
styled ( very loose ) story.  But it could just as well have been done
in any other way.
Highly recommended film, if you not only love the music, but also the
musicianship behind it all.
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Moderator of Centipede's THE FILM.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Canadian musician and composer Glenn Gould was born in Toronto in 
1932.  By the age of three, his gifts were apparent, and he was 
performing professionally nine years later.  Gould became one of the 
world's most renowned classical performers, making more than 60 
recordings, as well as working in the fields of publishing, 
conducting, radio and television broadcasting, and scoring feature 
films.  His version of Bach's "Goldberg Variations" is definitive, and 
was included as one of the samples of humanity's best on both Voyager 
spacecraft.  Gould died of a stoke in 1982 at the age of 50. 
     THIRTY-TWO SHORT FILMS ABOUT GLENN GOULD presents a unique, 
impressionistic look at the offbeat musician.  Instead of giving a 
chronological view of Gould's life, writer/director Francois Girard 
has elected to present a variety of snapshots, including recreations 
of actual events (with Gould played brilliantly by Colm Feore) and 
interviews with real-life contemporaries and friends.  Says Girard:  
"As Gould was such a complex character, the biggest problem was to 
find a way to look at his work and deal with his visions.  The film is 
built of fragments, each one trying to capture an aspect of Gould.  
There is no way of putting Gould in one box.  The film gives the 
viewer 32 impressions of him.  I didn't want to reduce him to one 
dimension." 
     Give Girard credit for understanding his subject and the best method 
of portraying him.  The character and personality of Glenn Gould come 
across brilliantly in this film.  While nothing ninety-three minutes 
in length can hope to express all the facets of a man of Gould's 
depth, glimpses of elements lead to an understanding of the whole. 
     There are indeed 32 episodes, ranging in length from under one 
minute to just over six.  Five of these are interviews, several have no 
dialogue, and three show Colm Feore's Gould wandering a winterscape.  
The most original two segments are "Gould Meets McLaren", which 
features animated spheres dancing to Gould's music, and "Pills", which 
contains closeups of all the various medicines resident in the 
musician's bathroom. 
     Some of the episodes are funny; some are poignant.  In "Crossed 
Paths", Gould's friends recall his love of talking.  One man remembers 
falling asleep while on the phone with Gould, then waking up hours 
later to find that the one-sided conversation was still in progress.  
"The Tip" recounts how Gould made a killing on the stock market by 
defying the advice of his broker.  "Motel Wawa" presents Gould's views 
on the supernatural and the afterlife, which leads directly into 
"Forty-Nine", in which the musician expresses his fear of turning that 
age because the digits (four and nine) add up to thirteen. 
     Colm Feore captures Gould perfectly, bringing his energy and 
restlessness, as well as his quiet aloofness, to the screen.  Because 
of the unusual nature of THIRTY-TWO SHORT FILMS ABOUT GLENN GOULD, 
it's easy to forget that we're watching an actor play Gould, not the 
man himself, and Feore does nothing to spoil the illusion. 
     In "Lake Simcoe", one of the movie's first segments, Gould states, 
"I'm fortunate to have been brought up in an environment where music 
was always present."  The same can be said of THIRTY-TWO SHORT FILMS, 
where Gould's recordings form a backdrop to nearly every scene.  This 
is a movie to be savored by those who are familiar with the work of 
Glenn Gould, and an opportunity for those who aren't to explore the 
essence of a rare musical genius.  It's an eclectic film, and an 
astonishing portrait. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 
