Title
Review for Galaxy Quest (1999)
Number of Reviews
26

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) You're dragged to a party after a Star Trek convention,
and you get trapped in a corner by a "uniformed" nerd who thinks he's
interesting. He's telling you his idea for a screenplay, called GALAXY
QUEST, where William Shatner- and Leonard Nimoy-types are at a Con, and
they meet some REAL aliens, but they think they're just eccentric fans.
"Ho-hum," you yawn, and politely excuse yourself to go find your date so
you can get out of this nuthouse.
Well, believe it or not, somebody actually produced GALAXY QUEST
(namely, Mark Johnson and Charles Newirth). It's as bad as you would
imagine, and yet it's as good as it could possibly be.
Tim Allen plays Jason Nesmith, an actor on the TV show Galaxy Quest.
He's at a sci-fi convention with his "crew" (Alan Rickman as Sir Alex,
who wears an elaborate alien headpiece for the show and who longs for
some real acting work; Sigourney Weaver as the female officer who has to
wear a revealing outfit; and Tony Shalhoub who looks like he's having
fun as the ship's engineer.)
Nesmith often takes side jobs playing his character at private parties.
One of the "parties" turns out to be thrown by four real space aliens
who have built a ship exactly like the one on the show. They invite the
captain and his crew to their home planet. Once there, the demure,
polite aliens get to the point -- they ask the crew if they wouldn't
mind saving their world from an evil alien race, just like they do every
week on TV.
I say GALAXY QUEST is as bad as you would imagine because there is very
little you can do with this concept. It's one joke, repeated in as many
ways as will fit into 90 minutes. What's worse is that the joke is a
specific parody, and if you've never followed Star Trek, the movie just
won't make sense.
The second-worst thing the filmmakers could have done is to make a joke
of the movie's TV show, which they did. Cardboard sets and cornball
dialogue get a few cheap laughs, but the movie would have been better if
the TV show were more plausible. Part of the humor in GALAXY QUEST
relies on mistaking what's real for what's fake. By making the show
cheap and hokey, they lost some of that comic leverage for the bigger
jokes.
The WORST thing they could have done is to make a joke of the TV show's
actors (the movie's characters). But they didn't, and because the
characters are not parodies, because they have real depth, the movie is
as good as it could possibly be.
Tim Allen in particular breaths life into his role. He drinks and has a
huge ego. But on the other hand, he loves his role, he loves his fans,
and he loves signing autographs and answering questions. In other words,
Allen brings a unique, vivid personality to the role instead of just
settling for a bad William Shatner imitation. If Academy Awards were
based on the ratio of performance quality to source material, Allen's
score might earn him a nomination.  
Clearly, GALAXY QUEST takes some well-deserved shots at Star Trek, like
the elaborate headpieces and the revealing outfit. The movie also has
some funny lines that we've always wanted to hear on Star Trek. The
expendable crewmate manning a computer console calls out "Hey guys,
there's a red thingy movin' toward the green thingy. I think we're the
green thingy." Sigourney Weaver, crawling through the ventilation to get
to the bridge, says "Ducts. Why is it always ducts?" 
But taken as a whole, GALAXY QUEST is just a parody. And parody is only
funny when you know the source material. GALAXY QUEST could never stand
on its own, and in the annals of filmmaking, it won't get its own entry.
If it is mentioned at all it will only be as a footnote to the Star Trek
movies.
If you're a Trekkie who doesn't take it too seriously, you will probably
have a good laugh at GALAXY QUEST. You should take a look. But if you
don't know the difference between Star Trek, Star Wars, and Star Search,
then you might as well see something else. 
-- 
___________
Marty Mapes
mmapes@moviehabit.com
"There's nothing different about any of them except the neckties." 
-- Alice Brady, referring to men in The Gay Divorcee

Author
Christopher Null
     Just when you thought "high concept" couldn't get any lower....
     That's right, it's an amazing double negative that hasn't
successfully been pulled off since SOUTH PARK:  A movie that's
incredibly stupid yet fall-down funny.
     How stupid?  Here's the plot:  Washed-up actors from a 1960's
sci-fi TV show called "Galaxy Quest" are mistaken for a real starship
crew and are whisked to the stars to do battle with an evil entity.
     How funny?  Well, it's not SOUTH PARK funny, but it's frankly one
of the better comedies of the year.
     "Star Trek" fans -- you are being mocked.  But don't take it
personally.  If you can laugh at your inner geek, you'll find GALAXY
QUEST immensely entertaining and enjoyable.  I was a STAR WARS fan and
didn't really grow up with "Star Trek," but I got a real kick out of the
self-loathing of the likes of the tired character actors played by
Rickman and Shalhoub.  However, it's Sigourney Weaver who strikes her
most memorable character since Lt. Ripley of ALIEN's Nostromo.  As the
blond and buxom "Tawny Madison," she owns the part and every scene she's
in.  While pairing her with goofball Tim Allen is liking casting pearls
before swine, Allen does redeem himself with a spot-on Shatner homage.
     Getting inside the twisted mindset of the 'Trek geek is much more
fun than you might think, and GALAXY QUEST plays all the genre's clichés
out to the hilt.  In this case, that's a good thing.  Just pray that we
don't see a sequel.  But knowing "Star Trek,"....
Director: Dean Parisot
Producer: Suzann Ellis, Mark Johnson, Charles Newirth
Writer: Robert Gordon, David Howard
Starring: Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Tony Shalhoub, Daryl Mitchell,
Enrico Colantoni, Sam Rockwell, Missi Pyle
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Sam
Rockwell, Daryl Mitchell, Enrico Colantoni, Robin Sachs, Patrick
Breen, Missi Pyle, Jed Rees, Justin Long, Jeremy Howard.
Screenplay by Robert Gordon and David Howard.
Directed by Dean Parisot.
104 minutes
Rated PG, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests
to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com
with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
The spirited comedy "Galaxy Quest," which follows the has-been crew of
an old "Star Trek" style TV show when they get scooped up by a group
of aliens who mistake them for genuine interstellar heroes, would make
a fine companion piece to the light-hearted documentary, "Trekkies."
Both films look at the people who attend sci-fi conventions, from
hopelessly typecast actors who depend on the gatherings for their
bread and butter, to those fans who dress up like their heroes and
sometimes appear to have trouble recognizing the line between reality
and pretend. Both productions are rather slight affairs, choosing to
mostly stay on the surface level rather than digging a little
deeper. And both movies are far more entertaining than one would ever
expect them to be.
The story begins many years after the cancellation of "Galaxy Quest,"
a cheesy TV show quite similar to the original "Star Trek"
series. Desperate for work, the cast travels the sci-fi convention
circuit; signing autographs, posing for photos and dealing with
impossibly obscure trivia questions from devoted fans. When a group of
folks in odd uniforms ask series star Jason Nesmith (Tim Allen) to
help save their people from a galactic meanie, the actor takes their
words as a proposal for a paying gig in some dorky role-playing game.
He's wrong. The "fans" are bona fide aliens assuming human form,
members of a gentle species called Thermians. These sweet creatures,
with no understanding of the concept of fiction, perceived the
transmissions of "Galaxy Quest" they picked up through space to be
documentaries of historic events. So when the evil space pirate Sarris
(Robin Sachs, decked out like a giant grasshopper with Borg
accessories) assaults their race, they turn to the valiant "Galaxy
Quest" crew for help. To make things easier for their heroes, they've
even built a full-scale working duplicate of the vessel used in the TV
show, unaware that the original ship was nothing but a tiny model. In
short order, the stunned "Galaxy Quest" cast find themselves in the
cosmos, with the fate of a race in their hands.
The high-concept premise works because of some clever set pieces,
imaginative special effects and appealing performances from the
cast. Tim Allen is fun as the "Galaxy Quest" Commander, an
overstuffed, insensitive egocentric actor clearly modeled after "Star
Trek's" William Shatner. The "Trek" parallels continue with his
cast-mates. Sigourney Weaver, decked out in a blond wig, is this
crew's Uhuru, the token female relegated to repeating computer
commands. Alan Rickman draws big laughs as the Spock of the group, a
bitter performer stuck under alien make-up who has always believed the
show to be beneath his talents ("I'm a Shakespearean actor!" he
complains). Daryl Mitchell is fine as the now-grown actor who played
the plucky kid on the old series.
Tony Shalhoub absolutely steals the show as Fred Kwan, the most
adaptive of the "Galaxy Quest" cast. In the show, he played a
character of Asian heritage, despite the fact that he obviously wasn't
(Scotty? Chekov? Take your pick). In the cast's real-life outer space
adventure, he is absolutely unflappable, and Shalhoub's low-key line
readings are hilarious. Sam Rockwell, fresh from a maniacal turn in
"The Green Mile," is a hoot as a hanger-on who once played a nameless
crewman killed in the first act of an episode (think of anyone in a
red-shirt on "Star Trek"). Rockwell spends most of the film expecting
to be knocked off for cheap dramatic effect.
While "Galaxy Quest" mines sci-fi clichés for lots of laughs, it
could have been funnier had the writers thrown in even more pop
culture references for die-hard fans. The film plays like a
straightforward first-season episode of "The Simpsons," before the
writers hit their stride and began to stuff the series with too many
gags to take in on the initial viewing. Still, the movie is
refreshingly benign (due in large part to the naďve, lovable
Thermians) and does contain some surprisingly subtle observations
(when placed on the real spaceship, the cast members immediately fall
into their old roles, as if they were locked in some TV character
caste system). As comedies go, "Galaxy Quest" may not reach its full
potential, but it's a fine way to while away 104 minutes.

Author
R.L. Strong
DREAMWORKS PICTURES PRESENTS A MARK JOHNSON PRODUCTION
"GALAXY QUEST"
TIM ALLEN  SIGOURNEY WEAVER  ALAN RICKMAN  TONY SHALHOUB  SAM
ROCKWELL  DARYL MITCHELL  CO-PRODUCERS  SUZANN ELLIS & SONA GOURGOURIS
MUSIC BY DAVID NEWMAN
ALIEN MAKEUP AND CREATURE EFFECTS  STAN WINSTON
COSTUME DESIGNER ALBERT WOLSKY
EDITOR DON ZIMMERMAN, A.C.E.
PRODUCTION DESIGNER LINDA DESCENNA
DIRECTOR OF PHOTOGRAPHY JERZY ZEILINSKI
EXECUTIVE PRODUCER ELIZABETH CANTILLON
PRODUCED BY MARK JOHNSON & CHARLES NEWIRTH
STORY BY DAVID HOWARD
SCREENPLAY BY DAVID HOWARD AND ROBERT GORDON
DIRECTED BY DEAN PARISOT
Fandom is a strange phenomenon. There are those that revel in the
minutia of every episode of "Lost in Space", "Star Trek", Godzilla
movies and more. What is even more fascinating about fandom is the
growing acceptance and exploitation of it by those actors and
actresses that receive this attention. The film "Galaxy Quest" is a
film that both pokes fun at and embraces this faction, in a loving
tribute to both modern commercialism and old fashion escapism.
The film opens at a convention celebrating the cast and production of
a long ago canceled television show, 'Galaxy Quest'. The four cast
members waiting, behind stage for the arrival of the "Star" Jason
Nesmith (Tim Allen). They bicker and complain about the lack of
attention they had received due to their "Captain", and the
typecasting that has all but ended their careers. As Jason Nesmith
arrives and takes the stage with his T.V. crew, he soon becomes as
disenchanted as his fellow actors, overhearing a couple of kids
complaining about his posturing over a poor quality program. Knowing
that his fellow cast members hold him in the lowest of esteem, Jason
returns to his home to drink away his disappointment.
The following morning, Jason is awakened by a quartet of costumed
fans, who proclaim to be from the Klatuu Nebula asking him for his
help in saving their planet. Hung over and depressed, Jason believes
that the quartet is actually a production group he had previously
arranged an engagement with. So getting into their limousine, Jason
passes out as the four Aliens brief him on their history and the
situation at hand. The limousine turns into an alley and is suddenly
lifted off the ground.
Waking up on, what he believes to be one of the most elaborate sets
he's ever seen. Moving into the command deck, Jason confronts Saris
(Robin Sachs), the evil Alien dictator who is out to conquer the
"Thermions". Nonchalantly, carrying on his role, Jason commands the
alien crew to fire on Saris' ship. Feeling that the gig is over, Jason
walks off the deck and is followed by Mathesar (Enrico Colantoni), who
is concerned of the situation but agrees to send Jason home so that he
can arrive at another engagement in the San Fernando Valley. Locking
Jason into a steel room, Jason cries out "Hey, where's my Limo?", as
the outer doors open revealing the vast nebula of space. Encased in a
liquid bubble, Jason is catapulted through a black hole and onto the
deck by his swimming pool.
Rushing to a Hardware Store, where the other cast members of "Galaxy
Quest" are engaged in a ribbon cutting ceremony, Jason tries to tell
his "crew" about his adventures. As Jason tells the group, Mathesar
and his group arrive to report of Saris' survival and demand for
surrender. Angry and disappointed Jason's fellow actors walk off,
until they realize that Jason may have been offering them.. a job.
"Galaxy Quest" is just pure entertainment. Light, jovial, and just a
hell of a lot of fun.  The screenplay by David Howard and Robert
Gorgon is both a knowing and loving tribute to classic sci-fi
television but also to the fandom that it has inspired. Seen as a
lampoon on the 'Star Trek Convention' circuit, "Galaxy Quest", pulls
out many fanciful rumors of cast squabbling, cardboard sets, the
obligatory cast member who must die, and fans who attend the
conventions costumed as their favorite character. The adventure in
space is as enjoyable (if not more so), in that the actors now have to
behave as the characters they had once portrayed, all the while
bitching and complaining about Jason trying to "hog the scene".
Tim Allen gives his best performance here. His comic timing has never
been more on the mark. But the real charm here is the marvelous comic
turn by Sigourney Weaver as actress Gwen DeMarco. Besting her
performance in "Ghostbusters", Ms. Weaver gives a hilariously
performance as an actress noted for her bosom and "repeating whatever
the computer says".
Desperate to escape from the clutches of typecasting, Alan Rickman as
actor Sir Alexander is absolutely droll in his role, oblivious to the
foam latex head piece he wares throughout the film Tony gives the
character of Fred Kwan a wonderful deadpan quality. His acceptance of
whatever happens is the counterbalance to the rest of the cast.
Special mention also to Daryl Mitchell as Tommy Webber who manages to
be both the innocent of the group and the one most needing to follow
his fellow actors wherever they go. Enrico Colantoni as Mathesar
painfully funny, his delivery of his lines spoken through a tight
misunderstanding of the pronunciation and meaning of English, is
almost vaudevillian in its delivery and use of strange accent. Sam
Rockwell as Guy Fleegman is hilarious, a part time actor who stumbles
upon the adventure of the lifetime and is fearful for his life because
"his character does not have a last name". And finally, Robin Sachs ,
laboring under heavy costuming and makeup as Saris, gives a formidable
performance, augmented by Stan Winston's marvelous creature designs
and makeup.
As for the technical  credits, Stan Winston's creature effects, what
can be said but bravo. From recycling his Martian design from Tobe
Hooper's "Invader's From Mars", to creating some humorous new designs
for the aliens, Stan Winston proves why he is one of the industries
most sought after effects technicians. And the special effects  by
Industrial Light and Magic continue to amaze and delight. The
cinematography by Jerzy Zielinski is nicely appropriate, conveying
both the concepts and timings of a television drama while also
enveloping the screen with a bright and colorful template. David
Newman's score is both heroic and cliched in such a way that it calls
up both the absurdity of the concept while reveling in its campiness.
A damn good score that bears repeated listening.
Director Dean Parisot handles the film with a sure hand and style that
is both simplistic and unique. One of the most humorous tricks the
film plays is that the opening of the film starts off at an aspect
ration of 1.66:1(1.66 times as wide as it is tall), not a very wide
composition, looking almost like a television show. It soon shifts to
a theatrical ratio of 1.85:1 during the convention scenes, finally
settling to a full panavision ratio of 2.35:1 with Jason Nesmith
finally realizing he is actually in outer space (it's unfortunate that
this marvelous gag will be lost on home video). Director Parisot
manages to create a charming and very funny homage to fandom.
"Galaxy Quest" is just one fun evenings worth of entertainment. A fine
film for the whole family, with only a few questionable moments for
younger children. But still a film that will entertain and can be
enjoyed over and over again.
 Owned & Copyright Š 1999-2000 R.L. StrongNothing in this article may
be quoted or re-printed without the expressed written permission of
the author.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Crash!  Scrape!  It's hard piloting a large spacecraft through a space
station if the only practice you've ever had is with cardboard models on
a television series.  This is just the quandary that the crew of the
NSEA Protector find themselves in when aliens from space, who have seen
their "historical documents," namely their old television series, take
the crew off to fight a real space battle.  Needless to say, our
reluctant heroes have no idea, well no real idea, what to do.
In Dean Parisot's side-splittingly funny GALAXY QUEST, this delicious
concept is milked for every joke possible.  Setting a perfect comedic
tone, the movie is a delightful and imaginative parody of STAR TREK,
right down to their hokey conventions with adoring fans, dressed in full
and authentic series regalia.  The campy movie never veers into
slapstick, and the ensemble cast plays every scene with complete
seriousness and believability.  Given the volume and the frequency of
the laughter that the film produces, it could be thought of as the PG
comedic equivalent of THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY.  GALAXY QUEST makes
silly ideas so likeably funny that you can't control your laughter, even
if you try.
Leading the crew of the invincible Protector is Commander Peter Quincy
Taggart (Tim Allen as Jason Nesmit), whose signature line is: "Never
give up!  Never surrender!"  Nesmit is an extroverted, egocentric actor
who plays the convention crowds like he's a rock star.  The rest of the
cast from the series, which ended twenty years ago, can barely tolerate
his grandstanding, especially a British-trained, Shakespearean actor
Alexander Dane (Alan Rickman) who plays Dr. Lazarus.
A blonde Sigourney Weaver plays actress Gwen DeMarco, whose part in the
series, as Lt. Tawny Madison, required her to repeat the commander's
commands.  He speaks, she repeats, the computer obeys and that's it.
Needless to say, DeMarco has never been pleased with her highly limited
role.
Rounding out the crew is Tech Sergeant Chen (Tony Shalhoub as Fred Kwan)
and Lt. Laredo (Daryl Mitchell as Tommy Webber).  Every science fiction
show needs lots of expendable crew members.  Sam Rockwell, as Guy
Fleegman, plays just such a character who died in his episode before the
first commercial.  Fleegman, a would-be actor who spends his time
hosting the conventions, worms his way in to join the rest of the cast
on their one real mission.
Stealing the show is Enrico Colantoni as Mathesar, the leader of the
Thermians who have come to enlist the aid of their beloved heroes.  With
voices rather like porpoises and gestures that blend many animal
behaviors, the Thermians produce instant mirth whenever they are on the
set.  The obsequious Thermians model their lives on the lessons they've
learned from Commander Taggart and his crew.  They've even reconstructed
the Protector, right down to gadgets that they have no idea how to work
but are sure the real crew will.
The film's purposely ridiculous monsters range from innocent-looking
alien babies with sharp teeth to lumbering rock monsters to a
grotesquely rotund pig, all done with spoofing, not frightening, in
mind.
Although Nesmit thinks fighting a real battle is "the role of a
lifetime," his fellow actors look on in horror, especially after they
watch the ruthless alien Sarris (Robin Sachs) torture one of the
captured Thermians.  With a constant look of "Oh my God, I can't believe
I'm doing this," the actors try their best to fake it.  Although most of
them convincingly do and say the right things, Fleegman doesn't have the
same ad-libbing skills as the others.  ("There's a red thingee moving
toward the green thingee," he says while reading the display indicating
that they are about to be attacked by vastly superior forces.)
For all of those scriptwriters who don't think through the logic of
their stories, the movie shows what can happen.  Madison's life is put
in danger as she is forced to work in a ship designed by a bunch of
writers.  "Whoever wrote this episode should die!" she screams with
venom.
Only flagging briefly when it tries momentarily to get serious, the
parody is likely to appeal as well to 10-year-olds as to senior
citizens.  There's even a "Gilligan's Island" joke.  Yes, the Thermians
think it's a documentary, and they feel quite sorry for those poor
people stuck on that island.
GALAXY QUEST runs 1:42.  It is rated PG for silly monsters and a little
mild profanity.  The film would be fine for all ages, but the monsters
may briefly frighten some impressionable young kids.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, gave the film ****.  He laughed loudly and
often.  He was there with some neighbors and most of his fifth grade
class, who enthusiastically gave the film *** 1/2 to ****.  Words I
heard afterwards from them included: imaginative, exciting, hilarious,
great plot, best movie in a long time, etc.  The kids were blown away by
the movie.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
As we all know, Earth started polluting interstellar space with television
signals in 1939. Fast-forward 60-odd years now, into a reality for all
intents and purposes ours, except here Star Trek isn't Star Trek, but the
all-too similarly cloaked "Galaxy Quest." During those 60-odd years, too,
some of those escaped television signals have cultured an audience, in the
literal sense. Specifically, an alien audience without any notion of
'fiction,' meaning, to them, the cast of characters who comprise "Galaxy
Quest" are real, capable of heroics, etc. And yes, this has been done
before, once in Twilight Zone and more recently in Futurama, but now it's
feature length and packed with stars: Tim Allen as James Nesmith playing
Captain Taggart; Sigourney Weaver as Gwen Demarco playing busty Tawny
Madison; Alan Rickman as Alexander Dane reluctantly playing Dr. Lazarus;
more.
Too, it starts where all Trekkie-type stuff lives and breathes: at the
ubiquitous convention, done up per SNL. A cast of characters still wearing
their costumes 20 years after the show was cancelled, all of them fully
aware both of how ridiculous this all is and how, without it, they would
have nothing. Well, all of them are aware except for Nesmith, the 'captain,'
who's so addicted to the ego-rush associated with star treatment that he
continually ostracizes his fellow hangers-on. Soon enough he cues in that
he's a joke though, meaning his self-confidence dwindles to nothing. Which
of course sets Galaxy Quest up as now having somewhere to go, something to
do, a narrative arc to follow: regain Nesmith's self-confidence for him,
make him believe in himself again.
The bad thing about this is, though, that Nesmith's lived with 'Captain
Taggart' so long that the two are inextricable. Or, more than that, the
Taggart character is even the dominant one, where Nesmith really exists.
Solution? Get Taggart his self-confidence back, which is where the
ultra-naďve aliens enter: the best way to boost a starship captain's
self-confidence is to give him a real starship, one they've painstakingly
modeled after the cardboard one on television. It's the old Narnia fantasy,
where, if you're nobody in your 'real' life, just step into the closet, into
another world, where everybody knows your name.
Of course, however, restoring Taggart's faith in himself is just the aliens'
function. Their motivation, as it has to be, isn't so charitable: they just
want Taggart and crew to save them from some scary looking, Men in Black-ish
aliens. Which proves to be quite entertaining, watching the "Galaxy Quest"
crew come together as a team and wing their way through their old roles.
And, no, nothing that happens is really unexpected--including their
'savior,' who gets sorethumbed early on--but all the same, it's funny enough
and fast enough that it doesn't really matter. You don't go to Galaxy Quest
to be moved, after all, you go for the send-up, the adventure, the space
bloopers, for Tim Allen in another good role (The Santa Clause, Toy Story),
for Sigourney Weaver back in zero-gravity, with blond hair, fighting aliens
again. Really, the most difficult part of Galaxy Quest is trying to endure
all the kiddy trailers that are part of the package. If you can make it
through that, though, it's all 'second star on the left and on till dawn'
stuff from there on out, which is precisely the mix of Never-Never Land and
space opera we need, now that Kirk's out of the picture.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Sometimes the lamest ideas translate into the funniest films, and Galaxy
Quest is a perfect example of this strange paradox.  Basically a Star
Trek spoof, Quest follows the exploits of five washed-up actors that
appeared years ago on a hokey but popular sci-fi television series,
aptly called `Galaxy Quest.'  Through a series of bizarre circumstances,
the group find themselves battling real aliens on a real spaceship, with
real lives (including their own) at stake.
Having burned through their fifteen minutes of fame during the run of
`Quest,' the unemployed actors have since been relegated to making
appearances at nerd-filled show conventions and opening electronic chain
stores.  Like Trek, each member of the cast despises their on-air
leader, and the show's most popular character, Commander Peter Quincy
Taggart, who is played by Jason Nesmith (Tim Allen, Home Improvement).
Among his hilariously predictable underlings are Dr. Lazarus of
Tev'Meck, portrayed by Alexander Dane (Alan Rickman, Dogma), a
Shakespearean-trained Brit that proclaims, `I was in `Richard III!' and
hates his character's silly catch-phrase, `By Grabthar's hammer, by the
suns of Warvan, you shall be avenged!'
Sigourney Weaver (Alien: Resurrection) plays Gwen DeMarco, who in turn
plays Lt. Tawny Madison, a blonde sex-kitten whose only apparent duties
are to repeat whatever the computer has just said and to have buoyant
breasts.  The hilarious Tony Shalhoub (Stark Raving Mad) tackles the
role of Fred Kwan (Tech Sergeant Chen) while 10 Things I Hate About You
scene-stealer Daryl Mitchell is Tommy Webber, playing a grown-up Lt.
Laredo (the character was just a `Webster'-sized kid in the TV show).
During one `Quest' convention, Nesmith is approached by a gaggle of
geeks with hopeless haircuts and alien attire that claim their planet
will be destroyed without his help.  Since these conventions are a
breeding ground for costumed kooks and tech-babbling buffoons, he thinks
nothing of it.  At the next convention, a hungover Nesmith mistakes the
same group for the bookers of his next convention appearance and takes
off with them.
But the geeks aren't really geeks  they're bona-fide aliens (including
Just Shoot Me's Enrico Colantoni) that have picked up satellite
transmissions of `Quest' and mistaken them for historical documents of
Earth's continual triumph over its interstellar adversaries.  They've
recreated the spaceship from `Quest,' incorporating every facet of the
show into its design, and legitimately need Nesmith's help to fend off a
barbaric alien race from wiping out their planet.  The chief baddie is,
I think, the bass player for Gwar.
Long story short, Nesmith persuades his fictional crew to join him as he
battles genuine evil in outer space.  Of course, they're clueless, since
they have no real knowledge of space travel or interplanetary war.  But
that's what makes the film funny.  Screenwriters Robert Gordon (Addicted
to Love) and David Howard don't let one space cliché go unused, and
director Dean Parisot shows some promise after last year's abysmal mess,
Home Fries.  Allen does a super Shatner, and the others do a great job
of acting jealous of his fame.  Since the cast shares jokes and
one-liners, the film seems to be more balanced than you would expect
from a silly space comedy.
1:49 - PG for some action violence, mild language and some adult
situations

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Daryl Mitchell, Tony
Shalhoub, Sam Rockwell, and Enrico Colantoni        
"Galaxy Quest" is a funny and clever spoof on "Star Trek" and its many spin-
offs. After seeing numerous television programs and movies imitating William
Shatner's bizarre speech patterns, this is the only film that overtly satirizes
the whole crew, the ship, the aliens, the trekkies and the gadgets of the
infamous 1960's television show. Don't be mistaken, there are plenty of Shatner
jokes in "Galaxy Quest" but the film is more than just a simple mockery; it is
as much a derision of "Star Trek" as it is a celebration of the show's
longevity. My mom, a serious trekkie who also saw the film, found it more
amusing then I did mainly because the film holds countless inside jokes
designed specifically for die hard fans. The film is still enjoyable to those
who do not appreciate "Star Trek" not only because it contains several
intelligent jokes that everyone should understand, but also because it has a
great deal of exciting action and adventure elements. 
The acting in the film is very light and an enjoyable alternative to the
heavily dramatic performances from the likes of Matt Damon's Tom Ripley or
Denzel Washington's Rubin "Hurricane" Carter. The actors are having fun playing
their parts and because of their mirthful attitudes, the audience has the same
amount of fun watching them. Playing actors who star in "Galaxy Quest" a
popular sci-fi show of the past, the cast is full of stereotypes immediately
identifiable with those on "Star Trek." Tim Allen is perfect as the pretentious
Shatner captain who always receives credit for a job well done. Allen is
basically doing a live action Buzz Lightyear, which is fine because he is so
good at it. Sigourney Weaver plays your traditional scantily dressed crew
member whose only real purpose on the show is to look beautiful and to attract
male viewers. Weaver makes her character work, although it would have been nice
to see her break out of the constant sexism she faces at all times. The biggest
surprise from the cast was Alan Rickman's hilarious performance as a Spock-like
character who is tired of saying the same "Live Long and Prosper"- like one
liner. Rickman shows that these actors are forever doomed to their characters
on "Galaxy Quest," they can never have another role again without the
comparison of "Galaxy Quest" by their audience. The rest of the cast is
enjoyable, including Sam Rockwell as the paranoid unnamed actor who dies on the
show before the opening commercials. Although Rockwell tended to overact at
times, like he did in "The Green Mile," he certainly has his moments especially
towards the end. 
"Galaxy Quest" does an excellent job grabbing the viewer's attention with a
memorable opening scene set at a sci-fi convention. The movie not only
perfectly satirizes "Star Trek" episodes and characters, but it also portrays
fanatics with perfect accuracy. Once the actors actually go into space to fight
real life combat against real evil bad guys, the momentum dies down a bit,
especially when compared to its opening twenty minutes. However, the film
remains constantly enjoyable and humorous. "Galaxy Quest" is a short and
refreshing break from the myriad of three hour movies releasing for Oscar
consideration. This is a must see for Trekkies.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The cast rivalries of "Star Trek" actors, and the conventions of
"Star Trek" as well as "Star Trek" conventions, all get a fairly loving
shellacking in an enjoyable comedy that asks if the cast of "Star Trek"
had to fight real aliens, how well would they do.
     Back in the early 1970s there was a science fiction TV show that
would be immortal to its fans, "Galaxy Quest."  Even today the die-hard
fans want more.  Let's get this part out of the way so we can proceed.
Tim Allen plays Jason Nesmith who on the show played Comdr. Peter
Quincy Taggart.  Alan Rickman plays Alexander Dane who played Dr.
Lazarus of Tev'Meck.  Sigourney Weaver plays Gwen DeMarco who played
Lt. Tawny Madison.  Tony Shalhoub, who does not look the slightest bit
Chinese, plays Fred Kwan who played Tech Sergeant Chen.  And Daryl
Mitchell plays Tommy Webber who played Lt. Laredo.  With each but
possibly Laredo, the writers were clearly thinking of a corresponding
member of the "Star Trek" cast.
     In spite of the fact that Galaxy Quest has been off the air for
many years the cast continues to be a hot item at science fiction media
conventions.  Just about everyone in the cast is tired of being type-
cast, but they have to contend with the fame and popularity they got
from the TV show.  Most tired is Alexander Dane who at one time played
Richard III to raving audiences but now is reduced to repeating the
tire TV show catch-phrases over and over, ad nauseum.  And all are a
little tire of how Jason Nesmith, who played their leader, basks in all
the glory at the conventions and treats the other cast members like
decoration.  He behaves like a rude, ego-centric jerk.  When four teens
in alien costumes ask Nesmith to see their space ship and fight an
alien for them he plays along with the gag.  Then he finds out that
they in truth are aliens, their spaceship is authentic, and their foes
are all too real.  Soon the whole crew is pulled involuntarily into the
adventure.  For once they have no script, no director, no lines, and
they are in real danger.
     As a story about the actors we have come to know so well from
"Star Trek," this film is passable but cliched.  By depending on each
other they build firm relationships of mutual respect.  Outward Bound
probably has hundreds of stories just as moving.  As a space opera
adventure this film is fairly lame.  That is not the point, of course,
but it might have been a better movie with a little more thought about
the adventure.  In general the audience is a step or two ahead of the
characters.  The greatest value of the film is the lampooning of the
"Star Trek" iconography.  And in doing that it is considerably more
adept than anything Mel Brooks has done for a good long time.
     Nobody requires great dramatic scenes in a film like this.  Tim
Allen's acting was more than sufficient and his timing adequate.  He
might have issued one little "To infinity and beyond," if that would
not have been mixing metaphors.  Sigourney Weaver did not have a lot to
do besides wear a tight suit well, which she still can do surprisingly
luster, half-speed performance from character actor Tony Shalhoub.  He
is one of the actors I tend to watch for, but not for the sort of
effort he seemed to give this role.  He looked like he just felt out of
place.
     The ideal length for this material would have been as a ten-minute
skit.  It is impressive that director Dean Parisot kept the chuckles
coming as long as he did.  This is a one-viewing film, but pleasant
enough.  I give it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Bob Bloom

 Galaxy Quest (1999) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Tim Allen, Sigourney
Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Sam Rockwell and Daryl Mitchell.
 Imagine that the cast of the original "Star Trek" series were recruited by
a group of aliens who thought what they saw on TV was the real thing to
help them battle an evil alien menace.
 How do you think William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy, James Doohan and the rest
would react?
 Well, that is the one-joke premise of "Galaxy Quest," a movie that is
funnier than its flimsy concept.
 The humor of "Galaxy Quest" is not so much in the situations, but in the
recognition.
 The story by David Howard, who co-authored the screenplay with Robert
Gordon, relies on our familiarity not so much with "Star Trek" but with a
culture that blurs the line between reality and fiction as well as the
concept of cultdom and fanaticism.
 The funniest scenes in "Galaxy Quest" are not those in space, but the ones
on Earth in which the "crew" of the NSEA Protector attend an annual
convention and are besieged by fans who ask questions about minutiae
concerning that old TV series that the bored and humiliated actors don't
know or even care about.
 The cast is headed by Tim Allen as Jason Nesmith, alias Commander Peter
Quincy Taggart, who is abducted by the childlike Thermians from the Klatu
Nebula to help them defeat the evil Sarris.
 Allen does not do a Shatner impersonation, but he exudes the right amount
of ego and hambone to remind you of the flamboyant "Star Trek" actor.
 Nesmith then recruits his co-stars to help out. His crew is played by
Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Daryl Mitchell and Sam
Rockwell.
 Shalhoub and Rockwell walk away with the film. Shalhoub is Fred Kwan,
alias Tech. Sgt. Chen, a laid-back kind of guy who goes along with the
flow. For the most part he remains cool and unflustered by the
extraordinary circumstances in which he his thrown.
 Rockwell, seen recently as the psychotic killer Billy the Kid in "The
Green Mile", plays Guy, who appeared in one episode of the "Galaxy Quest"
TV show and was killed off in the first five minutes.
 He fears that real life will imitate art during this mission and that he
will be the one to die in battle with the Sarris. After all, he reasons,
his character didn't even have a last name.
 The entire cast seems to have fun with their roles. Rickman as the
resident alien continually complains about how he used to be a serious
actor. And, shades of "Star Trek," he always carps about Allen's
Nesmith/Taggart stealing his best lines and earning all the glory.
 "Galaxy Quest" is an enjoyable movie. The special effects are so-so, but
this is more of a character-driven science fiction comedy than one relying
on lasers and explosions to entertain.
 "Star Trek" fans will recognize some of the veiled references and
situations, but you needn't be a Trekker (or even a Trekkie) to have fun
with "Galaxy Quest."
 It may be a bit too violent for the very young moviegoers, but older
children and parents may have a good time together watching some
make-believe heroes transform themselves into the real McCoys.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Michael Dequina
_Galaxy_Quest_ (PG) *** (out of ****)
Is there an easier target in all of contemporary pop culture than
_Star_Trek_?  The hambone acting, the cheesy sets, the ridiculously
convoluted scientific jargon, and--the pičce de résistance--the
stereotypically geeky, obsessive fan following--what is there not to poke
good-natured fun at?  So the makers of the thinly-veiled _Trek_ spoof
_Galaxy_Quest_ have it fairly easy; the set-up is all there, and all that's
needed is the follow-through.  Happily, unlike a number of recent cinematic
send-ups, _Galaxy_ doesn't drop the ball.
A big help is that writers David Howard and Robert Gordon have come up with
a clever story on which to hang the _Trek_ gags.  The film takes its title
from a _Trek_-like sci-fi TV series whose cult following is stronger than
ever well over a decade after cancellation.  And, like the original _Trek_
cast, the only work the _Quest_ crew seems to get these days are appearances
at conventions.  But the role of their lives comes when a group of space
aliens called Thermians, having seen all of the _Quest_ episodes and
believing them to be actual spacefaring adventurers, enlists the crew's aid
in combating an evil monster.
This framework gives director Dean Parisot ample room to stage some
effects-heavy action sequences.  The younger members in the audience will
especially enjoy these sequences, such as some elaborate space chases and an
encounter with a rock monster.  This is not to say that adults won't find
enjoyment from these sections as well, for all the effects work in the film
is first-rate.
What will appeal to the older set even more, however, is the smart, edgy
humor, which begins with the characters.  Tim Allen plays the pompous
Shatner-esque Jason Nesmith, who played Peter Quincy Taggart, the commander
of _Quest_'s central spaceship, the Protector.  Gwen DeMarco (Sigourney
Weaver) is eager to shake the stigma of being the show's token cheesecake,
Lt. Tawny Madison, the "communications expert" whose only job was to repeat
everything the computer said.  Alexander Dane's (Alan Rickman) years of
cutting his acting teeth on the Shakespearean stage went down the drain once
he was typecast in his _Quest_ role, half-alien Dr. Lazarus.  The other crew
members for this mission are Tech Sgt. Chen, played by the non-Asian Fred
Kwan (Tony Shalhoub); Laredo, the Protector's 10-year-old navigator, played
by the now-adult Tommy Webber (Daryl Mitchell); and Guy Fleegman (Sam
Rockwell), a rabid _Quest_ fan who once had a bit part in the show as a
nondescript officer.
As anyone with a passing familiarity with _Star_Trek_--and thus the world of
_Galaxy_Quest_--would know, the nondescript officer is always the first to
go, and thus Guy fears for his life while in space.  Clichés such as these
are gleefully satirized throughout the film, such as touchstone mantras (not
surprisingly, Alexander is sick of reciting his) and defused bombs whose
countdown timers stop only at the one-second mark.  Not escaping the aim of
the writers are those fanatical fans who know every last technical detail of
the show.  Of course, the real test of the jokes is if they are playable to
a _Trek_-oblivious viewer, and no one needs to have any familiarity in that
area to get them (though it certainly helps).
As is the case with all family-friendly comedies, _Galaxy_Quest_ isn't above
some straightfaced would-be tear-wringing moments, but the forays into cheap
sentimentality are easily forgiven when everyone involved in the production
is of such high spirit and intelligence.  When I say that _Galaxy_Quest_ is
a fun time for the entire family, I mean it; it's clean, has all the
requisite eye candy and slapstick for the younger set, and--most
distinguishing of all--an uncommon level of sophistication for the adults.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Mark O'Hara
It's a nice tradition that we have on Christmas Day - seeing a movie.  Last 
year it was the hilarious Irish comedy "Waking Ned Devine."  This year we 
took the kids to "Galay Quest."
If you have heard good reviews about this film, believe them.  Even after 
all of the television series and movies about spaceships and militaristic 
goings-on  in space - and especially after the parodies poking fun at this 
fare - "Galaxy Quest" handles itself with originality.
The film takes off on the groundbreaker of them all, "Star Trek."  The cast 
of the fictional television show "Galaxy Quest" now appears at conventions, 
where ardent fans - many of whom dress up to emulate their favorite 
characters - gather and exchange ideas and spend money.  Tim Allen plays the 
commander of the ship - the William Shatner character.  Allen's name is 
Jason Nesmith, the actor who portrays Commander Peter Quincy Taggart.  
Eighteen years after the show's cancellation, Nesmith is still making money 
from these conventions.  It seems like the entire cast also enjoy the 
benefits of their former stardom.  These players include Sigourney Weaver as 
actress Gwen DeMarco, who plays Lt. Tawny Madison.  Her main role in the 
show, back in the 'seventies and early 'eighties, was to show cleavage, 
along with repeating the computer's pronouncements.  A pretty face.  Tony 
Shalhoub plays Tommy Webber/Tech. Sgt. Chen.  Daryll Mitchell plays Lt. 
Laredo (he was a child when the show was on the air).  Alan Rickman plays 
Alexander Dane/Dr. Lazarus, and Sam Rockwell plays Crewman #6 in Episode 81. 
  Well, all of these second-rate actors seem to be eking out a living from 
their long-past celebrity.  And they are all fairly disillusioned and bored.
That is, until Nesmith convinces them to go on what they think is a paying 
gig.  They believe these fans dressed as aliens are taking them to another 
guest appearance, so they might hawk autographs and field questions from 
obsessive fans;  quickly they discover their sponsors are actual aliens, a 
race that has studied the television show, believing it to be "historical 
documents."  Ergo, the aliens have constructed virtually everything they 
witnessed onscreen.  With innocent and gleeful faces, they display weapons, 
ships and extensive technology that they have somehow engineered and 
constructed after merely glancing it through the "Quest" transmissions.  
Besides serving as a basic premise for the story, these technologies make 
for a hilarious conceit, as the crew members seem baffled by the science 
they are faced with using.  The aliens, of course, are convinced the actors 
constitute the veteran crew of "Protector," whose motto is the commander's 
catch line, "Never give up; never surrender."  So the washed-up actors 
masquerade as their actual characters, unwilling to disillusion the 
extremely respectful aliens, who have appointed them to helm the embodiment 
of the fictional ship.  It turns out, by the way, that the actors simply 
have to duplicate their actions from the show in order to run the gadgets on 
the real ship.
The bad guys here are a race of green reptilian aggressors, who are 
determined to destroy the good aliens - the Thermians.  The main conflict 
traces the fight with these quasi-reptiles, who are after the Thermian-made 
device called the Omega 13.  Exactly what this device is, no one knows, as 
it was mentioned only vaguely on the T.V. show.  Naturally, Jason Nesmith 
appears completely outclassed by the alien general.  What is fascinating is 
watching all of the riffs and comic twists that result from the numerous 
clichés and conventions set up through the plot.  Will the actors stop their 
petty bickering long enough actually to help their admirers from deep space? 
  Will the rabid fans back on Earth get satisfaction from seeing the next 
appearance of the crew?
The film is well directed by Dean Parisot.  Its pace is quick, lending a 
loose comic tone;  the timing also enhances the many allusions and 
self-reflexive gimmicks.  Parisot capitalizes on countless references to 
ploys frequently spotted in "Star Trek" and similar shows, and even in the 
"Alien" movies, in which Sigourney Weaver starred as Ripley.
Tim Allen's nonchalance is important to his success in the type of double 
role he plays here.  Though he is a hopeless, alcoholic jerk, Nesmith is 
somehow ennobled during his stint as the real Commander Taggart, and earns 
the credit bestowed upon him.  It's Allen's best performance since "The 
Santa Clause."
Weaver does a nice job playing the aging actress portraying Tawny Madison.  
In one scene she snaps at another crew member that, even though her job is 
merely to repeat the computer's words, she will do it with relish.  Weaver 
is best in the subtle comedy resulting from her asides to other crew 
members.
Tony Shalhoub proves his reliability again, showing off his knack for 
excelling at widely different roles.  His Tech Sgt. Chen is an air-headed 
version of Scotty or Geordi or O'Brien or Torres.  The change he undergoes 
is one of the funnier transitions in the film.  One small criticism I have 
is that Daryll Mitchell's character - Tommy Webber as Lt. Laredo - goes 
through a similar change in character.  Here a parody succumbs to the very 
conventions it tries to undermine, though even this concession is done with 
charm.
Finally, Alan Rickman does perhaps the most solid job of support. He's a 
classically trained Shakespearean actor, and very unhappy at having to don 
the same bony headpiece to further his failed career.  His Dr. Lazarus is a 
stone-faced boor whose feud with Nesmith never fails to elicit chuckles.
A favorite of my daughter's was Mathesar, the leader of the good aliens, 
played by Enrico Colantoni.  His humming, hesitating voice is itself a piece 
of hilarious shtick, and the relationship he builds with the incompetent 
Earthlings is endearing.
Stan Winston's shop did the special effects for the film, and produced 
smooth work.  The bad  alien costumes are particularly compelling, and one 
scene at the end is remarkable in its realism.  Watch for Allen in a 
knock-down funny fight against an alien pig lizard.
After watching the documentary "Trekkies" this past summer, we found this 
film to be a light variation.  Both films are a delight, and both convey a 
sense of ambivalence toward sci-fi fans (much like the tone of a Shatner 
sketch on "Saturday Night Live" in which Capt. Kirk lashes out at 
overzealous "Trek" fans, only to apologize later).  Ultimately, "Quest" 
recognizes how the heart of a show like this is the fans and their loyalty.
For any fans of space movies, especially those set in the microcosms of 
ships, "Galaxy Quest" (though it has a lame title) is a must-see.  Its 
constant references to the genre it parodies make it an intelligent and 
crisply written work.  And it's just plain fun to sit back and laugh at this 
light but smart humor.  See it before going back to school!


Author
Jamey Hughton
There are far too many instances in modern cinema when a film with
wonderful promise fails to reach its full potential. It is frustrating
to see an opportunity for something fresh and exciting slip to the
elementary level of recycled formula. I was hoping `Galaxy Quest', a
film with a clever premise that begs for proper handling, wouldn't
suffer a similar fate. Luckily, this thoroughly entertaining `Star Trek'
homage has a few creative brain cells to spare, not to mention some
amusing perks for those craving sci-fi adventure.
`Star Trek' fans, be warned: you are being mocked in `Galaxy Quest'.
Actually, screenwriters Robert Gordon and David Howard show their basis
for inspiration in a rather loving manner, suggesting that this goofy
comedy is more of a playful homage to the Trekkies' universe. `Galaxy
Quest' is an ancient SF television program that has generated a rabid
cult following ever since its cancellation 18 years ago. But the
fan-gathering conventions still live on. Jason Nesmith (Tim Allen), who
played the Shatner-esque Commander Peter Quincy Taggart on the program,
relishes every minute of the glorified fame that has continued through
the years. Gwen DeMarco (Sigourney Weaver), Fred Kwan (Tony Shalhoub)
and Tommy Webber (Daryl Mitchell) - who all played crew members of the
spaceship `Protector' - are also grateful for the fortune `Galaxy Quest'
has bequeathed upon them, despite the fact that Nesmith is always given
the spotlight. But Alexander Dane (Alan Rickman), who played the
extraterrestrial medical man Dr. Lazarus, regrets the fact he will
always be labeled as his `Galaxy Quest' character - refusing to ever
repeat the line Dr. Lazarus is famous for.
And now, insert the clever premise: at the latest convention, Nesmith is
confronted by a group of pale individuals whom he assumes are dressed
like aliens. They insist that he join them on an important mission to
stop an evil intergalactic tyrant. Nesmith, assuming this is just
another acting gig, persuades the remainder of the cast to tag along.
And then comes the real shocker: the aliens at the convention, called
Thermians, are actual aliens. They believe that the space-age adventures
of the `Protector' are detailed historical documents from planet Earth.
In a nutshell: the Thermians assume they are enlisting the help of
Commander Taggart and his experienced crew when, in fact, they are
nothing but an aging group of out-of-work actors. Clever, isn't it?
Luckily, Gordon and Howard are able to maintain the humorous vibe
generated by the initial premise. With its sci-fi humor, `Galaxy Quest'
isn't always on the mark, but the light-hearted daintiness of the
screenplay helps establish a feeling of enjoyable giddiness. It's the
sort of giddiness you get when something promising is going your way,
and the outcome is inevitable. The villain of the story, named Sarris,
is a menacing creature who appears to be the result of a crossbreeding
experiment between a Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle and a lobster. In a
hilarious scene, Nesmith (still unaware that the situation is not an
acting gig) talks casually to Sarris over an video intercept and (after
noting that the makeup effects look fantastic) orders the Thermians to
bomb the enemies' ship with `a lot of missiles'. In both its
affectionate nod to the `Star Trek' universe and its structural basis
for inventive humor, `Galaxy Quest' is funny and clever.
The light-hearted adventure behind the story proves to be enjoyable as
well, with Stan Winston creature effects and F/X work that is thoroughly
impressive for a comedy. Among the peculiar alien life-forms the crew
encounters are a swarm of vicious demon children and a towering
formation of stones that would best be described as a rock monster'.
The Thermians, on the other hand, are a race of peaceful beings caught
reluctantly in an intergalactic war. Their leader, the friendly Mathesar
(played with effective tenderness by Enrico Calantoni), is shocked by
the notion of anyone who offers misleading facts about themselves -
which could make it difficult for Nesmith and co. to reveal their actual
identities.
The human characters are well-played by the energetic cast. Former Tool
Man Allen hasn't had much luck with his previous ventures to the big
screen (I think `Jungle 2 Jungle' was the major cause of  suicide in
1997), but here his performance is perfect. Weaver looks terrific in a
blonde wig, Rickman shows a sophisticated knack for comic timing, and
Shalhoub has fun as the only crew member who doesn't seem awestruck by
the extraordinary predicament they are in. Even Sam Rockwell (who played
a garish inmate in `The Green Mile') reveals his lighter side, and even
steals a few scenes playing a guy who made a brief appearance before
being killed off in episode 81. For a comedy, `Galaxy Quest' is
unusually well-written and exceptionally well-conceived. Anyone
searching the galaxy for light-hearted fun - a `Star Trek' fan or not -
would be hard-pressed to do better.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by UIP on April 28, 2000; certificate PG; 102 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Dean Patriot; produced by Mark Johnson, Charles Newirth.
Written by Robert Gordon, David Howard.
Photographed by Jerry Zielinski; edited by Don Zimmerman.
Sometimes when I feel lazy I sit on the couch and flip through satellite TV 
channels. One of my discoveries is a station called Granada Plus. In the 
daytime it airs a lot of the programmes that I saw when growing up  -- cop 
shows like "Starsky and Hutch" and "Cagney and Lacey", as well as 
science-fiction fare like "The Time Tunnel", "The Incredible Hulk", "The Six 
Million Dollar Man", "Lost in Space" and "Star Trek".
I thought of such delicious pieces of pop culture while watching "Galaxy 
Quest". The movie opens at a comic book convention, where the celebrity 
guests were performers in a very "Star Trek"-like TV show called, well, 
"Galaxy Quest". It was cancelled in the early 1980s, and now its actors are 
out of work, spending their time showing up at gigs to sign autographs. Main 
star Jason Nesmith (Tim Allen), who bears a suspicious resemblance to William 
Shatner, is a goofball who drinks too much and takes his fans' affections for 
granted. Blonde bombshell Gwen DeMarco (Sigourney Weaver) still laments that 
interviewers only ever asked her about her breasts. Classically-trained 
thespian Alexander Dane (Alan Rickman) is known for his moaning: "I played 
Hamlet once!" he wails into the mirror.
These guys, along with three other former cast members, run into some 
strange-looking fans who talk in robotic voices and make jittery movements. 
They make a plea of Jason, which he interprets as a request for another star 
appearance. As it turns out, though, this band of admirers are actually 
aliens who have seen and admired "Galaxy Quest" from outer space, believing 
it to be a set of historical documents. They want help from their heroes to 
battle their intergalactic foes.
After a period of initial shock, Jason excitedly leaps into this opportunity. 
"It'll be fun! Just like being on the show!" His colleagues have to take him 
aside to remind him that they are not real space warriors, just actors. Not a 
problem, it turns out: The friendly aliens' spaceships have been modelled on 
those of "Galaxy Quest", and the controls have been based on the actors' 
movements.
What I love about this movie is that it replicates the feel, structure and 
rhythm of sci-fi adventures with a rejuvenating sense of lightheartedness. In 
other words, it's as exciting as those old shows were from a kid's point of 
view, and very funny, too. The film has a lot of self-referential dialogue, 
but that's nothing new any more -- its general sense of whimsy is much more 
enjoyable. And it has a moment I've been waiting to see for years: Instead of 
the spaceship pulling out of its tiny loading bay with perfect ease, the 
pilot ends up bumping it against the wall, and having to say "Oops! Sorry!"
The cast is terrific. Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman and Tony 
Shalhoub are familiar faces, and look so out of their depth in the middle of 
all this silliness that of course we find ourselves smirking. They also 
create characters we care about. Just because they're in a comedy doesn't 
mean they turn into robots who spit out one-liners -- they interact like real 
people, making everything they have to deal with just that little bit more 
absurd, and entertaining.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Ross Anthony
Tim Allen, Commander Taggart of the hit TV series "Galaxy Quest," is
mistaken for a real space captain by Aliens desperately in need of his
courage. After reviewing the "historical documents" (broadcasts of the TV
show), the aliens beam him aboard bowing happily to his reluctant
leadership. Allen and crew of actors eventually decide to honor the
misguided recruitment and help defend these goofy aliens from the nasty
Sarris, a "A Bug's Life" grasshopper-like space bad guy.
It's pretty darn funny; though, you might be expecting a spoof, and while
elements of Star Trek mockery appear, they don't dominate. In fact, they
seem almost out of place in this stand alone space-comedy.
Since this alien race virtually worships "Galaxy Quest" they've built their
ship to the specs of the show's NSEA Protector. Therefore, pilot Daryl
Mitchell, though only an actor, should be able to step on board and do what
he does on the show 26 half hours a year. In a hilarious scene where he
first takes control, de-docking the ship from the star port, Mitchell drifts
a bit from center, the huge vessel screeches, scrapes and sparks against the
side walls.
Then there's crew member six, ever afraid of being killed off since his
character isn't important enough to have a last name. He mans the radar
after Sarris fires on the ship, "Uh Commander, there's this red thingee
moving closer to the green thingee - I think we're the green thingee."
Tony Shalhoub, the ship engineer, is awesome, "I'll get someone to spray
that with WD-40." Alan Rickman packs a whole lot more acting power than his
Spock-mock character demands; but that in itself is rather funny. Still,
it's the overly-friendly aliens themselves that keep this film rolling,
translating their shrieks into perpetually pleasant English for their idols,
"We've prepared some of your more Esoteric dishes, we hope you enjoy these
Monte Christo Sandwiches."
Focusing on fun, the direction of this film steers like a spaceship through
a mine field, dodging in and out from strong to "Dr. Who cheesy" and back.
Of course, the film doesn't take itself seriously, but should it have, while
maintaining its current level of fun, this could have been one of the finer
films of the year. Still, a good solid fun time. You'll laugh a lot.
Galaxy Quest. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Starring Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Sam
Rockwell, Daryl Mitchell, Enrico Colantoni, Robin Sachs.
Directed by Dean Parisot.
Written by David Howard and Robert Gordon.
Produced by Mark Johnson and Charles Newirth at DreamWorks.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
James Sanford
        Label "Galaxy Quest" as another one of those bright ideas that
was never given sufficient time to develop before going in front of the
cameras. It wants very badly to lampoon the enduring popularity of "Star
Trek" -- as well as the sorry post-"Trek" careers of most of the series'
stars -- and every so often it hits its mark. More frequently than not,
however, the screenplay by David Howard and Robert Gordon opts for safe
and bland over satiric, leaving us with a movie that's watchable but
frustrating since it's so rife with unexplored potential.
 For example, if you managed to sign Sigourney Weaver in your
sci-fi comedy, wouldn't you work in a couple of "Alien" gags just to
capitalize on the casting? If Howard and Gordon ever came up with any,
they didn't make it to the final cut, leaving Weaver with little to do
except run around in a cleavage-revealing spacesuit. Her comic skills,
shown to prime advantage in "Ghostbusters" and "Working Girl," get
considerably less exposure than her chest. Nor does "Quest" get much
mileage out of Tim Allen. Wake up, guys: You've got the voice of Buzz
Lightyear on board and you can't even whip up a little "Toy Story"
parody?
 Almost immediately, "Quest" introduces us to hard-drinking
Jason (Allen), long-in-the-tooth sex kitten Gwen (Weaver, underneath a
mountain of blonde hair) and pompous Alex (Alan Rickman), the
less-than-gifted actors who starred in the cult TV series "Galaxy Quest"
almost 20 years ago. The show has long since been canceled, but the fans
remain devoted nevertheless, showing up to see their favorite characters
signing autographs at conventions or hosting ribbon-cutting ceremonies
at appliance stores.
 Among the throngs of devotees is a quartet of otherworldly
types called Thermians, who've caught the "Galaxy Quest" repeats on
their home planet in the Klatu Nebula and believe its stars truly are
heroic starship troopers. These are the same beings, it turns out, who
weep over the bad luck of the castaways on "Gilligan's Island."
The actors, all of whom are anxious for any sort of work, agree
to go along with the Thermians, not realizing the four are actual aliens
who want help battling the tyrant Sarris (Robin Sachs), a slimy cross
between a lobster and a gila monster. Genuine combat turns out to be
more than the "Quest" crew bargained for, and they're ill-equipped to
deal with flying a spaceship. "There's a red thingy moving toward the
green thingy, and I think we're the green thingy," one of them notes,
struck by the sight of a radar screen that actually works.
 Aside from Rickman's droll reading of Alex, the movie's chief
appeal is its sometimes clever special effects, including a gooey form
of teleportation and a pile of rocks that turns into an almost
unstoppable monster. The makeup effects by Stan Winston are also superb,
particularly the work on Sarris and his cohorts.
 The comic edge the story needs rarely surfaces, though.
Occasionally there's a sharp line here or there, but all too often the
humor simply doesn't connect and the screenplay isn't imaginative enough
to sustain interest. To paraphrase a famous ad line, in space, no one
can hear you yawn. James Sanford

Author
John Beachem
How would William Shatner and company react if forced into a real "Star Trek"
situation? This is the basic premise behind "Galaxy Quest", the new comic film
from Dreamworks. Such a premise could easily be turned into a single joke film
but "Galaxy Quest" manages to keep the laughs coming. With a great supporting
cast and a hilarious performance from Tim Allen, the film only drops the ball
once or twice when it tries to be a little too serious.
Jason Nesmith (Tim Allen) is an aging object of affection for thousands of
"trekkies"; only here, they're most likely known as Questers. Galaxy Quest may
have ended 20 years prior, but this hasn't stopped the original cast from
spending all their time appearing at conventions and supporting local business
openings. However, while Jason may be enjoying his lifestyle his fellow cast
members are more than a little tired of it. Alex (a hysterical Alan Rickman)
wants to be a dramatic actor again, and Gwen (Sigourney Weaver) is tired of all
her interviews consisting of questions about her breasts. So when an alien
race, led by the benevolent but incredibly naive Malthesar (Enrico Colantoni),
asks the cast for help (believing them to be real astronauts), they can hardly
refuse the chance for something different.
One thing a comedy like this needs is an actor who can act in a completely
serious fashion even when ridiculous events are unfolding around them. Rickman
and Weaver are both present for this precise reason. The two of them are
wonderful at looking dour and disapproving while their cohorts go through comic
antics. The more comical roles belong to Allen and the perfectly cast Tony
Shalhoub (Men in Black, The Siege) as the supposed chief engineer. Shalhoub's
character, Fred Kwan, is hilarious because he seems to have no problem
whatsoever with the situation he is in. While the other cast members appear
shocked by all they see, Kwan just gives a grin and says something like "That
was a hell of a ride".
A lesser film might have mocked trekkies and the show itself, and this isn't a
hard thing to forgive as both are so easy to mock. However, "Galaxy Quest" is
so completely good natured about the entire thing that one gets the impression
that they're laughing along with trekkies rather than at them. This is possibly
due to the fact that the cast is obviously having such a good time making this
film. One can almost imagine them doubled over with laughter between scenes
where they speak with the aliens who have grins constantly plastered on their
faces.
There are certainly a few flaws here, but they don't detract too much from the
experience. For one, Sam Rockwell's (Green Mile) character is rather
irritating. Known as Guy, or crewman number six, he spends the entire film
whining about how he's going to be killed because he was an extra on the show.
Things also get a bit too sentimental at parts in a film which should have
maintained its goofiness the whole way through. "Galaxy Quest" is basically
harmless fluff at it's worst, hilarious at it's best. It's a lot of fun, but it
won't stay with you for too long once it's over. The films runs 102 minutes,
which is just about perfect. I'd recommend catching a matinee if you can, but
do try and see this in theatres as some of the effects are really quite good. I
give "Galaxy Quest" a well earned four stars.
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   How would you explain what an actor is to an adult who
never heard a radio program, watched TV, or went to the
theater or a movie?  When you think about it, this would be
pretty difficult.  After all, how do you make clear to someone
of such a vastly different culture that people who pretend to
be other people are entertaining?   This is precisely the
dilemma faced by a crew of aging performers in "Galaxy
Quest," a consistently funny, good-natured, uncynical parody
of a popular TV program that was cancelled after running for
three years despite its hard core of dedicated fans.  "Star
Trek," a series that lasted from 1979 to 1982 and featured
(by today's standards) pretty chintzy special effects, was to
some extent a cult offering, its devotees actually memorizing
details of the various episodes so well that they could quote
chapter and verse what happened in which episode in much
the way that a Jehovah's Witness could do a similar task with
the Bible.  By spoofing the series in a congenial way, Dan
Parisot gets solid performances from a fine crew of actors,
making good use of a script written by David Howard and
Robert Gordon.  Though the movie's targeted audience is
probably bright, albeit geeky, teens and college students,
"Galaxy Quest" could conceivably be appreciated by the little
ones, its PG rating based on a little cartoon violence and a
couple of briefly sensual scenes.
   In propelling his lampoon of the TV series, director Parisot
plays up the theme of laid-off actors.  Just what do well-
known performers become when their employment is
canceled?  (In the case of "Cheers," for example, we know
that one such entertainer went on to far greater fame with his
own TV program, another has taken on some powerful roles
in movies, while some of the others are doing not as well as
before, gaining little parts in off-Broadway plays and in movie
cartoon voiceovers.)  The guys in "Galaxy Quest" (read: "Star
Trek") are pleased as punch to hear the wild applause at the
special conventions which the devotees attend to see some
old screenings and collect autographs, but none of them are
doing anything worth writing home about.  One of the
intriguing aspects of "Galaxy Quest" is that each actor plays
another actor who plays yet another actor, providing a field
day for semioticians.
  In the principal role of Jason Nesmith, Tim Allen doubles as
Commander Peter Quincy Taggart--the role taken by William
Shatner in the TV series--while Alan Rickman performs in the
guise of Alexander Dane, a lizard-like alien who befriended
the crew in that very same TV program.  With Sigourney
Weaver as Gwen DeMarco (here performing as Tawny
Madison), Tony Shalhoub as Fred Kwan and doubling as
Sergeant Chen, and Daryl Mitchell as Tommy Webber aka
Laredo, these characters are about to see life's imitating art. 
   One day a crew of friendly, stiff octopi from another planet-
-who have been able to take on the physical appearance of
human beings and have their language immediately
translated--approach the cynical and drunken Nesmith,
begging him to save their planet from evil green giants led by
Sarris (Robin Sachs).  Having watched episodes of Star Trek,
the leader, Mathesar (Enrico Colantoni), and his "people"
have no idea that the programs are unreal, meant simply for
entertainment.  Considering the episodes to be actual
historical documents, they convince Nesmith and his
colleagues to beam up to their planet and use their ingenuity
to rid them of unfriendly aliens.  What follows is one
circumstance after another as the fearful actors--who have
become discouraged and misanthropic from being out of work
for so long--gradually become proud fighters for their alien
friends, thereby gaining a whole new outlook on life. 
Essentially, Dan Parisot does a good job proving the hipness
of existential philosophy: you are what you commit yourself to
doing. and if your commitment gives you pride and genuine
purpose, what more can you ask of life?
   The comic tone is evoked by the rigid walks and bizarre
talk of the friendly aliens, by the confused and often edgy
banter of the human crew determined to save their pals, and
by the dialogue which parodies the corny lines of the TV
show.  "I won't say that stupid line one more time," insists
Dane as he prepares to meet his devotees--who expect him
to repeat the watchwords of the show.  The actors
increasingly and unconsciously follow the dialogue they
maintained from their 1979-1982 scripts as they meet the
challenges.  "Galaxy Quest" is altogether a holiday surprise,
a movie with a trailer that could make a potential moviegoer
think twice before paying his money and taking his chances,
but one which comes through as an congenial, occasionally
laugh-out-loud satire that has a broad affection for its target.
Rated PG.  Running Time: 104 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Gary Jones
What happens to the stars of a long-cancelled TV show that still has a
devoted following? In the case of the tacky science fiction adventure
show Galaxy Quest, the actors, now forever associated with their roles,
scratch out a living attending fan conventions and opening stores. Tim
Allen plays the actor who portrayed the starship commander (the show's
James T. Kirk). Now a boozy has-been, he glories in the adulation he -
or at least his character - receives from the show's obsessive fans.
Sigourney Weaver was the show's sexpot who now bemoans the fact that her
sole responsibilities were repeating whatever the ship's computer said
and displaying the maximum amount of cleavage. Alan Rickman plays a
British acting knight who was the show's equivalent of Mr. Spock and is
mortified at the depths to which his career has now sunk. But things are
about to pick up for the clapped-out Galaxy Quest cast. Transmissions of
the TV show have been picked up by the Thermians, a meek alien race
persecuted by nasty giant locust-like baddies. As if the Thermians
weren't in enough trouble already, they interpret the show as
documentary material and believe that the Galaxy Quest crew are genuine
intergalactic heroes. Oops. Obviously a race lacking in locust-stomping
ability, the Thermians come to Earth to seek the crew's help.
Spoof science fiction films can be truly awful. (Spaceballs. I rest my
case.) In fact, good science fiction comedy films are as rare as
Klingons with good table manners. The sci-fi porn epic Flesh Gordon was
pretty funny, but that hardly counts. Although Galaxy Quest could easily
have been a one-joke film that relied too heavily on its premise, the
idea is developed and sustained in David Howard and Robert Gordon's
script, which skilfully exploits the conventions of TV science fiction
series to comic effect. And the fans, who could so easily have been made
the butt of jokes and dismissed as spotty propellerheads with poorly-
developed social skills, are actually treated with considerable warmth
and good-humour.
The lead performances are fine, but the standouts are in two of the
lesser roles. Sam Rockwell plays "Crewman number 6", who was only ever a
minor character in the show and, knowing the facts of TV show life,
fears he's expendable and likely to perish at any moment. The most
memorable turn, though, comes from Enrico Colantoni, who in his
performance as the grinning Thermian with his bizarre sing-song version
of spoken English, manages to be both endearing and very funny. Dean
Parisot's direction is competent in a low-key way, though the production
never threatens to rise too far above the cheesiness of the material is
seeks to affectionately poke fun at, which is perhaps just as well.
Although Galaxy Quest is never going to win bucketloads of awards, it
succeeds in its modest ambition to be a lightweight but extremely
enjoyable science fiction comedy.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Daryl Mitchell, Tony Shalhoub,
Enrico Colantoni. Directed by Dean Parisot. Rated PG.
You'd think it would be easy to spoof Star Trek, but try spoofing it
without cruelly mocking it. That's a bit more difficult. The farfetched
sci-fi series is, after all, enormously popular, what with its gigantic
fan base and ongoing installments both on television and in movies. If
you're not nice to it, you lose. Galaxy Quest is to Star Trek what Mel
Brooks's Spaceballs was to Star Wars, an affectionate, riotously funny
parody that freely takes jabs at various elements of its subject but
never seems mean-spirited or malintentioned.
"The show's been cancelled, but the journey is far from over." That is
the current tagline of "Galaxy Quest," a Star Trek - type show that's
no longer produced but lives on forever in reruns. It also lives on in
conventions, gatherings of the show's obsessive fans who never fail to
dress in "Galaxy Quest" costumes and ask absurdly logical questions
about its delirious technobabble.
Jason Nesmith (Tim Allen) played "Commander Peter Quincy Taggart" on
the show and is the only one of the cast who still gets excited about
the gigs they have to do. The attitudes of the rest -- Tommy Webber
(Daryl Mitchell, Gwen DeMarco (Sigourney Weaver), Fred Kwan (Tony
Shalhoub) and Alexander Dane (Alan Rickman) -- range from indifference
to utter contempt. Dane, who played a Spock-like alien, is especially
disgusted, considering himself above his demeaning job and stubbornly
refusing to recite his character's cheesy trademark line "By Grabthar's
Hammer, you shall be avenged" (or something like that) for his die-hard
fans.
One day, Nesmith is greeted by an especially fanatical group of "Galaxy
Quest" followers. They are actually aliens from a planet known as
Thermia. They have mistaken the "Galaxy Quest" episodes for historical
documentation of actual heroic space travel. The next day, the
Thermians whisk Nesmith away to a spaceship to help them defeat the
evil Sarris (named, in one of the film's only mean-spirited gags, after
Village Voice film critic Andrew Sarris). Nesmith thinks it is only an
elaborate gig, and sort of blows it off, but when he is transported --
or I should say shot -- back to Earth in a rather celestial manner, he
believes.
Next thing the cast knows, they are being dragged by Nesmith to this
spaceship. Of course, they all think he is out of his mind and once he
does convince them that there really is a spaceship, what they want to
do is get out of there as fast as the transporters will take them. But
after some persuading, they stay on to fight the icky Sarris and find a
way to provide a peaceful existance for the flailing Thermians.
I was quite surprised how well this comedy, which came off as utterly
brainless from its marketing campaign, worked. Taking shots at both the
obvious and not-so-obvious elements of Star Trek and its fandom, Galaxy
Quest never goes for cheap laughs, opting instead for broad but smart
parody. Nothing is safe -- not the cliches, not the fans, not the
absurd taglines -- but on the other hand, everything is safe, since
Galaxy Quest treats its subject with utter respect and sometimes even
subtle admiration.
The highlight of the movie is Tony Shalhoub's Fred a.k.a. Tech Sergeant
Chen who, when in character, is the complete opposite of Scotty from
the original Star Trek. While Scotty, who was the technician for the
Enterprise would constantly yell "I NEED MORE POWER DOWN HERE
CAPTAIN!", Chen's cry for help is more to the tune of "The core, like,
won't take it or something." It's a hoot, but it doesn't stop there:
Weaver, whose character has the menial task of repeating everything the
computer says and Rickman, with his relentlessly holier-than-thou
attitude aren't far behind.
Galaxy Quest succeeds as a funny parody of Star Trek and while it's not
a masterpiece -- it tends to falter in its more serious moments -- it
is immensely entertaining fluff and excellent counterprogramming to all
the sober Oscar contenders being released this holiday season. By
Grabthar's hammer, this is a hell of a movie.

Author
Scott Renshaw
GALAXY QUEST
(DreamWorks)
Starring:  Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Daryl
Mitchell, Sam Rockwell, Enrico Colantoni, Robin Sachs.
Screenplay:  David Howard and Robert Gordon.
Producer:  Mark Johnson.
Director:  Dean Parisot.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, violence)
Running Time:  102 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I can say without reservation that GALAXY QUEST boasts the best
mainstream "high concept" of 1999. I started chuckling the moment I heard
about a film in which the cast members of a beloved television
science-fiction series -- a decade removed from any career except 
appearing at conventions and ribbon-cuttings -- were mistaken by an alien
race for real fighters for interplanetary justice. I saw it as a wonderful
opportunity both to needle the phenomenon of "Star Trek" fandom and to
embrace its fundamental optimism. If handled properly, it could be a fun
and funny adventure into the way our popular entertainments can help
define our world, and define the performers who create them.
     I was so engaged by the concept of GALAXY QUEST that, even as the
film was unfolding, I kept cutting it slack. I nodded in amusement at the
personalities of the show's "crew": Jason Nesmith (Tim Allen), bombastic
prima donna who portrayed Capt. Peter Quincy Taggart; Gwen DeMarco
(Sigourney Weaver), still bitter that her Lt. Tawny Madison was viewed as
a pair of breasts that repeated what the computer said; Alexander Dane
(Alan Rickman), a Shakespearean-trained thespian who dreads every time he
has to don the prosthetic headpiece of the alien Dr. Lazarus. I smiled at
the idea of a troubled alien race, the Thermians, so captivated by the
positive message of the "historical documents" they intercept that they
model their entire society after the world of "Galaxy Quest." And I was
ready to ride along as the has-beens get a chance to be real heroes,
helping the Thermians battle for freedom from the domination of the
would-be dictator Sarris (Robin Sachs).
     GALAXY QUEST turned out to be a pleasant diversion. It's also
something of a missed opportunity (or, more specifically, a series of
missed opportunities). Screenwriters David Howard and Robert Gordon drop
in plenty of goodies for those in the "Star Trek" know, yet they're often
more content to rely on insider gags than to flesh those gags out. The
characters are broadly sketched, with their various crises and need for
respect providing a vague foundation for the story (Tony Shalhoub is far
more vividly goofy as the "chief engineer" too oblivious to realize his
situation is genuinely dangerous). A story with the potential to focus on
how the actors come to terms with their legacy ultimately becomes just
another comic adventure, less about the people than about the premise.
     Oh, but that premise does make for some entertaining viewing. Most of
the best jokes showcase an internal logic that should be the envy of every
science-fiction film: Because the Thermians designed the real ship after
the television ship, it follows all of the show's rules. Wonderful moments
find Nesmith and DeMarco navigating a series of crushing obstacles that
serve no logical purpose ("I'm going to kill whoever wrote that
episode," quips DeMarco), and the ship's former child star helmsman (Daryl
Mitchell) scraping the "Protector" out of space dock. Though the humor
does tend towards the "insider," at least it's insider in a generally
clever way, finding amusement even in the captain's tendency to lose his
shirt during every fight scene.
     GALAXY QUEST is far too lively and good-natured to deserve harsh
criticism; in a season full of prestige-hungry Oscar wannabes, it's nice
to see a film interested primarily in putting a smile on your face. The
smiles, unfortunately, don't turn into full-fledged laughs often enough. 
The situations beg to have the absurdity level turned up just a notch; the
characters beg to be given more personality. "High concept" is most often
used by critics as a derogatory term, but that didn't have to be the case
for GALAXY QUEST. Though it may send you out of the theater chuckling, it
could have taken its concept even higher.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
GALAXY QUEST:  By Grabthar's Hammer, What A Movie!
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
The only thing wrong with Galaxy Quest is that it was released at the
wrong time of year.  If any film ever deserved a mid-February release,
it is this one.  For Star Trek fans (and you know who you are) Galaxy
Quest is a great big gushy Valentine of a movie.  Galaxy Quest is to
Star Trek, in a way, what Shakespeare in Love is to Shakesperian
theater:  a warm-hearted, affectionally satirical love-letter.  Both
movies poke fun at their respective conventions while staying true to
that which is important.
(Not to say that The Trouble With Tribbles is equivalent to Romeo and
Juliet, mind you, just trying to make a point here.)
Galaxy Quest works because it hits the three points of the Star Trek
strategic triad:  the actors, the fans, and the show itself.  The movie
begins with the crew of the USS Enterprise... ahem, that's the NSES
Protector, sorry, preparing for their appearance at a convention.  Like
the Star Trek actors, the Galaxy Quest actors are trapped in Stereotype
Hell:  they can neither get another acting job nor escape their fans.
Some, such as Sigourney Weaver's communicatons officer, are touched but
bemused by the attention.  Others, like Alan Rickman's obligatory alien
life form, are sick to the point of despair at the prospect of another
sci-fi convention.
And then, way at the far end of the spectrum, there's Tim Allen, playing
actor Jason Nesmeth, playing Galaxy Quest star Commander Peter Quincy
Taggart.  Nesmeth is an egomaniac of staggering, galactic, even (if I
may say so) Shatnerian proportions.  (One even expects him to take off
his toupee at one point, such is the resemblance.)  Naturally, he loves
the attention from the fans, though he doesn't understand it.
Naturally, he hogs the limelight, to the annoyance of his co-stars.  And
naturally, he's the one who gets kidnapped by a race of space aliens who
believe that the "Galaxy Quest" show is real and that he can command
their replica starship to victory over the space lizards.
This starts the show, which we'll get to in a moment.  First, a word
about the fans, who are at once the core audience for Galaxy Quest and
the target for much of its satire. Accordingly, Galaxy Quest has adopted
an attitude that's mocking, yet respectful.  Most of the comedy directed
towards the fans is in the form of sight gags -- middle aged people
walking around with alien makeup on their heads.  It's possible that
some fans might take offense to this portrayal -- the woman in Arkansas
who showed up to the Clinton trial decked out in Starfleet regalia comes
to mind -- but the mockery in Galaxy Quest is nothing if not
affectionate.  (There is a Shatneresque explosion directed towards one
fan by Allen, but Allen gets his comeuppance, you just watch.)
The real true fans of the show are the Thermians, the alien race that
constructed the "Protector 2".  They have been monitoring Earth
television and are so convinced that what they see on TV is real that
they have remodeled their entire civilization around "Galaxy Quest"
reruns.  (Star Trek fans will recognize this as one of the show's
typical conceits -- the original show featured alien civilizations based
on the Roman Empire, Chicago gangsters, and even the Nazis.)  When the
Thermians show up at the hung-over Allen's house, he takes one look at
their pasty faces and Moe Howard haircuts and assumes they are fans.
(One wonders if this is an everyday occurence for Shatner.)
Allen's Buzz Lightyear character in Toy Story 2 asks himself at one
point, "Was I ever that deluded?"  Allen is plenty deluded here, at
first, thinking that the Thermian vessel is just an elaborate set.
(This is one of more existential moments in Galaxy Quest:  you have an
actor on an elaborate set playing the part of an actor who thinks he's
on an elaborate set.)  Allen, however, eventually realizes the truth and
hustles back to collect his "crew" for another joyride.
This is where the real show begins, and it's a splendid, hysterical
farce.  Galaxy Quest manages, one way or another, to spoof every single
Star Trek episode there ever was.  Every one of the show's conventions
is gleefully, impishly trashed to the point that I won't even bother to
catalog the goofiness.  The Galaxy Quest screenwriters are operating
with an immense amount of knowledge about the Star Trek universe -- so
much so that one wonders if they haven't been to a few sci-fi
conventions themselves -- but they manage to distill it all down into a
series of funny skits that should delight even those who have never seen
the show.
Like Star Trek itself, Galaxy Quest is an ensemble piece.  And like the
Star Trek actors themselves, the Galaxy Quest actors have experienced
stereotyping themselves.  The underappreciated Sigourney Weaver is back
in space again, but she's cleverly cast as the anti-Ripley, a blonde
bombshell with little to do and less to wear.  After his boffo
performance in Die Hard, Alan Rickman was typecast into sardonic villain
roles, and he appears here as a sardonic good guy.  (Unfortunately, he
doesn't steal the show hear to the degree and extent that he stole the
show in Dogma.)  Tony Shalhoub and Daryl "Chill" Mitchell are both
refugees from Must-See-TV ("Wings" and "The John Larroquette Show",
respectively).  Mitchell isn't given much to do, unfortunately.
Shalhoub isn't given much more, but he makes the most of what he has --
including one line that still makes me giggle every time I think about
it.
Tim Allen, of course, has the most stereotyping of anyone on the crew.
It's hard to say if Allen is a victim of stereotyping or if he just
doesn't have much range as an actor.  (Probably both.)  Nevertheless,
this is the perfect part for him, and he plays it with brio.  Allen is
allowed here to be cocky, overconfident, and incompetent but still be
charming and funny.
If Galaxy Quest is too early to be a Valentine, it is the funniest New
Year's card you'll get.  Star Trek fans will howl with laughter, kids
will giggle uncontrollably, and everyone else will, at least, be
entertained.  Go see it.
Movie Reviews:
http://www.hsbr.org/buzz/reviewer/reviews/bdreviews.html
http://www.epinions.com/user-curtisedmonds
"JANUARY 1, 1000:  This was the historic day that humanity celebrated
the dawn of our current millennium. The occasion was marked by feasting,
dancing, and the public beheading of a whiny, tedious group of people
who would not stop insisting that, technically, the new millennium did not
begin until January 1, 1001."  -- Dave Barry

Author
Nick Lyons
  At first I was intrigued by the strange cast and odd creatures on the Galaxy
Quest trailer, but that was before I saw the film. Now my view has completely
changed. It's time to embrace for impact, because this is a very bumpy ride.
  The story begins with the cast of Galaxy Quest including: Jason Nesmith (Tim
Allen), Alexander Dane (Alan Rickman), Gwen Demarco (Sigourney Weaver) signing
autographs at a convention. They meet fans who dress up in costumes, fans who
worship the ground they walk on, and a group of aliens called Thermians who
believe that they are the ultimate saviors against the dreaded alien colony
lead by Sarris (Robin Sachs). Of course they are unaware of this until they
actually begin performing their duties, and meet the ugly aliens themselves.
Thus begins the long adventure to help save the Thermians.
  The movie plays like a really bad Star Trek episode, in fact it's worse. I
don't even think Trekkies will appreciate this weak spoof, because quite
frankly it's just not funny. All the jokes are basically collected observations
from the series. One such continuous joke involves a simple crew member who
believes he will die in space, because no extra on the TV show ever lives, as
proven in the Star Trek series. Creative jokes like this may seem like a clever
idea, but not when they are used to death. A person can only take so much. We
do not need to be tortured, especially when you have to pay for it.  
  It's pretty bad when even Tim Allen is pitiful. It's not like I expected an
Oscar worthy performance form him, but a few laughs would have been helpful.
Speaking of acting, 2 fine talents were wasted as well. Sigourney Weaver was
here to show cleavage, well at least it worked. It's pretty bad when the only
entertaining value of the film is cleavage. It just shows you how disgraceful
the film really is. Alan Rickman however was not so lucky. After his last hit
(Dogma) he embarrasses himself by doing this sloppy mess. It's just a shame to
see talented actors and actresses throw their ability away. 
  When the film couldn't get any worse, thankfully some nice special effects
pop up. Like many big blockbusters (Armageddon, The Haunting to name a few)
they rely heavily on effects to help boost the film's box office results. 9 out
of 10 times it works, but unfortunately we have to shell out hard earned money
and suffer through this junk. When will it stop? I am getting tired of being
suckered into seeing such trash. It may look fine and dandy, but we need to at
least have a story. Is that too much to ask? Obviously it is. 
  When Galaxy Quest finally ends, it literally crash lands. Aside from the
impressive looking creatures from Industrial Light And Magic, it's an
embarrassment to the cast, and it's embarrassing to the science fiction genre.
It's not the least bit fun, nor was it entertaining. The only place where this
movie belongs is to infinity and beyond.

Author
Christian Pyle

Galaxy Quest
Reviewed by Christian Pyle
Directed by Dean Parisot  
Written by Robert Gordon and David Howard
Starring Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Daryl
Mitchell, and Enrico Colantoni
Official Site: galaxyquest.com
Better Sites:  http://greatsci-fimovies.hypermart.net/galaxy_quest/
http://www.moviefanonline.com/previews/1999/galaxy_quest/galaxy_quest.htm
Grade:  B+
Somewhere out in space, the peaceful Thermians are being slaughtered by a
belligerent race of lizard people.  Their last hope:  Commander Peter Quincy
Taggart and the valiant crew of the Starship Protector, heroes the Thermians
know from Earth's broadcasts.  The Thermians travel to Earth to find Taggart. 
One little problem:  the Thermians don't know that the "historical documents"
they've received from Earth are actually episodes of "Galaxy Quest," a TV
series that was cancelled in 1982.
Eighteen years after the show ended, the cast of "Galaxy Quest" is still in
costume, making personal appearances at conventions, spouting catch phrases,
and lamenting the lack of other opportunities.  William Sha - uh, I mean -
Jason Nesmith (Tim Allen), who played Commander Taggart, is an egotistical boob
who doesn't realize how much his former co-stars hate him.  Alexander Dane
(Alan Rickman) played alien scientist Dr. Lazarus and now whines constantly
that he was once a Shakespearean actor.  Gwen DeMarco (Sigourney Weaver) wore a
tight, low-cut as Lt. Tawny Madison, whose only job aboard the Protector was to
repeat what the computer said.  Laidback Fred Kwan (Tony Shalhoub) was the
ship's engineer, and Tommy Webber (Daryl Mitchell of TV's "Veronica's Closet")
was the child star at the steering wheel.
A contingent of Thermians led by Mathesar (Enrico Colantoni of TV's "Just Shoot
Me") scoop up a hung-over Jason and whisk him up to a working replica of the
Protector to negotiate with General Sarris, leader of the lizard people. 
Accustomed to personal appearances with fans who earnestly believe the show is
real, Jason only realizes that he's actually been on a spaceship after the
Thermians beam him back to Earth.  By that afternoon, the Thermians are back
for more help, and this time Jason brings the rest of the cast, including Guy
Fleegman (Sam Rockwell), who played the ill-fated "Crewman # 6" in one episode
of "Quest."  To survive, the cast will have to learn how to play their parts
for real.
"Galaxy Quest" does for science fiction television what "Austin Powers" did for
60's spy movies. The script is smart and on target.  It's filled with funny
moments that satirize ridiculous plots, motifs, and characters common to the
genre as well as attacking the obsessive fan culture that still surrounds shows
decades after they're cancelled.  My favorite sequence has Jason and Gwen
racing through the bowels of the ship to stop it from blowing up when they're
confronted by a passageway lined with huge metal choppers sliding menacingly up
and down.  Gwen:  "It doesn't serve any purpose!  Why would they even build
anything like that!"  Jason:  "It was on the show!"  Gwen:  "The show was badly
written!" 
The cast is filled with comic talent, so much so that I was a little bummed
that Tony Shalhoub and Daryl Mitchell didn't get more screen time.  Sigourney
Weaver stood out (in more ways than one - considering the way her costume was
cut to accentuate her breasts), reminding me of the comic flair she showed
years ago in "Ghostbusters" and "Working Girl."
On the down side, the losers-rise-to-the-occasion-and-become-heroes plot is
predictable and thin.  More bothersome to me, however, were the serious moments
as Thermians are tortured by the evil lizard guys.  These scenes weighed down
the comedy that followed.  The theme of genocide (the small band of Thermians
aboard the ship are the last of their race) seems inappropriately heavy for
this movie.
Bottom Line:  There's more laughter than lulls, and I had a great time.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Sean Townsend
STARRING:  Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Sam
Rockwell, Enrico Colantoni, Daryl Mitchell
DIRECTOR:  Dean Parisot
WRITTEN BY:  David Howard, Robert Gordon
Ever wonder if extraterrestrial beings are listening in on all the radio
and TV signals that have been beamed into the heavens since 1895 or so?
The idea has been touched on in films like Joe Dante's Explorers (in
which aliens learn English from watching old reruns of The Honeymooners)
and Robert Zemeckis' Contact (with its astonishing opening shot wherein
the broadcasts get older as the camera zooms out into deep space.)  In
the unexpectedly good Galaxy Quest, a group of ingenuous aliens look to
a bunch of actors from a canceled sci-fi series as saviors of their race
after watching the "historical documents" they've intercepted.  It's a
great premise, ripe with possibility, and director Parisot delivers with
a highly entertaining film that pokes gentle fun at Star Trek and the
obsessive fans who keep it alive at conventions and on the Internet.
The film begins at one of these conventions, portrayed with dead-on
accuracy in its characterization of various fan types, from the hardcore
know-it-alls to the snide tourists.  We're also introduced to the actors
as they bicker backstage.  Gwen DeMarco (Weaver, displaying an
eyebrow-raising buxom blondeness), whose character did little on the
show but look good and repeat the computer's phrases, is resigned to her
fate but appreciative of the fans' loyalty.  Tommy Webber ('Chill'
Mitchell, who also appeared in Parisot's 1998 Home Fries) is the
grown-up version of the show's boy genius pilot; Fred Kwan (TV actor
Shalhoub, in a hilarious low key) was the show's Tech Sergeant.  The two
most famous and popular actors are Alexander Dane (Rickman, in a very
Trek-like fin-headed prosthesis), a frustrated Brit who constantly
bemoans his missed career as a serious actor, and Jason Nesmith (Allen),
who played Commander Peter Quincy Taggart and still enjoys the little
slice of adulation he receives.
After overhearing some scathingly hurtful truth about himself at the
convention, Nesmith blows off some diehard fans, walks out on the
autograph session, and goes on a solitary bender at home.  He is
awakened by an odd group of strangely dressed people knocking on his
balcony door.  Assuming they are fans who want to hire him for a
personal appearance, he goes with them in a limo but falls asleep during
the ride.  When he comes to, he finds out that the 'fans' are in fact
aliens who have recruited him, their greatest hero, to negotiate with a
tyrannical enemy who has all but eradicated their people.  Convincing
the other actors to join him, he takes command of a faithful, functional
replica of the show's starship (based, of course, on the aliens' careful
observance of the show's episodes) and, with the help of several of the
guileless aliens, the crew tries to vanquish the bad guys.
There are a great many opportunities for humor here, and Parisot takes
full advantage, yet never condescends to Trekkies.  In fact, the movie
is at times a celebration of the strange symbiosis between the beloved
series and its dedicated admirers.  The scenes that directly parody Star
Trek conventions are often laugh-out-loud funny, and footage of the old
Galaxy Quest show, complete with foam rubber rocks and badly
choreographed fisticuffs, is nothing short of inspired.  Rickman, as
usual, is a pleasure to watch as he venomously spits out the show's
silly catchphrases.  Recently popular actor Sam Rockwell (The Green
Mile, A Midsummer Night's Dream) is also amusing as a bit player in the
series who weasels his way into the adventure but is sure he's going to
die because "that's how it always goes."  The best casting job, however,
is undoubtedly Tim Allen, who turns his trademark oblivious swagger into
the perfect Shatner impression.  Even the obligatory special effects are
welcome, adding a real excitement to the space battle scenes.
Were it not such a critical cliché, I might be tempted to describe
Galaxy Quest as "fun for the whole family."  Judging from the delighted
giggles and shrieks of the tykes at the screening I attended, that
description would certainly fit (although there are some sequences that
might scare the younger ones a bit.)  In any case, it is a fun movie,
and even if you've never been to a Star Trek convention, you'll be
pleasantly surprised.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "GALAXY QUEST" (DreamWorks)
Glory, Hallelujah - this is the Christmas action comedy you've
been waiting for! Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony
Shalhoub, and Daryl Mitchell play five actors who - 20 years ago -
starred on a popular television series that was canceled. For four
seasons, from 1979 to 1982, they played the crew of the NSEA Protector
- now they earn their living appearing in costume at sci-fi
conventions and chain-store openings. However, far in deep, outer
space, the Thermians, a race of aliens from the Klatu Nebula, have
intercepted Earth's TV transmissions and, having no knowledge of
fiction or drama, they have mistaken the sci-fi shows for valid
historical documents. So when they're faced with a deadly adversary,
the ruthless Roth'h'ar Sarris of Fatu-Krey (Robin Sachs), the
Thermians abduct the characters - Comdr. Peter Quincy Taggert,
Lt. Tawny Madison, Dr. Lazarus, et al - not realizing they're really
out-of-work actors. With no script, no director, and no clue about
real space travel, the actors must turn in the performances of their
lives to become the intergalactic heroes they've convinced everyone
they are, as they encounter cannibalistic Blue Demon children, a giant
Rock Monster, and a Pig Lizard. As the vain, self-serving commander,
Tim Allen has never been better. Sigourney Weaver is a sexy, shameless
babe, and Alan Rickman is outrageous as a Shakespearean-trained Brit
who has been reduced to playing a half-human/half reptile. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Galaxy Quest is an exuberant,
enormously funny 8. Aptly directed by Dean Parisot from a cleverly
ironic screenplay by David Howard and Robert Gordon, it's a bright,
shiny holiday package of pure enjoyment, destined to blast into one of
the big hits of the season.
