Title
Review for Trigger Effect, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kyle MacLachlan, Elisabeth Shue, Dermot Mulroney, 
      Richard T. Jones, Bill Smitrovich, Michael Rooker
Director: David Koepp
Producer: Michael Grillo
Screenplay: David Koepp
Cinematography: Newton Thomas Sigel
Music: James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     THE TRIGGER EFFECT, a psychological thriller from David Koepp, 
opens with an image of coyotes tearing at a dead carcass.  An electrical 
power plant stands in the background.  It's a visceral, unsettling 
scene, and you'd have to be more than a little dense not to figure out 
that it's a metaphor.  Like THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU, THE TRIGGER EFFECT 
wants to explore the fine line that divides the civilized man from the 
inner beast.  And, while this film admittedly has its share of problems, 
it at least does a better job of achieving that goal than this year's 
adaptation of the H.G. Wells story.
     To the extent that THE TRIGGER EFFECT is intended as a tense, 
somewhat nerve-wracking thriller, it's adequate, and certainly better 
than the formula-driven likes of THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE.  First-
time director Koepp, working with tips from Steven Spielberg and Brian 
De Palma (Koepp co-wrote JURASSIC PARK and MISSION IMPOSSIBLE, and was 
able to call on the directors of those films for advice), handles the 
material smoothly.  The flaws lie mainly in the script that writer Koepp 
gave himself to direct.
     The premise is as intriguing as it is timely:  what if some freak 
occurrence caused a massive, perhaps country-wide, blackout?  There's no 
electricity, telephones don't work, and no TV or radio stations are on 
the air.  No one understands what's happening.  The authorities don't 
have answers.  With communications out, law and order is breaking down.  
Looters are being shot on sight.  People are buying guns to protect 
their property and families.  The specter of anarchy looms.
     Our guides through this nightmarish vision are a typical yuppie 
couple, Matt (Kyle MacLachlan) and Annie (Elisabeth Shue).  The cracks 
in their apparently-happy marriage begin showing not long after the 
lights go out, and the arrival of their longtime friend, Joe (Dermot 
Mulroney), hastens the erosion.  Joe and Matt are supposed to be good 
buddies, but a current of hostility bubbles just beneath the surface of 
their relationship, and the volatility of their situation threatens to 
bring it violently into the open.  The danger is further increased when 
Matt pawns his watch to buy a 12 gauge shotgun.  Meanwhile, a mysterious 
black man named Raymond (Richard T. Jones) keeps having odd, chance 
encounters with Matt.
     THE TRIGGER EFFECT's most serious problem is that, while the 
tension is palpable, the setup generating it feels contrived.  Once we 
settle into Koepp's plot, the story is solid enough to keep our 
interest, but it's difficult to plow through all the artificiality that 
burdens the film's early scenes.  The characters seem like creations of 
the moment; we have no sense of their history, and we certainly don't 
like them -- they're irritating and self-centered.  It's as if they 
didn't exist before first appearing on screen.  Too much of the 
interpersonal strife between Matt, Annie, and Joe seems manufactured, 
and, since it doesn't feel natural, it damages our ability to accept the 
trio as human beings rather than products of a writer's imagination.
     Ultimately, THE TRIGGER EFFECT is about how people react when 
driven by desperation, and, to a lesser extent, how humanity has come to 
rely too heavily on technology.  There are times when these themes are 
hammered home a little too zealously, but, unlike in THE ISLAND OF DR. 
MOREAU, we're spared a sermon.  Heavy-handed symbolism and obvious 
metaphors are as far as THE TRIGGER EFFECT goes.
     Once Koepp has brought us through the awkward setup, things improve 
dramatically.  There are a number of compelling sequences, including one 
where the three main characters, fleeing their California home for 
Colorado, encounter an armed stranger (HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL 
KILLER's Michael Rooker) alongside a deserted highway.  The series of 
events started by this meeting force Matt to question his own capacity 
for violence, and whether there can be any such thing as mutual trust in 
a chaotic world.
     At times, Koepp's vision is almost post-apocalyptic, which gives 
the film a dark, paranoid edge.  The reason for the blackout is never 
explained, which is probably a good thing -- the film works better with 
the cause left as a matter of conjecture.  Had Koepp fashioned better-
rounded characters with a more believable central conflict, THE TRIGGER 
EFFECT could have been an outstanding example of high-energy, thought-
provoking cinema.  However, as it is, it's more intriguing than 
memorable, and worthwhile only to those with the patience to sit through 
a dissatisfying and uneven first half-hour.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE TRIGGER EFFECT is a Hitchcockian thriller about everyone being
reduced to their most basic instincts, the bottom of their Maslow
triangle.  Through a massive and long lasting power outage people
revert to animal behavior.  Much like TESTAMENT, this show presents a
convincing tale of what could happen.  After the ten state power outage
this month, the show is especially topical.
     THE TRIGGER EFFECT is written and directed by first time director
David Koepps.  His writing credits include MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, THE
PAPER, and JURRASIC PARK so he is skilled with the art of tension.
Here the show is a massive web of tension.
     The film opens with two coyotes eating their kill.  This is
followed by a fast cut to a nearby power plant.  Soon we cut again to a
scene at a movie theater.  As in SLACKER, the scene moves from person A
to B and then B to C, etc.  Each time there is an incident that almost
happens and doesn't, but the writer serves notice that you can expect
these characters back again.
     Matthew (Kyle MacLachlan) and Annie (Elisabeth Shue) return home
after getting cussed at in the theater.  They are pretty shook up, but
soon forget it as Annie starts turning Matthew on.  Just when they are
about to make love, baby Sarah cries out loudly.  This great little
scene ends as they immediately start a game of rock-paper-scissors to
see who will have to go sit with Sarah.
     Soon the power goes out.  It is a hot and sticky night so this is
a terrible inconvenience.  They look outside, and the whole city is
dark.
     When they wake up, the power is still off, and their baby's ear
infection has gotten much worse.  She must get medicine, but the phones
and the radio are out too.
     Now the terror starts.  The pharmacist will not give Matthew the
medicine because the doctor is unreachable.  Put yourself in Matthew's
shoes.  Imagine the horror of your baby getting sicker and sicker, and
yet the drugs she needs are so close you can almost reach over the
counter and touch them.  It is at this point that the bounds of normal
civilized behavior begin to get violated.  This ordinary man getting
caught in circumstances beyond his control is a classic Hitchcock
theme.
     Their high school friend Joe (Dermot Mulroney) comes by, and they
begin to discuss what caused the outage and how bad the situation is.
He gives out a lot of theories, many funny including "The Martians have
landed.  They want our women."  Eventually he gets serious and says he
has heard reports of massive looting and killing.   He and Matthew go
and buy a gun to protect themselves.
     After a while this all becomes a lark, and they drive into town to
see what is happening.  I have friends that drove into Manhattan from
New Jersey during a massive power outage in the late 70s so I know this
is a normal reaction for some.
     The second night finds the three of them together in the
candlelight of Matthew and Annie's house.  After too much wine, a
romantic triangle begins to develop.  The script is excellent
throughout.  A great mixture of tremendous tension followed by a little
humor.  After one fight, Anne tells them, "Boys, if you can't play
nice, we're aren't going to have any more of these little sleepovers."
At one point Matthew asks a cop, "Is it bad out there?"  But the cop
just replies, "Out where?"
     The rest of the show has them coping with an ever more hostile
environment.  People revert back more and more to their animal
ancestry.  Every few minutes, the tension ratchets up some more.
     This is not a show where suspension of disbelief is necessary.  As
presented, it is all plausible and is made even more so by some
excellent pieces of acting by the cast.  Shue (from LEAVING LAS VEGAS
and ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING) and MacLachlan give fascinating
performances.  People in ordinary circumstances sometimes are forced to
do things they would never consider otherwise.
     Small parts of the script really hit home.  None of the plastic
works.  Only cash is accepted.  In the power outage this month we were
in a toy store trying to buy something with my credit card when it was
made inoperable without power.  Moreover, without power no one could
figure out the price nor would I have had exact change anyway.
     The low and pervasive music by James Newton Howard serves as a
Chinese water torture on the audience.  Editor Jill Savitt knows just
when to cut so that the audience stays on the edge of their seats.
Many small scenes are excellent.  One of my favorites is a big
confrontation with guns that gets resolved amicably in a surprising
way.
     THE TRIGGER EFFECT runs 2:02.  It is rated R.  There is no sex or
nudity, and generally the language is pretty mild.  There is some
violence, but nothing gory.  I think the film would be fine for most
kids ten and up, regardless of the rating.  I recommend this thriller
to you and award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Bryant Frazer
It's a terrific idea for a movie. Kyle MacLachlan and Elisabeth Shue 
play Matt and Annie, an unremarkable couple raising a baby and 
renovating their house in the Los Angeles suburbs. Matt's a 
fundamentally decent fellow, albeit stuffy and insecure. Annie is that 
wonderful combination of motherly grace and sexual brushfire, but she's 
unappreciated by her husband, who's consumed mostly with himself. Into 
this stable but stale relationship trips Joe (Dermot Mulroney), Matt and 
Annie's down-to-earth friend with a distinctly rough-hewn charisma. 
Naturally, Joe represents everything that's missing from Annie's life, 
and winds up shooting some trouble for the couple and getting under 
Matt's skin.
I'm sorry -- that's not a terrific idea for a movie, although it's not a 
bad one. The catalyst here, the brilliant conceit that makes events 
move, is that old dramatic standby, the blackout. The lights of L.A. are 
knocked out, not by your run-of-the-mill power failure, but by some 
relative cataclysm that takes out power in a handful of western states 
and simultaneously scrambles the telephone lines. The neighborhood 
becomes something reminiscent of a war zone, with human kindness in as 
short supply as batteries and gasoline. Neighbors stalk through their 
front yards carrying flashlights and guns, and the community gathers for 
strategy meetings.
Writer and first-time director David Koepp (his writing credits include 
Jurassic Park and Mission: Impossible) relies on mood, atmosphere, and 
thoughtful plotting to make the sense of widespread fear and desperation 
palpable, since he's got no budget to speak of. (Independence Day, which 
was throbbing loudly in the theater next door, is nowhere near as good 
at setting a mood of panic.) From the very first scenes, you can tell 
that Koepp's not in complete control of his material; the performances 
seem forced, as though the characters are marking time waiting for 
something to happen.
But before long, it starts working. The narrative is made up of steadily 
mouting challenges to Matt's competence as a lover, a parent, and a 
husband (that is, his very manhood) -- when his child falls ill, he must 
figure out how to get his hands on amoxicillin; strapped for cash, he 
has to negotiate to buy a gun. Those challenges are personified in Joe, 
who visits to help hold down the fort, and gets to know Annie a little 
too well for Matt's taste. Annie, meanwhile, is a shameless flirt, at 
least with the lights out. Shue's open sensuality is perhaps the best 
thing about the movie; even if her character seems drawn mainly from her 
own award-winning turn in last year's Leaving Las Vegas, she's an 
absolute pleasure. Mulroney isn't quite as natural, but the movie starts 
to pick up speed as soon as he comes on screen. For one thing, his nuts-
and-bolts presence is a welcome relief from MacLachlan's one-note 
performance.
Years after being used to such good effect by David Lynch (in Blue 
Velvet and Twin Peaks), MacLachlan seems to have settled into a new 
groove, playing charmless characters (c.f. last year's execrable 
Showgirls). MacLachlan's Matt is the kind of petulant bonehead who gives 
the suburbs a bad name. The script never quite shows what makes him 
tick, but the way MacLachlan plays the role, he surely thinks he's 
entitled to something -- in this respect, The Trigger Effect echoes 
nothing so much as Falling Down, in which Michael Douglas played The 
White Guy Who Couldn't Take It Anymore. (The Trigger Effect also shares 
some of Falling Down's weird racial subtext, twice pitting the white guy 
versus the ethnic other.) It's a miscalculation that distances the 
audience from Matt's dilemma.
Even so, Koepp is a skillfull craftsman, and The Trigger Effect is a 
surprisingly taut thriller in spite of its flaws -- until it takes a 
horribly wrong turn. At about the two-thirds mark, the trio make a 
decision to hit the road and drive until they reach a family member's 
home in Colorado. Before long, there's a confrontation on the road, and 
events are thrown topsy-turvy as Koepp makes a clumsy grab at deeper 
meaning. (One of the end credits helpfully points out that the story is 
inspired by the old PBS TV series Connections, one episode of which 
looked at the impact of a similar blackout in the Northeast.) In the 
process, the triangle that gives the movie its structure is completely 
dismantled in favor of a sharper focus on Matt. It's unexpected, sure, 
but it's here that the movie loses its bearings, and its laborious 
proceedings become too much to swallow.
The final straw? Well, you'd expect Matt to have learned something from 
his own stupid decisions, but his role in the hysterical, highly 
improbable climax makes you wish somebody would shoot him just to stop 
his shouting. What a comedown. Wish Koepp better luck with his next 
effort.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE TRIGGER EFFECT ** 1/2 . Directed and written by David Koepp. 
Photography, Newton Thomas Sigel. Editing, Jill Savitt. 
Production design, Howard Cummings. Music, James Newton Howard. 
Producer, Michael Grillo. Cast: Kyle MacLachlan (Matt), Elisabeth 
Shue (Annie), Dermot Mulroney (Joe), Richard T. Jones (Raymond), 
Michael Rooker (Gary), Bill Smitrovich (Steph), et al. A Grammercy 
release. 93 min. Rated R (language, violence) 
"The Trigger Effect," screenwriter David Koepp's first feature as a 
director, hooks you strongly at the start. Later, when slowness, 
loose ends and diffusion lessen the power of the hook, there is still 
evidence of tight collaboration between the writer-director, his 
cinematographer (crisp work), editor, production designer and 
others.
Koepp has said that his inspiration was the late 1970s BBC 
documentary series "Connections," written, directed and 
"performed" by that fascinating man, James L. Burke. It is 
abundantly clear that the connection to "Connections" is used with 
dexterity in "The Trigger Effect."  
The opening shot is of coyotes devouring their prey at night. You 
may think this is in the wilderness, but then, in quick succession 
the next shots are of a large power plant, of a busy mall on a Friday 
night, of its multiplex and of the inside of a theater. Connections 
are imaginatively made between animals, technology and humans.
Knowing nothing of the movie, as soon as the second shot appeared 
I thought that the old Latin saying "Homo homini lupus" (Man is a 
wolf to man) was the direction the film would take. It did, with a 
vengeance. The mall sequence is a tour-de-force, a single, 
continuous four-minute Steadicam shot in which strangers bounce 
off each other  in such uncivil ways that within humans not only 
are connections shown but the disconnections too. 
Inside the theater we witness unpleasantness between some black 
and some white customers, as Annie gets insulted while her 
husband Matt remains timorously silent. There's also something 
disconnected between those two, and quietly reinforced by the cold 
look of the parking structure they go to after the show.
We follow them to their upscale home in some suburb of (unnamed) 
Los Angeles. The house, bristling with burglar alarms, is in a state 
of disconnection with itself, because of messy renovations in 
progress. There is tension between husband and wife, the kind of 
gradual alienation that can set in a marriage. It is manifested by 
several subtle yet telling details.
They find their baby girl feverish and in pain with a recurring ear 
infection, for which there is no more medicine left.  A sudden 
blackout affects the whole city, at the very least.. Every activity 
and machine connected to electricity comes to a halt, including 
broadcasts. Matt drives to a store where the lifeless tills make 
only cash acceptable. He has no prescription for the child's drug, 
there's no way to call the doctor. Matt, after an altercation with 
the unpleasant pharmacist, returns home empty-handed. Later 
though, in a decision which cannily combines paternal anxiety and a 
show of newfound machismo, Matt goes back to the store and steals 
the drug in a good, suspenseful sequence.
There's commotion in the chic development, with neighbors 
grumbling, advising, consulting and showing more un-neighborly 
selfishness than mutual help.
Subcontractor Joe, Matt's oldest friend, visits and stays. He adds to 
the tension as, in more subtle ways yet, we see that best buddy or 
not, manual worker Joe is disconnected from the high-earning  
(profession unknown) yuppie Matt. Also because Joe is single, of 
the "marriage is living death" school, with a succession of 
girlfriends and with an eye on Annie.
What is not subtle is the blatant way the film keeps underlining 
Annie's sexuality at every turn. When the threesome sit by the fire,  
the wife, after a drink or two, loses her inhibitions and engages in 
not so oblique sexual talk.
Matt and Joe go out and buy a shotgun which, expectedly, has 
tripled in price. By the next morning, an intruder has been shot dead 
(How the cops were contacted remains a mystery). Annie gets 
closer to Joe. All talk of leaving town. (A sure way to guarantee 
looting). It is at this juncture that the movie begins to lose points 
by becoming too much ado about not enough danger.
It might have been a study in new stresses added those of "normal" 
life. The pharmacy bit , for example, could have been extended to a 
blackout's other problems. But writer-director Koepp cannot shake 
off a penchant for the sensational. Never explaining the source, 
extent or estimated length of the blackout, he treats it like a 
mythical plague that brings out the wolf in humans.
David Koepp has co-authored the quirky "Apartment Zero,"  "Death 
Becomes Her," "Jurassic Park," "Mission: Impossible," "The Paper," 
"Toy Soldiers." His solo scripts are "Bad Influence," '"Carlito's Way,"  
"The Shadow," and " The Trigger Effect." He can be good, but does he 
like "strong" and hyperbolic situations!
Here he continues going over the top on Sunday, the third day of the 
crisis, when thousands of cars take to the road in an eastward 
exodus. The trip, the encounters (some wildly coincidental), the 
fear of the unknown and of strangers, lead to misunderstandings 
and irrational violence, as well as to a too neat, Hollywoodish, 
goodie-goodie rapprochement between individuals and races, while 
heroicizing Matt. All this is too much deja vu and in far too slow a 
tempo.  
Metaphors and symbols, past a certain number, encumber the 
picture.  Like most movie people, Koepp sees life through 
Californian glasses. Those of us who have been through much longer 
blackouts --though, granted, not in a megalopolis -- can testify 
that the resulting inconveniences can also make people helpful and 
kind in this "we're in it together" situation. But then, ugly sells 
more tickets than nice, and, 'tis true, Los Angeles is not angelic. 
What is universally valid for developed countries is our modern 
dependence on technology. But let's not go overboard and whole-hog, 
and read the movie as a denunciation of dehumanization by 
technology. Machines, gadgets and alternating current may spoil us  
or become counter-productive fixations. They can render us 
helpless when they abandon us. But they have also improved 
immeasurably the quality of life, work, health, leisure and have 
added (including Cyberspace) incalculable benefits to our existence. 
It's too late to become Luddites.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     There is nothing that will make a Hollywood marketing executive
salivate like a current news story to which a new film can be linked, and
if you remember the bounce THE CHINA SYNDROME got from the Three Mile
Island accident of 1979, you'll understand why.  When a seven-state power
failure hit the American west on August 10th, the folks at Gramercy must
have done the Mipos Dance of Joy -- five days later, I had press material
for the blackout thriller THE TRIGGER EFFECT mentioning the August 10th
failure.  It's hard to resist that kind of "torn-from-today's-headlines"
marketing, but I hope they don't make THE TRIGGER EFFECT look like a cheap
knock-off by overdoing it, because it is nothing of the kind.  This is a
sharp and surprisingly effective thriller which makes up for a sluggish
middle with an exceptional start and finish.
     It is Friday in an unnamed California city, and a young married
couple named Matt (Kyle MacLachlan) and Annie (Elisabeth Shue) are
enjoying a night at the movies despite some talkative fellow audience
members.  The problems really begin when they get home.  Their infant
daughter has an ear infection, their housing contractors appear to be
committing petty thefts, and to make matters worse, the power goes out.
The first night, it's an inconvenience; the next day, it becomes
dangerous.  Along with the power, phones and radio stations are also out,
causing rumors to run rampant, and stores -- those which remain open --
can only take cash.  Along with their friend Joe (Dermot Mulroney), Matt
and Annie try to wait out the blackout, but find themselves forced to act
as the threads of civilization begin to unravel around them.
     THE TRIGGER EFFECT opens with one of the niftiest single-take scenes
of the year, following a chain of events in a mall which eventually
introduces us to Matt and Annie.  Beginning with a man on the receiving
end of a spilled cup of coffee, rookie director David Koepp (screenwriter
for JURASSIC PARK, MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE and others) shows people acting
shocked at the rudeness of others, then proceeding to treat someone else
just as rudely.  It is a smart and subtle piece of film-making which
underlines the main premise of THE TRIGGER EFFECT:  how fragile a
foundation it is on which civilization is based.  It is amazing how much
more obvious the ineptitude of THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU becomes when
compared to a film which takes a very similar theme -- what separates us
from animals -- and does it so much better.
     It's a great concept for an information age thriller, with both a nod
to and an updating of the classic "Twilight Zone" episode "The Monsters
are Due on Maple Street," but Koepp loses track of his story for a while
to focus on relationship troubles between Matt and Annie.  He tries to
connect those troubles to the film's central themes -- Annie has a problem
respecting the mild-mannered Matt until he steals medicine for the baby --
and he is successful for a little while.  Elisabeth Shue does smart work
as a sexy mother and wife with a bit of a wild streak, and Kyle MacLachlan
is a solid hero as the relentlessly civil Matt, but they are distracted
along with Koepp by the introduction of Mulroney and a romantic triangle.
Whatever point Koepp might have been trying to make about the attraction
of "animal behavior" gets muddled in the house-bound middle third of THE
TRIGGER EFFECT.
     Fortunately, Koepp pulls it all together for a nerve-wracking
conclusion as Matt, Annie and Joe hit the road in an attempt to get out of
town.  Just two days removed from a normal life, the world around them
dissolves into paranoia and a relentless pursuit of survival, and a climax
featuring two superb showdowns:  one involving an edgy stranger (Bill
Simitrovich) who claims to want nothing more than a ride, the other
involving Matt's attempt to break into a house to steal car keys.  Koepp
is not a genius at creating shaded characters (remember, he _did_ write
JURASSIC PARK and MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE), but he demonstrates an impressive
talent for building tension and for pacing a thriller to keep his audience
involved.  It is also noteworthy that Koepp never makes a point of
explaining what caused the blackout, because that would have been sending
the wrong message about what mattered about this story.  THE TRIGGER
EFFECT is a disturbing and all-too-real tale which makes the ironic
observation that we have come to depend on technology for our humanity,
and if a little creative marketing will bring people out to see it, then
so be it.

Author
Michael Dequina
The title of screenwriter David Koepp's directorial debut, The
Trigger Effect, is meant to reflect how one event--in this case, a
blackout--can trigger a chain of (largely unfavorable) events.  The title
actually better describes the execution of the film than its basic plot--one
bad idea sets off a series of more bad ideas until the film becomes
unsalvageable.
Writer-director Koepp establishes the scene rather well, setting up
a promising psychodrama: the young married couple of Matt (Kyle MacLachlan)
and Annie (Elisabeth Shue) find their life thrown off balance when a massive
power outage paralyzes the city and Matt's best friend Joey (Dermot
Mulroney) comes to stay in their home.  Matt is a somewhat stuffy elitist
who can reveal a more savage side when push comes to shove; Annie is a new
mother with a checkered past as a "wild child"; and Joey is the slightly
boorish, macho type. Having these three mercurial personalities stuck in a
claustrophobic setting and reverting to more primal instincts is fertile
fodder for a psychological thriller.
But all the promise is wiped away when the three (four including
Matt and Annie's daughter) decide to leave town and make a long, hard
journey through the desert and country to Annie's parents' house.
Interesting plot strands (such as Joey's slight awakening of Annie's wild
side) established in the house are abandoned for the conventional trappings
of a road picture.  And the characters start to act like only those in a
movie would act in order to further the plot--for example, they decide to
make an unnecessary stop for fuel, which lands them right next to the car of
a mysterious stranger (Michael Rooker) who, of course, causes trouble.  One
bad, credibility-straining plot turn lead to another until the weak, cliched
conclusion, one of those "things are back to normal but never will be the
same again" endings.
It's ironic that the directorial debut of celebrated screenwriter
Koepp (Jurassic Park, Mission: Impossible) would fall short in the writing
department but show some life on the directorial end.  While he cannot
generate enough suspense and forward momentum to carry the movie through
from beginning to end, he is able to create some suspenseful moments, such
as scenes involving a prowler and a pharmacy break-in.  Visually, Koepp
tends to overdo blue (witness the fades to blue and more blue lighting than
your average X-Files episode), but he at least makes the whole package
visually interesting, and he coaxes decent performances from the stars, who
have to overcome some rather shallow characterizations.
Ultimately, The Trigger Effect will become a victim of its own
title--once word of mouth spreads on this unthrilling thriller, its minimal
box office power will be shut off.
