Title
Review for Mishima: A Life in Four Chapters (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A magnificent and appropriately disturbing treatment of the life
and times of Japan's most famous and controversial writer.
Yukio Mishima is the man Japan wants to forget, but cannot, and most of that
may be due to the way he chose to live -- and end -- his life. On November
25, 1970, he occupied an army garrison with several comrades-in-arms, took a
general hostage, and demanded to address the soldiers. After a
nearly-inaudible harangue in which he tried to exhort the men to reinstate
the Emperor as the absolute authority (instead of the prime minister), he
went back inside amid jeering and insults. There, he committed seppuku, and
was beheaded by one of his followers. What appalled his countrymen so much
was not that he had killed himself, but that he had done so in a manner
which had been considered gauche and tasteless -- and for something which
most of his fellow Japanese no longer considered important.
But it was important to him, and MISHIMA, a complex and beautifully-mounted
movie by Paul Schrader, works inside-out from the man's mind to show how he
came to end his life in so theatrical and obsessive a fashion.
The movie opens on the day of his death and interleaves the action during
that time with the rest of his life: his insecure, highly cloistered
childhood (during which the seeds of his death-obsession and homosexuality
sprouted); his confused youth (he was not drafted due to health reasons and
never forgave himself for not being able to serve his country); and his
meteoric rise to literary success. His own writings, which were often highly
autobiographical in tone if not in fact, are spoken on the soundtrack by Roy
Scheider. Mishima was an absorbing and highly skilled writer, and that is
demonstrated to tremendous effect.
The movie's look deserves to be brought back in widescreen glory; the only
prints available are on a panned-and-scanned VHS tape. Mishima's life is
presented in crisp black-and-white; the scenes from his novels, which are
used to comment on his own life and his perceptions of his country, are
filmed in stylized, theatrical Technicolor, and shrouded in a pulsating and
eerie Philip Glass score. The film is mostly in Japanese (Paul Schrader's
script was translated)  which provokes the question of whether a Japanese
filmmaker could have treated this material at all.
If the movie has any failings, it's only because of the material's focus,
and possibly because of restrictions on the subject matter imposed by his
estate. Mishima's adult homosexuality is treated very quietly, and there's
no mention of his wife and children. But none of these things detract from
the movie's ultimate purpose: to show us a man, tortured and divided against
himself, who chose to act on his beliefs to a degree that few men dared
consider -- and to give us a sense of empathy for him, rather than scorn.
