Title
Review for To Have and Have Not (1944)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"To Have And Have Not" is a highly entertaining movie
that combines drama and romance.  The script and story
is very good, and the cast is excellent, stocked with
many favorite actors from the 1940s.
Humphrey Bogart is an entrepreneur in Vichy-controlled
France, making a living renting his fishing boat.  His
sidekick is lovable drunkard Walter Brennan.  He lives in
a hotel owned by Frenchy, a Free French loyalist.
Hoagy Carmichael tinkles the ivories in the hotel bar,
where Bogart befriends pickpocket Lauren Bacall.
Bogart and Bacall get mixed up with the Free France
movement, leading to encounters with the local authorities
led by Dan Seymour.
There are many similarities to "Casablanca".  Bogart plays
the same tough guy with a tender heart.  He fights the
agents of the Nazis.  His love interest is a much younger
blonde.  He spends time in a bar with a piano player.
Dan Seymour is in both films.  "To Have and Have Not" is not 
quite in the same class, however, as the script is not as 
great and the direction is much looser, with several filler 
scenes that are fun but reduce essential dramatic tension.
The chemistry between Bogart and Bacall is remarkable.
Of course, they became married in real life.  In this film,
however, it seems odd that Bogart's character, a jaded
but honest sort, would put so much faith in a young 
pickpocket.  This was Bacall's first movie.
The more interesting relationship is between Bogart and
Brennan.  Bogart respects Brennan despite his constant
begging for drinks.  Brennan is fond of asking strangers
whether they've been bit by a dead bee, and both Brennan
and Bogart listen closely to the tone of the stranger's
answer.  It is a quick character test, and if the stranger
is annoyed by the question, he fails the test.
The 1940s seem to have a higher percentage of great films
than other decades.  Usually a glance at the cast is all
that is needed to tell whether the film is fluff or
substantial.  "To Have and Have Not" demonstrates that a 
good story and a strong cast can make a very good film,
without the emphasis on action, stunts and special effects
that more recent films have.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
