Title
Review for Sticky Fingers (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

STICKY FINGERS (director/writer: Catlin Adams; screenwriter: Melanie
Mayron; cinematographer: Gary Thieltges; editor: Robert Reitano; cast:
Helen Slater (Hattie), Melanie Mayron (Lolly), Eileen Brennan (Landlord,
Stella), Loretta Devine (Diane), Christopher Guest (Sam), Carol Kane
(Kitty ), Stephen McHattie (Eddie), Danitra Vance (Evanston), Gwen
Welles (Marcie), 1988)
This girls' sitcom film is strictly fluff, with a few comical moments
succeeding in a long line of misfires. The girls try so hard to be funny
by making faces and doing slapstick, that it is a shame that the
storytelling ability of the director is so poor, that it undermines the
comedy. It is imitative of a dumb boys' film, with the same way of
irritating you. The setting is NYC (I might add a phony looking
Manhattan ambiance) and the scene is the singles one for two hard luck
buskers, one playing a classical violin and the other a cello in Central
Park to make their rent money. They are struggling showgirls, sharing
the same apartment, and hoping for their big break, to cut a record or
get a part in a musical.
Their overwhelming problem comes when Hattie (Slater), the bleached
blonde violin player buys some weed from her drug pusher, ex-attorney
Diane (Devine), even though she's broke. When Diane gets an emergency
call that her boyfriend has been hit, she is able to talk the ditsy
Lolly (Mayron) to hold onto her green bag without asking what's in the
bag and quickly splits. Inside the bag is $900,000 smackers, which
throws the girls into a frenzy of feeble comic antics, unworthy of
Laurel and Hardy on a bad hair day.
To provide some NYC character atmosphere, we have the girls' landlord
(Brennan) demanding rent from the girls in a strident NYC accent. The
landlord broke her leg, so her hick sister Kitty (Kane) stays with her,
and flirts with the parking attendant from across the street, Eddie
(McHattie). Kane does a 'My Friend Irma' bit, competing with the girls
who live on the 5th floor of the walk-up, to see if she's as big a
numbskull as they are.
Naturally, the money becomes too much of a temptation for the pair, as
they get sticky fingers over it. To add to their problems they get
burgled, but it is their musical instruments and electrical equipment
that gets taken and not the money. So the girls go on a shopping binge,
bet in a casino, buy new musical instruments, pay their back rent, and
have used up over $200,000 buying gaudy earrings, flimsy dresses, tons
of shoes, and who should call them, but the one they never want to hear
from again, Diane, wanting her green bag.
When that exchange takes place in the lady's room of a theater they are
appearing at, the trouble begins, as Diane has been followed by some
pretty bad hombres, who will do anything to get their money back, and
they don't care who is holding the bag. The police have also followed
her and will arrest her on the spot. That leaves the bad guys with no
choice but to go after the two buskers with the green bag.
The funniest one in the film, was Lolly's somewhat-boyfriend Sam
(Guest). He plays her off like he was a fiddler in a flea circus, as he
is still with ex-girlfriend Marcie, and is never around when she needs
him. When he is spotted with his arm around Marcie, he tells her the
stupidest lie imaginable and when confronted with why he can't even show
up to Lolly's seders to meet her mother, he replies, "Don't you talk
seder to me, because seder is kugel and kugel is poop." Whatever that
means, it was the funniest moment in a film that couldn't get to Central
Park if it was standing on it.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jeff Meyer
STICKY FINGERS (United States, 1988)
Director: Catlin Adams
Screenwriters: Catlin Adams, Melanie Mayron
Cast: Helen Slater, Melanie Mayron, Danitra Vance, Eilleen Brennan,
      Carol Kane, Christopher Guest, Stephen McHattie
     Well, what can I say?  These two musicians (Slater and Mayron [the latter
also co-wrote the film]) are living hand-to-mouth in New York as park
performers, going through various romantic tribulations (McHattie and Guest)
and avoiding their landlord (Brennan).  A drug-dealing friend asks the pair to
keep an eye on a bag while she's out of town.  Of course, they decide to open
it and find that it's full of money.  $900,000 worth.  Of course, they
initially want nothing to do with it, but....look, do I have to draw you a
picture?
     Mayron and Catlin Adams showed up after the showing, and everyone was
very polite, which is never a good sign.  They said they had wanted to do
a "Laurel and Hardy" type film; at times, I thought it was a Lucy and
Ethel comedy, as Slater and Mayron tend to look at each other and go
"WAAAAHH!" throughout the picture.  Sorry, but give me SONS OF THE DESERT
any time.
     There are a couple of performances that do stay above water -- you'd
expect it with such a good cast.  There is something about Carol Kane that
makes me grin idiotically whenever she's on; here, she plays here a ditzy
Southern woman bit as Brennan's sister, in New York to help Brennan recuperate
from broken legs.  Her romantic dalliance with the parking lot attendant next
door is really good.  Danitra Vance, one of the best Ebersol-produced SATURDAY
NIGHT LIVE performers of the early 80s, does a nice job as the girls' rational
musician friend.  And Mayron, who is a favorite of mine on the TV program
THIRTY-SOMETHING, is appealing in her quiet moments; it's a pity she didn't
bring the writers from the show onto this project.  Christopher Guest, one of
the best comic performers of the last decade, isn't given anything to be use,
and ends up being rather dull.
SUMMARY: Slapstick and shopping humor, all having the general humorous
composition of soggy cardboard.  There's better things out there, gang...
LINER NOTES:  Sorry these are taking so long to get out -- STICKY FINGERS was
shown a week ago, and is already out in the theaters.  I'm just now catching up
with the reviews.  Observations so far: seen quite a few films, though I
avoided IT'S ALIVE III on the basis of the lateness of the hour, IGUANA because
the showing at the Secret Festival (which I can't tell you about, sorry) was so
disturbing that I went home and read for the rest of the day, and A KILLING
AFFAIR on the recommendation of Peter Reiher.  Good films so far, and one GREAT
film: DOMINICK AND EUGENE, which is out in theaters already.
