Title
Review for Rift (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Max Hoffmann
Premiere Jan 23 at Sundance Film Festival, UT
     This film was so bad, it may end up being my "guilty treat" for
this year.  (Last year was the video rental gem, LADY TERMINATOR.)
     Director Barkin based the film on his play of the same name.  It
revolves around a neurotic NYC love triangle, with three of the shallowest
characters you've encountered on film.  The "20-something" cast look
like models from a Newport cigarette ad, especially the smoky hunk,
Timothy Cavanagh, who plays the domineering husband who slowly sinks
into the bottle, (but somehow manages to maintain those abs and
perfectly spiked hair in the process.)
     The dramatic tension is supposed to rest on the fact that "Tom"
(William Sage), best friend to Bill (Cavanagh) and Lisa (Bransford)
might be slowly losing his mind.  The tenuous grip on his sanity is
portrayed by a seemingly endless replay of a "nightmare" sequence that
looks like out takes from a rejected HBO "Tales from the Crypt" episode.
The director missed an opportunity when he chose to put wan, thin-lipped
Wm. Sage in all the sweaty near nude nightmare sequences, and leaves
the hunkier Cavanagh fully clothed in nearly every scene.  The nightmare
always ends with Bill getting ready to kill Tom because he's been
fooling around with his wife, Lisa.  Imagine Tom's fragile sanity when
he discovers that Bill and Lisa's marriage is crumbling, and that Lisa
just "might" be falling for him.
     The corn really gets piled on when Lisa convinces Tom to start
seeing a psychiatrist, Joe Isuzu look-alike Alan Davidson.  The shrink
starts showing up, not only in Tom's dreams, but in bar mirrors, on his
TV ... anywhere there's a glass surface.  His mugging face is about as
obnoxious as the starched braids of Pippy Longstocking ... and a gradual
wave of titters start developing in the audience with each appearance.
     The cast is lightweight, and collectively have the talent clout of
a minor role supporting daytime soap opera star.  The actors are
obviously used to getting audience reaction from some SoHo or Village
crowd with gymnastic eyebrows and great hair.  Ms.  Bransford "changes
character" via a variety of head bands and home shopping club jewelry.
(She's a rich girl from Park Avenue, Tom and Bill are best buddies from
Queens.)  The guys are about as "yo boy" as Rob Lowe, and Lisa has all
the nascent social grace of a Mary Kay hostess.
     Although I wouldn't recommend this film to anyone, I found
enjoyment in counting the number of ways they blew it.  (a) In a tender
and emotional scene where Lisa "comforts" the terrified Tom, you start
to notice how much lacquer they put in his hair to keep that one strand
dangling precariously over his brow.  (b) In a "let's watch their love
grow" sequence of youthful antics and dorky music in a carnival, you
start counting the times that Lisa's hair doesn't match in retakes, or
how her shoes don't match her hand bag.  In summary, you pass your time
with this film pretty much the way you kill a dreary cross-country
flight in economy ... by people watching, and looking for pathetic
little details.  Unfortunately, with this film, you don't get the
peanuts and a Coke.  A thorough reading of those Nordic Ski-Trac ads
would be a welcomed relief.
