Title
Review for Shi di chu ma (1980)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Roaringly good early Jackie Chan vehicle, loaded with splendid
stunt choreography and -- no! -- a nifty story.
YOUNG MASTER opens with a scene of such brashness and confidence that I was
holding my breath out of fear that they couldn't sustain such a tone
throughout the movie. And they really can't, but they come close enough that
it makes little difference. The scene in question is a contest between rival
martial arts schools, in which two teams dress up as Chinese New Year's
dragons and must compete to retrieve a prize from an elaborate obstacle
course. It's ten thousand times more riveting that the usual "Ha! Ha! Now
you will die!" stuff that most chopsocky movies build their story around.
It's also where we meet Jackie Chan's character, named (not coincidentally)
Dragon.
Despite being well-coordinated, Dragon still loses the competition to the
rival school. His teacher, disgusted with the lack of discipline he shows,
kicks him out -- and his brother, as well, when it turns out his brother's a
sellout to the other side. This sends the two of them right into gobs of
trouble, since Dragon's brother has decided that the best way to make his
living is through allying himself with a criminal family. All of this comes
roaring out at us at the speed of about six fpm (fights per minute).
What's surprising about all this is that it holds together, makes a strange
amount of sense, and becomes a clotheslines for Jackie to hang no end of
martial-arts-based visual gags. (One fight, involving a battle fan, required
over 300 takes to get right.) The movie also has a fixation with props used
in weird ways: there are scenes where a pipe, a bench, and a length of rope
get used in ways that boggle the mind.
Jackie Chan has risen from a cult figure to a consummate "total
entertainer", a man who so completely lionizes the screen that it's no
wonder he was able to make routine HK action movies into something really
special. Here's proof.
