Title
Review for Blow Dry (2001)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
BLOW DRY, which the ads loudly proclaim to be by the writer of THE FULL 
MONTY, has all the charm of a fifth generation copy of a tape of THE 
FULL MONTY, which is what it feels like.  Writer Simon Beaufoy recycles 
all of the elements of the plot that hit the jackpot for him last time.  
The story is set in a cheesy working-class English town.  There's a 
tragedy to be coped with -- this time it's cancer rather than 
unemployment.  And, of course, he ends it in one of his signature 
surprises.  It's too bad that this time he forgot to make it funny.  To 
be fair, much of the blame has to go to director Paddy Breathnach, who 
wasn't associated with THE FULL MONTY or anything else you've ever heard 
of before BLOW DRY.
Set in Keighley, England, the movie is about the National Hairdressing 
Championship, a veritable hair Olympics.  The cocksure Ray Roberts (Bill 
Nighy) and his assistant Louis (Hugh Bonneville) are competing for their 
third straight title.  Cheating his way to the top again, Ray fears only 
local barber Phil Allen (Alan Rickman) and his assistant, Phil's son 
Brian (Josh Hartnett).  Phil quit the hairdressing competition 10 years 
ago when his wife, Shelley (Natasha Richardson) left him to live with 
Sandra (Rachel Griffiths), his hairdressing model.  The script does 
little with this lesbian subtheme other than introduce it.
Brian makes extra money by working the graveyard shift, cutting hair at 
the local mortuary.  Brian takes Ray's daughter and model, Christina 
(Rachael Leigh Cook), there one night on a date.  Although the movie's 
cast is good, their acting isn't much more lively than the corpses lying 
around waiting to have their hair done.  Actually, the whole movie is 
about as dead as these stiffs.  I didn't think Alan Rickman (GALAXY 
QUEST) could give a performance this lifeless, but director Breathnach 
does the impossible, turning the living into the dead.  Maybe he has a 
future in horror flicks.
BLOW DRY runs 1:45.  It is rated R for some language and brief nudity 
and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie news, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A renowned British hairdressing competition is coming to a small town and
the local barber is iffy about hopping aboard. That is, until his son and
ex-wife get together and convince the man to join. And for kicks, his old
hairdressing nemesis is also entered into the tournament. Sounds kooky,
right? Well, his ex-wife is dying of cancer and she left him for another
woman a few years back. Have a blast!
CRITIQUE:
It seems as though every other year, the Brits slap a cute, quirky, small
town comedy into our theatres and into our hearts and as that same time of
year rolls around again this year, well...this movie is definitely not it!
Predictable, highly uneven, filled with too much drama and not enough humor,
this unfortunate attempt at capturing a small town's "obsession" with a
quirky British hair-styling competition, doesn't deliver much on any front.
The film lacks any real emotional narrative drive, falls flat on way too
many supposed jokes (although I couldn't really tell if they were supposed
to be funny sometimes, but I think colored sheep are supposed to be,
right?), has a very boring soundtrack featuring tunes decades old and just
seemed about 15 years past its prime. The only semi-redeeming quality of the
film is its actors, but even this eccentric bunch couldn't save this oddly
fashioned movie screenplay. Here's a film which tries to mix a woman dying
of cancer, a quirky hair contest, a lesbian couple dealing with past
infidelities and a teen romance all in one big pot, but none of it seems
sincere, interesting or fresh. In fact, there really isn't one thing in this
movie that isn't easily forecast about three scenes before it happens.
And to top that off, most of the characters are just plain boring. It isn't
bad enough that the film hasn't properly characterized the folks in the
movie for us to care about, but couldn't they at least have made them more
interesting? There's no panache here...zero! They should've taken some
lessons from all of the fun characters designed for a similar type of film
named BEST OF SHOW from last year. I mean c'mon, sure I was impressed by
Josh Hartnett's accent (although I have no idea if it was locally accurate
or not-"Mum!"), but couldn't the kid also been given an actual personality
to boot? (mind you, his "bedhair" remained intact) Or how about giving Alan
Rickman more to do than just stare at the screen and feel sorry for himself?
And is Rachael Leigh Cook ever going to develop into anything more than an
adorable little face on the big screen? I sure hope so. In the end, the film
falters the most in its inability to effectively balance its humor and
drama, and ends up being too emotional when it shouldn't be, and not funny
enough, when it should be. The best thing for this film would have been for
it to be released as a straight-out comedy or a straight-out drama, but this
shot in the dark was definitely not the way to go. Even a shot of Heidi
Klum's bush couldn't save this puppy (and I ain't kidding about that!).
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Best in Show (8/10) - Chocolat (6/10) - The Gift (7/10) - Mystery, Alaska
(8/10) - Sliding Doors (7/10) - State and Main (7/10) - You Can Count on Me
(8/10)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Yipes! This film was written by none other than the screenwriter of the
highly successful British comedy, THE FULL MONTY, Simon Beaufoy. I guess the
second time around is not always a charm, eh? Actually, he has apparently
been trying to distance himself away from this project (I could see why!),
which is why the credits of this film actually read "Based on a screenplay
by..."
Actress Natasha Richardson is married to actor Liam Neeson.
This film was originally titled NEVER BETTER.

Author
Robin Clifford
It is time, once again, for Britain's annual National Hair Championship and
the mayor of the town of Keighley, England has fought for the honor to host
the affair. But, the town folk don't hold the same enthusiasm for the event
until a local, estranged family decides to get back together and enter the
competition in "Blow Dry."
"Blow Dry" has its heart in the right place but the screenplay by Simon
Beaufoy, in the hands of director Paddy Breathnach, doesn't fulfill the
potential of either the family drama or the hairdressing competition. There
are two different movies playing here, one a melodrama and the other a
flashy contest, but neither gets more than shallow coverage.
The core melodrama begins with Shelley (Natasha Richardson) leaving her
hairdressing salon and her lover, Sandra (Rachel Griffiths), for a doctor's
appointment. The news isn't good, but Shelley puts up a brave front, as if
all is well. At the same time, the Nation Hair Championship competition is
heating up and members of the hair care community from all over Britain are
heading to Keighley.
The lead competitor, Raymond Robertson (Bill Nighy), wants to win at
whatever cost and begins a campaign of sabotage on the other players to
assure his victory. This includes checking on an old opponent living in
Keighley, Phil Allen (Alan Rickman). Phil was married to Shelley when, 10
years before, she left him for Sandra the night before the hair finals that
year. The bitter Phil, now just a town barber, had given up competing
forever - until Ray visits him and  he learns of Shelley's terminal
illness. It becomes a battle of the best in Britain when Phil, Shelley,
their son Brian and Sandra go against Ray and the rest for the coveted
Silver Scissors trophy
This mix of family drama and the glitter of the championship work against
each other in "Blow Dry." On one hand the story tries to tug at our
heartstrings with Shelley's plight against cancer, a broken family and the
need to get it all together one last time for the competition. This part
meanders as she tries to rally her ex-spouse, Phil, and son Brian to join
her, break the news of her illness to Sandra and keep her cancer under
control. This tear-jerking tale is diametrically opposed to the glitzy
world of the hair championship.
The competition is handled in a light-hearted way that has the requisite
outrageous hair-dos, egotistical cutters, cute team monikers (The Kilburne
Kutters, The Style Warriors) that sound like gang names, and a lot of
glitter. This goofy humor conflicts with Shelley's serious dilemma and
family woes, forcing the viewer to shift gears between the comedy and the
drama. By the time it was all over, I didn't know whether I should laugh or
cry, so I did neither.
The talented cast, led by Richardson and Rickman, are given little to do to
develop their stick character into real people. The backdrop of the
championship intrudes into the family drama, abruptly shifting the focus to
comedy and glitz. The actors try, but can't get past the material.
Richardson's Shelley is a stoic and pragmatic woman. Rickman looks
uncomfortable with his character, Phil, and doesn't do anything to show the
inner turmoil caused by the current events. The rest - Griffiths, Josh
Hartnett and Rachael Leigh Cook - are little more than background window
dressing.
The melding of seriocomic material can be done well, but not in "Blow Dry."
I give it a C-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Miramax Films makes two kinds of movies - those that win awards and those
that make money.  The former are arthouse hits that star the likes of
Natasha Richardson, Alan Rickman and Rachel Griffiths, while the latter are
usually teen-oriented comedies featuring dreamy (but dull) talent like Josh
Hartnett and Rachael Leigh Cook.  The creative gap between the two resembles
the Pacific Ocean, but nobody minds because each turd like Down To You can
bring in enough money to make five Hamlets and buy five Butterflys.
Apparently some stroke victim over at Miramax greenlit a project that merged
the studio's two genres into one ugly film.  It's called Blow Dry and it's
about a British hairdressing competition.  The very idea of a film about
competitive hairdressing is preposterous to begin with, and it could
possibly be the worst premise for a movie since Stallone's Over the Top, but
what makes Blow Dry even more bothersome is that it isn't even the 21st
century's first film about a British haircutting contest.  That's right -
less than one year ago, we saw the release of The Big Tease, a similarly
themed farce that looks like Citizen Kane when placed next to Blow Dry.
Now let's discuss the title.  There are certain words that should be avoided
when choosing a name for your film.  If you're not careful, something that
seemed clever at the time could turn around and bite you in the ass when
review headlines blare "Do Whatever It Takes to avoid this movie." Obviously
"awful" and "bad" are off limits (see Bad Girls), as are "good" and "great"
(see Isn't She Great).  Anything with "love" or "hate" could cause trouble
(see A Thin Line Between Love and Hate).  I'd even be leery of words that
could taunt in rhyme ("If you're a big, fat dummy, you'll love The Mummy").
But "blow?"  Come on.  It's like shooting fish in a barrel. Or making fun of
the President.
Blow Dry opens with the announcement that the small town of Keighley will
host the 2000 British Hair Championship.  Keighley's Mayor (Warren Clarke)
is thrilled about the news, but when he announces it to the village's press
corps, they all yawn disapprovingly.  Or maybe it was everyone in the
audience yawning.  It's hard to tell because I was distracted by the fact
that such a small town had so many members of the press.
It becomes clear fairly early on that there are three hairdressing teams in
the film:  the one we're supposed to root for, the one we're supposed to
dislike, and the one that's supposed to make us laugh until our sides hurt.
The good guys are, essentially, a family torn apart by infidelity.  Former
hairdressing champ Phil (Rickman, Galaxy Quest) was married to Shelley
(Richardson, The Parent Trap), but she ran off with his model, Sandra
(Griffiths, Me Myself I).  Now Phil and his son Brian (Hartnett, Here on
Earth) run a Keighley barbershop, while Shelley and Sandra own the town's
only salon.  Will they be able to patch up their differences before the
contest's all-important Total Look category begins?
The bad guys are even less interesting.  Bill Nighy (Still Crazy) plays an
evil stylist with an underling who rigs each competition with things like
trick combs.  He also has a daughter (Cook, AntiTrust) who is visiting from
Minneapolis and gets temporarily sucked into her father's evil plans before
falling for the hunky Brian.  The supposedly funny hairdressing team is made
up of two sexually ambiguous Siegfried and Roy-types who have a beautiful
model (played by supermodel Heidi Klum).
Hartnett and Cook aside, the remaining acting talent looks embarrassed to be
here, but not nearly as embarrassed as it should be.  The characters get
more and more annoying as we're introduced to them, but each individual
character grows more aggravating as the film progresses, as well.  Hartnett
mumbles his way through a British accent, which sounded decent at first, but
that was because his lines were limited to one word.  Thankfully, Cook
doesn't even attempt the accent, and is, basically, eye candy.
Blow Dry was written by The Full Monty's Simon Beaufoy, who peppers the film
with a bunch of stuff that's supposed to make the audience titter but
instead is greeted with groans.  The movie is surprisingly short on gay
jokes, which is just about the only cliché that isn't totally exploited by
Beaufoy.  Blow Dry doesn't have a lick of Monty's charm and, worse yet, just
isn't funny.  Even the film's big sight gag - a shot of Heidi Klum's
well-coiffed bush - goes over like a lead zeppelin.  But since Everybody
Loves Raymond is popular, some folks may actually enjoy it.
1:32 - R for some language and brief nudity

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
With Alan Rickman, Natasha Richardson
     The most intriguing thing about this uneven, formulaic British 
comedy is the writing credit:  Based on the Screenplay "Never Better" by 
Simon Beaufoy.  What does this mean?  Beaufoy is the screenwriter 
responsible for The Full Monty, and Blow Dry looks like an early, 
groping draft, with a hairdressing competition substituted for male 
strip-tease. 
     If Beaufoy tried to distance himself from this one, it's 
understandable.  The screenplay is manipulative, predictable, and 
uninspired.  What gives it a brush of charm is the talents of its cast.  
Alan Rickman is Phil, a gloomy, embittered barber in the provincial 
Yorkshire town of Keighley.  He has some reason for his bitterness: his 
wife Shelly (Natasha Richardson) left him some ten years earlier to run 
off with another woman, their friend and model Sandra (Rachel 
Griffiths).  They didn't run very far - Sandra and Shelley have a 
hairdressing salon just down the street.  This is awkward for all 
concerned, especially Phil and Shelly's son Brian (Josh Hartnett), who 
works for his Dad and is painfully embarrassed by his lesbian Mom.
     This cozy little world is shaken up by two momentous revelations.  
Shelly has terminal cancer.  And the National British Hairdessing 
Championships are coming to Keighley.  The movie makes very little 
distinction between the emotional importance of these facts, but in plot 
terms the edge goes to the hairdressing competition. 
     Phil and Shelly are former champion hairstylists, and Shelly, dying 
as she is, sees the championships as a chance to get the family back on 
speaking terms before she goes to the Great Salon in the Sky.  Phil of 
course will have nothing to do with it, but we don't put any stock in 
that - the question is not if, but when and why, he will come around, 
take up curling iron and blow dryer, and win the event. 
     The plot bears no more discussion.  What makes this an 
entertainment worth something close to the price of admission in this 
slow cinematic season is the cast, or at least most of it.  Rickman, 
always a moody cuss, uses his appealing Bassett hound world-weariness to 
great effect; when he allows a smile to crack the dour crust it's like 
sunshine breaking through a gloomy sky.  Richardson uses all her 
considerable charm and skill to make us forget as much as possible the 
dreary plot device she's been saddled with.  Griffiths is good, despite 
an embarrassing scene in which she does a Japanese impression.  Bill 
Nighy (the lead singer in Still Crazy) adds a deliciously conniving 
character as Phil's unscrupulous hairdressing rival, and Warren Clarke 
is funny as the town's showbiz-happy mayor.  And any movie that has 
Rosemary Harris, even in a badly underwritten character, has some claim 
on our affections.  The young folks, imported from Hollywood for teen 
appeal, are a split decision: Hartnett does okay, mastering the 
Yorkshire dialect effectively, but the ingE9nue Rachel Leigh Cook is a =
washout.  Beaufoy's script should have been left in its drawer, and this 
cast used for something better suited to its talents
