Title
Review for Swing Time (1936)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Swing Time" is a musical comedy starring
Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers, one of ten
films they made together.  It followed
their most successful film, "Top Hat",
repeating that film's formula of light
romantic comedy, singing, and dancing.
Astaire is once again a professional dancer,
but makes his real money gambling, thanks
to a lucky coin and cardsharp Victor Moore.
Astaire is engaged to Betty Furness, but
soon takes an interest in Rogers, who just
happens to be a dancing instructor.  Astaire
has a rival for Rogers, just as in "Top Hat",
proud conductor Georges Metaxa.
In addition to Astaire and Rogers, much of
the supporting cast from "Top Hat" returns,
particularly Helen Broderick and Eric Blore.
Some of the humor in "Swing Time" works well.
When Astaire makes an unwelcome visit to his
fiancee, the cat hisses at him.  Later, Moore
attempts to impress a dancing instructor,
and clumsily knocks down a fence.  But some
gags can be seen a mile off, like the snowball
that hits Broderick, and others just fall flat.
It is interesting that the studio would choose
homely Moore as Astaire's sidekick.  While Astaire
is always formally dressed, he still does not
look like a leading man, and does not need
competition.
Of course, Astaire vehicles are considered classics
due to the production numbers, which only make
up a quarter of the feature's length.  Even if
the songs and choreography are outstanding, the
film's grade would still be dominated by the script
that constitutes most of the film.  The songs
are well-crafted but innocuous.  Astaire certainly
can dance, and there is interesting choreography
with shadows in the 'Bojangles' production.  But
even that number is damaged by the poor singing
of the ensemble chorus.
I thought "Swing Time" was only a marginally good film.
However, most people clearly find more charm in
Fred Astaire's vehicles than I do.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
