Title
Review for Nephew, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Greg Nowak
Director: Eugene Brady 
Cast: Pierce Brosnan, Sinéad Cusack, Hill Harper, Donal McCann, Aislin
McGuckin
Screenplay: Jacqueline O'Neill, Sean P. Steele
Producers: Pierce Brosnan, Beau St. Clair
Photography: Jack Conroy
Production Design: John DeCuir Jr. 
Runtime:  147 min.
US Distribution:  None - See text
Rated N/A (PG?):  Very short fight, sex alluded to as possibility, drawing
with breast 
Out of 5 stars: ****1/2 (4-1/2)
There was a huge crowd - so many over 100 people could not be admitted - at
a premiere screening of "The Nephew" (first screening with a major general
audience admittance).  This was a movie premiere at the Santa Barbara
International Film Festival.
Pierce Brosnan (007), produced his first movie with Beau St. Clair. It was
a constantly mind-moving and personal movie with lovely scenes of Ireland.
Chad (Hill Harper, Beloved) is a cute 17 year old mixed race (African
American and Irish) nephew, who's Irish mother died. He comes "back to
Ireland", living with the Curmudgeon Uncle, Tony Egan (Donal McCann). He
meets Pierce Brosnan's character, Mr. O'Brady (or just Brady), because he
falls in love with the beautiful daughter. There are many scenes (ah,
character scenes) to laugh at, others pull some tears. 
The three mentioned above were at the premiere in the flesh, with the
director Eugene Brady. After the movie they took questions. The movie was
very good, it not fantastic.  The Nephew has not been "picked up" in North
America but has been in the rest of the world.
The Nephew is generation secrecy of a "Titanic" proportion. Let's hope the
rest of America will be able to see The Nephew.
Contact given in the program guide: 
" Print Source: Irish Dream Source, Inc., tel: (310) 449-3411 "

Author
John Smythe
A review from the Stockholm Film Review
http://www.fortunecity.com/lavendar/heat/435/
Tony Egan (Donal McCann) devotes his time to farming a small holding on 
the Irish island Inishdaragh. He gets a shock when he receives a letter 
from America from his estranged sister. It is twenty years since she 
left, and she has written to Tony asking him to look after her teenage 
son Chad, since she is dying and he is her only living relative. When 
Chad (Hill Harper) arrives, his presence causes a reaction among the 
people of the island, and also revives a dark episode in Tony's past, 
which had lain simmering since his sister's departure.
There are a number of enduring themes in Irish story-telling, regardless 
of whether the medium is prose, theatre or film-making. One is the 
claustrophobic nature of small-town or rural life in Ireland, which is 
accentuated in an island community. No relationships of any sort can 
escape the attention of the community, and the close-knit nature of the 
community means that a destructive act can ripple throughout and affect 
everyone. Another is the long-lived nature of people's memories, where 
deeds of ancestors continue to colour the lives of the living. And, of 
course, no self-respecting Irish drama is complete without the sea. The 
sea, which introduces visitor and invader alike, and which provides the 
means of escape, usually to the new world (America). 
All of these themes feature in The Nephew, though happily as merely 
background material for a light-hearted and funny love story. It is 
probably just as well, since the story (by Jacqueline O'Neill and Jack. 
P. Steele) is almost too complex for its own good. Chad returns to 
Inisdaragh to learn more about his mother's family and background. His 
quest causes unease amongst several of the locals, especially his uncle, 
but also the local bar-owner, Mr. O'Brady (Pierce Brosnan, who also has 
a credit as executive producer). Egan and O'Brady hate each other, and 
the source of that hatred is a relationship between O'Brady and Chad's 
mother decades earlier, and Egan's opposition to it. Matters aren't 
helped when Chad begins to woo O'Brady's daughter, Aislin (Aislin 
McGuckin). If that wasn't enough, Chad incurs the enmity of Peter (who 
secretly desires Aislin), and whom Egan pointedly ignores every time 
they meet, even though Egan is friendly with his mother, the local 
postmistress (played by Sinéad Cusack). Phew !
Luckily, the potential for a gloomy drama is avoided by large helpings 
of humour. Donal McCann is one of Ireland's most underrated and 
versatile actors, and he conveys just enough bitter humour with 
dourness, guilt and regret to retain our sympathies. Egan's actions in 
the past has irreparably changed the course of his family for worse 
rather than better, and now Chad's arrival offers him a similar set of 
choices - can he live with the same consequences ? The blossoming 
relationship between Chad and Aislin is also nicely done (though Chad's 
interest in her is never clear - her friend Rachel (Lorraine Pilkington) 
seems far more fun). 
There are some nicely observed scenes, particularly Chad's encounters 
with farming, and a very funny (and accurate) depiction of a choir at a 
Roman Catholic mass, which features Tony (Phelim Drew) who appears 
throughout the movie to liven it up. Unfortunately, one of the better 
moments is spoiled by the trailer. 
The film is not without its flaws - the relationships dovetail too 
neatly, and are far too conveniently resolved, considering the dark 
nature of the story. In fact, the story would be better served with less 
characters, since some of them never develop beyond bare outlines. The 
character of Peter (Luke Griffin) does nothing but sulk and glower in 
every scene, but there's little else he can do since he has so little 
dialogue. Pierce Brosnan seems so intent on not upstaging anyone that he 
practically fades into the background - it's a shame that his character 
does not have a more central role.
The director never really captures the feeling of a small island 
community either - panning shots of mountain ranges and expansive lakes 
don't help (the movie was filmed in Wicklow, by the look of it), and 
there are probably too many shots of characters staring dolefully out to 
sea. 
Nevertheless, the Nephew is surprisingly good fun, and the instances of 
emotional catharsis are well outnumbered by comic moments.

