Title
Review for Go Fish (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Phil Trubey
     Black and white "docu-drama" about lesbian life.  A low-budget
film that works both as a low-key venture into lesbian life and as a
truly artistic film.
     I describe this movie as a "docu-drama" primarily because the
movie works more as a view into lesbian life that it does as a
traditional story--the movie does have a plot, but it is simplistic
and predictable.  The movie is ostensibly about Max, a young pretty
woman who is desperately searching for the perfect soul mate.  We
sometimes hear passages from her stream of consciousness written
journal.  Her roommate, Kia, carefully sets Max up with Ely, a woman who
has been hanging onto the ghost of a relationship for the past few
years.  The rest of the movie follows the blossoming relationship
between Ely and Max.
     Along the way, however, are several cinematic, artistic, and
dramatic devices that move this movie from being merely okay to being a
real treat to watch.
     One of the most powerful scenes is a beautifully done piece just
after one of the characters sleeps with a male friend of hers.  As she
is walking back, all sorts of guilty, peer pressure thoughts race
through her mind--is she truly a lesbian?  How will other women react?
Will she be outcast from both straight and gay communities?  She ends up
defending herself before a back alley mock trial of her peers in a
surreal, dark, judge and jury atmosphere.  The viewer is left to make
up their own minds about what it means to be "lesbian," "straight," or
"bi"--and whether any of these labels make any sense anyways.
     The movie is also infused with some genuinely funny scenes--we see
the hilariously distorted imaginings of what went on the night before
as Ely and Max describe what happened to their respective roommates.
The part where four women try to come up with a colloquial name for
"vagina" almost threw me off my seat.
     Unlike Hollywood's attempts at slickly "exposing" male gay life,
GO FISH doesn't ram any messages down your throat.  It matter of
factly shows slices of lesbian lifestyles and lets you extract what you
want from the movie.
     If you're looking for an alternative to this summer's bland
offerings of mindless Hollywood shoot em up action adventure movies, go
see GO FISH.  It is an artistic treat that will spawn many good cafe
discussions.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Guinevere Turner, V. S. Brodie, T. Wendy McMillan, 
           Anastasia Sharp, Migdalia Melendez 
Director:  Rose Troche 
Producers:  Rose Troche and Guinevere Turner 
Screenplay:  Rose Troche and Guinevere Turner 
Cinematography:  Ann T. Rossetti 
Music:  Brendan Dolan and Jennifer Sharpe 
Released by the Samuel Goldwyn Co. 
     In many ways, the story behind the making of GO FISH, Rose Troche
and Guinevere Turner's girl-meets-girl lesbian love story, is as
interesting as the actual film.  This is certainly not a case of a
low-budget independent movie flowing smoothly until the rights are
bought by a distributor.  At times, internal strife threatened to bring
filming to a halt (Troche and Turner, lovers at the beginning of the
production, ended their personal relationship halfway through), and
finding money was always a problem.  The cast and crew, many of whom
are lesbians, worked for free.  By the time the Samuel Goldwyn Company
won the bidding war for the rights to the film (following this year's
Sundance Film Festival), Troche and Turner were deep in debt.
     In formulating this movie, the two women had two primary goals in
mind:  present a good, entertaining movie about lesbians, and have some
fun doing it.  Said Troche, "It's important for a first feature: Make
it simple, do something you know.  And a lot of it came so purely from
what we wanted to see--a film that, as two lesbians, we would be
really excited to see."
     The story focuses on Max (Turner), a "single lesbo looking for
love," and the unlikely candidate of her affections, Ely (V. S.
Brodie).  While Max is a cute, lively, and energetic young woman, Ely
is reserved, self-conscious, and not especially attractive.  (Max's
first reaction is to call her "U. G. L. Y.  She ain't go no alibi.")
Nevertheless, there is a connection between them, and the better part
of GO FISH is spent exploring their tentative overtures towards
romance.
     The characters that surround Max and Ely are almost as interesting
as the two principals.  There's Kia (T. Wendy McMillan), the
intellectual eldest member of the sapphic circle (she kiddingly tells
Max, "I was a dyke while you were in diapers"); her lover Evy (Migdalia
Melendez), who gets kicked out of her house when her mother learns of
her sexual leanings; and the promiscuous Daria (Anastasia Sharp), who
seems to have slept with just about everyone, including (*gasp*) a
man.
     The basic subject material is, of course, nothing new.  But the
unique and humorous spin that Troche and Turner place on it, is.  GO
FISH is a thoroughly engaging motion picture with a touching romance
and a great deal of humorous commentary.
     That commentary is provided by GO FISH's version of a Greek
chorus:  Kia, Evy, Daria, and Daria's lover-of-the-moment.  The four
lie on the floor and speak directly to the camera, giving a witty
play-by-play of the latest goings-on in Max and Ely's courtship.  In a
more polished movie, this technique might seem inappropriate, but in
the context of the grainy, black-and-white GO FISH, it works just
fine.
     The film certainly isn't a technical masterpiece.  The quality of
the 35 mm blowup print varies from adequate to poor, the sound
occasionally isn't synchronized with the picture, and the "arty" edits
employed by Rose Troche confuse as often as they provide an effective
transition.  Some of the acting is wooden (as might be expected from
amateurs) and more than a few lines of dialogue come across as
stilted.  When was the last time you heard someone use "facilitate" in
a sentence, as in "Why don't you facilitate a relationship for me?"
     Nevertheless, Troche and Turner have achieved their aim--GO FISH
is the most enjoyable and entertaining gay/lesbian film to come along
in a few years.  It is heartfelt, able and willing to see the humor in
almost any situation, and avoids a preachy or condescending tone.  This
is a modern romance of the sort that Hollywood is afraid to touch.
Fortunately, there are filmmakers like Troche and Turner who are
determined to make and distribute a GO FISH, no matter what obstacles
stand in their way.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Eric Walker
     The movie begins in a classroom, as a group of students and their
teacher compose a list of names of famous people who *might* be
lesbians.  The names chosen are interesting, including "Peanuts'"
Peppermint Patty to Marilyn Quayle.  But when one student speaks up and
asks, "why are we making this list," the professor states that it's an
example of how little written literature there is to describe the
history of the lesbian lifestyle, and how she hopes that this can be
changed.
     GO FISH, the feature-length debut for director Rose Troche, is a
low-budget, black-and-white film that aims to be a light-hearted love
story of two women who fall for each other.  It succeeds, and the charm
and slice-of-life honesty of the characters is where this film's
"heart" lies.  Its small, "homey" feeling gives it warmth and
likability, and while the actresses aren't professionals, they project
honesty and are sincere about their parts; we don't feel as if they're
merely speaking scripted words.  Independently-made films of this sort
can't compete with the technical razzle-dazzle of Hollywood, but the
fact that they are a sincere effort on the part of the filmmakers (who
often invest a great part of their own personal wealth into the movie)
give them a vitality that simply can't be matched by the assembly-line
product that comes from the major studios.  The typical movie-going
audience has been raised from birth on Hollywood motion pictures, and
they can often be shocked and confused by the "feeling" projected by a
movie of this sort.  This speaks more of Hollywood's control over the
audience than it does of any faults in the technical quality of the
film itself.
     The story is simple: a close-knit group of friends arrange a
liaison between Max (played by Guinevere Turner), a pretty and somewhat
naive young lady; and Ely (V. S. Brodie, who also was involved in the
writing and production), a lonely woman who still pines for her lover,
even though she moved away two and a half years ago.  The two girls
know they're being set up, but they don't mind because they feel an
attraction to each other.  They'd like to get to know one another
better, but they're both shy and unsure of how the other will act--in
much the same way that relationships here in real life are started.
This charming story is a variation on the classic boy-meets-girl tale
that we've seen a thousand times before, with the twist being the fact
that it's a girl-meets-girl story.  We have a pretty good idea what's
going to happen, and the question one keeps asking is "when are they
going to have sex?"
     The movie does have its share of sexual content, and it's frank
and quite lifelike.  Unlike the rehearsed eroticism of Hollywood, the
sex scenes here seem natural and unforced; the ladies hop into bed
because they like having sex.  They also fall in love, too, but they
know that it's fun as well, and they like having fun.  (Since I am not
a lesbian, I honestly can't say how accurate a portrayal this is of the
feelings women have towards other women, and towards sex.  But the
audience I sat with in the theater enjoyed it and applauded it; I heard
comments from various people that it was an accurate portrayal.)
     The movie also makes statements about the lesbian lifestyle and
the way our society frowns on it, as well as commenting on the "labels"
that women use to describe everything, from their own sexual parts
(i.e., a conversation describing a suggestive use of the phrase "honey
pot") to the way a woman in the gay community can be shunned if she
actually dares to sleep with a man.  Miss Troche obviously knew that
her movie would be seen by many as a looking glass into lesbian life,
because it's actually being sent to mainstream theaters that normally
wouldn't screen films of this type.  (The Samuel Goldwyn Company, which
has made a name for itself by sending relatively "controversial" or
financially risky movies to mainstream theaters, such as Kenneth
Branagh's highly acclaimed films, is handling the distribution of this
one.  Since the movie was made on a shoestring budget, the company is
almost certainly guaranteed to make a profit on it, even if it only
attracts its most obvious audience.)  This is why the film spends time
looking at life as a lesbian; various segments are interspersed within
the movie, forcing the audience to take note of the fact that the
characters are lesbians, and they're trying to assert themselves in a
world that frowns upon them.
     It would be easy to emphasize these moments as the approach of the
"angry filmmaker lashing out at the world," but Miss Troche doesn't do
that.  She merely presents these scenes as a way of reminding us that
lesbians have their own unique problems, and many questions that are
not easily answered about their relationships with the rest of the
world (and with each other).  We're obviously meant to think about this
after the movie is over, and it *is* something worth considering.  But it
can also distract from the main purpose of the film, which is simply to
tell an entertaining story.  I've always had trouble adjusting to
sudden, jarring insertions of seemingly unrelated scenes, as well as
film-school style symbolism such as we see in the brief shots of a top
spinning on a chessboard, or being gripped by a hand.  (These scenes
are probably intended to represent the unpredictability of the future,
and the fact that we never know who we're going to meet in the future.
As the movie states: "The girl is out there.")  While this style of
filmmaking has its proponents, it tends to limit its appeal to the
thinking person's audience that "understands" such filmic styles.  (The
famous French New Wave films of the late 1950s and early 1960s have
this similar limitation.)
     But the movie has some very strong moments.  One especially
pleasing scene occurs as Ely prepares dinner for some guests, while two
of her friends make love in the other room.  It's an amusing use of
symbolism (and the audience laughed heartily), while it also gives us
an idea of Ely's feelings: she's becoming impatient, and tired of
longing for her past lover.  The film's final scene is also noteworthy,
as it gives us various shots of women making love while Ely and Max
enjoy themselves and spend time together.  I suspect these scenes were
filmed to get the audience all hot-and-bothered, so that they would go
home and make love (or have sex for fun).  There's nothing wrong with
this, of course; I consider it an amusing joke on the part of the
filmmakers.
     I wonder if this movie would have been allowed to be distributed
by the Goldwyn company if it was *not* presented as a "statement" on the
lesbian lifestyle.  Whenever a film like this appears in mainstream
theaters, it's expected to represent an entire community and speak in a
bold voice:  "This is what we are!"  GO FISH does do its part to
present itself as a lesbian love story, with emphasis on the 'lesbian'
part, but I think its best moments come when it simply tells being a
love story that just happens to involve two girls.  It's worth seeing
for this reason alone, but you may consider its additional elements to
be the icing on the cake--or a distraction.
     Either way, you won't be disappointed when you see GO FISH.
Movies like this are often promoted as "the emergence of a startling
new talent" and "the beginning of a promising career."  I certainly
hope this is the case here.  It's always good to see fresh, new
faces--they're the lifeblood that will keep the cinema going forever.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Guinevere Turner, V. S. Brodie, T. Wendy McMillan,
Anastasia Sharp, Migdalia Melendez.
Screenplay:  Rose Troche & Guinevere Turner.
Director:  Rose Troche.
     The problem with nearly every mainstream film dealing with
lesbians is that they have been just so *serious*.  If you believed
what you saw on the screen, you'd think that every lesbian relationship
involved a "fallen" heterosexual grappling in anguish with her sexual
identity.  Even at their best, such "love-that-dare-not-speak-its-name"
melodramas painted a picture that just didn't gibe the reality I have
seen.  What a breath of fresh air GO FISH is: a low-budget romantic
comedy finally showing lesbians having fun and leading day-to-day
lives.  Though uneven and amateurish enough to be occasionally
distracting, GO FISH is mostly a frisky and funny pleasure, playing
like a sort of WHEN SALLY MET SALLY....
     Co-scripter Guinevere Turner stars as Max, an introspective young
student who describes herself as "a carefree, single lesbo lookin' for
love."  Among those who try to help Max in her search for Ms. Right are
Max's roommate Kia (T. Wendy McMillan), a sarcastic teacher; Kia's
partner Evy (Migdalia Melendez); and gleefully promiscuous Daria
(Anastasia Sharp).  Eventually they conspire to set Max up with Daria's
roommate Ely (V. S. Brodie), a timid and plain-looking veterinary
assistant clinging to a moribund long-distance relationship.  As Max
and Ely take the tentative first steps toward a relationship, their
friends gather to analyze their progress, and to discuss other topics
near and dear to them.
     GO FISH was a labor of love and a financial nightmare for Turner
and co-scripter/director Rose Troche, so it may seem unfair to
criticize the erratic film quality and choppy editing.  However, many
of the rookie mistakes Troche makes are difficult to pass off on
economics.  Between scenes, she often inserts self-consciously artsy
snippets of flashing lights, folded hands and spinning tops, and they
just aren't in synch with the otherwise light-hearted film.  Ditto for
the lengthy dream sequence in which Daria is subjected to the scorn and
criticism of other lesbians for having sex with a man.  It was as
though Troche wasn't sure she was ever going to get a chance to make a
movie again, and thus threw every idea she had into this one, resulting
in a somewhat scattered final product.
     Troche is also at the mercy of her mostly non-professional cast,
and they in turn are at the mercy of some occasionally very sketchy
characters.  The best role belongs to Turner, an appealing presence
with self-effacing humor.  Max is the youngest and least experienced of
the principal characters, and Turner sells her insecurity.  Also solid
is T. Wendy McMillan's Kia, a veteran of the lesbian wars who acts as a
sort of mentor to Max.  She delivers shome sharp lines with a wry wit,
and anchors the scenes in which she, Evy, Daria and Daria's
amour-du-jour comment on Max and Ely's relationship.  Not so fortunate
is V. S. Brodie, who stumbles her way through a part written more
through other characters observations than through anything Ely says or
does.  While I have no problem with the idea that Max might see past
Ely's unconventional looks, I would expect there to be a more
interesting personality for her to find there.
     As underdeveloped as some of the characters might be, they still
have plenty of funny things to say.  In the film's opening scene, Kia
leads a class in speculating on what historical figures, celebrities,
and even fictional characters might have been lesbians.  The "talking
heads" scenes are particularly entertaining, chief among them a
discussion of preferred terms for the female genitalia.  One late
sequence shows Max and Ely individually describing a date to their
friends, accompanied by hilariously off-base, RASHOMON-like
interpretations of those events depicted on screen.  And in the film's
sweetest and funniest moment, Ely practically skips home after a
particularly good evening with Max.  Yet as amusing as GO FISH is, it
is not without some frank observations on what it means to be a lesbian
in the 1990's.  A pair of scenes narrated through Max's journal entries
are extremely potent, bringing across both the commonality of the need
for love and the unique concerns of these women.  GO FISH is not
without its bumps and flaws, but it is both funny enough and insightful
enough to warrant casting a line into its deep waters.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  This halting and spotty first
     production for director Rose Troche is the story of two
     very dissimilar lesbians who finally fall in love after
     much effort by friends.  The portrait of a lesbian
     subculture is not always flattering and often not even
     very interesting, but there are moments of clever wit.
     Rating: 0 (-4 to +4).
     GO FISH is the long, slow story of the meeting, slow romance, and
eventually getting together of two lesbians.  One is the attractive and
energetic Max (played by Guinevere Turner); the other is the more
introspective and almost masculine Ely (V. S. Brodie).  They seem
mismatched in looks, in tastes, and in temperaments.  But their friends
are determined to bring them together.
     Along the way we get a look at their lives and the lives of their
circle of friends in the lesbian sub-culture.  Superficially the women
in this small circle are witty and affable, in some ways like the menin
LONGTIME COMPANION.  But as time wears on they appear to have less and
less in their lives beyond tracking who in their group is sleeping with
whom.  The lesbians are shown to be aimless and self-absorbed and
fixated on the sex-lives of themselves and their friends.  Just
occasionally there is an on-target piece of sly if self-deprecating wit,
like a minutes-long conversation on what is just the perfect anatomical
euphemism to replace "honey-pot."  This neuron-numbing conversation is
both exasperating and funny, much like some of the writing in THIS IS
SPINAL TAP or FEAR OF A BLACK HAT.  Another pointed sequence shows the
women who daily had been the objects of bigotry bringing the same
bigotry to bear on one of their numbers who had experimented with
bisexuality.  With similar intolerance, Max's first reaction to Ely is
insulting rejection simply because Ely is unattractive.
     Perhaps part of the inspiration for this film was SHE'S GOTTA HAVE
IT, though Rose Troche simply does not move the plot along and does not
engage the viewer nearly as well as Spike Lee does.  This is a first
film for director Troche who co-produced, co-authored with actress
Turner.  In many ways the unevenness of the production betrays Troche's
inexperience.  The cinematography is crude and in black and white to
save costs.  Acting is very often at the high-school play level.  The
film is salted with odd visual images, apparently symbolic but usually
obscure or perhaps meaningless.  A device that is perhaps over-used to
give us the thought of the characters is to have them lie on the floor
head-to-head and discuss their innermost thoughts.  It is a crude
device, albeit occasionally useful to the script.  In Spike Lee's first
film he had characters talking directly to the camera as if being
interviewed and he used it for much the same purpose.
     Early in the film, one of the characters complains about "touchy-
feely, soft-focus, sisters-of-the-woodlands" sort of lesbian films and
this is clearly intended to be an alternative.  Whether it is intended
to be as self-critical of the urban lesbian subculture is questionable.
But even at its short length much of this film drags and is in need of a
tuning.  I rate this on a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
