Title
Review for Fisher King, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Robert FERGUSON)
     There are few directors working today who fully grasp the nature of
film as a visual media, and even fewer still who have a distinct  visual
style which is evident through-out their work.  Along with people like
Tim Burton, Peter Greenaway and Akira Kurosawa,  Terry Gilliam is one of
those directors, and his latest film,  THE FISHER KING, is certainly
evidence that his unique style remains a fundamental part of his
filmmaking.
     Gilliam's previous three films (TIME BANDITS, BRAZIL, and THE 
ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN) formed a trilogy which dealt with the
nature and relationship of fantasy and reality.  THE FISHER KING also
touches on that theme, but at heart, it is a film about retribution and
redemption, in the most traditional senses: retribution for sin, and
redemption from evil.
     As you might gather from the title, the device about which the plot
revolves is a modern day retelling of the myth of the Fisher King and 
the Holy Grail.  While THE FISHER KING is not an overtly religious
movie, it *is* very concerned with morality -- the master-stroke of the
plot is that myth and everyday life gradually form a seemless blend, and
the dramatic force of the movie comes from these entwined elements.
     To go along with fascinating plot, there is the bizarre and
brilliant direction by Gilliam.  His use of strange camera angles and
odd lens choices work together to make the film create its own reality,
still recognizably our own, but somehow cast in a new light; however, it
is his flair for staging and spectacle that grabs you again and again.
There is a scene set in the heart of Grand Central Station in New York
that is the visual centerpiece of the movie, and is as perfect a bit of
filmmaking as I have ever seen.
     Jeff Bridges plays a shock-jock radio personality, whose fall from
grace is as sudden as it is deserved.  Robin Williams plays a crazed,
homeless man whose life is entwined with Bridges'.  Bridges gives a fine
performance, but Williams is excellent -- with this film, and his
performance in  AWAKENINGS, Williams has without question established
his credentials as a "serious" actor.  Reuhl and Plumber play the love
interests for Bridges' and Williams' characters, respectively, and they
both do an equally fine job.
     THE FISHER KING is a profoundly good movie.  It has good
performances, an intellectually and emotionally engrossing plot, a
distinctive visual style, and a patented Terry Gilliam monster.  What
more could you want?
[THE FISHER KING opens either this week or next "at theaters everywhere"
in the U.S. and Canada].

Author
Kevin Patterson
I really wish they would make more films like THE FISHER KING. Movies these
days seem to have lost sight of one of the most unique aspects of visual
storytelling: its capacity to portray dreams and fantasy. That's not to say
that movies don't ever stretch the boundaries of reality any more, but they
do so cynically and cheaply, littering the screenplay with enough
tongue-in-cheek one-liners so everyone can just relax. "Of course we don't
*really* want you to think that a giant asteroid is going to hit the
earth," filmmakers seem to be saying, "but it sure is fun to watch, isn't
it?" Even Steven Spielberg, who brought such extraordinary stories as CLOSE
ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD KIND and E.T. to our screens, has now tuned his
sensibilities either to fantasies that are essentially negative and
destructive, as in THE LOST WORLD, in which dinosaurs are brought to life
only so they can chase people around and kill them, or to big-budget
historical re-creations (not to take anything away from SAVING PRIVATE
RYAN, of course, but the point's the same).
The preceding paragraph might give readers the mistaken impression that THE
FISHER KING is a fantasy film. It isn't, really: in fact, it takes place in
'90s New York City. The genius of THE FISHER KING is that rather than
simply being an escapist fantasy, it argues for the place of escapist
fantasies in the real world. Director Terry Gilliam is on familiar turf
here, but never before has he given the opposition so much screen time: the
"realists" in his films have previously been either obviously corrupt and
evil (the totalitarian regime in BRAZIL) or almost cartoonishly dull and
crotchety (the parents in TIME BANDITS and the medieval town leader in THE
ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN).
In THE FISHER KING, protagonist Jack Lucas (Jeff Bridges) is a bona fide
'90s cynic if there ever was one. When we first meet him, he's a Howard
Stern-style radio host who makes a living spouting off and insulting his
callers. One night, after making an off-hand comment about "stopping the
impending yuppie takeover," he turns on the TV to find that one of his
listeners apparently took him seriously and shot up a posh restaurant.
Three years later, having quit his showbiz job and freeloading off of his
girlfriend Anne (Mercedes Ruehl), he's depressed and on the verge of
suicide when he's attacked by a pair of muggers, only to be rescued by a
homeless man named Parry (Robin Williams) who believes he's a medieval
knight on a quest for the Holy Grail. He knows where it is, too, and
explains this to Jack, who quickly realizes that Parry's actually talking
about a sports trophy in a wealthy New Yorker's home collection.
Parry's wife, as it turns out, was killed in the restaurant shooting three
years ago, and the personal tragedy is what has spawned his delusions. Jack
understandably feels partly responsible, and decides to try to help Parry,
which can be a rather exasperating task at times: Parry is often distracted
by a "Red Knight" that he believes is chasing him, and talks to "Little
People" who come to visit him occasionally. He's also fallen in love with a
lonely woman (Amanda Plummer) that he sees pass through the train station
every day. Jack and Anne determine to set the two of them up, and Gilliam
handles the goofball romance that develops particularly well, letting them
stay true to their quirky personalities without mocking them or allowing
their scenes to degenerate into farce. Meanwhile, Jack and Anne start to
rediscover some of the magic in their own relationship, which had been
going slowly downhill due to his depression and aimlessness.
In the hands of someone other than Gilliam and screenwriter Richard
LaGravenese, the story might easily have ended here: Jack makes his act of
redemption, Parry is "cured" of his fantasies, and the two couples live
happily ever after. Not in THE FISHER KING. Parry has a relapse, slipping
away into a coma and leaving Jack bewildered. Eventually, he realizes that
the only way to bring Parry out of it is to find his Holy Grail for him.
This is the film's grand gesture: it requires Jack to join Parry in his
fantasy before the two of them can really finish what they started. THE
FISHER KING is a long, hard-fought , and ultimately well-deserved victory
for romanticism and imagination over today's cynical brand of pragmatism.
That's not to say that THE FISHER KING is perfect. It starts to get a
little unwieldy towards the end of its 137-minute running time, as another
crisis for Jack and Anne is unconvincingly introduced. This seemed like a
waste of screen time, and it really wasn't necessary to make Jack rehash
all  his previous conflicts in the final half hour; the unfinished business
with Parry would have been enough. For the most part, however, Gilliam
keeps the story on track, mixing in the right amounts of doubt and
disappointment so that the film's essentially optimistic viewpoint comes
through without seeming sappy or undeveloped. Too many films nowadays stage
an uplifting finish without the story or characters to back it up. THE
FISHER KING is one movie that earns its happy ending.
SEnd comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.
Film Reviews Page:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I would like to share with others that THE FISHER KING is on my
top of my worst movies of the year list.  Yes, I know the critics are
going gaga over it.
     I found the Jeff Bridges character to be a total loser.  His
character taught me nothing other than it is pretty awful spending a
lot of time with an alcoholic dead beat even if he is only on a movie
screen.
     I found Robin Williams's character somewhat better, but spending
hours a bum with a mental problem was not exactly terrific either.
Yes, I know I could use the politically correct term, "homeless", and
then I would have to view him reverentially.
     After an hour I walked out.  I only wish I had been smart enough
to do it sooner.  I found that the images, especially that of Jeff
Bridges, stayed with me for a while, and I did not like it.  He was
someone I wish I had never met.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE FISHER KING is a film directed by Terry Gilliam, written by
Richard LaGravenese.  It stars Robin Williams, Jeff Bridges, Mercedes
Ruehl, and Amanda Plummer.
     THE FISHER KING is the first film by Terry Gilliam the script of
which he did not write.  His previous films (including THE TIME BANDITS,
BRAZIL, and THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN) are marked by
particularly compelling visual fantasies, rococco dreams, wounded
innocence, and whimsical anti-rationality.  THE FISHER KING is also a
recognizable Gilliam film.  Here we have the innocent locked in combat
with a cynical world.  We have spectacle and fantasy and whimsy.  But
unlike the curious emotional detachment that marks his earlier films,
there is here a commitment to emotion, to feeling, and the result is a
more humane film.
     It is also, no doubt to the regret of Gilliam's true believers,
more disciplined, more controlled, less beguiling, less amazing, and
less unconventional than his past auteuristic efforts.  Neither is THE
FISHER KING black in its humor or nihilistic in its conclusions.  The
film ends on one of the uppest notes you will ever see in a movie, but
one that is so fantastic as to be tinged possibly with some small
measure of irony.
     Certainly, the film concentrates on its characters more than that
has been previously the case.  This is, at least in part, one result of
using of using a star cast with recognizable names; and in part, the
result of using LaGravenese's original script that emphasizes
relationships and character development in a way that Gilliam's own
script, spinning out their entrancing webs of fantasy and spectacle,
never do.
     The principal actors are each excellent in his or her own way.
Robin Williams will naturally attract the lion's share of the attention
to his performance as Parry, the lost and wounded street person and
former mediaeval history prof.  It is a very showy, energetic
performance, indeed, and another high watermark in Williams' continuing
growth from extemporizing stand-up comic to an actor of depth and
control.  This is not to say that Williams is any less the uniquely
manic, pyrotechnical talent he's always been.  But he's learning how to
use it to create a character other than Robin Williams.
     Jeff Bridges will deserve more praise for his achievement in THE
FISHER KING than he is likely to get, the result of working with an
actor as scene-stealing as Williams.  However, Bridges turns in as fine
a performance as he ever has as another wounded, lost victim of the
psychosis we call the modern world.  He's a former talk radio star who
destroys his life and many others' with a mean-spirited, thoughtless,
on-the-air remark.  His character Jack reluctantly is drawn into the
role of Parry's knight errant.  Parry wants to recover the Holy Grail,
which takes two forms in this movie: a cup in a millionaire's library
and a mousy little klutz of an office drudge played by Amanda Plummer.
Jack's role is to heal himself by healing Parry and the other
characters.  In this movie everyone is Percival and the Fisher King.
     (Bridges is also the focus of an interesting subtext concerning 
homophobia.  Jack tells Parry early on, "Don't ever hug me in public
again."  During the now well-known nude romp in the Meadow of Central
Park, Jack says to himself that he expects "a homophobic jogger" to
happen by and decide to avenge himself on his father.  One of the
important supporting characters is a wonderfully off-the-wall drag queen
who sprawls across Jack's lap in one scene, a sprawl that turns into a
protective cuddle.  Jack becomes less and less worried about being
mistaken for a gay man as the movie progresses to its final scene back
in the Meadow.  BTW, I loved the performance of the dragster; I don't
have his name here, but he's become one of my current heroes.  His scene
delivering a singing message to Plummer is one of the great moments in
this movie.)
     The two women have featured roles, rather than roles that are
visible in virtually every scene.  Mercedes Ruehl plays Anne, Jack's
patrona and savior and girl friend and sometime employer.  Ruehl is best
remembered for her role in MARRIED TO THE MOB.  She brings to the role
of Anne the same toughness with an added tenderness and nurturing; she
suffers for love, but there are limits.  She's strong-willed and
supportive and enters into a unwilling friendship with Plummer than
parallels somewhat Jack's relationship to Parry.  Amanda Plummer is
equally admirable as the egoless wallflower who blooms and discovers
life.  She tells Anne she has no personality; Anne tells her that au
contraire she does have a personality -- sometimes she can be a real
bitch.  Plummer's character visibly opens up and flourishes like a
sunrise to this suggestion: yes, being a bitch is a very good thing to
be for her.
     THE FISHER KING has much more linear plot than "real" Gilliam
movies, but it has its moments of magic and wonder.  You've probably
heard about the waltzing scene by now; this scene is managed with such
smoothness and deftness to make you gasp with admiration of the
director's technical skill, as well as the auteur's vision.  There are
bits and pieces of paper and floss drifting unexplainedly and
inexplicably through scenes.  Do they have meaning?  Does meaning?
Gilliam uses New York as if it were a set built to his specs.  His
camera angles depict the rise and fall and rise of his characters.  It
is a complete film, using all a film's resources.
     Be warned that the movie depicts horrifying violence, uses obscene
language, nudity, sentiment (but not sentimentality), romance, and
tears.
     I highly recommend THE FISHER KING, even at full prices.

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
THE FISHER KING: A wild and original, warm, funny, bitter, frightening,
and human tale which rises way above its "redemption" genre.
Plot kickoff: I think it would be confusing and misleading to try to
describe this plot other than as a function of the characters, besides
which this is really a movie which shouldn't be "spoiled."
Characters/acting: Jeff Bridges plays Jack, a cold, cynical talk show
DJ trying to put his life back together after one of his shows
backfires.  Mercedes ?, the rebel from TOTAL RECALL, shows she can
really act as his girlfriend, bemused by his friendship with a homeless
man, Perry, played by Robin Williams.  Williams turns in his best
performance yet, surpassing his performance in THE WORLD ACCORDING TO
GARP (my favorite performance of his until this movie).  Perry believes
that the Holy Grail is hidden in a millionaire's condo in Manhattan.
Perry is also in love with a mousy woman who works at a book
publisher's, who is played charmingly by Amanda Plummer, the woman who
played the fey mute girl in THE WORLD ACCORDING TO GARP.  All four of
the main performers, and a few minor ones as well, turn in flawless,
heartbreaking and uplifting performances.
Cinematography/FX: The believable blending of fantasy with everyday
life is aided by the excellent cinematography, which seems dreamlike and
realistic at the same time.  Several scenes should definitely be caught
on the large screen.  I *loved* the Chinese restaurant sequence.
Score: If you just can't get enough of "I Love New York In June" this
is the score for you.  Seriously, the score is a mix of background music
and pop radio, with a few odds and ends.  Not a score I'd buy, but it
meshes well with the movie.
Violence/language: Quite violent at times, mostly by suggestion, but
there is some gore.  This is a movie which takes a serious look at the
homeless (though that's not the focus of the movie), and they get
treated badly.  Profanity, slurs mostly uttered by bad guys.
Skin/situations: Foreplay, some frank talk about sex.
Analysis: I would say the one error is the pacing, which is too slow in
the beginning, and too fast near the end to make certain plot twists
completely acceptable, but is just right for most of the movie.  Still,
that was a flaw my mind churned up after, not during, the movie.  I'd
like to catch it again sometime to catch the lines I missed when the
audience was laughing at the previous lines.  The little touches of
throwaway lines and background action add a richness to this movie which
is rare.  Highly recommended.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
      Normally I would put a brief summary of the film here but the only
way I could do that would spoil THE FISHER KING so I decided to skip the
summary.   Most people have already seen this film but I wanted to put
in my opinion anyway.
      THE FISHER KING is rated R for explicit language, adult
situations, and one very small scene of graphic violence.  I give the
film a four on a zero to five scale.  I highly recommend seeing the film
for it is very well done and enjoyable.  Although the film looks like it
runs for a long time it doesn't seem that long when you're actually
watching it.
      The reason I went to see this film is because it stars Robin
Williams, and I am a fan of Robin Williams' work.  The film I saw was
quite different than what I had expected from the ads.  I was expecting
a retelling of the Fisher King and the holy grail story.  The movie is
not really a retelling of the Fisher King story.  It is however a really
good film that is definitely worth watching at full price.
      Robin Williams puts in one of his best roles yet.  His best role
in my opinion was in DEAD POETS SOCIETY.  His character in THE FISHER
KING is quite believable.  Williams thinks that he is a knight in a
quest to find the holy grail.  Williams is able to put humor into this
character without ruining the dramatic part of this film.  At some
points in the film I felt myself wanting to get up and cheer for Robin
Williams while other times I felt bad for him.  
      Jeff Bridges also puts in a great performance.  Bridges finds out
about Robin Williams and his quest.  Because of a past event Bridges
feels badly for Williams and tries to make himself Williams protector.
This puts a lot of strain on Williams and his girlfriend Ruehl.  Jeff
Bridges really brings his character to life and, like Robin Williams,
really made me feel for his character.
      Director Terry Gilliam has done MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL,
which was a very good comedy about the quests for the holy grail, and
BRAZIL, a science fiction film that I thought was horrible.  He has also
done a couple of other films that I have not seen, both comedies.  He is
an actor in the MONTY PYTHON films too.  I don't think that Gilliam has
ever done a dramatic film before this one and I feel that THE FISHER
KING was a very good start.
