Title
Review for Julius Caesar (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Stuart Burge
Adapter: Robert Furnival
Starring: Jason Robards, Charlton Heston, John Gielgud, Richard
Chamberlain, Robert Vaughn
"Julius Caesar" is not one of Shakespeare's best works, but it's still
an awesome piece of playwritedom.  The story takes an original approach
to it, showing it from the perspective of one of the major accomplices
in the assasination of the great Roman leader - Brutus, who is seen as a
tragic anti-hero, who is too easily influenced by some of his peers. 
Yes, a part of him agrees with his friend's Cassius's ideas that he is
too power-hungry, but Caesa is his friend and not a bad guy at all.  In
one scene, we see Caesar as being totally selfless (someone hands him
something about himself, and he puts it on the bottom of the pile,
chosing to deal with the problems of other people before his own - this
has a cruel irony since it talks about the conspiracy to kill him).  And
in the end, Brutus commits suicide, seeing that he has no way out,
having made a tragic mistake in taking part in the assasination.
This is all in this big star adaptation of the play.  But all the film
has to do is do the text word for word, which all Shakespeare films do,
'cause, well, it's Shakespeare.  So what the filmmaker has to do is make
it original and fresh (much like Olivier, Zefferelli, or Branagh) and
have great actors (like Olvier or Branagh, not Zefferelli).  This
certainly has the cast.  Two time Oscar winner (though not at this
point) Jason Robards is the protagonist, Brutus.  Charlton Heston is
Marcus Antony.  Ubergod John Gielgud is Caesar.  And Richard Chamberlain
has a cameo as one of the Roman senators (or something, I forget).  Too
bad they all don't live up to the bard's text, proving that the names of
all these great actors doesn't mean that they're ALWAYS great.
Robards is absolutely wooden in his role.  He shows about two facial
expressions the whole film.  Yes, the guy's supposed to be in deep
thought, but Robards just looks like he's looking at the cue cards the
whole time.  Robards is, in fact, a great actor, and he was even back in
the early days (check out Leone's "Once Upon a Time in the West").  But
he breathes no life into his character, and just doesn't live up to his
potential as a fantastic actor, one of the best working.
Charlton Heston.  Charlton is revered as one of the greats, and he is. 
He's a good actor, just not as good as some people make him out to be. 
I mean, the guy can be powerful, like in "Ben Hur" (or his cool speech
he makes in Branagh's "Hamlet").  He can also be miserably hokey (i.e.
"Soylent Green is made of PEOPLE!!!" or, need I say "EARTHQUAKE!!!!"). 
Here, he's in hokey mode.  Again, the guy CAN act, and he doesn't do a
bad job with the "Friends, Romans, Countrymen, lend me your ears"
speech.  And granted, he does have to live up to Marlon Brando's Oscar
nominated performance in the '55 version of it.  But he's just not up to
this role at this point in his life.
John Gielgud...or, as I have been calling him lately "Coolest Old Man
with a Goatee"...is pretty good as Caesar for awhile.  I mean, if
someone asked ME who to cast as the big cheese of Rome at the time, I'd
pick Gielgud.  But there's one part that kills me.  And it's the most
essential part of the role of Caesar.  The line "Es tu Brute?" is
supposed to be said in shock.  Brutus is like his best friend, and he
turns to him after he stabs him, and asks his best friend why he has
killed him along with the other jerks.  It's the most powerful part of
the entire play, and Gielgud just says it like he's thinks he's some
great Mr. Theatre.  He says it in two parts and neither of them
concludes with a question mark or has any kind of feeling in it.  Which
is basically what this film is lacking in: feeling.
Richard Chamberlain is in this for about two seconds.  He's good.
This film is not bad at all.  I watched it in 10th grade English and it
showed the play well.  But it goes nowhere with it.  It's also a more
liberal adaptation in one sense (other than casting Heston): the
stabbing scene is very gory.  In the play, you get the idea that they
all stab him simultaneoulsy.  In this one, they take turns at stabbing
him, and it goes on FOREVER.  By the end, Gielgud is so drenched in karo
syrup that I'm surprised he could even say "Es tu Brute?"
While this is a pretty good film version of the play, straightforward
and fitting for classroom use, it's nothing very special.  If you really
want to see a great version of this, rent the one with Brando in it
(he's thin in it, by the way).  But in the meantime, this will do.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
