Title
Review for Carried Away (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CARRIED AWAY is an incredible film being opened slowly around the
United States by its distributor Fine Line Features.  Locally it is
playing at the Towne Theater in San Jose.  The film has two amazing
performances by Dennis Hopper and Amy Irving that are both worthy of
Oscar consideration, and the rest of the cast gives great performances
as well.  Most of all it is a devastating film although ultimately a
hopeful one.
     As the story opens, an exhausted middle aged farmer named Joseph
Svenden (Dennis Hopper) is having a nightmare about the time he
permanently damaged his leg in a farming accident when he was a
youngster.  He is woken out of the dream by his elderly mother.  She
chides him, "Get up.  It's 5 o'clock already."  Despondent and using
his old cane, he limps in the darkness through the cold and bleak wind
to the barn.
     Joseph makes most of his meager income as an uncredentialed
teacher in a two room school house.  His fellow teacher and long term
lover is Rosalee Henson (Amy Irving).  The school is in the middle of
nowhere, and the school board has declared that this is its last year.
It will be consolidated with a more modern school that is thirty miles
away.  The only part of his life that he is good at will then vanish.
     Rosalee has always wanted to marry Joseph, but perpetually
melancholic Joseph is not ready to get married now or maybe ever.  His
mother is dying, and he is not happy with what he views as his
miserable existence.  Thanks to drab and ugly costumes (Grania Preston)
and makeup, both of these forty-seven year olds look to be going on
sixty.
     Joseph has given up on life, but still he longs for meaning.  His
relationship with Rosalee is going nowhere.  As he describes it, they
make love in the dark on Friday and Sunday nights.  His whole life is
monotonous, and he despises it.
     One day, a vivacious new seventeen year old blonde student,
Catherine Wheeler (Amy Locane - the rich girlfriend from SCHOOL TIES),
comes into his classroom and his life is changed forever.  Ah, now you
think, this is the LOLITA story for our generation.  Well, maybe it is,
but I don't think so.  The script by Ed Jones is based on the novel
"Farmer" by Jim Harrison who wrote "The Legends of the Fall," and I
found this script more intriguing and believable than LOLITA (1962).
Actually, this film is not near as much about the forbidden love of a
teacher and a student, as it is the study of two middle-aged people who
feel like their life has passed them by.
     Catherine and her dad, an athletic and imposing looking retired
Major (Gary Busey), ask Joseph if she can board her horse in his barn
and come everyday to ride it.  He says yes with both anticipation and
anxiety.  One day she comes to ride her horse, but when he sees her in
the barn, she starts stripping to see if she can seduce her teacher.
He has the good sense to run away from such a minefield of trouble, but
lacks the convictions to stay away for more than a few minutes.
     Soon the forbidden affair is in full bloom.  From there the story
is a mixture of the predicable and the complete surprises.  When the
Major declares on a hunting trip with Joseph that "I'm too old to just
kill for the sake of killing" and that he only shoots what needs to be
shot, Joseph is suitably frightened, but then again, not enough to
alter his amoral behavior.  The casting of Busey as the Major is
perfect.
     Director Bruno Barreto asserts remarkable control with his
charges.  Who else could take explosive and uncontrollable actor Dennis
Hopper (WATERWORLD, PARIS TROUT, and almost a hundred other films) and
get a touching, quiet, and poignant performance out of him.  Watch
especially how sadly he fiddles with his old pipe reminding the
audience how hopeless Joseph feels in his situation and how trapped in
his environment.  His acting is reminiscent of Anthony Hopkins in one
of his pensive English roles.
     Similarly, the director takes Amy Irving, who hasn't had a good
part since MICKI + MAUDE and YENTL, and gets a performance of great
beauty of a woman even more trapped in her shell than her lover.  Their
love making and their false starts range from the sad to the sweet and
to the powerful.  None are erotic, but all are tastefully done, and at
least one, is quite surprising.
     Amy Locane plays a supporting role, but she is excellent and
certainly much more effective than Sue Lyon was in LOLITA (1962).
Catherine plays Joseph like a fish on the end of a line.  Whenever he
even thinks about breaking off, she starts a provocative undressing
routine, and he postpones any notion of leaving her.  She owns him like
the devil owned Faust.
     There are a few other characters in this fairly sparse drama.  My
favorite of those not already mentioned is Hal Holbrook who plays Dr.
Evans, who is Joseph's friend and his mother's doctor.  There are also
many charming scenes of Joseph taking care of his mother (Julie
Harris).  Sometimes they play an old piano together, and other times he
rubs lotion on her decaying body.  He loves her intensely.  One time he
confesses to her, "What can I say.  I'm a bad man.  But sometimes it is
fun to be bad."
     The movie is extremely sad, but never lugubrious or manipulative.
Many of the lines are gems.  When Rosalee cries that "I'm not going to
get another chance," she sums up in a single sentence all of what it
means to be a late middle-aged person.  As Joseph puts it, "I don't
have any excuse.  I guess I wanted to be carried away."  Rosalee
feeling just as trapped and lost as Joseph, declares, "I want to be
carried away too."
     Cinematographer Declan Quinn (VANYA ON 42ND STREET) picks the most
gray and depressing colors he has in his bag to construct the images.
He uses the lighting to cast darkness on his characters reflective of
their feelings about themselves and their lack of opportunities in
life.  Usually cinematographers use their skills to enliven a picture,
but here Quinn is quite effective in make an already morose tale, even
more so.
     The sets by Peter Paul Raubertas are bleak and foreboding.  Bruce
Broughton's music is full of soulful violins, flutes, and muted
trumpets to cast a dreamy and nostalgic feel over the sets.  The music
is subdued, but it is perhaps the most hopeful part of the production
suggesting the hope of redemption.
     CARRIED AWAY runs a well edited (Bruce Cannon) 1:44.  It is rated
R for sex, full frontal male and female nudity, and some bad language.
There is no violence.  Given the nature of the relationships, I do not
recommend this show for teenagers.  For adults, I give it a strong
recommendation and award the film *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It is a small town which a passerby, if he gave it any thought
at all, would imagine to be like the thousands of small farm towns
that dot our country.  For the most part it would be true. It is the
little things that make the difference between one place and another.
     There is  Rosealee (Amy Irving), a war widow and there is Joseph
Svenden(Dennis Hopper).  Joseph had been a good friend of Rosealee's
husband before the war.  Over the years since the war ended, Rosealee
and Joseph have struck up a close friendship that became more than
that, much like husband and wife without an actual marriage and each
having a separate home.  Rosealee has a teenaged son, Robert
(Christopher Pettiet) while Joseph has an aging, dying mother (Julie
Harris).  Hal Holbrook plays her doctor.
     Both Joseph and Rosealee teach at the small local school.  When
the county extends its jurisdiction to include the school it is found
that all these years Joseph had never had a license to teach. . . and
the school is closed down.
     Although both Rosealee and Joseph have had sexual relations these
many years, the passion for each other has diminished in time.
Nothing exciting happens until the arrival of a beautiful, blonde, 17
year-old student and her father.  Joseph cannot help his eyes from
following this new student, Catherine (Amy Locane).  When her father
asks if Catherine can board her horse at Joseph's stable, he readily
agrees.  One day when he is in the stable but does not see Catherine,
he climbs the ladder to the hay loft where she is lazily lying.
Almost before he knows it, despite his being in his late 40s and she a
mere 17, she strips and the movie takes a new turn. For one thing, Amy
Locane has a stunning body and it is exhibited for a good part of the
film. Frontal nudity by Amy Irving and Dennis Hopper, as well as Amy
Lucane, make this a most sensual film.  No point in pretending
otherwise.
     Once this new relationship becomes known to practically everyone
in the village, the fireworks begin and the film takes on a new
aspect.  What do each of the characters do in this situation?    What
does the film's title, "Carried Away" mean if not that you have but
one life to live and you had better live it now.?

Author
Chuck Dowling
Carried Away (1996) **** out of ***** - C:Dennis Hopper, Amy Irving, Amy
Locane, Gary Busey, Hal Holbrook. W:Ed Jones. D:Bruno Barreto.
Hopper, in a refreshing change from his recent trend of playing nothing but
psychopaths, is a small town school teacher who was crippled as a child in a
farming accident. He has maintained a simple life in the small town where he
was born. He takes care of his ailing mother and is in a relationship with
his childhood sweetheart and fellow teacher (Irving). His life is shaken up
drastically, however, when a new student, Catherine (Locane) arrives in his
class.
Her father (Busey), an ex-military man, comes to Hopper's farm to ask if
they can board a horse there. Hopper accepts, which means that Catherine
will be spending a great deal of time there. One day he goes to look for
Catherine and finds her up in the hay loft of the barn. She promptly removes
her clothes and the two have sex (although Hopper is hesitant at first, he
quickly gives in). Thus begins an affair between the two.
My only problem with the film was that moment right there. It seemingly
happened for no reason. Nothing prompted it. We never see why this teenaged
girl was immediately drawn to a crippled older man. Towards the end we are
led to believe that Catherine is slightly insane, but by then it really
doesn't matter anymore.
Hopper tries to conceal this affair from his girlfriend, but also uses his
newfound youthfulness to better his relationship with Irving. For a while it
works, that is until the affair becomes public knowledge. Naturally, Irving
is enraged and a rift develops between the two. Holbrook plays the town
doctor and family friend who becomes the first to discover (accidentally)
about the affair. He has some good scenes and some funny lines when he
confronts Hopper.
Movies like this aren't made very often, which is good because when they do
come along, they are much more appreciated. "Carried Away" tells such a
simple story, one you've no doubt seen before. But it still seems fresh,
thanks to exceptional acting from all involved and excellent detail for the
time period. I could have done without the five minutes of full frontal
Hopper late in the film, but it wasn't difficult to just look away until the
scene was over. As just a note of trivia: Amy Irving is the director's wife.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Dennis Hopper, Amy Locane, Amy Irving, Gary Busey, Hal Holbrook,=20
      Julie Harris
Director: Bruno Barreto
Producers: Lisa M. Hansen and Paul Hertzberg
Screenplay: Ed Jones and Dale Herd based on the novel FARMER by=20
      Jim Harrison
Cinematography: Declan Quinn
Music: Bruce Broughton
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
     For the most part, Dennis Hopper is known as a psycho villain of=20
the first order.  Consider this resume:  the off-the-wall sleazeball in=20
BLUE VELVET, the mad bomber in SPEED, and the nutcase gang leader in=20
WATERWORLD.  It seems that when you want a really over-the-top bad guy,=20
Hopper's the one to get.  So it comes as something of a surprise to find=20
him playing completely against type in CARRIED AWAY.  Here, he's Joseph=20
Svenden, a shy, insecure school teacher who probably couldn't kill=20
anyone if pushed into it.  Most amazing is that Hopper not only succeeds=20
in the role, but thrives.  Giving his best performance since 1991's=20
PARIS TROUT, Hopper immerses himself in Joseph so completely that the=20
actor's own personality, along with his considerable baggage, becomes=20
submerged. =20
     It's difficult to say what CARRIED AWAY is primarily about, because=20
it deals with so many issues:  how we view sexuality, how love compares=20
to lust, and how everyone -- men and women -- have a tendency to become=20
stale and complacent with the approach of late middle age.  Joseph knows=20
about this latter issue first-hand.  At age 47, he's dissatisfied with=20
his life, but doesn't know what to do about it.  He's engaged to a=20
woman, Rosealee Henson (Amy Irving), whom he has loved since high=20
school, but something lifeless in their relationship keeps him from=20
actually tying the knot.  He hasn't found anything that he's truly good=20
at -- he's a mediocre teacher and a worse farmer.  He lives with his=20
dying mother (Julie Harris) in the house where he has spent his entire=20
life.  Joseph is trapped, both in an infirm body (a childhood accident=20
caused serious damage to one foot), and in his village. =20
     Relief -- or at least a modicum of excitement -- arrives in the=20
person of Catherine Wheeler (Amy Locane), a sexually precocious 17-year=20
old with a killer body.  Her parents move into one of Joseph's=20
neighboring houses, and she becomes his student at the small two-
classroom school where he teaches.  In her own way, Catherine feels as=20
trapped as Joseph.  Her mother is a drunk and her father is more=20
interested in shooting pheasants than caring for her.  So, looking for=20
an escape, she discovers her teacher, whom she clumsily seduces.  An=20
expert touch isn't needed, however.  Joseph is quite willing, and,=20
though he feels guilty at first, he gradually comes to view his=20
relationship with Catherine as a liberating experience=85 until she begins=
=20
to fantasize about marrying him.
     At its heart, CARRIED AWAY is a love story.  It's about Joseph and=20
Rosealee, and how Catherine's presence in their lives invigorates their=20
relationship.  Through his affair with Catherine, Joseph discovers what=20
it means to be alive.  He wakes up.  In his own words, he is "carried=20
away", and, in a poignant, touching scene with Rosealee, he shows her=20
the joys of letting go.  "I want us to change," he says, "before we get=20
too old and die."
     In addition to Hopper's fine job, the principal supporting players=20
are solid.  Amy Irving (CROSSING DELANCEY) bears all (literally and=20
figuratively) in a performance of surprising emotional depth.  Rosealee=20
is a sad figure who, like Joseph, wants something that she doesn't=20
understand and can't put into words.  As Catherine, Amy Locane (BLUE=20
SKY) exudes not only sexuality, but vulnerability.  Despite frequently=20
appearing as the vixen temptress (like when she's imitating Lady=20
Godiva), Locane offers us glimpses of the hurt, confused child carefully=20
concealed beneath the brazen exterior.  Gary Busey, as Catherine's=20
father, is uncharacteristically restrained, and Hal Holbrook provides=20
most of the comic relief as a small town doctor.
     One of the things I found most refreshing about CARRIED AWAY is how=20
little melodrama there is for such a potentially-controversial issue. =20
When Joseph's relationship with Catherine comes into the open, as it=20
surely must, we're not treated to histrionic displays by distraught=20
parents and neighbors.  In fact, director Bruno Barreto has a little fun=20
with the audience concerning the reaction of Catherine's father.  But,=20
ultimately, the one who has the most difficulty coping with the thought=20
of a 47-year old man sleeping with a 17-year old student is Joseph=20
himself. =20
     Although Catherine is developed as a real character with real=20
problems, CARRIED AWAY isn't as much about her as it is about Joseph's=20
reaction to her.  This is, after all, his story.  Although these two=20
profess to love one another, they are both lying, perhaps as much to=20
themselves as to each other.  Their reasons for having sex are far more=20
complex than simple "love", and Barreto's film has the courage to=20
examine those reasons.  CARRIED AWAY is erotic, but it's also thoughtful=20
and intelligent, and, coupled with Hopper's extraordinary performance,=20
that's reason enough to be carried away by this motion picture.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
