Title
Review for Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer (1986)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
Henry, Portrait of a Serial Killer (1990)
A movie review by Serdar Yegulalp
Copyright 1997 by Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Bleak and point-blank -- just the way it should be. Makes its case
with cold-blooded precision and intelligence.
"Serial killer chic" is a relatively new entry to the cultural vocabulary,
and one of the more stomach-turning ones. I've never found someone
automatically admirable or even interesting because they killed creatively
or in great numbers, and because of that I had apprehensions about seeing
HENRY. I wasn't sure I wanted to see the story of multiple murderer Henry
Lee Lucas portrayed as some kind of nihilistic hero/antihero.
Thankfully, that's not the way HENRY works. The director, John McNaughton,
took a small budget and a gallery of actor friends and created a chilling
and intelligent piece of work. It doesn't provide cheap-jack explanations
for Henry's behavior: it shows him up for what he is, an unrepentant and
un-idolizable man who killed when the mood struck him.
At the film's opening, Henry's friend Ottis Toole has a sister, who comes by
to stay while she tries to find work in Chicago. In a viciously riveting
scene, he admits matter-of-factly to having murdered his own mother, and she
covers his hand with hers. They are damned together from that moment on.
Henry and Ottis eventually begin to kill for fun. The movie is especially
good at showing how they seem to have drifted casually into it: there's a
scene where the two go to buy a new TV. The pawnbroker they talk to goads
Henry with ugly words, and Henry responds by stabbing the man to death with
a soldering iron. No preface -- it smashes into us as suddenly as it does
the broker.
In a scene which many damned the movie for, unseen, they steal a video
camera and film the murder of a whole household, playing it back over and
over again for their own enjoyment. The movie itself, however, does not
glorify the killings, but shows instead that Henry feels no joy at his work,
only irritation.
HENRY succeeds thanks to excellent writing and direction as well as acting.
Michael Rooker is credible as Henry from the first frame, just standing
there, and the rest of the cast works by being unaffected and casual as
well. The producers had originally comissioned a slasher film from
McNaughton, but he decided to give them something more memorable, and
consequently the film nearly didn't see release.
The film does not glorify or justify -- it just shows us, with unflinching
coldness, what Henry was. I'm hard pressed to see how anyone can see this
and consider Henry any kind of "victim" or "hero". Then again, probably, so
would Henry.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John MacNaughton
Writers: Richard Fire and John MacNaughton
Starring: Michael Rooker, Tom Towles, Tracy Arnold
I imagine if "Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer" had been directed by,
say, David Lynch.  He would have made a big joke out of it, and gotten
itself off on the fact that it's about a man who kills for no reason
whatsoever.  He'd have made it into a black comedy, and thus destroyed the
entire effect of the film on the viewer.  John MacNaughton (who would go on
to direct less controversial fare, like "Mad Dog and Glory" and the recent
"Wild Things") takes a completely realistic and serious look at it and the
results are not only disgusting, fowl, and wretched, but also ingenius,
wonderful, and just plain amazing.  No one said you had to be clean to be
intelligent.
"Henry" is a portrait of a guy named, uh, Henry (Michael Rooker), who lives
in Chicago in a terrible apartment with a guy named Otis (Tom Towles),
who's not a serial killer, but knows that Henry went to prison for
murdering his mom when he was a teenager.  The two met in prison, and we
discover that Otis has a parole officer who has gotten him a job working at
a gas station.  We come to realize that neither of them really knows the
other's dark secret, Otis's being that he's a sex offender.
As the film opens up, we see Otis picking his sister, Becky (Tracy Arnold),
up from the train station, and taking her to live with he and Henry.  Becky
is running away from a husband, as well as a whole other life (Becky was a
stripper), and thinks she can find refuge with the two.  She discovers that
Henry killed his mom early on, but instead of being repulsed, finds herself
drawn to him sexually.
As the film goes on, Otis discovers that Henry is a serial killer, and
instead of freaking out, decides he wants to become one as well.  We know
that Henry isn't a serial killer who kills for a reason, or has some kind
of overall method or print that he leaves on every victim.  In the
beginning, we learn that Henry has killed a whole bunch of people just in
the opening minutes, but that all of them were innocent people.  So Henry
shows Otis the ropes of being a successful serial killer (successful in
that you never get caught), but telling him to kill people via different
methods, and never leaving anything to incriminate one's self.
The film is apparently loosely based on the life of a real serial killer,
Henry Lee Lucas, and it almost looks like a film crew sat in with him,
followed him around, and then editied it all together (although we know
that Michael Rooker, the guy who plays Henry, is an accomplished actor,
most recently seen as the sheriff in John Singleton's "Rosewood," so we
know it's not realistic).  MacNaughton's direction is extremely bland,
although I don't mean that negatively: he portrays Henry in a very
realistic manner, not adding any wild directing techniques to what he does,
and because of this digs deeper into the character than any other kind of
film would have.
The film was made in 1986, but wasn't released until 1990 because the film
is so controversial.  It's easy to see why: the film is unrelentless in
portraying Henry without any subjectivity that every scene is eerily
realistic, so realistic that perhaps someone out there might view the film
as a "How To..." on being a serial killer.  But if anything, the realism
scares anyone out of the possibility of becoming a serial killer, because
that means you have to be as screwed up as Henry is.
There's one scene that really got me: Henry and Otis attack a family in
their home, with Henry shooting the entire thing on a video camera.  It's
an unbroken shot, and it's all the more frightening when you learn that the
woman playing the mother, who gets fondled by Otis, went into shock after
the scene was over.  It's one of the most frightening things I've ever
seen, and it would have been really cheap if it had been screwed over with
by some directorial interruptance.
As unrelentless as this film is in being realistic, there is one technique
that MacNaughton uses that not only causes the film to become less gory,
but also to become more scary.  In the beginning, we see a bunch of corpses
of people Henry killed recently, and in the background, we can faintly hear
the sounds of what transpired when he was killing them.  Instead of showing
the scenes, MacNaughton adds even more scariness to the film.  Is it
actually scarier than seeing the murders?  Of course, it is.
And it doesn't hurt that Michael Rooker is incredible in his performance. 
There's a moment in a diner where he seems just like a normal everyday
person, paying his bills, and about to go on his way.  But then the film
cuts to later, and everybody in the place is dead.  There are other scenes
where he's friendly but not too creepy, but others when he's just scary as
hell to even look at.  His performance is unrelentless, just like the film
is, and never pulls its punches, much like the film (again).  The others,
Tom Towles and Tracy Arnold, are also great, but not as great as Rooker
(probably why Rooker actually has a semi-career).
If there's a problem, it's that we never really understand Henry.  The film
doesn't dig down into why he does things, and we never really get to know
what Henry's about.  But isn't not really knowing everything about a person
what a portrait is?  The film simply portrays Henry for who he is, and
there are no reasons applied to why he's a serial killer.  Yes, we learn
that he killed his mother because she was a "whore," but then why does he
kill a waitress at a diner who merely rings up his bill?
By not giving reasons, the film actually becomes stronger.  We learn to
notice things for ourselves, like how Henry may not be able to really
function with people, and anyone who gets too close to him, or even ask of
him any friendly compliments, may ellicit some homicidal tendencies in
Henry.  Or maybe it's just that he can't help it, and he can't explain why
he does things.  Instead of being bogged down by some director who wants to
put an imprint on this film, MacNaughton is wise and doesn't allow anything
to interfere with the portrait of this horrific and unexplainable human
being.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
The Phantom (The Phantom)
     The Phantom can't remember the last time he was forced to suffer so much
for his chosen profession.  Not that HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER was
bad; on the contrary, it was one of the best horror films -- or films of any
kind -- he's seen in a while.
     But HENRY's not your average horror film.  No, HENRY wasn't made for the
misfits and members of the raincoat set who share the Times Square auditoriums
that the Phantom frequents.  It actually has artistic pretensions (so much so
that the Village Voice, in a review typical of its contemplative, restrained
style, called it "the best movie of the year").  So instead of opening next to
NINJA DOMINATRIX and a revival of MAKE THEM DIE SLOWLY, HENRY opened in New
York at an art house in Soho.
     To be perfectly frank, the Phantom much prefers the company of the kindred
spirits who flock to each of Michael, Jason, and Freddy's features.  At least
then he isn't the only person in the auditorium who isn't dressed in black.  At
least then he isn't surrounded by hoards of pretentious, espresso-sipping,
Canby-wannabees.  And at least then he isn't forced to associate with people
who ask "Is that real butter?" and then decide not to get the popcorn when
they find out it isn't.  
     But here the Phantom is getting caught up in his own private hell,
something with which his faithful phans should not concern themselves (though
supportive email and expressions of sympathy are always welcome).
     Let us instead get to the point: HENRY is a great film.  For a film that
was supposed to be nothing more than a run-of-the-mill slash and trash flick,
HENRY is surprisingly good.  The director, John McNaughton, had in mind more
than just Blockbuster fodder, and with HENRY he succeeds in presenting a
complete artistic vision -- a view from inside of a sociopathic killer.
     Ironically enough, we have our own very much under-appreciated board of
censors, the MPAA, to thank in part for HENRY's artistic success.  For had they
not deemed HENRY unviewable by the nation's teenagers (it was originally given
an X rating), it might well have been released and promoted as nothing more
than another in a long line of slice-and-dice epics.  And had that happened, a
lot of people would have missed out on a stunningly good film, since most
mainstream film-goers studiously avoid the genre.
     The plot is quite simple: HENRY was "inspired" by the story of Henry Lee
Lucas, a mass murderer now on Death Row in Texas.  Henry confessed to murdering
hundreds of people, including his mother, but later retracted his confession
and claimed that he murdered his mother only.  The real-life Henry also had a
friend named Otis, who he accused of participating in his crimes, and Otis had
a niece named Becky who the police believe was among Henry's victims.
     McNaughton uses this story as a starting point for HENRY, and though the
title might lead one to believe that HENRY is another THIN BLUE LINE, a message
at the beginning of the film states that the story portrayed is purely
fictional.  It could only be this way, of course, for otherwise McNaughton
would have had to rely on the very unreliable testimony of a sociopath awaiting
execution.
     The film itself looks and feels as empty as Henry's soul, and there is
very little dialogue.  As a film, HENRY exists as a tribute to cinematic
technique, and the film works only because McNaughton does not judge nor even
pretend to understand Henry.  Phans should not go expecting pat answers,
armchair psychology, or movie-of-the-week morals.  Even the scene in which
Henry relates the circumstances surrounding the murder of his mother does
nothing to illuminate Henry's motives; worse, its outcome completely confounds
our expectations.  To McNaughton's credit, that one quiet scene visibly
unsettled the audience more than did all of the film's graphic violence.
     In many ways HENRY reminded the Phantom of BLOOD SIMPLE, but it seemed
closer still to STRANGER THAN PARADISE in that the film had a disjointed, empty
feeling that nonetheless was exactly right in tone.  HENRY is also reminiscent
of SEX LIES AND VIDEOTAPE; McNaughton uses many of the same techniques as did
Steven Soderbergh, though while Soderbergh wanted us to feel somewhat ambiguous
about sex, McNaughton wants us to feel somewhat ambiguous about mass murder.
Shockingly enough, he succeeds.
     Michael Rooker (who has previously acted in EIGHT MEN OUT and SEA OF LOVE)
turns in a stellar performance as Henry.  If you catch yourself empathizing
with HENRY, or if you find yourself understanding and agreeing with some of the
things he says, Rooker's performance is the reason why.  The Phantom cannot
think of a less sympathetic character; by comparison, it was easy to empathize
with DeNiro in TAXI DRIVER.  Even Michael and Jason, cartoon characters that
they are, are more human than Henry, for at least they have, in their many
sequels, expressed some human emotion.  But Henry is a true sociopath and so
exists in a realm of existence beyond our comprehension.  Rooker turns in a
performance that in a just world should win him an Oscar; it's a shame that he
won't even be nominated.
     What more can the Phantom say?  In its review, The Voice was not too far
off.  Though the Phantom would hesitate to call HENRY the best film of the
year, it will almost certainly rank in his top 10 by December.  
     Unfortunately for his phans, though, HENRY is currently only in very
limited release.  Worse, the film is unrated (better that than accept our
national censor's stamp of disapproval), and so it will never be shown in a
good number of movie theaters across this great, enlightened land of ours.
     So, phans, will you ever be able to see it?  The Phantom's guess is that
most of his phans will have to wait and see if it hits Blockbuster's catalog in
the coming months -- truly a shame, in the Phantom's opinion, since he knows
how much of a film's impact is lost on a small screen.  But even if you have to
wait for its videotape debut, make a special note to see HENRY, a film as
disturbing as it is excellent and as thought-provoking as it is stylish.  In
short, HENRY is a film that no horror phan -- or serious phan of the cinema --
will want to miss.
