Title
Review for Paradise Lost: The Child Murders at Robin Hood Hills (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "God, please help us through this.  God, please help us through
this,"  wails John Mark Byers.  His eight year old stepson has been
brutally tortured, raped, and murdered and his grief is understandably
overwhelming him.  Viewers will be whispering the same sentiments to
themselves as they sit through the movie.
     PARADISE LOST: THE CHILD MURDERS AT ROBIN HOOD HILLS is one of the
most realistically tragic documentaries ever.  Directed and edited by
brilliant documentarians Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky, who worked
together previously on BROTHER'S KEEPER, the show is a tour de force.
Rarely has the cinema been this powerful, this engrossing, and this
painful to watch.
     In 1993 three second graders, Steven Branch, Christopher Byers,
and Michael Moore were viciously killed at Robin Hood Hills near West
Memphis, Arkansas.  Soon thereafter the police picked up three
teenagers: Jessie Lloyd Misskelly, age 17; Damien Wayne Echols, age 18;
and Charles Jason Baldwin, age 16 and charged them with the murder.
     The police find satanic books with key passages underlined in
Damien Echols's bedroom, and they get a full confession from Jessie
Misskelly that implicates all three of them.  Misskelly weaves a
macabre tale of satanic rituals that were performed on the hapless
little boys.  A television reporter asks Chief Inspector Gary Gitchell,
"On a scale of one to ten how solid do you think the case is?"
Gitchell confidently replies, "Eleven."
     The filmmakers were afforded a unique opportunity that they used
to maximum effect.  They were present during almost every part of the
trial and its preparations.  This includes attorney strategy sessions
and interviews with the defendants and the witnesses.
     The editing of the film is flawless.  It serves only to enlighten
and never to confuse.  If there is a mistake made in the film, it is
that the filmmakers are somewhat more sympathetic to the defendant's
arguments than to the prosecution's, but it is on whole, a
well-balanced documentary.
     Although the film is unrated, it is NC-17 material.  The shocking
video and still pictures of the crime scene are essential to showing
graphically how heinous were the actions of the killers, but they are
suitable for viewing only by mature adults.  Even hardened critics like
I frequently have to look away.  In the clips that we are shown the
boys have turned blue and are mutilated.  Sickening.  Sickening.  And
yet, I am glad the show was this explicit.  The truth is horrible, and
should not be censored.  People should know how bad it is.
     In the press kit, the filmmakers argue that the reason they feel
their approach is not gratuitous is that "our society has become so
desensitized to news reports of violent crime that we felt it was
important that the viewer really feels and emotionally recognizes the
horrific nature of the crime."  I concur.
     Because of the confession, the trials are separated with
Misskelly's trial going first.  Although there are many surprises at
the trials, I will not give anything away other than that necessary to
set up the cases.  Suffice it to say, that you would not like to have
not been called to serve on either jury.  If you had been, the phrase
"reasonable doubt" and the pictures of the little boys would be
indelibly marked on your brain and would forever making your sleeping
difficult.
     The parents of the victims and of the accused take center stage in
this real life drama.  This is backwoods Arkansas.  The people in the
film are uniformly poor and naive.  Each is convinced that they know
all the answers and that god is on their side.
     In an alternatively moving and chilling sequence, John Mark Byers
sings "That old rugged Cross" in church.  After that he goes outside
and shows off a big gun he has that he claims has untraceable bullets.
He shoots round after round into an exploding pumpkin and tells the
camera how he will blow off the heads of those teenagers if the courts
ever let them go.
     Fundamentalist Christianity is prominently featured in the film.
One of the signs on the church proclaims that "Satan has no
unemployment problems."  People babble biblical phrases continually in
nonsensical arguments for their cause.
     The heart of the first trial is whether Jessie Misskelly, who has
an IQ of 72, gave his confession willingly.  Was he feed the
information by the police and just parroted some back to get them off
his back?  Before you decide if you think this is a potentially valid
line of reasoning, see the trial first.  It is not as simple as it
sounds.
     As I watched the film, I thought how I would have walked out had
it been a fictional show.  People like these do not exist, and the
actors are shamelessly overacting.  Except this is exactly what
happened and as it happened.
     In the second trial the evidence looks as if it may be mainly
circumstantial, and the big question is whether the prosecution can get
Jessie Misskelly to testify.  Both defense and prosecution have major
aces up their sleeves.  A parent of one of the victims gives a
Christmas present to a member of the documentary crew, and it turns out
that it may or may not be a key piece of evidence.
     During one of the trial's recesses, Damien complains that, "West
Memphis is sort of like Second Salem because whatever happens is blamed
on Satanism."
     Rather than evoking tears, the film is more likely to make your
emotional systems rupture because it is so hard to take in all that is
arrayed before you.  Clearly one of the best films of the year, and
certainly the hardest of them all to endure.
     PARADISE LOST: THE CHILD MURDERS AT ROBIN HOOD HILLS runs 2:30,
and I would not want one a minute of it deleted.  It is unrated but
would be NC-17.  It has some of the most horrendous images you will
ever see.  Do not let your teenagers go.  Period.  I give the film my
absolute top rating of **** and say people should see it if they are up
to it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Gotham)
Documentary by Bruce Sinofsky and Joe Berlinger.
MPAA Rating:  Not rated (graphic depictions of corpses, profanity)
Running Time:  150 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
(*Note: PARADISE LOST premiered on HBO this summer prior to its theatrical
release)
     Three years ago, I might have given a perfect rating to PARADISE
LOST: THE CHILD MURDERS AT ROBIN HOOD HILLS; two years from now, I might
be similarly inclined to honor it.  Such are the vagaries of critical
opinion, that temporal beast, that I found my experience of Joe Berlinger
and Bruce Sinofsky's documentary both enhanced and diminished by recent
pervasive coverage of high-profile murder cases.  As a carefully
constructed detective story, PARADISE LOST is riveting; as a study of
small town America at its best and its worst, it is compelling.  However,
as an examination of publicly-aired grief and suspicion of the criminal
justice system, it is merely exemplary rather than extraordinary.
     PARADISE LOST begins with chilling footage of a May 5, 1993 crime
scene outside of West Memphis, Arkansas:  8-year-old classmates Michael
Moore, Steven Branch and Christopher Byers have been hot-tied, beaten and
stabbed to death, and Byers castrated.  The murders naturally outrage the
insular and deeply religious community, and families of the victims are
only too ready to believe the worst when three likely enough suspects are
arrested.  17-year-old Jessie Misskelley confesses under police
questioning to participating in a Satanic ritual in which the three boys
were killed, and implicates 16-year-old Jason Baldwin and 18-year-old
Damien Echols as well.  Damien, an occult-fascinated, heavy
metal-listening eccentric, is particularly tailor-made for prosecution,
but there are potential problems with the case.  Jessie has an IQ of only
72, and his confession is riddled with inconsistencies.  There also
happens to be virtually no physical evidence, and plenty to suggest that
the crimes may have occurred somewhere beside the muddy ditch where the
bodies were found.
     The first half hour of PARADISE LOST introduces us to a fascinating
cast of characters, and to a setting which is as critical to the case as
any piece of evidence.  John Mark Byers, stepfather of victim Christopher
Byers, is shown in a tirade against the killers laced both with hatred and
with Scripture, and he becomes a personification of a town as obsessed
with its perceptions of the devil as it is steadfast in its Christianity.
There are moments of powerful emotional honesty which capture the deep
conflict between the need for catharsis and the call for forgiveness --
one victim's grandfather holds back tears as he refuses to hate the
accused teens, while Byers' mother lashes out against them and "the
mothers that bore them."  Hovering over the proceedings like a dark angel
is the film's most enigmatic figure, Damien Echols -- a perceptive,
self-absorbed and vaguely frightening young man who is like a Satanist
from central casting.  Misskelley and Baldwin, both tiny and timid, seem
physically incapable of the crimes; when Echols takes the stand, toying
with his hair and answering questions as though the world were wasting his
time, you can see him digging shovelsful of his own grave.
    The courtroom scenes are rife with the kind of confrontations familiar
from both fictional and real-life proceedings, but the knowledge of its
reality makes every unexpected revelation all the more enthralling.  For
much of the film, Sinofsky and Berlinger let the trials of Misskelley
(tried separately) and Baldwin and Echols unfold slowly, and it seems
their focus is the railroading of the three accused boys as a result of
their outsider status.  Then new bits of evidence keep exploding like land
mines.  Another possible suspect emerges after turning over a weapon to
the film-makers; Damien's testimony appears to trip him up; another
character is revealed to have a brain tumor.  It is a case of such
complexity that any amateur juror who has railed against noteworthy
verdicts should be forced to watch PARADISE LOST as a civics lesson.
     The courtroom drama of PARADISE LOST is certainly intriguing, but I
think the film spends a bit too much time in the courtroom, because the
actual evidence is only half the story.  When Sinofsky and Berlinger spend
time with the families, they force us to confront the scars the families
on both sides will bear, and to confront our own preconceptions in the
process.  At the same time, it was difficult to listen to the righteous
wrath of the victims' parents and not recall the media trials waged by the
fathers of Ronald Goldman (in the O.J. Simpson trial) and Polly Klaas (a
much-publicized California rape-murder case).  Outrage against the concept
of presumed innocence just isn't news in this age, and PARADISE LOST
simply underlines this trend rather than exposing it.  That is not to
diminish its power -- PARADISE LOST will have you asking yourself
questions long after it ends.  Perhaps by the time I reach my own personal
verdict, its power will have overwhelmed its familiarity entirely.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by     Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky
Produced by     Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language and gore)
Running Time    150 minutes
Reviewed at     The Varsity, Chapel Hill, NC (3OCT96)
     A true-crime film that credits a "Heavy Metal Music Consultant?"
Believe it or not, a sparse soundtrack by Metallica is one of the many
pleasures to be partaken in PARADISE LOST: THE CHILD MURDERS AT ROBIN
HOOD HILLS.  This fascinating though overlong documentary from the
makers of BROTHER'S KEEPER recounts the events surrounding the discovery
of three murdered boys in West Memphis, Arkansas, the reaction of their
families, and the resulting trial that convicted three adolescent
outcasts with nary a shred of physical evidence.  Though the details of
the crime-- involving sexual mutilation-- are graphic enough to make
your hair stand on end, the most harrowing portrait of evil is that of
an unforgiving Christian community.  Filmmakers Joe Berlinger and Bruce
Sinofsy, who were given access to anyone and everyone associated with
the trial, take us into the churches, the trailer parks, and, in one
unforgettable sequence, onto the firing range where a grieving father
imagines the suspects as the giant pumpkin he's using for target
practice.  Recommended.  
--
Mike Legeros
Corporate Training
SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC, USA, Earth
mailto: legeros@unx.sas.com (w) legeros@pagesz.net (h)

Author
Dave Cowen

Path: news.mks.com!worf.mks.com!viktor
From: news@daily-bugle.newsops.execpc.com
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Subject: REVIEW: Paradise Lost: The Child Murders at Robin Hood Hills (1996)
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Date: 17 Oct 1996 14:52:39 GMT
Organization: Eschatfische Communications (fische.com)
Lines: 102
Sender: viktor@mks.com
Approved: viktor@mks.com
Message-ID: 
Reply-To: esch@fische.com (Dave Cowen)
NNTP-Posting-Host: centi.mks.com
Summary: r.a.m.r. #06107
Keywords: author=Cowen
Originator: viktor@worf.mks.com
There's a giddy moment in the second half of PARADISE LOST: THE 
CHILD MURDERS AT ROBIN HOOD HILLS when, entirely through events that 
would not have happened had the documentary filmmakers not been there,
a whole new spin on the circumstances surrounding the murders that 
PARADISE LOST is documenting develops. Perhaps MAN BITES DOG was 
prophetic after all: some of the best documentaries we've seen over 
the last few years (ROGER & ME, HEIDI FLEISS: HOLLYWOOD MADAM) have 
featured the documentary filmmaker as protagonist, not just blindly 
documenting a person or event, but actively playing the part of what 
Errol Morris called the "detective-director," doing research and 
pushing themselves directly into the lives of the individuals being 
chronicled by the documentary. 
In PARADISE LOST: THE CHILD MURDERS AT ROBIN HOOD HILLS, originally 
filmed on video for an HBO series, directors Joe Berlinger and Bruce 
Sinofsky follow the case of a triple homicide where three young 
children were attacked in West Memphis. When being pursued by the 
police (for relatively unstated reasons) a young man, Jesse, fingers 
Damien (a young man in the "goth" lifestyle who reads about Wicca and 
listens to Slayer) as well as Jason, a boy who frequently "hung out" 
with Damien, as being participants in the murders. Jesse's defense 
claims that the testimony was "forced on him" by the police, and that 
Jesse's low IQ prevented him from being able to provide rational 
answers to the types of interrogation methods used by the police, 
causing him to repeat the scenario the police presented to him, not 
the actual events that happened. Ultimately, in spite of a possible 
deal that would lessen the impact of a possible guilty verdict,
Jesse refuses to testify against Damien or Jason. Damien's defense 
indicates that there is no physical evidence linking Damien to the 
crime, and that he is being persecuted for his "style" -- the clothes 
he wears, the music he listens to, the books he reads. Jason's defense
argues that guilt by association is no reason to put away a 16-year 
old when there's no physical proof of any association with the crime. 
While the bulk of the movie spends time in the court, the filmmakers 
also focus on the parents of the murdered boys. At first, it would
seem that it would be impossible not to feel sympathy for parents 
whose children had been murdered in such a brutal manner... but as 
the movie progresses, the attitudes and actions of the parents, one 
in particular, begin to grow more and more disturbing -- in such a 
way to suggest that, given the opportunity, they would be capable of 
just as brutal an action as the murders of their children in 
retribution to those who have been accused with little evidence as 
backup. A shot of the parents naming pumpkins after the accused and 
then blowing them up with semi-automatic weapons is particularly 
disturbing. 
As they did in their 1992 documentary BROTHER'S KEEPER, Berlinger 
and Sinofsky focus on much more than just the trial, bringing in 
subtexts focusing on nature of stupidity (and the perception of it), 
the nature of religion in a small town, the importance of image, the 
legal issue of reasonable doubt, and much more. The film is not 100% 
objective: while the filmmakers portray almost everyone in the film 
as being equally vain or stupid (the exception being the 16 year- 
old Jason, who seems to be the most intelligent and calm individual 
participating in the proceedings), the filmmakers use haunting camera 
shots that play on many levels that subtly point the viewer to the 
filmmakers' agendas and ideas. This can hardly be considered a flaw,
however: a two and a half hour presentation of trials and events 
that spanned months of time can not be objective, and the way 
Berlinger and Sinofsky put the case together for the viewer, offering 
their opinion in a manner that is not blatant or manipulative, keeps 
the filmmakers from being so biased as to present an inaccurate view 
of the proceedings. To describe the kind of brilliant shots which 
visually provide the clues and subtext referred to above would
be to give away many of the important and shocking events in the 
film -- something that would damage the enjoyment of the film greatly 
for the viewer. There are a host of surprises, many unintentionally 
very funny, in PARADISE LOST, that could be ruined by a badly-placed 
spoiler. Despite the fact that PARADISE LOST is a documentary that 
runs over two hours, don't be under the impression that it will be 
boring or longwinded: like the similarly impressive documentary HOOP
DREAMS, the film is impossible to predict... creating lots of edge-of-
your-seat suspense along the way. 
PARADISE LOST is ultimately a much more accomplished film than the 
earlier BROTHER'S KEEPER done by the same team. In PARADISE LOST we 
simply look at a situation through the eyes of the filmmaker, letting 
the words, actions, and camera-level view of others tell the story, 
where in BROTHER'S KEEPER, the filmmakers plied the subjects of the 
film with pointed and obtrusive questions. By being active 
participants in the proceedings, yet never straying or manipulating 
the facts in any way, PARADISE LOST becomes an incredibly 
fascinating, enjoyable and successful documentary -- and one that 
lends itself to portray a disturbing but accurate view of human 
nature lurking below the surface of both the film and our communities. 
Dave Cowen (esch@fische.com)
Eschatfische. ------------------------------------ http://www.fische.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
PARADISE LOST: THE CHILD MURDERS AT ROBIN HOOD HILLS (director: Joe
Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky; cast: Damien Wayne Echols, Jason Baldwin,
Jessie Miskelly,1996)
It is hard to believe how fictional the truth can seem, at times, as it
is played out in earnest for this documentary, without actors or script,
just by those involved in the crime scene, as the film goes into gross
detail, describing the horrific murders of the three second-graders,
Christopher Byers, Steven Branch, Michael Moore, found with mutilated
bodies, on May 5, 1993, in a wooded area near West Memphis, Arkansas,
which the locals call Robin Hood Hills, and then following-up the trial
of the three teens accused of this crime, whose motive was attributed to
their being in a satanic cult.
Crime is as American as apple pie, and unfortunately, bizarre murders
are not that uncommon on the American landscape. But when the victims
are three innocent 8-year-olds, emotions naturally run high, that there
is a public outcry to get the killers and either execute them or give
them life sentences, as we look at ourselves and ask who could do such a
thing and why. We also want those who did it caught as soon as possible;
we want to see how our criminal system works: from police, to
prosecutors, to lawyers, to judges, and to jury. For most of us, we have
formed an opinion on how we think it works, even if we realize that
statistics of arrests and convictions do not tell us the whole story. It
is not until we see an actual trial, do we sense how delicate a system
we have, how in the hands of forthright, honest, intelligent, and
fair-minded participants, the system should work fine, but if that is
not so, we better watch out, the system can backfire on us and make us
scratch our heads and wonder if it is possible for justice to work. And
that is what this objective documentary does, as it allows us into the
courtroom to see how the participants do their job.
For some reason there is a separate trial for Jessie Miskelly, the pint
sized 17-year-old, who has an IQ of 72, he speaks in a slow and
deliberately awkward manner, and seems less intelligent than even that
low score indicates. He is the one the police picked up and questioned
after a month of mounting pressure against them that they have bungled
the case, by getting a confession out of him, without a lawyer present,
and after he at first denied doing the crime. In his flimsy confession
where he does not even accurately state what has happened, he goes on to
implicate two other friends in the crime, the meek and slightly mentally
deficient Jason Baldwin, and the more intelligent and articulate Damien
Wayne Echols, who antagonizes the small-town by being into heavy metal
music, his favorite group being Metallica, and purchasing a book he got
from the library on a witches movement called Wicca (white magic), which
he says he only read about and does not practice, and that he also
antagonizes most citizens of the town, by dressing in black, which his
father caustically comments, "Even Johnny Cash wears black." In other
words, these three friends, who were not interested in sports and
appeared to be different in temperament and attitude than the rest of
the town, were looked upon with hostile suspicion, even before the
crime.
The filmmakers spend a lot of time with Jesse's family and with the
lawyer's defending him, and going over his confession, which he now says
is not true, and all of them come to the conclusion that Jesse was a
frightened boy, who just gave that confession to get out of the police
line of questioning. He supposedly has an alibi for when the murders
took place, but the filmmakers did not reveal what his alibi was or for
that matter what the other accused boys' alibis were, for a reason I
cannot understand. In any case, there is nothing to link him to the
crime except for the dubious nature of the confession. There is
absolutely no physical evidence of any kind at the crime scene to
implicate him and his friends, even though all the victims bled, and one
lost 5 pints of blood while bleeding to death. It is highly unlikely
that Jessie and his passive friends would have been able to do the
crime, not withstanding that they had no reason to do it, and then after
the crime be so thorough in covering up any evidence. Just seeing them
and hearing their story, and seeing no solid proof put forward, except
for innuendo and a coerced confession, is not what I call a solid case
against them.
Jessie was found guilty and given a life sentence plus 40 years, even
though, in his confession, he claimed not to murder any one, he just
held down the Moore boy for the others to kill. It was made apparently
clear that the police and the prosecutors, were not looking for any
reason to exonerate these three from the crime. These rational men,
defenders of the law, were satisfied and even smug with the job they
were doing. The job they did frightened the heck out of me, because of
their unwillingness to check everything out, and as much as the crime
revolted me, this revolted me with almost equal disdain.
We also see a hair raising bit of unexpected melodrama, from John Mark
Byers, stepfather of one of the victims, as he is caught on videotape
recreating how he thinks the murders took place, calling on God for
vengeance. This guy was more frightening to watch than the three accused
of the crime, and indeed the defense team suspected him of doing the
crime, but since the police refused to really question this guy
seriously, except the man himself, did say, he gave his step-son a
spanking for misbehaving shortly before the crime took place. Later on
in the case presented against the two remaining defendents, who are
tried together, he gives a knife he has to the filmmakers, who turn it
over to the prosecutors, who find blood traces on it with his blood and
his step-sons. There is no follow up to the fact that he stated there
was no reason for there being blood on the knife, since he never used it
before. But under questioning from the defense attorney, he now
remembers cutting himself with it. This is a knife that could have very
likely been used in the crime.
There is also a manager of a local fast food place, who said on the late
afternoon of the gruesome murder he called the police to his Bojangles,
because there was a blackman in the woman's rest room with blood all
over him. The police, even though they were aware a  bloody murder had
just happened, did not apprehend this man or follow this lead up in
their investigation.
The trial of Damian and Jason is hinged on the claim that they committed
the act as a ritual killing for their satanic group, something that the
state has absolutely no evidence on, but the testimony of a mail order
Dr., who claims to be an expert on cult groups, even though the accused
both deny being in any kind of group, and no one can offer proof that
they are in such a group. They call themselves loners. Though, Damian
has a girlfriend he has a baby with, he is not an active participant in
any gang or cult. On camera she states that Damian couldn't harm anyone,
she is confident that he couldn't have done the crime. Jason could
hardly say a word, and seems to be mortified, not really aware of what
is going on, and appears to have no connection with anything occult,
except he likes to hang around with Damien and listen to heavy metal
music.
Needless to say, they are convicted of the crimes, even though Jessie
recants his confession and refuses to cut a deal with the prosecutors
for a reduced sentence, to testify against his friends, because he would
be lying, and his mother said that she would be in court to watch him,
to make sure he doesn't tell a lie.
Damian gets the death penalty, while Jason gets a life sentence. Their
sentences are now under appeal.
If ever there was to be a public outcry against how the judicial system
works and the arbitrary use of the death penalty, this film should give
you food for thought about how unfair the judicial system can be for
those who are of the poor class. It was frightening for me to watch how
the process works. There is no outcry from the community about
injustice, and even if this case is the exception to the way the courts
operate, that most cases are handled with more of a search for justice
and with less of a rush to judgment, which I sincerely doubt, this
compelling documentary leaves me perplexed,  not only in my questioning
of the verdict, but the whole process itself, and wondering if our
system is so flawed, that it would really be damaging to impose a death
penalty sentence on anyone, realizing how political all verdicts appear
to be.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' Movie Reviews"   http://www.sover.net/~ozus
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 9/96 (limited)
Running Length: 2:25
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Gruesome murder scene photographs)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1
Directors: Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky
Producers: Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky
Written by Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky
Cinematography: Robert Richman
Music: Metallica
U.S. Distributor: Creative Thinking International
     Someone once said this about the United States' justice system:  
"If ten guilty men must go free to prevent one innocent man from falsely 
going to prison, so be it."  This philosophy explains why, at least in 
theory, every accused criminal is presumed innocent until proven 
otherwise.  At some point, however, our approach to justice in this 
country became warped.  So, if the system is broken, is it possible to 
get a fair trial?  This is a crucial question, and, if we accept the 
evidence presented in Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky's PARADISE LOST, 
the sobering answer may be "no", at least in certain high-profile cases.
     Berlinger and Sinofsky, who made 1992's BROTHERS KEEPER, have 
stated that they initially approached this project as an examination of 
America's disaffected youth.  What they uncovered during the course of 
filming radically changed the movie's direction.  PARADISE LOST became a 
trial of the American justice system, and, to a lesser extent, a 
condemnation of the media's lack of objectivity.  Other documentaries, 
such as THE THIN BLUE LINE and BROTHERS KEEPER, have followed similar 
paths, but none with the devastating impact of PARADISE LOST.
     On the night of May 5, 1993, three eight-year old boys, Steven 
Branch, Christopher Byers, and Michael Moore, were tortured and murdered 
in Robin Hood Hills, West Memphis, Arkansas.  The community, 
understandably outraged, cried out for blood.  It took the police a 
month to make arrests.  The eventual suspects were Jessie Misskelly, age 
17; Damien Echols, age 18; and Jason Baldwin, age 16.  Jessie, who has a 
72 IQ and was subjected to a grueling 10-hour interrogation, confessed 
to his involvement in the killings, but later recanted the confession, 
claiming to have been coerced.  He was tried, convicted, and sentenced 
to life plus 40 years.  Likewise, Damien and Jason were found guilty.  
Damien was sentenced to die by lethal injection; Jason was to spend the 
rest of his life in jail without the possibility of parole.
     PARADISE LOST follows events surrounding the crime, from the 
discovery of the bodies (as shown in a graphic police crime scene video) 
to the verdicts.  Berlinger and Sinofsky painstakingly chronicle ten 
months worth of developments, illustrating how easily justice can be 
swayed.  There's no way that this movie can answer the question of the 
defendants' guilt or innocence, but one piece of information is clear 
from PARADISE LOST:  Jessie Misskelly, Damien Echols, and Jason Baldwin 
did not receive fair trials.  
     There was almost no physical evidence connecting the three to the 
crime.  Jessie's confession was, at best, obtained under dubious 
circumstances.  But the town of West Memphis needed scapegoats, people 
they could demonize.  Because Damien was "different" by his own 
admission -- he wore black, listened to Metallica, and had shown 
interest in the Wicca religion -- he made an excellent target.  Jessie 
and Jason were guilty by association.  Suddenly, news reports were full 
of allegations of Satanic rituals and occult ceremonies, with 
intimations of human sacrifice and sexual perversity.  Damien, Jessie, 
and Jason were tried in and convicted by the media.  They didn't have a 
chance in court.  Oddly, however, the three weren't fazed by their 
convictions.  Their families exhibited far more distress than they did.
     Berlinger and Sinofsky have obtained an amazingly in-depth and 
intimate picture of the situation.  Their cameras were allowed in the 
courtrooms, behind closed-door strategy sessions, and in the prisons 
where the accused were being held.  The friends and families of the 
victims and the defendants cooperated with the film makers, enabling 
them to get close to both sides.  As a result, there are no faceless 
entities here -- all of the participants have personalities.
     DADETOWN, an earlier 1996 release, questioned the role of 
documentary film makers in examining their subjects, and this issue is 
raised in PARADISE LOST when a knife given to Berlinger and Sinofsky by 
a victim's father is introduced as a piece of evidence.  Suddenly, the 
documentarians were no longer detached observers, but participants.  
And, while it's unlikely that their "contribution" affected the outcome, 
it's impossible to say for certain.  Ultimately, however, when you 
consider the nature of PARADISE LOST's main concerns, this matter is of 
secondary importance.
     Arthur Miller's THE CRUCIBLE, which is due in theaters this fall, 
offers the Salem Witch trials as a parallel to McCarthyism.  PARADISE 
LOST shows that witch hunts didn't end centuries, or even decades, ago.  
Religious fanaticism fueled much of the hatred against Damien, Jessie, 
and Jason.  The mere hint of Satanism doomed their cases, even if their 
only real crimes were listening to heavy metal music, wearing strange 
clothing, and holding unconventional beliefs.  There's much about these 
three that we'll never know, but the scary thing is that the men and 
women of West Memphis don't care about those gaps.  Truth has become far 
less important than closure.  And it doesn't matter that, if these boys 
are innocent, the real killers are still free.  Equally disturbing is 
the underlying hypocrisy typified by one scene:  a victim's father leads 
his fundamentalist congregation in song, then is shown making vicious 
jokes as he uses a gun to blast holes in a pumpkin he alternately names 
Damien, Jessie, and Jason.
     No documentary released in 1996 challenges an audience the way this 
one does.  The questions it proposes are profound, and there are no 
answers.  PARADISE LOST is one of a very few films that completely 
absorbs the attention.  Watching Berlinger and Sinofsky's movie is like 
witnessing an execution:  it's horrifying, gut-wrenching, and impossible 
to turn away from.  Anyone with an interest in law and order, the 
American justice system, or the role of the media in trials, should seek 
it out.  PARADISE LOST is the kind of film that will leave even the most 
devout defendants of the legal system either shaken or shaking their 
heads.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman
