Title
Review for Booty Call (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     BOOTY CALL is a hilarious primer on safe sex, with Jamie Foxx and
Tommy Davidson as best buds told "no glove, no love" by their equally
eager counterparts (Vivica Fox and Tamala Jones).  The boys' quest to
acquire that which must be worn-- and which must be found in the middle
of the morning and in Chinatown, no less-- leads to a predictable, but
roll-on-the-floor funny comedy of errors.  (Davidson's tug-of-war with a
dog is a classic.  And don't miss an unbilled Art Malik as one of two
punning Punjabi grocers.) Though slow in spots, only the last half-hour
is tedious.  That's when the movie moves into a hospital.  Groan.
Still, *some* medical attention may be necessary, as there's a strong
likelihood that you'll laugh your ass off.  
     BOOTY CALL was screened at General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley in
Raleigh on 3/8.  Understaffed, as us- ual.  And screen #7 stinks of
mold, from four rows of water-damaged chairs.  Ugh.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Brian Takeshita
I know there were times during this movie that I laughed pretty hard.
The problem is, I can't remember them as I write this review.  That's
not a good sign.
In BOOTY CALL, Jamie Foxx is Bunz, a character whom I can't really
describe, because I don't know that much about him.  I only know that
he likes to shoot dice on the sidewalk, and that he doesn't like
relationships, just "booty calls" at three in the morning (no
questions, no commitment).  Bunz has a best friend named Rushon (Tommy
Davidson), who seems to be Bunz's direct opposite:  On the straight
and narrow, and currently in a long-term commitment (a whole seven
weeks, wow!).  Rushon wants to finally sleep with his girlfriend,
Nikki (Tamala Jones), but for a reason which is not totally explained,
it's going to happen after a double date with Bunz and Nikki's friend
Lysterine (Vivica A. Fox), who have never met.  To make a long story
short, the two couples pair off and spend the rest of the evening
having their attempts to do the deed spoiled by Nikki's obsession with
safe sex.  First she wants condoms, so Bunz and Rushon go out and get
them.  Oh, no, they have to be latex, not lambskin.  Back to the
store.  Now they've got to get dental dams, or there'll be no
foreplay.  Why are both couples stopped each time Nikki makes a
demand?  Nikki phones Lysterine, who lives across the hall, and tells
her she'd better be making these demands, too.  Talk about coitus
interruptus.
BOOTY CALL is a film that does not know whether it wants to be a
regular comedy or one of those over-the-top comedies.  The difference
between the two is that in the latter, things constantly happen which
are so far removed from reality.  In this category, for example, you
have ACE VENTURA: PRIVATE EYE on the mild side, and AIRPLANE! at the
extreme.  There are times during BOOTY CALL where the film steps out
of its shell and tries for this status, but then too often quickly
retreats to the safety of convention.  It is disappointing, and even
worse, distracting.
There are also instances where the screenplay by Takashi Bufford and
Bootsie Parker (are those real names?) does not live up to its
potential, as jokes are left unexploited or even ruined by bad
writing.  For instance, there is a scene where our main characters are
in a Chinese restaurant.  Bunz goes up to an Asian gangster and speaks
to him in fluent Cantonese, much to everyone's surprise.  However,
when asked how he learned the language, he goes into this explanation
of how he started picking up words from late-night kung-fu films, and
soon gained mastery.  This negated the ludicrousness of the entire
scene.  If, on the other hand, when asked how he learned to speak
Chinese, Bunz simply replied with, "kung-fu movies," and then moved
on, the joke would have been much more effective.  This is because it
would have been totally unbelievable, but funny because we know it is
unbelievable.  By explaining the point and trying to make the
ridiculous plausible, the film is not giving its viewers enough
credit.
The inconsistency and uncertain believability unfortunately also raise
other questions.  Why are two such disparate people like Bunz and
Rushon best friends?  Why do Rushon and Nikki fix up Bunz and
Lysterine?  If Nikki is so obsessed with safe sex, why doesn't she
have some condoms at her own apartment?  These questions are not
answered by the screenplay, but are overlooked for the sole reason of
moving the plot forward.
A very noticeable quality of BOOTY CALL is the prevalence of
unnecessary foul language.  Some movies use a lot of swear words, but
use them under very justifiable circumstances, as when they are
employed consistent with a character's pattern of speech.  Other
films, such as the recent JACKIE BROWN, use them in ways that almost
parody themselves.  BOOTY CALL just sticks them in to get laughs, and
it doesn't work.  They stick out like sore thumbs because there is
almost no reason to use them.
Half of the scenes seem to occur for no reason.  The Chinese
restaurant, a holdup at a convenience store, and a trip to the
hospital seem to have nothing to do with the story, and are in there
for filler.  This is surprising, considering that the film is less
than eighty minutes long.  It's too bad that the core of the film
isn't much better, since it is comprised of sometimes funny, but
forgettable dialog.  I refer you to the first paragraph of this
review.

Author
James Berardinelli
BOOTY CALL is a hilarious, fun-filled romp through one very long night in the lives of 
two black best friends. One, Rushon (Tommy Davidson), is a sensible guy who has been 
going out with Nikki (Tamala Jones) for seven weeks -- and they've yet to sleep together. 
Rushon's bud Bunz (the hilarious Jamie Foxx) can't believe that, and he bets Rushon that 
he can "get it on" with Nikki's friend Lysterine (Vivica A. Fox) before Rushon can do the 
same with Nikki.
This leads to quite a few funny sequences and one hysterical one involving the two guys' 
attempts to get lucky, and their frequent trips to the Indian-owned convenience store, 
for things like condoms and plastic-wrap. The first hour contains a few of the funniest 
lines of 1997, but in the last 20-or-so minutes, BOOTY CALL goes way downhill. Still 
definately worth a rental.
A movie like LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES, which is an Australian romantic-comedy, is sure 
to be slammed by critics. They will undoubtedly compare it to MURIEL'S WEDDING, it won't 
match up, and then they savagely pan it. But, honestly, this tale of five totally 
different, but equally messed-up college students is actually quite an enjoyable way to 
spend 75 minutes (one thing to be said for this movie is that it doesn't outstay its 
welcome).
LOVE's story: Character 1 loves Character 2 whose friend Character 3 loves character 1 
and Character 1's friend Character 4 is a lesbian whose ex-girlfriend Character 5 is now 
dating Character 6, who Character 5 doesn't like at all. Forgive me for forgetting all 
their names. It's not anything new or special, but it is something good, and that's 
enough for me. Worth a rental.
THE RELIC will, I'm sure, be remembered by me in January, 1998, as a fixture on my 
bottom-10 of 1997 list. This film is a horrible, boring, overlong would be-horror film 
that shouldn't have been made in the first place. Why do they continue to make bad films 
based on bad books? I don't know, but if this tale of a part-human monster terrorizing a 
museum is any sort of clue, movie producers will stop.
Penelope Ann Miller, a fine actress, is useless here as the brilliant, beutiful, 
endangered scientist who has to get herself and a bunch of other idiots to safety. What's 
really sad, is that Miller, a relative no-name, is the biggest star in this film. No, I 
take that back -- what's really sad is this film. I could go on for paragraphs and 
paragraphs about the stupidity and implausability of this cartoonishly bad movie, but I 
digress. This is a bad movie. Bad. Look at it on the shelf and walk away.
THAT DARN CAT is a slapstick-y comedy about a cat that stumbles onto a kidnapping. Patti 
(Christina Ricci) lives in the nothing-town of Edgefield, a suburb of Boston, and she 
hates it there. She likes her cat, though, and when this cat comes home with a watch 
around its neck saying "Hell" (well, "Hell" actually) she begins putting all the pieces 
together, and after much hassle, gets a rookie FBI agent (Doug E. Doug) to help her.
I wasn't expecting much from this live-action, Disney children's comedy. And I didn't get 
much, either. I did however, get enough to have _almost_ enjoyed the movie. While some 
jokes fall flat (a Keystone Cops-esque chase through town), some are quite funny (two 
rival gas-station owners' feud). The way that Edgefield goes from being a boring, stupid 
town by day, and a wierd, PG-BLUE VELVET-ish town by night, makes me wonder what an 
auteur like David Lynch could've done with this script. Rent it if there's nothing to do.
