Title
Review for Don't Say a Word (2001)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "DON'T SAY A WORD" (20th Century-Fox)
  In this child-snatching suspense story, Michael Douglas plays Dr.
Nathan Conrad, a successful Manhattan psychiatrist whose eight year-old daughter
Jessie (Skye McCole Bartusiak) is kidnapped on Thanksgiving by Koster, a
European jewel thief (Sean Bean). To get her back, the doctor most promise not
to call the police. He is then given seven hours to unlock the mind of a new
patient, a deeply disturbed woman, Elisabeth Burrows (Brittany Murphy), referred
to him by a colleague (Oliver Platt), and extract a six-digit number that's the
key to locating a rare red diamond worth $10 million that Koster and her father,
his ex-partner, stole a decade ago. But Elisabeth cryptically insists, "I'll
never tell...any of you." Adapted by Anthony Peckham and Patrick Smith Kelly
("True Crime") from Andrew Klavan's novel and directed with visual flair by Gary
Fleder ("Kiss the Girls"), this is a tension-filled, if predictable, thriller,
juggling four different scenarios: a) the doctor's desperate attempts to draw
the number out of Elisabeth, b) flashbacks to the childhood trauma that has kept
her in various psychiatric institutions for years, c) the crooks' interaction
with the doctor's bedridden wife (Famke Janssen), immobilized after a skiing
accident, and d) the involvement of a tough NYPD detective (Jennifer Esposito)
in a seemingly unrelated murder that eventually leads to Jessie's captors.
Problem is: you know from the getgo how it's going to turn out - and none of the
actors are trying anything new. Douglas faced similar nightmarish predicaments
in "The Game" and "Fatal Attraction," while Brittany Murphy honed her
quirky/crazy character in  "Girl, Interrupted." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Don't Say a Word" is a disturbing, diverting 6, escapist entertainment
that really shouldn't be dissected.

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A rich psychiatrist with a great home life gets his cute daughter kidnapped by
some bad guys who want him to extract some information from the mind of one of
his nutty patients. Of course, the patient is not cooperative and the doctor
only has a few hours to comply with their demands, before they kill his
daughter. Pretty good premise, no?
CRITIQUE:
If you're not a fan of movies packed with plot holes, inconsistencies and yes,
even more plot holes, heed my words and skip this hollow thriller. And I don't
like saying that either, since this film actually had some potential and started
off pretty well. Sure, the story is basically just an amalgamation of RANSOM,
PRIMAL FEAR and NICK OF TIME pureed into one, but the whole "psychiatrist
working against the clock" thing, actually had me engaged at first. But it's at
about the halfway mark of this movie, that the bottom drops out and all that
we're left with are a lot of questions and very few plausible answers. We get
the overly smart kid who manages to "pull one" over on the bad guys. We get a
weak woman with her leg in a cast beating the crap out of a tough bad guy. We
get Douglas' character, a New York uppedity psychiatrist, suddenly turning into
an action hero, with moves and attitude to boot. And what about the film's main
plot point? Why would the bad guys still give a crap about this thing after 10
years, and even more so, why would they only give the shrink until the day's end
to do his part? (you waited 10 years, what's another few days?- or why not set
up another heist instead?). I'll tell you why, it's because we wouldn't have a
(bad) movie otherwise, that's why! And many, many more.
Ugh, whatever the case, it was just about the time that Douglas' character
suddenly removed Murphy's character from the mental home (and how come she went
with him so nicely? I thought she didn't trust him), that I turned to my buddy
and asked when the movie had turned into a joke. And a few bogus chase and
action sequences later, we were left with a long-winded ending that did little
to answer any other questions I might've still had, and actually brought up even
more contradictions. Badly put together, this movie features some decent acting,
some nice cinematography and an initially interesting premise, but loses it all
in a haze of plot miscues which ultimately leave you with little care for
anyone. In fact, if it wasn't for Brittany Murphy's excellent portrayal of a
traumatized teen, Jennifer Esposito's embarrassing performance as a police woman
(yeah, right! watching her delivering lines was the funniest part of this flick-
but it wasn't supposed to be) and Michael Douglas' cool "regular guy" part,
there would be little reason to remain seated until the end of this picture.
Incidentally, can anyone please give me one good reason why Esposito's character
was in this movie in the first place? She was completely superfluous.
And on top of all that, by the end of this flick, the director seems to have
realized how dumb the audience must be to have bought most of the garbage that
he'd been shoveling out for the hour and a half prior, and decides to add insult
to injury by flashing back to an earlier character's death when one of the bad
guys dies, just so we know (as an audience), that the two are interrelated
somehow. Ooooh, thanks, Mr. Fleder...I appreciate the spoon-feeding, dude...yum,
yum...but how about explaining every other plot point in your film that made no
sense? Whatever. Either way, I don't give a rat's ass because this movie is a
dog and that's unfortunate because it actually did have some good points going
for it. See it if you like dumb thrillers. Incidentally, if you appreciated
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, you will likely enjoy this film as well. They both start
off with interesting premises, only to toss all logic and sense out the window
about halfway through.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Along Came A Spider (4/10) - Girl, Interrupted (5/10) - Kiss the Girls (7/10) -
Primal Fear (7/10) -- Seven (10/10)

Author
Steve Rhodes
In DON'T SAY A WORD, Michael Douglas, as psychiatrist Dr. Nathan Conrad, has
just hours to meet the kidnappers' demands or they'll kill his eight-year-old
daughter, Jessie (Skye McCole Bartusiak).  They don't want money.  They need Dr.
Conrad, an expert on dealing with severely troubled teens, to get his new
patient, Elisabeth Burrows (Brittany Murphy), to reveal a six-digit number that
only she knows.  Is he up to the pressure?  Can he pull it off?  Of course. 
He's Michael Douglas.  And being Michael Douglas he'll have you empathizing with
his pain.
Directed by Gary Fleder, this entertaining thriller delivers the goods.  Sure,
it follows a fairly standard formula, but you won't mind.  There are just enough
twists to keep you guessing, and the acting is solid from Famke Janssen, as
Jessie's temporarily incapacitated mother, to Sean Bean, as the omnipresent
leader of the kidnappers.  Fleder, as he did in KISS THE GIRLS, keeps you on
your toes and ready to be frightened, even if things rarely do go "Boo!"  It is
anticipation that causes chills not actions.
Although it is a satisfying film, it's not a flawless one.  The script by
Patrick Smith Kelly and Anthony Peckham, based on Andrew Klavan's novel, has
some easily fixed problems and troubling logical holes.  Det. Sandra Cassidy
(Jennifer Esposito), for example, foolishly ventures alone into a dark and
dangerous situation without first requesting backup.  The kidnappers, whose sole
goal is to get the numbers, have key information that will help Dr. Conrad find
them, yet refuse to tell him.  And in the missed opportunity category, why do
the writers take the time to setup an elaborate mystery around Elisabeth's
mental condition and then immediately solve it?  What's the rush?
Among the film's most satisfying twists is the story's final resolution.  In
this, the writers don't disappoint.
DON'T SAY A WORD runs 1:40.  It is rated R for "violence, including some
gruesome images, and language" and would be acceptable for teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States today, Friday, September 28,
2001.  In the Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century
theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 20th Century Fox / Regency/Village Roadshow
 Director: Gary Fleder
 Writer:  Caroline Case, Patrick Smith Kelly
 Cast: Michael Douglas,  Brittany Murphy, Famke
Janssen, Sean Bean, Oliver Platt, Jennifer Esposito, Skye
McCole Bartusiak, Conrad Goode
   Some people think that psychiatrists are among the most
neurotic people around, and why not?  A completely stable
person may simply not become interested in the field any more
than would a guy with 20/20 vision would choose to become an
optometrist. (Yes, I realize there are some.)   Nonetheless, if you
know Michael Douglas, who played Mr. Calm in Oliver Stone's
1987 film "Wall Street," you can expect him in his current role as
a psychiatrist to be stable, loving, smart.  But in "Don't Say a
Word," he is more like the unflappable fellow in David Fincher's
"The Game" who is shaken to his roots while playing a deadly bit
of recreation planned by his well-meaning brother.  Unfortunately,
"Don't Say a Word" shares more with Fincher's film than with
Stone's in that Gary Fleder's excursion into the psyches of the
traumatized and of the criminal has no sense of humor.  Even
worse, it takes no chances, mines no new territory, but instead
plays that old war horse, the race against time.  Movies like this
one deadl with kidnappers want something from their prey and
give the innocents x number of hours or days to come up with a)
money, b) information, c) whatever else is needed.  In a failed
attempt to offer complexity, Fleder juggles several balls
throughout the film as it plods on to its predictable conclusion, but
this succeeds only in making the slick story more convoluted
than it needs to be.
   The 56-year-old Douglas is paired with the 36-year-old Dutch-
born Famke Janssen, a woman whose youth belies her lack of
appeal as an actress.  Douglas is Dr. Nathan Conrad, seen from
the beginning completing a session with a youthful patient, the
kind of shrink we wish we all had--understanding and down-to-
earth.  He is Aggie Conrad's loving husband and the caring father
of eight-year-old Jessie (Skye McCole Bartusiak).  He is about to
fall apart emotionally when he finds his daughter missing on the
very morning that he is take her to a street party near his Upper
West Side New York neighborhood.  Receiving a call from
Patrick Koster (Sean Bean), he and his wife are warned--as
kidnappers are wont to do--to avoid calling the police.  Koster
and his small group of co-conspirators are full professional: they
have bugged the Conrad residence and can watch every move
made by his currently bedridden wife, stuck at home with her leg
in a cast and in traction.
   Fleder begins the film in a promising, if formulaic way,
choreographing a bank robbery in the Williamsburg section of
Brooklyn, one in which the criminals toss aside sums of money,
seeking only a gem said to be worth ten million dollars.  (Who
would pay them such a sum is something we can only guess.) 
When the gang is double-crossed by the father of Elisabeth
Burrows (Brittany Murphy as a teen), Elisabeth is traumatized,
held over in Bellevue Hospital, bearing a secret that the
gangsters are asking: she will not say a word, at least not to
ordinary psychiatrists like Dr. Sachs (Oliver Platt), and certainly
not to detective Sandra Cassidy (Jennifer Esposito)--which is
why the bad guys are after the only head doctor who might pry
the confidential information from the pale, unsmiling patient. 
These are smart criminals indeed.  But in a commercial movie
such as this one, they're never smart enough.
   After the terrible incident of September 11, some say that
"Arnold" movies may be on borrowed time...that the public may
no longer be willing to accept mindless fodder involving exploding
buildings and edifice-climbing heroes who would be the envy of
"Crouching Tiger"'s Michelle Yeoh.  Director Fleder's film may not
be an Arnold movie (he has done better than this with the stylized 
"Things To Do in Denver When You're Dead)."   But is there a
chance of extending this moratorium on blockbusters to
unimaginative race-against-time pics such as "Don't Say a
Word"?
Rated R.  Running time: 110 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
New York psychiatrist Dr. Nathan Conrad (Michael Douglas) is just trying to
get home to his laid-up wife Aggie (Famke Janssen, "Made") and eight year
old daughter Jessie (Skye McCole Bartusiak, "The Cider House Rules") on 
Thanksgiving Eve when his friend Jerry Sachs (Oliver Platt, "Lake Placid")
sidelines him with the complex case of catatonic, but newly violent Elisabeth 
Burrows (Brittany Murphy, "Girl, Interrupted").  At home the next morning, 
Nathan finds his daughter kidnapped and himself in a race against time to 
unlock a number from Elisabeth's head in "Don't Say a Word."
After delivering two terrific performances as compromised characters last
year,
Michael Douglas ("Wonder Boys," "Traffic") takes the low road in this messy
children-in-distress potboiler from director Gary Fleder ("Kiss the Girls").
Nathan's presumed psychiatric expertise with teenagers is established by
his telling a panty-stealing preppie that 'we all did that.'  After
five minutes with Elisabeth, an eighteen year-old no one's been able to
properly diagnose in her last ten years of institutionalized life, Nathan
declares her a talented faker.  Elisabeth, creepily played by Murphy in
a first scene which recalls Linda Blair in "The Exorcist," apparently accepts
Nathan's analysis and begins to assist the doctor even though she fears
giving him the information 'they all want.'  So much for this film's tension.
Screenwriter Patrick Smith Kelly ("A Perfect Murder") serves up a bunch of
kidnappers who can set up security cameras and bugging devices anywhere they
want, but don't have the sense to move their kidnap victim out of her
mother's hearing range.  A scary looking kidnapper (Conrad Goode, "Tomcats")
begins to soften towards Jessie in a bit of character development that's
forgotten when it should count.  A police lieutenant (Jennifer Esposito,
"Made") remains on the outskirts of the action until coming into
play at the exact right moment during the film's never-ending climax.
The head of a Bellevue-like NYC hospital is stupid enough to deny knowledge 
of a woman who was not only his girlfriend, but interned under him, to a 
police detective.  
While Famke Janssen does her best with her "Sorry, Wrong Number" sideplot,
Michael Douglas is left to act determined while racing against an arbitrary
deadline.  The promising Brittany Murphy could have made something of her
role if the screenplay hadn't abandoned its intriguing setup as soon as it
introduced it.  Sean Bean ("Ronin") is a stock bad guy,  Oliver Platt
is saddled with a plot-driven character and poor Jennifer Esposito might
as well be in a different movie.  Young Skye McCole Bartusiak is believably
precocious as Jessie.
Cinematography by Amir Mokri ("Coyote Ugly") and production design by Nelson
Coates ("Kiss the Girls") are of higher caliber than the material warrants.
Director Gary Fleder, whose film has been leaking air throughout its entire
run time, lets the whole thing deflate as one climax leads to another which
leads to yet another, each seeming more like stalling for time than anything
else.
The old adage holds true - if you can't say something nice, "Don't Say a 
Word."
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Don't Say a Word sounds a lot better on paper than it ends up being on the
big screen.  It's a psychological thriller based on a novel - a good start -
and features performances from the usually reliable Michael Douglas and
stars-in-the-making Brittany Murphy and Sean Bean, the latter of whom will
appear in the upcoming Lord of the Rings trilogy.
But Word is merely a predictable, by-the-numbers action flick with a little
psychobabble thrown in to the mix.  In fact, the only shocking thing about
the film is the fact it was one of three set to open on September 28 that
feature prominent shots of the World Trade Center (the others are
Serendipity, which will remove the potentially offending images; and
Sidewalks of New York, which also stars Murphy and has been pushed back to a
November release).
Word begins ten years ago with a group of five expert thieves knocking off a
Manhattan bank to get their mitts on a $10 million ruby (for some reason,
they pass up various other riches).  The gang, led by Patrick Koster (Bean,
Ronin), leaves in two cars and, as they get away, realize they've been the
victims of the old switcheroo.  Before we learn more, Word brings us into
the present day, where Dr. Nathan Conrad (Douglas, One Night at McCool's) is
heading home from his upscale psychiatry practice to spend the Thanksgiving
holiday with his wife Aggie (Famke Janssen, X-Men) and eight-year-old
daughter Jessie (Skye McCole Bartusiak, The Patriot).
Before he reaches his luxurious Central Park West home, however, Nathan
receives a call from Dr. Jerald Sachs (Oliver Platt, Ready to Rumble), an
old colleague who needs his help with a new patient at a dingy nuthouse on
the other side of town.  Figuring it will only postpone his arrival home by
an hour or two, Nathan meets Jerald and his patient, a spooky 18-year-old
named Elisabeth Burrows (Murphy, Summer Catch) who has been in 20 different
institutions and had just as many different diagnoses.  It seems that
Elisabeth witnessed her father being hit by a subway when she was eight and
hasn't been the same sense.
Long story short, Nathan wakes up the next morning to find his daughter has
been kidnapped, and her captors say he has until 5:00 that evening to pry a
mysterious six-digit code from Elisabeth's crazy noggin.  Hmmm.let me get my
abacus.  Elisabeth is 18 and her dad was killed when she was eight.  That's
ten years ago.  I wonder if her dad had something to do with the ruby
robbery?  It doesn't take a rocket scientist to stay at least one step ahead
of Word at any point.  It becomes clear fairly early on that Nathan will
both save his daughter and cure Elisabeth like some kind of psychiatric
superhero.  The only unanswered question is whether Word's final shot will
show Elisabeth eating Thanksgiving dinner with Nathan's family or not.
The best aspects of Word come from the most unexpected places.  Nathan's
wife Aggie has a broken leg and is in traction, confined to her bed for the
entire film while she's being watched by the bad guys' hidden video cameras
(it's like a reverse Rear Window).  And the badly underdeveloped
relationship between little Jessie and her kidnapper has a lot of potential,
as the girl seems to grow on the gruff, tattooed gangster (it's like a
reverse Stockholm Syndrome).  And Amir Mokri's (Coyote Ugly) cinematography
is, at times, quite captivating, especially in the gritty flashback scenes
and prologue that make New York City look like Sarajevo.
Instead, director Gary Fleder (Kiss the Girls) and screenwriters Patrick
Smith Kelly (A Perfect Murder) and Anthony Peckham, adapting from Andrew
Klavan's novel, insist on including a completely worthless subplot involving
a homicide detective (Jennifer Esposito, Dracula 2000) who may be the
toughest female law enforcement agent since J.Lo in Out of Sight.  Still,
her character does nothing but take up time, making Word about 20 minutes
longer than it needs to be.
1:52 - R for violence, including some gruesome images, and language

Author
Max Messier
Surrounded by hype, high hopes, and the promise of an over-the-top
performance by Clueless's Brittany Murphy, Don't Say a Word looked full
of promise.  Hell, when I hear that "I'll never tell" whisper on the TV
commercial, goose bumps run up my spine.
Alas, Word is filled with little but disappointment, a kooky mix of
Girl, Interrupted and Ransom, with Michael Douglas and company
collecting a paycheck to plod through a vapid and dull kidnapping
thriller.
Douglas stars as Nathan Conrad, renowned New York psychologist, devoted
father of Jessie Conrad (Skye McCole Bartusiak), and loving husband to
Aggie Conrad (Famke Janssen).  After a gang of jewel thieves, headed by
Sean Bean's Koster, kidnaps his daughter, Nathan is forced to extract
from his new patient, the catatonic and violent Elisabeth Burrows
(Murphy), the location of some hidden bank job booty that her father hid
from the Koster gang a decade ago.  But with hard-nosed Detective Sandra
Cassidy (Jennifer Esposito, doing her best J. Lo impression) tracking
down Koster and his gang of hoodlums, the stakes are raised as Nathan
races against the clock to crack the mystery of Elisabeth's head in
order to get the goods inside.  The catch - Nathan only has until five
o'clock to solve the puzzle!  Whoa, the suspense is almost too much.
Don't Say a Word loses the audience inside of 15 minutes.  Murphy looks
and acts like Linda Blair from The Exorcist during the first part of the
movie, then turns around and reprises like her role from Girl,
Interrupted.  And the only real "crazy" to be found in the film is
director Gary Fleder's (Things To Do In Denver When You're Dead)
staggering use of flashback sequences.  Oliver Platt, Famke Janssen, and
even Sean Bean are decent actors, but the stuff they are given here --
such as a bedridden wife fighting off the token black guy with her
crutch -- is insulting and demeaning.   Additionally, the use of the
surveillance cameras and laptops to track Nathan's every move is
downright unbelievable.  How do ex-cons fresh out of the Big House
afford all this equipment?
Despite its flaws, Don't Say a Word is surprisingly some of the best
mainstream film you'll find this month -- and audiences will lap it up. 
Americans love lukewarm, half-baked thrillers starring big names and
accompanied by cheap thrills.  Someone get me my lithium!
Director: Gary Felder
Producer: Anne Kopelson, Arnold Kopelson, Arnon Milchan
Writer: Patrick Smith Kelly, Anthony Peckman
Starring: Michael Douglas, Oliver Platt, Famke Janssen, Sean Bean, Guy
Torry, Jennifer Esposito, Skye McCole Bartusiak, Isabella Fink
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
