Title
Review for Cold Fever (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Atsushi Hirata is a stranger in a strange land.  He wanted to
spend his holiday in Hawaii, but his grandfather talked him into an
unusual family responsibility.  He has to trek across Iceland in the
dead of winter to the remote spot where his parents died seven years
before.  There he must perform a traditional Japanese memorial
ceremony.  Any journey through unfamiliar territory can be a mixture of
comedy and horrors and in the frozen Iceland of December the right (or
wrong) error could prove fatal.  (One ominous road sign asks in several
languages "Does anyone know you are going this way?")  In Jim Stark's
and Fridrik Thor Fridriksson's screenplay characters time and again
find they must put themselves in each other's hands or volunteer help
to others.  Sometimes it proves to be a wise thing to do; sometimes it
is a mistake.
     The most active character in the story is the landscape of
Iceland, a colorless combination of fog, ice, snow, and black rock.
Sometimes it looks dead only to come to life unpredictably spouting
volcanic geysers of hot water into the air.  In this mostly frozen
world Atsushi is a fish out of water, trying to understand the strange
Icelandic people and the rules they live by.  Notable among the people
he meets are a woman who claims to collect funerals (or rather pictures
and recordings of them), a bar of Icelanders who consider themselves
cowboys, and an incredibly rude and vulgar American couple.  Sometimes
Atsushi finds that going with the flow of the people around him is
dangerous, but sometimes fighting the tide is worse.
     Atsushi Hirata is played by Masatoshi Nagase, who seems to be
specializing in the role of Japanese tourist abroad.  He played a
similar character in Jim Jarmusch's MYSTERY TRAIN.  His character does
not convey a lot of emotion that is obvious to a Western audience.  And
much of his character's appeal is in the empathy of what he must be
feeling rather than his expressiveness.  Fisher Stevens and Lili Taylor
play the American couple whom Atsushi finds much more trouble helping
than it seems worth.  Much more appealing is the morbid but pleasant
fan of funerals, Laura, played by Laura Hughes.
     Not all that is in the script is original or even in good taste.
To create artificially some visual excitement on the first scene of the
frozen landscape of Iceland, Fridriksson borrows a touch from THE ROAD
WARRIOR.  There seem to be some scenes poking fun at the lack of appeal
of Icelandic cuisine that seem a little over the top.  The moral of the
story and what Atsushi has learned from his experience is a line simply
spoken at the end of the film and seems a bit pat and uninspiring.
Except perhaps for its setting this film is not going to win any awards
for originality or profundity or even for being highly articulate of
its theme.  But it is as amiable a film as many playing at local
theaters and from time to time even manages a few surprises.
     COLD FEVER is a likable if somewhat unoriginal road picture, even
it may not have much to say other than to accept Icelanders however
weird their customs are.  One wonders if the beautiful but forbidding
vistas of Icelandic landscapes, looking like views of another world,
will help or hurt Iceland's tourist business.  The film itself rates a
low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Joan Ellis
      "Cold Fever" is a one-man road movie; it is also a
cross-cultural feast so funny and touching, so eccentric, that we
watch in fascination just to see what can possibly happen next. 
On one level, nothing happens in this movie; on another,
everything does.
     Atsushi Hirata is a successful young Japanese businessman
about to enjoy a golfing vacation in Hawaii.  In short order we
see that he is imprisoned in a world of corporate musts.  He must
make a toast, he must perform, he must do his duty, and finally,
pushed by an elder, he must cancel his vacation in order to
administer burial rites for his parents, who died in an
automobile crash while living in Iceland.  Only he can bring
peace to their spirits.    
     The melancholy young man is lifted by jetliner out of one
culture and deposited in another utterly alien one. The great
beauty of this movie, and its gift to the audience, is the
extraordinary immediacy and strength of the cultures it evokes.  
     Atsushi has chosen to cross the country during the
impossible winter season--by cab, car, horse, and on foot. 
Propelled by obligation, he will allow nothing to keep him from
reaching his goal.  By the time he arrives, we are quite
literally shivering in our seats from watching horizontal sleet
blowing across an already frozen landscape.  
     Thick-coated horses stand in the wind.  Night hovers
continually, lightened only by the ubiquitous whiteness.   Alone
on a one-lane road of rutted ice, Atsushi's few random encounters
are with people who sing--almost in self-defense against the
hostile climate that surrounds them.  They sing in barns, at
funerals, in the backs of trucks as they negotiate a countryside
of white buildings, white water, and white ice. 
     "Does anyone know you are going this way?" asks an ominous
road sign.  Finally, in a bar where the villagers drink "Black
Death," the national sedative," and sing American cowboy songs,
he meets an old man who will guide him on the perilous final leg
of his impossible journey.  The harshness and isolation have
produced an Icelandic Jimmy Stewart.
     Atsushi says very little: "Very strange country; very long
night; very complicated road system."  Not much more than that. 
But he brings great dignity to his quest, and the rituals he
performs for his parents are beautiful.  His search is a majestic
obligation that is the only and very ample thread on which the
filmmakers hang their acute observations of a hostile climate and
the culture created by it.  
     Credit the cross-cultural independent film makers who
imagined this story, and Masatoshi Nagase, who carries it as
Atsushi.  As he says at the end, "Sometimes, the road you take
leads you to a place that's not on any map."  He's right, and it
is a very good trip.      

