Title
Review for Nuns on the Run (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Randy Parker
        There are only a few contemporary actors who can make fans laugh
simply by appearing on screen.  These actors don't have to do anything
funny; just looking at them brings on the giggles.  Woody Allen and John
Cleese are prime examples, and if you ask me, so is Eric Idle, who--unlike
Cleese--has been woefully underutilized by filmmakers since Monty Python
disbanded.
        Finally, seven years after MEANING OF LIFE, Idle has a starring
role (opposite Robbie Coltrane) in NUNS ON THE RUN.  NUNS, unfortunately,
is a mindless, unoriginal caper comedy, but thanks to Idle's elastic face
and silly expressions, the movie is thoroughly entertaining.  We're talking
dumb but fun.
        Idle and Coltrane play aging crooks who are looking to go straight.
As the title suggests, they end up hiding in a convent, disguised as nuns.
Idle, who is no stranger to appearing in drag, brings his customary flair
to the role.  Coltrane, as Idle's partner in crime, plays his part well,
but he doesn't have Idle's comic pizazz.  Camille Coduri, who plays Idle's
love-interest, is adorable in a Goldie Hawn sort of way.
        Writer-director Jonathan Lynn throws gag after gag at the screen,
and only some of them stick.  The movie's appeal derives more from the
comic performances than from Lynn's uneven screenplay, which relies too
much on cheap, physical humor.  NUNS ON THE RUN is no FISH CALLED WANDA,
but it's nearly impossible to resist Eric Idle as a nun.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     STAR WARS and RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK shifted the market for adventure
films.  Their slam-bang pacing spoiled audiences who previously were happy
with the pacing of adventures such as SHE and THE MAN WHO WOULD BE KING.
Monty Python's various films and television show similarly shifted the
comedy audience.  By pre-Python standards NUNS ON THE RUN would be a
frenetic comedy with some interesting characters and a few good laughs.  It
has been getting some bad press as being not funny enough and lacking in the
punch that a film such as A FISH CALLED WANDA had.  Well, it really does not
have the steady laughs of A FISH CALLED WANDA, but it is every bit as funny
as the classic Alec Guinness Ealing comedies.  And if it is less substantial
than classic Guinness comedy, it is certainly more substantial than most of
the modern comedies being made.  That means that it is roughly eight times
as good as empty comedies such as THROW MOMMA FROM THE TRAIN or BLIND DATE.
     In NUNS ON THE RUN, Brian Hope and Charlie McManus are two aging hoods
who want to get out of crime.  Their boss cannot afford to have them
possibly double-cross the organization, so when the boss finds out they want
to leave they know their days are numbered.  Their only chance is now to
double-cross the organization and steal enough money to escape to Brazil.
When their gang is going to rob a local triad gang, Hope and McManus see
their chance to make off with the boodle.  [Note of explanation: Someone can
correct me if I am wrong, but I believe the Triads are the same secret
organization sometimes known as the Tongs.  The film makes fun of their love
of cutlery.  The real Tongs are as professional and deadly as any of their
European counterparts.]  Things do not go well for the two and they end up
with both their own gang and the Triads chasing them.  Their only escape is
to disguise themselves as nuns and hide in a convent.  But Hope is
bewildered by the Catholic religion he is now expected to know.  McManus is
Catholic and tries to rescue him, but his explanations are little help.  In
the discussion of religion, the comedy is at its richest.  Hope's very life
may depend on his understanding McManus's muddled explanation of the Holy
Trinity and the basic doctrines of Catholicism.
     For the most part this comedy could have been done in the 1950s.  It
pokes a little fun at Catholicism, but never to the point that it is really
disrespectful.  The film's only scene that would have been out of place in
the 1950s is a delightfully vulgar shower room scene.  In general the film
works like a well-oiled machine, with many diverse plot elements coming
together in unexpected combinations.
     Eric Idle of Monty Python fame stars as Brian Hope.  Idle's age is
starting to show on him and he looks surprisingly middle-aged here, but that
helps to give Hope character.  For once his antics are outshone by a non-
Pythonite, Robbie Coltrane, who played Falstaff in HENRY V and Bob Hoskins's
mystery-loving friend in MONA LISA.  The film was written and directed by
Jonathan Lynn, who in this country is best known for writing and directing
the television shows "Yes, Minister" and "Yes, Prime Minister."  While
lacking those series' sophistication, NUNS ON THE RUN is still an
intelligent, whimsical comedy.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
