Title
Review for Defending Your Life (1991)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Randy Parker
        DEFENDING YOUR LIFE is an imaginative vision of the afterlife from
the twisted mind of writer-director Albert Brooks, who also stars in the
comedy.
        After dying in a car crash, on his birthday of all days, Brooks
wakes up in Judgement City, a satirical rendition of purgatory where higher
beings evaluate the lives of newly deceased earthlings.  Brooks has five
days to convince two judges that he's worthy of passing on to higher plains
of existence.  Enter Rip Torn as the slick lawyer who defends Brooks in
court against prosecutor Lee Grant.  During his "trial," Brooks must view
episodes of his life on a movie screen, and these scenes are both
hysterically funny and painfully poignant.  It's impossible to resist
chuckling (and cringing) at Brooks as he and Torn try to explain away his
cowardly behavior on earth.  Torn, in particular, is in vintage comic form,
and he walks away with the picture.
The movie also features Meryl Streep, appealing as the love-interest, and
Shirley MacLaine, who pops up in a hilarious cameo.  While the film is
uneven, many of its gags are priceless.  Take, for example, the food in
Judgement City: it's always the most delicious you've ever tasted ... and
it's also CALORIE-FREE--so chow down!

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Find out where Southern Californians go
     when they die.  Albert Brooks's life-after-death comedy is
     charming and fun, but sidesteps substance.  Rating: low +1.
     Albert Brooks writes, directs, and stars in subtle little comedies
about human foibles.  He has a good feel for small characters and a good ear
for dialogue.  His MODERN ROMANCE has him wooing a beautiful woman with whom
he is unable to get along.  His LOST IN AMERICA has him quitting a good job
in a fit of pique and then going out in an RV to discover a real America
that is not what he thought it was.  Each gives a hint what he thinks life
is about, but it is open to some interpretation.  In DEFENDING YOUR LIFE he
turns to fantasy so instead of hinting he can come right out and state his
values.
     A Brooksian character, Daniel, dies on his birthday and finds himself
in a very Californian view of an afterlife.  In Judgment City he is given a
hearing to defend his life and the way that he has led it.  At stake is
whether he will attain a higher plane in the next life or not.  Rather than
just hint at his values, the way Brooks as screenwriter did in previous
films, he now can posit a heavenly host who can say, "This is the standard
by which you will be judged."  And his standard comes down to "Be brave."
If you do not insist on the salary you think you deserve, if you do not take
a chance on your investments, if you do not have sex with someone when you
want it, it will be held against you in Brooks's afterlife.  Ethics count
for nothing.  Helping others if not done in a spectacular feat of courage
counts for nothing.  Courage is what counts.  What could have been a view
into Brooks's personal philosophy suffers greatly from the apparent
shallowness of that philosophy.
     At heart then, the film misses a chance to be about something profound
and instead is just another film like L. A. STORY and SCENES FROM A MALL
about California values.  This particular vision of Limbo-adjusted-for-
Californians is a vision of what Brooks thinks his contemporaries would like
in an afterlife.  It is garish hotels and gourmet food.  You can eat as much
as you like without worrying about calories, cholesterol, or capacity.
During the day you have hearings on your integrity as a person, then at
night you can go hear a comic or see what you were in previous lives in a
sort of upscale convention center.
     Brooks's character meets and falls in love with the perfect woman,
Julia (played by Meryl Streep).  She is easy-going and affable and was a
hero in her previous life.  Julia is not so much a woman as a walking good
example.  She is sailing through judgment while Daniel is having serious
problems with a strident prosecutor (played by Lee Grant) and an enigmatic
and strange attorney played by Rip Torn.
     DEFENDING YOUR LIFE is diverting, but the ending is weak and the
philosophy is shallow.  I rate it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Albert Brooks
Starring: Albert Brooks, Meryl Streep, Rip Torn, Lee Grant, Buck Henry,
Leonard O. Turner, Ethan Embry, Susan Walters, Shirley MacLaine
Probably the reason Albert Brooks is a cult favorite rather than a big box
office draw is because he's like a much less cinematic version of Woody
Allen: he makes films that look and sometimes feel like big budget comedies
like "Father of the Bride" and "Mrs. Doubtfire," but contain so much
intelligence and wit, and deal with some broad and narrow human hang-ups
(mostly his own, but we can all relate).  The thing is if a normal
moviegoer (i.e. not me) went to see one of his films, they'd probably laugh
their goddam asses off because his films are hilariously clever, all while
never shooting over the audiences' heads.  The philosophical ideas are
general ones, and can easily be dissected from the surface.
"Defending Your Life" is one of the funniest and most clever comedies that
I've seen released this decade.  On the surface, it's just a really witty,
and hilarious film about what happens when you die.  But underneath is a
film that's about the way we judge everything we do, about the way we
punish ourselves for missing opportunities, and how we often forget to
merely be human.  The film was written, directed, and co-produced by
Brooks, one of the funniest men alive, who also stars in the film as Daniel
Miller, a reasonably happy man with a lot of neurotic hang-ups, and who one
day hits a bus head-on while driving home in his new BMW (while listening
to Barbra Streisand do "Something's Coming" from "West Side Story," no
less).
Instead of going straight to heaven, Brooks takes his character to a sorta
limbo world called Judgment City, where everyone who dies in America (from
the West Coast, of course) has to go to be calmed down from their "trip,"
and then be forced to "defend their lives."  Right away, this film is
hysterically witty: Judgment City looks like a normal American
city/vacation spot, complete with tall buildings, numerous hotels,
nightclubs, comedy spots, restaurants, and even golf courses (miniature and
real).  It even has billboards, and one woman who works in the city who
tells Daniel that if he has any suggestions on how the city can look more
like a city on Earth, there's a suggestion box at every corner.
As far as "defending his life," Daniel is given a lawyer, Bob Diamond (Rip
Torn - PERFECT casting), as well as a prosecutor, Lena Foster (Lee Grant,
another bit of perfect casting), who has a bit of anger aimed at Bob right
away (Daniel tries to get a mistrial because of this).  Daniel discovers
that he will have four days of trials in a tiny courtroom with only
himself, the two lawyers, and two judges presiding, where he will watch
movie versions of certain episodes of his life that show him as being a
wimp or being strong.
Meanwhile, Daniel meets a woman his age, Julia (Meryl Streep), who has also
recently died in a stupid accident, and the two immeadiately hit it off,
and find that they are entrapped in an earthlike romance.  Both have
varying degrees of unhappiness, and they soon find that they may be parted:
those who win their trials can go onto the "next part of existence;" those
who lose go back to Earth as someone else...and it looks like Julia will be
winning and Daniel will be pathetically losing.
One of Albert Brooks specialities is effortlessly blending hysterical bits
of comedy with warmer more sentimental parts, all without ever becoming
sappy or cheap.  Here, he blows us away with his many pokes at ideas of
afterlife, like how when you die, you can eat whatever you like and how
much you like, all without ever gaining any weight...and it's the best food
you'll ever eat.  And then he gives us a romance which is quirky AND
heartwarming, all because he and Streep have such great chemistry together.
 Brooks makes the cynical jokes while Streep laughs at them, all the while
being subtlely attracted to one another.  It's not often that you see a
comedy that can give us a romance that is not only interesting and moving,
but is also intelligent.
Everything that goes into this film is a part of Brooks and his certain
hang-ups, and his films are comic zeniths of imagining ways of overcoming
his fears and anxieties.  Here, he attacks the way that many of us are too
judgemental and hard on ourselves.  He shows Daniel as having two lawyers,
one who is making excuses for him and trying to show that some lackluster
moments were actually good for him; the other who is constantly criticizing
everything he does, and never really being able to let go of them.  The
fact is that Brooks is probably still plagued with these problems, as we
all are, but this film is a way of being able to at least understand them,
and maybe slightly overcoming them.
Still, if you're not blown away by the way he adds numerous amounts of
depth to his film, you'll at least be bowled over by his great sense of
humor, which finds laughter in basically everything, all while possessing a
good amount of intelligence.  His creation of Judgment City is inspired, to
say the least.  After all, wouldn't God or whatever created us try and make
those who die more comfortable to the massive change of lifestyle?  And
don't you all fear having to explain a very embarassing moment (or moments)
in your life to someone who has control over where you go after death?  And
don't you think that after all your failed relationships that the one time
you meet that someone who you want to spend your entire lifetime with is
after you die?  Isn't that just like life?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve_Tenney
     I just saw DEFENDING YOUR LIFE yesterday.  It stars Albert Brooks and
Meryl Streep.  It's one of the best movies I've seen in a long while.
It's the kind of movie which *should* cause people (at least anyone who is
at least half way conscious) to reflect on their own current life
situation (but in a kinder, humorous fashion).
     Basically Albert Brooks plays a divorced yuppie who is about to
celebrate his birthday alone, driving his brand new BMW.  He dies in
that BMW and is sent to a "Holding Place" (I am reluctant to use the
Roman-Catholic term of purgatory--because of the negative
connotations), called Judgement City.  The purpose of this city is to
review each new arrival's life, or at least some pivotal episodes of
such, to determine if they are ready to advance to the next level of the
universe, or to be sent back down to earth to try it again.
     "This is not a trial," one of the judges at Brooks' review
explains; instead, it is just a process to help them come to a fair
decision on his fate (so what's the difference?).
     Rip Torn does an excellent job as Brooks' defense attorney and Lee
Grant is just as able as the stern prosecutor.  Judgement City has been
made to look very familiar and earth-like to the judges so that they
can feel as comfortable and at-home as possible (it also saves the
production company a fortune in costly set designs and special effects).
     Brooks did a magnificent job in writing and directing and there's
plenty of gags to keep the audience laughing, (i.e., the weather station
in Brooks' motel room which states "74 degrees, perfectly clear All the
Time".  The dialogue is also very well written.
     In a nut shell, Brooks' review is not going well.  It seems that
the basic criteria in life to be judged by, is whether he was courageous
enough, if he had enough gumption to stick up for himself and others in
various situations.  Naturally Lee Grant repeatedly brings up many
episodes which clearly demonstrate how lacking Brooks is in the "gutsy"
category.  Rip Torn remains upbeat and almost jovial even in the face
of what seems to be a meager task; the few episodes he is able to scrape
up in Brook's defense are very pitiful.
     Brooks meets and falls in love with Meryl Streep, who's life review
is going just grandly, and seems to be a cinch for the next level.
Brooks does a great job in bringing out the humor by contrasting Meryl's
situation with his own (She gets to stay in a much classier hotel, with
a Jacuzzi and French pastries, they only need to review four episodes
from her life, compared to nine from his).   
     I really loved this movie and the concept of the afterlife (though
it's not really original).  If indeed we are judged in this manner after
we die, I'm sure it wouldn't be so simple or straightforward, and
courage wouldn't be the only criteria.  I'm sure kindness would have to
fall in there somewhere.  But one can only speculate-------

Author
Chuck Dowling
Defending Your Life (1991) ***** out of ***** - C:Albert Brooks, Meryl
Streep, Rip Torn, Lee Grant, Buck Henry.
Albert Brooks is probably the smartest comedic talent working in films
today. He wrote and directed "Defending Your Life" which is one of the
brightest and funniest films of all time.
Brooks plays Daniel Miller, a business executive who is killed in a traffic
accident. He wakes up in Judgment City, a waiting grounds of sorts where you
have to "defend" your life on Earth. A trial is held for every person who
dies to see if they have evolved enough to pass on to the next step in the
universe. If they don't pass they are sent back to Earth to start all over
again and eventually if that person never evolves enough, they are "thrown
away". The trial is like a trial here on Earth with prosecutors, defenders,
and judges. During the trial, moments from the person's life are shown on a
big screen in the courtroom, while the two lawyers battle to prove if the
person has led a good life and overcome his or her fears.
This is a brilliant idea for a film and Brooks pulls it off perfectly. He
takes what people could consider a controversial subject (life after death)
and makes a film which I don't see how it could be offensive to anyone. It's
sweet, charming, romantic (during his stay, Brooks meets Meryl Streep and
they fall in love), it's clean (Rated PG), and most importantly, it's funny.
This is one of those rare films where every joke is a winner. The music by
Michael Gore is excellent. And the supporting cast does an outstanding job,
especially Rip Torn as Daniel's defender.
"Defending Your Life" is Albert Brooks' best film to date and those who
enjoy this film should also enjoy "Real Life", "Lost in America", "The
Scout", and "Mother".  All are written and/or directed by Brooks.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     Albert Brooks is at it again, making another movie about one man's
quest to redeem himself.  Brooks directed, acted, and starred in
Defending Your Life, the very funny story of a man defending his life
after his death.
     Brooks is a Muppie (Middle-aged Urban Professional---what happens
to Yuppies after 35) who is clearly beloved by his coworkers.  But on
his 39th birthday, Daniel (Brooks) absent-mindedly crashes his new BMW
convertible into a bus, and finds himself someplace else.  The someplace
else is Judgement City, and it's a place people go after they die.  At
first, Daniel is just dazed, and meekly does whatever he is told.
     Judgement City is a wonderful creation, and Brooks deserves loads
of credit for creating the most amusing afterlife since BEETLEJUICE.
This is the afterlife as if the US government created it---everything is
very orderly, there are lots of glass towers, you can eat anything you
want and never gain weight, and people who behaved very well in their
lives get the best accommodations.  Daniel, for example, winds up in a
place that's a lot like a Holiday Inn.
     Daniel is instructed to go to meet his lawyer, Mr. Diamond.  The
purpose of a stay in Judgement City is to see if you are ready to go
onto the "next stage," or if you need to return to Earth to conquer your
fears by living another life.  He has to watch himself from nine
different days in his life and defend his actions.  These scenes show
him to be basically well-meaning yet fearful.
     When he isn't defending himself, Daniel discovers a woman, Julia
(wonderfully played by Meryl Streep).  Julia is a very sweet, vivacious
woman for someone recently dead.  She and Daniel take to each other
right away---after all, they are some of the few young people there.
It's clear that Julia is destined for the "next stage," and that Daniel,
no matter how good his intentions, is destined to return to Earth to try
again.
     Here's a spoiler only if you've never seen a commercial or trailer
for the film:
     The ending is shown in every commercial and trailer ever shown for
this movie.  This was a mistake.
     This movie is very sweet and good-natured and very funny.  However,
aside from Brooks and Streep, the other performances were aggravatingly
muted.  Jim, my husband, wished Robert Preston was alive to play Mr.
Diamond, because Rip Torn gave an annoying, two-note sort of
performance.  Likewise, Lee Grant was utterly colorless as the
prosecuting attorney.
     While there is much amusing in this movie, and I do recommend it
because the leads are so strong, Brooks belabors a few jokes.  The
eating-all-you-want comments got to be a bit much, along with the "small
brain" jokes.  I rate it a 7 on the Chuck scale.
     Oh, members of the Gaffe Squad will notice a minor one when Daniel
and Diamond are eating lunch.  I already sent a note about it to PREMIERE
magazine.
