Title
Review for River Red (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Castle Hill Productions 
 Director:  Eric Drilling  
 Writer:  Eric Drilling, play by Eric Drilling
 Cast:  Tom Everett Scott, David Moscow, Cara Buono, David
Lowery, Denis O'Hare, Michael Kelly, Leo Burmester, Tibor
Feldman, James Murtaugh
   When Cain asked, "Am I my brother's keeper?" he probably
meant the question to be rhetorical, but since that time, we
thinking people have wondered just what are our
responsibilities toward our family, friends, community, even
the world.  In his feature film debut, Eric Drilling tackles the
question by focusing on two young men, brothers united in
their hatred of their abusive father.  He traces the
consequences on both of an irrevocable action that solves
one of their problems but leads to more complications in their
lives than the gesture was worth. "River Red," a gothic tale of
patricide, guilt and redemption, is a small indie film that
telegraphs its storyline from the beginning.  Nonetheless, fine
acting, particularly by David Moscow in the role of the
sacrificing younger brother, engages our care for the two lost
souls as we deplore their malevolent deeds but rejoice in the
justifiable revenge which concludes the story.
   Writer-director Drilling opens his story with a flashback to a
remote, New Hampshire setting. Ten-year-old Dave Holden
and his kid brother Tom grimace as their chain-smoking father
takes over their backyard touch football, brutally tackling Tom
to Dave's impotent disgust.  Moving his characters to their
teens, Drilling shows Dave (Tom Everett Scott) and Tom
(David Moscow) trying to start an old pick-up truck that
they've bought, while disapproving dad (Denis O'Hare) knocks
Tom to the ground and punches out a headlight.  When Dave
stabs his father to death Greek-tragic style, alleging that he
did so for his brother's benefit, Tom, who is still a minor,
voluntarily takes the rap and is sent to a juvenile facility. 
Dave, left alone in the rustic house, cannot find the job he
needs to pay off his father's debts and, despite the help and
romantic attentions of a neighbor, Rachel (Cara Buono), he
pursues a life of petty, violent robberies to fund his needs.
   Drilling has a talent for portraying the atmosphere of a
remote area of Americana which offers a bar as the sole
place of entertainment and escape for the locals.  As
expected, the town is generally more neighborly than a big
city, with everyone from the local grocer to the auto repair
garage putting expenses on the tab.  Though Dave is unable
to get a loan from the bank or an extension of the deadline
for mortgage payments, he is befriended and temporarily
employed by bar owner Billy (David Lowery--an accomplished
lead singer with over a million records sold) and counseled by
a judge (Leo Burmester) and a psychiatrist (Tibor Feldman). 
His financial situation does not dampen the attentions of
Rachel (Cara Buono), who must make all the moves herself
because of Dave's newly-withdrawn nature.
   In addition to providing an arresting, if predictable, tale of
fraternity and patricide, Drilling's movie is a study of guilt. 
According to the writer, a man who feels guilty about his
brother's sacrifice does not endear the remorseful person to
his benefactor.  Rather, it causes little more than a growing
resentment, even hate, toward the person who has made one
feel culpable.  Even the poor dog, an endearing Golden
Labrador Retriever who is Dave's only companion, is sent out
to pasture because Dave does not like the way the animal's
look makes him feel blameworthy.
  A filmed version of Mr. Drilling's well-acted play which has
been opened up for the screen and is perfectly suited for
home video, "River Red" offers rewards to fans of the large
screen who can admire the lush, rural setting of New
Hampshire (actually filmed in the Northwest New Jersey of
Rockaway).
