Title
Review for Here on Earth (2000)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Bob Bloom
Here on Earth (2000) 2 stars out of 4. Starrng Chris Klein, Leelee
Sobieski, Josh Hartnett, Michael Rooker, Annette O'Toole, Annie Corley
and Bruce Greenwood. Directed by Mark Piznarski
 For young filmgoers - the audience for which it is targeted - "Here on
Earth" may be a new experience.
 These days, most relationship stories dealing with young men and women
center around how quickly he (she) can connive to get her (him) into
bed.
 Not so with "Here on Earth." This is an old-fashioned love story. It's
flawed, a bit saccharine and at times plays like a Hallmark movie of the
week, but it just drips with sincerity and stars three very attractive
young performers.
 The three protagonists in "Here on Earth" are stock archetypes: The
arrogant, snobbish, rich boy humanized by love; the young girl wiser
than her years; and the best friend who's a bit rough around the edges
but ultimately displays an understanding and kind heart.
 That these characters are played by Chris Klein, Leelee Sobieski and
Josh Hartnett make the clichés palatable.
 The plot: Klein's Kelley Morse - rich, Boston-bred, private school
educated - is put on probation and sentenced to spend the summer in
small-town Putnam, Mass., helping to rebuild a diner that was destroyed
because of a drag race in which he and townie Jasper Arnold (Hartnett)
were the perpetrators.
 Sobieski is Samantha. Of course, everyone calls her Sam, and she is
Jasper's girl until ..
 Aw, you can figure out the rest without me.
 During the course of "Here on Earth's" approximate 105-minute running
time we learn that Kelley's haughtiness hides a sensitive soul. How do
we know? Because he can quote Robert Frost.
 We also learn that Sam has a dark secret, and that Jasper's tough
veneer also is a masquerade.
 Prodded on by a sappy score by Andrea Morricone, son of legendary
composer Ennio Morricone, "Here on Earth" leisurely flows from one scene
to the next.
The movie is slow, but never dull.
 A fine supporting cast of adults, including Annie Corley, Michael
Rooker, Annette O'Toole and Bruce Greenwood, keep the younger performers
on their toes.
 The trio of young people are well lit and perform admirably. Sobieski,
especially, looks eerily like a young Helen Hunt, and her acting ability
improves with each role.
 Klein who was most enjoyable in "Election," here seems buffed and
bronzed. He appears to strain trying to play the bad kid, but relaxes
when his good qualities are allowed to break through.
 Hartnett is touching in the `other guy' role and holds his own with his
contemporaries.
 It's kind of refreshing to see a movie in which young people are not
sex-crazed adolescents with only one thing on their minds.
 Who knows. "Here on Earth" may ignite a romantic spark in you.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/57a29c3ae8f55739882568a50018c59e?OpenDocument
Starring Chris Klein, LeeLee Sobieski, Josh Harnett, and Bruce Greenwood
 In David Mamet's The Spanish Prisoner, Steve Martin puts his two cents
in on doing business in America.  "Always do business as if the person
you're doing business with is trying to screw you, because they probably
are.  And if they're not, you can be pleasantly surprised."  The
entertainment industry is a business, and I conduct myself around this
business with the expectation that each movie that I see will be
terrible.  That way, as I come out of the movie, I can be pleasantly
surprised.
 Don't think I'm crazy… It's reverse psychology: it's not supposed to
make sense.
 This weeks pleasant surprise was Here on Earth, a film which I expected
to be LeeLee Sobieski (the scantly-clad tailor's daughter from Eyes Wide
Shut) dropping her intellect and artistic integrity for a more sizable
paycheck.  As it turns out, her intellect and artistic integrity are
about the only things she doesn't drop in this film.  Sobieski plays
Samantha, a small town girl with vices that include (but are not limited
to) scenic waterfalls, birch trees, and Robert Frost poems.  Sam is the
object of the rivaling affections of two boys, a rich prep named Kelley
(Chris Klein), and a hick-with-a-heart named Jasper (Josh Harnett).
 Kelley would have been valedictorian of his prep school if it weren't
for the fact that a joyride / car chase with Jasper resulted in the
destruction of a diner named Mable's Table.  When a judge sentences the
two rivals to rebuild the diner, Sam predictably falls for Kelley.
Rather than play the vicious jealousy card, writer Michael Seitzman
chooses instead to give Sobeiski a terminal illness, and from there the
movie proceeds to its achingly predictable climax.
 After reading the summary on what is likely to go down in history as
one of the worst written scripts ever, you probably are pondering why
Here on Earth was a pleasant surprise.  Well, this film works exactly
like The Hurricane did: by placing great actors in parts not worthy of
them.  Sobeiski is one of the few people that actually can die with
style.  Klein is able to pull of the I-hate-small-towns shtick, act like
a jerk, and still have us love him.  Greenwood plays both stock roles of
the town sheriff and the grieving dad to a T, and Harnett truly shines
as the most human character of the entire group.  In addition to this,
the film is remarkably well photographed.  The nature outside of the
small town is captured perfectly in the lens of Michael D. O'Shea.
Director Mark Piznarski also handles his cast and crew well.
 All in all, Here on Earth is yet another movie that proves that a good
script really isn't necessary to have a good movie.  If it could just
have gotten a good script, Here on Earth could have taken me straight to
heaven.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Chuck Dowling
See this review as it was intended at: http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
Cast: Chris Klein, Leelee Sobieski, Josh Hartnett, Michael Rooker, Annie
Corley, Bruce Greenwood, Annette O'Toole, Elaine Hendrix, Stuart Wilson,
Ronni Saxon 
Written by: Michael Seitzman 
Directed by: Mark Piznarski 
Running Time: 96 minutes 
Spoiled rich kid Kelley Morse (Chris Klein) receives a new Mercedes for
a graduation present.  He and his buddies take it for a joyride to a
small nearby town, where he proceeds to torment the locals simply
because he's rich and they're not.  He ends up provoking Jasper (Josh
Hartnett) into a race and as a result, the local gas station and diner
are destroyed when they crash into it. 
Kelley is sentenced to rebuild the diner, and has to live with Jasper in
a spare room over his family's barn.  Jasper's girlfriend Sam (Leelee
Sobieski) soon takes a liking to Kelley however, despite the fact that
1) it was her family's diner that was destroyed and B) all Kelley does
is sit around, sulk, and smart off to the townspeople.  But when she
sees him sweaty and shirtless, that's apparently all she needs to lose
her feelings for Jasper (whose only fault seems to be a perpetual case
of hat hair). 
So Sobieski soon falls in love with Kelley, especially after the day she
follows him through the woods and hears him giving his graduation speech
(which he was unable to deliver because he caused the DESTRUCTION of
property and nearly KILLED dozens of people).  In the speech, Kelley
quotes a poem by Robert Frost, which just so happens to be Sam's
favorite poem as well.  Awwwww.  Soon they're frolicking around in the
fields and for some reason waste no time letting people in town
(especially Jasper's best friend) see them together. 
Kelley continues to make an ass of himself in town, especially when he
shows up at the town dance, drunk and steaming because Sam went with
Jasper.  Kelley runs off and decides to leave town.  Sam catches up to
him at the bus station and he asks her to come to Boston with him. 
Jasper shows up and tearfully confesses to Sam just how much he loves
her, and Sam, without even breaking stride basically says "See ya!" and
takes off to Boston with Kelley. 
Here on Earth goes in so many wrong directions from the start that by
the time its fairly decent ending comes around, its completely
worthless.  Chris Klein and Leelee Sobieski are two of my current
favorite young performers, and it's because of their presence that I
watched this film in the first place.  However, not long into the
proceedings I wanted to just reach into the film and strangle them
both.  I shouldn't have such feelings towards people I like, but their
characters are so infuriating that... well trust me, you'll feel the
same way. 
Even though both of the lead male characters are usually in the wrong,
Kelley is hands down the more unlikable of the two, simply because his
jerkish actions are calculated.  He INTENDS to be a jackass each and
every time he does it.  Jasper on the other hand, only REACTS to
Kelley's provocations, and afterwards comes across as being truly sorry
for his impulsive actions.  But, as in life, nice guys finish last. 
For the entire film we watch Sam fall in love with the guy no one likes
while the film's only sympathetic character gets completely crushed. 
THEN, a cancer subplot comes into play (where things get even MORE
infuriating, if you can imagine that).  What, things weren't depressing
enough for you Mr. Screenwriter?  Who greenlit this project?  Who "on
Earth" thought this would entertain anyone?  Perhaps if the film had
been structured where Kelley perhaps felt some remorse after he caused
the DESTRUCTION of property and nearly KILLED dozens of people.  But
even after he's destroyed these people's lives he continues to be a snob
to them, and ruins one more for good measure. 
Here on Earth is available on DVD from Fox Home Entertainment.  It
contains the film in its original theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1 and
is enhanced for 16x9 televisions.  Extras include Jessica Simpson's
music video for "Where You Are", a commercial for the film's soundtrack
(which by the way is the only good thing about the film), the original
theatrical trailer and five TV spots, trailers for other Fox releases
(Anna and the King, Anywhere But Here, The Beach, Drive Me Crazy, Ever
After, Romeo + Juliet, Simply Irresistible), as well as that new Fox
promo touting their upcoming DVD releases that I really enjoy.  The
picture and sound quality on the disc are fine... nothing that will
challenge anyone's audio/video systems of course.  Fans of this movie
(if any exist) should enjoy the DVD release. 
Here on Earth is not entertaining nor is it compelling.  No joy or
entertainment value can be derived from any of the events of the film. 
It is merely a waste of time, money and talent. 

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Teenybopper alert: this picture is made just for you.  Forget about the rest of us. We've seen it before in "Love Story," but you haven't so, here goes. Leelee Sobieski is a feisty waitress from the wrong side of the tracks. Josh Hartnett is her townie boy-friend, and Chris Klein is a cocky, Princeton-bound, Boston-bred prep-school kid who takes his shiny new Mercedes out for a drive in rural Massachusetts. A dangerous car race brings their lives together when it results in the destruction of a local diner called Mabel's Table, owned by Sobieski's mom (Annette O'Toole).  In fitting punishment, Klein and Hartnett are forced to rebuild the family-run restaurant as community service during the summer. That involves snobby Klein boarding with Hartnett's working-class family and falling for Sobieski.  But that's a minor trauma compared with the tragedy that happens later - when Sobieski discovers that her old track injury to her knee has developed into cancer. After "Eyes W!
ide Shut," TV's "Joan of Arc," and "A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries," Leelee Sobieski basks in the teenage mainstream, while amiable Chris Klein goes sulky and serious after "American Pie" and "Election." They do their best with the material they're given. It's just too bad that Michael Seitzman's soap-opera script is so lame, Mark Piznarski's direction so slow-paced and prosaic, and Andrea Morricone's score so schmaltzy. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Here on Earth" is a pubescent, tear-jerking 4. The title comes from poet Robert Frost's musings about the beautiful Berkshire woods where the lovers discover "a little bit of heaven, here on earth."

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Here On Earth (2000) 
Rated PG-13; running time 90 minutes
Genre: Drama 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0195778 
Official site: http://www.hereonearthmovie.com/main.html  
Written by: Michael Seitzman
Directed by: Mark Piznarski
Starring: Chris Klein, Leelee Sobieski, Josh Hartnett, 
Bruce Greenwood, Annette O'Toole, Annie Corley, Stuart Wilson, 
Elaine Hendrix, Michael Rooker
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamshere.html
After my scathing review of the sappy Brokedown Palace, I attracted the 
attention of a 14-year-old AOL troll who, among other things, took 
umbrage with my dismissal of that piece of celluloid as MTV-esque in its 
lack of depth or sensible storyline.
Man, she'll be chompin' at the bit after this one...
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
A lookalike movie ("Doc Hollywood" without the humor, "An Officer And A 
Gentlemen" without the smarts) with lookalike actors (Leelee Sobieski 
looks like a young Helen Hunt, Chris Klein looks a bit like Keanu 
Reeves, and in the right light, Josh Hartnett looks like Tommy Lee 
Jones, pre-wrinkles), this flick soaks in the deep-fry vat of stupidity.  
"Here On Earth" (or "HOE", as I like to call it) simplistically recounts 
a mindnumbingly dumb "love triangle" between Kelley Morse (Klein), a 
spoiled little rich boy doing court-ordered community service rebuilding 
a diner he and "farmboy" Jasper Arnold (Harnett) trashed during a 
testosterone-driven drag race through Jasper's small town, and hometown 
girl Samantha "Sam" Cavanaugh (Sobieski), the object of Jasper's 
affection and Kelley's mapmaking tutorial.
Throw in a completely unnecessary (and just as completely unsuccessful) 
ploy to Pull At The Heartstrings with a subplot you could smell from a 
country mile away, and you'll understand Bammer's 5 Second Review of 
"Here On Earth": "Yuck".
The Upshot:
You Know Your Movie Sucked When...the only thing interesting about it 
was the geography fetish the writer seemed to have.  Bad enough that 
Richie Rich and Miss Thang had sex to a bad recital of various states; 
worse yet was Seitzman's inability to keep track of whether his story 
was set in Massachusetts, New York, or Toledo, Ohio.  More proof that 
public schools are failing our Youth; get thee back to Remedial 
Geography, sir! 
This one went south (one of the few geographical directions that Kelley 
didn't head) rather quickly, when Seitzman and Piznarski chose to make 
the Kelley character a total jackass from start to finish, without 
giving him even the hint of a redeeming characteristic (even his 
Obligatory Half-Nekkid scenes felt too slimy to be sexy) or reason to 
root for him.  Sam's attraction to Kelley made absolutely no sense in 
that, or any other, context; to say that it seemed to come from way far 
out of left field, would be a gross understatement.  And because she, in 
turn, stepped all over poor loyal Jasper in her eagerness to play Name 
That State with Kelley, she sank right into the quagmire with Richie 
Rich; instead of coming across as Innocence, Awakened, she more closely 
resembled Ho', Golddigging.  Of the three lead characters, only Jasper 
had my sympathies--and he came off looking like a damfool, for letting 
his long-time girlfriend use him like a doormat (even after they'd 
broken up, no less).
There's little use in talking about the other characters--all there to 
support the losing cause of propping up the lamebrained main- and 
sub-plots; or how the cinematographer tried to capture the essence of 
Small Town U.S.A.--so nicely done that all it did was remind me of how 
bad the humans looked within it. If the storyline, as foundation, is 
shaky, the rest of the "house" is doomed to crumble; and "HOE" was 
standing on some seriously shaky ground.  
The last time I felt this mad after having watched a movie was in 
January of this year.  The target of my anger?  You remember a lil' 
something called "Supernova", no?
The "Black Factor"  [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
And now that I've offended the sensibilities of the MTV Generation, 
let's see if this application of the BF Brush winds up alienating me 
from My People...
As I sat in the theater watching "HOE", I kept pinching myself to make 
sure I hadn't nodded off and missed the part that explained why Sweet 
Smalltown-girl Sam would go for a [I'm running out of non-curse words to 
call him] stuck-up cretin like Kelley.  Clearly, Sam suffered from the 
same sicknesses that far too many Black women in America suffer from: 
the "No Good Black Men Left" fever and the "...So I'll Take This No-Good 
One" flu.  I could easily see the three main characters being Black, 
without skipping a beat: my mind's eye saw Charlie, faithful sturdy 
9-to-5'er with a mortgage and a receding hairline, supporting LaShaun, a 
simple city girl who hangs tough with him--until Slick Maurice rolls up 
to the curb with his Lexus and his Rolex; then it's Goodbye Charlie...
Hey, dog me out for that stretch of the imagination if you will, but at 
least my version *entertained* me for a minute or two.
Bammer's Bottom Line: 
Is it Just Me, or have most of the movies so far this year been bloody 
awful?  Maybe it's another ill effect of La Nina.  Here's to hoping the 
Bad Weather surrounding these writers, directors, and actors, will clear 
up soon.
"Here On Earth" (rating: greenlight): 
Somewhere along the way, it lost its compass.  But not even a 
state-of-the-art Global Positioning System could've helped "HOE" find 
its way home.

Author
Scott Renshaw
HERE ON EARTH
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Chris Klein, Leelee Sobieski, Josh Hartnett, Bruce Greenwood,
Annette O'Toole, Michael Rooker.
Screenplay:  Michael Seitzman.
Producer:  David T. Friendly.
Director:  Mark Piznarski.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  97 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Mark Piznarski's HERE ON EARTH does not take place here on Earth. It
takes place in a world of sun-dappled meadows, where golden backlighting
sets every moth into glorious relief. It takes place in a world where
lovers exchange sentiments the same shade of purple generally associated
with Barney the Dinosaur. It takes place in a world where class difference
is the ultimate impediment to happiness, where wealth is the ultimate
evil, where love means never having to say you're sorry. Welcome to the
world of HERE ON EARTH: Planet Melodrama.
     I'm not about to dismiss melodrama out of hand; if daytime drama,
professional wrestling and romance novels are any indication, people still
love conflicts writ large and lacking in moral shadings. Even TITANIC, for
all its spectacle, was essentially melodrama. But melodrama also has its
own rules, and HERE ON EARTH consistently violates them. The set-up finds
New England prep school student Kelley Morse (Chris Klein) celebrating his
impending graduation by heading into the nearby town to make trouble with
the locals. He ends up in a drag race with Jasper Arnold (Josh
Hartnett) which results in the destruction of the town diner. Kelley and
Jasper are then sentenced to spend the summer re-building the diner, which
offers plenty of time for mutual attraction to bloom between Kelley and
Jasper's longtime girlfriend Samantha Cavanaugh (Leelee Sobieski).
     There are, of course, impediments to the Kelley/Samantha coupling in
Michael Seitzman's script. Samantha's sister (Elaine Hendrix) has been
left with a child after a fling with a guy from the same prep school,
meaning the Cavanaughs are opposed. Kelley's father (Stuart Wilson) has
big plans for his son that don't include small town girls, meaning he's
opposed. And there's a twist of medical tragedy in store down the
line. The two leads therefore proceed to play their embarrassingly
scripted courtship for just the Hollywood concoction that it is. Klein
alternately pouts over his plight and reveals his longings for a more
fulfilling life; Sobieski plays the winsome heroine with Mary
Pickford-esque sidelong glances. Their relationship doesn't resemble
anything you would ever see between two actual human 18-year-olds, but
that's fine. When Sam silences Kelley's fumbled attempt at an apology with
an all-forgiving finger to the lips, you know you've been spending time in
a place where romanticism trumps reality.
     Still, there are little things that never feel right about this
world. It's a problem that the rejected boyfriend is from a
salt-of-the-earth farm family, meaning he can never play the Billy Zane
TITANIC role of scowling villain. In fact, you'd almost root for Jasper to
win out, if not for the fact that you may spend most of the film wanting
desperately to reach through the screen to comb his hair. The disapproving
Cavanaugh father (Bruce Greenwood) -- a sheriff, no less --  similarly
becomes a weeping softie. The one villain who's allowed to be a villain is
Kelley's industrialist dad, but we're cheated out of the one moment the
film seemed to have been building to: Kelley's pointed repudiation of the
life his father has planned for him. There's no moment of melodramatic
satisfaction from seeing the bad guy get a good telling-off. For a
melodrama, HERE ON EARTH seems awfully reluctant even to have a bad guy.
     I'm not sure whether I could have embraced even a fully melodramatic
HERE ON EARTH. Even in its basic premise, it's too awkward a melding of
adult tear-jerker and doe-eyed teen appeal romance. Still, there's no
question that melodrama can work when those involved are unashamed about
the fact that they're creating melodrama. That's why people cheer and boo
at wrestling matches; it's why people spend 20 years following their
favorite soap operas. That should have been why the bonding of Kelley and
Sam across opposite sides of the tracks would provide an emotionally
cathartic experience. Instead, it's a half-hearted effort in a genre where
heart is all that matters. The makers of HERE ON EARTH have made a visit
to Planet Melodrama. They just don't seem ready to live there.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Flash to filmmakers: Not all teenagers live their lives guzzling booze,
trying to gross out each other with bathroom humor and attempting to
outdo each other with sexual antics. Most teenagers show more maturity
and good judgment than that with which you normally credit them. You
don't have to hold their generation in ridicule in order to make a movie
about them. Their emotions do not have to be parodied.
HERE ON EARTH focuses on a romance between two kids who've just
graduated from high school. The chemistry between the two is real and
touching, and director Mark Piznarski concentrates on the basics. The
two young lovers are ecstatic just to be able to share a few kisses. In
an era when movies have people hopping into bed on their first date,
Piznarski has his actors work on the simple parts of affection, as they
gently brush each others cheeks with the backs of their hands. And he
has both of them spend significant amounts of time being pensive and
thoughtful, an attribute rarely seen in movies, especially those
featuring teens.
The story opens without much promise, looking like just another
formulaic picture. The young members of a working-class, small northern
town are at odds with the rich kids who attend the fancy prep school
nearby. Two car loads of kids, one from each side of the tracks, get
into trouble after they cause the local diner to go up in flames. The
judge sentences the two drivers, Kelley and Jasper, to spend the summer
helping to rebuild the diner.
Chris Klein (ELECTION) plays Kelley, the prep school's valedictorian.
Kelley, the son of an absent, workaholic father and a now-dead mother,
is an unhappy loner who suffers emotional constipation. Most of Klein's
performance is quite nice, but his big scene in the greenhouse comes
across surprisingly flat. As Chris's nemesis, Jasper, Josh Hartnett (THE
VIRGIN SUICIDES) delivers a performance that is remarkably bland until
it takes off smartly towards the end.
At the apex of a love triangle of sorts is Leelee Sobieski as Sam, short
for Samantha. An up-and-coming actor, Sobieski got her breakthrough part
as a young lover in DEEP IMPACT. Since then, she has done roles as
diverse as Joan of Arc for television and the leader of the campus nerds
in NEVER BEEN KISSED. Stanley Kubrick even showcased her in a small role
in his last film, EYES WIDE SHUT. In HERE ON EARTH she literally makes
the picture as she does most of the heavy lifting for the film's
romance. Sam is a sweet and innocent girl with a tough underside.
Sobieski's performance as Sam is so natural that she barely seems to be
acting.
Jasper has always been Sam's best friend. They sort of fell into being
lovers since they were comfortable with each other and used to hanging
out together. In a small town, their relationship is more one of
convenience than passion. When Kelley catches Sam's eye, she realizes
for the first time what genuine infatuation is.
Kelley's father, played by veteran actor Stuart Wilson, figures his son
will follow in his deal-making footsteps. This means that a small-town
girl like Sam should have no place in Kelley's life. "This girl is just
a distraction," he lectures his son. "That's what it is. You have much
bigger things ahead of you." His father is full of such unwanted advice.
"Keep your eyes forward on the important things," the father tells his
son sternly. Important things to the father all involve making money
with matters of the heart having no value whatsoever.
The movie works best when it keeps the focus on the lovers and away from
the subplot of the town versus the school. Although there are some nice
little pieces of dialog in that part ("My probation didn't say anything
about me spitting out watermelon seeds with you people."), we've seen
this part too many times before.
The poignant film with its slow and tender rhythms has delicately moving
music to match. Some aspects of Michael Seitzman's script, such the
diner's "Lover's Wall" and the character's penchant for quoting Robert
Frost ("One could do worse than be a swinger of birches."), could be
criticized as schmaltz. But, within the context of the romance, they end
up being touching instead.
This film, filled with good messages, has a little underage drinking --
3 beers to be precise. But, surprise, it shows that such activities,
even in relative moderation, can have negative consequences.
The story's tragic last act, which is hinted at early-on, adds dramatic
tension and wraps up the drama with an emotional punch. Although
effective, this story element makes it all too easy for cynical critics
to write off the movie as mere soap opera, ignoring the honest romance
that occupies the body of the movie.
So how do you shock a teen audience brought up on films like AMERICAN
PIE?  Our audience, chock full of teens, was aghast at the meadow scene
in HERE ON EARTH. What was the action that caused our teens to cry out
in shock?  As a sign of love, Kelley leaned over and kissed the top of
Sam's foot.
HERE ON EARTH runs 1:39. It is rated PG-13 for some sensuality and
thematic elements and would be fine for kids around 9 and up. Given the
film's romance angle and its pacing, kids under 13, however, will likely
not be interested in it.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Chris Klein made his big-screen acting debut less than a year ago but
still managed to be cast in two of the year's funniest films – Election
and American Pie.  His buff bod and goofy good looks made him a natural
to tackle the brainless jock-type roles that decent American comedies
seem to always need.  You could laugh just looking at him.  So who
decided that he should star in a romantic drama?
Klein stars as Kelley Morse, a Princeton-bound rich kid who, as the film
opens, learns that his father won't be able to attend his graduation
ceremony because of an important business trip.  As the class
valedictorian, Kelley's pop will also miss his son's speech to the
graduating class of Rallston, a private high school in the middle of
nowhere.  In fact, it's so in-the-middle-of-nowhere that Earth doesn't
seem to know where it's supposed to be set.  It was filmed in Minnesota,
but they definitely made it seem like it was supposed to be set in New
England – specifically outside Boston.  But there's a bus that says
Buffalo (NY) and there's a baseball stadium emblazoned `Go Mud Hens,'
which would imply Toledo (OH).  Maybe the title is supposed to be a
clever play on the film's patchy locations, but that's pretty
unbelievable seeing how Earth displays no other ingenuity whatsoever.
Basically, Earth is about Kelley falling in love with a simple farm girl
that he meets in the nearby town.  Samantha Cavanaugh (Leelee Sobieski,
Eyes Wide Shut) already has a long-term relationship (as well as a
strange knee problem) with Jasper Arnold (Josh Hartnett, The Faculty),
but is quickly swept off her feet by Kelley.  Does Sam choose the boy
born with a silver fork, knife and spoon in his mouth, or stick with the
boy she grew up with, even though he's a backwoods, Bible-thumping
simpleton?  Two words – Darva Conger.  Even though Sam's sister had her
big dumb country heart broken by a Rallston boy, Sam still ditches
Jasper for the boy with the perfect hair that can buy and sell her a
million times over.  Does anybody actually root for characters like
this?
The story is nothing new, so let's talk about the execution (or lack
thereof).  Earth is packed full of wuss-rock, from the Goo Goo Dolls'
ballad over the title cards, right through to Jessica Simpson's closing
credits stinker.  It also offers the most ridiculous sexual precursor
since the Affleck/Tyler animal cracker scene in Armageddon when Kelley
kisses Sam's feet and moves up her body naming each of her `parts' after
U.S. states.  One could even argue that Kelley is in the midst of a
massive sexual identity crisis, since he found his naked mother dead in
a bathtub some years earlier.  Oh, and he has a girl's name, and is
chasing after someone named Sam.
Multiplexes should be staffed with ushers standing at the theatre door
with boxes for guys to check their marbles into before watching this
film, because nobody with a pair will remotely enjoy it.  I'm pretty
sure the guy behind me lost his somewhere during the last third of the
picture because he was frantically searching the floor for something
when the lights finally came on.  The only thing that may be able to
hold a guy's attention is Sobieski, whose last theatrical release was
Eyes Wide Shut (which was actually filmed about three years ago).  She's
slowly starting to grow out of her `Helen Hunt's daughter' look and, in
the meantime, has sprouted C-cups, which are prominently displayed
throughout the film.
Earth was directed by Mark Piznarski, who is probably best known for his
work on television dramas like My So-Called Life and NYPD Blue, as is
cinematographer Michael D. O'Shea – not the beer, but the guy that
shoots Once and Again.  The awful script was penned by Michael Seitzman
(Farmer & Chase).  Earth is yet another early entry into my `Worst Films
of 2000' list.  If theatres had windows, I would have jumped out.
1:48 - PG-13 for mild adult language and some sexual content

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Mark Piznarski.
Cast: Chris Klein, Leelee Sobieski, Josh Hartnett, Michael Rooker, Annette 
O'Toole, Bruce Greenwood, Annie Corley, Elaine Hendrix, Stuart Wilson.
2000 - 96 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for mild profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 25, 2000.
"Here on Earth" may be a cliched melodrama, the same, or similar, to any 
umpteenth movie about romance and tragedy, but give it points for having its 
characters be fairly intelligent teenagers, rather than caricatures starring 
in the next high school comedy. As someone who cannot stand sappy movies, or 
anything that overly strains for tears from either happiness or heartbreak, 
the verdict on "Here on Earth" comes fairly as a surprise, considering that 
the cheese admittedly does grow rather overwhelmingly in the finale. But 
maybe it is the good type of cheese--Velveeta or Helluvagood, rather than a 
generic store brand--because, for once, its obvious manipulations really did 
work on an emotional level.
When Kelley Morse (Chris Klein), a rich and snobbish senior at Rallston 
Academy, an exclusive boys' prep school in Massachusetts, receives a sleek 
new car as a compensation gift from his father (Stuart Wilson), who will be 
away on business during his graduation, missing his valedictorian speech, he 
decides to take a ride with two buddies into a nearby rural community. After 
saying a few patronizing things to the waitress at the local diner, 
17-year-old Samantha (Leelee Sobieski), Kelley ends up getting in a drag race 
with her boyfriend, Jasper (Josh Hartnett), which ends with them crashing and 
the diner, owned by Sam's family, burning to the ground.
As punishment for the crime, Kelley is sentenced to spend the summer at 
Jasper's family's home, where the two boys will fulfill their community 
service by aiding in the reconstruction of the diner. At first, sulking and 
refusing to eat with the residents of the town, Sam eavesdrops on him one day 
in the woods, as he is giving the speech that he ultimately will not be able 
to give at his graduation. When he quotes Robert Frost's poem "Birches," 
Sam's favorite, she suspects there's more to Kelley than meets the eye, and 
maybe--just maybe--behind that hot-shot exterior is a warm, caring heart. 
Even as she starts to fall in love for the first time in her life, Sam cannot 
shake off the memories of her childhood and teenage best friend Jasper, whose 
romantic relationship with Sam just sort of happened, as if it was to be 
expected.
The ads for "Here on Earth" downplay the picture's tragic last half-hour, and 
that is a smart move. Once audiences--its target being teenage girls between 
13-18, but that could easily stretch out to other demographics--get into the 
theater to see a sumptuously photographed, idyllic romance, there will be no 
escaping its downbeat final act, which, if my theater-packed, sobbing 
audience is any indication, has the power to truly touch you, even as the 
characters may sometimes be saying things that are so clearly from a 
screenplay, rather than realistically coming out of their mouths. If my 
assumptions are correct, "Here on Earth" could easily become the big sleeper 
of the spring movie season, and since it may be the most successful film of 
its teen tragedy formula since 1970's classic weepy, "Love Story," it 
deserves recognition.
If the dialogue occasionally wanders into the sap, cheese, and corn 
factories, it not once is shameless, and the performances are easily the 
element that pushes the film up an extra notch or two. First and foremost, 
Leelee Sobieski, a wonderful and fresh find who has starred in such films as 
1998's "Deep Impact" and "A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries," and had a small 
role in Stanley Kubrick's 1999 opus, "Eyes Wide Shut," brings true depth and 
sharp-wittedness to her role as Samantha. You care about her, and the 
decisions she makes, because she is the type of teenager who favors reading, 
intellect, and true love, over meaningless sex and drugs, and has an amiable, 
kind presence. 
Her romantic counterpart, Chris Klein, has wisely chosen a serious role over 
his first two comedic ones in "Election" and "American Pie," and although he 
unavoidably has that goofy sort of look about him, it isn't his fault and he 
shouldn't be criticized merely for that. Klein tries his hardest and makes 
very few missteps, while the two of them (Sobieski and Klein) are well-cast 
together, and have perfectly tasteful chemistry. One look at them, and you 
just know there is nothing naughty at all going on in their minds. All they 
are interested in is finding someone who cares about and loves them as much 
as they likewise do.
The third, and last, central role is that of Jasper, played with a surprising 
poignant maturity by Josh Hartnett, who was unable to show off the full range 
of his acting abilities in 1998's "The Faculty" and "Halloween: H20," but who 
proves here that he is a truly talented young actor with an undoubtedly 
bright future ahead of him. Jasper is smartly written in Michael Seitzman's 
screenplay, not as a jerk who fights for his girl when she inevitably chooses 
to be with Kelley, but as an understanding young man who cares too much for 
Sam to not respect her choices in life. 
Added credit must go to Seitzman's script, not for its intermittent schmaltz, 
but for not resorting to easy teen stereotypes and a story whose suspense 
comes from whether two certain characters will end up together. We know for 
the majority of "Here on Earth" that Kelley and Sam will be together because 
their romance has begun by the 30-minute mark. Instead, we wonder what else 
the story has to offer, and although its late plot development can be easily 
telegraphed if you watch closely enough throughout, at least it seriously 
deals with tough life decisions and the mending, or closure, of loving 
relationships.
Directed by Mark Piznarski, "Here on Earth" has the ability to sometimes be 
too obvious, but if there is ever a genre for really good melodramas, ones 
that don't come around very often, that work despite their downfalls, then 
this is one of the prime candidates. Adding validity to the project, 
Sobieski, Klein, and Hartnett are a strong thespian team, and are aided by 
earnest supporting roles from the likes of Annette O'Toole and Bruce 
Greenwood (as Sam's parents), Elaine Hendrix (as Sam's older sister), and 
Annie Corley (as Jasper's mother). It may not be an earthshaking cinematic 
experience, but it does have its heart in the right place, here on earth.
