Title
Review for Anniversary Party, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Laura Clifford
Novelist Joe Thierrian (Alan Cumming, "Josie and the Pussycats") has 
recently returned home to repair his marriage to actress Sally Nash (Jennifer 
Jason Leigh).  They've decided to use the occasion of their sixth wedding 
anniversary to open their home to friends to celebrate their reunion, their 
decision to start a family and Joe's triumphant bid to direct the movie 
adaptation of his latest novel.  But the addition of some outsiders, one 
bearing ecstasy, wrecks havoc on "The Anniversary Party."
We know we're getting an 'insider' look at Hollywood Industry players 
as the film begins with Joe and Sally taking instruction from a personal
trainer as their housekeeper and cook race around preparing for their
party.  They seem happy, but cracks begin to appear even before their
guest begin to arrive.  It seems Joe's insensitively invited stranger Skye 
Davidson (Gwyneth Paltrow), a twentyish superstar who will play the lead in his
new movie - a role everyone knows he based on Sally.
The first arrivals are their business managers Jerry and Judy Adams (John 
Benjamin Hickey, "The Bone Collector;" Parker Posey), who have insisted they 
also invite their potentially litigious neighbors.  Sally's current
director Mac (John C. Reilly, "The Perfect Storm") and his neurotic actress
wife Clair (Jane Adams, "Happiness") are followed in quick succession by
Sally's costar Cal (Kevin Kline), his wife Sophia (Kline's real life wife
Phoebe Cates) and their two kids, those neighbors Monica (Mina Badie,
"Georgia") and Ryan Rose (Denis O'Hare, "Sweet and Lowdown"), Sally's
best friend Panes (Michael Panes) and Joe's old girlfriend Gina (Jennifer
Beals).
The beginning of the film is a treat as we watch these actors stretch,
creating all kinds of odd dynamics.  Jane Adams throws caution to the
winds as a self-absorbed new mother.  'Having a baby changes everything - 
you can't be the center of your own world anymore,' she observes amidst
her non-stop chatter about having to lose weight (she's stick thin), 
her concern over a new baby sitter (promptly forgotten) and demands
for a change of clothes so as not to carry pet dander home to her allergic
child (she chooses her hostess's high priced couture evening wear).
Down-to-earth mother Sophia watches all this in amazement (Cates is the
only member of this gathering who seems to be normal - presumably she's
simply playing herself - a retired actress married to a star.  When Sophia
says she's glad she got out of the business, the lines between reality and
fantasy are blurred, but we're glad her old chum Leigh (they costarred in
"Fast Times at Ridgemont High") got her back in front of the camera for this
natural performance.)
Mina Badie is a delight as the unfamous neighbor invited to play with 
the Hollywood elite.  She wants to fit in with a group who've all been
predisposed to regard her as a joke.  Denis O'Hare is a bit strident as
her husband, who passes up no opportunity to harp on the barking of Joe's
dog.  Badie lets us in on his real problem, though - jealousy - when she
cracks that all he needs is a good review (he's another writer).
Skye Davidson's arrival is comical.  Presented with her golden locks gently
fanning about her, Paltrow is excellent goosing her own persona.  'I think
you're my first goddess' gushes Joe.
Leigh becomes warier as the evening progresses.  First she must deal with the
ego-blow of her friends discovering that an actress 10 years younger than she
has gotten her own husband's starring role.  Then she overhears Mac harshly
criticizing her current performance.  Joe's too comfortable with Gina, then
is caught kissing the neighbor.  Leigh, with her baby teeth and bruised eyes
adding to her vulnerability, has simply never been better.
The same can't be said for Alan Cumming who trots out the fey, androgynous
routine that's become his single acting note.  Cumming needs to lose the
camp and get back to acting.
As writers, Leigh and Cumming haven't covered any new ground here.  One
suspects that their friends have helped fashion some of the witty dialogue
that's tossed around.  The story resembles a larger ensemble of "Who's
Afraid of Virginia Woolf?," another tale of a substance soaked evening
bringing out the worst in a childless couple.  Their reliance on drugs
to pitch their party into higher gear just loosens the weave of their
fabric.  The writer/director/stars' own big confrontation scene, is, 
ironically, the least believable, most cliched of the entire film.  
Veteran cinematographer John Bailey's first shot at digital video results
in crisp images.  The glass Neutra house in the Hollywood Hills chosen
as a location is both visually interesting and gives a bit of "Rear
Window" flavor to the proceedings.
"The Anniversary Party" casts its audience between the Roses, average
folk peering in at the shenanigans of the rich and famous.  Leigh and
Cumming's actors' camp is an interesting exercise to watch, even though
ultimately the performers themselves seem to have gotten the lion's share
of the entertainment.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
SSG Syndicate

Susan Granger's review of "THE ANNIVERSARY PARTY" (Fine Line Features)
   When you and I make home movies, they're on a camcorder with family and friends but, when Jennifer Jason Leigh and Alan Cumming decided to make their own movie, they recruited some heavy-hitting pals like Kevin Kline and Gwyneth Paltrow and utilized digital video in the hands of cinematographer John Bailey. The result is an interlude of caustic wit, reminiscent of Jason Leigh as Dorothy Parker in tales from the fabled Algonquin Round table. Jason Leigh plays Sally, an insecure, fading actress, while Alan Cumming is Joe, a "sexually ambivalent manchild" about to direct his first movie which is based on his latest novel. After a five-month separation, they're celebrating their sixth anniversary along with their intention to start a family. In their glass  house in the Hollywood Hills,  their show-biz guests include Parker Posey, John C. Reilly, John Benjamin Hickey, Jane Adams, Jennifer Beals, Gwyneth Paltrow, Kevin Kline, Kline's real-life wife, actress Phoebe Cates,!
 along with their son and daughter. And they're all trying to be nice to the litigious, non-show-biz neighbors, Mina Badie and Denis O'Hare. It's a strong ensemble but certain performances inevitably stand out. For example, Gwyenth Paltrow as the younger actress to whom Joe has offered the leading role in his film - much to the surprise of  wife Sally, and Phoebe Cates as a former actress who gave up her career to care for their children. If all this sounds vaguely familiar, think of Blake Edwards "The Party," Lawrence Kasdan's "The Big Chill," and Kenneth Branagh's "Peter's Friends." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Anniversary Party" is a verbally vicious and venomous, if self-indulgent 7. But - be warned - there's drugs (ecstasy), booze, nudity and adultery on the menu in this confessional comedy.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE ANNIVERSARY PARTY  (2001) *** Written and directed by Jennifer Jason 
Leigh and Alan  Cumming.Photography, John Bailey. Editing, Carol Littleton 
and Suzanne Spangler. Music,  Michael Penn. Cast: Alan Cumming (Joe 
Therrian), Jennifer Jason Leigh (Sally Therrian), John Benjamin Hickey 
(Jerry Adams), Parker Posey (Judy Adams), Phoebe Cates (Sophia Gold), Kevin 
Kline (Cal Gold), Owen Kline (Jack Gold), Greta Kline (Evie Gold), Mina 
Badie (Monica Rose), Jane Adams (Clair Forsyth), John C.Reilly (Mac 
Forsyth), Jennifer Beals (Gina Taylor), Gwyneth Paltrow (Skye Davidson), 
Denis O'Hare (Ryan Rose), Levi Panes (Michael Panes) and Karen Kilgariff 
(Karen).Produced by Joanne Sellar, Alan Cumming, Jennifer Jason Leigh. A 
Fine Line release.115 minutes. Rated R.
Leigh and Cumming are a married couple. He is a Brit bisexual writer, she 
is an actress whose career is menaced. They have recently gotten back 
together after one year's separation. And to celebrate their sixth wedding 
anniversary, they invite several friends (or "friends"?)--all in showbiz in 
one way or another, plus, for "political" reasons, next-door neighbors whom 
they have never seen but with whom they have been having a fight about a 
too-barking dog. The party is at the couple's modern, to-die-for home in 
the Hollywood Hills.
Leigh is on my list of best performers. This movie confirms it. It matters 
little that the film's basic set-up is s not especially original. Once 
again we have motley people in a limited space. But, as in Lawrence 
Kasdan's "The Big Chill," the participants are not too motley, since the 
hosts and most of the guests are, and play, Hollywoodian professionals.
In the course of the evening, an above-average number of extant, new or 
possible relationships, of home as well as "trade" problems, are touched 
upon and/or catalyzed as relatively sane or quirky or fairly sane people 
interract. Much of this is due to the lessening of inhibitions courtesy of 
the drug Ecstasy.
The film has documentary authenticity. When the performances (acting, 
dialogue, behavior, etc.) do ring false, they are in fact "real-life false" 
since showbiz people almost always act no matter who, what or where they 
are. Conclusion: we get faithfulness off-stage, in private lives.  Their 
roles in this movie may or may not reflect personal experience, but even 
when they don't, they come from a milieu that the thespians, witers, 
directors, etc. are most familiar with.
It makes no difference to the audiences that certain parts or passages are 
improvised, or else pretend to be. The bottom line is convincing realism. 
If something looks or sounds phony, it is because it is that in life, when 
cameras are not running.
The movie has nothing that's radically fresh or unusual,  just as most 
people --including film-persons-- seldom offer anything new. But what you 
see and hear is very well done --notably its satires.
Unlike some other movies I have seen recentlly and that were shot in 
digital video with murky results, the video here is pretty close to the 
traditional celluloid. It could even fool you into non-awareness of the 
digital process.
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
    CAPSULE: This is a film of characters and interactions rather 
    than pyrotechnics.  The film is driven by the personalities of 
    the characters.  That's good.  What's missing is the reason to 
    care much about these characters and their interactions.  
    That's bad.  The film has a gamut of emotions presented but 
    few rub off on the viewer.  We need not just more films like 
    this but also better films like this.  I would invest interest 
    in Jennifer Jason-Leigh and Alan Cummings not for current 
    value but for growth potential.  Rating: 5 (0 to 10), low +1 
    (-4 to +4)
THE ANNIVERSARY PARTY is a film about characters and 
relationships. Most of what happens in the film is talk.  We have 
seen a number of such film like John Sayles's THE RETURN OF THE 
SECAUCUS SEVEN, Lawrence Kasdan's THE BIG CHILL, and a personal 
favorite, Bruce Beresford's DON'S PARTY.  I am not sure why the 
latter is a favorite of mine unless perhaps because it is 
Australian and has a little bit of that country's politics.  In 
any case these films are perhaps cautionary tales suggesting that 
parties and get-togethers should be kept brief and free from mind-
altering substances to avoid indecent exposure of painful truths 
(and assorted body parts).
THE ANNIVERSARY PARTY does not take place in an exotic local 
(assuming that DON'S PARTY does) unless you consider the suburbs 
of Los Angeles exotic.  The film is produced, directed, and stars 
Alan Cummings and Jennifer Jason Leigh, but sports a hefty 
ensemble of actors from independent films who are anxious to play 
opposite other actors rather than digital effects.
Sally and Joe (played by Jennifer Jason-Leigh and Alan Cummings) 
are celebrating their sixth wedding anniversary, but not 
celebrating six years together.  They have been together only a 
few months of the six years and have just recently gotten together 
again.  They have invited their friends, most of whom they cannot 
stand.  Though the film Joe is to direct has a character based on 
Sally, He has cast a younger actress, Skye (Gwyneth Paltrow), in 
the role and Sally is less than pleased with Skye.  Also among the 
invitees are the neighbors (Denis O'Hare and Mina Badie) with whom 
a thin coat of civility covers a festering feud over the behavior 
of the Tom and Sally's dog.
Where THE ANNIVERARY PARTY failed for me was in my lack of empathy 
for any of the characters.  The script fails to give us much 
reason to care whether these people are going through a bad patch 
or not.  The script seems contrived to set up ironic dramatic 
revelations and superficial insights into people's characters.  
These people are more involving than checkers on a board, but less 
than chess pieces.
There is not much that can be told in a review about a film like 
this because the characters are introduced, they party, and then 
there are ironic plot twists about the characters.  Introducing 
the characters without telling the plot twists is pointless.  
Revealing the plot twists would spoil the experience of seeing the 
film.  Not that what happens is so dramatic, but in a description 
of such a film less is more.
Alan Cumming and Jennifer Jason Leigh have assembled a cast of 
familiar actors including themselves and Paltrow, but also Kevin 
Kline, Phoebe Cates, Jane Adams, John C. Reilly, Jennifer Beals, 
and Parker Posey. If you do the math, not every one of these can 
be use to his full potential.  Each is part of some small subplot 
and each does a little fun acting exercise.  The feel is as if 
Cumming and Leigh wanted to actually throw a party for their 
friends, mixing business and pleasure.  The result is diverting 
enough to eavesdrop upon but really rather un-engaging as a while.
THE ANNIVERSARY PARTY keeps several plots going, each of which 
will be resolved by the end of the party.  Once they are resolved 
the viewer will happily simply drop them.  There is little to 
think about here after the film is over. I rate THE ANNIVERSARY 
PARTY 5 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Alan Cumming, Jennifer Jason Leigh.
Cast: Jennifer Jason Leigh, Alan Cumming, Phoebe Cates, Kevin Kline, Jennifer 
Beals, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jane Adams, John C. Reilly, Mina Badie, Denis O'Hare, 
Parker Posey, John Benjamin Hickey, Michael Panes, Owen Kline, Greta Kline.
2001 - 115 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, nudity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 24, 2001.
When you think about it, who better to write and direct their own film than 
actual veteran actors, who have spent countless amounts of time on movie sets 
taking in the jobs of everyone around them? While the occasional actor who 
takes a stab at directing has a tendency to become pretentious, there seems 
to be a relatively high actor-to-successful-director ratio. 
"The Anniversary Party," written and directed by actors Alan Cumming and 
Jennifer Jason Leigh, is a striking triumph--an incisive, thought-provoking 
look at the questionable longevity of a marriage, set at their sixth-year 
wedding anniversary, following a year-long separation. The couple is fading 
thirtysomething movie actress Sally Therrian (Leigh) and her novelist husband 
Joe (Cumming), who is about to start filming an adaptation of one of his own 
books. The upcoming film project, widely known to be about Sally, is one that 
he is planning to cast 22-year-old ingenue Skye Davidson (Gwyneth Paltrow) 
in, much to the chagrin of Sally, who is hurt he didn't choose her, instead. 
Set over the course of a 24-hour period, the first hour depicts the guests 
(all real-life friends of Cumming and Leigh) arriving. The varied group, all 
involved in the Hollywood industry, include recent Oscar winner Cal Gold 
(Kevin Kline) and his wife Sophia (Kline's real-life spouse Phoebe Cates); 
the Therrian's business manager Jerry Adams (John Benjamin Hickey) and his 
daffy wife, Judy (Parker Posey); Mac Forsyth (John C. Reilly), the current 
director of the romantic comedy Sally is making, and his neurotic, 
ultra-skinny wife, Clair (Jane Adams); and Gina Taylor (Jennifer Beals), 
Joe's long-time photographer confidante. The two outsider guests are the 
Therrian's next-door neighbors, Ryan (Denis O'Hare) and Monica Rose (Mina 
Badie), whom they have been instructed to grudgingly invite to avoid a 
possible lawsuit over their long-standing feud about Sally and Joe's barking 
dog. Also making an appearance, and causing Sally's true feelings to begin to 
rise to the surface, is Skye Davidson.
After the corny party games are played (the charades scene is pricelessly 
funny and genuine) and Sally and Joe open their anniversary gifts, the 
designer drug, Ecstasy, is introduced to the group as Skye's present. Their 
subsequent ingestion by everyone who decides to stay paves the way for the 
film's second hour. At first enjoying themselves and having a blast, Sally 
and Joe have various encounters with the other guests that makes them 
question their own relationship, with a secret that Sally has been harboring 
that may threaten to tear them apart forever.
Highly publicized to have been filmed in 19 days on the controversial digital 
video format, "The Anniversary Party" has a naturalistic flow to it that 
makes it feel less like a fictional motion picture, and more like a two-hour 
eavesdrop on the type of party that the rich and famous might really throw. 
Adding to the realism is a flawless cast who, in many cases, play characters 
decidedly similar to themselves, and who all believably seem like a large 
gathering of good friends. Kevin Kline (1999's "Wild Wild West") and Phoebe 
Cates (who has not been onscreen since 1994's "Princess Caraboo"), for 
example, play a movie star couple who, in Cates' case, has given up her 
prospering film career to raise her children. Likewise, Jennifer Jason Leigh 
plays someone not too far away from where she herself is at--a woman in her 
late-thirties whose career has recently been on a down slope, questionably 
because she is now a little too old to be playing the "young" roles, and not 
old enough to be getting the Susan Sarandon or Meryl Streep parts. The 
screenplay, by Leigh and Cumming, is so very impressive that it actually 
seems more like a delightfully well-acted, two-hour improv, rather than a 
"written" piece.
As previously mentioned, the cast is a top-notch smorgasbord of reasonably 
well-known talent. In a film that houses many standout performances, Phoebe 
Cates is superb and (in one truthful sequence) heartbreakingly funny; Gwyneth 
Paltrow (2000's "Bounce") gives her role of Skye, who most think of as dense 
and childish, several different character shades that expose her to be a 
little smarter than she looks; Jane Adams (1998's "Happiness") reaps comic 
gold as a new mother who is, to put it mildly, an obsessive parent, as well 
as an obsessive dieter; Jennifer Beals (1998's "The Last Days of Disco") is 
astoundingly assured in the best role she's had in ages; and Leigh's 
half-sister, Mina Badie (1994's "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle"), is 
quietly poignant as a neighbor who doesn't seem to have the same stuck-up 
attitude as her husband, and begins to realize their extreme differences as 
the night presses on.
The movie wouldn't be complete without the audacious, passionate effort that 
Jennifer Jason Leigh (1999's "eXistenZ") and Alan Cumming (2001's "Josie and 
the Pussycats") have put into their directing debut, as well as their two 
central acting turns. Leigh and Cumming have rarely been better onscreen than 
they are right here, as a couple who do, indeed, love one another, but might 
not be secure enough in their own bodies to be able to survive each other's 
company. Best of all is a confrontation near the end, as they search for 
their missing dog, that is full of such pain, anger, and betrayal that it's 
almost difficult to endure.
It's clear that Leigh and Cumming put their entire heart and soul into the 
project, as they've not only crafted a comedic drama of surprising depth, but 
one of true emotional maturity. Very Altmanesque in its free-flowing 
treatment of the characters and story, "The Anniversary Party" is alternately 
so adept, so funny, and so powerful that it manages to stand on its own as a 
true original. It's easily one of the best American films of the year.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/dustinputman.htm
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Joe and Sally Therrian, played with comedic and dramatic verve by Alan 
Cumming and Jennifer Jason Leigh, are throwing a party.  And not just 
any party, but an anniversary party to celebrate their sixth wedding 
anniversary.  Given that they had broken up just 5 months ago, their 
friends at the party are pleased to see that they have patched things 
up.  
Cumming and Leigh, who jointly wrote and directed THE ANNIVERSARY PARTY, 
invited their real-life friends to star with them in it, which gives the 
film a killer ensemble cast.  How often do you get to see the likes of 
Cumming, Leigh, Jane Adams, Jennifer Beals, Phoebe Cates, Kevin Kline, 
Gwyneth Paltrow, Parker Posey and John C. Reilly in the same movie?  
With this impressive talent, they make an indie-budget film that has 
more edge, skill and pizzazz than you normally find in such productions.  
To add even more icing to this cinematic cake, respected cinematographer 
John Bailey (ORDINARY PEOPLE and AS GOOD AS IT GETS) demonstrates that 
digital video can indeed look sharp, sumptuous and generally steady.  
Normally, indie directors are willing to accept DV movies that appear so 
ugly that they remind you of your neighbor's bad home videos.
Joe and Sally are both in "the business," as are almost all of the 
guests.  Joe's an author turned director who is currently directing for 
scale, whereas his lead actress, Skye Davidson (Gwyneth Paltrow), is 
being paid four million.  Joe, who is described by one character as a 
"sexually ambivalent manchild," clearly has more than a directorial 
interest in Skye, which Sally resents.  When Skye, a blonde bimbo who 
lies about her age, first enters the room, she bats her big eyes at Joe, 
and a tiny breeze fans her golden hair.
Skye, who is a big fan of Sally's pictures, tells her, "I've been 
watching your movies since I was 4," which, of course, only reminds 
Sally that she's no longer an ingénue.  Skye goes on to remark that when 
she was in drug rehab -- the second time -- she wasn't allowed to watch 
Sally's drug movie because the acting was too realistic.
Among many good performances, Jane Adams (HAPPINESS), as actress Clair 
Forsyth, the wife of Sally's current director Mac Forsyth (John C. 
Reilly), turns in one of the best pieces of work, as she allows herself 
to look awful in the service of her craft.  Clair is a painfully thin 
new mom who is stoked up on diet pills in order to lose the fat that she 
doesn't have.  Always so jittery that she seems in danger of leaping off 
the screen, Clair has a long, revealing nude scene that will make you 
want to bring her a robe to cover up.
The comedy turns more serious as the story advances, and the funniest 
lines usually have aspects of both humor and drama.  Sophia Gold (Phoebe 
Cates) reveals the dirty little secret that every parent knows but 
doesn't want to admit.  Once you have children, you can't commit suicide 
since "kids rob you of that option."  It's a bitingly true commentary on 
parenthood.  The script is filled with such little gems of wisdom.
THE ANNIVERSARY PARTY runs 1:55.  It is rated R for language, drug use 
and nudity and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 22, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley it will be playing at the Camera Cinemas.  The 
movie was shown recently at the Camera Cinema Club 
(http://www.cameracinemas.com/club) of Los Gatos and San Jose.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Zenny Tropa
I have long admired Jennifer Jason Leigh for her courage in the face of
critical adversity, cheering every mumble in Mrs. Parker and the Vicious
Circle, clinging for dear life to the screwed warble-songs of Georgia. 
Sadly, "The Ballad of Jenny" went askew this year when she decided to
continue her particular Brand X of raw performance, churning out snarly
but predictably intense perfs in The King is Alive and her own
co-directed The Anniversary Party.
Along for the ride, helping her pen this Party of lovey-dovey actors in
a disgruntled group hug, is none other than her Cabaret co-star, Alan
Cumming.  Together, they're a force to be reckoned with: the crčme de la
crčme of indulgence.  Playing a bisexual writer and an aging starlet who
never won an Academy Award, they are in effect exorcising their jitters
toward an unsuspecting audience.  Whether you're willing to go along for
the ride is entirely up to you, but this critic found it to be deadly
dull.  Too much poisoned ice cream will give you a headache.
Watching actors talk about their lives is like listening to rock
musicians wank off about aesthetics.  Put simply, who's in the mood to
listen to that shit?  Furthermore, Cumming's smirking and Leigh's
secretive slow burns only lead to one place: Disaster.  This Hollywood
couple (meaning the characters in their movie, Joe and Sally), throws
their sixth anniversary party for their actor and director friends. 
They talk their talk, they do their drugs, some of 'em get naked and
jump in the pool, and in the end they scream and yell in over-ripe
monologues about trust, love, and commitment.
Just when you think someone's about to shout, "What about the baby?"
they do.  Of course they do!  What about the offscreen drug addict
sister -- what's to become of her?  Tragedy is the mother of drama, and
welcome to the meal because these actor-filmmakers are gonna ram it down
your throat.  Open wide, now!
Kevin Kline and Phoebe Cates are really married -- so why not cast them
as a married couple?  Cates hasn't acted in a few years, so how about a
few wry comments from her on leaving the game behind?  Toss in some
Shakespeare for Kline to keep him happy.  Oh, and what about their
kids?  They have two kids!  I know -- cast them in the movie, too! 
(Incidentally, the dance number Kline does with his little girl is the
highlight of the party, oddly endearing and sad.)
Let's see -- what other friends do we have?  Leigh acted with John C.
Reilly in Georgia, which was a great supporting role.  He plays a
director teetering on the brink of a great failure, so that gives him
ample opportunity to emote.  Jane Adams, so freaky as the neurotic
sister in Happiness, enters some terrain of gawkiness heretofore unknown
as Reilly's loopy wife.  She goes topless for at least half an hour, cuz
that's what serious actors do!
Parker Posey is less bitchy than usual, which is a nice change.  She's
an agent or something, stuffed in a conservative shell that's cracking
around the seams.  Gwyneth Paltrow plays a Dumb Movie Star.  Jennifer
Beals plays a photographer who mothers Cumming, but her role proves so
unnecessary she's absent for vast amounts of screen time, which is
perhaps all for the best.
I have run down the laundry list of talent who show up for Leigh and
Cumming's party.  Hopefully, they had good fun making this movie.  One
mostly wishes the Cumming/Leigh tag team had selected a more imaginative
cinematographer who could move beyond the steady medium shot once in a
while.  At least then there'd be the illusion that something were
actually happening besides a lot of Lee Strasberg musings in full
effect.  You can't blame actors for wanting to emote, but this sort of
movie makes one yearn for the stylized notes hit by Hal Hartley, where
no one cries or smiles.  Buster Keaton, where are you?
Director: Alan Cumming, Jennifer Jason Leigh
Producer: Joanne Vicente, Alan Cumming, Jennifer Jason Leigh
Writer: Alan Cumming, Jennifer Jason Leigh
Starring: Jane Adams, Jennifer Beals, Phoebe Cates, Alan Cumming, Kevin
Kline, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Gwyneth Paltrow, Parker Posey, John C.
Reilly
http://www.theanniversaryparty.com/frames.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Fine Line Features
 Director: Alan Cumming, Jennifer Jason Leigh
 Writer:  Alan Cumming, Jennifer Jason Leigh
 Cast: Alan Cumming Jennifer Jason Leigh, Steven
Freedman, Clara Demedrano, John Benjamin Hickey, Parker
Posey, Phoebe Cates, Kevin Kline, Denis O'Hare, Mina Badie,
Jane Adams, John C. Reilly
   They say that Sir Winston Churchill and his wife Sarah slept
in separate bedrooms, which would make any modern person
assume that they were unhappy together.  This could be true,
but the Robert Altmanesque "The Anniversary Party," written,
directed and acted by Alan Cumming and Jennifer Jason
Leigh, might give you pause.  The premise of the movie, I
think, is that loving another person is easier than being
together with that individual.  Yes.  Love is difficult to find but
living together is even more demanding.  Look at the
marriage rate in the U.S. and then examine the divorce rate. 
Despite the alleged unpopularity of matrimony, I believe about
90% of Americans get married at some time in their lives. 
Fifty percent of them, however, get divorced.  The other fifty
percent?  Miserable, maybe.  If my thinking about "The
Anniversary Party" is correct, the way to get those divorce
figures down is either to outlaw marriage (which would bring
the divorce rate down to 0) or continue performing the
services but have the couples live apart.  What's wrong with
banning marriage altogether if so many people are miserable? 
Probably that being single is worse.  How does "The
Anniversary Party" support my premise?  Look at what's going
down in this picture, which is sometimes emotionally
wrenching, at other times challenging the viewer to think that
these incredibly rich people should just shut up and enjoy
their money.
   The principal couple, the ones holding a party for their sixth
anniversary, are Joe Thierrian (Alan Cumming) and Sally
Therrian (Jennifer Jason Leigh).  Joe made his money as a
novelist and is about to direct a picture based on his latest
piece of fiction.  Sally is an accomplished actress but despite
her good looks and athletic build is beginning to get long in
the tooth, at least from the standpoint of what the movie
audience demands of leading women.  They had broken up
five months before. Now they're together and have invited
some friends, business associates, and neighbors to their
Hollywood Hills home (architecturally designed virtually to
erase the border between the interiors and the exteriors) to
show all that they are really together this time around.
   In like manner, the people who are invited to the house
have erased the borders between their acting roles and their
real selves because they are the actual friends of Cumming
and Leigh.  They are an ensemble of some of the big names
in Hollywood today.   Most striking in appearance is Gwyneth
Paltrow as Skye Davidson, a woman in her early twenties
who is being paid 4 million to act the role of the lead
character who seems--at least to Sally--to be based quite
closely on her and on her marriage.  Sally is furious that her
husband even invited the young star to the celebration, and
Skye doesn't make things any better by telling Sally, "I've
been watching you since I was 4 years old.  I'm so thrilled to
be playing you as a young woman."  That Skye assures her
that she was always a big fan of hers does not assuage the
wound.
   The film, which should remind viewers of Lawrence
Kasdan's 1983 pic "The Big Chill"--a look at a group of former
college-radical friends who have dropped back into society--is
even more unstructured and devoid of anything resembling a
tight narrative.  While the slack might well turn off those who
insist that the story's always the thing, the ensemble acting of
this talented bunch and to an even great extent the chemistry
among them which signals that these folks have known each
other for a while makes "The Anniversary Party" an engaging,
bitterly-humorous bit of eavesdropping into this long day's
journey into night.  While it's a stretch to think that real people
can go through such drama at a single party, the credibility
and the bon mots make watching this quite an enjoyable
experience.  Acting to type, Jane Adams out Parkers Parker
Posey (who is also a guest though a toned-down one) as the
group's most overt neurotic, gesturing wildly as she holds
tightly to a cell phone with which she expects to hear from her
baby sitter a few times each hour.  The unborn come in for a
drubbing as Sophia Gold (Phoebe Cates) reports "once you
have children, you can't commit suicide since kids rob you of
that option."  
   Others who take turns entertaining the guests at the party
while entertaining us in the audience with their pithy sayings
and emotional outbursts include Kevin Kline as Sophia's wife
Cal, while John Benjamin Hickey is the guy a lot of us can
relate to--an outsider, invited only because he's a neighbor,
though his invite comes only as a way to stop him from suing
over Joe and Sally's perpetually barking dog Otis.
   What seems to be dividing critics so far is the use of digital
video, which is not only cheaper but can give more of a
cinema-verite look to the proceedings.  To cite distinguished
online critic Steve Rhodes of Internet Reviews, "John Bailey
demonstrates that digital video can indeed look sharp,
sumptuous and generally steady," while equally distinguished
online critic Chuck Rudolph of Matinee Magazine disagrees:
"Digital Video can only debase a movie to make it look like
the barren home videos of birthday parties and weddings." 
My view?  Looks fine to me, but at any rate I was more than
sufficiently absorbed by the spiked dialogue of these poor little
rich folks to worry about the sharpness of the photography.
Rated R.  Running time: 115 minutes.  (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
