Title
Review for Preacher's Wife, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
Penny Marshall updates the 1947 holiday film, "The Bishop's Wife",
which starred Loretta Young, Cary Grant and David Niven, with her
latest effort, "The Preacher's Wife", starring Whitney Houston, Denzel
Washington and Courtney B. Vance.
The Reverend Henry Biggs, played by Vance, is the pastor of a small,
urban church which has seen better days. Henry, living in the shadow
of the church's former pastor, the father of his beautiful wife Julia,
played by Houston, has doubts about his ability to save his little
parish from its downward spiral. Finally, in desparation, Henry asks
the big guy himself, God, to lend a hand.
Help does arrive in the guise of Dudley, played by Washington, an all
too down-to-earth angel sent to assist the skeptical preacher in
turning things around for the church and community.
I have a very strong affinity to the original film, "The Bishop's
Wife", mainly because of a decades-long crush on Loretta Young as the
luminous Julia. Young gave a deeply charming performance, exuding
warmth, love and beauty, making the film a poarticular holiday
favorite of mine.
Penny Marshall, with "The Preacher's Wife", does a competent job in
remaking and updating the original film, catching the spirit of "The
Bishop's Wife", if not the more palpable magic of the first.
Whitney Houston, not a particular favorite of mine, is far more self
assure than her earlier outings, dominating the screen when singing,
especially the gospel tunes. Her acting is still stilted, but getting
better. The many songs she sings takes attention from her developing
acting skills.
Dudley, the angel, as played by Cary Grant, always struck me as a
vacuous, if suave, character, in the film for the face. Denzel
Washington lends the character the necessary charm and wit, with a
hint of randiness, that it needs.
Courney Vance, of the principle cast, fares best ast the beleaguered
preacher, Henry, who is trying to hold his church and his marriage
together, while also trying to cope with the dealings of the
ubiquitous Dudley. Where David Niven played Henry as a straight-laced
prig, Vance gives the Reverend more dimension and nuance.
There are some theological problems about Dudley's origins that go
against the teachings of Christianity, but, what the hell, we'll let
it slip by.
"The Preacher's Wife" is a kind-hearted holiday flick with lots of
gospel music and decent performances, and a fair rtelling of the
original.
I give "The Preacher's Wife" a B-  (I give "The Bishop's Wife" a B)
Director Penny Marshall and screenwriter Allan Scott have done a fine
job of updating "The Bishop's Wife" for the 90s with "The Preacher's
Wife." Whitney Houston stars as Julia Biggs, the wife of Reverend
Henry Biggs (Courtney B. Vance), a man trying, but failing, to walk in
the footsteps of Julia's inspiring father and keep his poor New York
City parish from going under. Their son Jeremiah (Justin Pierre
Edmund) is about to lose his best friend Hakim to child welfare, the
church boiler is near collapse, a young parishioner is falsely accused
of a crime and developer Joe Hamilton (Gregory Hines) has purchased
the church's mortgage with pricey condominiums in mind.
Denzel Washington is Dudley, the angel who's been waiting to be sent
to earth to good deeds and eat pizza.  While Washington doesn't quite
embody the charm of the original's Cary Grant, he comes fairly close.
At least the women, including Julia's mom Marguerite (Jennifer Lewis),
don't find him too tough to take even though Reverend Biggs views him
with suspicion.
"The Preacher's Wife" is obviously a Whitney Houston showcase, though.
She's the church's choir leader, giving way for ample opportunity to
let her belt out a few numbers.  I usually find her singing grating,
but here, singing mostly Gospel numbers, she's just fine.  This is her
most natural and relaxed performance.  You believe she's as good
hearted as she's supposed to be, even if she indulges in a little
'window shopping' with Dudley. 
The real standouts in the cast are Jennifer Lewis, a still beautiful
and devillish older woman with a solid moral core and Courtney B.
Vance's beleagered Henry (he's beginning to show a real chameleon-like
acting ability - his character here is SO different from those of
"Dangerous Minds", "The Last Supper" and "Panther").  Also amusing in
a supporting role is "Waiting to Exhale"'s Loretta Devine as Bigg's
single mother church secretary.
I have a couple of complaints with "The Preacher's Wife."  For one
thing, Whitney's wardrobe is largely inappropriate.  During the
skating sequence she's wearing a hat that looks like an expensive
designer number. In fact, the struggling family seems to lack for
nothing - Jeremiah's bedroom is strewn with toys.  The costumes used
for the church's nativity play look Hollywood professional as well.
Also, the running time is padded out to a full two numbers because of
all the musical numbers, not all of which are necessary.
Overall, though, "The Preacher's Wife" is a fine holiday family film.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Preacher's Wife (1996)
Denzel Washington, Whitney Houston, Courtney B. Vance, Justin Pierre 
Edmund, Gregory Hines, Jennifer Lewis, Lionel Richie. Directed by Penny 
Marshall. 125 minutes
PG, 3.5 stars (out of 5 stars)
A really good Christmas movie is hard to find. For every "Miracle On 34th 
Street" or "It's A Wonderful Life," there's hundreds of films that don't 
stand the test of time. Hopefully, "The Preacher's Wife" will become one 
of the keepers.
The story is simple. Reverend  Henry Biggs (Courtney B. Vance) has doubts 
about his effectiveness in helping his community and family. His prayer 
for help is answered with the arrival of Dudley (Denzel Washington,) an 
over-enthusiastic angel who becomes tangled with the parish, and develops 
a crush on Mrs. Biggs (Whitney Houston.)
Penny Marshall's assured direction makes "The Preacher's Wife" shine. She 
adroitly works around Whitney Houston's limited acting skills, 
highlighting Houston's vocals while using the other actors to convey the 
story.
Courtney B. Vance gives a strong performance as the Reverend Biggs. 
Trying to carry a neighborhood on his shoulders has worn Biggs down, 
leaving him a fretful, shaken man. Vance effectively imparts the 
minister's grim mood, while keeping him a sympathetic character. Denzel 
Washington is charming as the angel, in a playful, loose performance. He 
manages to be boundlessly optimistic without ever becoming cloying. The 
most memorable performance, however, comes from Justin Pierre Edmund, an 
adorable six year old who plays the Biggs' son. Edmund is a mush-mouthed 
delight in a bright, innocent performance that would win over even the 
most cynical viewer.
The real strength of "The Preacher's Wife" lies in its sense of community 
and spirituality. The inner-city neighborhood operates as an extended 
family  these people care about each other, and their love and faith is 
infectious. The many songs performed by Houston and the church choir help 
to bolster the sense of joyous communal spirituality.
The film is not without flaws. Houston's acting is almost as vacuous as 
her voice is strong. During several key dramatic scenes, she has an odd, 
pre-occupied look. And Gregory Hines' turn as the villain of the story, a 
land developer who wants to "improve" the neighborhood by tearing the 
heart out of it, lacks a sense of real menace.  
"The Preacher's Wife" triumphs over its weak spots due to the film's 
overwhelming spirit. Memorable Christmas movies work when they convey 
sentiment in a genuine fashion. "The Preacher's Wife" is destined to 
become a holiday classic.

Author
Walter Frith
'The Preacher's Wife' is a good natured remake of 'The Bishop's Wife' from
1947.  That film featured Cary Grant, David Niven and Loretta Young and their
respective positions are filled in this movie by Denzel Washington, Courtney
B. Vance and Whitney Houston.   An angel (Washington) in a surprisingly
ordinary performance gets his wish and returns to Earth to help a
neighbourhood preacher (Vance) who is the best character in the movie and who
has lost much of the spirit he has in his faith.  Throughout the course of
the picture Washington passes himself off as the preacher's assistant and no
one believes he's an angel except Vance and Houston's little boy by whom the
film is narrated.  I enjoyed 'The Preacher's Wife' on a sub standard level of
holiday entertainment and it is wonderful for the entire family but has a
deliberately slow pace courtesy of Penny Marshall ('Big,' 'Awakenings,' ' A
League of Their Own.')  She has made a nice film but a very ordinary one and
to be too critical of this movie is like being too critical to your mother
because you thought her Christmas cake was missing something.  It simply
isn't a nice thing to do.  This is especially true and 'The Preacher's Wife'
deserves high praise for being deliberately family oriented and a movie
charming for even the smallest children.  They certainly did do their best to
please making this one.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Another long sit.  Director Penny Marshall's all-black, sometimes-
musical remake of THE BISHOP'S WIFE-- the 1947 Best Picture nominee that
starred Cary Grant as an angel who arrives on Earth to assist a man of
the cloth-- is a good twenty minutes too long.  Maybe thirty.  The
padding is obvious in the musical numbers, of which there are at least
eight.  (I lost count.) Most of the singing is done by Whitney Huston,
whose character commands a church choir.  (Her voice soars, but her
acting doesn't.  Neither she nor co-star Courtney B. Vance appear
excited about anything in this romantic holiday comedy.)  The forced
fuzzies are also overkill.  From foster homes to fidelity, every con-
ceivable crisis is confronted and given a cheery resolution.  The jokes
are funny, thank good- ness, and there's a Microsoft gag midway through
that's worth the price of admission.  Even with a nice performance by
Denzel Washington, who plays the visiting spirit, and some occasionally
impressive supporting work, I still wanted to go home and strangle my
Tickle Me Elmo.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Hit (BIG and AWAKENINGS) and miss (JUMPIN' JACK FLASH and
RENAISSANCE MAN) director Penny Marshall tries her at a remake.  She
takes 1947's THE BISHOP'S WIFE with Cary Grant, Loretta Young, and
David Niven and updates it for the 1990s with Denzel Washington,
Whitney Houston, and Courtney B. Vance.  Besides the change to an
almost all black cast, she switches the religion from Episcopal to
Baptist and demotes the cleric to a preacher.
     The major revision is that the film goes from being a full fledged
movie to a good sitcom episode.  The actors are pleasant enough, and
there are several nice chuckles, but Marshall is content with letting
everyone glide along on autopilot.
     Bestowing on holiday audiences a film that teaches good morals and
is for the whole family is definitely commendable.  And certainly,
funny little sitcoms are a popular form of entertainment.  It is just
that movie goers usually expect a more substantial gift.  They want
their presents trimmed with more involving characters and with a
director with a keener eye for humor.
     Looking on the good side of Penny Marshall's gift to us, THE
PREACHER'S WIFE is a good spirited movie even if it is terminally
lightweight.
     The Rev. Henry Biggs (Courtney B. Vance) has a church in a poor
section of town that is falling apart.  The boiler is busted and the
church is broke.  You may remember Vance from THE LAST SUPPER where he
was excellent as the most sinister member of a band of liberals who
murdered conservatives to improve the breed.  Here his performance is
reduced to smiling a lot.  He gives the least believable and most
uninteresting characterization in the film.  Vance is a much better
actor than his work here demonstrates.
     Always reliable Denzel Washington plays the angel Dudley, who
comes down to earth to help the preacher.  He explains to Henry that,
"You have no idea what the competition is like just to be sent down
here."  Marshall has Washington play his part very low key so that you
forget he is an angel.  Denzel Washington's talent manages to shine
through Marshall's overly mellow approach.
     Whitney Houston has a soothing voice and gets to sing many a tune
in the show as she plays the preacher's wife Julia.  Houston's
specialty, as illustrated by her work in THE BODYGUARD, is to provide
the foundation about which the other stars build the movie.  Kevin
Costner provided the interest in THE BODYGUARD, and Houston's character
was little more than focal point for the story line.  Similarly in THE
PREACHER'S WIFE she provides the tension between Henry and Dudley.
     The script gives Houston some good lines, but she is not
convincing.  A putative romance between Dudley and her is little more
than a couple of humorously raised eyebrows between them.
     Gregory Hines plays superrich developer Joe Hamilton who wants to
tear down the old church and put Henry into new digs.  Joe has designed
a crystal palace of a church complete with daycare center, senior
citizen's facility and "a new clientele" for Henry.  Joe paints a
vision so attractive that the pressure is on for Henry to sale his soul
to this entrepreneurial devil.
     The sets and the costumes for the movie pose a problem.  Whereas
the exterior shots are full of graffiti filled walls and the
discussions are of poverty, the people look, act, and dress firmly
middle class.  The rectory looks like something a wealthy church on
Fifth Avenue might provide for its minister.
     Although the meantime between laughs is longer than it should be,
the picture does have its moments.  My favorite is when Dudley comes
upon a "fish typewriter" in the office.  When the aquarium screensaver
on the PC switches to the Microsoft Windows logo, Dudley consults the
official "Angel's Handbook."  This well-worn bible of religious canons
has a page with the Microsoft Windows logo so that the angels can
recognize mankind's key secular insignia.  The Silicon Valley audience
at the press screening laughed harder at this scene than any other.
     More typical of the humor is the repartee among the leads.  Henry
defends his mother with, "She wasn't that fat."  But, Julia throws it
back to him with, "Policeman saw your mama come walking down the
street, he'd yell, 'break it up.'"
     Jenifer Lewis, as Julia's mother Marguerite Coleman, steals most
of her scenes.  The mother is a philosopher with an acerbic tongue.
She tells her daughter, "Things haven't changed since Adam, and he gave
up one of his ribs so he'd have somebody to keep things from."
     In a Christmas movie season that glorifies finding a Turboman
action figure for your son because "whoever doesn't is going to be a
real loser," the story here comes to a refreshingly different
resolution.  The Biggs get their son Jeremiah (Justin Pierre Edmund)
something for Christmas that truly embodies the spirit of the Christ
child.  This concluding aspect of the movie pushed me over the edge
into being able to recommend what is otherwise a lame comedy and a
lightweight remake.
     THE PREACHER'S WIFE runs about 1:45 I think, but the press kit
does not give the time.  There are two uses of the word hell as an
expletive that push the rating from G to PG.  There is no sex, nudity,
violence, or other profanity.  The movie can be seen by the whole
family, but the slowness of the pacing will probably lose the interest
of those under eight.  I give the film a marginal thumbs up and a
rating of ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Denzel Washington, Whitney Houston, Courtney B. Vance, Gregory
Hines, Jenifer Lewis, Loretta Devine, Justin Pierre Edmund Director:
Penny Marshall Screenplay: Nat Mauldin and Allan Scott based on a
screenplay by Robert E. Sherwood and Leonardo Bercovici
"Father I ask of You this day,
Keep my loved ones safe and guide their ways.
Bless the selfless heart that freely gives,
And strengthen those who truthfully live.
Bid your angels to watch these humble souls,
And send that angel 'Dudley' to fulfil Your goals ."
   Amen. A prayer by TMT Voon.
Angels once walked on the earth as did men. Able to disguise themselves
as human kind they walked unnoticed amongst the people doing God's
bidding. Whether you believe there are angels or not, does not
discourage the hope of some, that these messengers of God protect and
encourage His own. So when the pastor of a rough neighbourhood begins
to feel the emotional and physical drains of daily service to the
community, God sends an angel called 'Dudley' to help lighten his
burdens.
Denzel Washington is the cuddly 'Dudley', wearing a very well made,
?Armani? grey suit with matching tie and overcoat. This suit is the envy
of every well dressed person; and since Whitney Houston has good taste
in clothes, she just can't keep her hands of this cuddly 'Dudley' in the
Armani. Whitney goes shopping with the angel in the grey suit. Then goes
dancing with the angel still in the grey suit, before skating with the
angel who is still wearing the grey suit. One wonders at this stage
whether this angel has anything to wear beside the grey suit????
This movie is another well-meant project by Penny Marshall which has
perhaps fallen short of great expectations. I'm not sure whether Whitney
gave them hell on the set of this movie, but she sure sings like an
angel. Denzel smiles sweetly, and is all pleasantness as the angel
Dudley. However, such restraint begins to wear thin behind those
white-tooth grins - let that 'Devil In A Blue Dress' out Denzel.
To the depressed and disillusioned pastors of this world, I have a few
simple words of advice. The business of church work, sacrifice and
giving is an important testimony for the Christian faith, but don't
forget why you are doing it in the first place. Like any other job, one
needs to rest, or you'll end up neglecting yourself and your family.
Remember even God needed a "Kit Kat" on that 7th day.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Denzel Washington, Whitney Houston, Courtney B. Vance, Gregory
Hines.
Screenplay:  Nat Mauldin and Allan Scott, based on THE BISHOP'S WIFE
screenplay by Robert B. Sherwood and Leonardo Bercovici.
Producer:  Samuel Goldwyn Jr.
Director:  Penny Marshall.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild profanity)
Running Time:  121 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It won't be difficult for many viewers to accept Denzel Washington as
a character sent straight from heaven...particularly female viewers.
Washington has been a regular on "sexiest man" lists, dazzling audiences
with his confident smile while building an impressive body of work in
roles characterized by intensity, integrity and -- frequently --
inscrutability.  Yet for all his obvious talent and good looks, he has
often seemed unapproachable on screen, so cool that he fails to be warm.
THE PREACHER'S WIFE comes as a welcome addition to Washington's resume, a
somewhat predictable holiday confection buoyed by Washington's engaging
lead performance.
     THE PREACHER'S WIFE is set in an inner city New York neighborhood,
where local Baptist minister Henry Biggs (Courtney B. Vance) is facing a
personal crisis.  Confronted by financial problems in the church and
social problems in the community which seem beyond his ability to change,
Henry drives himself relentlessly, to the point of neglecting his wife
Julia (Whitney Houston) and son Jeremiah (Justin Pierre Edmond).  Finally
Henry asks for help from above, and he gets it in the form of Dudley
(Washington), a rookie angel thrilled to be back on earth.  Henry
naturally has difficulty believing this insistent fellow is divine,
especially when Dudley begins spending quality time with Julia and
Jeremiah, forcing Henry to consider his priorities more carefully.
     A remake of the 1947 Cary Grant-Loretta Young-David Niven vehicle THE
BISHOP'S WIFE is a natural notion for a spiritually renewed era when
angels are appearing on television ("Touched by an Angel") and in the
movies (the upcoming MICHAEL) faster than they can dance on the head of a
pin.  It is equally natural to expect a certain amount of holy-rolling in
such an effort, but THE PREACHER'S WIFE does a fairly good job of walking
the fine line between sincere and sanctimonious.  Penny Marshall (BIG,
AWAKENINGS) has shown herself to be that rare contemporary director who
can make a "feel-good" film which doesn't leave you feeling insulted, and
she generally avoids saccharine overload.  There is a bright good humor to
most of THE PREACHER'S WIFE which makes it possible to overlook such
manipulations as the fate of an adorable orphan and a conflict with a
nasty real estate developer (Gregory Hines, discovering a new career as a
heavy after this film and Marshall's 1994 RENAISSANCE MAN).
     The major problem with THE PREACHER'S WIFE is the same problem which
has characterized most of Marshall's films:  it's just too long.  Her
movies have a tendency to run out of gas with a lot of film left to run,
and THE PREACHER'S WIFE could have benefited from plenty of additional
editing.  Much of it could have come from Whitney Houston's performance,
which consists largely of finding reasons to break into song like Elvis
Presley in one of his carefully crafted vehicles.  Houston certainly has a
spectacular voice, and it is nice to hear her using it for gospel
standards rather than dreary ballads, but half a dozen musical numbers
simply pushes the limit and pads the running time.  Little Justin Pierre
Edmond should have been another strong candidate for the editor's knife;
the button-cute rascal is one of the worst child actors I have seen on
screen in years.
     Thankfully, Denzel Washington is on hand to provide a jolt whenever
THE PREACHER'S WIFE needs it most.  His first appearance may be a shock to
those who know him best as serious, determined characters in films like
MALCOLM X, CRIMSON TIDE and COURAGE UNDER FIRE:  dropped from the sky into
the snow, looking decidedly dapper in a grey suit, hat and topcoat,
Washington's Dudley proceeds to celebrate his return to corporeal form by
spinning around on the ground like one of the Three Stooges.  It is a
giddy and completely unexpected moment, and one of many where Washington
shows the mischievous edge to this angel seduced by flesh.  His innocence
and earnestness are thoroughly charming, and his scenes with Courtney B.
Vance (effective as the real principal character of the story) have a
particular appeal.  If there isn't much chemistry between Washington and
Houston, well, that's not really the point of THE PREACHER'S WIFE.
Besides, Denzel Washington is a chemical reaction all by himself, and it
is a pleasure to see that he can sparkle as well as he smolders.

Author
Michael Dequina
The Preacher's Wife (PG) *** (out of ****)
'Tis the season for shopping, gift-giving, and feel-good family
films like The Preacher's Wife, which, despite a major problem (which can be
summed up in two words), gets the uplifting job done.
In Penny Marshall's frothy reworking of 1947's The Bishop's Wife,
Denzel Washington plays Dudley, an angel sent down from Heaven to help
Reverend Henry Biggs (Courtney B. Vance), who is doubting his ability to
make a difference to the community and his family--wife Julia (Whitney
Houston) and son Jeremiah (Justin Pierre Edmund).  Dudley does his best to
restore the reverend's faith in himself, but along the way he cannot help
but be sidetracked by what earth has to offer, including the neglected Julia
and Jeremiah, who savor the attention he, and not Henry, gives them.
It's good to see the gifted Washington in a departure from the heavy
dramatic roles he's made his name in, and he has a ball as the funloving and
well-meaning Dudley; the fact that he does so well in a lighthearted role is
just a testament to his  remarkable talent.  Vance is likely to go
underappreciated for his subtle performance; he manages to make the audience
care without resorting to showy theatrics.  Perhaps the most memorable turns
come from a trio of supporting players.  Loretta Devine has a few choice
moments of neurosis as Henry's put-upon secretary;  the hilarious Jenifer
Lewis all but steals the show as Julia's sassy mother; and Edmund is a
natural charmer as Jeremiah.  He's bound to leave audiences going "aw" all
through the movie as he did with the preview audience I was in.
To her credit, Houston gives her least annoying performance to date.
In a wise move, Marshall and screenwriters Nat Mauldin and Allan Scott have
her break into spirited gospel numbers whenever the story allows it, and it
is during these moments that she truly comes to life, showing an infectious
energy like never before on the big screen.  But when the music dies down,
so does her performance.  As an actress, Houston is the blandest of the
bland.  She can't make a line sound natural to save her life; every word
that comes out of her mouth sounds scripted.  She is also an oddly chilly,
distant, self-involved presence; she does not have a convincing maternal
rapport with Edmund, let alone any romantic sparks with Vance or Washington.
It's as if she's acting in a box apart from everyone else.  As a result, the
emotional involvement in Henry and Julia's relationship--the center of the
story--is weakened.  We want Henry to get his life together and make his
family happy because he, Jeremiah, and Dudley want it; the fact that Julia
is involved at all is of little consequence.
But the aim of The Preacher's Wife is to make the audience walk out
of the auditorium with smiles on their faces and their spirits lifted, and I
cannot imagine anyone not giving in at least in part to its charms--of which
there are many.  It is a fun, feel-good family film that actually does leave
you feeling good.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Andrew Hicks
        THE PREACHER'S WIFE is a two-hour Hallmark card -- 
sappy and unoriginal yet uplifting and touching. Yes, I'm a sarcastic 
cynic, but even I can put that aside when a decent feel-good movie 
comes along, especially these morally-sound musical comedies with 
a black female lead (SISTER ACT, anybody?). THE PREACHER'S 
WIFE is a positive movie about the comraderie of a black community 
like only a white woman could tell it... I didn't say I was going to set 
the sarcasm _completely_ aside.
        Denzel Washington plays an angel sent to lend assistance 
to a preacher (Courtney B. Vance) and his family. Whitney Houston, 
of course, plays the preacher's wife, a gospel-singing woman who 
finds her husband has less and less time for her as troubles mount 
in the church and community. Their son's best friend is being sent 
away to a foster family, a local kid is charged with armed robbery, 
the church boiler is shot and a greedy local businessman (Gregory 
Hines) is buying up all the property in sight. Predictably, these 
problems only exist to be solved by Denzel the Anzel... excuse 
me, the Angel...
        Courtney is hard to convince at first, even after Denzel 
pops up three consecutive times when Courtney prays for divine 
help. And all Denzel's talk of an angel handbook and the three rules 
he has to abide by (don't expose him to sunlight, don't get him wet, 
don't feed him after midnight) seems more than a little odd, but the 
preacher's family easily accepts him as Courtney's new assistant.
        Two of THE PREACHER'S WIFE's best comic 
performances are from Whitney's WAITING TO EXHALE 
compatriot Loretta Devine, as Courtney's secretary, and Jenifer 
Lewis in the role of Whitney's mother. In a movie that asks us to 
believe angels are among us, the fact that Whitney's mom looks 
young enough to be her sister is infinitely less believable.
        Denzel almost assumes Courtney's roles for awhile, serving 
as father-figure for their son, doing church paperwork and even 
taking Whitney dancing at Jazzie's, a club frequented by Lionel 
Richie. (Actually, I think Lionel works there as part-time bartender 
to supplement his paltry "All Night Long" and "We Are the World" 
royalties.) This causes a little heavenly strife and even prompts 
Courtney to say the h-word, but rest assured all will end happily.
        As always, the soundtrack comes courtesy of Whitney 
Houston herself and, just like the last two times, is billed as "the 
soundtrack event of the year." She doesn't even make albums 
anymore, just soundtracks. Unlike THE BODYGUARD or WAITING 
TO EXHALE, though, her musical contributions to THE 
PREACHER'S WIFE give the movie its identity. Songs like "I Love 
the Lord" and "The Lord Is My Shepherd," most of which feature 
the Georgia Mass Choir, could singlehandedly make gospel music 
radio-friendly. Lyrics saying God is "bigger than a Shaq attack," 
though, probably won't go over big with the kids. Trust me.
        Penny Marshall, who directed this remake of Cary Grant's 
THE BISHOP'S WIFE, did an admirable job making this movie 
attractive holiday fluff that elevates itself above the mediocre mush 
you'd expect. She followed the recipe for a feel-good Christmas 
movie and came up with something tasty, not just the usual 
PRANCER fruitcake. Remaking it with a black cast was her best 
idea -- it's the appeal of Denzel, Whitney and the supporting cast 
that make the movie fun to watch. THE PREACHER'S WIFE is a 
safe movie for all ages, and I imagine more than a few church youth 
groups will be taking trips to the movie theater this Christmas 
season.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Denzel Washington, Whitney Houston, Courtney B. Vance, 
      Gregory Hines, Jenifer Lewis, Loretta Devine, Justin Pierre Edmund
Director: Penny Marshall
Producer: Samuel Goldwyn Jr.
Screenplay: Nat Mauldin and Allan Scott based on a screenplay by  
      Robert E. Sherwood and Leonardo Bercovici
Cinematography: Miroslav Ondricek
Music: Hans Zimmer
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     Henry Koster's 1947 release, THE BISHOP'S WIFE, earned Academy 
Award Nominations for both Best Picture and Best Director.  Starring 
Cary Grant as an angel sent to earth to aid a struggling cleric, the 
film, which combines elements of Charles Dickens' A CHRISTMAS CAROL and 
Frank Capra's IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE, is a typical, feel-good, Christmas 
offering.  It's a lighthearted fantasy that works well enough on its own 
terms, but, by today's standards, seems rather dated.  
     Nearly fifty years after THE BISHOP'S WIFE first reached theater 
screens, director Penny Marshall has decided to revamp the story and 
make a new movie.  Using the bare bones plot structure from the 
original, she and screenwriters Nat Mauldin and Allan Scott have brought 
the characters and situations into the nineties, simultaneously 
transforming an all-white cast into an all-black one.  The result is THE 
PREACHER'S WIFE, a surefire seasonal hit (despite the overlong running 
time).  And, with Disney behind the production, you can be sure that the 
merchandising (most notably the soundtrack) will threaten to dwarf the 
in-theater experience.
     Marshall is probably the ideal film maker to attempt this kind of 
remake.  After all, her directorial trademark is the happy ending.  Even 
her best films (BIG and A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN) have moments of almost-
sickening sweetness.  THE PREACHER'S WIFE milks that quality for all 
it's worth.  Those looking for something truly uplifting will find more 
than they could possibly want in this movie.  Creatively, however, it's 
on shaky ground.  Beneath the warm sentiments and likable personalities, 
THE PREACHER'S WIFE is rather trite.
     I think I would probably react the same way if someone produced a 
passable remake of IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE.  I enjoy that film immensely, 
but my affinity for it results largely from a nostalgia for the period 
during which it was made and in which it transpires.  A modernized 
version of Capra's movie would lack that crucial quality, and, 
consequently, the viewing experience would suffer.  Much the same can be 
said about THE PREACHER'S WIFE.  It has better production values than 
its predecessor, but the intangibles aren't the same.  An element of the 
magic is missing.
     Courtney B. Vance gives a strong performance as Reverend Henry 
Biggs, the pastor of St. Matthew's Church in Newark, N.J.  When 
financial difficulties arise, Henry prays for help.  God's answer is to 
send an angel named Dudley (Denzel Washington in his lightest role since 
MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING) to Earth to assist him.  However, when Dudley 
approaches the pastor with the truth about his identity, Henry is 
understandably skeptical.  That doesn't stop the angel, whose mission is 
not only to help St. Matthew's through a rough time, but to restore the 
preacher's dwindling faith.  Complications arise, however, when Henry's 
wife, Julia (Whitney Houston), develops an attraction for Dudley, who 
offers her kindness and compassion in place of her husband's abstracted 
indifference.
     Despite having two hit movies behind her (THE BODYGUARD, WAITING TO 
EXHALE), Whitney Houston is far from an accomplished thespian.  In her 
defense, her acting skills have improved, but she's still out of her 
depth in the company of performers like Washington and Vance.  She does 
a lot of singing in this movie -- enough, in fact, that it could almost 
qualify as a musical -- but those are the only scenes when her natural 
charisma and energy translate to the screen.
     Besides Houston, the cast includes two other WAITING TO EXHALE 
alumni.  The first is Gregory Hines, who plays an upper-class wheeler-
dealer type ("he's so oily you could fry chicken on his smile").  The 
second is Loretta Devine, who sparkles as Henry's hyperactive secretary.  
The real scene-stealer, however, is Jenifer Lewis as Julia's mother, 
Marguerite.  She's a delightful presence, and her delivery of several 
biting one-liners almost manages to give THE PREACHER'S WIFE the 
semblance of an edge.
     The uplifting moral here is that miracles can happen for those who 
believe.  THE PREACHER'S WIFE is about reclaiming lost faith and 
spreading the message of love.  These are themes common to almost every 
beloved holiday classic.  So, as a Christmas film, THE PREACHER'S WIFE 
has all the right sentiments, and presses the expected buttons.  On the 
other hand (call me a Scrooge if you will), I'm not sure I'd want to see 
this movie at any other time of the year.  If not for the pervasive 
spirit of the season, something like this could easily send me into 
sugar shock.  It's a little too nice and happy.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
