Title
Review for Hamlet (2000/II) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rachel Gordon
When most people think of Shakespeare they cringe, thinking of
melodrama, costumes, and strange vocabulary.  But what happens if you
pare down the stereotypical theatrical imagery of Shakespeare and simply
concentrate on the characters in the story?
This new version of Hamlet, directed by Campbell Scott (The Spanish
Prisoner) and Eric Simonson does just that, and beautifully so.  The
setting is Americanized (the post-Civil War-era South), the production
design simple, and nobody is forcing an accent unknown to them.  It
makes you want to scrounge for the books you packed away in high school
because you didn't feel like figuring them out at the time.
Everyone knows the story of Hamlet by now, so I'll pass on the plot
description and stick to appreciating this provocative adaptation.
The production is woven by an impeccable ensemble cast.  For instance,
Polonius (Roscoe Lee Browne) and his kin (Lisa Gay Hamilton as Ophelia
and Roger Guenveur Smith as Laertes) are captured as a family unit --
not just as the councilor of Claudius (Jamey Sheridan) or the
unfortunate love interest of Hamlet (Campbell Scott).  They are also
African-American, which adds yet another layer as to why Ophelia and
Hamlet can't end up together, and why Polonius will always be an advisor
but never king.
This is just a fraction of how the secondary characters aid in
articulating the prison-like world that Hamlet is stuck in.  Even the
Players, who normally have a quick few shots in a film to show that the
play prompted by Hamlet aggravates Claudius (Jamey Sheridan), have
strong scenes.  When they come up the driveway, Hamlet is pleased to
finally have someone to talk to, and Hamlet actually gets a few moments
of happiness.
Unlike most adaptations of Hamlet that center on the title character --
almost becoming a vanity piece -- Scott and Simonson wisely choose to
give these secondary characters ample screen time.  Hamlet is also
played with a refreshingly different, layered interpretation.  He isn't
simply melancholy, or even self-pitying.  Scott evokes in Hamlet an
intelligence and quiet charisma that keep you focused on his progress
throughout the almost-three-hour movie.
Even better, everything is wonderfully underplayed, allowing the viewer
to appreciate the feelings conveyed.  The words themselves haven't
changed but are spoken with human simplicity and not the common
theatrical bravura.  Monologues blend well into the rest of the dialogue
and aren't just set up to remind you that you are watching Shakespeare. 
This is a coming-of-age story and is played as such instead of shouting,
"See, this is a classic!"
A unique fantasy element has also been added so that there is nothing
shocking about the method to Hamlet's madness.  It is easier to
understand the complexity of his emotional upheaval.  These moments are
set apart simply but effectively through the use of a beating drum.  His
experience with the Ghost continues to impose on his mind, forcing him
into submission.  At one point he cuts his own arms with glass, more to
come back to reality than as a suicide attempt.  Though Shakespeare
purists may argue that this wasn't in the original play, it's a powerful
scene impossible not to connect with.
This is one of the best Shakespeare adaptations ever filmed.  It may be
three hours long, but you get so caught up in the motives of individual
characters and how they affect one another that you barely notice the
time.  Highly recommended.
Director: Campbell Scott, Eric Simonson
Producer: Mary Frances Budig, Jonathan Filley, Campbell Scott
Screenwriter: Campbell Scott, Eric Simonson
Starring: Blair Brown, Jamey Sheridan, Campbell Scott, Lisa Gay
Hamilton, Roscoe Lee Browne, Roger Guenveur Smith
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
