Title
Review for 'Til There Was You (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "God, I love methamphetamines -- more than life itself," confesses
ex-TV child star Francesca Lansfield (Sarah Jessica Parker).
Francesca, who played Taffy on the perennially popular show called "One
Happy Family" (think "Brady Bunch"), is fresh out of drug rehab.  All
of the men who grew up watching her have the hots for her now, and she
says she is not shy since "my tits grew up on national television."
(This last line and the incident where Jeanne Tripplehorn runs into a
barrier were the only times the audience at the screening came alive.)
     Scott Winant, who was one of the directors of the TV series "My
So-Called Life," directs 'TIL THERE WAS YOU.  Filmed by Bobby Bukowski
in shades of pastel, the movie tries hard, too hard, to be a whimsical,
romantic comedy.  I've never seen Winant's television work, but this
movie, Winant's first theatrical film, arrived DOA at the screening,
and his direction as well as the disastrous script by Winnie Holzman
were the culprits.
     I spent most of the movie staring at the screen in disbelief.  The
dialog is little more than a collection of snippets of meaningless
small talk, and the direction is so muddled that it takes quite a while
to sort out what is happening and who is who.  The bad news is that
when the story does become clear, you will not care.  The characters
are as artificial as their favorite restaurant, whose interior is
constructed out of aluminum triangles.
     Jeanne Tripplehorn, who was terrific in BASIC INSTINCT, plays a
ghost writer named Gwen Moss.  Moss laments that she has missed the
golden 10 minute window in her life when she was old enough to be
married but not too old.  Her life has gone down hill ever since.
     Dylan McDermott is architect Nick Dawkan.  Nick, who claims to be
just about the only man in America who never saw "One Happy Family,"
has Francesca as his live-in lover.  She has his body, but his mind
pines for an unknown female letter writer to the local newspaper.
     Midway through the movie, in a scene with Gwen's dad (Michael
Tucker), it looks momentarily as if the film will finally get its
footing.  Her dad, who manages to be both funny and the only believable
character in the film, bursts Gwen's bubble.  "I'm going to tell you
something important," he says while munching candy.  "I never loved
your mother.  Not real love."  She was shocked, and so was I, but then
the film went right back to its plastic characters and her dad
vanished.   (You can almost hear the director screaming, "Get him off
my set; he's not whimsical.")
     Perhaps most offensive is the story's attitude toward smoking.  It
is way cool.  You half expected to see a Joe Camel ad in the closing
credits.  Smoking represents rebellion and camaraderie among the
characters.  It used after sex and even instead of sex -- complete with
heavy, erotic panting.
     To complement the film's painfully slow pacing, the unrelenting
music by Terence Blanchard and Miles Goodman has a staccato piano that
will begin to feel like water torture.  I felt like the music was
trying brainwash me into believing the film's drivel through the
music's repetitive romantic rhythms, which had all of the charm of a
stuck record needle.
     Gwen's lover, Bob, proposes his solution to their romantic
difficulties.  "I think we should go to Paris," he suggests to her at
the aforementioned aluminum restaurant.  "Surrounded by rude French
people should bring us closer together."  With dialog like this why did
the producers go forward with this project?  The movie needs a rewrite
and a new director.  The cast would work if it had reasonable material.
     'TIL THERE WAS YOU runs 1:44.  The film is rated PG-13 for
language, sexual suggestions and drug references.  The picture is
remarkably tame and would be fine for kids 10 and over, but why bother?
I recommend you avoid the film, and I give it a single star for a good
cast trapped in awful movie.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jeanne Tripplehorn, Dylan McDermott, Sarah Jessica Parker,
Jennifer Aniston, Craig Bierko, Steve Antin, Patrick Malahide, Karen
Allen
Director: Scott Winant
Screenplay: Winnie Holzman
This movie should have been more aptly titled, ‘ALL THE OTHER PEOPLE I
HAD SEX WITH, UNTIL THERE WAS YOU.'
Gwen Moss (Jeanne Triplehorn), had always thought that her parents were
the perfect couple. She imagined that when she grew up, she would meet
the man of her dreams and like her parents, live her life in perfect
marital bliss. Boy was she wrong.
The first man was `Divine', a handsome college professor of literature,
that was until she found out he was also fucking all the other boys and
girls in class. The second was `Right', a dashing publicist for the rich
and famous, that was until she found out he was obsessed with someone
else. The third was `Perfect', a childhood sweetheart running for mayor,
that was until she found out he cared more about his career than her.
All of these men, TILL THERE WAS YOU.
Nick Dawkan (Dylan McDermott), came from a broken home rife with
parental discord. Like everyone else, he was searching for true love.
His first love was purely `Sexual', a college sweetheart and we know
that a relationship based on sex, doesn't last. The second had great
`Looks', but that doesn't last either. The third was the result of a
childhood crush on a TV star (Sarah Jessica Parker). Immeasurable
expectations only breeds immeasurable disappointment, when the real
person does not live up to her on screen persona. All of these women,
TILL THERE WAS YOU.
So when Nick and Gwen meet over a cigarette, outside a Smoker's
Anonymous meeting room, how do we know they are right for each other?
They could simply be number four in the long line of sexual contacts. A
relationship based purely on ‘we share something in common' (loneliness
and smoking), does not necessarily equate to true love. This is the
movie's major flaw. We are shown why their other relationships failed,
but we aren't shown why they are right for each other. They meet, they
look compatible, they have some common interests i.e. poetry, old
buildings, but this could simply be a prequel for a one-night-stand, and
not the precursor for a long lasting relationship.
Unfortunately, this is not the movie that will launch Jeanne Tripplehorn
or Dylan McDermott into the greater public eye. Sarah Jessica Parker, is
as usual, entertaining as the ex-childhood TV star.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jeanne Tripplehorn, Dylan McDermott, Sarah Jessica Parker, 
      Jennifer Aniston, Craig Bierko, Steve Antin, Patrick Malahide, 
      Karen Allen  
Director: Scott Winant 
Producers: Penney Finkelman Cox, Alan Poul 
Screenplay: Winnie Holzman 
Cinematography: Bobby Bukowski 
Music: Miles Goodman and Terence Blanchard 
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures 
     Most romantic comedies make it known early in the proceedings that 
they intend to follow all the time-honored, tried-and-true conventions 
of the genre by leading us down a well-trodden path littered with 
formulaic plots and overused character types.  For the most part, 'TIL 
THERE WAS YOU, 1997's April romance movie, manages to avoid this trap, 
and, in the process, has the dubious distinction of making us wonder if 
by-the-numbers familiarity is necessarily a bad thing.  In trying to be 
different by using the SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE approach of keeping the main 
characters apart until the finale, 'TIL THERE WAS YOU feels like a joke 
without a punchline.  The payoff, such as it is, is distressingly 
anticlimactic, and results in frustration. 
     Comparisons with SLEEPLESS are unavoidable.  Nora Ephron's 1993 
summer splash, which has inexplicably become something of a recent 
classic of the genre, takes the risk of keeping Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks a 
continent away from each other for the entire movie.  Nevertheless, 
because the actors are charismatic and their characters are likable, the 
picture never loses its way.  We look forward to the inevitable moment 
when the two will meet, but the script doesn't seem to be dragging its 
feet getting to that point.   
     That's not the case with 'TIL THERE WAS YOU.  Although many of the 
details are different from those in SLEEPLESS, the approach and intent 
are the same.  Sadly, the rhythm is all wrong.  Jeanne Tripplehorn, best 
known to this point as Michael Douglas' wife from BASIC INSTINCT, is 
Gwen, an incurable romantic who has waited her entire life for the right 
person.  Now in her early thirties, she's beginning to lose faith in 
life and love.  Every time she meets a man, there are problems.  Little 
does she know that Mr. Right is nearby, only she keeps missing him. 
     Mr. Right is actually Nick (Dylan McDermott, DESTINY TURNS ON THE 
RADIO), an architect who is charitably described as "emotionally 
unavailable."  Nick is involved with Francesca (Sarah Jessica Parker), 
the childhood TV star of a BRADY BUNCH knockoff who grew up to become a 
wealthy, materialistic, insecure ex-drug addict.  These two live 
together, rather unhappily, while Gwen floats around the periphery of 
their lives, occasionally coming into contact with Francesca, but never 
meeting Nick.  Until the end, that is, when fate finally intervenes.   
     Part of the problem with 'TIL THERE WAS YOU is that the characters 
aren't all that compelling.  Just because they have arcs (Gwen gaining 
confidence in her ability to write; Nick learning the value of truth) 
doesn't mean that they're well-developed.  And let's face it:  McDermott 
and Tripplehorn aren't Hanks and Ryan.  They don't light up the screen 
in such a way that their mere presence can save an otherwise-stillborn 
scene.  And 'TIL THERE WAS YOU has many stagnant moments.  At one-
hundred twelve minutes, it runs too long and becomes unnecessarily 
involved in poorly-developed, uninteresting subplots (like the one to 
save an "historically important" housing complex).  Instead of waiting 
expectantly for Nick and Gwen to meet, we become impatient for the 
encounter.  The movie fails to divert us along the long and twisting 
road to their rendezvous. 
     And, when that meeting finally takes place, it's disappointing.  By 
playing a song over their first significant conversation, 'TIL THERE WAS 
YOU robs us of the chance to hear Nick and Gwen getting to know each 
other.  After that, the film hurries to the "happily ever after" 
conclusion without giving us the opportunity to care whether the 
relationship works.  First time feature director Scott Winant and 
screenwriter Winnie Holzman have apparently forgotten why people go to 
romantic comedies. 
     As disappointing as much of 'TIL THERE WAS YOU is, there are some 
high points.  Certain individual scenes -- Gwen's revealing heart-to-
heart with her father (Michael Tucker), Gwen and Francesca's lively 
bathroom chat, and Nick's final attempt to be truly honest with 
Francesca -- work extremely well.  I also appreciated the manner in 
which coincidence is woven throughout the script without the characters 
ever making mention of it (for example, it's up to us to figure out that 
Nick's father's uncle was Gwen's grandmother's long lost love).   
     Unfortunately, the good parts of 'TIL THERE WAS YOU are oases in a 
desert.  They can't save the whole thing, which, in the end, seems like 
nothing more ambitious than a SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE wannabe.  By 
definition, romantic comedies are supposed to be "feel good" 
experiences, but, rather than leaving its audience enchanted, 'TIL THERE 
WAS YOU trails dissatisfaction in its wake.   
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Paramount)
Starring:  Jeanne Tripplehorn, Dylan McDermott, Sarah Jessica Parker,
Craig Bierko, Nina Foch, Jennifer Aniston.
Screenplay:  Winnie Holzman.
Producers:  Penney Finkelman Cox, Tom Rosenberg, Alan Poul.
Director:  Scott Winant.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  110 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     As the opening minutes of 'TIL THERE WAS YOU unfolded, I was fully
prepared to despise it for continuing the SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE-ization of
the romantic comedy genre.  The success of Nora Ephron's 1993 paean to
celestially-destined love may be the worst thing ever to happen to film
romance -- what incentive is there to create a plot or characters which
make sense if you can explain everything away as "fate?"  Then it became
clear that 'TIL THERE WAS YOU wasn't falling into the SLEEPLESS trap.  In
fact, it was consciously subverting it.  And suddenly I was even more
depressed that the film I was watching was so painfully tedious.  Here was
the love story I had been waiting for, and it turned out to be an
uninvolving, maudlin and incoherent mess.
     'TIL THERE WAS YOU follows the parallel lives of two Los Angeles
residents whose lives paths first cross when they are children, and whose
lives continue to affect each other's through the years though they never
actually have met.  Gwen Moss (Jeanne Tripplehorn) is a professional ghost
writer raised on romanticized notions of meeting your soul-mate; Nick
Dawkan (Dylan McDermott) is an architect whose unstable childhood has led
him to a series of ill-fated affairs.  Their lives become truly
intertwined when Gwen signs on to ghost-write the biography of Francesca
Lansfield (Sarah Jessica Paker), a former child star who subsequently
begins a romantic relationship with Nick.  Nick's firm is also involved in
the planned demolition of Gwen's apartment building, and Gwen's
impassioned opposition begins a process which could eventually bring them
together.
     I'm sure that director Scott Winant and writer Winnie Holzman thought
they were on to something fairly clever when they came up to the concept
for 'TIL THERE WAS YOU, and in theory they were right.  The story of Gwen
and Nick isn't a story about people destined to be together, though the
structure toys with that notion as they repeatedly just miss meeting each
other.  This is the story of two people who still have a lot of growing up
to do when we first meet them -- Gwen is a passive idealist in search of
her own voice, and Nick is incapable of investing himself in anything for
the long haul.  What we watch over the course of twenty years of their
lives are the events which shape them into people who could live happily
ever after.  It's a wonderfully practical kind of romanticism 'TIL THERE
WAS YOU offers:  the idea that true love is the product of two people who
meet at a moment when they are both _ready_ for true love.
     That's the sturdy skeleton of the story, however, not the dead body
of a film which was made with it.  Winant and Holzman are both alums of
"thirtysomething" and "My So-Called Life," shows as beloved for their
detailed characterizations as they were loathed for self-involved
emotionalism.  'TIL THERE WAS YOU is all the things the detractors of
those shows most detested, without nearly enough of the balancing wit and
attention to detail which gave the shows such a devoted following.
Holzman gets some comic mileage out of Gwen's losing battle with the
eccentric design of a trendy restaurant (created by Nick, of course), but
that's one of the few effective comic situations in the film.  The two
hours of 'TIL THERE WAS YOU could inspire a lot of watch-checking as it
becomes a rambling parade of over-wrought situations and annoying
characters, with Gwen's picturesque apartment complex -- a cross between
Melrose Place and the Garden District where it is perpetually raining rose
petals -- becoming more of a recurring joke than a location.
     The fatal flaw comes with the casting of the romantic leads, and for
once the problem isn't that they don't belong together.  You're just not
likely to care one way or the other.  Jeanne Tripplehorn demonstrates a
nice flair for light comedy, but the pleasant-if-kooky character she plays
isn't nearly interesting enough to support the story.  That goes double
for Dylan McDermott's Nick, who is as difficult to watch as he is to be
involved with.  Nick is a complete blank for most of the film, and his
sudden conversion from sullen architectural Dadaist to lover of all things
poetic and ornate makes virtually no sense.  Thank heaven Sarah Jessica
Parker is on hand as the endearingly narcissistic Francesca, providing a
burst of energy whenever she's in a scene.  'TIL THERE WAS YOU needs much
more of that energy to match its good intentions, instead of 110 minutes
of nearly oppressive sincerity.  The struggles of real-life relationships
don't have to be this dreary, but when they are, the appeal of starry-eyed
hokum like SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE suddenly makes a lot more sense.

Author
Christopher Null
     A cute idea with questionable delivery, 'TIL THERE WAS YOU is a
romantic comedy for the very patient among us.  Clocking in at almost
two hours, my biggest complaint is the desperate need for some
cut-cut-cutting -- editing which would have made the film a much more
enjoyable experience.  It's a cute idea:  Gwen (Jeanne Tripplehorn) and
Nick (Dylan McDermott) are meant for each other, but they never seem to
cross paths.  Also in the picture is Francesca (Sarah Jessica Parker), a
now-grown-up child actress who ends up being the catalyst that
inevitably brings the couple together.  Written by "My So-Called Life"
scribe Winnie Holzman, the story is absolutely dripping in the expected
melodramatics and sentimentality -- but that's not necessarily bad. 
It's just that when you combine the film's tedious length with
questionable casting decisions (Parker disappoints, & Jennifer Aniston
plays a surgeon(!?)) you get a fine mess that eventually redeems
itself... just not all the way.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
James Sanford
         Reputations can be deceptive. For example, director Scott
Winant and writer Winnie Holzman are best known for their involvement
in TV's ``thirtysomething'' and ``My So-Called Life,'' two shows that
addressed real-life concerns without sitcom moralizing and phoney
happy endings.
  It's now trendy to laugh at the ``yuppie angst'' of
``thirtysomething,'' but take another look and you'll find a
consistently well-written series.  The short-lived, much-loved
``Life'' (which introduced the miracle that has become Claire Danes)
was even better, offering the most credible look at teen-age life of
any show since ``Family'' in the late '70s.
  But ``'Til There Was You,'' which Winant directed and
Holzman wrote, is pure plastic, flat and transparent. All involved
were all too obviously aiming for another ``Sleepless In Seattle,''
but what they've produced is a cinematic siesta. The honesty of the
duo's TV work is gone, replaced by a synthetic airy-fairy atmosphere
that quickly becomes stifling.
  Holzman's meandering screenplay revolves around architect
Nick (Dylan McDermott) and ghostwriter Gwen (Jeanne Tripplehorn),
who've separately led parallel lives, destined to intersect.
  Both Nick and Gwen do work that goes unappreciated. Nick's
grandiose visions of design, such as putting a rooftop garden atop a
homeless shelter, don't suit his firm. Gwen, a scribe for illiterate
celebrities, realizes, ``I never put my name on anything I write.''
Each of them has also amassed a resume of lovers without finding much
fulfillment.
  They also have nicotine addiction in common, and so many
cigarettes are consumed during this movie you may want to burn incense
and set out dishes of vinegar. It may be Holzman's idea of retro-chic;
most people will find it contempo-disgusting.
  The magnet that will eventually draw Nick and Gwen together
turns out to be Francesca Lanfield (Sarah Jessica Parker), a burnt-out
former child star trying to reheat what's left of her legend by
publishing her memoirs.  Once an adorable moppet on TV's popular ``One
Big, Happy,'' Francesca is now a salty-tongued veteran of numerous
rehab clinics. ``Yes, it's me and no, I'm not dead,'' she says when
greeting fans.
  Nick meets her when Francesca sells the apartment complex
she owns to a developer, and the predatory actress soon has him under
her spell. Gwen is hired by Francesca when the would-be autobiographer
decides to let someone else do the job. Thanks to a string of
coincidences, Nick and Gwen manage to avoid meeting, even though it's
obvious that two people as dull as they are certainly deserve each
other.
  Tripplehorn and McDermott are badly miscast. Tripplehorn's
attempts at slapstick are embarrassing, while McDermott's sullen
intensity is completely wrong for this kind of fluff.
  The only joy in the film comes from Parker, so delightfully
sweet in the recent Broadway revival of ``Once Upon a Mattress,'' and
so deliciously sour here as the jaded Francesca. The acid Parker
injects into comments like ``this is extremely non-enjoyable'' is a
welcome antidote to Holzman's syrup.
  The rest of the supporting cast does what they can with what
they're given, which is generally not much. As Gwen's lifelong friend,
Jennifer Aniston begins building an interesting character, only to
disappear abruptly from the story.
  Michael Tucker, playing Gwen's deceptive dad, contributes
the film's brightest scene, when he confesses the truth about his
marriage to Gwen's mother. Tucker and Tripplehorn strike sparks, and
for a brief moment ``'Til There Was You'' soars above the humdrum and
approaches hilarity. But with Tucker's exit, the movie clunks back to
earth and dawdles along to its surprise-free finale.
