Title
Review for Nun va Goldoon (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
A MOMENT OF INNOCENCE (NUN VA GOLDOON)
   Surely you've had at least one moment in your life that you
consider one of consummate meaning, that gives essence to
your being and which you mull over in the mind and in your
dreams.  Iran's great director, Mohsen Makhmalbaf, had one
single particular which impacted so greatly on his life that the
incident never left his consciousness.  With the resources at
his command, however, he was able to do with this moment
what most of us can only dream of accomplishing.  He
dramatized the episode for the motion picture screen,
shaping the affair in a way that would be not only entertaining
for people of various cultures but would cause them to stop
and think, "If only I did things a little bit differently, how my
personal history would have changed!"  
   Makhmalbaf was, like many artists of his time, opposed to
the Iranian regime under the Shah, a government which he
believed ignored the authentically pious identity of its people
and sided far too greatly with the cultures of the West,
particularly the United States.  As a form of protest in 1976,
he tried to disarm a policeman, using a young woman to
distract the officer, and in the process stabbed the poor man
and wound up with a five-year sentence in jail, where he was
tortured and his life threatened.  In 1996, when "A Moment of
Innocence" (known in Farsi as "Nun va Goldoon") was filmed,
he hired actors to re-enact that situation using the actual
officer whom he victimized twenty years earlier to direct a
younger version of himself!  Now, there's a concept that
would have pleased the great Sicilian playwright, Luigi
Pirandello, whose staged works questioned the nature of
reality and pondered the relationship of art to life.
   Given the nature of the human beast to forgive especially
when there is some reward attached to absolution, the officer
in question has no desire for vengeance against his attacker
but is far more absorbed in training a young actor to come
across to the movie audience as a dashing young man.  It's
no wonder, therefore, that when asked to choose from a line-
up of 17-year-old applicants for the job, he picks the
handsomest lad rather than the best performer.  When his
choice is vetoed by the director, Mohsen Makhmalbaf
(playing himself), he stalks off angrily but is drawn quickly
back to the studio as his vanity gets the better of him.  
   Meanwhile Makhmalbaf, coaching the younger version of
himself, instructs the 17-year-old about the ironic nature of
his confrontation with the police officer. He had used an
attractive young woman to distract the victim, sending her
each day to ask for the time or for directions, so that the
officer thought the woman was showing a romantic interest in
him.  The policeman was determined to give a flower to the
woman but the thought of doing so made his hand tremble. 
How heartbreaking to find out that this lovely person draped
in a black chodor was simply using him, setting him up for a
tragedy!
    Since art is never the same as life, things do not work out
in the photographic re-enactment quite as they did twenty
years previous.  In fact a far warmer turn of events transpires
in the present, one if, hit come to pass in '76, would have
changed Makhmalbaf's life significantly and might even have
led to choose a career other than film-making.
   For lovers of Pirandello-like films and for people who never
heard of the Sicilian dramatist but who like to ponder what-if's
of human existence, "A Moment of Innocence" is a moment
of meta-cinematic intensity.  If you had seen that director's
"The Silence" immediately preceding as I did, you'd not have
believed the two movies were by the same fellow, as
"Innocence" accommodates a less meditative, wittier, lighter
touch with quite a bit more depth of plot--involving other
people in the director's life whom he takes his protege to
meet and with whose daughter the young colleague is about
to recapitulate the older man's experience.  The most
humorous scene involves a tailor who is fashioning a
general's costume for the would-be cop, a man who looks
with fondness to some of the great American films of the past
like "Spartacus" and the works of John Ford.  Weaving
memories of the past into an artistic re-creation, the Iranian
director scores with a subtle, diverting, and many-tiered
comedy-drama.
