Title
Review for Oscar and Lucinda (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     There is a moment in OSCAR & LUCINDA in which Oscar Hopkins lets
the direction of his life be decided by the flip of a coin.  In an
Anglican seminary because of a similar rock toss years earlier, his
trembling hand pushes a large coin toward one of his fellow
seminarians.  Heads he leaves, and tails he stays.  As Oscar, an
emaciated Ralph Fiennes shrinks into the corner and trembles as his
future is determined.  Almost convulsing with fear, he finds that he
will be going.
     Looking boyish and unstable, Fiennes again proves the wide range
of his acting talent.  Oscar, an obsessive and generally successful
gambler, gives his money away to the poor, not that it gets him any
praise from the locals.  Describing their bizarre minister as someone
who "dresses like a scarecrow and looks like one too," no one
understands him, least of all himself.  All he knows is that he is an
obsessive gambler.  In a deliciously dense monologue he argues the
commonality of Christianity and gambling.  "We bet that there is a
God," he claims is one of the fundamental tenants of his religion.
     Into his life, set in England and Australia in the mid-1800s,
comes a compulsive gambler, Lucinda Leplastrier, played with a certain
charm by Cate Blanchett.  (The show suggests at one point that there is
a difference between a compulsive gambler and an obsessive one,  but
does not explain what that might be.)  Lucinda inherits a fortune,
which she uses to purchase a glass factory.
     When Lucinda shows Oscar a model of a glass building, he has an
inspiration.  "It is like a kennel for God's angels," he declares,
seeing a church when she saw merely an exhibit hall.
     Like Werner Herzog's powerful film FITZCARRALDO about an opera
house in the jungle, the crux of the story deals with moving the
materials for a large building in a hostile and primitive setting.
Oscar makes Lucinda a wager about whether he can transport all the
pieces for a glass church across the Australian outback.  "I dare not
hope, and yet I must that through this deed I gain your trust," he
explains his motivation in his letter to her.
     Potentially the most interesting part of the movie, the outback
excursion gets little screen time.  Most of the movie is devoted to
Oscar and his worries about his gambling.
     I had major problems with screenwriter Laura Jones's last
pictures, A THOUSAND ACRES and THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY, and this one was
only marginally better.  Adapted from a novel by Peter Carey, the movie
has trouble creating compelling characters.  They are certainly
interesting to watch, as are the inviting images by LITTLE WOMEN's
cinematographer Geoffrey Simpson, but they have no depth.  Some of the
language is poetic but rarely is it involving.  Quirkiness can carry a
picture just so far, and at two and a quarter hours, the movie begins
to wear out its welcome long before the ending credits roll.  The rich
and constant narration by Geoffrey Rush suggests a larger meaning than
the story has.
     "You will preach what you do not believe to men who do not care,"
Lucinda chides another of her Anglican minister admirers.  Similarly,
the movie tries to mesmerize us with its whimsy but doesn't seem to
believe in its own material.  The show does have its delights, but too
often we simply don't care.  With tighter editing and better character
development, the movie and its enjoyment potential could have been
enhanced immensely.
     OSCAR & LUCINDA runs 2:14.  It is rated R for violence, sex, and
brief nudity and would be fine for teenagers.

Author
James Berardinelli
Australia/USA, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 12/31/97 (limited), 1/16/98 (wider)
Running Length: 2:10
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, sex, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Cate Blanchett, Ciaran Hinds, Tom Wilkinson, 
      Richard Roxburgh, Clive Russell, Bille Brown
Director: Gillian Armstrong
Producers: Robin Dalton, Timothy White
Screenplay: Laura Jones based on the novel by Peter Carey
Cinematography: Geoffrey Simpson
Music: Thomas Newman
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
     Ralph Fiennes is carving out a nice niche for himself in the genre 
of period piece romances.  For his followup to the Academy-beloved THE 
ENGLISH PATIENT, he has once again turned to a love story, this time 
directed by accomplished Australian film maker Gillian Armstrong (LITTLE 
WOMEN).  Despite some obvious overplotting, OSCAR AND LUCINDA is a 
mostly effective and often affecting motion picture that touches our 
hearts while daring our minds to balk at its implausible coincidences.  
     The film opens in the mid-1800s, with parallel storylines in New 
South Wales, Australia and Devon, England.  As the helpful narrative 
voice of Geoffrey Rush informs us, Lucinda Leplastrier (Cate Blanchett) 
is a headstrong young woman being raised in the Australian outback.  
Meanwhile, half the world away, Oscar Hopkins (Fiennes) has broken with 
his puritanical father over religious issues, and has gone away to 
school to study to be an Anglican priest.  Lucinda is fascinated with 
glass; Oscar is obsessed with theology.  Lucinda is rich; Oscar is poor.  
Lucinda is forward and self-assured; Oscar is timid and uncertain of 
himself.  Yet one characteristic unites these two diverse individuals -- 
the compulsion to gamble, whether it's on horses, dogs, cards, or the 
flip of a coin.  And fate has decreed that they will one day meet.
     That day doesn't occur until 45 minutes into the film, when Oscar 
boards a ship bound for Sidney, Australia, where he hopes to change his 
life and minister to anyone in need of his help.  Another of the 
passengers is Lucinda, who is returning from England where she was 
shopping for machinery to equip her newly-acquired glassworks factory.  
At first, their relationship is that of a reverend and a confessor, but 
it doesn't take long for both of them to recognize a kindred spirit in 
the other.  A friendship is born, and, once they reach Australia, it 
develops into something more potent.  But Oscar is uncertain of 
Lucinda's affection, and feels he must do something to prove himself 
worthy of her.
     OSCAR AND LUCINDA isn't beyond a little manipulation to get the 
desired emotional response, and there are times when the storyline 
curves in preposterous directions.  On more than one occasion, it's 
apparent that events are occurring specifically to funnel the characters 
into a position where there is only one possible route.  Coincidence is 
a crucial plot device; without it, this movie can't go anywhere.  The 
voiceover narration (never one of my favorite techniques) is too verbose 
and breaks into the story at undesirable moments.  (However, without it, 
the final twist, which I will not reveal, would not be as poignant.)
     Yet, despite these quibbles, I enjoyed OSCAR AND LUCINDA.  
Storyline faults pale in the light of two such finely-realized 
characters.  Thematically, the film is also strong.  The unifying motif 
-- that everything in life is a gamble -- is successfully delineated.  
Oscar and Lucinda don't just wager their money, they bet their hearts, 
minds, and souls.  A card game they engage in shortly after they first 
meet could easily be considered a form of emotional "strip poker" where 
defenses are peeled away to reveal their shared, secret passion.  Oscar 
does not see gambling as a vice.  In fact, he believes that the greatest 
chance one takes in life is betting one's immortal soul on the truth of 
a religious faith.
     Ralph Fiennes, who normally plays strong, confident men, is very 
much at home as the fumbling, insecure Oscar.  The actor brings a 
variety of nervous tics to the part, all of which subtly add to a vague 
sense of discomfort whenever Oscar is on-screen.  As good as Fiennes is, 
however, he is eclipsed by Cate Blanchett.  The actress, who appeared 
earlier this year as one of the leads in Bruce Beresford's PARADISE 
ROAD, is mesmerizing as Lucinda.  She gives this liberated woman her 
flash, and feeds the chemistry between the two lead characters so that 
it sparkles rather than fizzles.  Effective support is provided by 
Ciaran Hinds (the male lead in Jane Austen's PERSUASION) as Lucinda's 
close friend, Tom Wilkinson (THE FULL MONTY) as Oscar's mentor, and 
Clive Russell as a self-serving adventurer.
     There's a real magic in the way Armstrong develops the story, 
keeping things moving in unexpected directions without lingering too 
long on any one moment or sequence.  (In fact, I wish she had devoted a 
little more time to the luminous middle act, which has Oscar and Lucinda 
together.)  With the skill of a consummate storyteller, she weaves 
romance, friendship, passion, humor, and tragedy together into a 
complete package.  The characters, with all of their human foibles and 
neuroses, are wonderfully developed by Fiennes and Blanchett.  So who 
cares if the storyline is a little ripe and unwieldy?  OSCAR AND LUCINDA 
still offers abundant pleasures to reward the viewer.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Tim Voon
We have a minister (Ralph Fiennes) who is scared of water, addicted to
gambling, a bit of a wimp, a murderer, who wages his girlfriend's
inheritance that he can deliver a glass church to the back yard of the
world (Australia bush), before being seduced by a female vamp and
drowning in the glass church ……and somehow I'm meant to be better off
for having journeyed with this tormented man to his watery grave? Hah.
This product of this Peter Carey novel had me annoyed and bored to tears
from the word gamble. To think that it was a prize-winning novel, had me
convinced that it achieved it's end not so much for what was written,
but how it was written. Yes, this movie is not for the pubescent
adolescent waiting for their first taste of love, not for those in their
twenties looking for true romance or those in their thirties searching
for a spouse. OSCAR AND LUCINDA can be left for the time when the kids
have come and gone, and you can once again afford to walk around the
house naked and contemplate the meaning of what else to do with your
life. Come to think of it everyone in the theatre was either carrying a
frame or a walking stick. This made me feel awkward and strangely out of
place for not having arrived on the same bus from the local retirement
village.
Needless to say, the performances by Ralph Fiennes and Cate Blanchett
are superb, but what is the use of fine performances when the story line
suffers from the angst of poor motivation. We have two
obsessive/compulsive gamblers. One is a woman and the other an Anglican
minister. Oh the dilemma the dilemma is like whether to light another
fag when you are desperately trying to stop smoking. So the minister
bites his nails, twitches nervously trying to water down his tainted
conscience, becomes tormented by his lack of self control which
ultimately results in a fool hardy bet that leads to his death.
Undoubtedly, this man is in dire need of Gambler's anonymous, but I
cannot bring myself to empathise with him. To think the entire situation
could have been easily prevented by a simple ‘I love you' and not by
‘Lets make a bet that I can deliver a glass church to the
outback'.….well annoys the hell out of me.
Full marks to Gillian Armstrong for tight direction, but really the
story line majorly sucks.

Author
Seth Bookey
Have you even noticed the difference between vegetables that have been
boiled and those that have been steamed? Boiling leaves them recognizable
but drained of color and flavor; steaming makes the colors brighter, even
brighter than they were originally.
This, dear viewers, is the difference between *Oscar & Lucinda* and its
competition, the epic and ballyhooed *Titanic* and the enjoyable but
superficial *As Good As It Gets*. What exactly is it that is so wondrous
about *Oscar & Lucinda*? It's a confluence of  storytelling, music,
direction, and cinematography.
Set in the 1840s, the movie follows the title characters' lives from
childhood on. Oscar is the son of a hardened fundamentalist minister who
won't even refer to 25 December as Christmas because it's "papist!" and
smacks his son for eating Satan's fruit (Christmas pudding), in the bleak
but beautiful landscape of southern England. Lucinda grows up rather happy
in New South Wales, Australia. Through various adventures and growing
pains, they come to love God and gambling.
Ralph Fiennes is completely out of typecast here, looking less than
handsome as the nervous jittery Oscar, with his scarecrow appearance and
lack of haircut. Cate Blanchet is absolutely captivating as Lucinda, the
woman of independent means who buys a Sydney glassworks. She lights up
every scene she's in. It would be a cliche to say she is luminous, but she
is. Also wonderful are Tom Wilkinson (recently seen in *The Full Monty*) 
as the Anglican minister Hugh Stratton and Clive Russell as the strict
Theophilus, Oscar's father. 
While some might find the story lacking, the music and the cinematography
are really extraordinary. Watching *Oscar & Lucinda* is like eating a ripe
fruit, or steam vegetable, and this is due to director Gillian Armstrong,
whose career has included *My Brilliant Career*, and more recently a
remake of *Little Women*--she's an Australian national treasure.
What we see is not the typical romance, but a true love story with vivid
characters doing things that are simply not acceptable in the 19th
century, and how they come to rely on each other. This is no ordinary
cookie-cutter romance with situation comedy e elements thrown in. If
anything, it's a situation tragedy with people who are 99.44% pure, and a
church that floats. While there are some slow moments and uninteresting
subplots, Oscar and Lucinda is anything but typical, and the turns it
takes are real, and moving, and shown with a strong sense of empathy. 
Based on the novel by Peter Carey; screenplay by Laura Jones.
Cinematography by Geoffrey Simpson, music by Thomas Newman. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Edwin Jahiel
OSCAR AND LUCINDA (Australia,1997)  ** 3/4. Directed by Gillian Armstrong.
Written by Laura Jones from the novel by Peter Carey. Photography, Geoffrey
Simpson. Production design, Luciana Arrighi. Editing, Nicholas Beauman.
Music, Thomas Newman. Cast: Ralph Fiennes (Oscar Hopkins), Cate Blanchett
(Lucinda Leplastrier), Ciaran Hinds (Reverend Dennis Hasset), Tom Wilkinson
(Hugh Stratton), Richard Roxburgh (Mr.Jeffris), Clive Russell (Theophilus),
Bille Brown (Percy Smith), Josephine Burns (Miriam Chadwick), Barnaby Kay
(Wardely0Fish), Barry Otto (Jimmy D'Abbs), Linda Bassett (Betty Stratton).
A Fox Searchlight release. 131 minutes. Rated R (sex, violence)
Religion and gambling make strange bedfellows. A rare subject for
literature,too, as in the book that, in 1988, won England's paramount
prize, the Booker, and became the source novel for the film "Oscar and
Lucinda." Yet, the most famous gamble in history is Blaise Pascal's wager.
The 17th century French writer,philosopher, mathematician, physicist bet on
the existence of God, in what is probably the biggest win-win gamble ever.
If God exists, you win. If He does not, you've lost nothing.
This bet is essentially reiterated in "Oscar and Lucinda," though Pascal is
not mentioned or credited. The bettor is Oscar, an Anglican minister whose
story is told in flasback by his great-grandson.
Oscar, born in Victorian England,was a country boy from Devon, who lost his
mother early. His father was a fundamentalist Christian, the leader of the
local Plymouth Brethren. He saw other sects --including the Anglicans --as
heretics, and even punished his son for tasting Christmas pudding, that
work of the Devil.
His fanaticism drove Oscar into the household of an Anglican preacher, then
to Oxford where he studied for the Ministry. An impecunious loner, Oscar
became friends with a schoolmate who introduced him to betting on horses.
The bug bit him with the strength of an Ebola virus. Rather than become
that standard type of fiction, the addicted gambler who loses all, Oscar
became a steady winner.He paid his debts, saved a pittance for his modest
needs and placed his winnings in poor-boxes.
After ordination,to avoid the temptation of gambling while serving God, he
decided to become a missionary in backwoods Australia. He made the long
sea-voyage even though he had aquaphobia, an intense fear of water. I was
amused by someone calling it "hydrophobia," which evokes rabid dogs, bared
fangs and awful drool, whereas poor Oscar is the soul of gentleness!
Lucinda was Australian, a girl with a will. She grew up in the country, had
a fascination for glass, was totally orphaned and inherited a nice fortune.
In Sydney she bought a glassworks and became that extreme rarity for her
day, a female entrepreneur. In her private life, Lucinda was also an
intense gambler who favored cards, played in the homes of known gamblers or
in Chinese dens, wore (how shocking!) bloomers. She shared her love of
glass with the Reverend Hasset. They became friends.All this made Lucinda
more than suspect in the eyes of the public and the clergy.
When Lucinda had gone to England for modern equipment, and was returning to
Australia, she and Oscar met on the ship, recognized their passion for
gambling and became friends.
Their relationship was not carnal, not even overtly amorous, although one
suspects that it was an "amitie amoureuse," -- stronger in Oscar's case.
But he won't say a word since he believes that love exists between Lucinda
and Hasset.
Now, Hasset, whose friendship with Lucinda has raised eyebrows among the
clergy, has been exiled, appointed to a nothing place far within the
outback. Oscar, in a strange move that allies glass and faith, has
Lucinda's works construct a glass church which will be taken to the faraway
boondocks to the Reverend Hasset.
"O & E" is an original tale, to say the least. The paperback edition of the
book is 448 pages. The film is 131 minutes. There is no way that the novel
could be transposed without huge cuts. As a result the movie is fascinating
yet puzzling; fresh yet frustrating; complex but meandering.
At its most basic, a motion picture is an assembly of scenes that contain
images that (generally) have movement in them. There are cuts and there are
cuts. Editing (or cutting) can be slow or fast. Many cuts don't belabor
matters yet convey the essentials. This is good. But when cuts make whole
sections disappear, they may leave gaps and the audience wonders about what
went on.
In "O & L" the absence of certain explanations diminishes
characterizations, motivations and plain facts. Why is Oscar scared of
water? (It is hinted at in the movie but not sufficiently explained). How
did young Oscar fare after breaking with his father? Does Oscar think that
there are no gambling opportunities in Australia? Why does he wear
Salvation Army-type clothes when he later could afford better ones? And how
is it that he can be a regular winner in the tricky area of gambling? What
is his "system"? What was the source of Lucinda's passion for glass and
where does her mother's wealth come from? What, for the public, are exactly
the Prince Rupert's glass drops? Why, in the expedition to haul  the glass
church, does the hitherto rather pleasant leader, Mr. Jeffris turn into a
killer?
(Yes, there's a critique of racism toward the aborigines but it feels
thrown in). Etc.
The film is disjointed and cloudy, although its beautiful photography, sets
and often lush settings can captivate and temporarily refrain you from
asking too many questions. The cast does very well with what it has, but it
is all too sketchy. A pity, as the better Australian movies are strong on
people, motivations and character developments, and that's also director
Gillian Armstrong's forte: "My Brilliant Career," "Mrs. Soffel," "Little
Women" and others.
"O & L" can be stunning with pictorials more than with its human psyches.
The most quoted line comes from the narrator. "In order that I exist, two
gamblers, one obsessive, one compulsive, must meet." Yet the difference
between obsession and compulsion is   murky at the very least.
Many touches of humor do make up partly for the film's frailties. The loss
of Oscar's virginity is both comical and crucial to the plot. The jewel of
the crown, however, is the transporting of the church, a sort of
Fitzcarraldo Lite. It too could have used lengthening within a movie that
needs an extra hour for catching up with the book.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Fox Searchlight Pictures
 Director:  Gillian Armstrong
 Writer:  Laura Jones
 Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Cate Blanchette, Tom Wilkinson, Clive
Russell, Ciaran Hinds, Josephine Byrnes, Richard Roxburgh,
Bille Brown.
   Some of the fine movies of recent times feature food as the
central character: "Babette's Feast," "The Big Night," "A Chef
in Love."  But never before has a single dish, a small dessert
item, figured so prominently that the entire story would not
have taken place without it.  In "Oscar and Lucinda," two
maids in the employ of Oscar Hopkins's father calls the teen-
aged boy into the kitchen and offer a taste of their delicious
Christmas pudding.  Oscar tries a piece and he's in heaven. 
As he's about to spoon up another morsel, the door swings
open: in comes his fanatically puritanical, Pentecostal dad,
who throws the pudding and its plate into the fireplace, slaps
the boy on the ear, and gives hell to the maids for offering 
pleasurable provender.  The severe, bearded man belongs to
a faith--much like the Danes in "Babette's Feast" who dine
daily on gruel--that eschews physical pleasure, suggesting
that the dessert was produced by Satan, and certainly not the
appropriate way to honor God on Christmas day.  While
Oscar has become too filled with the importance of faith and
salvation to turn agnostic, he begins to question his dad's
values and, believing he has received a message from God
(who talks to him while he tosses a disk at some symbols on
the ground), he decides to leave home and sign on to the
Anglican faith.  Shortly thereafter he becomes a reverend.
   "Oscar and Lucinda" leaves out much of the
characterization advanced in the novel by Peter Carey, such
as the fleshed-out portrait of the man who narrates the story
and who is Oscar's grandson.  But it more than makes up for
the exclusion with perhaps the most gorgeous photography of
any film of 1997, "Kundun" not excepted.  Portraying an
Australia circa 1850 during the reign of Britain's Queen
Victoria and the publication of Charles Darwin's "Origin of
Species," Gillian Armstrong's leisurely look at God, gambling,
gamboling and glass is the sort of film with which a modern
American audience can scarcely find universal meaning or
even to identify too closely with any of its characters.  Yet
"Oscar and Lucinda" is a haunting meditation on mores and
folkways of a bygone, romanticized era in the history of the
British Empire which pulls no punches in denouncing the
white man's rape of land settled by Downunder aborigines. 
Idiosyncratic as all-get-out, Armstrong's reliable adaptation of
the Booker-prize winning book compels our attention with its
consideration of repressed sexuality, the conflict between
earthly pleasures and the contemplation of the heavens, and
the singular pairing-up of two square pegs in a society of
round holes.
   Featuring conscientious performances by the protean
Ralph Fiennes and upcoming actress Cate Blanchette (soon
to appear in a movie about Elizabeth I), "Oscar and Lucinda"
centers on a shy, overly obedient red-haired boy, Oscar
Hopkins (Ralph Fiennes) who separates himself from his
father's household when the latter's religion proved a mite too
fanatical for the adolescent to tolerate.  Becoming an Anglican
minister, he develops a compulsion to gamble on anything
from cards to animals, rationalizing his behavior as a way to
add to the coffers to the poor, and, on a more metaphysical
level, as a religious experience in itself.  As he relates to the
equally eccentric heiress, Lucinda Leplastrier (Cate
Blanchett), a liberated woman who dresses in slacks like a
man and runs a glass-making factory, "Our whole faith is a
wager, Miss Leplastrier. We bet--it is all in Pascal and very
wise it is too, that there is a God. We bet our life on it.  We
calculate the odds, the return, that we shall sit with the saints
in paradise.  Our anxiety about our bet will wake us before
dawn in a cold sweat.  We are out of bed and on our knees,
even in the midst of winger.  And God sees us, and sees us
suffer."  The two play cards with more passion than most
people feel when they make love.  In one reckless moment,
Cate bets her entire inheritance against Oscar's future legacy
that he cannot transport a glass church which she has built to
a remote location in Northern Australia by Good Friday, where
he is to turn the edifice over to the Reverend Dennis Hasset
(Ciaran Hinds), who had been exiled to the sticks for being in
the company of the raffish Miss Leplastrier.  The midsection
of the film becomes a road movie, as Oscar and his band trek
through allegedly dangerous areas controlled by aborigines,
expecting to deliver the goods to a thoroughly surprised
preacher and his congregation.  
   A key point of the novel which the film hasn't the time or
inclination to bare is the motive behind Lucinda's reckless
wager.  It's not that she has no use for the money she had
inherited: she did, in fact, bask in her ownership of the glass
works she purchased.  But she was plagued by guilt.  The
money did not belong to her; it was her parents'.  More
important, she believed that her father stole the money,
having overrun land settled by blacks, which he later
successfully farmed.  
   But no matter.  Movies are a visual art, and Gillian
Armstrong--working with Luciana Arrighi's luxuriant production
design, Janet Patterson's striking costumes, and Geoffrey
Simpson's resplendent lensing--has splashed the screen with
color and a thoroughly adult piece of craftsmanship, while
evoking--however sketchily--the conflicts between physical
pleasure and the hope of salvation, between Victorian
assurance of the existence of God and Charles Darwin's
challenge to this certainty, and between a concern for the
community's values and a grasping on to one's own notions. 
She has evoked solid work from Ralph Fiennes and Cate
Blanchette, two oddballs who were made for each other but
able to consummate their feelings only at the card table.  If
we must bring the metaphysical down to earth, "Oscar and
Lucinda" is at heart a tale of two lonely people brought
endearingly together if only for a second in God's cosmic
timetable.  Rated R.  Running Time: 131 minutes.  (C) 1997
Harvey Karten

Author
Scott Renshaw
OSCAR AND LUCINDA
(Fox Searchlight)
Starring:  Ralph Fiennes, Cate Blanchett, Ciaran Hinds, Tom Wilkinson,
Clive Russell.
Screenplay:  Laura Jones, based on the novel by Peter Carey.
Producers:  Robin Dalton and Timothy White.
Director:  Gillian Armstrong.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, violence, profanity)
Running Time:  132 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I suppose you could call OSCAR AND LUCINDA perfectly successful to
this extent:  I was genuinely fascinated by these two characters, and
invested in seeing them happy together.  Based on the novel by Peter
Carey, it tells the story of two souls whose destinies collide in
Victorian-era Australia.  Oscar Hopkins (Ralph Finnes) is a reclusive,
penniless divinity student; Lucinda Leplastrier (Cate Blanchett) is a
high-spirited heiress who invests in a glassworks factory.  Though their
backgrounds are in some ways completely opposite, they share one important
hobby in common:  both are compulsive gamblers.  Each finds that wagering
provides a daring sense of release which nothing else in their proscribed
lives can provide, leading to an instant connection when they meet on
board a ship to Australia.
     The respective performances of Fiennes and Blanchett are certainly
impressive -- Fiennes the timid holy man with toussled hair and stammering
speech, Blanchett the "proud square peg" in a world of round holes.  When
the come together, however, the chemistry is nothing short of
intoxicating.  The scenes in which they meet to share furtive games of
cards take on the feel of illicit sexual encounters, eyes wild with a
sense of abandon and discovery.  No screen pairing of the year offered
more promise for fascinating interaction.
     What an absolute pity that the narrative divides Oscar and Lucinda
almost as soon as they are united.  Convinced that Lucinda carries a torch
for a missionary minister (Ciaran Hinds), Oscar sets off on a fool's
errand to prove his devotion to Lucinda, leading an overground party to
bring a pre-fabricated glass church to a remote location in the Outback.
His increasingly feverish quest provides opportunities for some
spectacular shots by cinematographer Geoffrey Simpson, including lingering
views of the glass church floating down a river on a barge.  It's just
terribly frustrating knowing that these two characters are hanging around
in the same movie, but not in the same scenes.  An interest in the fate of
their relationship may keep you watching, but it will also keep you
fidgeting.  On the page, I can see this story being an engrossing,
heart-breaking page-turner.  On the screen, with two great performances
giving a spark to the rare moments these characters are together, OSCAR
AND LUCINDA becomes a beautifully filmed and splendidly acted tease.
