Title
Review for Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1992)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
The Phantom
     It's nice when a film lives up to its title, as far too many these
days do not.  In part this is due to the endless tide of sequels
Hollywood's long-suffering audiences have been subjected to; after all,
what is it about pedestrian titles like BATMAN RETURNS that might raise
our spirits?  How do LETHAL WEAPON 3 and DIE HARD 2 tickle our fancies?
The answer is that they don't, for although everyone loves a clever
title (and an even more clever film to back it up), they are sadly few
and far between.  (With DIE HARD 2, people took matters into their own
hands and redubbed it DIE HARDER, which is both more appropriate and
rather more clever than the film itself.)
     BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER, however, has little to worry about in
this department.  Though we'll be treated to one or two other
well-thought-out titles (WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP and DePalma's upcoming
RAISING CAIN come to mind) before year's end, BUFFY -- more than any
other film in recent months -- works hard to capture our interest even
before the theater lights dim.  Its title conjures up all sorts of
intriguing possibilities, and it's impossible to think of it without
becoming at least moderately interested in seeing the film.
     The question, of course, is what happens *after* the theater lights
dim.  In the case of BUFFY, we are again pleasantly surprised to find
that unlike many films this year, BUFFY is truly a smile.  By this, the
Phantom means that at any point during the film, you'll likely find
yourself smiling at something, if not outright laughing out loud at some
bit of cleverness, a throwaway line, a delightfully incongruous scene.
And you won't be alone -- look around you and you'll see that most of
the rest of the audience is smiling as well.  There aren't many films
that can produce this reaction -- this involuntary smiling -- but BUFFY
does, and does quite often.  And that's worth a lot in this season of
expensive frowns, this dismal summer season of more-of-the-same action
films and tame high-concept comedies that are worrying studios and video
dealers alike.  For after all, although people are still going to the
movies, they are with few exceptions going with little enthusiasm and
low expectations.  How else to explain the generally positive response
to the anachronistic LETHAL WEAPON 3?  The overwhelmingly positive
notices that BATMAN RETURNS has garnered, even though that film suffers
from one of the worst cases of sequelitis in recent memory?  (BATMAN
RETURNS comes to vibrant life just once when Michelle Pfeiffer
transforms herself for the first time into Catwoman.  The rest of the
time we get an awful lot of high-budget wheel-spinning in traditional,
grand, LETHAL WEAPON style.)
     In the Phantom's opinion, the problem with this summer's crop of
films is that there are too many dollars chasing too few smiles (if the
Phantom may be permitted to appropriate a term traditionally used in
economics, a subject that is itself the root cause of much moviegoer
misery these past few months).  Extraordinary amounts of money have been
spent on exceedingly tired comedies like MO' MONEY, comedies that are at
best sporadically funny but much more frequently horrifyingly bad,
filled with unnecessary violence and misogyny and bereft of any ability
to make their audiences feel good for 90 minutes (which is, after all,
all a Hollywood film has to do to be considered successful; these films
are for the most part not being made for the ages, unless Hollywood has
redefined "the ages" to mean six months down the road when the film hits
Blockbusters).
     BUFFY, though, looks like it's had someone's time -- rather than
money -- lavished on it, and as a result we find few expensive special
effects, no high-rent actors, and -- surprise of all surprises -- a
shockingly literate script.  As Joe Eszterhas so ably proved with his
overpriced and very bad screenplay for BASIC INSTINCT, more money
doesn't always buy better dialogue or non-intelligence-insulting
situations; instead, BUFFY's screenplay delights and amuses us at every
turn, whether it's presenting Buffy to us for the first time, giving us
a glimpse of an exceedingly dysfunctional basketball coach's
motivational techniques, or letting us enjoy Paul Reuben's antics as the
least likely vampire to grace the silver screen in years.  Best of all,
just when we begin to feel that the film has left us stranded in smile
heaven in order to set up a superfluous action or love scene, BUFFY's
screenplay comes to our rescue once again; and as we leave the theater,
what crosses all of our minds, what surprises us and encourages us, what
makes us shake our heads in disbelief is this: BUFFY never lets us down.
It is a film that is consistently entertaining, one that never tries to
flimflam us with gore or special effects, and one that moves confidently
at its own pace, secure in the knowledge that its audience will be right
behind it, smiling all the time and hoping for more.
     Its story couldn't be more simple: Buffy, you see, is our
generation's Official Vampire Slayer, and as such it falls to her to
take care of the growing vampire menace in her sunny, Southern
Californian home town (to demonstrate this, the film gives us a glimpse
of Buffy in a prior life, back before there were malls).  Donald
Sutherland is reborn each generation as the vampire slayer's tutor,
sidekick and kick-boxing coach (Buffy may be able to lead a cheer, but
as an Official Vampire Slayer, she requires a fair amount of
assertiveness training); his job is to convince her that her destiny
lies not in cheering the basketball team on to victory but in pounding
wooden stakes through people's hearts -- a tough job, but someone's got
to do it.
     On hand as well are Paul Reubens and Rutger Hauer, who handles his
light comic role as well has he's handled the large-caliber automatic
weapons he's co-starred with in the past (the Phantom will even go so
far as to forgive him for SPLIT SECOND, the only Rutger
Hauer-with-a-shotgun film that was almost perfectly unentertaining).
Hauer plays Lothos, the head of Vampires Local 54, who directs Paul
Reuben's actions and spends most of the film waiting for his climactic
confrontation with Buffy.  He looks suitably creepy most of the time,
though he stops well short of causing the audience's skin to crawl (as
he did in incomparable horror film THE HITCHER); this is just as well,
since BUFFY is a comedy first and foremost and a horror spoof only as an
afterthought.  In this, it's a bit different than FRIGHT NIGHT, RETURN
OF THE LIVING DEAD, EVIL DEAD 2, NIGHT OF THE CREEPS, AN AMERICAN
WEREWOLF IN LONDON and countless other (and lesser) horror spoofs, but
it's as fun and entertaining as the best of them (the Phantom was
particularly reminded of Tom Holland's wonderful FRIGHT NIGHT, which is
a must-see for phans of horror-comedies).
     Paul Reubens seems to be having a marvelously malevolent time as
Lothos' Renfield and executive assistant; he also mugs up a storm in a
death scene to end all death scenes, and frighteningly enough, in a few
scenes he actually comes to resemble his police mug shots -- surely a
sign that he's perfected the look of the living dead.  
     Kristy Swanson as Buffy takes command of the film early on and
doesn't relinquish it to Luke Perry's mugging, Paul Reuben's antics, or
any number of surprisingly funny actors in bit parts throughout the film
(including Mark DeCarlo as a coach who's spent too much time reading
self-help books and Candy Clark as Buffy's even-more-airheaded mother).
She remains the focus of attention, and her transformation from Valley
Girl to Vampire Slayer is carried off nearly without a hitch (though the
film almost loses its way once Buffy discovers her more serious and
responsible side, Swanson keeps the proceedings on track until the
screenplay can toss another throwaway line or two our way).
     Director Fran Rubel Kuzui (with a name like that, you know you're
in for a comic treat -- Ms.  Kuzui's name sounds like a clown sneezing)
keeps the film rolling along to its somewhat predictable conclusion, and
although it is not entirely funny nor even very original for every one
of its 98 minutes, it is funny and original enough for this summer.
BUFFY is well worth a look now while people are talking about it and
while its many throwaway comic lines are fresh in people's minds.  For
BUFFY passes the hardest test of a good comedy: it's still funny well
after you've left the theater, and any two people who've seen it can
amuse themselves for a good long while by recalling the best of the
film's dialogue, the funniest of its situations, and the overall good
feeling it left them with.  For even greater effect, see the
embarrassingly bad MO' MONEY first, if only so that you can fully
appreciate what it is that BUFFY's filmmakers have done -- and have not
done.  No gore, no violence, no car chases, no explosions, no misogyny,
no pumping soundtrack; instead, BUFFY lets us smile beatifically for 98
minutes.  And for the Phantom, that's worth $7.50 any day.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A dim-witted Valley-girl is chosen to be the most recent inductee into the
centuries-long line of vampire slayers. Despite her initial skepticism, the
girl eventually settles into her role of kicking bloodsucker ass, with the
aid of a salty old mentor and a cute slacker boy.
CRITIQUE:
Flat comedy/horror flick that barely scratches the level of mediocrity in
either genre. Most of the jokes in this film were either recycled or
uninspired, while the horror aspect appeared to be entirely underdeveloped.
Kristy Swanson's breasts helped me ease through most of this film, as well
as the cheesy acting by the man with the beach forehead, Luke Perry, but
overall, it felt like a "good premise gone awry" at best. And even if camp
were to have been this film's prime motivation, it met its mark but only
slightly. That being said, I was never bored during the film (which only ran
for about 85 minutes or so), but felt as though the vampire-slaying scenes
could have been expanded further, as well as the bloodiness of the whole
thing.
Too much time was spent on the high school aspect of the script, which was
essentially a bunch of dumb-dumb kids talking over-written dialogue to one
another. Like CLUELESS (7.5/10) but without the wit or entertainment value.
Rutger Hauer was also the crappiest bad guy, using every single cliché in
the book, including my all-time favorite, which consists of talking the ears
of your nemesis, instead of killing them off quickly as you should. Needless
to say, the final confrontation was a perfect example of an anti-climax, if
I ever saw one. See it if you like the premise, Swanson's breasts, Perry's
Caesar haircut, Affleck's two-second appearance, or Paul Reubens only other
real part since Pee-Wee "I love porno" Herman, otherwise, return to your
video store and rent a real fun vampire movie, like THE LOST BOYS (8/10).
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
If you don't blink, you may just catch actor Ben Affleck playing an extra as
a basketball player.
Rutger Hauer was the actor upon whom Anne Rice based her famous vampire
character Lestat. Rice had apparently hoped that Hauer would get to play
Lestat in the film version of INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE (8/10), but by the
time the movie was made, Hauer had passed the proper age by a decade or two.
The role eventually went to Tom Cruise.
Paul Reubens' real name is Paul Rubenfeld. Before Pee-Wee Herman, he was
honorably discharged from the Marine Corps.
This film spawned the successful television series of the same name, which
has been running since 1997, with Sarah Michelle Gellar playing the part of
Buffy.
Director Fran Rubel Kuzui went on to direct...uuhm...well, as of 1999,
nothing. Screenwriter, Joss Whedon, on the other hand, went on to write a
piece of TOY STORY and all of ALIEN: RESURRECTION. He claims that the studio
changed his BUFFY script, reportedly to make the movie funnier, and
presumably less scary.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     Donald Sutherland goes to high school cheerleader Kristy Swanson
and tries to convince her that she is the chosen one to fight vampire
Rutger Hauer and his assistant Paul Reubens.  After he convinces her
that she is the chosen one he tries to teach her in the ways of vampire
slaying.
     If you are in the mood for a serious film or a horror film, BUFFY
THE VAMPIRE SLAYER is not for you.  BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER is mainly a
teenager/college student comedy film.  Most adults, unless you are stuck
in the Peter Pan Syndrome, will find this film a waste of time, and
money.  I highly recommend this film to high school and college
students, but not to adults.  If you are a Peter Pan adult, I suggest
matinee prices only.  On a scale of zero to five, I give BUFFY THE
VAMPIRE SLAYER a four.   BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER is rated PG-13 for
adult situations, explicit language, violence, and adult humor.
     I have always thought that Luke Perry, "Beverly Hills, 90210," had
no acting ability, and after seeing this film I have seen nothing to
change my mind.  The only reason that I can see that he was put in this
film was to attract teenage girls so they can "oh" and "ah" him when he
is on the screen.  Thankfully his part is well-written and he isn't a
key actor in this film.
     Paul Reubens, the famous Pee-Wee Herman (who I don't think will
ever work as Pee-Wee again), shows signs of becoming a real actor.  I
have never been a fan of Pee-Wee Herman and I hated Pee-Wee's Playhouse.
I also extremely disliked his acting in Cheech and Chong's NICE DREAMS.
He looks and sounds nothing like Pee-Wee, and thankfully, acts nothing
like him.  If he keeps it up he might have a future in films!
     Kristy Swanson does a good job as Buffy, and I think that she is
the cutest vampire basher you will ever see.  She does an exceptional
job in the beginning of the film as the "I'm better than everybody else
cheerleader."  Donald Sutherland, I think, has one of the best
characters in his career.  Usually I am not taken with his characters,
like the college professor in NATIONAL LAMPOON'S ANIMAL HOUSE, but I
liked his character in this film.   There isn't much to say about Rutger
Hauer.  He is not on for much time at all and never really got any
character development.  The film could have spent a little longer on
him.
     The film was well written, and towards the end Paul Reubens has one
of the best scenes in the film.  The film was not scary.   I will assume
that it was not meant to be.  If it was, they messed up.  Who ever wrote
the part for the principal must have just come out of high school.  His
"Don't look at me as administration, look at me as a party animal"
speech is very typical, at least in my high school, of those in power.
I wish that the film had been longer.  Just about the time I really
started to get into it, the film was starting to wind down.
     One last note, you should stay through the beginning of the end
credits because they contain a few funny scenes.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Kristy Swanson; Donald Sutherland; Paul Reubens & Rutger Hauer
Buffy The Vampire Slayer is the film that spawned the successful television
series of the same name. While Buffy's creator Joss Whedon, who is probably
one of the most talented men in Hollywood, wrote both the TV series and the
movie, the lead actress is different. Buffy was first played by Kristy
Swanson in this movie, as opposed to Sarah Michelle Gellar who plays the
vampire killing babe on TV.
Buffy is cheesy. And it is meant to be (at least I hope that they meant it
to be). My first piece of advice is if you watch this film expecting
anything other than a campy, fun little film, you are in for a big
disappointment.
Apparently vampires roam the Earth. On top of this disturbing fact, there is
only one person that can stop them. The Vampire Slayer. Now there is only
one slayer at a time, and each time one gets killed a new one is chosen to
replace her. Well, in present day Los Angeles its air-head cheerleader Buffy
(Kristy Swanson) that gets the nod to be the next slayer. When she gets
approached by Merrick (Donald Sutherland), her watcher (the guy that trains
her), she is not exactly interested in the job. But soon becomes convinced
that LA has more than its share of vampire activity. The vamps are headed up
by Lothos, played by Rutger Hauer in one of his usual villain rolls. The
interesting casting choice comes in Lothos' sidekick, Amilyn, played by none
other than Paul Reubens (a.k.a. Pee Wee Herman). Now I don't want to give
anything away, but when Pee Wee's fate is decided at the end of the movie it
is one of my favorite scenes in a movie of all time. I won't say any more
but the movie is almost worth it for that one scene alone. Almost, but not
quite. As a horror film -- it isn't scary. As a comedy -- it isn't that
funny. So I'm not really sure what Buffy The Vampire Slayer is trying to be.
As I said, I think Buffy's writer Joss Whedon is one of the most talented
men in Hollywood, but I get the impression that this one of his earliest
efforts, and I must say that his skills have improved significantly since
this movie.
Kristy Swanson shines in this movie if only because she is just so darn
cute. That and the fact that she seems to get most of the best lines on the
movie, other than Pee Wee. Donald Sutherland and Rutger Hauer are good in
their roles but one has to wonder just how bad their careers were at the
time to take these roles. Luke Perry also shows up as pike, Buffy love
interest. Not being a big Luke Perry fan, I was surprisingly impressed at
the job that he did.
In Summary, Buffy is cheesy, campy, and not a particularly great movie,
although worth a look if you are just interested in a little bit of fun
without having to think too much.
Good for a few laughs, but not much else  5/10

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The one original vampire hunter and the best known was, of course, Van
Helsing from Bram Stoker's DRACULA.  Universal had the character in two
films in the 1930s.  Hammer had at least some character named Van Helsing
(always played by Peter Cushing) in four different films.  It created the
idea that the Van Helsing family took it as a congenital mission to destroy
vampires.  BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER modifies this idea to say that there are
a chain of women vampire hunters going back to the Middle Ages.  It asks
what would happen if the mantle fell on the shoulders of a Valley Girl who
is less than totally bright (to put it charitably).  Well, perhaps the idea
has possibilities.  We may never know.  What we have gotten is a film that
bears the earmarks of having been made from the first draft of a script,
then edited by someone who was not interested in the material.
     Buffy seems to be majoring in sensual cheerleading at Hemery High
School in the San Fernando Valley.  In the opening sequences we establish
that she is very now and awesome and, in her own words, "vacuous."  Then a
mysterious character named Merrick arrives on the scene and tells Buffy that
she is next in line to be a vampire slayer.  Why does he think it is she?
Why did this honor come to be conveyed on her?  Why ask why?  The
screenwriter didn't.  Though Buffy is skeptical at first, when bodies start
digging their way out of graves, she starts to reconsider.
     So far the plot isn't so bad.  We could stand to have a little more
explanation for what is going on, but this film could still be decent.  Then
BUFFY sours very quickly.  At least the horror aspects of the plot do.  We
get a few scenes of vampires reprised from other films as if borrowing their
scenes also borrows their logic.  There are scenes of the main vampire
(played by Rutger Hauer made up to look like Edgar Allan Poe) catered to by
his assistant (played by Paul Reubens)--the sort of thing you saw in the
later and poorer Hammer films with Mike Raven.  But why is this aristocratic
vampire showing up in Southern California, so near to where this
generation's slayer is being created?  Is it coincidence?  Is there a
reason?  We never know.  It is convenient for the story that he be there, so
he is.  And given that vampires have kept their existence almost entirely
secret all these years, why do they suddenly start acting as openly and
blatantly as Hell's Angels?  Well, the film needed a spectacular third act
and that logic is more important than story logic.  This is a film that
never fails to sacrifice its intelligence when that becomes convenient.
Prime example: to show how dense the teachers are at Hemery High, their
reaction to the vampire attack is to officiously drop detention slips on
each of the victims.  It makes no sense but, hey, maybe it will get a laugh.
     The film does work a little better as a satire of the Valley Girl
lifestyle; perhaps the writers understood that a little better than the
horror aspects.  But even there, there are problems with the basics.  The
plot has Buffy becoming friends with the local rebel who shaves off his
beard for her.  That sounds simple to show in film.  But the beard
disappears before the shaving scene and then returns.  This is a lot more
than a marginal continuity error since the film does focus on the shaving
ritual.  Another problem in script muddling is Buffy's satorial realization
of what an enigmatic statement really means.  The problem is that it is
never explained to the audience.
     BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER has a little humor that really is funny, some
that is heavy-handed, and some horror film trappings.  Unless publicity
works overtime, BUFFY will quickly zap to its appropriate medium, video.  I
rate this a -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Brundage
Buffy, the Vampire Slayer (1992, PG-13)
Starring Kristie Swanson, Luke Perry, David Arquette, Donald Sutherland
 I'll admit to it – I watch the series.  Occasionally, I'm tuned to
Pittsburgh's WB 31 and it just happens to be Tuesdays and I decide: OK,
tonight I'm going to watch cheap horror and dammit, I'm going to do my best
to enjoy it!  Why `Buffy, the Vampire Slayer' is my drug of choice I don't
know.  I've only been watching it for a few weeks and teen angst films and
TV shows were never perennial favorites, but I'd like to think I see
something in the show that most people don't.  What is it?   I would have to
say that, like `The X-Files," `Millennium," `ER," and `Ally MacBeal," four
other shows that I watch about every week, `Buffy, the Vampire Slayer' has a
sick sense of humor.
 I've always been a fan of dark comedies, as anyone reading my reviews for a
long time will know, and I've always found that, if a dark comedy doesn't
try to have any point beyond humor, it's much more enjoyable.  `Buffy, the
Vampire Slayer', in catering to the acne center of the nation (both
figuratively and literally), ends up putting all of this stupid crap of love
and relationships and `well-built' characters which are actually cardboard
cutouts.  It would be much stronger without all this teen angst crap.
 Even the people who like my reviews are probably saying, GET TO THE MOVIE,
ALREADY!  The truth of the matter is, through the last two paragraphs, I
have been explaining to you why I liked the movie Buffy, the Vampire Slayer
more than I like the show.
 The movie, Buffy, the Vampire Slayer doesn't waste time getting into its
unique brand of sarcasm.  You are first greeted with seeing an ancient
slayer and a voice-over introduction with a caption `Europe – The Dark Ages'
, and then cut to an LA mall with Buffy, LA prep and soon-to-be-slayer and
the caption `Los Angeles – The Lite Ages'.  This kind of sarcastic pace
keeps up through the entire movie.
 The performances, admittedly, are lacking.  The direction is downright bad,
and the storyline really doesn't help much, but all of this is made up in
spades with one of the most finely crafted formula scripts courtesy of Josh
Whedon.  This is the type of guy Kevin Williamson would hang out with,
someone who is able to take a genre and say: `OK, I'm going to work with
you, work within you, and still make fun of you at the same time.'  He even
throws in a cheap romance between Buffy and Pike (a name and a fish!),
played by Luke Perry back when both he and 90210 were `the thing'.
 Yes, it's one of those films my sister would go `oh, that's so sweet' to
while I'm laughing my ass off.  I'm sorry, but when I see something as
utterly hilarious as a relationship based upon attraction, sex, love,
leather jackets and riding the world of undead minions, I just have to
laugh.
 I'm aware that, after reviewing both this and She's all That with positive
reviews, I will either be shot at by other, vehemently disagreeing critics
or cause critical praise for Friday the 13th, but I'm saying my mind and my
mind tells me that this is bad.  Wait, hold it, my mind does tell me this is
bad, that it is cheesy horror crap and it keeps telling me `shouldn't you be
seeing Life is Beautiful instead of sitting around and watching a HORROR
film?', but my soul -- thank God the part of my body I review with  -- tells
me that this one is worth renting.  That is, if you can stand a horror film
instead of some high-brow crap and want to laugh.

Author
Rob Falk
     If you were expecting a horror movie full of scares, blood, and
guts, don't see this movie.
     If you were expecting a movie of any depth and meaning, don't see
this movie.
     If you are looking to be mindlessly entertained with stupid wanabee
valley-girls, vampire butt-kicking, and watching a total babe doing
interesting gymnastics routines, see this movie.
     This is not a movie that will go down in the books as a great
contribution to mankind or anything, but for an afternoon movie with
nothing else to do, it is OK.
     The pseudo-big names in the movie are Donald Sutherland as Merrick,
the trainer of the killer bimbo, Paul Rubens of Pee-Wee fame (hey,
kiddies, look at what I can do!  He he!) playing the major antagonist's
right hand man :-), Luke Perry of 90210 as Pike, the Rebel Without a
Clue (pre-teen girls all over the country are sighing now), and Rutger
Hauer playing Lothos the major vampire baddie.  
     The basic plot is that all throughout history, there have been
women who were destined to fight and destroy vampires.  Buffy (what a
name!) is this time's chosen champion.  Merrick finds the young
cheerleader and convinces her that she is the Chosen and must fulfill
her destiny.  After much whining and complaining, and the death of
Merrick, Buff decides that she must go out and fight.  Buffy must also
deal with her shallow friends as she develops a thing for Pike (The
thing from another tax bracket).  When I mean shallow, I mean that I
have stepped in deeper puddles, one of their friends gets muched by a
vamp, and all they are worried about is the yellow leather jacket they
had lent the victim.
     The effects were decent, even though the flying the vampires did
was kind of lame.  The action and fight choreography is very well
done IMHO, and the plot and screenplay were decent.  I give it a B- for
entertainment value alone.

Author
2fatguys@tdis.icpsr.umich.edu (Too Fat Guys)
Roger:  In this cinematic extravaganza, Kristy Swanson plays Buffy, an
        undisciplined, frivolous, vacuous, valley girl cheerleader.
        Unfortunately for her, vampirism seems to be big in LA this
        year.  Shortly, she is informed by Merrick (Donald Sutherland)
        that she is the Chosen One, slayer of vampires.  He takes Buffy
        under his wing and trains her to fight the vampire Lothos
        (Rutger Hauer), and his evil henchman (Paul Reubens).  Luke
        Perry appears as Pike, Buffy's love interest.
Roger:  Of course, it's not particularly clear that the slayer is there
        to annoy Lothos.  There is a strong undertone of Merrick's
        collusion with Lothos, perhaps that Merrick's real job is to
        train slayers for Lothos's consumption, not destruction.
        Another completely spurious bit of plot relates to some of
        Merrick's instructions.  Buffy draws on them, during her final
        confrontation with Lothos.  Despite having heard them twice,
        during the film, it is still unclear to me what these
        instructions were supposed to mean.
Roger:        So, that's one thumb up and one thumb down for BUFFY THE
        VAMPIRE SLAYER.  That's all for now -- the tty is closed.
-- 
For the latest review by the Two FAT Guys, finger roger@icpsr.umich.edu.
