Title
Review for Phar Lap (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
PHAR LAP (Australia,1983)***. Directed by Simon Wincer. Written by   David
Williamson. Produced by John Sexton. Photography, Russell Boyd. Editing,
Tony Paterson. Production design, Lawrence Eastwood. Music, Bruce Rowland.
Cast: Tom Burlinson,  Richard Morgan, Robert Grubb, Simon Wells , Kelvyn
Worth, Justin Ridley, Martin Vaughan,  Ron Leibman, et al. 107 minutes.
Warm, well-told, attention-keeping  story of Australian racehorse of late
20s-early 30s, a champion who apparently is still a legend in equine
circles, and a household name in Australia. Phar Lap won 37 races in three
years, died abruptly in 1932, in California, perhaps the victim of Mob
interests that it menaced.  The film stresses faith and affection felt from
the start by stable boy Tommy Woodcock (Tom Burlison) for a horse that
seemed to be an unlikely champion.
The boy-horse-racing formula is sure-fire, but here it is buttressed here
by truth and uncontaminated by goo or overstatement. Familiar elements of
training, suspense, and thrilling victories are enhanced by good, offbeat
touches: a main trainer who is not lovable or colorful; stuffy, uppercrust
Anglos at the Jockey Club who discriminate  against a proletarian horse and
its American-Jewish owner (Ron Leibman, very good) and  who  handicap Phar
Lap increasingly, unfairly, and cruelly.
Phar Lap was the second feature by director Simon Wincer, who until then
had worked in TV. His first movie, Snapshot, seems to be as obscure as they
come. But Phar Lap turned out to be a success. Wincer had the good sense
(or luck) to use as his cinematographer the very talented  Russell Boyd
whose record already included such top films  as Picnic at Hanging Rock,
The  Last Wave, Gallipoli, The Year of Living Dangerously, Tender Mercies.
Depression-era sets, very good  but never gratuitously flashy camerawork,
stunning races, interesting biped-to-quadruped relations , all add up to a
gratifying film. Ten minutes were cut from the American print  for the sake
of better suspense and clarity
After this movie, Simon Wincer did good work: the war picture The
Lighthorsemen  (Australia);  Quigley Down Under (suspense with Tom Selleck
in Australia); the TV series  Lonesome Dove  and The Young Indiana Jones
Chronicles, the popular kidpic Free Willy and the entertaining Operation
Dumbo Drop (reviewed in E. Jahiel's site). Some other features were
weak-to-fair.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel
