Title
Review for Frankenstein (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  This version of Mary Shelley's classic
     novel takes some chances, including actually roughly
     following the plot of the novel, while giving a new
     interpretation of the relationship between Frankenstein and
     his monster.  That would have been a real virtue if the rest
     of the production was not so bland.  As it is, this is a
     disappointingly uninvolving version of the story.  Rating: 0
     (-4 to +4).
     Last autumn we saw Francis Ford Coppola's allegedly accurate adaptation
of Bram Stoker's DRACULA.  It turned out to be more faithful than some of
the better version, particularly in some superficial ways, yet it
transformed the story into one of Dracula trying to regain his lost love, a
rather fundamental departure from the original novel.  While the old
monsters are popular, Ted Turner's organization has financed their version
of FRANKENSTEIN, also claiming to be close to the novel.  Sure enough, the
basic plot and many of its twists are faithful to Mary Shelley, but
producer/director/writer David Wicks has decided--like most people making
film versions of FRANKENSTEIN--to make some fundamental changes to the
story.  Incidentally, their is one almost totally faithful film adaptation.
It is a 1975 Swedish-Irish co-production called VIKTOR FRANKENSTEIN, or on
television, TERROR OF FRANKENSTEIN.  Leon Vitali plays the doctor and Per
Oscarsson is the monster.  Except for one scene with a seance, it is a
literal adaptation from the novel--faithful, but ponderous and dull.  Wicks'
FRANKENSTEIN is a little less faithful, but also only a little less dull.
     The film starts accurately enough with Victor having chased the monster
to the Arctic and being rescued by a ship, then telling his story as a
flashback.  Frankenstein, it turns out, is a great medical scholar, an
exaggeration of Shelley's simple student.  He uses a strange process
something like an early matter duplicator to create a man.  Of course, most
film versions say that the monster was constructed from dead bodies, but
that is a  cinematic invention.  Shelley is intentionally vague about how
the monster is created.  This creation, while unconventional, is in no way
inconsistent with the novel.  From there the plot followed is a rough
approximation of the novel, except for the addition of a strange plot device
that is really a fairly fundamental change to the story.  The monster, being
a sort of matter duplication of Victor, has a physical and psychic link with
his creator.  If the monster is wounded, Victor also gets the same wound.
This transforms the story from its usual allegory of the relationship of God
and Man to one of the two sides of a single person's personality, more like
Jekyll and Hyde.
     The film is generally a fairly lackluster adaptation.  The only
character with real empathy value is the monster himself, played by Randy
Quaid.  His makeup is a real departure from standard interpretations of the
monster.  With his stocky structure and his moustache-less beard, he
resembles something between a troglodyte and a Scottish Highlander--with
burns on his face.  Again Shelley gives us little idea of what the man-made
man looks like, except that he is eight feet tall--which even the large
Randy Quaid cannot appear.  The remainder of the cast, led by Patrick Bergin
in the title role, conveys little emotion and helps to make this version
bland.
     John Cameron's score rarely creates much of a mood either, though its
use of choral voices is somewhat unusual and lend the score much of the
interest value it has.  After a few good Turner productions, including a
very satisfying version of TREASURE ISLAND, this FRANKENSTEIN is a
disappointing and unmemorable production.  (This version can be seen several
times this month on TNT.)  I rate it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dragan Antulov
For some literary scholars, FRANKENSTEIN, 1818 novel by Mary
Shelley, happens to be the very first piece of fiction
within the realms of science fiction genre. However, most of
the movie adaptations of the novel are associated more with
the genre of horror, thanks to Ken Whale's 1931 version,
unsurpassed until this very day. The other adaptations,
although some of them good, paled in comparison. It wasn't
much different in 1990s, which was rather bad decade for
movies dealing with Frankenstein monster. After
disappointing FRANKENSTEIN UNBOUND in 1990, we got equally
disappointing Kenneth Branagh's version in 1994. In the wake
of latter, Turner Pictures tried to cash in on the
renaissance of classic horrors, inspired by Coppola's
version of DRACULA. Result is rather forgettable and equally
disappointing television production, despite being more
faithful to the novel than most of other versions.
Movie begins when Swiss medical scholar dr. Victor
Frankenstein (played by Patrick Bergin) develops a method to
artificially create human being out of dead matter. The
result of his experiment is a disfigured by physically
superior monster (Randy Quaid). Creature escapes to
countryside only to find that the humanity hates it. Angry
at his maker, the monster kills his bride Elisabeth. Dr.
Frankenstein is now determined to track down and kill
monster, but soon he realises that he had developed a
psychic link with it.
The screenplay by director David Wickes employs somewhat new
(or unused) elements of the plot - materialisation instead
of patching up body parts, psychic link. However, those
elements aren't enough to drive off unpleasant effect of
deja vu for many viewers. And Wickes' unispiring directing
doesn't help at all. Actors are also disinterested, and
Randy Quaid as monster is quite unconvincing. The result is
failed film that looks like a cheap exploitation of great
literary and movie classics.
