Title
Review for First Love, Last Rites (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        One of the reasons I love independent cinema is the fact
that it often breaks the rules of Hollywood, which state that a
film must include an all-star cast, car crashes, lots of special
effects, and stunningly beautiful characters in order to make
money.  With budgets approaching pocket change, many indie
directors are breaking new ground in visual style by sidestepping
these laws.  The downside?  Some filmmakers are a bit too eager to
disregard rules which *shouldn't* be ignored.  "First Love, Last
Rites," for instance, does away with the notion that a movie should
contain a coherent narrative.  It cheerfully tosses aside the thought
that we should care about our characters.  It laughs in the face of
the idea that a movie should hold the audience's attention.  In
short, "First Love, Last Rites" is a film that goes nowhere, and is
in absolutely no hurry to arrive.
        The story, such as it is, revolves around Joey (Giovanni
Ribisi) and Sissel (Natasha Wagner), a young couple living together
in a run-down shack in the swamplands of Louisiana.  What do they see
in each other?  I have no idea.  Apart from the fact that neither of
them are the least bit personable and always appear to be half-
asleep, they seem to have absolutely nothing in common.  Oh, I take
that back: they both love sex.  Approximately a third of the film's
scenes feature the two of them boinking like rabbits.
        Sissel's creepy father soon befriends Joey, and they talk at
great length about nothing very interesting.  Eventually, the two of
them decide to start an eel-trapping business.  A large portion of
the film revolves around these plans, which are then completely
disregarded for no discernable reason.  Sissel's dad also attempts
to reconcile with his estranged wife by racing his car up and down
her driveway.  No, I'm not making this up.
        Towards the end of the film, Sissel actually begins to
display some emotions towards Joey, all of which are negative.  She
becomes moody and begins boiling her collection of 45RPM records.
Why?  Again, I couldn't tell you.  She berates Joey, although he
doesn't do anything except try to give her emotional support and
reassurance of his love.  (Gee, what a bastard.)  My favorite
"stupid" moment: while they're having sex, Sissel begs Joey not to
pull out of her.  A couple of scenes later, she accuses him of
trying to get her pregnant.  "You're trying to put a baby inside
me!" she shrieks.  Yes, this is definitely the woman *I'd* want to
move in with.  Wouldn't you?
        I'd like to describe the film's ending, but it doesn't really
have one.  Sure, there's a moment when celluloid is no longer running
through the projector, but the final scene is purely ambiguous.  Pick
any moment from the movie, and it would be just as sensible a place
to end as the one chosen by the director.  A great film can have an
ambiguous ending: both "The Full Monty" and "Chasing Amy" leave things
up in the air at their conclusion; as I left the theater after each,
I found myself wondering what the characters would do next.  Although
"First Love, Last Rites" leaves a lot of unanswered questions when
the credits begin to roll, I have not devoted one iota of thought to
how they could be answered.  I just don't care, unless it involves
Joey and Sissel both getting a swift kick in the rear.
        "First Love, Last Rites" is a tedious viewing experience,
full of bizarre symbolism (the rat in the wall, for example),
paper-thin characters, and scenes that make no sense whatsoever.
I've seen home movies that had a better storyline.  Though the
images of the Louisiana Bayou are occasionally lovely, most of the
visuals depict the interior of the squalid, rodent-infested house
inhabited by our two main characters.  Only the music shines,
capturing the flavor of the photography in every scene.  Skip the
film and check out the soundtrack instead.  I wish I had.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In what for most people would be the perfect romantic fantasy, two 
lithe, young lovers in their early twenties drag a mattress over to the 
open window in FIRST LOVE, LAST RITES.  With their hormones raging, they 
spend the day and on into the bright orange sunset making love.  
Completely nude, their bodies intertwine into one in a sexual ballet 
that director Jesse Peretz cuts much too short.
     As Sissel, TWO GIRLS AND A GUY's Natasha Wagner uses her deeply 
penetrating eyes to seduce the camera.  Oozing sex from every pore, she 
is perfectly cast the film's female lead.  When she gives her mate the 
"come hither" look, he obeys without question.  She has him on such a 
tight leash that he's willing to follow her every command, whether it be 
getting his fingernails painted different pastel colors or going to the 
graveyard at night to get a moontan.  Aluminum foil under the neck 
ensures that their tans are uniform.
     Much less successful is the casting of SAVING PRIVATE RYAN's 
Giovanni Ribisi as Sissel's lover, Joey, a Brooklyn guy in town on 
vacation.  His bleary eyes have the constant look of someone recovering 
from a bad hangover.  Sissel is Joey's "first," but Sissel seems quite 
experienced.  When Joey just turns over the lovemaking to Sissel, the 
picture comes alive with a raw sexual energy that most films are afraid 
of.  (The sex isn't that explicit, but it is intensely natural.)
     Much less successful is the rest of the movie, especially the 
subplot of Joey's teaming up with Sissel's father to become rich by 
trapping the eels in the Louisiana Bayou, where the story is set.  (The 
locale raises the temperature nicely, providing the steamy atmosphere 
which filmmakers prefer for filming sex scenes.)
     Another subplot deals with Sissel's many quirks, not the least of 
which is her obsession with boiling her vinyl records.  (The film is set 
in the mid-70s, but little is made of the fact and at least one car from 
the 90s is prominently featured in one of the scenes.)
     Other parts, such as the rat in the walls, have metaphorical 
meanings that most viewers will not attempt to figure out.
     Like two kids playing house, the two young lovers go frequently to 
Sissel's shack built on stilts.  Their intimacy and the beauty of their 
lovemaking saves the picture, even if just barely.
     FIRST LOVE, LAST RITES runs just 1:33.  It is rated R for sex and 
nudity, and would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
