Title
Review for Maytime in Mayfair (1949)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Roger Mellor
Roger Mellor (roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk)
'Maytime in Mayfair'  is set in the magical world of Mayfair's haute couture
and the creators of ladies fashions. Eileen Grahame (Anna Neagle) is the
designer-manageress of one of Mayfair's exclusive dress salons. She creates
designs for the rich - the lovely and the 'unlovely' alike: the dresses and
accessories which dictate the style of the whole fashion world. Across the
street is a rival establishment run by suave singing playboy D'Arcy
Davenport (played by West End Musical Star Peter Graves), who regularly
entertains his wealthy lady clients at the piano with a verse of "Amor,
Amor". Between them Eileen and D'Arcy are the despots of womens modes and
moods. D'Arcy would love Eileen to give up her own salon, and merge with his
business.
Michael Gore-Brown (Michael Wilding) appears on the scene. Irrepressible,
insouciant and impoverished, he finds himself by means of a legacy, heir to
the salon which Eileen runs. He is encouraged to sell the business by his
cousin, Henry (Nicholas Phipps), who is totally distainful of the fashion
business, who sees this as an opportunity for Gore-Brown to sell and make
some money.
Michael and Henry go to check the salon over, and are pleasantly surprised
by Eileen, as they were expecting to meet, in Henry's words 'a battleship in
black satin'. To Henry's disgust, Michael decides to take a lively interest
in running the busines with Eileen. Reluctantly, he is supported by the well
meaning Henry, who brings the threat of disaster to the salon: surprised
that Darcy belongs to the same 'gentleman's club' as himself, he allows
himself to be inveigled by D'Arcy into a drinking session, which ends with
Henry in the custody of the police, and D'Arcy gaining the secrets of
Eileen's latest "New Look" designs. He discloses these secrets to the press,
with a view to ruining Eileen's business.
Michael is also in romantic pursuit of Eileen, who initially, is not
unreceptive, but later she mistakenly believes that it is he who leaked her
trade secrets. In disgust, she leaves her salon, and travels to Paris to
view the latest collections. Darcy goes as well. Michael pursues her to
Paris, but Eileen and D'Arcy move on when the latter discovers that they are
being followed. Michael dispondently returns to London, and is on the point
of selling the business to two fashion 'spivs' (acting on D'Arcy's
instructions), when in walks Eileen,who has returned poste haste, after
learning of D'Arcy's betrayal.
Eileen and Michael send the spivs packing, and Michael decides to settle the
score with D'Arcy, the result of which he finds himself at the police
station. Eileen arrives to bail him out, and 'takes charge' of him herself,
as wedding bells ring..............
Herbert Wilcox's film, made at MGM Studios, Boreham Wood, is a Technicolor
follow up to 'Spring in Park Lane', one of the top UK box office successes
of 1948. It has the same stars (his wife Anna Neagle and Michael Wilding, in
an very mannered performance), songs (which here include:"Do I Love You"
(Music:Bruno Bidoli/Words: David Heneker), "I'm Not Going Home"(Music:Fred
Prisker/Words: Kermit Goell) and "Maytime in Mayfair" (Music: Harry Parr
Davies/Words: Harold Purcell),  the same musical director (Robert Farnon:
the score features Farnon's composition "Melody Fair" (for a fashion parade
sequence), together with arrangements of "The Moment I Saw You" and "Early
One Morning"), and screenwriter (Nicholas Phipps). However, whereas 'Spring'
was a deliciously light souffle concoction, albeit in black and white, this
sequel is more of a stodgy Technicolor pudding. Thora Hird makes a good
impression as a rather 'refined' receptionist at the salon.  'Maytime'
features a fashion show of top UK designs of 1950, which is of interest to
fans of the 'New Look', and (as in the earlier film) Neagle and Wilding
dance in the style of Astaire and Rogers. In an era of ration books and
postwar austerity, it is not difficult to see wny films such as 'Maytime in
Mayfair' were popular, particularly with female audiences, to whom the
characters and their world must have epitomised "glamour". As a contribution
to the late 1940's fantasy/glamour cycle of films ('The Red Shoes' is
another example), 'Maytime In Mayfair' is not without interest.
Roger Mellor (roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk)
Check out the British Musical Movies website at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com
