Title
Review for Vegas Vacation (1997)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
14 years ago, National Lampoon introduced us to a new family - The Griswolds.
In 1983, the Griswolds embarked on a cross-country journey with the
destination of Wally World, a world-renowned theme park in California. We
laughed our heads off as we shared the wild and crazy mishaps the family
endured. Two years later, we watched again as they went to Europe, and four
years after that, we shared Christmas with them. Now, eight more years have
passed, and the laughs have done more than die. They've been cremated.
VEGAS VACATION brings back Chevy Chase as Clark Griswold, the good intentioned
but ill-fated father of two. The premise is basically the same. Clark has a
wonderful idea to take his family on a bonding vacation, this time to Las
Vegas. His wife Ellen (Beverly D'Angelo) and teenage kids Rusty and Audrey
(always played by different actors - this time around, by Ethan Embry and
Marisol Nichols, respectively) join him and they soon find themselves in Sin
City where casinos will make the backdrop for ninety minutes of slapstick. Of
course a "Vacation" movie wouldn't be complete without good ole Eddie
(reprised by Randy Quaid), the misfit cousin, showing up at all the wrong
times.
There isn't too much of a plot here when it comes right down to it. It's
really just a skit movie. There are a couple of ways to define a skit movie,
which is not a real term as far as I know. The first would be a movie that
basically has one running gag for two hours, therefore coming off like a two
hour skit. The second would be a movie that seems comprised of about twenty
shorter skits, each lasting about five minutes. VEGAS VACATION comes off like
the first. A good example of the latter would be last year's BLACK SHEEP. The
problem with this format is that it becomes old fast, and it doesn't really
fit into a movie mold. In these cases, a "plot", which is generally very thin,
is used either as a shameless filler between scenes or to simply add
convenience to the gags (i.e. Have a good Vegas joke, make a Vegas movie).
Such is the case with this movie's mini-plots. Clark gets gambling fever and
begins spending all of the Griswold's money, Ellen is on the verge of an
affair with Wayne Newton (!), Rusty has a fake ID and is using it to his
gambling advantage, and Audrey is desperate for fun and winds up joining her
cousin Vickie (Shae D'Lyn) as an exotic dancer.
The simple fact is: this movie isn't funny. At first, I did find myself
chuckling heartily at a couple of little jokes, but when the movie got
rolling, my interest suddenly stopped. Chase plays Clark Griswold really well.
He made the character and he is the character. D'Angelo, to be quite honest,
never was too impressive as Ellen, and this movie doesn't show any signs of
redemption. As for the two new Griswold kids, the word "blah" comes to mind.
The "Vacation" series seems out to prove that anybody can play these two
characters, the simple reason being that there is nothing to them. They're so
generic, you'll expect the credits to read "Girl #1 as Audrey Griswold".
VEGAS VACATION differs from the first three in the series by more than just
laugh factor. Yes, it's true that VEGAS VACATION isn't even close to being
close to being as funny as the others, which were actually pretty fun in their
own doofy ways, but there are a couple of other things that set this one
negatively apart. First off, why did they leave off the National Lampoon's
heading on the title? I couldn't find any reasons why, but maybe the fact is
even National Lampoon didn't want to be associated with such a lame film.
That's saying a lot, especially when you look at what else the company has
proudly presented: LOADED WEAPON 1, PCU, etc. If they expected this to be
another hit, you would assume they'd be proud to tack on the notorious header,
but for reasons only we can guess at, like the movie sucking, they didn't.
There is another difference here that makes an obvious impact. The first three
films in the "Vacation" series were written by John Hughes, a talented writer
who is behind several popular films of the 80's including MR. MOM, SIXTEEN
CANDLES, THE BREAKFAST CLUB, WEIRD SCIENCE, PRETTY IN PINK, FERRIS BUELLER'S
DAY OFF, PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES, and UNCLE BUCK. Wowzers! What a
résumé! Looking at the names, you'd think this guy wrote everything that now
stands as a movie icon for the 1980's. Well that's not all. This guy also
brought us 90's hits including the HOME ALONE series, the remake of 101
DALMATIANS, DENNIS THE MENACE, and the current FLUBBER. VEGAS VACATION,
however, didn't have John Hughes behind it, and the loss is very obvious.
This time around, the script is in the hands of Elisa Bell, whose only credits
thus far include four made-for-TV movies. VEGAS VACATION plays very much like
one, and it would actually work much better as a made-for-TV sequel. If this
sounds like a wild idea, it's not. REVENGE OF THE NERDS third and fourth
installments were both television movies, and they seemed like it. VEGAS
VACATION would fit in well on the FOX network as a 2:00 a.m. Sunday morning
movie, but as a silver screen major motion picture, it's quite out of place.
Stephen Kessler's jejune direction doesn't help things either. He only makes
the film even more TV-movie-ish. Each consecutive "Vacation" movie has
suffered a drop in directing power. We started the series off with Harold
Ramis, who also directed CADDYSHACK and GROUNDHOG DAY as well as co-writing
GHOSTBUSTERS. Not too bad. Then we had NATIONAL LAMPOON'S EUROPEAN VACATION
being directed by Amy Heckerling, who would go on to direct the hits LOOK
WHO'S TALKING and CLUELESS, as well as having already directed the infamous
FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH. Lastly we had NATIONAL LAMPOON'S CHRISTMAS
VACATION, directed by Jeremiah S. Chechik, who went on to direct the charming
BENNY & JOON. Kessler, so far, has one title under his belt, the short film
BIRCH STREET GYM, which received an Oscar nomination in 1992. Granted that
this was his first attempt at a feature length film, we can allow for some
amateurish quality, but instead we get a movie straight from the text book -
boring, bland, and deeply unoriginal.
If you loved the "Vacation" movies, and I know *some* of us did, there still
isn't anything here worth seeing. If you loved them, don't ruin your good
impressions of the series by indulging in this tragic example of cinema ala
carte. If you never did like the series, why the need to confirm why?

Author
Chuck Dowling
Vegas Vacation (1997) *** out of ***** - Cast: Chevy Chase, Beverly
D'Angelo, Randy Quaid, Wayne Newton, Wallace Shawn, Sid Caesar. Written By:
Elisa Bell. Directed By: Stephen Kessler. Running time: 92 minutes.
The 90's have been a rough decade for Chevy Chase. There was that awful
talk show of his, along with a string of box office failures: "Nothing But
Trouble" and "Man of the House" just to name two. Chevy desperately needed
a hit with this latest film. He may not have one, but he certainly doesn't
have another failure either.
I had low expectations for "Vegas Vacation". Aside from all of the failures
from the last few years, there were things specifically about this film I
was worried about. For one, the theatrical previews for it are awful. They
really made this thing look potentially bad, considering the trend to put
all of a comedy's best jokes into a trailer in order to get the public to
the theater. Another reason was the lack of involvement from series writer
John Hughes, even though he's seemingly gone insane, remaking cartoons and
remaking Home Alone eight different ways.
Chase is back as accident-prone Clark Griswold, and Beverly D'Angelo, who
just keeps getting better looking as the years go on, returns as his wife
Ellen. Their kids Audrey and Rusty are along for the vacation as well, and
are of course, played by different actors. A subtle joke is even made early
on about these multiple casting choices. This time out, Clark has received
a big bonus at work and he takes that family on vacation to Las Vegas.
Obviously, nothing goes right for Clark.  He immediatly starts to lose all
their money in the casino.  Ellen gets involved with Wayne Newton (playing
himself, naturally).  Rusty manages a fake ID in order to gamble, and
Audrey becomes a dancer. To make matters worse, Cousin Eddie (Randy Quaid)
shows up to keep Clark company.
By now there are certain things we expect when we see a "Vacation" movie.
Most notably we are expecting Chevy Chase to fall down and get into some
weird physical misadventures. Well, the years are starting to catch up to
Chevy, and there's really no physical comedy in the film. And the one
extended scene which does attempt just that, a scene a Hoover Dam, fails
miserably. So really all that's left is dialogue. Is it funny? Most of it
is. There are some great lines, and Randy Quaid just about steals the film
as idiot white trash Cousin Eddie.
They do play "Holiday Road", the series anthem which was absent from
"Christmas Vacation".  However, it's used during the scene which Christie
Brinkley reprises her role from the original "Vacation", in another scene
which fails miserably. The rest of the songs used are good and well-placed.
Most are what you would expect for gambling montages: Dean Martin, Frank
Sinatra, etc.
The biggest laughs come about 60-70 minutes into things when Clark, after
losing all the family's money, attempts to win it back using Eddie's money
at a third rate casino. Games in the casino consist of stuff like "War",
"Paper Scissors Rock", and "Pick a Number 1-10". If the whole thing could
have been THAT funny...
"Vegas Vacation" is at the bottom of the list of the four films in the
series, yet it's still an entertaining time at the movies. It just didn't
seem like they were trying very hard as they were filming it. With just a
little extra effort it could have really hit the jackpot. Maybe this film
will create a little momentum for Chevy and then his next film could be
great. One can only hope.
--Chuck Dowling  
--Chuck's Movie Reviews -- http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Chevy Chase; Beverly D'Angelo; Randy Quaid; Ethan Embry & Marisol
Nichols
Vegas Vacation is the fourth film starring Chevy Chase and Beverly D'Angelo
as the heads of the hapless Griswold family. As with the other three films,
their two children, Rusty and Audrey, are played by a revolving series of
actors. This time Ethan Embry and Marisol Nichols fill the roles. Also back,
is Cousin Eddie (Randy Quaid), the slob relative who seems to bring problems
wherever he goes. In Vegas Vacation Clark Griswold (Chase) decides to take
the family on vacation to Las Vegas so that he and wife Ellen (D'Angelo) can
renew their wedding vows. It is at this point when comedy is supposed to
ensue. Apparently the filmmakers thought that putting the Griswolds into Las
Vegas would be so funny on its own that they wouldn't bother to write any
jokes into the script. At least that's the way it looks when watching this
turkey.
About half way through Vegas Vacation I began to have serious doubts as to
whether there would actually be a single laugh in the entire film, since
there had been none up to that point. By the end of the movie I had actually
snickered a couple of times, and I had smiled at a couple of gags. I might
add that none of the funny (and I use the term loosely) moments came as a
result of anything Chase, D'Angelo or Quaid were involved in. They might as
well have stayed home for as much as they contributed to this film. The two
best things in this movie were Ethan Embry and Marisol Nichols as the
Griswold kids, who manage to have a couple of their own adventures. Rusty
becomes a Vegas high roller, providing most of the film's best moments.
Every time Chase and Quaid were involved in a gag, it just made it more and
more apparent that they should have stopped this series after the third
film.
Which brings me to the best moment of the film. The Griswolds are driving
down the highway and Holiday Road (the theme from the original Vacation)
begins to play. Christie Brinkley and her red Ferrari (also from the first
movie) drive by. It was a cute moment, but all it really did was remind me
just how funny the first film had been, and just how far that this series
has fallen. Too bad.

Author
Paul Miller
As we all might have expected, another of the "Vacation" movie has
arisen.  If you think, some of the best movies of the past few years
have been with Clark, Ellen, Rusty, and Audrey.  Of course we've all
seen Christmas Vacation, sure to bring laughs to everyone.  I was hoping
for a lot with Vegas Vacation...
At the beginning of the movie, Clark earns a bonus for making a food
preservative that keeps cookies fresh for years.  He wants to go to Las
Vegas in hopes of remarriaing his wife.  The family doesn't really take
to the idea, but nonetheless go anyway.
This is where the fun begins.  They meet up with Eddie (of course, Randy
Quaid) who is always funny and doesn't leave me down.  They have a
stripper daughter, but that really doesn't matter.  They catch snakes,
etc.
I liked Vegas Vacation, but expected more out of it.  The parts of
vulgarity and partial nudity that made the first three fun wasn't
apparent.  In fact, besides the Hoover "Damn" scence with was on the
trailer, there wasn't much else in the way of vulgarity.  I think they
ruined the movie somewhat by making it more "family-oriented".
Anyway, I liked the movie and would recommended it even though it COULD
have been much better.

Author
Nick Schaden
        Midway through "Vegas Vacation", Clark Griswold (Chevy Chase) looks
out his car window and sees Christie Brinkley in a red Ferrari.   This
is an obvious nod toward an near identical scene in the now famous
comedy "National Lampoon's Vacation", which started the entire Vacation
movie series.   A small tear nearly formed in my eye, remembering how
funny Chevy Chase and "Vacation" was, and how far downhill both the
actor and the series have become.   While in my opinion "Vacation" was
one of the funniest movies of the 20th century, "Vegas Vacation" is only
mediocre, and the series is showing its age.
        "Vegas Vacation" is the story of Clark Griswold, his wife Ellen
(Beverly D'Angelo), and their son Rusty (Ethan Randall) and daughter
Audrey (Marisol Nichols).   It's vacation time once again for the
Griswolds, and this time their destination is Las Vegas.   As expected,
the vacation is a humorous disaster.
        One on hand, like the other movies in the "Vacation" series, it
succeeds in several key points.   First, the movie successfully
satirizes much of the real problems for Vegas travelers, from gambling
traps to cheesy entertainment and nightlife.   In addition, while Chevy
Chase and Beverly D'Angelo stumble through a few portions of the movie,
for the most part they fill their respective roles as Clark and Ellen
well.   Finally, the Griswolds' cousin, Eddie (Randy Quaid) always
results in a few laughs, keeping the movie on its two feet.
        However, what "Vegas Vacation" falls short in (which frankly should be
a strong point of any good comedy) is the humor.  Put bluntly, "Vegas
Vacation" isn't incredibly funny, with mostly only chuckles coming from
my mouth while watching it.   This occurs mainly because of the one
prevalent joke throughout the movie: Clark's gambling problems.   While
watching Clark lose big time on the blackjack table is moderately
humorous the first time, seeing it again and again with little
variations in style or substance just plain isn't.
        In the end, "Vegas Vacation" has a few high points, but for the most
part is only a blatantly average movie. While there are several comedies
that are quite worse than "Vegas Vacation", there are many that prove to
be much better - I'd suggest seeking those out before watching this
movie.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     It's tough to say who has been part of more fiascos in the past
fifteen years:  the VACATION series' Clark Griswold, or Chevy Chase.
Personal problems and terrible choices in film projects -- dreadfully
comedies like FLETCH LIVES, NOTHING BUT TROUBLE and COPS AND ROBBERSONS --
have turned Chase into a poster boy for unfulfilled career potential, and
lately it seems that he is trying so hard to win back his audience's good
will that it simply comes off as pathetic.  His latest attempt to
re-animate the corpse of his film career -- a return for a fourth draw
from the successful VACATION well -- probably seemed like a good idea at
the time, and the film isn't a complete disaster.  It's simply so lacking
in attempts at humor that Chase might have had a better chance at coming
up with a winner playing a slot machine.
     Chase once again plays Clark Griswold, hapless patriarch of Chicago's
Griswold clan:  wife Ellen (Beverly D'Angelo), daughter Audrey (Marisol
Nichols) and son Rusty (Ethan Embry).  With a freshly-earned bonus burning
a hole in his pocket, Clark decides to take the family on another vacation
adventure, this time to the new family entertainment Mecca of Las Vegas.
Naturally, nothing goes quite according to plan for Clark.  While he is
busy losing his shirt at every possible game, Ellen becomes infatuated
with Wayne Newton (Himself), whose feelings may be mutual.  Even worse,
Cousin Eddie (Randy Quaid) and his family turns out to be living in the
nearby desert, bringing even more bad luck too bear on the Griswolds.
Meanwhile, Rusty parlays a fake I.D. into a glimpse of the high life, and
Audrey learns some bad habits from Eddie's daughter Vicki (Shae D'Lyn).
     After fourteen years and three previous films, the VACATION series
has been around long enough to be the target of some in-jokes, and a
couple of the film's best gags are based on familiarity with 1983's
NATIONAL LAMPOON'S VACATION at the very least.  Early in the film, Clark
laments a lack of family time together by noting to the kids, "I hardly
recognize you any more;" after four different actors have played both
Audrey and Rusty, it's not surprising.  There is also a cameo appearance
by Christy Brinkley, once again playing Clark's sports car-driving object
of desire, only now with a baby on board.
     Unfortunately, the series has also been around long enough for the
audience to expect a certain level of outrageousness and wild sight gags a
la series creator John Hughes, and VEGAS VACATION simply limps along for
much of its 92 minutes.  Chase can still make incompetence an art form,
and he gets a couple of amusing bits in an airplane bathroom and trying to
plug leaks in the Hoover Dam with chewing gum.  The truth is that many of
the actual jokes in VEGAS VACATION are funny; there are just stretches of
minutes at a time when there isn't even an attempt at a joke to be found.
The film gets particularly tedious when it follows the exploits of Audrey
and Rusty (played with a transcendental blandness by Nichols and Embry),
but it's not much better trying to turn Wayne Newton into a comic actor.
Screenwriter Elisa Bell has set a film in one of the easiest cities in the
country to make fun of, yet she seems unable to come up with anything
funny to say about it.  In fact, between the sluggish script and the
extended sequences showing off the Vegas sights and observing a Siegfried
and Roy show, you'd think that VEGAS VACATION had been commissioned by the
Nevada Chamber of Commerce.
     The biggest surprise in VEGAS VACATION turns out to be that after
over an hour of snooze-inducing nonsense, it comes up with one of the most
purely inspired comic sequences of the last few years.  With Clark nearly
broke and desperate to make back the thousands of dollars he has lost to a
black jack dealer (played with delightful smugness by Wallace Shawn), he
walks into a second-rate casino which allows gambling on some more
familiar games:  Flip a Coin, Rock Paper Scissors, the children's card
game War.  I was nearly in tears laughing as a stone-faced croupier at 
the "I'm Thinking of a Number Between 1 and 10" table informed Clark that
7 was incorrect, then almost immediately angry that a fraction of that
imagination hadn't gone into the rest of the film.  All that remained was
for VEGAS VACATION to trot out the obligatory car crash and finish up with
another ten minutes worth little more than a shrug.  For five minutes,
VEGAS VACATION is a hilarious parody of the gambling culture of Vegas; for
five minutes, Chevy Chase was back on top.  Perhaps those five minutes can
serve as a launching pad to better choices.  But I wouldn't bet on it.

Author
Michael Redman
Years ago the announcement of a film starring Chevy Chase and produced
by the hilarious "National Lampoon" magazine generated anticipation of a
hilarious time. That was then, this is now.
The fourth "Vacation" film continues the downhill slide. The first movie
featuring the Griswold family and their misadventures heading towards
Wally World was a comedic hit. Based on that success, we've been
subjected to the all-American "Father Knows Worst" family in Europe, at
Christmas and now gambling their life savings away. 
Remarkably enough, in a city that is a parody of everything American,
the movie finds little to laugh at. It's one lame sight gag (in every
sense of the word) after another. The Christy Brinkley in a convertible
scene from the earlier film is even recycled with a meaningless punch
line. Honed to a fine art on "Saturday Night Live", Chase's fumbling and
bumbling are still well-timed, but now are old hat.
When the Griswolds arrive in the city of blinking lights, Clark (Chase)
works desperately at being the worst gambler in the western hemisphere.
His wife Ellen (Beverly D'Angelo) flirts with the notion of an affair
with heartthrob Wayne Newton (played in his sleep by himself). Son Rusty
(Ethan Embry, the fourth actor to portray the boy) picks up a fake ID
from a street vendor and lucks his way into riches. Daughter Audrey
(Marisol Nichols, also the fourth) learns social skills from her
stripper cousin.
The sit-ups sound great and in another film might have been the basis
for comedy. Here they lay the foundation for humor that is tepid at
best.
The film promo shows a Hoover Dam tour guide. The pseudo-amusement is
based on the similarity of the words "dam" and "damn". If you think
that's feeble, remember: they pick the best for commercials.
Fortunately for the audience, there are a few high points. Randy Quaid
returns in his role as cousin Eddie who has moved to a trailer in the
midst of the scenic H-bomb testing grounds. Eddie is so upfront
degenerate that he provides a welcome relief to the tedium.
The only truly funny scenes come when Clark wanders into a "different"
type of casino. Specializing in Coin Toss,  Rock-Paper-Scissors and
Guess The Number; the establishment is what you might expect in Las
Vegas on the Bizarro world. Even here, the struggling Mr. Griswold can't
get a break. He loses the Coin Toss, although there may be some shady
dealings since the players never see the result. He can't even guess the
number between one and ten.
Futile hope springs eternal when a new "Vacation" film comes out, but to
no avail. Hopefully this is the last of them to dash those hopes into
the ground with its hobnailed boots of mediocrity. You never know, maybe
that would force Chevy into choosing a movie with something more than
potential.
Unless you're looking for something to waste your time, skip this. Wait
until the video comes out, fast-forward for an hour and a half and watch
the five minutes in the alien casino and then turn the machine off.
You'll thank me forever.
[This appeared in The "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
2/13/97. Michael Redman can be contacted at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Tim Voon
Cast:  Chevy Chase, Beverly D'Angelo, Randy Quaid, Ethan Embry, Marisol
Nichols. Screenplay:  Elisa Bell. Director:  Stephen Kessler.
What was I expecting on this vacation? A five star hotel with a
presidential suite and adjoining swimming pool and spa? Fool. I'm
forgetting that this is a Chevy Chase movie, where pearls are tossed to
swine. I should have rented "Leaving Las Vegas" instead, in which case I
would have got a budget motel and a bargain priced prostitute. Then at
least I would have been spared the meaningless squander of the Griswald
Clan. After four Vacations, "National Lampoon's", "European",
"Christmas" and now "Vegas", I think the next family outing should be
kept a private affair.
I have great difficulty remembering the basic plot elements with any
Chevy Chase movie. In particular the ones where he goes on holiday with
his family. What do they end up doing? How does it start or end? The
truth is I can't remember. Aren't movies meant to be memorable, the good
ones at least. So one can reflect back and say that was a good movie
because -- My single memory of any Vacation movie is of a cyclist who
starts spurting blood from all his major vessels, after being run down
by the Griswald family. Not one for the family photo album I'm afraid.
Little happens in this movie that hasn't already joined the black hole
of lost thoughts lingering in my mind. The children, now grown up go
their worldly ways as their father abandons the family to the guile of
gambling. The wife, lonely and miserable falls into the arms of Wayne
Newton. The movie climaxes when they steal a winning lottery ticket from
a dead man. Which brings up the only thought provoking moment of the
entire movie. Would you do the same?
