Title
Review for Dr. Dolittle 2 (2001)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Max Messier
Sequels just never measure up to their predecessors.  Every now and then
it happens -- a la Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan, The Empire Strikes
Back, and The Rescuers Down Under -- but those are the exceptions. 
The original Eddie Murphy comedy Dr. Dolitte was a lukewarm and tepid
yet entertaining movie filled with cheap laughs, terrible acting, and a
painful reminder of Murphy's slow decent into another slump.  But alas,
the studio gods spoke and a sequel became unavoidable when the original
Dr. Dolittle (er, the original Eddie Murphy Dolittle, itself being a
remake) grossed over $290 million dollars worldwide -- not including
sales from the hip-hop soundtrack.
Well, Murphy has lost the nappy deadlocks of the first film and again
takes on the role of the intrepid animal doctor/interpreter Dr. Dolittle
in Dr. Dolittle 2.  This time around, Dolittle has honed his
communication skills and runs a joint animal and human medical office in
beautiful San Francisco.  Over the past few years, Dolittle has become
the Sigmund Freud of the animal kingdom -- providing sexual advice to a
turtle with erectile dysfunction, overseeing support groups for stray
dogs, and guest-starring on Crocodile Hunter.
One night, a raccoon with a thick Brooklyn accent shows up at his door
and requests that the Doc meet with The Beaver -- the head of some type
of animal Mafia in the Marin County forests.  The Beaver requests that
the Doc stop a evil logging company -- controlled by Jeffery Jones and
Kevin Pollack -- from clear-cutting the homes of all of the forest
dwellers.  The only way to save the forest lies in the loins of an
endangered species of bear named Archie (voiced by Steve Zahn), whom the
Doc has to retrain in how to live in the wild so he can mate with
another bear named Ava (voiced by Lisa Kudrow).  If Archie and Ava do
the mystery dance and produce little Archies and Avas, the forest would
then be deemed off-limits from the clutches of evil logging company. 
The only problem is that Archie is a circus bear who best knows how to
dance to disco and has the demeanor of Woody Allen -- Wayne Newton in a
bear suit.  So its up to the Doc to teach Archie how to be the alpha
male of the wild, save the forest from the overacting of Kevin Pollack,
learn how to communicate with his own human family, and somehow make us
believe that a talking monkey has a drinking problem.
Dr. Dolittle 2 could've been a contender.  In a decade of film - Nutty
Professor II, Bowfinger, Life, Holy Man, Metro, A Vampire in Brooklyn,
Beverly Hills Cop III, and Boomerang -- Murphy has done little worth
remembering.  But in Dr. Dolittle 2, Murphy gives one of his better
performances in recent years.  He seems looser, more interested in the
role, and gives fleeting glimpses of that energetic and sharp humor that
made him so famous in the '80s.  Still, he seems reserved and unsure
about how to work in this brave new world of family films and wholesome
entertainment.
The voice talent is where the gold lies.  Steve Zahn's dry wit and
apathy give Archie the Bear the comedic edge it needs to compliment the
excellent training of the animal (coupled with his CGI manipulation). 
Norm Macdonald returns in his role of the wisecracking family dog Lucky
and provides added humor.  The various voice talents of Cedric the
Entertainer, Michael Rappaport, Kudrow, and Molly Shannon are witty but
don't draw attention away from the amazing animatronics of the talking
animals.
But Dolittle 2 suffers from a serious identity crisis and, like the
original, never really sells the humanization of its animal characters. 
Worse still, the film constantly veers among being a Hallmark special,
an environmentalist call to arms, a cheap rip-off of a Farrelly brothers
comedy complete with fart and poop jokes, and a family film about cute
animals and important messages like "being yourself and never
compromising your dreams."
Even with its flaws, Dr. Dolittle 2 is a decent matinee movie for the
kiddies.  The film also provides enough humor for those grown-ups in the
audience brave enough to sit through 90 plus minutes of endless product
placements, Eddie Murphy playing Dean Martin to the Jerry Lewis antics
of a talking bear, and the bear singing "I Will Survive."  [For a very
special treat try watching Max karaoke "I Will Survive." -Ed.]
Director: Steve Carr
Producer: John Davis, Joseph Singer
Writer: Larry Levin
Starring: Eddie Murphy, Kristen Wilson, Kyla Pratt, Jeffery Jones, Kevin
Pollack, Lil' Zane, Lisa Kudrow, Steve Zahn, Norm Macdonald, Cedric the
Entertainer, Molly Shannon
http://www.drdolittle2.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Steve Carr.
Cast: Eddie Murphy, Kristen Wilson, Raven-Symone, Kyla Pratt, Lil' Zane, 
Kevin Pollak, Jeffrey Jones; voices of Steve Zahn, Lisa Kudrow, Norm 
MacDonald.
2001 - 81 minutes
Rated PG (for mild profanity and sexual innuendo).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 23, 2001.
"Dr. Dolittle 2," a pointless sequel to the 1998 hit, is superior to its 
hideously misguided predecessor, and yet it's still pretty bad. Aimed more 
squarely for children than the original (this one is rated PG; the original 
was PG-13), it is harmless and fluffy, with a few scattershot moments of mild 
amusement. It is also painfully routine, more often boring than not, and 
instantly forgettable. 
Dr. John Dolittle (Eddie Murphy), the famous veterinarian who has the gift of 
being able to understand what animals say, is back, along with his lawyer 
wife, Lisa (Kristen Wilson), and two children, Charisse (Raven-Symone) and 
Maya (Kyla Pratt). When a forest is threatened to be torn down by a nasty 
land developer (Jeffrey Jones), Dr. Dolittle is given a month to perform the 
impossible: take a circus bear (voiced by Steve Zahn) and get him to mate 
with a country bear (Lisa Kudrow).
Written by Larry Levin and directed by Steve Carr (2000's despicable "Next 
Friday"), "Dr. Dolittle 2" is placed firmly in the category of "unnecessary 
sequel." The premise of saving land from being torn down is as old as the 
hills, and doesn't help matters; certainly a more original idea could have 
been concocted if a follow-up had to be made. 
The various interactions between the doctor and the animals are predictable 
and too often tiresome. While children may enjoy much of this, it doesn't 
successfully carry over for the adult audience, which all good family films 
do. Better is a subplot involving the rocky relationship between the doctor 
and his 16-year-old daughter, Charisse, who has begun to date. This section 
of the movie does away with the main attraction of the animals, but it also 
offers up a fairly accurate, if PG-rated view, of the growing pains of an 
adolescent. It is surprising to see Raven-Symone, who once played little 
Olivia on TV's "The Cosby Show," all grown up, and she certainly has the 
charisma of an actress with a definite future in films.
As for Eddie Murphy, does he really have nothing to do anymore than make 
sequels to successful first pictures? Last year it was the perfectly 
dreadfully "Nutty Professor II: The Klumps," and now it is "Dr. Dolittle 2." 
Since he is so clearly upstaged by the animal performers, and doesn't get 
nearly enough comedic material for himself, Murphy's role could have been 
played by anyone and it wouldn't have made a bit of difference. Likewise, the 
film itself could have never been made, and it wouldn't have been missed. If 
anything, it could have saved millions of wasted dollars.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/dustinputman.htm
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Robin Clifford
The doctor is in once again as Eddie Murphy reprises his role as the man
who can walk with the animals and talk with the animals in "Dr. Dolittle
2."
The summer movie season and the success of the 1998 remake of Hugh
Lofting's long successful children's stories have made a sequel to "Dr.
Dolittle" inevitable. And, you get what you expect, though without the
little surprises the first story had, with the good doctor honing his
"talent" to converse with critters. This time around, we know Dr. D, his
family and some of the animal crew (Lucky the Dog (voiced by Norm
MacDonald), the rats and the drunken monkey (Phil Proctor) appear again)
and are introduced to a whole new gaggle of talking creatures.
Now, Dr. John Dolittle is secure in his God-given gift and opened his
clinic doors to humans and animals alike. With his professional life in
good working order, John turns his attention to his family, only to find
that his daughter, Charisse (Raven-Symone), has become withdrawn and
petulant. As he tries to cope with the emotional state of his teenager, he
is solicited by a tough-talking raccoon that insists that the doctor come
to the nearby forest to have a sit down with his boss, known as The Beaver.
The doc agrees to makes the journey and, to his horror, discovers that a
lumber company is clear-cutting the forest for profit and the forest
creatures' homes are in peril.
Dr. John looks into the situation and finds there is no way to stop the
devastation - except if it will save an endangered species. One such
candidate is a lone female Pacific Western bear that lives in the woods,
but without a mate to propagate the species, the government refuses to save
her or the forest. The only male bear of the same species anywhere nearby
is the member of a circus troupe and he, Archie (Steve Zahn), refuses to
give up his creature comforts - until he catches sight of the attractive
femme bear, Eva (Lisa Kudrow). In a Rocky-esque series of events, Dr.
Dolittle vows to help change Archie's behavior and introduce the bruin to
the forest (and Eva) to make little bears. It's a battle against the clock
as John struggles to make Archie a true bear of the world while they try to
save the habitat of all the other animals.
"Dr. Dolittle 2" is just what you expect, no less and not more. Half of the
film consists of a whole bunch of animal animatronics and computer graphics
that give the desired anthropomorphism that we came to enjoy so much the
first time around. This is where almost every laugh comes from as the
various creatures strut their stuff and sass the good doctor. Man, for some
reason, loves to give a human persona to his animals and "Dr. D 2" strikes
the right note. When the godfather-like Beaver explains, "I'm just a
fisherman blessed with many friends," a la Don Corleone, or his
hench-raccoon, Joey, (Michael Rapaport) uses a cell phone, it is funny. The
rest of the critters get to put their funny two cents in, too.
The human half of the story fares less well, mainly because it's just too
human. There is an evil plot by the state government, greedy businessmen
(Jeffrey Jones) and, of course, their lawyers (Kevin Pollack) to destroy
the land and make all the animals homeless. The forest critters, led by the
understanding Dr. Dolittle, must do battle to stop the megalith and they do
so in a way that would make Gandhi proud. But, the man story is the least
of the two halves.
The human characters, except for Murphy as the doctor, are superfluous.
When John has tender moments with his family or faces off against the
corporate baddies, you just want him to go back to the animals. I think,
for the next sequel (and I guarantee there will be another), they should
forget the people and stick with the animals.
With Lucky marking his territory over and over and Archie having intestinal
problems at one point, we are talking lowest common denominator,
humor-wise. The target for the toilet humor is the younger audience (which
is why more animals/less plot would be better, at least from a kid's POV).
The "story" of saving the environment is simply a frame to lay the gags
upon and provide the attending parents with an "adult" story when they take
their kids to see the doctor and his friends. But, "Dr. Dolittle 2" is for
kids and for the kid in us. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
Murphy is a comic genius. He adds fun and flavor to each one of his projects, 
which certainly wouldn't be the same without him. Whether playing an entire 
obese family in The Klumps, or a talking donkey in Shrek, the man is just 
all-out hilarious. He's been trapped before in bad films Holy Man and the 
original Dr. Dolittle, but always bounces back. This time he reprises the 
role of the animal-talking doctor, and is, of course, funny. In this witty 
sequel, however, he has some backup. Most of it comes from a talking bear. 
Dr. Dolittle has become a worldwide sensation. Pet owners swamp his home with 
their ailing animals, and he's opened a successful veterinary clinic. His new 
fame has led him to drift away from his wife Lisa (Kristen Wilson) and newly 
sixteen daughter Charisse (Raven-Symone). Dolittle has to reintroduce a 
circus bear living in captivity named Archie (voice of Steve Zahn) to the 
wild, and make him appealing to forest bear Ava (voice of Lisa Kudrow). The 
bears are endangered species, and if they mated, it would stop a logging 
company from tearing down the forest. Reintroduction has never been 
accomplished, but it's a challenge the doctor will take, with the help of 
many other forest animals. 
Other voices include Michael Rapaport, Norm Macdonald, Isaac Hayes, Mike 
Epps, and Jacob Vargas. Each vocal performance is unique, and everyone is 
quite good. The highest praise, however, must go to the animal trainers. 
These animals actually look like they're saying the lines in the script. 
Whatever they did, it works. 
The jokes come fast, and are perfectly appropriate for kids. This makes it a 
summer rarity, in that both adults and kids will like it. It is far better 
than the one-joke Cats & Dogs. Also noteworthy is the refreshing family 
subplot to the story. Dolittle must balance his work with his family, and the 
scenes between him and Raven-Symone are quite touching. They feel real. 
Though no one will be a better person because of this film, certainly no one 
will be bored. This is a solidly entertaining comedy for everyone. It's a 
film you'd expect around Thanksgiving rather than summer. Murphy's 
high-energy performance makes this one to see. I'd be up for a third one. 
Read more reviews at www.moviepie.com 

Author
Steve Rhodes
In DR. DOLITTLE 2, Eddie Murphy repeats his role as the sweet doctor who has the
gift of gab with animals.  With female humans, especially his now dating,
16-year-old daughter Charisse (Raven-Symone), Dr. Dolittle is anything but the
alpha male that he tries to get his animal friends to be.  
A sometimes cute but too often flat tale, this sequel tries to get by with easy
to devise, recycled humor ranging from piles of pigeon poop to a large, gaseous
bear (voiced by Steve Zahn).  Even the music choices lack originality.  How many
movies have featured "I Will Survive" recently?  There are so many that I've
lost count.
Sometimes redoing old themes can be funny.  The best of these is a takeoff on
THE GODFATHER, in which a beaver offers the doctor some fish in return for
future services.  When he refuses to accept the fish, Joey the Raccoon (voiced
by Michael Rapaport) warns him, "Hey, the beaver offers you fish.  You take the
fish!"
Using the canonical kids' movie theme, the story features evil and unscrupulous
big businessmen -- Are there any other kind in kids' shows? -- who are out to
despoil the environment.  Specifically, these guys, played by Jeffrey Jones and
Kevin Pollak, work for a lumber company that is going to cut down trees so that
people can live in houses.  Shocking.
Still, some of the animals are cute.  Pepito (voiced by Jacob Vargas), for
example, is a chameleon with a "broken blender."  No matter how hard he tries to
switch color schemes, he just stays an icky green.  And some of the scenes, like
one involving a dog support group, in which the doctor has the dogs repeat in
unison, "I am somebody's best friend," will bring a smile to your face.  The
result is an innocuous, but far from inspired film.  Wait for video when the
rental price will better reflect the value of the entertainment.
DR. DOLITTLE 2 runs 1:21.  It is rated PG for language and crude humor and would
be acceptable for most kids.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave it ***, liking the animal humor and the funny
musical numbers.  His cousins, Jacob, age 8, and Matthew, age 5, both gave it
*** as well.  Jacob's favorite part was "the bear going to the bathroom," and
Matthew liked the talking bear parts best.  None of them laughed much during the
movie, but they smiled a lot.
The film is playing now in nationwide release in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger's review of "DR. DOLITTLE 2" (20th Century-Fox)
When I took a seven year-old and a ten year-old to see Eddie 
Murphy, once again, play Dr. John Dolittle, they loved it. And 
why not? Filled a merry menagerie, including his faithful dog 
Lucky (voiced by Norm Macdonald), plus lots of fart and 
poop jokes, it's aimed directly at pre-teens. The story begins in 
Dr. Dolittle's San Francisco clinic where, after hours, he 
conducts a group therapy session for strays, assuring them, 
"Every dog can find a family and be someone's best friend." 
But his healer-who-talks-with-animals routine is interrupted 
by a summons to meet the Mafia-connected Mr. Beaver 
(voiced by Richard C. Sarafian). It seems the little critters 
need his help to save their forest that's being threatened by an 
evil logger (Jeffrey Jones) and his lawyer (Kevin Pollak). So 
Mrs. Dolittle (Kristen Wilson), a lawyer, gets an injunction, 
pleading that the forest is home to the last Pacific Western 
bear, an endangered species. The catch is that Dolittle must 
play match-maker for the bear, named Ava (voiced by Lisa 
Kudrow), pairing her with Archie (voiced by Steve Zahn), a 
circus-trained bear, who has no desire to live in the wild. 
"Winnie the Who?" Dolittle cajoles, appealing to his vanity. 
"You'll be famous!" But once Archie gets a look at Ava, he 
changes his tune to "I Will Survive" and tries to win her 
affections from a rival Kodiak bear. Written by Larry Levin 
and directed by Steve Carr, Dolittle's survival-training with 
Archie provides plenty of laughs, as does the subsequent 
world-wide Animal Strike. There's also a dreary romantic 
subplot involving Dolittle's petulant 16 year-old daughter 
(Raven-Symone) and her pizza-delivery boy-friend (Lil' 
Zane). On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dr. Dolittle 
2" is a sweet-natured 6. It's an amiable, big-screen sit-com 
that's not hard to bear.

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     There are plenty of horse laughs in Eddie Murphy's return 
engagement as John Dolittle, doctor and animal counselor.  There is also 
an environmentally-friendly plot about deforestation and endangered 
species.  Murphy himself is smooth and likeable as the zoophonic 
physician, and the animals are cute and move their lips when they talk.  
In the dog days of summer, it's hard to ask a great deal more of a 
popular comedy. 
It certainly seems to be too much to ask for a moratorium on 
scatological humor, although Murphy, writer Larry Levin, and director 
Steve Carr show a modicum of  restraint, holding off on the heavy stuff 
for the first hour or so.  But their self-discipline only lasts so long 
before giving in to the toilet humor that has become indispensable to 
modern lowbrow comedy.  Here, at least, one of the gags does come to 
grips with the classic question of whether a bear exercises a certain 
bodily function in the woods; the answer is: not always. 
As the picture begins, Dolittle is minding his own business, giving 
a positive-image mantra to a stray dog support group ("I am somebody's 
best friend") and dealing with his Father-Knows-Best family life when he 
is summoned by a tough-talking wiseguy raccoon (voice of Michael 
Rapaport) to a meeting with the Godbeaver (Richard C. Sarafian).  The 
beaver alerts the doctor to the rapacious activities of a logging 
company bent on clear-cutting a local forest.  There are many bits of 
information one might need animal language skills to uncover, but this 
wouldn't seem to be among them - surely environmental activists would 
have already pushed this item to the front page.  But logic is not the 
bottom line in this movie. 
Dolittle agrees to take the case (how could he refuse), and with 
his lawyer wife (Kristin Wilson) he gets a court injunction to stop the 
logging on the grounds of irreparable harm to an endangered species - 
the Pacific Western Bear.  But there is only one such bear in this 
stretch of woods - a female (voiced by Lisa Kudrow).  To qualify as a 
savable species a mate will have to be found for her, and Dolittle 
locates one in a circus sideshow - a tap-dancing ham of a bear named 
Archie (Steve Zahn).  Trouble is, Archie has no talent or taste for the 
rustic life.  It's up to Dolittle to persuade him to take the gig, and 
then teach him how to survive in the wild and win the bear lady.
Levin's script relies on clever one-liners, not on story or 
consistency.  There's no follow-through on the animal mafia premise, for 
instance, and a subplot involving the emerging sexuality and 
independence of Dolittle's sixteen-year-old daughter (Raven-Symone) goes 
nowhere: a promised trip to Europe and a promising boyfriend (Lil' Zane) 
are dropped unceremoniously from the screen.  But you won't really care 
about that sappy subplot, anyway.  What makes DD2 worth while are the 
jokes, and if you like talking animals with a sense of humor (and who 
doesn't?), you'll have a good time.  Eddie Murphy has the charisma and 
comic talent to hold it all together, although for the most part his 
character here is so tamed that he seems to have moved from Mr. 
Robinson's neighborhood into Mr. Rogers's.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
There's just no middle ground when it comes to Eddie Murphy films.  It's
either a throw-your-hands-in-the-air blockbuster that spawns an incredible
amount of sequels (like Beverly Hills Cop, 48 Hours, The Nutty Professor
and, eventually Shrek), or a flop that is swept under the carpet so quickly
that most people have forgotten it ever existed (like Holy Man, Vampire in
Brooklyn and Metro).  What is it about Murphy that makes people want to
watch him play the same roles over and over again?  You don't see it with
his comedic contemporaries, like Adam Sandler and Jim Carrey (I'm still
pretending Ace Ventura 2 never happened).  Murphy could probably pump a
sequel to Professor out every two years and still gross well over $100
million at the box office each time.
Dr. Dolittle 2 probably won't be much of an exception, but that certainly
doesn't mean it's a good film.  In fact, it will probably gross less than
the first version did, which brings up another interesting point about
Murphy:  How come the films in which he doesn't primarily appear as himself
make so much less money?  Think about it.  People love his voice work in
animation (Shrek, Mulan) and think it's great when he's hidden behind fat
suits and prosthetics (Professor), but when it's just Eddie, it's usually a
bomb.  Not counting Dolittle, which was really more about the talking
animals than Murphy, his last genuine box-office hit that wasn't either
animated or a sequel was 13 years ago (Coming to America).  Most of Dolittle
2's target audience wasn't even alive back then.
In Dolittle 2, Murphy reprises his role as the titular John Dolittle, a San
Francisco doctor who, since the closing credits rolled in the 1998 original,
has become a world-famous, globetrotting superstar, much to the displeasure
of his neglected family.  His practice now treats both humans and animals,
and Dolittle spends a lot of free time with various animal support groups,
as well.  When he does manage to find his way home, the family's quiet
moments are routinely interrupted by animals with strange physical ailments
looking for the healing hands of the good doctor.
One such interruption comes via a wiseguy raccoon (Michael Rappaport) who
swears he's not in the Mafia and insists Dolittle meet his boss, the Beaver
(Richard C. Sarafian).  The Beaver tries to enlist Dolittle to stop the
deforestation of a large wooded area outside San Francisco proper.
Dolittle's attorney wife (Kristen Wilson) advises him the only way to stop
the loggers (led by 3000 Miles to Graceland's Kevin Pollack and Sleepy
Hollow's Jeffrey Jones) from going chop-crazy is to find an endangered
species in the forest and attempt to create offspring of said species.
There is one rare female Pacific Northwest bear (Lisa Kudrow, Lucky
Numbers), but the only male in existence has been working in a circus his
entire life (Steve Zahn, Saving Silverman).  Will Dolittle postpone his
family's much-needed vacation to attempt mating a circus bear with a forest
bear?  Do they shit in the woods?  (The bears, not the Dolittles.)
Dolittle and family move to the forest, where the doctor tries to train
Archie the circus bear to survive in the wild (they call it a
"bear-a-thon"), and the bear even helps him learn a little bit about
himself, too.  And the whole time, all I could think of was the Robert
Schimmel joke (Q. How do they teach bears to ride bikes?  A. They nail their
feet to the pedals and beat the shit out them.) that was funnier than
anything in the movie.  The animals piss, shit and fart up a storm, and
there's enough gags about ball-licking and various sexual acts to make you
wonder how this earned a PG rating.  But what else would you expect from a
film that is narrated by a talking dog (Norm Macdonald) and stars a drunken,
sweater-wearing monkey?
The original Dolittle (not the Rex Harrison one) was directed by Betty
Thomas, who was hot off the success of Private Parts and Late Shift.  This
time, the reins are handed to Steve Carr, whose only feature film credit was
the nearly unwatchable Next Friday.  Carr has worked on numerous music
videos for the likes of Method Man, Jay-Z and Redman - not exactly a sound
pick for a children's film, but stranger things have happened (remember
Julia Roberts and Lyle Lovett?).  I'm not sure Dolittle is bad enough to
have original author Hugh Lofting spinning in his grave, but it ain't no
Babe, either.

Author
Laura Clifford
Eddie Murphy's back as the San Franciscan doctor who can talk to the animals.
Just as he's coming to terms with daughter Charisse's (Raven-Symone, "Dr.
Dolittle") sixteenth birthday and dating, Dr. D's given a message from a possum
(voice of Isaac Hayes) that he must meet with a beaver in the forest. When the
possum's ignored, a rather mobster-like raccoon (voice of Michael Rapaport)
appears with smooth birthday wishes and a more forceful request. Dr. D meets
the beaver (Richard C. Sarafian) and learns they need his assistance to keep
developers from destroying their forest.  Dr. D's at a loss, until he discovers
that a lone, endangered Pacific Western bear lives there - if he can find a
mate and establish the forest as breeding grounds, the government will step in
to protect their habitat.  Dr. D finds Archie (voice of Steve Zahn), a circus
bear who likes the plush life, and attempts to turn him into a macho suitor in
"Dr. Dolittle 2."
"Dr. Dolittle 2" features a new director (Steve Carr) and the film's original
screenwriter (Larry Levin).  This is a sequel with the same strengths and the
same (albeit fewer) flaws as the original.
Once again, the story sags when focus is on the human characters, although some
spirit is injected by Lil' Zane as Charisse's new boyfriend.  (It's fun to
watch Murphy rif on the protective dad thing.)  The bad-guy developers (Jeffrey
Jones and Kevin Pollack) aren't as obtrusive as the evil medical practice
partners of the original, either.  However, once again Mrs. Dolittle (Kyla
Pratt) is painted as a shrew when painfully obvious miscommunications have her
ordering her husband out of the bedroom and onto to the couch.
When the filmmakers and special effects maestros turn to the animals, however,
"Dr. Dolittle 2" mostly works.  Eva, the forest's wild female bear (charmingly
voiced by Lisa Kudrow) immediately declares Archie weird, but his funny antics
and persistence begin to make inroads.  We do learn more than we need to about
Archie's wild and domesticated bathroom habits, and there's Lucky's territory
marking competition with a wolf, but the toilet humor comes with the film's
demographics.  The mob societal structure of the forest denizens is a nice
anthropomorphic touch.  New character, Pepito, a chameleon who can't change
color, doesn't have much to do with the story, but gets a healthy share of the
funny lines.
As with the original, the technical budget has gone towards making the animals
interact over making the forest locations seem real.
Eddie Murphy delivers, as do the effects crew, but "Dr. Dolittle 2" is clearly
for the kiddies.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
