Title
Review for Pillow Book, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Froilan Vispo
Someone had made a post days ago seeking info on a Peter Greenaway, who
I do not know, and yesterday there was an enthusiastic post on THE
PILLOW BOOK by Peter Greenaway (DROWNING BY NUMBERS, THE COOK, THE
THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER, PROSPERO'S BOOKS) which I had seen last
September, so here's my contribution on Greenaway and his latest film.
THE PILLOW BOOK is about a young Japanese fashion model, Nagito (Vivian
Wu), with a predilection for writing on skin.  Attention-getting
premise, to be sure, with lots of erotic and symbolic potential.  The
film brings together two intimacies: the knowledge of the lover's skin
with the revelations of the personal diary, for the knowledge of
another's thoughts is intimacy itself.
The film takes its title from a diary of random observations, organized
under headings similar to "Annoying Things" or "Things We Love," which
were recounted and written at the bedside by its author, a Japanese
lady of the court.  Nagito will write her own pillow book, and the film
follows the painful completion of hers.
Our protagonist's father was himself a writer on skin as well as an
author, often writing on Nagito's skin when she was a child with a
calligraphy brush, chanting the same phrase again and again, something
like "...and He made her out of clay, and He took up His brush, and
painted in her eyes, her breasts, and her sex.  And then He painted in
her name,  so that she will not forget." (It has been awhile since I've
seen this film, so any corrections/reminders, such as our protagonist's
name, as well as opinions, are invited.)
Nagito grows up and makes a bad marriage.  Then, like her father, she
also attempts to write, at the same time struggling (as all artists
must, it seems) to make a living, until she is discovered (as all
supermodels are, it seems) and becomes a fashion model whose dalliances
are much sought after by papparazzi.
Like her father, Nagito makes another mistake - she gets into the
publisher's bed, in a way (and here lies another twist that will remain
unrevealed).  You see, she had met this publisher's translator and
lover, Jerome (Ewan MacGregor), earlier and had judged his sexual
potential to be poor based on his calligraphic ability.  But Jerome
becomes her means of getting her own books noticed.  How?  By bedding
him and writing her manuscript on the Jerome's skin for his
publisher/lover to read and eventually, obsess, over.
One more mistake - she falls for the Jerome and the rest of the film
sees her struggle to complete her contractual obligation to her
publisher for the possession of the most-prized pillow book of all (see
details after the SPOILER warning below) - one that truly combines
thought and touch and remembrance of past love.
I very much wanted to like this movie but it failed on several points.
If you like Greenaway's usual lush art direction, there's much to watch
here.  Too much, in fact.  At several points smaller screens are inlaid
along the edges of the main one, each filled with its own images, so
either you twist your neck making glances or your eyes are drawn to the
peripheries concentrating on nothing.  Either way you are left with
nothing but fragments.  Showing far more than can be possibly observed
becomes a poor excuse for seeing any movie again, and the interest
wasn't there to warrant a second viewing of TPB.
There is Nagito's own writing.  If her writing wasn't up to publication
standards the first time around, how does it become more worthy of
publication or obsession when written on the publisher's lover's skin?
It's too gimmicky and backfires on our protagonist, and I would be
willing to forgive on this point if we were given adequate proof of our
Nagito's skills, but we are given little, and the hints offered weren't
exactly enthralling.
The story becomes a tiring game of one-upsmanship at the end, a movie
revolving around a gimmick.  In DROWNING BY NUMBERS the story
progresses along with the counting of numbers one to one hundred,
sometimes appearing where unexpected.  Here, again and again,
love-poems written on bodies are offered, and with each new one we are
asked to  play a guessing-game with Greenaway playing the braggart who
offers us no choice but to endure this display of cleverness.
This is not the first time I came out of a Greenaway film
disappointed.  I recall being infuriated by THE COOK, THE THIEF..., all
that pomp and ceremony adorning a bad joke masquerading as a plot.
What disappoints more is that with his undeniable intelligence, with
all his daring and virtuoso art direction, the narrative and
characterizations end up neglected, and sadly this is true for TPB.
Surprisingly, for a film with so much erotic potential, there was very
little of it, if any at all, in the actual movie.  With so little to
relate to, we end up playing the role of the uncaring voyeur.
Greenaway cares enough to make us pay attention, but makes no effort to
make us care.
I was willing to be seduced, was almost awed into submission by the
visual glory of it all, but ended the film discovering that I had
played the role of the unsatisfied lover who is all too aware of "what
might have been, what might have been." No, I didn't rush up and out of
the theatre after a film to work away with my paintbrushes with glee.
Instead, months later, I type away at my keyboard venting my
frustration with Greenaway's flashes of genius.  If only he could keep
it up for an entire movie....
Jerome dies and a grieving Nagito is inspired to write her masterwork
on the dead Jerome's skin.  The publisher, by now obsessed over
Nagito's writings, then has Jerome's body stolen and flayed for
possession of the script-laden skin.
Like THE COOK..., the dead male lover becomes the object of obsession
and literally the book - in TC... the lover dies by ingestion of book
leaves while in TPB the skin is adorned by love poems.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Pillow Book (1997)
Vivian Wu, Ewan McGregor. Directed by Peter Greenaway
Not Rated, 3 and one half stars (out of 5 stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
Usually, movies are best enjoyed if you enter the theater knowing as 
little as possible about what you are going to see. In this age of media 
overload, people receive so much advance information about films; through 
trailers, "insider" shows like "Access Hollywood", magazines such as 
"Entertainment Weekly" and ubiquitous movie reviews, that by the time 
they actually watch the finished product, the experience has been ruined. 
In the case of "The Pillow Book", however, some advance information is 
probably useful. In order to appreciate a film this unusual, you need to 
be in the correct frame of mind. Try to go to the theater with the 
attitude you would have when viewing an art exhibit. Forget traditional 
narratives and just let the film flow over you. "The Pillow Book" isn't 
simply an example of style over substance. In this movie, the style IS 
the substance.
The Pillow Book", the ninth film from director Peter Greenaway ("The Cook,
 The Thief, His Wife and Her Lover"), does have a story, but it is told 
more in images and presentation style than in dialogue. Nagiko (Vivian Wu 
from "The Joy Luck Club") is a Japanese-born fashion model obsessed with 
calligraphy and justice. As she grew up, her father (Ken Ogata), a master 
calligrapher and mediocre writer, had a unique birthday ritual. Each year,
 he would celebrate his daughter's birth by painting her face in script, 
while reciting an ancient blessing. Nagiko worshipped her father and 
cherished the annual rite. She also loved the selections her aunt would 
read her from "The Pillow Book Of Sei Shonagon", a 1000 year old volume 
of romantic reminiscence. Nagiko was so enamored with the writings that 
she routinely took meticulous notes on her experiences and feelings to 
create her own pillow book. 
While still a child, Nagiko peeked through a door at just the wrong 
moment and caught a glimpse of her father sexually submitting to his 
publisher (Yoshi Oida), the "fee" for getting his work printed. Young 
Nagiko didn't understand what she saw, but the image would haunt her over 
the years. When she reaches adulthood and her father stops the annual 
birthday ritual, Nagiko flees Japan, and an arranged marriage with the 
publisher's boorish son. In Hong Kong, she becomes a successful model and 
spends her free time seeking sexual and emotional satisfaction, trying to 
get men to paint script on her body. Eventually, she meets Jerome (Ewan 
McGregor from "Trainspotting"), a British translator who suggests she use 
his body as the canvas for her work. The driven woman develops a strong 
erotic and literary relationship with the young man, made all the richer 
by the knowledge that Jerome is the lover of the same publisher who once 
used her father for sexual gratification.
Director Greenaway manipulates images to paint his own pillow book. Most 
of the film is presented in the letterbox format, with occasional 
subtitles (the film's sparing dialogue switches casually from English to 
Japanese) drifting by. The images are layered, with shots on top of other 
shots, and elegant script superimposed on the screen. Music is used with 
strong effect as well, creating a deeply textured multi-media 
presentation that works far more often than it does not. Ironically, some 
of film's most striking images are the simplest: ink-saturated water 
swirling down a drain, Nagiko curled in the fetal position in a round 
basin, and the many body canvases covered in beautiful script. 
There is a great deal of full frontal nudity in "Trainspotting", 
particularly from the remarkably uninhibited Wu and McGregor, but overall 
the effect is not erotic. Greenaway's multiple-imaging echoes and 
amplifies Nagiko's state of mind. She is obsessed with calligraphy and a 
desire for justice. The nude men she paints, except for Jerome, are 
little more than canvases, vehicles for her attempts to satisfy her 
obsessions, and we view them that way as well. Nagiko's obsession and 
self-absorption is the center of "The Pillow Book". She is the only 
character of substance, which is the film's weakest point and probably 
central to what makes it so memorable. 
"The Pillow Book" completely puts the viewer into another person's shoes, 
something that rarely happens in modern film. Nagiko's mind is not a 
pleasant place to be, but it is fascinating. "The Pillow Book" is a 
difficult film, and Greenaway's imaging occasionally seems more like 
grandstanding, but the sometimes disturbing, often beautiful images offer 
an experience one rarely will encounter in a multi-plex. 

Author
Matthew K. Gold
Peter Greenaway's THE PILLOW BOOK, a lush, spell-like movie, weaves
together words, flesh, ink, paper, and celluoid. The main character, a
young Chinese woman (Vivian Wu) whose father wrote a poem on her face on
every childhood birthday,
grows up with a fetish for words written on bare skin. At first, she
looks for lovers who will write on her; later, one lover (Ewan
McGregor) convinces her to inscribe her masterpiece (a series of "books"
based on a thousand-year old volume that lists things
which "make the heart beat faster") on his body.
THE PILLOW BOOK is as disturbing as it is pretty. It provocatively draws
analogies between human skin and paper and entrances the viewer's eyes
with beautiful, breathtaking imagery, but it also displays human bodies
as denatured objects. Naked bodies (particularly McGregor's well endowed
naked body) litter the screen, which can be either liberating or cruel,
depending on how one understands Greenaway's use of the human form.
Greenaway's distinctive style is a postmodern cinematic expression of
the Microsoft Windows 95 operating system: multiple
scenes float freely across the screen like lost ships drifting on
celluoid winds. It's an Altman-like concept of cinema seen through
the eyes rather than heard through the ears. Words spill across all of
the images like misplaced subtitles written with a
calligraphy pen.
Sensual and enticing, but ultimately problematic, THE PILLOW BOOK is a
unique vision of immoral beauty.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 6/97 (limited)
Running Length: 2:06
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Nudity, sex, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1 and 2.35:1
Cast: Vivian Wu, Ewan McGregor, Yoshi Oida, Ken Ogata, Hideko Yoshida
Director: Peter Greenaway
Producer: Kees Kasander 
Screenplay: Peter Greenaway 
Cinematography: Sacha Vierny
U.S. Distributor: Cinepix Film Properties
In English and Japanese with subtitles
     Calligraphy is one subject that not many movies have explored, and 
none has approached it in quite the way that British director Peter 
Greenaway does in his latest motion picture, THE PILLOW BOOK.  To use 
the film's own words to describe it, this is about the "two things in 
life that are dependable:  the delights of the flesh and the delights of 
literature" and how they can be melded into one.  If you're looking for 
something off the beaten path this summer, THE PILLOW BOOK won't 
disappoint.  Whatever its shortcomings, this film is different.
     Of course, considering the director, that's hardly surprising.  
Greenaway has routinely spurned traditional movie making techniques, 
preferring to use celluloid as an experimental canvas.  His reputation 
has been formed largely as a result of a series of intriguingly 
unconventional motion pictures, including PROSPERO'S BOOKS, a bizarre 
re-invention of Shakespeare's THE TEMPEST, and THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS 
WIFE AND HER LOVER, a twisted fable about an eloquent gangster getting 
his just desserts.  The closest Greenaway has ever come to being 
mainstream is THE COOK, but, considering the relatively widespread 
distribution that THE PILLOW BOOK is likely to receive, that may change.
     While there's nothing especially groundbreaking or difficult to 
grasp in THE PILLOW BOOK, Greenaway's experimentation here still has the 
power to alienate audiences who aren't prepared for what the film 
offers.  As has been true in his past efforts, there are copious amounts 
of full frontal nudity, and it seems that lead actors Vivian Wu (THE JOY 
LUCK CLUB) and Ewan McGregor (TRAINSPOTTING) perform half of their 
scenes without any clothes on.  Nevertheless, by keeping the audience at 
arm's length, Greenaway manages the impressive feat of de-eroticizing 
the nudity.
     For the most part, the director seems more concerned about 
technique than narrative and character development.  The plot functions 
more as a series of markers for Greenaway's stylistic riffs than a 
necessary aspect of the movie.  Indeed, THE PILLOW BOOK is so visually 
arresting that it's capable of holding our attention for two hours 
largely on the strength of its images.  There are pictures-within-
pictures, French song lyrics rolling across the bottom of the screen, 
multiple aspect ratios, color bleeding into black-and-white scenes, and 
other intriguing methods of composition.  Even simple shots, such as a 
swirl of ink-saturated water being sucked into a drain -- a color image 
that's all black-and-white -- can be striking.  And, for those who enjoy 
a little bafflement, there's a sequence near the end where the dialogue 
is in Japanese, but Greenaway intentionally does not use subtitles.
     The only character of any real importance in THE PILLOW BOOK is 
Nagiko, a Japanese-born fashion model with obsessions for calligraphy, 
physical pleasure, and revenge.  When she's a child, her loving father 
(Ken Ogata), a master calligrapher, paints a traditional blessing on her 
face every birthday.  Nagiko adores her father almost to the point of 
worship, and is horrified to learn that, to get his work published, he 
has to submit to homosexual relations with his publisher (Yoshi Oida).  
To make matters worse, that same publisher arranges for Nagiko to be 
trapped into marrying a cruel, callous man who views her as an object, 
not a person.  Eventually, fed up with her life, she flees Japan for 
Hong Kong, where she begins her career.
     When she was little, Nagiko's aunt would read her excerpts from the 
PILLOW BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON, the 1000-year old diary of a courtesan.  In 
Hong Kong, Nagiko begins her own pillow book, but, instead of writing on 
paper, she uses the bodies of her lovers.  They, in turn, utilize her 
flesh for their calligraphy.  Nagiko's quest is for the perfect 
lover/calligrapher combination, but it becomes a difficult search.  As 
she says, the older men are not interested in the pleasure she can 
provide, and the younger men are easily distracted.  Then she meets 
Jerome (Ewan McGregor), an Englishman in Hong Kong, who proves not only 
to be her artistic match, but offers the means by which she can enact a 
long-dormant plan of vengeance against her father's publisher.
     As Nagiko, Vivian Wu gives an impressive performance, using her 
bare skin as a tablet for the calligrapher's ink and her acting ability 
as a means to flesh out her character.  Ultimately, Nagiko becomes the 
only well-realized personality in THE PILLOW BOOK.  The supporting 
characters who surround her, including Ewan McGregor's Jerome, are 
shallow and thinly-realized, often functioning more as plot devices than 
individuals.  Wu's Nagiko is THE PILLOW BOOK's only truly human element. 
     There's something admittedly fascinating about the way Greenaway 
explores this mixture of calligraphy and the human form.  However, as 
unique as this combination may be, it's actually one of THE PILLOW 
BOOK's few original ideas.  Other directors may hesitate to venture into 
such unfamiliar territory, but Greenaway has been here before.  In its 
approach to sexual obsession, art, and revenge, THE PILLOW BOOK often 
recalls THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER, sometimes almost to 
the point of cannibalization.  Visually, however, THE PILLOW BOOK erupts 
in a manner that causes THE COOK (which was stylistically memorable in 
its own right) to pale in comparison.
     The great irony of this film, which is (at least on one level) 
about the power of writing, is that the words are of secondary 
importance to the overwhelming visual presentation.  The camera, not the 
script, dominates our response to Greenaway's film.  In the final 
analysis, THE PILLOW BOOK has much more to show than it has to say.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Peter Greenaway
Starring: Vivian Wu, Yoishi Oida, Ken Ogata, Ewan McGregor, Hideko Yoshida,
Judy Ongg, Ken Mitsuishi, Yutaka Honda, Barbara Lot
They say that a film reflects the man who made them.  Or at least I do. 
That's why I'd like to find out what kind of a person director Peter
Greenaway really is, especially after seeing two of his films, "The Cook,
the Thief, His Wife, and Her Lover" and "The Pillow Book."  The first
features tons of sex, full nudity of both sexes, people eating escrement,
and cannibalism.  The latter, his latest film, features some more sex, some
more graphic nudity, and, for a little cherry on top, calligraphy being
written on naked human flesh.  Something tells me this guy was a bit of an
outcast in pre-school.
Compared with "The Cook," one of the best films to be released in the 80s,
"The Pillow Book" seems rather shallow.  Instead of being against gluttony
and being a thinly veiled attack on politics ("The Cook" attacked Margaret
Thatcher...somehow), "The Pillow Book" has a smaller and more general
vision.  It's a film about gaining life experiences.  That's all.  It also
dabbles in vengeance, sensuality, the connection between literature and
sex, as well as love, but these are mere ingredients in the big picture,
which is a very simple work complexly and originally told by one of the
most interesting directors working today.  I'm not sure if he's one of the
best, but he's definitely intriguing.
"The Pillow Book" centers around the early life of a Japanese woman named
Nagiko (Vivian Wu), who shares a deep affection for her calligrapher father
(Ken Ogata), since when she was young, he would write on her on each of her
birthdays, telling the same story about how God would write in every
feature on his clay creations, and wrote their names on them so he would
not forget them.  Unfortunately, she discovers at an early age that he's
not a very successful writer and must therefore satisfy the sexual urges of
a homosexual and tyrranical publisher (Yoishi Oida), who becomes the object
of Nagiko's anger because of this.
After a pathetic arranged marriage goes bunk, she high tails it to China to
become a writer like her father, and to try to get vengeance on the
Publisher, all the while trying to find a lover who can satisfy her
sexually and shares the same fetish she does, which becomes writing
calligraphy on naked flesh.  Eventually, she runs into a Scottish linguist,
Jerome (Ewan McGregor - yes, that Ewan McGregor), who not only shares her
fetish to almost equality, but also just happens to be the Publisher's
young lover.  Soon she begins to come up with a bizarre vengeance on him...
Though it takes awhile to really get into the film, "The Pillow Book" is a
endlessly fascinating film, told in a surreal and sensual fashion.  The
direction by Peter Greenaway is definitely original, as he develops his
framing bizarrely, cropping shots so that they fill only a fraction of the
allotted screen space, and features images to pop up in the screen, and
sub-titles to sometimes appear...and sometimes not.  The film is filmed in
about four different languages, and only sometimes does what the actors are
saying become dictated for American audiences.  And sometimes French song
lyrics from the soundtrack quickly roll across the screen, giving the
entire film a kind of documentary/music video feel.  Something tells me
Greenaway should dabble outside of narrative film.  I don't know why...
The story's not extraordinary, as it sometimes contains cliches and
allusions to past Greenaway efforts (most notably "The Cook").  The whole
idea of a delicious kind of vengeance was used in "The Cook," while another
scene is almost an exact retread of a late scene in "The Cook," with one
small exception (as small as it is).  But once looking past this, it's easy
to realize how complex this film is.  Scenes and moments don't make sense
when you first see them, but later on they're made totally clear. 
Characters show up for maybe a scene and then show up later on to become
one of the major characters (most notably Jerome).  And the focus of the
film seems to be straying but once the finale comes, it appears that it
hasn't lost its focus at all.
The most amazing film about this film is the way it feels.  Greenaway is
one of the most sensual directors, a man who can make a film just FEEL
great by using bizarre cinematic techniques.  He makes the story of
Nagiko's life seem more amazing than it really is, just like the life of a
regular person.  But what is The Pillow Book?  It's a book by an ancient
courtesean recounting her experiences, which is something which Nagiko
reads and tries to duplicate in a bizarre fashion.  This is what Greenaway
is doing with Nagiko's life, retelling it in a bizarre fashion.  And it's
one of the more amazing experiences I've had watching a movie lately.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Directed by: Peter Greenaway
Written by: Peter Greenaway
Cast: Vivian Wu (Nagiko), Ewan McGregor (Jerome), Yoshi Oida (The
Publisher), Ken Ogata (The Father),. Judy Ongg (The Mother), Hideko
Yoshida (TheAunt/The Maid). 
Produced by : Kasander & Wigman Prods./Alpha Films/Woodline Films
in association with Channel Four Films, Studio Canal Plus, DeLux Prods
Rating : *****
Theatres: Shaw
(Includes English, Japanese, Mandarin and Cantonese dialogue)
The First Book - The Book Of The Uninitiated
"It's not a film, it's an ... experience," said my friend, a confessed
Greenaway devotee. So, if you have never had the benefit of the
experience before, welcome to the weird and wonderful world of Peter
Greenaway.  A world of strange obsessions, of bodies nude and quartered,
of frames within frames and words within pictures.  See the amazing
tableaux-fashioned scenes, with many wondrous things all happening at
once. Hear the sounds of crowds, Japanese chants and French songs,
airplanes roaring and even the soundtrack fast forwarding.  Thrill to
the haunting beginning and the bravura ending.
But what's it all about, sir?  "I have found that there are but two
things in life which are dependable: the delights of flesh and the
delights of literature." This quote from the film is itself a quote from
the Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon, and these then are the twin obsessions
of Greenaway's film.  The pleasures of Body and Text are woven together
in the mind of Nagiko (Vivian Wu), a modern Japanese woman fixated with
the writing of words on skin. As a child, her birthday is celebrated
with a face-painting ritual by her father, marking Gods creation of
human beings from clay figures by writing on them.  As an adult, she
seeks out lovers who will write over her body, exchanging sex for
calligraphy.  And then there is a hateful marriage, a passionate love
with a translator (Ewan McGregor) , a revenge, and the writing of a
series of  eleven "Books" on bodies, which are simultaneously an act of
love and revenge.
Scratching your head, perhaps? And yet, everything in THE PILLOWBOOK
proceeds according to an inner logic as inexorable as astrology.  Submit
to its logic, and everything makes perfect sense. Enter a hall of
mirrors:  the father exchanges sex for calligraphy just as the daughter
does;  a burning of books marks Nagikos departure from Japan just as a
second fire marks her return.  Offhand details all comment obliquely on
the films themes: like the scribbling of a car license plate on one
hand, or the writing out of a cheque on another.
Naturally the film submits also to the logic of the larger Text that
is Greenaway's body of work.  Fans will detect many links with his other
films:  the fascination with multiple foreign languages as in THE FALLS,
the dissection of the body as in THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HIS
LOVER, sex as bargain and exchange as in THE DRAUGHTSMANS CONTRACT, 
the use of numbers, lists and patterns as in so many of his films. Most
obviously, the PILLOW BOOK is a continuation of the obsessions of
PROPSPEROS BOOKS, with its similar graphomania, lavish visuals, naked
bodies and streams of words layered thick on the screen.  You can see
whole university courses in the making even as you watch.
The Fifth Book - The Book of the East (Far)
One thing that's new to the Greenaway canon is the PILLOW BOOK's
focus on the Orient.  But in hindsight, it's easy to think of Japan as
an obvious source of Greenaway fascinations: after all, this is a
culture that produced ritual suicide, "comfort" houses, Tetsuo and
un-useless inventions.  The Timeout film guide once described THE
DRAUGHTSMAN'S CONTRACT as "a better exploration of an alien world than
most science fiction films," and to me, the Japanese world seems as
worthy of Greenaway's space probe as any.
There's a lot of it in this film.  Apparently, at Cannes, an American
journalist asked Greenaway why The Pillow Book is so full of naked men.
His response: "Trust you, as an American, to ask such an absurd
question!".
There is indeed a loud and very silly fat American in this film. He
is the Book of the Exhibitionist, and he is naked too, of course.
The Seventh Book - The Book of the Trainspotting Allusion
Ewan Mcgregor dies in a wonderfully melodramatic ritual drug overdose.
The Eighth Book - The Book of Conclusions
A list of splendid reasons to watch THE PILLOW BOOK: for its
beautiful images; for its power to send eyes, ears and brain spinning;
for its moments of emotional warmth (more frequent than some of
Greenaway's other films); because it is extravagantly pretentious and
unashamedly arty; because it is awesome, rich and strange.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
Julian">href="mailto:clem_lim@pacific.net.sg">Julian Lim is a bonsai
waterer in training.


Author
David N. Butterworth
Let me get one thing straight from the outset.
In "The Pillow Book," eclectic British director Peter Greenaway's exotic
tale of calligraphy and eroticism, you get to see Ewan McGregor's thing.
McGregor, the hot young import of "Trainspotting," "Emma," and this
summer's "Brassed Off!," has proven a bankable commodity in a few short
years, so "Ewan McGregor...  Penis!" might seem an unusual summation of his
career to date (this is how one audience member economically previewed his
latest film to a fellow viewer).  Penises come in all shapes and sizes,
from intimidating, turkey neck monsters to little doggy do-shaped
squigglers, and such is the preponderance of penises on parade in "The
Pillow Book" that sitting through it feels like watching "Multiplicity"
with Harvey Keitel in the lead.
While some might not find the flaccid male organ particularly attractive,
Greenaway's fearlessness in displaying it so flamboyantly does satisfy a
sense of equality.  With all too many actresses--talented ones
included--being required to bare all to secure even the leanest of parts in
a mainstream movie, Greenaway provides the rare opportunity for male
performers to show us what they're really made of.  McGregor, if for
nothing else, should be commended for his willingness to stand around naked
for the sake of Art.
Or in the case of "The Pillow Book," body Art.
Challenging, irritating, but always sumptuously decadent, Greenaway's films
are about as far removed from traditional cinema as you can get.  He's also
controversial; his "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife & Her Lover," clearly the
work of a truly gifted and original filmmaker, helped usher in the NC-17
rating.  Another reason to get excited by a Greenaway movie is that they
don't come along all that often.  His last movie to open in Philadelphia
was the stylish, sleepily Shakespearean "Prospero's Books" in 1991.  For
some reason--and it wouldn't be the first time this has happened to the
filmmaker--his 1993 film "The Baby of Macon" seemed to have trouble finding
a distributor.
This time around, Greenaway's elaborately ornate work draws its origins
from a pillow book (diary) of a 10th Century Japanese courtier called Sei
Shonagon.  Her writings focus on lists of "things which make the heart beat
faster"--plum blossom covered in snow or all things indigo-colored, for
example.  As the story switches to modern-day Japan, we find Sei Shonagon's
journal being read to Nagiko (played in adulthood by Vivian Wu) by her aunt.
"God makes a clay model," her father (Ken Ogata), a renowned calligrapher,
explains to the young Nagiko on her birthday while painting elaborate
greetings on her face.  "He paints in the eyes, the lips, and the sex.
Then he paints in the owner's name lest he should ever forget it.  When he
approves of his creation, he signs his name in order to bring it to life."
After witnessing her father involved in a sexual situation with his
publisher (Yoshi Oida), Nagiko carries these teachings forward in her adult
life, seeking out the ideal lover-calligrapher, one who can not only
fulfill her obsession with writing on human skin, but assist her in
exacting revenge on the publisher.  In this way she can honor her father.
McGregor's naive translator/scribbler Jerome provides Nagiko the foil she
needs for both endeavors.
Greenaway constructs his story about "flesh and the writing table" with an
experimental barrage of mattes, overlays, and subtitles, switching from
black and white to color and back again.  Words pour like rain.  Excess is
always a good word to describe his style, yet with "The Pillow Book,"
Greenaway's obsession with language, both written (the bold brushstrokes of
the Japanese characters) and spoken (Wu's stilted yet effective narration)
complement the visual imagery superbly.
The director has himself admitted that his process of making films is
actually more rewarding than watching them.  With "The Pillow Book," Peter
Greenaway explores a subject that provides an ideal medium for his peerless
technique.  For this reason, the watching is reward enough.

Author
Seth Bookey
(France / UK / Netherlands, 1995; Japanese, Mandarin, and Cantonese with
English subtitles)
  Seen for $8.75 on 22 June 1997 by myself at the SONY Tower East.
   Peter Greenaway's latest film proves to be a departure from his recent
   efforts--it has a discernible plot. The last, and only, Greenaway film
   I have seen was Prospero's Book, and it was one of the best naps I
   have ever had in the movies. Other patrons asked me to stop snoring,
   since it was keeping them awake. He is probably best known for The
   Cook, the Thief, the Wife and Her Lover. In The Pillow Book, Nagiko
   (Vivian Wu) tells us her life story. As a girl, her father would write
   on her face and neck. She also witnesses her father (Ken Ogata)
   subjected to an inferior sexual role by his Hong Kong publisher (Yoshi
   Oida). Interspersed with her story are passages from the 1000-year-old
   pillow book of the Empress Nagiko; her modern-day namesake tries to
   keep a pillow book of her own as well.
   Greenaway finds wonderful ways to display the vivid descriptions from
   the Empress's writings. Years later, Nagiko has trouble finding a
   perfect relationship that balances good lovemaking with good
   calligraphy. After a disastrous marriage in Japan, Nagiko flees to
   Hong Kong, where she lives in squalor but eventually climbs to
   lavishness. She eventually meets Jerome (Ewan McGregor), the bisexual
   that Nagiko initially rejects but then takes on as a lover. He
   convinces her to write on him, rather than being written on. She wants
   to get her work published by her father's publisher, so she writes her
   work on Jerome and send him to the publisher, who has his workers copy
   down the text. He also partakes in lovemaking with Jerome as well.
   Greenaway has made a name for himself as a visual artist whose
   storylines often fall flat.
   The Pillow Book features a visual opulence rarely seen in the cinema
   today. He uses picture-within-a -picture techniques that requires a
   certain visual agility from the viewer, especially since there are
   subtitles involved as well. Making viewers uncomfortable is also
   something for which Greenaway is famous, by grossing out the audience
   (grave desecration), by showing us the painstaking sexual education of
   Nagiko by her parents, the cruelty of her husband (Ken Mitsuishi), or
   by tiring the audience out with repetition. But through it all, every
   frame of the film is alive, with color, black-and-white, multiple
   frames, excellent cinematography and striking sets.
   The performances are fine, but they are secondary to the filming and
   the mise-en-scene. Also, since the storyline and the characters are so
   bizarre, it is hard to comment on the performances, except to say that
   the actors certain meet the challenge. There are some long passages
   without dialogue, and this will probably unsettle American audiences
   used to explosions and foul language. The most "violent" scenes in the
   film occur when Nagiko slaps someone, and some environmental activists
   who kidnap Nagiko. (That subplot, along with the annoying photographer
   Hoki (Yutaka Honda), are the most annoying and distracting portions of
   the film.)
   _________________________________________________________________
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Peter Greenaway is a filmmaker who often expects a lot from his
audience and takes chances.  The downside of taking chances is that
sometimes you lose.  THE PILLOW BOOK is one of his losses.  This is a
film that is pretty to look at and one which does a lot of strange and
unexpected things with the visual style.  But the story is over-blown,
over-long, overly-obscure, and overly melodramatic.
     The basis and inspiration for Greenaway's latest film is the
original Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon, published in Heian period, the
late 10th Century Japan.  The original was a collection of poetry,
reminiscences--some amorous, lists, and anecdotes all relevant to court
life of the time.  Greenaway's film inspired by that book is the story
of Nagiko (played by Vivian Wu), a modern woman who one millennium
later is collecting her own set of experiences, mostly erotic, inspired
by Sei, bur also by her own fascination with body painting.  Nagiko's
fascination stems from her father's annual ritual of on her birthday
painting text on her face and neck and retelling of how God made people
out of clay.  In his myth God painted each of them, naming them in the
process.  If He approved of his work he also signed it.
     Nagiko grows with an erotic fascination with having text painted
on her body.  Her first requirement of a lover is that he be a good
calligrapher, painting nearly anything on her body in any language.  In
flashbacks, often in only one small part of the screen, we see how her
father was betrayed by his publisher who also forced her into marriage
with his nephew.  The husband proves to be a cruel and insensitive man
who is also a lousy calligrapher in bed.  The film has a problem in
that most viewers from a European background are uneducated in the
subtleties of Japanese calligraphy and will not know good work from
work not so good.  Nagiko eventually finds love in the arms of Scotsman
Jerome (Ewan McGregor of EMMA and of course TRAINSPOTTING--any young
Scottish actor you see these days is probably from TRAINSPOTTING).  But
when the publisher's hand reaches again into her life, she decides it
is time for a particularly appropriate retribution.
     In the tradition of his PROSPERO'S BOOKS Greenaway plays with his
screen composition.  He varies the size and shape of the screen.  He
will inlay as many as four smaller frames with action into a full-sized
fifth frame, now reduced to a cross.  Greenaway works to combine the
texture of the original Pillow Book on paper with his own updated
version of the story.  The result is hypnotic but eventually the slow
and deliberate pacing and the repetition begin to wear on the audience.
Nagiko's attempts to recreate the painting experience of her early
youth in erotic terms almost reminds one of Jack Nicholson's stylized
erotic ritual toward the end of CARNAL KNOWLEDGE.  The pretensions of
Greenaway's style become a liability when there is too long for too
little story.  In the final analysis the story seems more an erotic
dream than an intelligent narrative.  Occasional pieces of wit do
leaven the story, but they require careful observation and are of a
very dry humor.  One example: characters in the film are painted with
texts meaningful to them, and apparently in the same vain a van is
painted with road maps, the texts that it follows.
     Greenaway's films are rich with style, but style without a good
plot can be as bad as plot without style.  I found his recent THE BABY
OF MACON far more rewarding.  Greenaway taking on Japanese culture
should have been a good deal more insightful and less tedious.  I rate
it a -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I need writing," insists the beautiful Japanese woman Nagiko
(Vivian Wu) to a stranger in the cafe.  "Don't ask why.  Just take out
your pen and write on my arm."  And rest of her body as well.
     Nagiko's obsession is finding a calligrapher who is as good a
lover as a calligrapher, and for her, skin is the medium of choice.
("I like the smell of paper - all kinds," she confides in her diary,
called a pillow book.  "It reminds me of the scent of skin.")
     Peter Greenaway's audacious assault on our senses is called simply
THE PILLOW BOOK.  Greenway is a cinematic stylist whose best known film
is perhaps the movie with the enormous title of THE COOK THE THIEF HIS
WIFE & HER LOVER.  (Yes, he did not allow commas to impede his
thought.)
     Greenway in recent interviews has been railing against the power
and the homogeneity of American movies.  His films are certainly like
no others.  In THE PILLOW BOOK, which he wrote, directed, and
co-edited, he creates a sumptuous movie in montage.  Most scenes make
heavy use of picture-in-picture techniques, thus making the movie
screen look like some feature laden television.  Part of the film is
shot in letterbox with a larger black band at the bottom holding the
English subtitles.  This asymmetric letterboxing is a projectionist's
nightmare.  Ours almost got tricked.
     The bizarre story can be followed if you pay close attention, but
it is merely a sideshow.  The movie exists to show off calligraphy on
skin as an art form and to dazzle the viewers with sights and sounds.
The best part of the film is the music by Brian Eno.  A mixture of
Chinese, Japanese, and French music.  All of it has a haunting beauty.
The French folk songs have subtitles that flow by sing-a-long style in
order to focus the audience on the music.
     The story is a conundrum but with periodically interesting
vignettes.  The reoccurring one, which various characters repeat, tells
an ancient legend of God making clay models.  "If God approved of his
creation, he brought each clay model to life by signing his own name."
>From this comes the tradition of writing on people's torsos.
     Most scenes are off the scale, any scale.  Typical is the one
where Nagiko's lover Jerome, played by Ewan McGregor from EMMA and
TRAINSPOTTING, has a solution for Nagiko for the publisher who is
ignoring her.  Nagiko will write her book all over Jerome, and he will
go to the publisher and strip so the publisher can see the beauty of
her writing.  It gets even more ludicrous once Jerome gets naked in the
publisher's office.
     The film sets a record for the number of shots of male frontal
nudity in a non-pornographic film.  None of the scenes are erotic and
only a few are meant to be.
     Besides the ridiculous story, the movie's other problem is the
acting.  The actors do not try to be convincing, and the director seems
happy to have them all on autopilot.  He approaches the film stock as a
canvas upon which he will paint a beautiful and shocking portrait.
Narrative has little importance to him.
     THE PILLOW BOOK would make a wonderful short film.  Trimmed down
to twenty or thirty minutes, I could easily praise it.  As is, it
becomes an incredibly long exercise in style.
     THE PILLOW BOOK runs an exhausting 2:06.  It is not rated but
would probably be NC-17 as it contains large amounts of complete nudity
as well as explicit sex and one scene of drug abuse.  The film is in
English, Japanese, Mandarin and Cantonese with English subtitling where
appropriate.  Although I was impressed by parts of the filmmaking, I
cannot recommend the picture.  I give it ** for its impressive and
unusual sights and sounds.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jerry Saravia

Peter Greenaway is the supreme film stylist of the 20th century. He creates
tales, not stories in the conventional narrative sense, of our erotic desires
and murderous impulses within the context of literature and art history. He
said recently that films are more concerned with pop culture than with art. I
couldn't agree more with the current schlock in cinemas nowadays. Arguably, his
most profound work was the controversial "The Cook, The Thief, His Wife and Her
Lover," a savagely funny tale of revenge and sex in a decadent restaurant. It
was not for all tastes, but then who says art is? "The Pillow Book" is his
latest film, and it is enticing, sexy and alluring though Greenaway often shies
away from his basic premise. 
"The Pillow Book" stars Vivian Wu as Nagiko, a flamboyant fashion model who is
obsessed with calligraphy. Her first husband had no interest in her obsession
and, as a result, their house was burnt down. Several years later, she develops
a certain sexual obsession: she wants to find the perfect lover who can also
paint calligraphy all over her body. Her obsession emanates from her childhood
when her father painted words on her face. Her latest lover is a bisexual
translator, Jerome (Ewan McGregor from "Trainspotting"), and she insists that
he write all over her body. If man can make perfect love to her, then he also
must be able to write perfect letters.
Peter Greenaway's gift as a director is his visual flamboyance - an ability to
layer several images together to convey the erotic feeling of where mind and
body integrate. He beautifully executes scenes of passion from the lovingly
choreographed close-up shots of men painting on Nagiko's skin to lighting
effects of Chinese symbols flashing and dissolving on the walls - the effect is
grandiose yet thrilling. The technique of rectangular frames subdividing the
screen and changing from black-and-white to color is marvelous to behold - this
style of editing originated in Greenaway's "Prospero's Books." No other
director can match the love and care that he puts into every shot of his films
(except for Scorsese and Lynch). In the end, though, it is really more about
Greenaway's own obsession of literature and art than it is about Nagiko's
personal odyssey. 
"The Pillow Book" becomes somewhat melodramatic in the last half when it
erroneously stays away from the character of Nagiko. Greenaway (who wrote the
film) devises a revenge plot involving Nagiko's father's employer - a
homosexual whom Nagiko feels had destroyed her family. After Jerome begins to
get involved with this character, a spooky and, literally, revealing thing
happens to Jerome's skin. But instead of focusing on Nagiko's obsessive
behavior, the movie opts for elements that negate the first half of the film -
the sexual connection of flesh and writing. The revenge plot is typical of
Greenaway but here, he loses the themes he explored beforehand and so the film
becomes distracting and laborious. There are several scenes of naked bodies
covered in writing confronting the evil homosexual, but they become repetitious
and meaningless. However, when Nagiko plans to keep her lover, the idea of
flesh and text is restored. 
"The Pillow Book" is better seen than described. It is purely a filmic
exercise in exploring themes rather than placing them in a narrative structure
or plot. Greenaway should be commended for trying to push the boundaries of
film structure in an age of homogenized hogwash. Nagiko is wonderfully
performed with genuine emotion by the sensual actress Vivian Wu (her lovemaking
sessions with Jerome are truly sexy). If only Greenaway chose a more internal
frame of mind when exploring Nagiko instead of coldly pulling her out towards
the end. "The Pillow Book" is a masterpiece of filmmaking but it is not as
intricate or as intimate as Greenaway's other works. 
For more reviews check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 

Author
Dennis Schwartz

PILLOW BOOK, THE (director/writer: Peter Greenaway; cinematographer:
Sacha Vierny; cast:Vivian Wu (Nagiko), Ewan McGregor (Jerome), Ken Ogata
(The Father), Judy Ongg (The Mother), Hideko Yoshida (The Aunt/The
Maid), Yoshi Oida (The Publisher), Ken Mitsuishi (The Husband), 1996-UK)
The Pillow Book is a Peter Greenaway (DROWNING BY NUMBERS, THE COOK, THE
THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER, PROSPERO'S BOOKS) mesmerizing visual
experience that touches base with spiritual and erotic themes, but only
wets one's appetite, as its story fails to fully enhance the seductive
nature of what is seen.
Of all things made into a film, calligraphy is one subject that few
movies have used as their subject, but Greenaway, true to his reputation
as a filmmaker with an outrageous streak in him to live up to, continues
to make outlandish films that have a certain perversity to them, as well
as show an elegance in clever filmmaking. Here, he starts off filming in
black and white the childhood experiences of Nagiko (Wu), who
wonderously listens to the stories being read by her aunt (Yoshida) from
a 1,000- year text, based on the work of Sei Shonagon, a courtesan,
whose spellbinding journal of sayings on the subjects of the flesh and
literature makes up "The Pillow Book." The idea of that book, that the
texts of those two subjects (sex & art) should fuse together as one,
with there being no difference between literature and what is beautiful
in their union. Pillow Book is an individual's diary of observations and
a presentment of an interesting list of things the diarist has jotted
down, such as duck eggs and a silver bowl filled with shaved ice.
Nagiko's father (Ogata), whom she idolizes, is a master calligrapher,
who paints her face with characters to celebrate her birthdays, and
tells her: "If God approved of his creation, he will bring the clay
model he created to life by signing his name to it." This seems to
tickle the little girl's fancy, so much so that when we next see her as
a young woman in technicolor, we realize that she has developed a fetish
for having her skin written on, equating her lovers with how good a
calligrapher they are.
After marrying in a traditional Japanese ceremony, to someone she knows
cannot please her, but is forced on her through an arranged marriage by
her father's publisher (Yoshi Oida), she will leave this husband whom
she cannot relate with and move to Hong Kong. Once there she will take
odd jobs, until becoming a fashion model and then a writer on flesh. She
will not communicate with her father from abroad after witnessing her
father's boss, the publisher, force her father to have anal sex with
him, which he does in order to have his books published.
The film concentrates on Nagiko having her lovers write over her nude
body, but she is becoming increasingly frustrated in finding the lover
who is the perfect combination of lover and calligrapher. She will meet
a young English translator she falls for even though she considers him a
scribbler, Jerome (Ewan), a part he plays with appealing relish. To
solve her dilemma of being with someone who is not a calligrapher, she
writes on Jerome's skin after he offers her his body.
Jerome crushes her spirit by having a bisexual relationship with the
same publisher who destroyed her husband financially, blackmailed her
father, and now has soiled the one she loves. She thought that she could
use him to get vengeance on the publisher, but when he goes naked before
the publisher, who reads The Book of a Lover that she wrote on him, her
jealousy and rage gets the better of her and she spurns Jerome.
The plot turns surprising simple, as revenge becomes the motive for
Nagiko, and this offbeat film will remain interesting mostly through its
striking visualizations.
The stunning visualizations range from ones of comedy to ones of
sensuality to ones of gross cruely. An example of comedy, would be in
The Third Book of Impotence, where she has the male she has written her
book on running naked through the crowded streets of Hong Kong. By
writing her own pillow book, that will include thirteen editions, she
will tell her own story. The last one is called The Book of the Dead,
and is an example of how pitiless her retribution can be. Her sensuality
is seen in most of the books she writes, but seems special when she is
with Jerome, as frontal nudity is there, to be examined from all
different angles by a technically efficient camera, that handles these
nude scenes as casually as if the actors were fully dressed.
The fun in the film is in the silliness of the story's subject matter as
juxtaposed against the solemnity of the books being written on skin,
with either somber religious chants or the same pop tune being played
over and over in the background. The repeating of the childhood story,
the constant flashbacks to Nagiko's childhood, where she is repeatedly
told that the diary being read to her is by a woman who has the same
name she has, give the film a stylish depth and a feeling that something
overwhelming is happening.
Greenaway has the knack of telling a seductive tale by utilizing
Nagiko's predilection to flesh out her character. She is really the only
one in the film that we see developing and the only one whom we come to
understand what she is trying to do. Her seventh book, The Book of a
Seducer, was very similar to a Confucius book, where she writes on a
man's bald head, "an itch to read, a scratch to understand." Her ninth,
The Book of Secrets, she has her words written on a man's tongue. There
seems to be a determined effort to be witty, even if the humor is not
scaled to what the story is saying.
The result of this work is a film that is startling to behold, with
gorgeous photogenic shots, superimpositions, amazing computer graphics,
a splash of intriguing gold and red color patterns, with everything
ending up so perverse and lost in an intimacy that seems so melodramatic
that even the scenes that do mean something to the characters still seem
to be too absurd to really mean much. But the film did have plenty of
fire to it, hatred, passion, jealousy, and mystery. I just didn't find
that the story was that emotionally engaging to win me over completely
to what I was seeing, even if I found the film had much to show for its
effort. But for those who like to see the unusual and something that is
artistic, this film is both unique and unforgettable: it's pure
Greenaway.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
