Title
Review for To the Ends of the Earth (1948)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  TO THE ENDS OF THE EARTH (director: Robert Stevenson; screenwriter: Jay
Richard Kennedy; cinematographer: Burnett Guffey; editor: William Lyon; cast:
Dick Powell (Commissioner Michael Barrows), Signe Hasso (Ann Grant), Ludwig
Donath (Nicholas Sokim), Vladimir Sokoloff (Commissioner Lum Chi Chow), Edgar
Barrier (Grieg), Harry J. Anslinger (Himself), Vernon Steele (Commissioner
Hadley), Lou Krugman (Commissioner Amar Hassam),  Eddie Lee (Chian Soo), Maylia
(Shu Pan Wu),  Fritz Leiber (Vranstadter); Runtime: 109; Columbia; 1948) 
A top-notch adventure yarn that criss-crosses the globe in the mid-1930s. The
film is told in a semi-documentary style entailing a Treasury Department
narcotic head of its San Francisco bureau, Michael Barrows (Dick Powell),
stumbling across a Japanese tramp freighter which is acting as a slave cargo
tub. He observes them overthrowing the illegal passengers when they thought that
the Coast Guard boat would stop them. 
In a cameo, the real Treasury director Harry J. Anslinger has a non-speaking
role as Barrows's boss. Barrows is presented as a dry-witted, contented married
man, who is first seen caring for his rose garden. 
This international crime on the freighter leads Barrows to Shanghai, where he
discovers he's after a sinister narcotics ring. They are a highly organized
worldwide opium smuggling gang, with poppy fields in Egypt. Barrows learns this
from the drug czar of Shanghai, Commissioner Lum Chi Chow (Sokoloff), and also
learns that their intentions are also political. They wish to transport the
opium into the West because the drug induces a weakness in its users and would
make it easier for Japan to dominate its enemies. 
When he agrees to work with Lum, he poses as a rug dealer and is steered to a
shady former American drug smuggler Sokim (Donath) who pretends to be helping
him catch the drug smugglers. 
He also keeps running into the blonde American widow of an engineer, Ann Grant
(Signe Hasso), and the sweet 20-year-old, orphaned, ward she's in charge of, Shu
Pan Wu (Maylia). 
When Barrows goes to Egypt, he finds the secret poppy fields and learns that
Ann's husband, an engineer, built the irrigation system for the smugglers. 
The finale tales place on a boat that has the smuggled opium aboard, as the
suspicious passenger Vranstadter (Leiber), and Ann Grant and Shu Pan are aboard.
The action intensifies when a grease fire is set in the galley and the dope
stored in the kitchen is tossed overboard with the boat just off the Eastern
Coast of America, as Barrows tries to figure out who is the head of the ring. 
A solid film that's high on entertainment value, even though it's a conventional
work. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brian Koller
Narcotics had been a taboo subject of the production code for years, ever
since Reefer Madness (1936) had unintentionally become a cult film
for pot smokers.  But To the Ends of the Earth not only tackled the
epidemic of worldwide opium smuggling, but portrayed the Treasury Department
detectives in such a positive light that they provided technical support.
Treasury commissioner Harry J. Anslinger even has a cameo appearance.
Always reliable and entertaining Dick Powell is the lead, playing federal
agent Michael Barrows.  Barrows is a family man who tends his rose gardens
in New York City.  But he is willing to drop everything at a moment's notice
to travel around the world, on the trail of opium smugglers.
The film is set during the mid-1930s.  Sinister, unseen Japanese
imperialists are behind the shipments.  Their scheme is to weaken the West
through drug dependency, to facilitate global conquest.  Powell follows the
trail through China, Egypt, and Cuba.  At each turn, he encounters two kinds
of people: helpful, courageous, honest government agents, and shady, greedy,
ruthless suspects who help produce or smuggle the opium.
To seeming innocents who keep appearing in the story are attractive Ann
Grant (Signe Hasso) and her young, orphaned, even more attractive ward, Shu
Pan Wu (Maylia).  Shu Pan Wu is in her late teens, but acts much younger,
like a sweet and friendly child.
Powell is a laconic derring-do hero, at one point climbing the side of a
cliff to reach suspected poppy fields.  His life is frequently in jeopardy,
but he remains unflappable.  He is completely comfortably in his
surroundings, no matter how exotic they may be.
He is also without hormones, which may be uncinematic but perhaps was
necessary to retain technical support from the feds.  This is the primary
difference between Barrows and James Bond: while the femmes may be fatale,
he never drops his chivalric guard.
Like in all good detective stories, solving one puzzle leads directly to
another.  The script and direction is crisp, and there is often some
suspense present.  The only real problem, then, is the credibility of the
characters and of the events themselves.  Certainly, opium smugglers would
go to the depths depicted to move their wares.  But the dramatic suicides
and omnipotent agents seem to be from a world unlike our own.
briankoller@usa.net
http://elvisfan.simplenet.com/movies/movies.html
http://www.epinions.com/user-briankoller
