Title
Review for Bad Girls (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Joan Ellis
     BAD GIRLS is a good idea that is doomed by a terrible script.
There is fun to be had when a dormant genre reemerges in the packaging
of a new era, and the Western is now riding full tilt into the '90s
carrying new sensibilities about women.  Yes, they were there, but what
did they do?
     In this movie, they spring full-blown from the kitchens and beds
of the men they served, hang holsters on their hips and make their way
as ex-hookers bent on a new life.  Four game actresses - Madeleine
Stowe as Cody, Mary Stuart Masterson as Anita, Andie MacDowell as
Eileen and Drew Barrymore as Lilly - struggle with bad lines.  Ready
for a romp, they sink in embarrassment.
     Deciding to start a sawmill ("We sold our bodies, why can't we
sell wood?") on Anita's Oregon homestead land with Cody's life savings,
they trip over various barriers in their effort to flee their desert
surroundings.
     The barriers, which should create the plot but don't, are erected
by Kid Jarrett, Cody's former lover who is supposed to provide the
plot's tension but doesn't.  The Kid (James Russo) is a most
uncharismatic bandit whose sole redeeming characteristic is his open
air desert bedroom featuring a mirrored bureau and a bed draped in
luscious fabric, a sort of outdoor commercial for luxury living right
there in the raunchy, mean Old West.
     The whole state, it seems, is hunting the notorious Kid for reward
money while the truth of it is that the whiny little fellow seems to be
living a short ride from town, presiding over an unimaginably
uninteresting bunch of alcoholic simpletons.  In the manner of old
flames, Cody knows right where to find him when she wants her money
back, which makes the journey seem like a quick trip to the cleaners.
     The establishment townsmen are dressed in suits, the bandits in
dirty laundry and the women in bluejeans and guns - except when, in an
inexplicable genie-like poof, they materialize in glorious dresses.
Their faces carry smudges to indicate hard work.
     The very fine Andie MacDowall is reduced to curling her lip upward
to give us a lingering look at her beautiful smile.  Mary Stuart
Masterson has nothing to do except deliver one nice comment on a
timeless culture:  "I was worthless till I married, I'm worthless as a
widow.  I was worth something as a whore." Drew Barrymore does well by
her action scenes but has nothing to say.  Only Madeleine Stowe is
given a chance to draw a character, and she does it well given
impossible circumstances.
     "Bad Girls" aims for the adventure of "Butch Cassidy and the
Sundance Kid" without understanding the meaning of daring, music or
style.  Still, it did leave me wishing, among other things I've missed
in life, that I might just once have strapped a holster to my hips and
leapt onto a flying horse to escape my enemies.


Author
Scott Renshaw
BAD GIRLS (or, "Girls Just Want to Have Guns")
Starring:  Madeleine Stowe, Mary Stuart Masterson, Andie MacDowell,
Drew Barrymore, James Russo, Dermot Mulroney.
Screenplay:  Ken Friedman and Yolande Finch.
Director:  Jonathan Kaplan.
     I'd be willing to bet that someone sold the concept for BAD GIRLS
with a one-line pitch like, "THE WILD BUNCH in bloomers." Such is the
way in Hollywood these days.  After all, Westerns have been hot at the
box office, and making the protagonists women guarantees a smidgen of
politically correct credibility (in addition to cleavage).  Besides,
with the paucity of good roles for women, talented actresses like
Madeleine Stowe and Mary Stuart Masterson will jump at that chance to
shoot guns.  The problem is that these prefabricated films almost never
bring along a script.  BAD GIRLS is always either hopelessly cliche or
insufferably stupid--and usually both.
     BAD GIRLS is the story of four prostitutes in Echo City, Colorado,
who wind up on the run together when one of them, Cody Zamora (Stowe)
kills an unruly customer.  She is saved from the hangman's noose by
Anita (Masterson), Eileen (Andie MacDowell) and Lily (Drew Barrymore),
and they head out together with detectives hot on their trail.  Their
plan is to make their way to Oregon, where Anita and her late husband
had a timber claim, and to finance a lumber operation with Cody's ample
savings.  These plans are interrupted when those savings are stolen by
Kid Jarrett (James Russo), a notorious bandit who has a history with
Cody.  The women and the gang of thieves repeatedly cross paths until
it becomes clear that this movie ain't big enough for the both of 'em.
     BAD GIRLS is frequently so incoherent that I was forced to wonder
whether director had chopped all the raw footage into two minute
chunks, strewn them about on the editing room floor and pieced the film
together in whatever order he happened to pick them up.  I knew I was
in trouble from the outset, when the rescue of Cody takes place.
Screenwriters Ken Friedman and Yolande Finch couldn't be bothered with
such niceties as explaining why Eileen and Lily might want to save Cody
(at least Anita was the one Cody saved).  There is not a second spent
letting these characters interact first, so that there seems to be some
kind of connection between them.  Apparently it's enough that they're
sisters in the world's oldest profession.  Then we are introduced to
Josh (Dermot Mulroney), a taciturn cowboy who's out to avenge ... wild
guess, anyone? ... the death of his Pa.  The thing is that this subplot
is not only cliche, it's put together in the least economical way
possible, with the inclusion of Kid Jarrett's aging father (Robert
Loggia).  This additional character just muddles the movie further; in
fact, I would go so far as to say that the inclusion of the entire Josh
subplot is unnecessary.  But that would have left Cody without a love
interest, and we couldn't have that, now could we?
     Oh, but there's more, pardners.  In the last two minutes, there is
the suggestion that Lily harbors a more intimate affection for Eileen,
something we are completely unaware of until the music swells to a
tear-jerking crescendo which means nothing because we have been given
no background.  James LeGros makes an appearance as a simple
homesteader who wins Eileen's heart, but his is the only performance
that isn't completely perfunctory.  Madeleine Stowe and Mary Stuart
Masterson are two of my favorite current young actresses, and both are
forced to spout dialogue which puts the "hack" back in hackneyed.
Director Jonathan Kaplan apparently had no idea what to do with a
Western, so rather than set up his own shots he tries to do his
half-hearted homage to Sam Peckinpah, with disastrous results.  Whole
set pieces are ripped off from THE WILD BUNCH, and Kaplan's use of slow
motion becomes absurdly comic.  The cinematography is quite good, but a
big pile of garbage is a big pile of garbage no matter what kind of
filter you put over the lens.
     Sometimes you can look at a film as bad as BAD GIRLS and see the
germ of an interesting idea that was undeveloped or simply butchered,
but not here.  There isn't the faintest attempt to make BAD GIRLS a
real examination of the plight of women in the American West; the women
are just a gimmick, unlike in THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO.  BAD GIRLS is
lazy, stupid, sloppy and, worst of all, boring.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Madeleine Stowe, Mary Stuart Masterson, Drew Barrymore, 
           Andie MacDowell 
Director:  Jonathan Kaplan 
Producers:  Albert S. Ruddy, Andre E. Morgan, and Charles Finch 
Screenplay:  Ken Friedman and Yolande Finch 
Music:  Jerry Goldsmith 
Released by Twentieth-Century Fox 
     You know you have arrived by the scenery--the dusty trails and
horse- drawn carriages, the old-time saloons with their lively whores,
and the picturesque backdrops that bring to mind Colorado as it once
was.  Arrived where?  you ask.  Why, directly in the midst of a genre
picture, where the likes of John Wayne, Mario Van Peebles, and Clint
Eastwood have ventured.  THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO this isn't, however.
     Echo City, Colorado, is exactly what you'd expect from an Old West
cliche town.  It has the dirt-packed streets and the ramshackle
buildings, although there aren't too many tumbleweeds to be seen.  Our
four heroines--Cody (Madeleine Stowe), Anita (Mary Stuart Masterson),
Lilly (Drew Barrymore), and Eileen (Andie MacDowell)--start off their
adventures here, as the resident prostitutes in Echo's only tavern.
The local religious fanatics are out to get the whores and Cody plays
right into their hands by shooting a customer who was becoming too
demanding of her good buddy Anita.
     It's lynching time, but--never fear!--in an amazingly dumb
rescue sequence, Cody's three friends free her from the hangman's
noose.  Then they're off across the plains, heading for Agua Dulce,
Texas, where Cody has some twelve-thousand dollars stowed away in a
bank account.  Along the way, there are a few meaningless and dull
action sequences, including a scene where the wagon gets away from the
girls and has to be corralled by Lilly.  Can someone possibly explain
how the editor missed snipping this?
     Actually, the main characters really aren't "bad girls."  They're
just misunderstood, but I suppose the title MISUNDERSTOOD GIRLS lacks
panache.  All four basically have hearts of gold, and in case we miss
this point when it is first none-too-subtly pointed out, we are
repeatedly bludgeoned by this simple truth.
     The Old West was a gritty place, and this is cleverly proven by
having the four women's faces smudged with cosmetic dirt during certain
strategic scenes.  Odd that their hair remained clean and manageable,
but you have to draw the line somewhere.  I mean, how much realism can
you expect?  This isn't UNFORGIVEN, after all.
     Along the way, we meet a number of male characters, none of whom
are any more interesting than the females.  There's Joshua McCoy
(Dermot Mulroney), who develops a crush on Cody after rescuing her, but
before rescuing Lilly and then needing to be rescued himself.  There's
Kid Jarrett (James Russo), who proves to be the West's most sadistic -
and inept--outlaw.  Also along for the ride is James Legros' William
Tucker (an uninteresting love interest for the equally uninteresting
Andie MacDowell), and Robert Logia's Frank Jarrett, who provides a
recognizable name and little else.
     How about the acting in BAD GIRLS?  Well, the title pretty much
says it all.  Some of the people in this movie have done good work
before.  You'd never know it by watching this.  And the
dialogue ... ouch!  A few examples:  "We sold our bodies.  Why can't we
sell some wood?"  [A deeply philosophical question comparing running a
mill to being a prostitute.]  "If your laws don't include me, well then,
they don't apply to me either."  [Anita trying to get out of paying a
lawyer whose opinion she doesn't like--she didn't have a gun at this
point, so she couldn't just shoot him.]  "All I ever got was a couple
of fancy dresses and a broken heart."  [Better, I suppose, than a
couple of fancy dresses and a broken neck.]
     Actually, there are a few funny moments.  I think I laughed more
than during MAJOR LEAGUE 2 (which isn't saying much).  Unfortunately,
BAD GIRLS isn't supposed to be a comedy, and most of the most amusing
sequences are intended to be serious.
     Never trust a Western where the scenery continually upstages the
actors.  At least director Jonathan Kaplan had the good sense to employ
a competent cinematographer.  Jerry Goldsmith's score, on the other
hand, is a bit ... shall we say ... melodramatic.
     All-in-all, BAD GIRLS would have been much better if the zealots
had hung Cody at the outset, then gunned down her three friends as they
tried to rescue her.  That way, this movie would have been only 8
minutes long.  Come to think of it, though, even at that length, it
would have seemed padded.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
