Title
Review for Dude, Where's My Car? (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Berge Garabedian<joblo@joblo.com>
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Dude, how come they didn't preview this movie for the critics? Dude, I think
it's cause most critics are over the age of 40 and barely remember how it
was to smoke weed and act stupid. Dude, but what kind of box-office can a
movie like this do anyway? Dude, it doesn't really matter, the studio is
obviously gonna make its money back cause it cost so little and films like
this rent out for years to come. Dude, since when did you get this smart?
Dude, uuuhmm...pass me the bong! Cough-cough!
CRITIQUE:
Dude, this movie is made specifically for one type of audience: 15 to
25-year old male horndogs who enjoy getting wasted or stoned every now and
again. Not many other people will "get" it. In fact, if you are not part of
that target audience, I doubt that you will either enjoy or appreciate this
movie's complete nuttiness. Mind you, I'm not part of that target group, but
since those days weren't that far off for me (or are they still around?),
the film's complete over-the-top goofiness worked for me just the same. This
movie combines elements from the CHEECH & CHONG flicks, BEAVIS & BUTTHEAD
and the obvious, BILL & TED'S. The movie doesn't take itself seriously, it
doesn't pretend to be about anything more than a couple of stoners running
around and getting into strange and funny adventures and it features plenty
of cleavage. Sound interesting to you? To many, it won't. To others, it
will.
Unfortunately, I was disappointed with one specific aspect of the movie. If
you're gonna have a movie about potheads and strip joints and big breasted
aliens, how'sabout showing us a little T&A every now and then? This movie
skips on most of the profanity and sexual gratuities and replaces it with
decent chunk o' humor, which was a little too PG-13 for my taste. I only
wish that someone would come around one day and make a nice, out of this
world trippy movie that features a deeper insight into these bumbling
idiots. But as it stands, this movie is still quite humorous all around,
definitely weird and unpredictable (the ostrich attack is a classic) and
frivolous enough to recommend to anyone who considers two goofs saying
"sweet!" and "dude!" over and over again...funny. I enjoyed it for the most
part, despite its unfunny patches and definitely enjoyed its giant sexy
alien woman at the end. Woo-hah! For those of you who enjoy the cheebah
every now and again, I say rent this puppy with some buds and some munchies
and have a blast! You could also follow it all up with FEAR AND LOATHING IN
LAS VEGAS, BREAKFAST OF CHAMPIONS and a late night copy of EVIL DEAD 2.
Whatever you do, enjoy this flick for what it is: stupid fun with a couple
of stupid guys.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actor Ashton Kutcher recently admitted that he hasn't smoked up in the past
three years (on "The Craig Kilborn Show"). Apparently, his move from NY
(where he was a male model) to LA (where he stars in TV's "The 70s Show")
has obliterated his pot smoking habits. His full name is Christopher Ashton
Kutcher and he was born in Iowa. He majored in Biochemical Engineering at
the University of Iowa.
The guy who plays Tommy in this movie is named Charlie O'Connell. He is
actor Jerry O'Connell's brother.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Danny Leiner.
Cast: Ashton Kutcher, Seann William Scott, Marla Sokoloff, Jennifer Garner, 
Kristy Swanson.
2000 - 90 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for violence, profanity, drug use, and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, December 16, 2000.
Sort of a teenage version of "Dumb and Dumber," "Dude, Where's My Car?" is 
such a bad movie that it exhibits a sort of innocent charm. From the very 
first frame, the movie doesn't have any illusions that it's anything more 
than a self-proclaimed stupid comedy. Instantly forgettable and lacking 
anything resembling honest human emotions, the first half is so bright and 
silly that it gets your expectations up far too much. Its surprising success 
right from the get-go hurts the final product more than helps it, as its 
jokes quickly grows tiresome and repetitive, until the movie becomes almost 
unbearable in its final thirty minutes.
Jesse (Ashton Kutcher) and Chester (Seann William Scott) are stoner best 
friends who wake up one morning to find that their car has disappeared. Not 
remembering anything from the drug-induced night before other than that their 
car holds their anniversary gifts for their girlfriends, Wilma (Marla 
Sokoloff) and Wanda (Jennifer Garner), Jesse and Chester set out to retrace 
their steps. With everyone they run into, another piece of the puzzle is 
filled in, from the advances of their voluptuous dream girl Christie Boner 
(Kristy Swanson), to their apparent visit to a strip club, to a case they had 
gotten hold of carrying thousands of dollars in cash, to a feuding group of 
alien hunters and actual extraterrestrial "chicks."
I've said it once already, and I'll say it again. "Dude, Where's My Car?" is 
so unabashedly dumb that you can't help but be a little impressed by its own 
throwaway trashiness. Aside from the tedious third act, the movie falls into 
the category of a guilty pleasure--the type of bad movie you can have fun 
with, rather than the type that is just plain awful ("Battlefield Earth" 
comes instantly to mind).
Ashton Kutcher (TV's "That 70's Shows") and Seann William Scott (2000's "Road 
Trip"), like Bill and Ted before them, make an instantly delightful duo of 
doofuses who have little on their minds, and are having a hell of a time in 
the process. Kutcher, especially, stands out as having quite an enjoyable 
presence, and it's not difficult to see him making more substantial motion 
pictures in the future. Since Jesse and Chester fill up every frame, they 
leave little room for anyone else. Marla Sokoloff (2000's "Whatever It 
Takes") and Jennifer Garner (TV's "Felicity") are briefly on hand as their 
respective girlfriends, while the unfortunate Kristy Swanson (1999's "Big 
Daddy") has clearly fallen on hard times by taking such a wasted role.
There are a couple comic sequences that work extremely well--far more than 
they have any right to. An encounter with a pushy, stubborn worker at a 
Chinese drive-thru, and a dog that does nothing but smoke pot and lie around, 
are admittedly a riot, as is an unpredictable kiss between the two male leads 
that rivals the on-screen smooch between Trey Parker and Matt Stone in 1998's 
infinitely superior "BASEketball." All of these setpieces, however, appear by 
the 40-minute mark, and it is followed by a comic dead zone in the 
increasingly preposterous climax.
"Dude, Where's My Car?" is terrible as a film, yet passable entertainment as 
a movie. 13-to-16-year-olds will likely have the most fun, and one's 
tolerance for strictly juvenile humor will decide what other age frame might 
enjoy such fodder. Credit director Danny Leiner and screenwriter Philip Stark 
for one thing: they realize "Dude, Where's My Car?" is akin to a piece of 
fecal matter, and have a great time living up to such a low honor.
     - Copyright 2000 by Dustin Putman
       Http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
       Reviews by Dustin Putman 

Author
John Beachem
Jesse (Ashton Kutcher) and Chester (Seann William Scott) are two pot heads 
who have just woken up after the wildest night of their lives. They trashed 
their girlfriends' house, and are wanted by the police, and somehow bought a 
lifetime supply of pudding. Unfortunately, there's just one problem: they 
don't remember any of it. They're certain the answers to all their questions 
lie in Jesse's car, but it seems to have vanished off the face of the earth. 
As the two attempt to track it down, events around them change from fuzzy, 
to strange, to downright bizarre. Somehow they seem to have become embroiled 
in an intergalactic war involving a mysterious object of unspeakable power, 
and its power is exceeded only by its mystery (as Jesse points out, that's 
not a lot of help in identifying it). Now, their girlfriends have been 
kidnapped by a group of fanatical nerds, they're being hunted by a 
transsexual thief, two unusual Nordic guys are following them everywhere 
they go, an army of ostriches is on their heels, and if you're feeling 
confused by all of this, just imagine how Jesse and Chester feel!
I feel somehow dumber for having watched this film. It's like being in the 
presence of an hour and a half of utter mindlessness has killed a multitude 
of brain cells. Even worse, and this is something I'm truly ashamed to 
admit, I enjoyed this mindless mess. Dude, Where's My Car? (I still get a 
kick out of that stupid title) is such an inherently good natured movie that 
I simply couldn't help but have a good time. Now, bear one thing in mind, 
this is a teen flick through and through. Everyone over the age of twenty 
three will no doubt sit there, staring at the screen in utter bafflement, 
wondering what all these kids are laughing at. After the movie they'll 
probably whine and complain that it wasn't funny and these kids today just 
don't know what good humor is. Normally, I'd agree, but this movie is not 
directed at adults. It's directed at high school age kids, those who laugh 
at just about anything resembling stupid humor (and this is some very, VERY 
stupid humor), and it will succeed in entertaining them.
Seann William Scott (Road Trip) and Ashton Kutcher (television's "That 
Seventies Show") are asked to carry this film entirely on their shoulders, 
and I'm happy to announce that they do a pretty good job. They're young 
actors, so obviously their comic timing is a little off, but what they lack 
in experience they make up for in effort. These guys are really trying to 
pull some laughs out of the audience, and they manage to do it on several 
occasions. Seann William Scott's primary strength is in his outlandish 
facial expressions. Two scenes that got a chuckle out of me were the look on 
his face while watching "Animal Planet", and the one he made when confronted 
by a very angry ostrich. Ashton Kutcher, on the other hand, is at his best 
when delivering really moronic lines with complete seriousness. My favorite 
was when he asks Christie Boner (Kristy Swanson) if she'd seen his car. She 
gets a little smile on her face, runs a hand down his chest and says, "I saw 
the back seat." Chester's jaw drops, but Jesse gets a confused look and then 
says, "Oh no, I was talking about the WHOLE thing." The rest of the cast is 
required to do very little, and they're all equal to the task. Fans of "Star 
Trek: The Next Generation" should watch for Brent Spiner in a brief 
appearance as a French ostrich farmer (don't ask, I still don't quite get 
that one).
The question you have to answer before even considering walking into Dude, 
Where's My Car? is this: Do I find people acting like complete idiots to be 
funny? Obviously if you are going into this movie expecting a strikingly 
witty and intelligent film, featuring excellent direction and a fascinating 
story, you haven't seen the previews. In fact, you probably haven't seen the 
previews for anything since you've no doubt been living in a cave for the 
past ten years. The humor in this film is more of this variety: Jesse says, 
"Dude, where's my car?" Chester says, "Where's your car dude?" Jesse 
repeats, "Dude, WHERE'S my car?" Chester repeats, then Jesse, then Chester, 
until you want to smack them both upside the head. If that sounds like the 
most moronic thing you've heard in your entire life, avoid this movie like 
you'd avoid your average outbreak of ebola. Yes, about half the jokes in the 
film fall completely flat, even for your average teen-ager. Yes, Danny 
Leiner's direction can only be described as inept at best as he allows 
countless scenes to go on for far too long. Finally, yes, the only people 
who should find this amusing are those who think the idea of a movie jumping 
into a music video up and out of nowhere is hilarious. Sad as it might 
sound, I actually laughed when that happened.
Despite the fact that only half the jokes work, and even they don't work too 
well, the movie does have two other factors working in its favor. First, as 
I mentioned earlier, it's extremely good natured. The closest the film ever 
comes to a mean spirited moment is when an old woman drives over Chester and 
makes a really nasty comment explaining why. Otherwise, these two guys try 
their best to help their girlfriends, make amends for whatever they might 
have done wrong the night before, and track down that infernal car. The 
other thing I really enjoyed about the film is that in a really dumbed down 
way, it rather works as a mystery. Obviously I'm not saying it's worthy of 
Dame Christie or anything, but it's interesting watching the events of the 
previous night slowly fall into place as our intrepid heroes track down one 
bizarre clue after another. The soundtrack to Dude Where's My Car? features 
nothing more than a compilation of fairly modern pop songs. What did you 
expect, a new score from Hans Zimmer? The movie runs a quick 86 minutes, and 
it stops just before wearing out it welcome. I'd recommend it to fans of 
teen movies, but not to adults under any circumstances. I give the flick 
three and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Steve Rhodes
TV director Danny Leiner's DUDE, WHERE'S MY CAR? tells an oft-told tale 
about a couple of stoner dudes whose IQs match their age.  Trying to 
find something original, first-time writer Philip Stark's script 
includes a transgendered lap dancer, space nerds and sexy 
extraterrestrials.  In more competent hands, the silly plot might have 
been developed into something funny.  PSYCHO BEACH PARTY, from earlier 
this year, had a similarly ridiculous story which turned out much 
better.  Even if DUDE, WHERE'S MY CAR? would rate a zero on the 
Laugh-o-Meter, at least it is a fairly good-spirited and colorful film 
that produces a few smiles.
A kitchen sink comedy, it throws in every gag that it can think of 
within the bounds of a PG-13 rating.  (Speaking of bounds, the PG-13 
rating apparently permits animals to smoke dope until they are wasted so 
long as the animal is a dog and not a human.)
Ashton Kutcher and Seann William Scott play Jesse and Chester, a couple 
of guys who got so stoned that they don't remember the previous night 
and where they left their car.  Going in search of the auto, they find 
that the house of their twin girlfriends, Wanda (Jennifer Garner) and 
Wilma (Marla Sokoloff), has been trashed by the party that they can't 
remember.  
It is a shame that they can't recall the previous night since people 
keep running into them to remind them about it.  One is a buxom blonde, 
Christie Boner (Kristy Swanson), who only dates hunks but who apparently 
made an exception for them last night.  She offers a free feel of her 
"ho-hos" to rekindle their memory.
The real excitement begins when five self-described "hot chicks," show 
up to offer Jesse and Chester sexual pleasure in exchange for something 
called the "continuum transfunctioner."  This is a device from outer 
space whose "mystery is only exceeded by its power."  Yes, you guessed, 
these chicks are really aliens who are up to no good.  In addition, some 
space nerds, who make Trekkies look like rocket scientists, want the 
device so that they can travel into space.  The nerds wear "interstellar 
jumpsuits" made of ordinary bubble wrap.  
Although I haven't even touched on other subplots like the one involving 
killer ostriches, you probably know more than enough to get a good sense 
of the movie.  This much can be said in its defense -- it is far from 
the worst movie this year.  It wouldn't even make the bottom 10.  That 
may not exactly be a recommendation, but it is the best that can be 
said.  Well, I guess I can think of one other -- I never considered 
walking out.
DUDE, WHERE'S MY CAR? runs a quick 1:23.  It is rated PG-13 for language 
and some sex and drug-related humor and would be acceptable for most 
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Pete Croatto
I really wanted to like Dude, Where's My Car?  After a week of
deadlines, dead time, and dead emotions, I needed a goofy movie to
revive me.
So, imagine my horror as I sat alone in the cavernous theater, trying to
muster a chuckle or a titter.  Ornery ostriches didn't do the trick. 
Neither did a transsexual stripper, a pot-smoking dog or an appearance
by Fabio.
There is a place for movies like Dude, Where's My Car? -- National
Lampoon's Animal House, Blazing Saddles, Tommy Boy, etc.  When they
work.  And when that happens, I'm on a cinematic high for weeks.  I
still smile whenever I hear the phrase "double secret probation."  In
the case of the silly comedies that fail, it's like watching a guy slip
on a banana peel.  It might be funny the first time, but how about the
fiftieth time?
Unfortunately, Dude has crates full of bananas, and it's ultimately
doomed -- just like its two main characters, Jesse and Chester (Ashton
Kutcher and Seann William Scott, respectively), doper roommates with a
major problem.  After a wild night of partying with Chester, Jesse can't
find his car the next day.  The two friends don't even have a clue as to
what happened the night before.
The boys soon embark on a madcap adventure to find Jesse's car.  In
their odyssey, they gradually learn about last night's events, which
included strippers, buff aliens, and tattoos.  Jesse and Chester also
discover that they are now responsible for the fate of the universe. 
Bummer.
I know a movie like Dude is geared for brainless laughs, but shouldn't
some thought have been invested in making it? The movie survives solely
on the aforementioned wacky antics, which turns Dude into a feat of
endurance that would fatigue a marathon runner.
There's no break from the goofball proceedings.  Screenwriter Philip
Stark and director Danny Leiner don't give us a single character with
any wit or subtlety.  Watching Dude is like viewing a parade of the
hackneyed characters of movies past.  There are stoned morons,
sympathetic girlfriends, bullying jocks, super-intense space nerds, and
the soulful black pizza owner (from The Last Dragon, of course).
As for Jesse and Chester, they might be the first characters in movie
history without a working cerebrum.  It would have been funnier if these
guys were smart, so they could sarcastically comment on their absurd
situation.  But Scott and Kutcher are given little more to do than say
"shibby" and "sweet" in a frat-boy cadence... and then break things. 
And that's a shame, because I like both of these guys.  Kutcher is a
dopey highlight on the Fox sitcom That '70s Show, and Scott with his
prankster grin was a big reason why American Pie was my favorite movie
last year.  In Dude, their scenes induce empathetic winces, instead of
laughs.
I wish I could say something glowing about this mess, and I wish I had
an idea of why people are seeing it.  My guess is it's either an
indication that 2000 was truly a terrible year for movies, or it could
be a genuine sign of the apocalypse.
Director: Danny Leiner
Producer: Broderick Johnson, Andrew A. Kosove, Nancy Paloian-Breznikar,
Wayne Allan Rice
Writer:  Philip Stark
Starring: Ashton Kutcher, Seann William Scott, Kristy Swanson, Jennifer
Garner, Marla Sokoloff, Charlie O'Connell, Hal Sparks
Official web site: http://www.dudewheresmycar.com/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
