Title
Review for Belstone Fox, The (1973)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
James Hill's film starts off as a children's story - Ashler, huntsman
for the Belstone estate, adopts orphaned fox cub and names him Tag;
fox forms bond with hound pup; huntsman returns grown fox back to
woods - but ends up like a landlocked version of MOBY DICK.  Once
released, the appropriately-named Tag leads the Belstone Hunt on a
cut-and-run chase through the trees and fields with an intelligence
beyond that of your average fox.  He's certainly smarter than the
humans chasing him, at any rate.  When one hunt ends with fallen
riders and dead hounds (in a stunt worthy of a Roadrunner cartoon) the
chase gets personal.  Ashler, who starts out as a sympathetic, fair
character, becomes driven by a vendetta that consumes him to the end
of the last hunt, where one of the two antagonists must die.
This is the stuff of a fine character piece, but we never really get
under the characters' skin.  Even the fox could have done with a bit
of development.  Hill spins an engaging yarn, but keeps neutral,
presenting neither Tag or Ashler as hero or villain (our tendency is
naturally to side with the fox).  Nor does he make any negative
comment about fox hunting.  But then, he doesn't have to: the sight of
grown men on horses stampeding about the countryside after a fox is
just plain risible.  The Hunt, heavily ritualistic, is a fair
representation of the human condition - civilized on the outside,
barbaric underneath - and those who break from the pack are
immediately outcasts, whether it is Ashler or his favorite hound
Merlin.  Film mixes individual-vs-conformity and man-vs-nature themes
easily and without pretension.  If it's a children's film then it has
more intelligence than the usual cutesy-animal flick of its type. 
Only slow point is the unnecessarily long birthday sequence.  Was this
included just for the sake of contrasting another `growth' ritual
against that of the Hunt?  Starring: Eric Porter, Rachel Roberts,
Dennis Waterman. 
