Title
Review for Moll Flanders (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
David N. Butterworth
No discussion of MOLL FLANDERS would be complete without the use of the
word "bawdy."  But the latest big screen version of Daniel Defoe's
picaresque novel, about the life and times of a young woman with an
unconquerable spirit, is just plain bore-dy.
Strong female roles are hard to come by, and writer/director Pen Densham
deserves credit for fashioning Moll's story for the screen.  His casting of
Robin Wright (FORREST GUMP) in the title role is, however, a major
liability.  Between her wooden voiceovers and awkward grasp of an English
accent (she goes from ribald commoner to gentrified aristocrat in the same
scene), Wright may be reduced to playing cocktail waitresses after her
contributions here.  She just doesn't have the emotional strength or
physical screen presence to carry the weight of the multi-faceted Moll.
Defoe's classic work is filled with material that cries out for epic
cinema, a vast tableau of life and lust in 18th century England.  The
story, curiously altered by Densham, chronicles Moll's miserable life, from
birth in London's Newgate Prison hours before her mother is hanged, to less
than exemplary positions as charity house scullery maid, beleagured
prostitute, and painter's wife, to name but a few-lateral moves all.
Densham's liberal rewrite is in keeping with the grim tone of the original,
but he shapes it into something that is melodramatic when it should be
dramatic, dull when it should be moving.
The film opens with Mr. Hibble (a stoic performance by Morgan Freeman,
looking bitchin' in braids) unearthing Moll's daughter Flora (Aisling
Corcoran) in an orphanage.  Hibble has been instructed by "a wealthy
benefactor" to recite Moll's salty memoirs ad nauseum to the child, with
some vague moralistic intent.
Talented child actors are few and far between, and newcomer Corcoran
epitomizes the worst of what's out there.  She's bratty, obnoxious, and
can't act for tuppence.  You feel terrible for Freeman in their early
scenes together; he's calm and collected in the face of objectionable
precociousness, but you wish he'd knock her into the middle of next week.
Corcoran's scenes grow thankfully fewer as this interminable film
progresses but by that time you'll be too busy looking at your watch to
notice.
Likewise, Stockard Channing is an embarrassment as unscrupulous madam Mrs.
Allworthy.  All that's missing from her realization of the character is the
eyepatch she wore in SMOKE; she plays Allworthy like a pirate, pillaging
and plundering the hearts--and pockets--of men.  "Life's terrible short
girl.  Give yourself some pleasure," she tells Moll.  Never having felt
love or tenderness or physical closeness of any kind, Moll justifies
prostitution as "making friends with eligible gentlemen."  Having said
that, she opts to misappropriate her soul for one hundred guineas to a
disgusting old man, then "hundreds" of clergymen, scientists and insurance
salesmen, until Mrs. Allworthy's enterprise is closed down by "the
guardians of morality."
One of Moll's clients (played by Irish actor John Lynch) turns out to be a
starving artist, and he pays Moll a regular commission to pose for him.
Love blooms in a soft-core cornucopia, and Wright's narration is cringeable
at this point: "He willed his soul into me.  We were one fusion of passion,
and unspoken knowledges.  We were a united force, pushing back the darkness
in each others lives."  As he keeps large slabs of meat around his
apartment, it's not surprising when The Artist finally catches something
nasty and dies.  Lynch is saddled with the same kind of obsequious dialogue
as Wright so we're grateful when he passes on.
"Moll Flanders was, by her own account, a murderess, a whore and a thief,"
explains the film's opening monologue.  Unless I was sleeping at the time
she didn't actually kill anyone, but it's the lackluster performances that
kill this film.  The only saving grace is Morgan Freeman, whose dignified
performance is the glue that keeps MOLL FLANDERS from coming apart at the
seams.  Wright, it so happens, is all wrong.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Okay admit it, when you hear the title MOLL FLANDERS, you think of
that racy novel from high school.  Yes, this is the same Daniel Defoe
book, but an excellent director, Pen Densham, has made it into a
marvelous character study and moving motion picture.  Certainly, MOLL
FLANDERS can be a bit bawdy at times, but compared to most popular
films today, the depiction of the sex here is tame.  This is cinema at
its best: great actors, stirring music, impressive sets, and an
intelligent script.
     As the story starts, Hibble (Morgan Freeman from SEVEN, THE
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, DRIVING MISS DAISY, and GLORY among others) takes
a little girl named Flora (Aisling Corcoran) out of an orphanage.  It
is his duty to read Flora the memoirs of her dying mother, Moll
Flanders (Robin Wright from FORREST GUMP),  whom she never knew.  Flora
is a saucy and high strung girl of about 7 who is more interested in
escaping that hearing some silly old morality tale.  Hibble is just as
determined that she will listen carefully to every single word of it.
     As chronicled in her memoirs, Moll lead a miserable life.  Her
mother was in prison to be hanged when she was raped by a guard.  They
postponed the execution until the day Moll is born.  The script, which
I believe is a loose adaptation of the novel, stays with spirit of the
book and the cadence of the speech, but takes a lot of liberties.  It
paints a Dickensian picture of the world that stretches credulity a
bit, but it was easy for me to suspend disbelieve.  I bought the story
lock, stock, and barrel.
     Moll comes to live in a religious school where the priests' fondle
her and the nuns do not believe Moll's complaints.  She is a strong
willed young woman who defiantly proclaims, "I'm not going to fear any
man of flesh and blood, no matter what costume he wears."  Soon she
escapes from her hellish home and in an upbeat mood reflects that,
"Hope comes to the young as naturally as the spring rains."
     Moll goes to work in the charitable home of Mrs. Mazzawatti
(Brenda Fricker from A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE and MY LEFT FOOT), and they
attempt to teach her all of the social graces.  Mrs. Mazzawatti's
daughters are anything but charitable, and Moll is forced to leave for
quite surprising reasons that you will never be able to guess in
advance.
     Moll is next taken in at a bordello runs by a conniving madam
named Mrs. Allworthy (Stockard Channing from SIX DEGREES OF
SEPARATION).  Hibble is Mrs. Allworthy's second in command.  Perhaps he
would be considered her butler.  At any rate, he and Moll eventually
become good friends.  At first Moll just cleans the floors at the
bordello, and life is still hard for her.  She is beaten there as she
has been all of her life and will be more in the future.
     After a while, Mrs. Allworthy's develops an affection for Moll and
so give her some advice, "Life's terrible short girl.  Give yourself
some pleasure.  I'll bet you've never been kissed."  Soon, she has
convinced Moll the way to riches is through prostitution.  Mrs.
Allworthy makes-up (make-up by Michele Burke) the naturally beautiful
Moll to look like a circus clown and auctions off her virginity for one
hundred guineas.  Moll tries to be optimistic about her life as a whore
confiding with us that, "I kept kissing frogs looking for a prince."
     After that her life and Mrs. Allworthy's take many turns some for
the better and some for the worse.  The story is wonderfully rich and
varied and always keeps the audience's attention.  After being beaten
all of her life, she meets a gentle painter of anatomical drawings
called The Artist (John Lynch).  His evil father is played by Jeremy
Brett from "The Sherlock Holmes" series on PBS as well as MY FAIR LADY
(1964).  The painter hates his father and warns Moll that, "Great money
does not a great human make."
     The ending of the film is somewhat of a surprise and is extremely
effective and moving.  MOLL FLANDERS may produce a few natural tears.
Although I cried a little toward the end, I never found the script
manipulative.
     The acting was nothing short of brilliant.  It is hard to have a
favorite in movies of this caliber.  If forced to choose, I'll go with
Morgan Freeman's performance as the best.  This luminescent actor seems
incapable of anything less than a compelling performance.  Although
this is not his best film, he is great in it.
     Technically the movie is on par with the high quality of the
acting.  In fact, even better than the acting is the script by the
director Pen Densham and the music by Mark Mancina.  The music has an
extensive range from delicate and loving to large and dramatic.  I
would be pleased to see this picture win many awards, but if I had to
pick one, I'd give it to Mark Mancina for the music.
     The movie was filmed entirely in Ireland.  The dramatic sets
(Caroline Hanania) and cinematography (David Tattersall) are gorgeous.
The snowy scenes are bleak and yet possess an inner warmth somehow thus
suggesting the possibility of hope around the next corner.  The
costumes (Consolata Boyle) like the sets are lush and evocative without
ever being unbelievably ostentatious.  My favorite costume is the
stern, long blue coat with the brass buttons that Hibble wears.
     The director and the editors (Neil Travis and James R. Symons)
demonstrate a flawless sense of timing.  The movie flows naturally and
sometimes slowly, but always with enough energy so that you remain on
the edge of your seat.  Also the strong mood of the picture has to be
credited to the director who is able to fashion just the right pieces
to make it all come together.
     MOLL FLANDERS is listed as running 2:49, but I think it might be a
misprint.  Certainly it did seem that long.  However long it is, I
would not want it edited down.  The film is rated R.  There is the
brutality of that era, but it is done tastefully.  There is brief sex,
some nudity, but no bad language that I can remember.  It would be fine
for any teenager and perhaps those a bit younger.  I give this show my
top recommendation and award it ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     If you're looking for a textbook example of counter-programming, you
would have to say that MGM's release of MOLL FLANDERS qualifies...either
that, or a textbook example of complete stupidity.  June is supposed to be
the exclusive domain of sequels, special effects and super-stars; films
based on period novels are not supposed to appear until the kids are back
in school, the leaves have changed colors and the air is heady with Oscar
talk.  Nevertheless, here we have a romance with English accents taking on
Cruise, Connery and Carrey.  It's a risky move, but one which could pay
off, because MOLL FLANDERS is a solid drama with a top-notch cast, and
gives Robin Wright a break-out role to show off her talents.
     The film, based on Daniel Defoe's novel, opens with a man named
Hibble (Morgan Freeman) showing up at a London orphanage to collect a
young girl named Flora (Aisling Corcoran).  Hibble tells the girl that he
knew her mother, and begins to read to her from the woman's memoir as they
make their way to their destination.  It tells of Moll Flanders (Robin
Wright), the daughter of a woman hung for thievery just after her birth,
raised by nuns in a foundling's home.  When she runs away from the home,
she is taken in first by a society family, and then by the bold and cruel
Mrs. Allworthy (Stockard Channing).  She soon discovers that Mrs.
Allworthy runs a brothel, and eventually joins the profession herself,
subsequently sinking into alcoholism.  But when an impoverished artist
(John Lynch) takes Moll in to be a model, she slowly begins to recover her
sense of self, and to learn about true love.
     Pen Densham oversees a marvelous look for the production of MOLL
FLANDERS, and that look helps to make a fitful first half easier to take.
Densham's screenplay often seems in too big a hurry to race through Moll's
early life and get her to Mrs. Allworthy's, and he doesn't always allow
the significance of certain events to become clear.  The greatest charms
in that first half are provided by Freeman and Corcoran, who share some
frisky scenes as the no-nonsense manservant and his mischievous charge;
those scenes provide welcome comic relief.  Making your way through MOLL
FLANDERS can be like the experience of reading the novel in a high school
English class -- the early exposition can lose you before you get to the
meat of the story.
     I would hope that such is not the case, because MOLL FLANDERS becomes
an extremely effective and satisfying love story, and because even in
that sluggish first hour Robin Wright turns in a wonderful performance.
Despite her delicate features, Wright can make herself appear amazingly
solid and determined, and that is a critical facet of the personality she
is trying to convey.  This is a story about the inner strength of a woman
who struggles against the life to which she was born towards her vision of
the life she believes she deserves, and Wright makes that journey as
touching as it is painful.  She has a superb partner in John Lynch, who
provides gently shaded work as the frustrated artist-cum-scientist whose
search for the ability to commit a soul to canvas helps Moll to
re-discover her own soul.  There is a completely natural chemistry between
them, and their relationship makes the second half of MOLL FLANDERS
something special.
     Densham's erratic sense of pacing does undercut the love story
somewhat, as MOLL FLANDERS never quite achieves the big, cathartic
emotional moments one expects from a story of this kind.  I think that he
also doesn't allow Freeman or Stockard Channing to do the best work of
which they are capable.  Freeman may be the best American screen actor of
the moment, but he never quite finds the character of the emotionally
enslaved Hibble, and Channing similarly wavers between a kind of
one-dimensional Victorian villainy and a kinder, gentler side.  By driving
his story towards the relationship between Moll and the artist, Densham
has sacrificed certain aspects of the story, but he makes that sacrifice
pay off.  What really makes MOLL FLANDERS work, in a way that the recent
JANE EYRE didn't, is that Densham maintains a fundamental sense of
optimism and energy, relegating the sense of loss and foreboding which
could have dominated the story to a secondary status.  MOLL FLANDERS is a
redemption story, and it is an effective one.  It is also a human story,
and that alone may help it to stand out while every theater around it
reverberates with tornadoes and explosions.

Author
Christopher Null
     Potential taglines for this movie...  MOLL FLANDERS:  *Less* than just
a bad title.  MOLL FLANDERS:  *Not* a shopping center in Belgium.  MOLL
FLANDERS:  Total waste of time.
     The last one is the most appropriate for this:  a picture which wastes
a lot of raw acting talent and pretty photography on a boring,
groaning-in-your-seat story which hinges on every clich in the book.
     MOLL FLANDERS is the most recent entry in the disturbing trend of
pictures made out of "classic" novels (in this case, Daniel Defoe's).
Regular readers pretty much know my opinion of how well this has been done
lately, but I'll say it again:  these movies haven't been too good.
     Robin Wright plays the titular character, a tempestuous woman born to
a death row-incarcerated mother in 18th century London.  She goes through
the ringer during the next two hours, going from nun to maid to whore to
respectable artist's wife to a voyage for the New World... none of which is
very interesting.  Along the way, she is befriended by Hibble (Morgan
Freeman, a character wholly invented for the film), a servant to the wicked
Lady Blystone (Stockard Channing), mistress of the bordello where Moll
plies her whoredom, and the two become friends.
     The story is told in flashback -- with Hibble finding Moll's long-lost
daughter, Flora (Aisling Corcoran), and telling her the story of her
mother.  As it turns out, Flora is a truly snotty little kid, and we
quickly find out that her mother is a snotty big kid.  Neither one carries
too much appeal as someone for us to look up to, and I was hoping against
hope that every time Flora would try to run away from Hibble, she'd escape.
She didn't.
     The big problem in MOLL FLANDERS, as mentioned earlier, is its very
poor and outdated story line.  Maybe the line "I'd had sex many times but
never made love" was new 150 years ago... but not any more.  Literally
*every* scene is predictable.  *Seriously.*  We've seen this all before in
a hundred movies -- mostly the kind that play on cable, late-nights.  Yawn.
     Even worse:  the humor in the film plays to the lowest common
denominator, alternating between sex jokes and genitalia jokes.  Not
exactly for the highbrow.  And there are lots of scenes with Moll acting
drunk, inexplicably insane, or both.  That's acting?  If I wanted to see
that, I could go back to college.
     The two saving graces:  very lovely cinematography and a clever
ending.  Enough?  Hardly.
     Hopefully I've made my point.  And judging from the audience's
reaction, I wasn't the only one with this opinion.  Best comment I heard
after the film:  "It was better than SPY HARD."  I couldn't agree more.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
