Title
Review for Jingle All the Way (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I admit it. I thought Arnold Schwarzenegger had a knack for 
comedy when he made TWINS and TRUE LIES. Watching him in JINGLE 
ALL THE WAY, I wondered why anyone ever thought he could carry such 
a lame movie targeted at susceptible kids. It was one thing to scare the 
crap out of kids with the PG-13 KINDERGARTEN COP, but parents who let 
small children see this movie will have to explain themes of violence, 
alcohol consumption, burglary, racism and child molestation. And you 
know they'll burst out in tears when Arnold punches one of Santa's 
elves. He later decks a reindeer. Hey, man, why don't you just kick the 
Easter Bunny in the nuts while you're at it?
        JINGLE ALL THE WAY is formula crap that follows the If 
Someone Falls On His Ass, It Must Be Funny school of thought. 
Arnold, Sinbad and Phil Hartman crash to the ground more times in 
this movie than a Special Olympics hockey team, and the movie 
dredges up more cliche and less believability with each successive 
scene. What can you expect from a movie whose entire premise is that 
two parents can't find a rare toy on Christmas Eve, and will do 
anything to get one?
        Arnold is, of course, one of the parents, a crack salesman who 
is never there for his son. He races from the office to his son's karate 
game, only to find out he missed it. And his kid distrusts him because 
he's never around. (Gee, we haven't seen THAT in a movie before.) 
Arnold the Absentee Father becomes convinced that the only way to 
buy back his son's affection is to get him a Turboman doll, which his 
wife (Rita Wilson, who will never be the breadwinner of the Hanks 
household choosing roles like this) told him to get weeks ago. So 
Arnold sets out to find a Turboman, which turns out to be more rare 
than the Tickle Me Elmo was when JINGLE ALL THE WAY came out.
        Let me back up for a minute here -- Arnold's kid is totally 
obsessed with this Turboman character, which is unhealthy beyond 
belief. Watches the show, eats the cereal, sleeps on the freakin' 
Turboman sheets. I'd try to discourage any further obsession myself, 
lest any kid seeing this movie think it's a wonderful thing to con your 
dad into racing out to buy you any toy you want. But nooooo, the 
climax of JINGLE ALL THE WAY has Arnold dressed up as Turboman 
in a parade, exonerating himself of all wrongdoing in the eyes of wife 
and son, who don't recognize him until the last minute.
        This is a sad movie all the way through, but it only gets worse 
after the opening scenes of Arnold and mailman Sinbad stampeding 
through a store, racing off to the mall and hooking up with a Santa 
(Jim Belushi) who runs a bootleg toy factory. Most painful to watch is 
a scene at a radio station, where Sinbad holds off the cops with a letter 
bomb after beating up the deejay (an embarrassed Martin Mull) who 
said he was giving away a Turboman doll.
        Capitalism has produced some pretty evil things (Chia pets), 
but this ode to excess and violent consumerism is one of the most 
shameful. Never mind the subplot with perfect neighbor Phil Hartman 
trying to seduce Wilson while Arnold is off shopping ("Your cookies 
are incredible"), it's the main plot of the movie that sends the message 
that it's okay to do whatever it takes to get your hands on what you 
want. Maybe that's what Christmas is like at the Schwarzenegger 
house, but not at mine.
Visit the Movie Critic at Large homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Close to 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair...

Author
Chuck Dowling
Jingle All the Way (1996) *1/2 out of ***** - C:Arnold Schwarzenegger,
Sinbad, Phil Hartman, Rita Wilson, Robert Conrad, James Belushi.
How is it that Arnold can make such high concept action films and such low
concept comedies? This is a completely absurd film that should insult anyone
over the age of 10. Arnold plays a normal father who, in what is now the
most overused character description in films, works all the time to support
his family therefore not having enough free time to spend with them. After
missing his son's karate class, he promises to get his son the toy he most
wants for Christmas, an action figure called "TurboMan". However, it's now
Christmas Eve, and the toy is impossible to find. So Schwarzenegger travels
from toy store to toy store hunting for the item, getting into one
ridiculous situation after another.
To make matters worse for Arnold, he has a rival in Sinbad, who is also
hunting for the toy. Sinbad somehow manages to show up in the exact same
places as Arnold does at the exact same times. They hit each other and yell
at each other while searching for the toy, and what fun that is.
The previews of the film wisely show no clips from the film's ludicrous
final 30 minutes, where at a parade, Arnold becomes TurboMan. Sinbad becomes
his arch-rival. Now this TurboMan outfit from the parade is complete with a
working jetpack and deadly flying weapons, which immediately makes me ask,
if this costume is just for a parade, well why isn't there an actual
TurboMan? This costume literally turns Arnold into a superhero! Ridiculous.
Basically what we have here is a live action cartoon, which I would say is
appropriate for the whole family if it weren't for a few things. For
example, Robert Conrad plays a motorcycle cop who always seems to turn up
where Arnold does, and he's treated like a buffoon for doing his job. Hey
kids! Cops are idiots! In more than one scene, Sinbad (who plays a mailman)
threatens people with a mailbomb. Ha ha. Then at one point he gives the
package to Conrad which then blows up. But it's like a cartoon bomb, it only
affects Conrad because he was holding it. Ha ha. Hey kids! Mailbombs are
funny! I sincerely hope that none of the bombing victims from Atlanta or
Oklahoma City go with their families to see this film hoping for a good
natured comedy for the kids. As a matter of fact, I hope no one goes to see
this no matter who they are, bombing victim or not.
--
Chuck Dowling
Reply to: chuckd21@southeast.net
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office

Author
Scott Renshaw
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Sinbad, Phil Hartman, Rita Wilson, James
Belushi, Jake Lloyd.
Screenplay:  Randy Kornfield and Deborah Kaplan & Harry Elfont.
Producers:  Chris Columbus, Mark Radcliffe, Michael Barnathan.
Director:  Brian Levant.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, cartoon violence)
Running Time:  89 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     JINGLE ALL THE WAY is the first film from Chris Columbus' 1492
production company which was not directed by Columbus himself, and I found
myself curious as to whether it would resemble the producing efforts of
his mentors Steven Spielberg and John Hughes -- more specifically, would
it look like a clone of Columbus' own films?  Just as an experiment, I
predicted to myself that JINGLE ALL THE WAY would involve an 
irresponsible/inconsiderate adult who, after plenty of broadly comic
trials and tribulations, learns What's Really Important.  That particular
combination of slapstick and sentimentality had served Columbus well in
two HOME ALONE films, MRS. DOUBTFIRE and NINE MONTHS (making him the third
highest grossing director in history behind Spielberg and Robert
Zemeckis), and there was no reason to suspect he wouldn't go to the well
again.
     Well, son of a gun, guess what.  JINGLE ALL THE WAY finds Arnold
Schwarzenegger playing Howard Langston, an irresponsible/inconsiderate
harried businessman who is forever disappointing his young son Jamie (Jake
Lloyd) by missing all the important events in his life.  Determined to
make it up to Jamie, Howard promises him that he will get the Christmas
present he wants the most:  the action figure of Turbo Man, a wildly
popular television action series character who has become a wildly popular
toy.  Unfortunately, Howard waits until Christmas Eve to make his
purchase, forcing him to go on a desperate search across Minneapolis to
find the scarce toy, and to battle with another equally desperate father,
mail carrier Myron Larabee (Sinbad), for one of the few Turbo Man figures
remaining in the city.
     And, of course, Howard walks away from his experiences having learned
What's Really Important.  I suspect Columbus may be fond of such
warm-n-fuzzy denouements because he wants to leave his audience with the
impression that it has watched something more meaningful than a
live-action cartoon.  The fact is that JINGLE ALL THE WAY is in many ways
a better cartoon than SPACE JAM, directed by Brian Levant (THE
FLINTSTONES) with an emphasis on absurd, elaborate sequences of physical
comedy which at least have a certain momentum.  Yes, some of them run on
past the point of diminishing returns, like a seemingly endless pursuit of
a bouncing ball, but other moments are keepers.  The "Turbo Man" TV
program is a neat little jab at "Power Rangers"-type shows in all their
over-marketed glory, and Schwarzenegger's encounter with an enraged
reindeer works better than it sounds.  Miraculously, there is also only
one scene of a kick to the groin in all the mayhem.
     It is when JINGLE ALL THE WAY turns message-y on us that it not only
loses steam, but demonstrates its crucial bit of mis-casting.  The guilty
party is Schwarzenegger himself, who has failed to understand the kind of
comedy in which he can be successful.  In the past, he has gone for laughs
playing against his image, his sheer physical presence -- see Arnie paired
with Danny DeVito as a mild-mannered genius in TWINS, see Arnie struggle
with toddlers in KINDERGARTEN COP, see Arnie pregnant in JUNIOR.  In
JINGLE ALL THE WAY, he is frequently put in the position of threatening
people to get his way, and it is not nearly the visual gag it could have
been when the massive Schwarzenegger is forced to play the part of Turbo
Man in a parade.  A Steve Martin, Michael Keaton or even Robin Williams
might have made Howard's quest more interesting, and the character more
sympathetic; with Big Arnold, JINGLE is simply frantic and a bit too
mean-spirited.
     Fortunately, Schwarzenegger has a pair of comic co-stars with more
sense for the material.  Sinbad plays a character with no consistent
personality -- sometimes a harmless nut, sometimes the film's villain --
but he can still make lame material funny (witness FIRST KID).  If JINGLE
ALL THE WAY had to star Schwarzenegger, it is to Levant and Columbus'
credit that they got someone both funny _and_ a physical match to be his
adversary.  Phil Hartman also has a fun part as the Langstons' next-door
neighbor Ted, who is like "The Simpsons'" Ned Flanders with a hyper-active
libido.  It is Ted's job to hit on Howard's wife Liz (Rita Wilson), which,
of course, helps Howard to realize What's Really Important.  What's really
important to remember about JINGLE ALL THE WAY is that its target audience
is probably under 12 years old, and that 90% of the humor involves bodily
injury, property damage, or some combination of the two.  Columbus wasn't
trying to discover any new worlds here.  He's already discovered a formula
which works.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Sinbad, Phil Hartman, Robert Conrad, 
      Rita Wilson, Jake Lloyd, James Belushi
Director: Brian Levant
Producers: Chris Columbus, Michael Barnathan, and Mark Radcliffe
Screenplay: Harry Elfont, Deborah Kaplan, and Randy Kornfield
Cinematography: Victor J. Kemper
Music: David Newman
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     JINGLE ALL THE WAY represents Arnold Schwarzenegger's fourth 
attempt at a "straight" comedy (I'm not counting LAST ACTION HERO or 
TRUE LIES, which were highly action-oriented), and, like the others that 
came before it, this movie isn't all that funny.  While it's true that 
the driving idea behind putting Schwarzenegger in this kind of picture -
- the big, hulking action hero struggling to overcome "normal" problems 
-- has potential, the film makers never attempt anything really 
ambitious.  The result is a pastiche of silly, cartoonish action and 
variably amusing physical humor.
     Another problem with JINGLE ALL THE WAY is the premise, which lacks 
the substance and comic potential to form the basis of a feature-length 
movie.  JINGLE ALL THE WAY seems hopelessly dragged out, as if the film 
makers came up with a great pitch, then, once they got the go-ahead, 
couldn't figure out how to extend things beyond TV sit-com length.  
Consequently, the picture sags noticeably in the middle as the director 
and screenwriters fight to extend the running length.
     Almost everyone has memories of a birthday, Christmas, or other 
holiday when they either got or didn't get a gift they had been 
coveting.  From a parent's perspective, trying to purchase such a 
present, especially if it's the "hot" toy of the year (remember Cabbage 
Patch Dolls and Transformers?), can be an agonizing experience, 
especially if they wait until the last minute.  In JINGLE ALL THE WAY, 
it's Christmas Eve, and Howard Langston (Schwarzenegger) is desperate to 
get the TurboMan action figure for his son, Jamie (Jake Lloyd).  Howard, 
a workaholic, has been neglecting his family lately, and he sees this as 
an opportunity to redeem himself.  Unfortunately, all the stores are 
sold out.  The result is a crazy, surreal series of misadventure through 
the streets and malls of Minneapolis.  Along the way, he encounters a 
rival (Sinbad) on the same quest, a mirthless police officer (Robert 
Conrad) who likes giving out tickets, and a con-artist Santa (James 
Belushi).  Meanwhile, as Howard is scouring the city for the last 
TurboMan, his bachelor next door neighbor, Ted (Phil Hartman), is 
getting closer to his wife, Liz (Rita Wilson).
     Back when TWINS was released, the idea of putting Schwarzenegger in 
a comedy was both audacious and innovative.  And, for the most part, it 
worked -- at least the first time.  TWINS wasn't the funniest film of 
the year, but there was a certain appeal in watching the big man in such 
an atypical role.  Then came KINDERGARTEN COP and JUNIOR, each lessons 
in diminishing returns.  Now that we've seen this conceit repeatedly, 
the uniqueness has worn off.  Schwarzenegger is, after all, more of a 
personality than an actor, so there are limits to how much he can bring 
to this role.
     JINGLE ALL THE WAY has its moments, all of which are lowbrow.  
Howard's madcap dash after a runaway super ball is worth a chuckle or 
two, as is his encounter with an unfriendly reindeer.  And certain 
aspects of the climax are legitimately hilarious.  Overall, however, the 
film is filled with too many stale spots.  The few attempts at 
satirizing the toy market are unfocused and not particularly daring.  
(Which begs the question:  could it be that there are real TurboMan 
dolls on the way?)  Sinbad, portraying a postal worker who is teetering 
on the edge, brings some life and energy to the production, but not 
enough to keep it from feeling much longer than it actually is.
     On the positive side, JINGLE ALL THE WAY is suitable for family 
consumption.  It's a genial, inoffensive movie, and all of the violence 
is exceedingly mild (people get punched and kicked, but no one is 
seriously injured).  The real problem with JINGLE ALL THE WAY has 
nothing to do with its suitability for certain age groups, but its 
suitability in general.  Being good-natured and family-friendly has 
little to do with being consistently entertaining.  JINGLE ALL THE WAY 
is forgettable, and that, more than anything else, is why I recommend 
passing up this holiday offering.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This big-budget Christmas comedy has a coarse and very obvious wit,
which would be perfect for kids if this were a kid's movie.  I'm not
sure it is, even though the humor is as broad as the shoulders of its
star, Arnold Schwarzenegger.  The Terminator plays a daddy desperate to
find the most coveted toy in Minneapolis-- a Turbo Man doll-- on the day
before Christmas.  Sure, the wee ones will love seeing Arnie chased
through a living room by a reindeer, pummeled by purses in the Mall of
America, and all the roughhouse rowdiness between him and Sinbad, who
plays his postal-carrying rival.  But what will they make of the darker
elements, like Phil Hartman's lecherous next-door neighbor?  Or Schwarz-
enegger slugging a Conga line of Clauses in a bootleg toy factory?  Or,
my favorite, the smoldering head of a wise man that gets drop-kicked
into a crowd of carolers?  (Heh.  Who *hasn't* wanted to cause unrest
among ye merry gentlemen?) Tolerating the rest of the movie, with its
lazy plotting, frantic pacing, and a message that violence is a solution
to everything, is a greater challenge.  As is accepting the fantasy
ending, which, while extremely upbeat, veers uncomfortably into LAST
ACTION HERO territory.  Stay through the credits for the final gag.
Great soundtrack, too, with several swingin' tunes from the Brian Setzer
Orchestra.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Directed by: Brian Levant
Written by: Randy Kornfield
Cast: Arnold Schwarzenegger (Howard Langston), Sinbad (Myron Larabee),
Phil Hartman (Ted zMaltin), Rita Wilson (Liz Langston), Robert Conrad
(Officer Hummell), Martin Mull (DJ), Jake Lloyd (Jamie Langston), James
Belushi, (Mall Santa).
Produced by : Twentieth-Century Fox
Rating : **1/2
Run Time: Approx. 88 Minutes
It's hard not to like comedies starring muscley action heroes denying
their true movie destiny. Watching Arnie painfully flubbing punchlines
instead of throwing satisfying punches, and Sly languishing in a
straightman role, where bad things keep happening to him instead of
easily vanishing when he runs at them with his guns, has become such a
delightful regularity (ohh, about once a year or so these days) that
these so-called comedies are virtually a new genre on their own. 
See, *these* guys, these Action Heroes who mistake breathing for acting,
are funny *by themselves*. They're funny when they're expirating tough
one-liners because they seem to believe so fully in their importance,
but they're even funnier when they're pretending not to notice how
important they already are. On a metadramatic level, it's impossible not
to adore the superhuman bravery involved in the Terminator swapping
places with Emma Thompson in JUNIOR and tying himself genetically to
Danny DeVito in TWINS, or when Rocky Balboa takes off his boxing gloves
to be smothered by his midget mother in STOP, OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT!
And like these others (except OSCAR, which I really kinda liked), JINGLE
ALL THE WAY, with Arnold Schwarzenegger as a momentarily failed father
trying to get back into his son's good graces, is pretty bad. The script
is woefully cliched, the ideas deliberately packaged into cute music
video montages that will only irritate, and Arnold.. well, Arnold is
just Arnold.
He's also Howard Langston, a bigwig at what appears to be a mattress
production company, who misses his son's, Jamie's (Jake Lloyd), karate
ceremony because he's too busy at the office. In a moment of human
conviction he swears to make it up to him by getting him anything he
wants for Christams. Jamie wants a Turbo Man (which Schwarzenegger
pronounces as "tear-bo man") Doll, the hero of his favourite action hero
cartoon.
Of course the Turbo Man doll is an extremely popular item, and has been
sold out since Thanksgiving. Langston's wife, Liz (Rita Wilson), did ask
him to get one weeks ago, but he'd completely forgotten about it. Now
it's Christmas Eve and he has one day to buy the doll as well as return
home in time for the Christmas Parade that same night.
That's the premise of the story, which sends Howard on a self-inflicted
quest throughout countless malls (including the Mall of America) to find
and purchase the elusive Turbo Man doll. At stake is the somewhat
fragile bond with his son, favour with an increasingly unhappy wife
("Damn you, Howard," she whispers when he unwittingly yells at Jamie on
the phone), and the very American need to redeem all past failings with
his son by securing this one triumph. On the way he meets (and keeps
meeting) a fellow parent and mailman called Myron (Sinbad) who also
seeks a Turbo Man for his son, and crosses swords (and loses) more than
once with an irate policeman (Robert Conrad). 
The tribulations are many: store clerks laugh at him continuously in a
silly montage sequence that really tells you what the film's going to be
like from the start, massive parent crowds barrage toy stores and
continually get the better of poor Arnie, even though he's big enough to
eat most of them. In one instance he chases a ballot ball into a child's
playpen and is creamed by mothers in handbags for being a pervert. In
another he is lured by a mall santa (John Belushi) to a huge warehouse
eerily filled to the brim with more merry Santas and fenced toys. He
almost gets his doll here, but a brawl ensues that culminates in a
police raid.
The latter sequence, with its surreal landscape of fluffy, crimson Santa
thugs, is one of the better bits of JINGLE ALL THE WAY. Another nice
part is the Turbo Man action cartoon that Jamie the son idolizes. A
rough imitation of those strange Japanese action cartoon-dramas (Mighty
Morphin Power Rangers, Masked Rider), the Turbo Man cartoon comes with
sidekicks and cool metallic outfits. Coolest, however, is the final
sequence which pits Howard against Myron in a surreal titanic battle for
a special edition of the Turbo Man doll (it's gold-plated!) as both men
play out their roles as Good and Evil personified on the Turbo Man float
at the Christmas parade. I'm going to beat you, Myron crows
convincingly, because I have a bigger brain! He does, indeed. It's
purple and we can see it sticking out of his head in a transparent globe
filled with brainwater. 
For the most part however, expect variations of the same theme from
KINDERGARTEN COP, JUNIOR and even TWINS, that will probably form the
basis of all Arnold comedies: ordinary life is just too *hard*; watch
Arnold grimace and lose out to his perfect, cookie-baking neighbour
(played smarmily by Phil Hartman) who dispenses Christmassy duties with
annoying cheer, watch him get bullied by a real reindeer and flail
hopelessly when it comes to something as mundane as Christmas shopping. 
JINGLE ALL THE WAY is pitched like a mockup of the disgusting
consumerism that rares its head during the Christmas season. But the
flat dialogue and overly sentimental portions go very far towards
smothering all life from this potentially satiric movie. 
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
Rebecca">href="mailto:rebecca@cyberway.com.sg">Rebecca Wan is a full-time
radish at the famed Jardin Des Vertes. In her spare time, she councils
wayward tubers and administers to backsliding carrots. 


Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger (Howard Langston), Sinbad (Myron
Larabee), Phil Hartman (Ted Maltin), Rita Wilson (Liz Langston), Jake
Lloyd (Jamie Langston), James Belushi (Mall Santa), Robert Conrad
(Officer Hummell), Danny Woodburn (Tony the Elf)
Directed by: Brian Levant, Written by: Randy Kornfield
Rated PG by the MPAA for violence and strong language
"Awww, poor baby... heehee!" - Howard Langston
Arnold, as Howard, is willing to do anything to anybody that hinders his
quest to find a Turbo Man action figure for his son for Christmas in
JINGLE ALL THE WAY.  Naturally, since he's Arnold and Chris Columbus was
involved in the production (as a producer), "anything" involves
generally beating the crap out of all kinds of people, animals, and
assorted objects - himself included.
JINGLE is ostensibly a family comedy, and, in the end, it does promote
family values.  Along the way, though, it also trumpets the joys of
brawling and divorce, as well as all but openly declares Santa Claus a
myth - three things that you may or may not want your kids exposed to. 
Most families won't be phased by this, though, and so JINGLE will be
welcome for viewing when the holiday season rolls around.  
The performances are mostly well done.  Arnold always has charisma even
in the most unlikely of roles, and it's a pleasure to see him apparently
having fun while he races around in this film, playing a bewildered
parent that's sharp in contrast to the always-in-control action heros
we're used to.  Sinbad steals many of his scenes, tossing out pop
culture references ("Rodney King... Rodney King... ") and acting quite
insane as the postal worker Myron.  Unfortunately, he's sometimes
portrayed as an unwanted comedic sidekick, and sometimes as a villian -
apparently someone couldn't decide what to do with him. 
The physical comedy in a family show is something we've seen way too
many times before, and it'd be boring if not for the fact that it's
Arnold Schwarzenegger getting his clock cleaned for a change.  At least,
until the scene in the warehouse.  That's the location for the most
inspired part of the movie, in which Howard ends up in a brawl with evil
Santa Claus impersonators who'd rather deck his halls with candy cane
nunchakus than sit down for milk and cookies.  That whole sequence is
beautifully surreal - and belongs in a better movie than this.  How can
you not love seeing an elf announce the arrival of the police by
shouting "It's the Grinch!  Scatter!"
Yes, there's a fair share of flaws to this show, as is the case with any
movie Chris Columbus touches, it seems.  When the story starts, we learn
how Howard is an overworked businessman who doesn't spend enough time
with his family.  And that's got to be one of the most overused
character cliches in all of filmdom.  It's just plain painful to see it
now.  The movie stays in rut for about 15 minutes until Howard gets home
and makes up with his son (Jake Lloyd, aka Anakin Skywalker in episode
one of the STAR WARS series, to be released in 1999), and after that,
becomes light-hearted and fun for some of the time... and painfully
stupid at other times.
Those other times belong primarily to Phil Hartman, who brings the movie
down heavily every time he shows up on the screen.  And he's on the
screen far too much.  Hartman was an asset to "Saturday Night Live," and
continues to be one to "Newsradio" and "The Simpsons," but, on the big
screen, he's playing the obnoxious sleazy guy far too often, and when he
does it, he's just that - obnoxious.  Every moment he shows up on the
screen is a pain, as is the subplot of him moving in on Howard's wife,
Liz.
Of course, not all of the humor hits the mark, either, as if often the
case with family films.  And when it does, it doesn't always hit it as
hard as the warehouse scene.
When the finale finally rolls around, the film is charging ahead at a
full slapstick comic pace, and it all seems so likable that you tend the
forgive the ludicrous nature of the much of what happens in that
ending.  The whole thing is wrapped up nice and neat when the credits
roll.  But after the credits have faded, Arnold, Liz, and Jamie appear
on the screen for one last scene that has one of the strongest comic
payoffs of the whole show.
The cynical - yet accurate - view of Christmas shopping and the strength
of the certain elements of the comedy, along with the likable nature of
the show are all good points.  But Phil Hartman and the stupid portrayal
of Howard at the beginning of the movie drag it down heavily.  It was
tempting to make the rating 1/2 a star higher because of its good
points, but Hartman just hurts the movie too much.  JINGLE ALL THE WAY
is only a mildly diverting time, since all the good moments are hurt by
all the Phil Hartman moments which only serve to make the viewer angry
that he/she is being forced to watch his horrible role.  Sadly, thanks
almost single-handedly to Phil Hartman and merely a few other obviously
stupid plot devices, JINGLE ALL THE WAY only gets...
"Back up!  This is a homemade explosive device!  And I'll blow it up! 
Know why?  'Cause I work for the post office, so you KNOW I'm not
stable!  Tell 'em!" - Myron
"This man is totally insane." - Howard
"THANK YOU!" - Myron

Author
Walter Frith
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Sinbad, Rita Wilson and Phil Hartman.
Arnold Schwarzenegger's attempts at comedy have been pretty successful
with 'Twins' (1988) 'Kindergarten Cop' (1990) and 'Junior' (1994). 
'Junior' is certainly the least of these three films in the opinion of
this reviewer but Arnold has struck pure gold with 'Jingle All the Way.' 
This is an absolutely dizzying and rambunctious physical comedy which puts
Arnold in good standing with the genre of slapstick.  The big guy plays a
workaholic dad and husband who is always breaking promises he's made to
his young son and is now feeling the resentment not only from the boy but
from his wife.  To try and make up for things Arnie promises to get the
boy a Turbo Man action figure which is the hottest toy on the market.  The
only problem is that he procrastinates and on Christmas Eve day is forced
to rush all over town to find one which is practically impossible.  He is
in competition with Sinbad who is trying to find one for his own son and
Sinbad delivers some good physical comedy but lays on the laughs mostly
with his gift of gab.  Director Bryan Levant ('Beethoven') uses some very
unattractive characterizations which add an extra dose of laughing gas to
the formula of this already fast paced and loony looking farce which plays
like a cross between a comic book and Saturday morning cartoon with
delightful results.  Rita Wilson (Mrs. Tom Hanks) plays Arnold's wife and
Phil Hartman is Arnold's seemingly nice guy next door neighbor with a
hidden agenda for pursuing Schwarzenegger's wife in romantic fashion. 
>From devilish Santa Claus con men to a sadistic reindeer to a climax which
puts Arnold in Turbo Man's shoes, this is a sheer feel good and hilarious
film which had me laughing in all the right places and offers some
touching moments as well.  'Jingle All the Way' is the best escapist fare
Christmas film since 'Home Alone' and is far superior in every way.  This
movie's title doesn't only deliver but you will definitely find yourself
laughing all the way and if you don't then shame on you, Scrooge!

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So what kind of movies can a superstar make?  Answer: Whatever
kind he likes.
     Let me confess.  I am a big Arnold Schwarzenegger fan.  From his
superhero movies (the TERMINATOR series, TRUE LIES, and ERASER) to his
comedies (TWINS), he brings a unique presence to his roles.  His shows
are bursting with energy, and there is rarely a dull moment.  Even in
the films of his of which that I have not been fond, JUNIOR comes to
mind, he is interesting nevertheless.
     So it is with JINGLE ALL THE WAY.  This is a horribly flawed film,
being needlessly mean-spirited, but it does have Arnold, and he is fun
to watch in it.  Nevertheless, I need to warn parents upfront that
there are many messages in the film of which you may not approve.  Most
are introduced in a spirit of humor, but young kids may not appreciate
the difference.
     "Don't forget.  Your my number one customer," concludes a harried
Howard Langston (Schwarzenegger) on the phone to everyone who calls,
even his wife Liz (Rita Wilson).  He is a busy man right before
Christmas, and he has a bad habit of missing his all the important
events in his young son Jamie's (Jake Lloyd) life.  This Christmas
season all Howard needs to do is pick up a Turboman action figure and
go to his kid's karate recital.  He waits too late for both of them.
     Howard's son explains to him how bad he wants the Turboman.  It
seems that ALL the kids are getting them this Christmas and "whoever
doesn't is going to be a real loser."  Those of us with young kids will
identify with this toy obsession.  Those without will probably think
this part of the film is little more than a plot device.
     The Langston's next door neighbor is divorced dad Ted Maltin (Phil
Hartman) and his son.  Ted appears perfect.  He not only has the
Turboman for his son, he has even bought him a live reindeer,
reasoning, "You can never do too much to make a kid's Christmas
special."  Howard hates his goody-goody attitude.  Ted is also the
neighborhood's number one lech.
     Set in a cold suburban landscape -- a snowy Twin Cities locale,
the cold is a metaphor for the film's bleak humor.  JINGLE ALL THE WAY
has more fistfights and hitting people than any kid's show I have seen
in a long, long time.  Howard even slugs the poor, defenseless
reindeer.
     Tagging along with Howard is Sinbad (FIRST KID) playing psychotic
postal worker Myron Larabee.  When Howard first meets Myron in a line
of anxious wannabe owners of Turbomen, Myron explains to him about the
toy manufactures.  It seems, "They use subliminal messages to suck
kids' minds out."
     After many more struggles and wrestling matches in stores that
turn out to be out of his son's Holy Grail, Howard begins to lose it.
He starts tearing up store displays in fits of anger.
     Success appears in the unlikely person of a mall Santa Claus
(James Belushi) and his elf.  They promise him a Turbo man for $300,
but they turn out to be part of a vast conspiracy of Santa Clauses and
elves who have a warehouse full of Turboman knockoffs.  Touch these
toys, and they fall apart.  This leads to the most distasteful fight in
the show.  Howard tries to punch out scores of Jolly Olde St. Nicks.
     While all the misery is unfolding on the screen, the music is
playing happy tunes like "I'll be Home for Christmas" to remind you
that this is supposed to be a comedy.  We all laughed a lot, but I
wonder how much of it was nervous laughter.  Both Arnold and Sinbad are
amusing.  The problem is that the reasons for the humor are troubling.
Do we really want America laughing over a postman who keeps threatening
people with a non-existent bomb?  As he says, "I work for the post
office so I'm not stable."
     Winning in the category for worst advice given in any kid's movie
this year is that by Ted's son to Jamie.  He counsels him, "Maybe your
parents should get a divorce.  Did wonders for my dad."
     Kids even get to see a young kid (Jamie) drinking whiskey from a
bottle.  Granted it is in a nightmare sequence, but still.
     The show ends very well, and if you stay through all the credits,
the movie continues with one last joke.
     JINGLE ALL THE WAY is a pathetic film that manages to be
entertaining nevertheless, and one whose high energy makes it hard to
dislike no matter how much you disagree with its messages.  A guilty
pleasure for its viewers.  For believers of the Hollywood conspiracy to
sap the morals of our youth theory, this picture is the one for them.
It will seem to vindicate their assertions.
     JINGLE ALL THE WAY runs just 1:29.  For a movie rated just PG, it
stretches the limits with lines including "what the hell" and "you
sorry ass."  There is no sex or nudity, but the mean time between
fights is about three minutes.  I liked this show more than I'd care to
admit, but I can't recommend any kid's film that is so mean spirited.
Jeffrey, age 7 1/2, on the other hand, loves it.  He gives it six
thumbs up and says it would be fine for kids six and up -- to which I
would add, at least.  I give the picture a reluctant **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
