Title
Review for Portaborse, Il (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A high-school teacher who ghost-writes novels, is hired as a
speechwriter and advisor to an ambitious government Minister in present
day Italy.  When the Minister runs for higher office, the teacher is
directly involved in the campaign.  As the campaign progresses, he
begins to learn how corrupt the political system, and his boss, are!  A
lighthearted social and political satire that doesn't insult your
intelligence; above average.
Italy (English subtitles), color, 1991, 95 minutes.
Director: Daniele Luchetti
     First, there is a potential "identification" issue to clarify.  The
Italian title of the film is IL PORTABORSE, which is translated
literally in the subtitle as BROWN NOSE.  However, the film was listed
in the San Francisco International Film Festival program guide as THE
YES MAN.  Apparently it will be released in the U.S. under the title
THE YES MAN; however I have no "official" confirmation of that.
     The story centers on a middle-aged high-school classics teacher,
who moonlights as a ghost writer of novels.  His girlfriend is also a
teacher, who lives some distance away.  The teacher lives in the old
family estate, which is crumbling and in need of expensive repairs.
     One day the teacher is offered a job as speech-writer and public
relations aide to Cesare Botero, an important government Minister.  He
accepts the offer, and moves to Rome to begin his duties.  When Botero
runs for higher office, the teacher becomes deeply involved in the
campaign, and politics in general.
     Although things are strange and interesting at first, the teacher
slowly learns that things are not what they appear to be in politics.
He slowly learns of the substantial corruption in politics: vote buying,
vote fraud, influence peddling, conflict of interest, and so on.  As the
story progresse, the teacher has second thoughts about his new career...
     This is a relatively light-hearted look at politics, and
politicians in general.  The plot is realistic, and the writers resisted
the urge to make it mean-spirited (in today's political climate, it
would be easy to be mean-spirited).  Although the film is set in Italy,
where it has apparently created considerable controversy, the view of
politics it provides is more universal.  To make comparisons with the
U.S., I would describe the government Minister Cesare Botero as a
politician who does many of the things Clinton has been accused of
(adultery, influence peddling, conflict of interest), but whose image
and rhetoric are both vague and populist, ala Jerry Brown.
     This film is relatively intelligent; the plot and dialog are
realistic.  The production values are high, and the acting nicely
understated.  The actor who plays the teacher (sorry, don't know his
name) reminded me of Dudley Moore (in his better days).  The result is a
sophisticated satire of politics and, indirectly, social values.  If you
enjoy low-key political satire, the film is certainly worth seeing.
U.S. Distribution: currently on the film festival circuit.  Print
source is: Titanus Distribuzione, 19 Largo Chigi, 00187 Rome, Italy.  No
confirmed information available on future U.S. theatrical release.
