Title
Review for Duoluo tianshi (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
David Nusair
Wong Kar-Wei's "Fallen Angels" is, on a purely visceral level, one of the
most exciting films I've seen in a long while.  Unfortunately, Wong seems
more interested in experimenting with his camera than creating tangible
characters for the audience to root for.
Ordinarily, that alone would be enough to sink a movie, but in the case of
"Fallen Angels", this is not so.  Every shot in this film is exciting just
to *look* at.  Wong does really interesting things with the camera, but he
doesn't allow the pyrotechnics to completely take over, as was the case
with last years dismal "Knock Off" (which contained a shot of a foot
entering a shoe.  Ugh.)
The movie follows three pairs of lost souls as they struggle to find some
meaning in their lives.  I can't say much more than that as I didn't
really know what was going on most of the time.  In fact, it wasn't until
about halfway through the movie that I was able to distinguish between
each character.  The constantly moving camera doesn't really allow for
the audience to associate with any one character.  We're always kept at a
distance from these people, I suppose in order to further add to the
feeling of alienation felt by the characters.
"Fallen Angels" is a refreshing change-of-pace from most Hollywood films,
which never bother to try anything different, at least on a visual level. 
In fact, I'd go so far as to say that "Fallen Angels" is more challenging
visually than any mainstream Hollywood film I've ever seen.  Sure, there's
directors like Robert Rodriguez who enjoy turning violence into operatic
orgies of death, but to see a filmmaker like Wong who actually assaults
the senses with images is truly something worth celebrating.  
But if Wong wishes to become a legendary filmmaker, he needs to work on
incorporating an actual story into those awesome images.  There were far
too many instances during "Fallen Angels" in which I asked myself, "now
who are these people again?  Is this that first couple or the second
couple?"  It was impossible to keep track.  Perhaps he could let the
audience know right away which character is which, by introducing them to
us with "name cards", as in Scorsese's "Mean Streets".
That's really besides the point, though.  Wong Kar-Wei has proven himself,
through very few films, that's he's a movie-maker to watch.  Let's just
hope that he hones his storytelling skills with his next few movies.

Author
Chris Loar
In this beautiful, baffling follow-up to CHUNGKING EXPRESS, Wong Kar-wai   
has lapsed once again into near-total disregard for coherence and   
linearity, serving up instead something like a visual symphony.   
 Structured more around allusion and image than character and event,   
ANGELS lacks the tight coherence of EXPRESS, which makes it at once   
astonishing and incredibly frustrating; viewers may find themselves   
transfixed by this vision of Hong Kong and its denizens, even as they're   
baffled by plotlines and elements of story that seem without purpose or   
direction.  Not every moment of the film is compelling, but taken as a   
whole, Wong has once again provided a fascinating statement about memory,   
longing, and human relationships in the urban world.
FALLEN ANGELS borrows from CHUNGKING EXPRESS its essential structure; it   
tells us two stories, both centering on peculiar love affairs.  The first   
shows us a detached gun-for-hire, Wong Chi-Ming (Leon Lai) and his   
partner, known only as the Agent (Michele Reis).  Wong and the Agent   
rarely meet, communicating by beeper code and fax, but they have an   
intimate connection nonetheless:  the Agent maintains Wong's base of   
operations, and takes his rubbish home with her to peruse in private.   
 The second tale shows us the antics of one He Zhiwu (CHUNGKING EXPRESS's   
Takeshi Kaneshiro), a mute ex-con who makes a strange living by   
impersonating shopkeepers after hours and forcing passers-by to consume   
his goods and services.  He develops a relationship of sorts with Cherry   
(Charlie Young), a young, possibly deranged woman recently dumped by her   
lover; He obviously cares for her deeply despite the fact that it's never   
clear that she's actually aware of his presence.
These stories, which sound like B movie fodder, are brought to luscious   
life by amphetamine-paced editing and cinematography that's almost too   
good to believe.  Wong is using his usual cinematographer, Christopher   
Doyle (also noted for his work on the recent TEMPTRESS MOON); their work   
together is consistently distinctive and provocative, and FALLEN ANGELS   
is no exception.  In fact, the filmmakers have outdone themselves; using   
a hand-held camera, a few wide-angle lenses, and complex, suggestive   
lighting, Wong and Doyle have provided us with a Hong Kong that evokes   
the longings and languishings of its inhabitants.   And, unlike EXPRESS,   
which tells its two stories sequentially, ANGELS tells its tales   
virtually simultaneously, driving home the point that Wong always seems   
to be making about life in the postmodern city -- that the urban   
lifestyle does not destroy the cords that tie people to others and to   
their culture, but rather transforms them into something less   
recognizable -- something complex, beautiful, and tragic.
The film's visual style is so suggestive as to be almost domineering, and   
it would make it easy to overlooks some impressive performances by its   
principals.  Fans of CHUNGKING EXPRESS will hardly recognize Takeshi   
Kaneshiro as he videotapes his father or attempts to forcibly shampoo an   
innocent bystander; his hair, his costume, and his demeanor bear no   
resemblance to those of the lonely, noble Cop 223.  But the actor retains   
his appealing, youthful exuberance, and he brings a credible humanity to   
a part that threatens to collapse into caricature.  Michelle Reis also   
deserves special mention; her stoic, detached demeanor dovetails nicely   
with her character's quiet, private obsessions.
FALLEN ANGELS certainly has its weak moments; Wong doesn't always seem to   
know the difference between the quirky and the trivial, and some of his   
subplots are more than a little tedious.  Moviegoers who demand that   
their films make easy sense and tell an entertaining story will probably   
come away frustrated or bored, or both.  But the film remains immensely   
valuable for its virtuoso style and its lusty embrace of urban life.

Author
David Dalgleish
"Partners should never get involved emotionally with each other."
Starring Leon Lai, Michelle Reis, Takeshi Kaneshiro, Charlie Yeung
Written & Directed by Kar-wai Wong
Cinematography by Christopher Doyle
        FALLEN ANGELS is the work of a man in love, a man infatuated, 
intoxicated by the act of making a movie.  It is love of the dizzying, 
unconditional kind, where the lover does not question his love, but 
simply immerses himself in it.  He surrenders to it.  Here, Kar-wai 
Wong (CHUNG KING EXPRESS) surrenders to cinema; he revels in 
everything it has to offer.  There is sex and violence and comedy, 
there are slow-motion hand-held shots and distorted overlit close-ups, 
there are shadows and smoke and mirrors and neon.  It is a sensory 
overload, orgasmic in its intensity.
        It's also very good, which is somewhat surprising, since the whole 
thing is so self-indulgent that it should, by all rights, be an 
incoherent mess.
        The narrative, such as it is, involves two parallel love stories, 
which intersect in intriguing ways.  The first of these plots involves 
a hired killer (Leon Lai) and his partner (Michelle Reis), who tells 
him who he has to kill.  Their relationship is strictly professional, 
but there is substantial sexual tension, which is not surprising, 
considering how good-looking they are.  This plot depends heavily on a 
fascination with things Hong Kong movies have long been fascinated 
with: there is a hip hitman who performs his job with ice-water in his 
veins, but is troubled in his heart, and there are gorgeous, pouty 
women in fabulous clothes, who fall in love with him.  
        The other plot, played mostly for comedy, is like some bizarre 
hyperkinetic adapation of a Banana Yoshimoto story; it features two 
young lovers (Takeshi Kaneshiro, Charlie Yeung) who meet in the night 
(the whole movie happens at night), and who have the sort of 
relationship befitting two disingenuously innocent oddballs.  This 
pair is more original and potentially interesting than their 
counterparts in the first storyline--but the hitman's story, clichéd 
as it may be by now, lends itself far better to Wong's ultra-cool, 
ultra-flashy style.  The first plot calls for manic energy, the second 
for subtlety and reflection.  The latter qualities are in short supply 
in FALLEN ANGELS, but that's not necessarily a bad thing.    
        Wong goes to great lengths to make every single shot interesting.  He 
and cinematographer Christopher Doyle (TEMPTRESS MOON) use lenses that 
distort everything so we seem to be watching through one of those 
fish-eye peepholes in apartment doors.  They use filters that give 
everything a grainy, overlit look.  The lights are abnormally bright 
and the darkness is abnormally dark and pervasive.  Colours are 
washed-out and monochromatic.  Hong Kong becomes the ultimate 
millennial urban sprawl, a place of garish neon lights, subway trains 
blazing in the night, McDonalds, and featureless undergound corridors.  
The camera is always calling attention to itself: moving or tilting or 
looking at the action from a strange angle.  The editing is of the 
breathless, breakneck, MTV-ish variety.   
        But, while he seems to be plunging ahead with reckless abandon, Wong 
has a good feel for rhythm and pacing.  The two plots are more or less 
dispensible, since FALLEN ANGELS is primarily concerned with how it 
looks, and the look is what makes it compelling.  Some of the best 
sequences in the film have no dialogue--they are streams of images, 
set to music, spendidly integrated.
        It would be easy to think that the movie is so hectic and frenetic 
because Wong doesn't want us to realize there is no substance to it.  
There is probably some truth to that idea, but I was surprised to find 
myself touched by a couple of scenes, and it seems to me that despite 
his rather unsubtle techniques, Wong develops a kind of poetry in the 
film, a poetry of sound and image, rather than words and meanings.  
Those moments which seem most superficial, concerned purely with 
visual play, are, finally, the most telling, because of Wong's 
intuitive sense of the language of cinema, the language of sound and 
image.
        Case in point: the scene I remember most vividly (admittedly, this 
might have more to do with hormones than great cinema) is a totally 
gratuitous masturbation scene.  It starts with Michelle Reis in a 
moodily lit bar, taking long sensuous drags on her cigarette, then 
playing a dreamy song on the jukebox, caressing herself through her 
shimmery silver dress, then we cut to her bedroom, where she pursues 
her onanistic pursuits to their end, now wearing black leather and 
fishnet tights.  There's no nudity, and all things considered, the 
scene is actually pretty tasteful despite its blatant fetishism.  The 
eroticism has more to do with the way it's put together than any 
pornographic effect: the music, the editing, the images, and the 
lighting tease out the sexuality of the act, rather than thrusting it 
upon us.  
        And while it may be gratuitous, the sequence is also incredibly cool 
and sexy, and that's what counts.  Indeed, that's not a bad way to 
describe the whole movie.  It's flashy and energetic, effervescent and 
evanescent.  It's rather like a 90-minute-long ad, but the only thing 
FALLEN ANGELS is selling is itself--and it's very persuasive.

Author
Anthony Harrison
  "I'm a lazy person, I like others to arrange things for me. Like
who's to die, and where and when-is all planned by others. That's why
I need a partner". These are the words spoken by the character Ming,
in the 1995 Hong Kong film "Fallen Angels". This belief of his,
explains his current situation and represents his attitude towards
life. The film showcases the relationship between Ming and his
business partner, as well as the relationship between a man named He
Qiwu and his father, his work, and his short term girlfriend.
Successfully, the movie intertwines the two stories, making them fit
and connect in subtle and not so subtle ways.  By the end of the film
it leaves the viewer thinking, about the ways in which we experience
life, and the way in which we are suppose to experience life. At least
that's what the director, Wong Kar-wai intended when he made this
film, and in my opinion, he succeeds.
  The first story the movie presents is the story between Ming, who is
an assassin, and his partner. His partner does all the preparation and
planning, so that all Ming has to do is kill. No decision making is
his modo for work and for life. His statement about being lazy and
liking the identity, time, and place of a person's death to be all
planned by others, suggest that he feels the same way about life in
general. The planner, being God, has already made the decision making,
and all Ming has to do, is do the job, whatever that may be.
  The character Ming grows throughout the movie by conflicts that
derive from his relationship with his partner, who is a woman that
remains nameless throughout the entire film. They've been partners for
years and when she begins to fall in love with him he decides to
terminate their relationship, although her falling in love with him
didn't solely cause his decision. He finally made up his mind to end
the partnership when he got shot.
  As the story of Ming and his partner unfolds, the movie shifts to
another story. He Qiwu's story. At the age of five, He Qiwu ate an
expired can of pineapples and lost his ability to talk. This handicap
made it difficult for him to find or keep a job, so he decided to
become his own boss. By breaking into stores after hours and running
them. The customers who are unfortunate enough to come to the store
he's taken over, are forced to buy something. It was by doing this
that created He Qiwu's criminal record, and from the help of his
father whom he has a deep bond with, he manages to dodge the police
numerous of times.
  "We rub shoulders with people everyday, strangers who may even
become friends or confidants." These words represents one of the ways
He Qiwu feels towards people and life. And these words also represent
one of the attitudes or beliefs that the films itself portrays. When
He Qiwu's character is introduced, the connections between the two
stories begins to show. There is a specific scene in the film that
displays the way in which complete strangers can find a connection
between one another by just walking passed each other. One day Ming's
partner, who is intensely in love with him but fears to get too close,
unknowingly walks pass Ming's girlfriend, Blondie, but as she walks by
she stops, because she recognizes Ming's smell on Blondie. Blondie
also recognizes Ming's smell on Ming's partner. They both stop and
look at each other.
       The characters Ming and He Qiwu both reach a point in their
lives where they decide to change, due to some form of pain they
experienced.  Ming gets shot and decides to end his partnership and
stop having things arranged for him, and make a decision for himself
wether it be right or wrong. Ming changes, or evolves by deciding to
live differently by arranging things himself, and not relying on
others to do so for him. He Qiwu gets his heart broken and decides to
change his ways and be more responsible. He decides to stop breaking
into stores after hours and running them and gets a normal job. Ming
and He Qiwu both change, which is one of the things this movie is
about. It's about connections, changes, decision making, and life in
general. Wether one believes in the possession of free will or not,
life is meant to be enjoyed even if it has already been planned out
for you. Depending on your belief.
      Visually, the film has a life of it's own. It's evident that the
director, Wong Kar-Wai has a very distinct visual style. The look of
the film is captivating and pulls you into the imagery presented. It's
the cinematography and editing that is the highlight of the
film. Filled with a huge amount of energy, the film grabs you, screws
with your head, and slowly lets go while the credits roll. The
director's use of super 8mm, 35mm, oblique angles, slow and fast
motion would seem like overkill in most other directors hands. But
Wong manages to make it all make sense.
       There is very little dialogue in the entire movie, due to the
fact that the story is toldmostly with narration from the main
characters. The viewer is transported into the mind of the characters
for most of the movie, and it works. The editing is fast paced
andimmensely energetic, and it's this and the camerawork that give the
movie so much energyand drive. The film gets a little boost from the
acting as well, which is also powerful, butit's clearly the director,
cinematographer and editor, who make this movie so much of a thrill to
watch.
       Being a foreign film I thought that there would be certain
views and or beliefs portrayed in the film that might be
incomprehensible to some people not native to that country, but I felt
that many of the beliefs were universal. Beliefs about making a
change. Wether it's for the better or worse, doesn't really matter, as
long as one doesn't spend his/her entire life following the plans and
decisions made by others. And beliefs about the interactions with
others can lead to many different possibilities. He Qiwu's words of
strangers rubbing shoulders with each other, who may become friends or
confidants, is evidence of this belief portrayed within the movie.
  Ultimately this movie leaves it's audience with an experience that
will be remembered for quite sometime after initial viewing. Not many
films have such a distinct style and image, and it is fortunate that
Wong Kar-Wai allowed the world to see his vision realized. During the
final scene in the film, Ming's partner says to herself, "The road
home isn't very long, and I know I'll be getting off soon. But at this
moment I'm feeling such lovely warmth." Now at the moment she said
that, she was riding on the back of a motorcycle with a guy who was
giving her a ride home. But the words are very relative to life. By
"the road home", she could mean the length of life to death, and by
"the moment" she could mean the time that is cherished during
life. Overall, Fallen Angels is a visually stunning and thought
provoking film that I recommend to everyone, who is a fan of
intelligent and outstanding works of art.
