Title
Review for Air Bud: Golden Receiver (1998)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The original AIR BUD was a delightful Disney film in the OLD YELLER 
tradition of a boy and his dog.  More than a comedy, it was a touching 
little film with some very sweet scenes.  
     Its sequel, AIR BUD: GOLDEN RECEIVER, shares little with the spirit 
of the original.  It stars a golden retriever, but not the original one.  
Sadly, the first Buddy was lost to cancer and the film is dedicated to 
his memory.  The new Buddy can still shoot hoops, but this being 
football season, he dons a helmet and becomes a football star - hence 
the GOLDEN "RECEIVER" part of the title.
     The film has the same writers as before, Paul Tamasy and Aaron 
Mendelsohn, but the script they came up with less than a year later 
feels rushed.  Totally devoid of ideas other than letting a dog run 
around on a football field, the movie has lame jokes and ineffective 
subplots.
     The same actor from the first film, Kevin Zegers plays the dog's 
owner, Josh Framm.  The same actor, Shayn Solberg, also plays Josh's 
friend Tom Stewart.  All of the rest of the actors are different.  They 
do share a common trait in being given little of interest to say or do.  
The movie works solely on the basis of the comical visual of Buddy in 
his silly little helmet and uniform running up and down the field with 
the opposing team tripping all over themselves trying to catch him.
     Typical of the recycled humor is the date that comes to see Josh's 
mom (Cynthia Stevenson).  He sneezes in the flower bouquet because he is 
allergic to dogs.  Another scene has the mom on rollerblades being 
pulled behind the dog, unable to let go until she falls in the arms of 
her future suitor.  There will be much made of Josh's resentment that 
his mother is dating, but the director, Richard Martin, the second unit 
director on AIR BUD, is unable to stage these scenes with any genuine 
feelings.
     Of all the ridiculous subplots, the one of the stupid Russian 
animalnappers is the worst.  The movie would be infinitely better and 
fifteen minutes shorter without them.
     Josh becomes the quarterback of his Junior High football team.  
Full of klutzes who can't run without falling, the team has been "the 
laughing stock of the league for the past decade."  When Buddy 
demonstrates his ability to catch a football and run with it, they put 
him on the team.  Amazingly, their opponents' coaches never object.  
     Only on the field does the movie work.  When Buddy lines up, does 
calisthenics, or whatever, he is funny.  But this sight gag is not 
enough to sustain a full-length movie.
     (Tim Conway and Dick Martin are the play-by-play announcers for the 
big game.  Dick plays a senile man who offers such colorful remarks as 
the way to win is to score more points than the other team.  He is 
embarrassing to watch.  One would hope that seniors' groups might picket 
the movie.)
     Will they win the state championship at the end?  Of course.  One 
part of the movie that is refreshing, albeit not especially believable, 
is that the coach isn't really interested very much in winning.  When 
they threaten to fire him for his team's terrible records, he doesn't 
care.  He thinks that the only thing that is important is whether his 
players are having fun.  Try to find a coach like that in real-life.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, really liked the film, giving it ****.  His 
favorite part was when Buddy got to play in some pro games, both 
basketball and football.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
James Sanford
        If there's a little demon who's making your life miserable,
``Air Bud: Golden Receiver'' offers a prime opportunity for sweet
revenge. Subject any wild child to 90 minutes of this charmless,
preachy and flabbergastingly dull excuse for a movie and the kid will
promise you anything in exchange for directions to the door.
  The original ``Air Bud'' introduced us to Buddy, a golden
retriever with a knack for playing basketball. Amateurishly made,
written and acted, this slipshod sequel finds Buddy broadening his
horizons by joining the local junior high school football team
alongside his drippy 13-year-old owner Josh (Kevin Zegers).
  Any vague amusement prompted by the initial sight of the
Budster in his canine-size helmet and customized shoulder pads
evaporates as the gridiron sequences prove to be nothing more than
lazy, badly staged slapstick even young viewers will be hard-pressed
to laugh at.
  When he's not passing the pigskin, Josh is brooding about
his mom Jackie (Cynthia Stevenson) and her budding romance with
veterinarian Patrick (Gregory Harrison). At one point Josh gets so
perturbed he almost boards a train to San Francisco, but anyone hoping
the movie might turn into an eye-opening study of the seamy lives of
runaway boys in big cities will be sorely disappointed.
  Even the sickening sweetness of the domestic drama is easier
to tolerate than the just plain sickening antics of Nora Dunn and
Perry Anzilotti as a pair of moronic Russian circus owners trying to
add Buddy to their menagerie.
  Seeing such former TV faves as Stevenson, Harrison and
particularly Dunn striving to maintain some kind of dignity while
acting in the company of Tim Conway and a ghoulish-looking Dick Martin
provokes sympathetic embarassment, not chuckles.
  Director Richard Martin - perhaps you've caught some of his
other cinematic jewels, such as ``White Tiger'' and ``North of
Pittsburgh'' - is inordinantly fond of medium close-ups, regardless of
whether or not they suit the scene. Often it's a challenge to figure
out exactly what's happening in the movie and most viewers will give
up trying long before the last reel.

Author
Mark O'Hara
This summer has not offered the goods to kids under 13 or parents who 
enforce the ratings system.  For example, I couldn't take my 10 year-old 
daughter to DOCTOR DOLITTLE because of its PG-13 status.
But we went today to AIR BUD:  GOLDEN RECEIVER, a rather unwieldy title 
but a decent film for kids.  And only the second theatrical release this 
summer, I believe, rated G.  (MULAN is the other.)
The sequel to last year's AIR BUD, this film expands upon the premise of 
a dog's prowess at basketball.  With a quick opening that does its job - 
moving fast and reinforcing Bud's craftiness and basketball expertise --  
the story unfolds easily and reintroduces us to Josh Framm (Kevin 
Zegers), now an eighth grader, and his mother Jackie (Cynthia 
Stevenson).  After a series of events that complicate the plot, we 
discover the family dog's amazing skill at catching a football.
The football motif is corny and fun;  it makes the viewer remember the 
type of film she is watching.  This is a kids' movie, and it's all right 
that a dog catches passes and eludes tacklers.  It's even all right that 
there is no objection whatever that Bud dresses in a cute quasi-uniform 
and scores touchdowns against other eighth-grades football teams.
The complications are what doesn't work so well.  
First, Gregory Harrison plays Patrick Sullivan, a handsome veterinarian 
who cares for Bud.  It's refreshing, by the way, that Bud likes him back 
- a turnaround from many family pets' uncanny instincts and hatred of a 
human character.  It's Josh who feels threatened when Patrick begins to 
date his mother.  Even though Josh is himself a personable adolescent 
and not an obnoxious stereotype of a teenager, he shows a sulking 
attitude when Patrick and Jackie grow close.  Why would a smart and 
supportive father figure turn off a boy like Josh?  Are a couple of 
shots of  Josh's deceased test-pilot father enough to make us believe 
Josh's motivation to act like he does?
Another subplot involves a sinister but comic Russian duo, played by 
Nora Dunn and Perry Anzilotti.  Their motive is greed when they set out 
to complete their circus of stolen animals with unique talents.  Dunn 
and Anzilotti prove solid caricature actors as they pursue Bud.  Their 
schemes and fates provide quite a few chuckles when the subplot surfaces 
now and again.  What is missing is the connective tissue.  In the first 
BUD, Josh came in contact with the baddie, who was the dog's original 
owner.  Here, however, the Framm family never even sees the Boris and 
Natasha clones.  Yes, the slapstick adds another funny dimension to the 
story, but by the end we feel as if an alarm were set but failed to go 
off.  Too many details, including a threat to fire the lovable football 
coach, come to naught.
Cynthia Stevenson turns in a credible performance as Jackie.  She brings 
a mousy, compassionate quality to Josh's mother.  The film, with its 
general audience rating, does not show much intimacy between Jackie and 
Patrick, but the actors convince us that a happy ending is possible.  As 
I stated before, it's the relationship between Josh and Patrick that is 
oddly bloodless.
The animal training deserves some mention.  Four big, feathery dogs were 
used to portray Bud, and the editing is slick and watchable.  Somehow 
this dog manages to catch everything thrown his way.  Even though we can 
tell the pigskin is half-inflated, the effect is cute.  And the pooch's 
uniform is precious:  white-painted, ancient leather helmet, smallish 
shoulder pads that make him look half bulldog, and blue jersey featuring 
"K 9."
The film gave me a few belly laughs, which is a sort of litmus test I 
apply to comedies.  Even though AIR BUD:  GOLDEN RECEIVER is a B-film, 
it appeals to a G audience.  That and the laughter it provides are 
enough to earn our money at the box office.


Author
Scott Renshaw
     Quite a few things have changed since last we visited with Buddy, the
hoops-shooting golden retriever star of AIR BUD.  His human pal, Josh
Framm (Kevin Zegers) is starting junior high school; Josh's widowed mother
(Cynthia Stevenson, taking over from Wendy Makkena) is re-entering the
dating arena.  Even the name before the film has changed, with Disney
shuttling the sequel from its flagship banner to Dimension, the genre
division of Miramax (apparently realizing the original had too few fart
jokes to qualify as a live-action Disney film).  And of course, the most
significant and tragic change involved the death of the original Buddy
from cancer, though he was only one of several dogs to perform in AIR BUD.
     I only wish that with all those changes they could have rustled up a
new screenwriting team.  Paul Tamasy and Aaron Mendelsohn return to duty
for AIR BUD: GOLDEN RECEIVER, this time turning Buddy into a football star
when Josh goes out for the local hapless youth football team led by
good-natured, multiple-bypass-waiting-to-happen Coach Fanelli (Robert
Costanzo).  Naturally this leads to amusing sequences of Buddy befuddling
opposing defenses as he makes like Jerry Rice.  But wait, there's more!
You also get touching dramatic sub-text as Josh struggles to accept his
mom's new relationship with a kindly veterinarian (Gregory Harrison).  All
that, plus a bumbling pair of Russians (Nora Dunn and Perry Anzilotti) who
want to kidnap Buddy to join their trained animal circus.
     The original AIR BUD had good intentions and solid family values to
spare, but it tied them up in such derivative and unfocused package that
even the kids in the audience couldn't keep their attention on the
precocious pooch.  New director Richard Martin picks up the pace
considerably this time around, but he can't do much to create any
cohesiveness with this story.  From moment to moment, it's hard to tell
whether AIR BUD: GOLDEN RECEIVER is supposed to be an Afterschool Special,
a John Hughes film or an episode of Rocky and Bullwinkle (though with
considerably less wit).  Martin even throws in some low-rent vaudeville by
pairing his own dad Dick (of Rowan & Martin fame) with Tim Conway as goofy
play-by-play announcers. It's hard to take the messages about believing
in yourself and loving a new parent seriously when they're juxtaposed with
two clowns sliding around in the contents of a tank conveniently labeled
"Fish Guts."
     It's also hard to take seriously a film where a premise so bizarre is
shrugged off as a given.  To the credit of the original AIR BUD, at least
it showed people fumbling with the basketball rule book to figure out
whether a dog was eligible for the team.  This time around, Buddy trots
onto the field in his leather helmet and shoulder pads as though it were
the most natural thing in the world.  Perhaps somewhere on the cutting
room floor is a scene in which an arbitrator cites the "Air Bud"
precedent.  Without such a scene, everything that follows seems a little
insulting to the intelligence, and an indication of how lazy the
screenwriters were that they couldn't come up with some creative way to
land Buddy on the team.  Isn't it about time for a satiric poke at school
"inclusiveness" rules?
     I'm not pretending that AIR BUD: GOLDEN RECEIVER was made with me in
mind.  This one is a short attention span kiddie-caper which did have the
young ones clapping and guffawing with some regularity, and perhaps that
counts for something.  It even features a few decent throwaway gags,
including a llama named Dolly and a splendidly off-key rendition of the
American National Anthem. There's just something vaguely desperate about
this whole AIR BUD franchise -- they have build not just one film but a
series of them on what amounts to a better-than-average Stupid Pet Trick.
Sure, it's harmless enough, but the frantic amalgamation of disparate
elements gave me a headache.  It's a bit frightening to note that the
original Buddy's trainer Kevin DiCicco is putting together another
project, AIR BUD: THE NEXT GENERATION.  Perhaps in the course of teaching
a new dog a new trick, he could teach a new screenwriting team one I'd
really love to see:  how to write a script that might appeal to someone
over the age of five.

Author
Matt Williams
In just a year since the original Air Bud hit the movie theaters, a
sequel has hurriedly been made.  This despite the fact that the titular
star of the original died shortly after the premiere.  But don't let the
hurried production fool you into thinking they may have had a great
story idea on their hands.  Air Bud: Golden Receiver is just as idealess
as the original.
Apparently, Air Bud's basketball-shooting trick isn't such a difficult
one after all.  In under a year since the original Air Bud, a
replacement dog has been found and trained to duplicate the original
Buddy's basketball shooting feat.  In addition, this new Buddy is also
able to catch a football...making him a two-trick puppy.
Air Bud's pal Josh (Kevin Zegers) is back, and manages to make the
basketball-to-football transition along with his pet pooch.  But Josh
also has some more family problems to deal with in this installment. His
mother (now played by Cynthia Stevenson) has begun to date for the first
time since the death of Josh's dad.  And even though she finds the
perfect man (a vet, no less), played by Gregory Harrison, Josh still
can't conceive of anyone replacing his father.
And Buddy is in more trouble this time around (though in a completely
ridiculous and completely unrelated subplot).  In the original Air Bud,
he was targeted by an evil clown.  For the sequel, the baddies are
Russian animal circus owner Natalya (Nora Dunn) and her inept sidekick
Popov (Perry Anzilotti).
People (and children) who for some reason enjoyed the first Air Bud will
find more of the same here.  The rest of us will only find more tedium,
more repetition, and more sheer annoyance.
The main problem with this film, as well as the original, is that it is
completely based upon a dog trick.  In this case, the dog trick isn't
all that unusual.  You don't see a basketball shooting dog every day,
but ball-catching ones are a dime a dozen.
At least the family subplot in this one holds a bit more substance, if
not any spontaneity.  But the entire circus-plot should have been axed.
Nora Dunn's atrocious Russian accent is nearly enough to make you run
screaming from the theater.  Add in chimpanzee, skunk and llama hijinks
and you're definitely brewing up trouble. (What the heck is a skunk
doing in an animal circus anyway?)
The only bright spot in the movie is the fact that the dog is cute,
which may certainly be enough for children.  However, there are plenty
of better kids films out there than this one
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases
