Title
Review for Hugo Pool (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Hugo Pool" is the work of the man who gave us one of the
great irreverent movies of all time, "Putney Swope." This is in
itself enough reason to run to see this latest contribution,
which puts him at the helm after a six-year hiatus.  But alas, if
"Swope" might be considered today even more brazen given
the more extreme demands of the political correctness
movement, "Hugo" is a distressing disappointment.  Now,
Downey's heart is certainly in the right place with this
absurdist comedy which treats one of the world's dread
diseases with a touch of honey.  Downey's wife Laura died at
the age of thirty-six of ALS, or Lou Gehrig's disease, which
attacks and kills off nerves rendering one part of the body
after another paralyzed and unusable.  In the production
notes, Downey is quoted as feeling that his wife, who lost her
life so tragically at an early age, was responsible for making
his own life so meaningful.  Downey constructs "Hugo Pool"
around that theme, setting up characters far more quirky than
the Savannah denizens you've seen in Clint Eastwood's
"Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil," using his central
character to bring a dysfunctional family together and provide
for a feel-good bonding of a zany community.
   The trouble with the movie is not so much that it is off-the-
wall silly but that the characters, who apparently are given
considerable freedom to improvise, also seem to be holding
themselves back as though fearful of treating the ALS
affliction with frivolity.  The characters are for the most part
cartoonish enough, but if any trait burnishes through it is
repulsiveness rather than mere oddity.  With Malcolm
McDowell in the role of a seedy and unsympathetic heroin
addict, Richard Lewis as a bulgy-eyed brat, Robert Downey
Jr. as an unimaginably giddy film director, even the good guys
are unable to save the work from audience indifference.
   A road movie in which one adventure follows another,
"Hugo Pool" features the title character, played by Alysssa
Milano, who runs a business filling pools with water and
cleaning them.  With a heavy schedule of natatoria to saturate
and unpollute in a single day, she calls on several of the
people in her life to help her.  She will pay her mother
Minerva (Cathy Moriarty) enough to allow her to settle
accounts with her disgusting bookie so that she will not have
to work off the debt in bed with him.  She will permit Franz
Mazur (Robert Downey Jr.) to work off the $12,000 he owes
her by impressing him into her service.  And she sends her
dissolute dad, Henry (Malcolm McDowell) to the Colorado
River to extract enough gallons of water to fill the pool of one
of her clients--illegally, it seems, since California is
experiencing a drought.  The most sympathetic character of
the lot is Floyd (Patrick Dempsey), the uncomplaining victim
of ALS, who seems content to have his head scratched, his
body uprighted in his wheelchair, and his need for liquid
elimination assisted.  Functioning as a kind of angel, the dying
Floyd fashions the folks around him into better people, not he
least by giving Minerva a hot tip on a long shot in a harness
race and by allowing the cutesey Hugo Dugay to overcome
her fear of sex.
   The picture features a choice ensemble of actors who are
starved by the lack of a nourishing script and whose
improvised quips and sallies fall far short of hilarity.  The best
that can be said of the film is that it emphasizes a bold and
colorful visual design, is professionally edited and has a good
sound track particularly in offering a section of Richard
Wagner's "The Flying Dutchman."  Rated R.  Running Time:
93 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Murali Krishnan
Many people around Los Angeles have swimming pools, so pool maintenance
businesses are not uncommon, but the Hugo Pool company is a bit odd. It is
run by the spirited young Hugo Dugay (Alyssa Milano), and on one particular
day, she has 44 pools to clean. Hugo enlists her father Henry (Malcom
McDowell), a former junkie, to steal water from the Colorado River to fill
the pool of a customer. Hugo also gets her mother Minerva (Cathy Moriarty),
a gambling addict, to join her. Henry and Minerva have been long divorced,
and the dysfunctional family somehow attract other bizarre characters to
them. During his water foray, Henry takes along a weird hitchhiker (Sean
Penn) with a dazzling pair of shoes. Hugo and Minerva run into a customer
confined to a wheelchair, Floyd (Patrick Dempsey), who is apparently the
only "normal" person in the story beside Hugo, and decide to let him join
them in the back of their on their rounds. Floyd has given Minerva a feel
for a winner of an upcomming horse race, so she is dying to get to the track
after the pools are done. To get all the pools done, each visit consists of
quickly scooping up floating leaves, dumping in a few chemicals, and
interacting with the odd customers, like Franz (Robert Downey Jr.), who is a
film director on the run because he shot an extra on his set.
Basing a film on quirky characters is not a simple task. To do it correctly
there must be a balance of both oddness and reality. That is, oddness can be
an exaggeration of the character but it cannot be the sole definition of the
character. The main problem with this film is that it tries to be amusing by
having eccentric characters, but instead it goes overboard and becomes
overbearing. In fact, the character of Franz is so exaggerated (from an
unidentifyable accent to manic behavior) that he becomes grating, and almost
makes the film unwatchable. At times, some characters take on a more
brooding quality, in an apparent attempt to give the story a more profound
base, but instead of balancing them, it seems to exaggerate them further. It
is clear that there are metaphorical meanings attached to the characters and
their stories, but this gets lost in their silliness. Although there is an
unpredictability to the characters, the main plot and subplot go exactly
where one would expect them to go.
The perfomances of the cast lacked credibility in general. Although Cathy
Moriarty frames a believable Minerva, the rest of the cast is handicapped by
poorly writing, and as a result we feel like we are watching actors playing
characters, rather than the characters themselves.
Recommended against. Perhaps this film can be enjoyed if the viewer likes
offbeat films and is in a forgiving mood. A few parts were entertaining, but
I almost quit in the middle.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: Undetermined
Running Length: 1:32
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Brief nudity, mature themes, 
      profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/5/97 & 5/7/97
Cast: Alyssa Milano, Patrick Dempsey, Malcolm McDowell, Cathy Moriarty, 
      Robert Downey Jr., Richard Lewis, Sean Penn
Director: Robert Downey Sr.
Producer: Barbara Ligeti
Screenplay: Robert Downey Sr. and Laura Downey
Cinematography: Joseph Montgomery
     Robert Downey, Sr. is an original American independent film maker.  
He has been at his craft for more than 30 years now -- his debut, CHAFED 
ELBOWS, came out in 1965.  His best known work, the trilogy of PUTNEY 
SWOPE, POUND, and GREASER'S PALACE, was released between 1969 and 1972.  
Downey has always taken his own road, never worrying about or giving 
into commercial pressure.  When asked by the producer of one of his 
films whether it would make money, he replied "Not a dime."  
     Three decades of film making haven't dulled Downey's edge, and, in 
1997, he's back with a terrific new feature -- an upbeat, quirky 
romantic comedy that reminds us just how stale most entries into this 
genre are.  But HUGO POOL, called by its creator a "comedy with serious 
relief" isn't just fun and games.  For Downey, there's another, deeply 
personal side to the film.  HUGO POOL promotes awareness of ALS 
(commonly known as Lou Gehrig's Disease), the degenerative condition 
that claimed the life of the film maker's wife and co-screenwriter, 
Laura, in 1994.  True to his nature, however, Downey never gets maudlin 
or preachy about the subject.
     HUGO POOL is essentially a day in the life of Hugo (Alyssa Milano), 
a Southern California pool cleaner.  As she goes from house-to-house, we 
meet members of her strange gallery of clients:  Franz Mazur (Robert 
Downey Jr.), a deranged film director who murdered one of his extras; 
Chic Chicalini (Richard Lewis), a gangster with a killer stare; and 
Floyd Galen (Patrick Dempsey), a victim of ALS who ends up joining Hugo 
on her rounds.  Also lending a hand are Hugo's burnt-out father, Henry 
(Malcolm McDowell), and her gambling-obsessed mother, Minerva (Cathy 
Moriarty).  
     The love aspect of HUGO POOL involves Hugo and Floyd, and it's 
touching, sweet, and funny.  Despite Floyd's considerable disability, 
the attraction between the two grows as the film progresses, eventually 
reaching a satisfying conclusion.  Patrick Dempsey, whose character 
can't move or talk, does all of his acting with his face and eyes.  
Alyssa Milano, whose resume includes several B-grade exploitation 
flicks, is a real revelation.  As Hugo, she's great -- tough, energetic, 
and charming.  If she wants to impress directors in the future, she 
should show them her work in HUGO POOL.
     The supporting cast is top-notch.  Malcolm McDowell does his best 
Jimmy Cagney accent while portraying an ex-druggie with an unusual 
method of therapy.  Cathy Moriarty is a woman who will go to any lengths 
to place a new bet.  Sean Penn plays a mysterious drifter who wears a 
registered pair of blue shoes (Penn did the role with the stipulation 
that he got to keep the shoes).  And Robert Downey Jr., in his sixth 
outing for his father, willingly pokes fun at his own off-screen image 
(HUGO POOL was filmed shortly after his most serious round of drug-
related police troubles).
     Like David Mamet and relative newcomer Quentin Tarantino, Downey 
writes some of the best dialogue around, and his script sparkles with 
it.  His words aren't the kind of things real people would say, but they 
have a rhythm and charm all their own.  Characters make comments like 
"Chances are taken, not given," "I'm too superficial to be hurt," and 
"If words could speak, I still would have nothing to say."  Out of 
context, these phrases are clever; when seen as part of the film, 
they're uproarious.  
     As Hollywood churns out $100 million blockbusters and the Miramaxs 
and Fine Lines of the world go after the next ENGLISH PATIENT or SHINE, 
idiosyncratic, thoroughly-delightful features like HUGO POOL are 
becoming more and more of an endangered species.  Thankfully, there are 
still directors out there like Robert Downey Sr. who don't care what the 
market will bear and are willing to do whatever's necessary to get their 
own singular vision to the screen.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
