Title
Review for Honey, I Blew Up the Kid (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Edwin Jahiel
HONEY, I BLEW UP THE KID (1992) * 1/2. Directed by Randal 
Kleiser. Written by Thom Eberhardt, Peter Elbling, Garry 
Goodrow. Cinematography, John Hora. Production design, Leslie 
Dilley. Cast: Daniel and Joshua Shalikar, Rick Moranis, Marcia 
Strassman, Robert Oliveri, Amy O'Neill, Lloyd Bridges et al. A 
Walt Disney release. 89 minutes. Rated PG. 
A honey of a movie? Not. Its predecessor, "Honey, I Shrunk the 
Kids," was far richer in possibilities, suspense, plot, 
characters and humor. 
Had the filmmakers kept faith with the original's grammar, the 
sequel would have been titled "Honey, I Blown Up the Kid." But 
nobody cares about tradition these days. 
It's all about Adam, played by the Shalikar twins who are 
variously reported as 2 or 2 1/2 years old. It depends, I 
suppose, from whether you count the age at the start or the 
end of the filming.  
Accidentally zapped by a special ray, Adam becomes larger each 
time he is exposed to an electromagnetic force field. In 
stages, he reaches 112 feet--at least that's what the press 
release says--a world record for a human. The previous 
champion I could locate was "The Amazing Colossal Man," only 
60 feet tall.  
The ray's inventor is Wayne Szalinski, Adam's dad. He is once 
again played by Rick Moranis as a hyper type and a super 
high-tech Rube Goldberg. He looks dim and is inept with simple 
daily chores. Welcome back to the old cliche about the 
absent-minded professor, the spacey scientist or the 
intellectual discombobulated by "real" life. (A lot of 
strange people are named Wayne these days, in movies).  
"Honey 2" is a single-joker, whereas "Honey1" had variety. The 
Spanish saying "if you lie down with babies, you wake up  wet" 
applies here. If your entire movie is about a colossal kid, 
there's little you can do except follow him with the camera, 
hope for the best and try to be flexible, fitting whatever 
baby does to your framework. 
As Adam's size increases so does the movie's yawn quotient. 
Two feeble mini-subplots--Wayne's nasty superior, Adam's older 
brother and a babysitter--are of small help. The film does 
very little with people, context or dialogue. It's all about 
special effects and Adam's "ooh, aah" cuteness. Big deal. Adam 
doesn't say much either. A little Eve would have been more 
interesting, since girls seem to develop speech faster.  
I retained just one nice, throwaway conceit and two good 
lines. The Szalinskis' suburb in desert-surrounded Las Vegas 
is called "Vista del Mar" ("Sea View"). The sentences, funny 
in context, are: "There's no way I'm changing those diapers" 
and "Look at that mother!"   
The special effects bring modern techniques to the venerable 
screen genres about gigantic people, animals or prehistoric 
creatures, whose size was caused by arrested evolution, 
encounters with aliens, nuclear radiation and such.  Some of 
those pictures became classics, like "The Lost World" (1924) 
or, better yet, "King Kong" with all its mythological, 
Freudian or sociological implications. Sometimes, as in "The 
Attack of the 50 Ft.Woman," the movies dreadful enough to 
become howls.  
"Honey 2" is neither campy, droll, or suspenseful. You know 
that no harm will come to the child, that Adam will do only 
material damage,  and that he will get back to regulation size 
at the end. I heard just one big laugh from the audience, and 
this from an adult. The many children in the theater were 
quiet throughout. Confused by the sights? By the technobabble? 
Overawed? Plain bored? 
Nowadays even the best special effects seldom impress the 
public. We take movie magic for granted. It is no longer like 
earlier periods when giant squids, invisible men or 
Lilliputians took the spectators' breath away and had them 
asking each other: "How did they do it?"  
In the small part of a laboratory watchman is redhead Ken 
Tobey, that likable second-shelf actor, who, as Kenneth Tobey, 
had his hour of glory when he played the lead in the classic 
sci-fi horror "The Thing" of 1951. Nice to see him again. It's 
a small bonus for aficionados clutching at straws.  

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Silly but undeniably enjoyable satire
     on 1950s science fiction films has the Szalinski family
     accidentally enlarging their baby to Brobdingnagian
     proportions.  Somewhat better than it really deserves to ne
     Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).  (Relevant diatribe follows the
     review!)
     At the current rate I would expect by the turn of the century the film
industry will have churned out more take-offs, pastiches, and satires of
1950s science fiction films than there were science fiction films made in
the 1950s.  None have ever seemed very good to me, but HONEY, I BLEW UP THE
KID is at least more light-hearted than most.  (Of course, the title may
sound less good-natured than intended, but all the ads make sure everybody
knows in just what sense "blew up" is intended.)  This is, of course, the
sequel to HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS, and though HONEY, I BLEW UP THE KID
began life as a script for an unrelated film BIG BABY, it was worked into a
sequel for the previous film.  Actually, it was to have been much the same
plot as THE AMAZING COLOSSAL MAN with a baby.  Echoes of that film still
abound in the script.
     In the years since the last film, a typical soulless corporation has
taken over Wayne Szalinski's scale-bending projects and is trying to magnify
and reduce objects without much luck.  Rick Moranis as Wayne continues not
to get much respect in spite of being the genius behind it all.  Still, it
is only Wayne that can make things work and even he cannot do exactly what
he wants.  What he accidentally creates is a two-and-a-half-year-old Adam
Szalinski who grows when he passes through electromagnetic flux.
(Conservation of matter?  What's that all about?)  We end up with a ten-
story baby clomping his way through Las Vegas--even the same streets that
Glenn Manning, the COLOSSAL MAN, walked.  This giant, however, is not shot
off of Boulder/Hoover Dam.  There is only a poster of the dam to remind us
of the original.  Incidentally, as well all know, any satire of 1950s
science fiction has to have a small role for either Kenneth Tobey or Dick
Miller.  This time it's Tobey's turn, with him playing a security guard.
     Standards for special effects have come a long way since THE AMAZING
COLOSSAL MAN (special effects in Bert. I. Gordon films were always
particularly bad!).  While in HONEY, I BLEW UP THE KID it rarely is
difficult to tell how an effect was created, there are only a few effects
that genuinely look wrong.  The only really bad effect that I noted was a
full-size model of a baby chest and arm in the background.  The arm just
does not move as wildly as it does in the surrounding scenes.  Kudos should
go to the "Baby Wranglers" listed in the credits, since Adam (played by
Daniel and Joshua Shalikas) seems always to do exactly the right thing at
the right time.  And it is true that the fictional Adam and the real life
Shalikas all seem to be extraordinarily well-behaved.
     My rating for this light-hearted piece of summer fluff is +1 on the -4
to +4 scale.
     I noted with some disappointment that the credits of HONEY, I BLEW UP
THE KID acknowledge similarities to the story "The Attack of the Giant Baby"
by Kit Reed.  CINEFANTASTIQUE reports that after Reed saw a promo for the
film she took the Disney organization to court over similarities to her
story.  Actually the Reed story concentrates on the nastier aspects of
babies and shows them magnified.  If, indeed, Reed thinks she invented and
owns the idea of over-size babies getting loose and causing problems in her
1981 story, I might suggest that she read (or re-read) the 1904 novel THE
FOOD OF THE GODS by H. G. Wells.  The mechanism for creating the giant baby
is in the realm of physics in the new movie.  Reed's mechanism is nearly
identical to Wells's.  That is, she has the baby eat a food with fantastic
growth properties.  I seriously doubt that the Wells estate has taken Reed
to court, and I can tell you for a fact that her story bears no similar
acknowledgement to Wells.  Science fiction has been in the past a field
where people could feel free to play with others' ideas and put new twists
on them.  But I suppose as long as some people in the field have deep
pockets and other people have greed, that can no longer be the case.  Be it
here noted that the concept of giant babies causing problems has somehow
been transferred from the Wells estate to Reed.  Presumably the concept of
time travel is still the property of the Wells estate.  David Brin probably
owes royalties on uplift to either Wells for THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU or
Nigel Kneale for QUATERMASS AND THE PIT.  Invisibility and alien invasion
again revert to the Wells estate who effectively own a controlling interest
in modern science fiction.  So it goes.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When I was growing up, the kids' movies, even (or especially) the
B movies, had one redeeming feature: a fascination with science.  What
better way to enliven a kid's imagination than a science fiction film?
     The HONEY I SHRUNK THE KIDS series provides not only science
fiction, but the appreciation for creativity and the whole invention
process.  Moreover, they celebrate quirky people as people to be
admired rather than ridiculed since their big ideas might just work.
     The second film in this series is director Randal Kleiser's HONEY
I BLEW UP THE KID.  Released in 1992, it represents a nicely done B
movie for the whole family.  The slightly hokey special effects are
just realistic enough not to be ridiculed.
     The same cast for the Szalinski family is back from the original,
but this time they have a two year old named Adam, played alternatively
by twins Daniel and Joshua Shalikar.  Rick Moranis repeats his role as
Wayne, the father and Rube Goldberg-style inventor.  Marcia Strassman
plays his understanding wife Diane.  Robert Oliveri, as Nick, has hit
puberty and has his eyes cast on Adam's baby-sitter, Mandy Park (Keri
Russell).  Amy O'Neill returns only briefly as Nick's sister Amy.
     The premise of the show is that Wayne is trying to perfect a
machine to enlarge items.  Adam accidentally walks into the path of its
laser, and, voila, giant toddler on the way.  As Adam grows by leaps
and bounds, they figure out that he has growth spurts when he comes
close to electrical waves.
     Where does he go to sop up electricity?  Why Las Vegas, of course,
with all its neon glitter.  Beside, what more visually interesting
place to film a giant than a backdrop of neon figures as big as this
Godzilla-sized toddler.
     I will not reveal the resolution to their predicament, but here's
a hint.  "There's one thing every little kid knows," Diane tells us.
"Daddies mean fun; mommies mean business."
     A film that from start to finish is good spirited family fun, it
never lapses into parody and never pretends to be more than it is.
     HONEY I BLEW UP THE KID runs just 1:29.  It is rated PG, but I am
not sure why.  The film would be fine for all ages.  The recent video
HONEY WE SHRUNK OURSELVES is our 8-year-old Jeffrey's favorite in this
series, but he likes HONEY I BLEW UP THE KID too.  I recommend this
picture to you and your family and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
