Title
Review for Freaked (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Alex Winter, best known as Bill S. Preston in the ‘Bill and Ted' films he 
made with Keanu Reeves, co-wrote, co-produced and co-directed this goofy 
schlock comedy.  It's almost a fanboy project dedicated to makeup FX films – 
the kind of thing you wish would feature cameo appearances by Rick Baker, 
Dick Smith, Tom Savini and Rob Bottin.  Story starts with former child actor 
Ricky (Winter, who looks like a throwback to a 50s juvie feature) hiring 
himself out as a spokesperson for a big corporation with concerns in South 
America.  It's the last place in the world you'd expect to find a Freak 
Show, but that's what Winter and his friends run into, and then become a 
part of.  Usually this would signal trouble ahead for those in the audience 
who are less than impressed with the ‘ick' factor that is the standard of 
most makeup FX sequences, but there's nothing to worry about in this story: 
the off-the-wall ‘freak' makeup – and there is plenty of it –  is in the 
service of comedy, not gross-out horror.
There's plenty of amusing material to choose from in the lineup of freaks 
that become Winters' allies, but my personal favorite would have to be Bob 
Goldthwaite's ‘Sockhead' (that face! that voice!  a perfect combination!), 
who I find hysterically funny.  Randy Quaid, one of the few cast members not 
smothered in makeup, gives a jolly, cackling performance as the freakshow 
proprietor.  I'm impressed that Winter got the likes of Brooke Shields and 
Mr T to send themselves up so outrageously while also being game enough 
himself to be disfigured for most of the film's running time in laborious 
makeup (his buddy Reeves contributes an uncredited performance and is even 
more unrecognizable as ‘Dawg Boy').  The humor of FREAKED is scattershot and 
falls flat a few times, but there's still a lot of gags to make it worth 
viewing.  And if you're tired of computer-generated visuals then you'll 
appreciate the domestic feel of the film's effects – there's a whole pile of 
latex on show and even some claymation (which includes a glimpse of the 
Cyclops from THE SEVENTH VOYAGE OF SINBAD).  It's an energetic, crafty piece 
which wears two faces: an independent feature that has overcome the 
limitations of a modest budget, and/or a slick studio effort that is 
low-tech by design.  Whatever the case, it still comes across as a personal 
project, as if Winter had always wanted to make a home movie with lots of 
cool monster makeup and saw his chance when he got into Hollywood.  It's 
clear that FREAKED is pitching for the youth market straight from its 
opening titles, which could easily stand alone as a video clip if you were 
to remove the credits.  Readers of ‘Fangoria' will probably love it.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
