Title
Review for Big Hit, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
24

Author
Jon Popick
The Big Hit does not explicitly state that it takes place in the present
day. I'm only guessing that it's supposed to, but I still remain
completely stumped. See, the problem is that the characters use phrases
that were rubbed into the ground over ten years ago. The laughable
dialogue includes, but is in no way limited to, the following
breakdance-era gems:
You can understand my confusion. And here's a sample of an eloquent
soliloquy delivered by the main character, Melvin Smiley (Mark Wahlberg,
Boogie Nights) as he ponders his own inadequacies in relation to his two
lady friends:
I can't stand the idear of dose two not likin' me. Der. I said it.
I'll give you a minute to shake the image of Shakespeare that was no
doubt conjured by that delightful snippet of wisdom. Speaking of Billy,
the foil in The Big Hit is pretty much a carbon copy of John Leguizamo's
hilariously over-the-top Tybalt in William Shakespeare's Romeo & Juliet.
This time, the offender is called Cisco (Lou Diamond Phillips, Courage
Under Fire), a badass who unimaginatively mutters "lesbian" at three
women that shun his greasy advances. Ironic because, in real life,
Phillips wife left him for clam-bumper Melissa Etheridge.
Have I forgotten the story? Well, it's about four perfectly chiseled
musclehead hitmen. They work for a crime boss named Paris (Avery Brooks,
Deep Space Nine), who somehow makes tons of green by having these four
dumbbells dispose of rival gang members. They're a slick crew,
consisting of antacid swilling Melvin, plotting Cisco, compulsive
masturbator Crunch Bokeem Woodbine, Caught Up) and pretty-boy Vinnie
(Antonio Sabato, Jr.). They decide to earn some extra cash by
moonlighting, but their first job involves unknowingly kidnapping
catholic school student Keiko Nishi (China Chow), the daughter of a
wealthy Japanese businessman and more importantly, the goddaughter of
Paris.
In addition to accidentally pissing off their boss, what these four
goons don't also realize that Keiko's pop has recently lost all of his
money in "a big Horrywood movie" bomb. The repo men haul everything out
of his house after he goes bankrupt, but he is still inexplicably left
with a call-tracing device. Don't even ask.
Directed by Hong Kong action helmer Kirk Wong (Jackie Chan's Crime
Story), the The Big Hit has a terrific opening sequence. The perfectly
choreographed slo-mo gunplay is no doubt inspired by executive producer
John Woo (Face/Off) and brilliantly shot by Danny Nowak (TV's Le Femme
Nikita). The story, from first time screenwriter Ben Ramsey, is pretty
weak and implausibly ends with one of the least understandable chase
scenes ever.
The Big Hit is just like The Wizard of Oz. Melvin is the always worried
Dorothy, Cisco is the yapping Chihuahua Toto while Crunch and
Vinniewell, they both need a brain. And both films start with The.
Proof positive, my friend, proof positive.
PLANET SICK-BOY:  http://home.eznet.net/~jpopick

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: April 24, 1998
Starring: Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, Christina Applegate,
Avery Brooks, Bokeem Woodbine, Lela Rochon, China Chow, Antonio Sabato
Jr.
Directed by: Kirk Wong
Distributed by: Sony Pictures Entertainment / TriStar Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (violence, pervasive language, some sexuality) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/bighit.htm
John Woo, who is credited with plenty of action films in his twenty-five
years in the motion picture industry, has a certain style of filmmaking
that no matter how intense the direction is, it cannot be escaped.
Similar to The Replacement Killers, another John Woo-produced/somebody
else-directed action film (surprisingly about another hit man with a
conscience), The Big Hit has an intensity and an off-the-cuff feel that
reeks of John Woo. While this in itself is no problem, Director Kirk
Wong feels the need to fight this Woo-ness, and instead of succumbing to
the style of that particular filmmaker he tries to stretch his product
into something else. Needless to say, that something else isn't as good. 
The closest comparison to that something else is 1997's Grosse Pointe
Blank (yet another hit man with a conscience), but that outstandingly
comical film had a far more grown-up feel to it. Similarly, John Woo's
most enjoyable films (Broken Arrow and Face/Off) retained a certain
amount of maturity no matter what the tempo was. However, The Big Hit
extends itself far beyond any barriers and is content to give the viewer
some shoot-'em-up silliness. One of the running jokes in the movie is
that the main character has an overdue rental of King Kong Lives, and
even as buildings are exploding around him he risks life and limb to
save the tape. 
The main character is Melvin Smiley (Mark Wahlberg), whose role is as
unlikely as his name. A hit man who can't stand the idea of anyone not
liking him, he falls prey to his girlfriend's and his fianceé's requests
for money. And of course, as a very good hit man, he's got lots of money
to give. So even though he makes thousands, he's close to broke, and to
remedy his situation he goes on a rogue assignment with fellow hit men
Cisco (Lou Diamond Phillips) and Crunch (Bokeem Woobine). Unfortunately,
the kidnappee (China Chow) for this particular job is the goddaughter of
Paris (Avery Brooks), Melvin's boss. Infuriated at the transgression,
Paris calls in Cisco to question him of his knowledge of the job, and in
looking for the easy way out, Cisco pins it on Melvin. 
None of the actors are particularly outstanding, save the possibilities
of the bossy Phillips (Courage Under Fire) and the sensual Chow. Avery
Brooks, whose role on TV's Deep Space Nine usually gives him quite a lot
of gravity, is pawned off as a tightly wound lunatic who kills at will.
The hangdog likes of Mark Wahlberg (Boogie Nights) can't sustain their
novelty, and soon his acting is just as bad as the pacing. The movie's
only high points are the take-no-prisoners action sequence at the
beginning, and then the extended explosiveness of the finale. Other than
that, the dry humor and the general wasted feel of the movie doesn't
lend itself to anything great. Worth a look, but perhaps not for all
types.
FINAL AWARD FOR "THE BIG HIT": 2.0 stars - a fair movie.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, Christina Applegate,
Avery Brooks, Bokeem Woodbine, Lela Rochon, China Chow, Antonio Sabŕto
Jr.        
Ingredients: 
Hip young hitmen, suburban love problems, kidnapping plan that
backfires, running gags about masturbation and an overdue video tape
Synopsis: 
THE BIG HIT  is an action comedy about the weekend adventure of Mel, who
leads a double life as both an accomplished hitman, and a handsome but
wishy-washy suburban 20-something. In the story Mel (Mark Wahlberg),
Cisco (Lou Diamond Phillips), Crunch (Bokeem Woodbine), and Vinnie
(Antonio Sabŕto Jr.) are hip, young guys who make easy money as hitmen
for mob boss Paris (Avery Brooks). Unknown to their boss, one day the
boys moonlight by taking a kidnapping job on the side. But it all
backfires when their victim, a Japanese tycoon's daughter named Keiko
(China Chow), turns out to be Paris' godchild. When boss Paris comes
a-calling, Cisco, in saving his own hide, frames Mel.
Talk about a bad weekend for poor Maalox-swigging Mel! Aside from the
mob coming after him, several things happen: His mistress Chantel (Lela
Rochon) runs off with his money and another man. Mel must also field a
visit from his fiancee Pam's irritating parents. A zealous video store
clerk hounds Mel for an overdue video. Lastly, Mel begins falling in
love with the kidnappee.
Will nice hitman Mel ever get his life together?
Opinion: 
On paper it sounds great, but in the theater it's different. The action
content is fine, but the audience is asked to swallow some improbable
characterizations. For example, when - - early in the movie - -  Mel
forks over his entire salary to Cisco; it seems like an odd thing to do.
Also in the movie the kidnap victim Keiko falls in love with her
kidnapper Mel after about two seconds. That's a little quick.
As Mel, Mark Wahlberg (formerly singer Marky Mark) does an admirable
acting job. His action is pretty good, too, though Marky throws the left
hook a little slow because the deltoid is stiff. Similarly Lou Diamond
Phillips entertains adequately as the over-the-top fast-talking,
knife-swinging, gold-toothed Cisco.
Unfortunately, THE BIG HIT tries to be hip, but ends up feeling fluffy
and mindless because the action is pretty, but the comedy doesn't quite
succeed. This makes THE BIG HIT watchable in a cute, 'pop' sort of way,
but plot-wise the movie doesn't seem to go anywhere, even with cinematic
gunfire and explosions in the background.
I lived a number of years in Tokyo, where comic books are filled with
pop idol characters - - muscular arms, westernized, doe-eyed young hunks
with hip hairstyles; and female Japanese schoolgirl characters: all
blouses and skirts and high socks (or sailor suits), and the occasional
fatherly Asian tycoon stereotype. 
The concept behind THE BIG HIT is to insert these popular types of
characters into a Western setting, mixing American pop music, lingo, and
apparel with Hong Kong style action, choreography, and balletic
cinematography. This is all part of a larger trend - - something I call
the 1990s Hong Kong/ Hollywood connection, whose biggest players are
producer Terence Chang and director John Woo. 
Basically, in recent years a lot of Chinese talent has come to Tinsel
Town. Think of directors John Woo (Face/off), Tsui Hark (Double Team),
or Stanley Tong (Mr. Magoo). Or actors/actresses Michelle Yeoh (Tomorrow
Never Dies), Chow Yun-fat (Replacement Killers), or Jackie Chan (Rumble
in the Bronx). All of these people, in one way or another, are on a
quest for a Holy Grail, the grail being a Hollywood formula that blends
elements of East with West to create box office success. 
I think this formula is feasible, as all of these people have had some
measure of success. But the 'magic' formula that works very time has not
yet been found. Some things work, and some things don't, sometimes.
And audiences genuinely enjoy action scenes and graceful cinematography,
especially if they augment an already strong plot. Watching a John Woo
or Jackie Chan film, one is impressed with the meticulous attention paid
to choreography sequences and graceful cinematography. Choreography is
one element of Eastern film culture that has successfully taken root in
America. Let's face it, nobody in the movies fights like John Wayne
anymore! 
A less successful element has been the idea of mixing action with
comedy. Hong Kong film likes to mix quirky comedy in with the action.
Most Western film stick with straight action (Diehard), but Quentin
Tarantino does the action/comedy thing, too. However, there's an
important East/West difference in the concept of comedy:
Much of Western comedy is situation driven. For example, in SEINFELD,
none of the main characters is a sendup of a stereotype, but each main
character is a bit eccentric, and gets into goofy comedic situations. On
the other hand, a lot of Eastern comedy is character driven. Actors
typically do over-the-top sendups of well-known racial or occupational
stereotypes. 
This comedic cultural difference has consequences. In THE BIG HIT Mel
meets his fiancee's parents. One is a comedic sendup of an alcoholic,
and the other is racial sendup of a Jewish mother. The portrayal is
meant to be funny, but I didn't hear a single laugh in the theater.
Similarly, another character in THE BIG HIT is an exaggerated nerdy
video store clerk; he didn't get an laughs, either. The sendup of the
Japanese tycoon father also fell flat. I see this as a cultural
difference. In the West, loony situation comedy goes over much better
than racial or occupational character sendups, which may be considered
borderline politically incorrect.
Another difference is the use of pop culture references in movies. Both
East and West use them. In Eastern movies, pop culture supplies a
decorative element of familiarity, much like the character sendups. But
in Western film, pop culture is always mixed with witty repartee or
dialogue (SCREAM, PULP FICTION, etc.). But in the West, pop culture
alone, minus the wittiness, is considered mindless MTV fluff. 
THE BIG HIT could be stronger if it replaces the overdone sendups with
eccentric originals, switched to more situational suspense for comedy,
pushes a stronger plot, and throws in wittier barbs. To make a long
story short, I like two things about THE BIG HIT. I like the premise (a
competent hit man doubles as an inept 20-something), and I like the
action sequences. On the other hand THE BIG HIT unsuccessfully tries to
squeeze comedy out of character stereotypes, and lacks snappy dialogue.
This succeeds to some extent, but comes off as 'okay' rather than truly
big. 

Author
Steve Harbaugh
The Big Hit,from Sony Pictures is a delightfully corny action romp which
finds you glued to the screen every minute of it. Although not a future
Oscar winner the movie does make you so that there isn't a moment of
boredom within it. The Big Hit is plain stupid fun set for the under 20
male generation.
The movie centers around Mel (Mark Wahlberg),a professional hitman with
a heart of gold. Mel,along with fellow hitman associates Cisco (Lou
Diamond Phillips), Crunch (Bokeem Woodbine), Vince (Antonio Sabato, Jr.)
and Gump (Robin Dunne) get pulled into a moonlighting
gig gone bad. A seemingly quick and easy kidnapping turns into a all-out
war when it is revealed the kidnapee Keiko (China Chow) is actually the
godchild of the boss of the hitmen,Paris (Avery Brooks). Cisco,the man
behind the kidnapping turns against his colleagues to save his own hide
and goes after Mel along with Paris and Keiko's father. Addionally,Mel's
mistress,Chantel (Lela Rochon) skips town with some of his earnings.
Mel's fiance,Pam (Christina Applegate) is also involved when her
disapproving parents come to visit,Mort (Elliott Gould) and Jeanne
(Lainie Kazan) and get thrown into the backdrop of the whole sherade as
well. Balancing trying to impress the future in-laws,dodging bullets,and
many more things plague Mel.
The movie opens to a attention-getting action-packed sequence followed
by the bare hind-ends of
the hitmen in their lockerroom. Obviously a treat for the ladies in the
audience. The movie differs from other action movies...the cornyness
involved. A eccentric video store clerk bugs Mel through the entire film
about returning a copy of King Kong Lives to the videostore. The movie
actually escalates towards the end more around returning the
videocassette than the actual "main conflict"...
a delightful change of pace which adds some humor. Another humorous
aspect of the movie is Crunch's new discovery of self-love. That's all I
will say. Also,Mel's constant consumption of Maalox for his stomach
problems...was it just added as a shameless plug?? The movie diminishes
some action scenes with the much-needed element of humor. And it plays
very nicely indeed.
Some moments in the film push towards black comedy. In the opening,Mel
places two garbage bags of dead body parts in his bathtub...as much as
it tries to be humourous,something so gruesome cannot be. Cisco
also,following a slightly humorous speech upon encountering Gump does
away with his partner to save his own hide. A shocking transformation
which makes us now view Cisco as more of an enemy. Another situation
involves a geeky upperclass teenager making out with Keiko in the back
of a limo which in turn has Mel (who is posing as the limo driver)
blowing his brains all over the back of the limo...A situation similar
to the one in Pulp Fiction.
Some parts of the movie will have you laughing out
loud,on-the-edge-of-your-seat,or "just watching". Although,basically
most of the movie centers on the first two. Yet the movie lacks any
bored moments there are times you are just watching to see what might
happen next. It lacks many things however.
The Big Hit is a good movie to see if you would enjoy a movie similar to
Lethal Weapon meets The Naked Gun. Although not near as corny as The
Naked Gun it is not however,as serious as Lethal Weapon. You be the
judge. The movie contains lots of violence (From Keiko's horny friend
being decapitated by a bullet through the skull to a bathtub filled with
body parts to numerous killings of "the bad guys" with big guns). There
is a good share of profanity as well. The sexuality ranges from the bare
butts of the hitmen to Mel & Pam's butt-grabbing scenes to the sexual
inneundos of Mel and Keiko. Mostly however,the big complaint for parents
with whiny kids wanting to see this movie would be the violence.
The movie in my opinion is very good. A "wake-up call" if you will to
hopelessly dull action flicks which need that element of humor. The
movie although sometimes finds you "just watching" as I mentioned
before...but for the most part it's good...a nice mix of action and
humor. See it if you want to,if violence doesn't offend you,if the back
ends of movie hunks makes you drool,or if you crave action.
Overall : B +

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Kirk Wong
Cast:  Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, Christina Applegate, Avery
Brooks, Bokeem Woodbine, Lela Rochon
Screenplay:  Ben Ramsey
Producers:  Wesley Snipes, Warren Zide
Runtime:  
US Distribution:  Sony Pictures/TriStar
Rated R:  violence, language, sex
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
I didn't hate The Big Hit, even though it is a stupefyingly terrible
film.  For the entirety of its running time, my eyes were attached to
the screen, and I never once got bored.  I found the film interesting
because of its unique awfulness:  this is such a confused disaster of a
film that it's entertaining to watch it in the same way that it's
entertaining to witness a thirty car pileup on a freeway spaghetti
bowl.  
As a narrative, The Big Hit is pure garbage, never truly deciding its
genre and constantly crossing all kinds of boundaries.  It reminded me a
lot of Grosse Pointe Blank, which is a similar film that fails in a lot
of the same ways.  It's fine to mix genres, if the film makers know what
they're doing.  Unfortunately, writer Ben Ramsey and director Kirk Wong
don't seem to know how to handle the material, and the result is an
action film that wants to be a comedy.  The biggest problem with the
amalgamation, in this case, is that the film is absurd and the comedy is
out of place.  But it sure is a fascinating failure.
Marky . . . er, Mark Wahlberg stars as Melvin Surley, a hitman.  He's a
good hitman, apparently, although his tactics seem a bit rambunctious
(he doesn't snipe or make clean kills--he just kicks the door down and
shoots everything).  He works with a few other hitmen--Cisco (Lou
Diamond Phillips), Crunch (Bokeem Woodbine), and Vinnie (Antonio
Sabbato, Jr.).  They're a nice bunch of muscular guys, who stand around
in the locker room after working out and compare masturbation to sex.  
They all work for a man named Paris (Avery Brooks), who is rich,
powerful, and in constant need of four sloppy hitmen.  It is very
important that they never go beyond their boss and do work on their own;
this, of course, is where the plot comes in.  They decide to kidnap a
young Japanese girl named Keiko (China Chow), who has a rich father. 
When they do this, it turns out she is Paris' . . . Goddaughter!  It's
very bad to have Paris against you.
The story is standard action film stuff.  It's nothing new, and nothing
particularly offensive (but certainly not the slightest bit
compelling).  Clearly the major selling point of The Big Hit is that
it's a John Woo-type of action film mixed in with some really hip
comedy.  It's true that a lot of the action sequences resemble recent
films that go for the same idea (such as Face/Off and The Replacement
Killers, which are both far superior).  There are stunts that are fun to
watch:  the opening sequence has Melvin and two of his partners going in
to kill some guy who has nothing to do with the story.  They use night
vision goggles and really powerful handguns.  Melvin is also very good
at breakdancing, and uses this talent to avoid bullets and knives.
Like I said, it's not boring; most disasters aren't.  What makes it so
bad is its genre-shifting madness.  It seems to start out as a
quirky-but-realistic action comedy, as Melvin is seen transporting bags
of human remains.  Then, as soon as they go to their first hit, it turns
into a music video with bodies and bullets flying everywhere.  Then,
somewhere in between, it turns back into comedy.  Keiko turns out to be
a spunky little girl; in one amusing scene, she is forced to read a
letter out loud, indicating that she has been kidnapped, but the letter
is littered with grammatical errors that skew the meaning of the words. 
And scenes like this work alone, but Wong applies this goofy tone to
scenes that should be more serious, or not be in the film at all.  One
of the most irritating moments has Paris ordering Cisco to come up to
his office after he learns that Keiko has been kidnapped; when Cisco
gets there, Paris and his men are standing around as if they knew Cisco
did it, but they let him out of there, telling him to find the
perpetrator.  The scene is played for laughs, but it isn't funny.  
And since it doesn't quite work as a comedy, it tries to fall back on
the action, which also fails.  This is a film where people fly fifteen
feet backwards when shot with a handgun.  Cars land on tree branches and
are supported by them.  Characters betray each other without a second
thought.  Grenades are thrown in tight places.  People jump out of tall
buildings and survive.  People outrun tumbling cars, and get out of the
way of falling objects in small fractions of seconds.  Most frustrating
of all, though, is the film's definition of a hit man:  these guys are
anything but subtle, quiet, and skilled individuals.  They're more like
socially depraved militia men (Melvin has an extensive collection of
firearms in his garage, including missile launchers and hand-held
machineguns).
The characters each have one trait that distinguishes them from the
rest; this obviously doesn't make for deep or interesting people to
watch.  The acting is kind of fun, though--Wahlberg is a good actor, and
his innocuous presence in this film is charming in a silly sort of way. 
Phillips certainly has fun with his psychotic character, while Christina
Applegate, who plays Melvin's fiancée, is convincingly air-headed.  
The Big Hit is an action film that unknowingly spoofs itself in trying
to be funny.  The funniest parts are supplied by the actors, and not by
the numerous failed attempts at sight gags and one-liners.  It's a true
disaster, one that makes me believe that the goofy and unrealistic tone
is completely unintentional.  Despite all this, though, I must reiterate
the entertainment value here.  You can cherish the awfulness of a film
like this.  If you embrace The Big Hit for the catastrophe that it is,
you just might enjoy yourself.  

Author
Bill Chambers
THE BIG HIT ** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (wchamber@netcom.ca)
starring Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, China Chow, Avery Brooks
written by Ben Ramsey
directed by Che-Kirk Wong
(F-i-l-m-f-r-e-a-k-c-e-n-t-r-a-l spells relief-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Set/7504
I just added the first installments of an idiotic film journal.
Don't forget to recommend a movie in the 'Can't Miss' section!)
I'm pooping on my own party here: THE BIG HIT lifted my spirits in a
way I didn't expect it to. Honestly, I didn't
expect it to lift my spirits at all, on the basis of the trailer (next
time, preview-copy writers, please refrain from trumpeting 'by the
creators
of Broken Arrow') and a general wariness of '90s hitman-chic: though I
sort of liked THE BIG HIT, one more movie
about loveable "cleaners" and I'll be psychotically climbing a
Hollywood water tower or two. THE BIG HIT,
despite being choice time-filler/killer, is a bit too self-aware
of--yet not clever enough in handling--its own
fashionably ironic core to be recommended.
Wahlberg stars as Melvin Smiley, ostensibly the leader of a team of
assassins who so wants to be universally
adored that he lets people walk all over him between jobs: a cohort
(Phillips), wrongfully claims Smiley's bonus pay,
and Smiley doesn't object; one of his girlfriends (Lela Rochon) is
practically extorting him to support her own illicit
affair; another girlfriend (Christina Applegate) invites her obnoxious
parents down for the weekend against his
wishes. Eventually, Smiley's insecurity makes him the target of
someone else's fix: in agreeing to look after
Phillips' kidnap victim (the adorable Chow-- mayhaps it's the private
school uniform), his own boss--the victim's
godfather--orders Smiley dead.
The script for THE BIG HIT plays as if it was written by a sixteen
year old. One hitman (Bokeem Woodbine)
explains that he only discovered masturbation in his twenties, and a
running gag has him constantly flexing and
pumping the muscles of his right arm. An old Chinese businessman has
lost his life-savings financing the most
expensive film ever made: a trashy drama written, directed by, and
starring himself, entitled, amusingly, "Taste
The Golden Spray". The shooting and fighting sequences--and everything
in between-- essentially satirize the
hokiest Hong Kong action movies, but without subtlety or focus. Asian
directors such as John Woo, Ringo Lam, et.
al, ushered an era into their homeland: rendering virtually all their
characters expendable, they rediscovered
the poetry in a gun-battle not seen since the heyday of Sam Peckinpah.
The copycats, the bubble-gum wacky killers
on the lam movies are what THE BIG HIT more closely resembles--
rather, parodies--and only one scene really
stands out as genuinely sharp: a Mexican stand-off, recently fodder
for the likes of Eastern-inspired Tarantino,
here takes place at a kosher dinner, with drunken Elliot Gould
vomiting on the killers between rounds.
Most Jackie Chan movies are crowd-pleasers precisely because they
simultaneously send- up the Martial Arts
genre yet stand out as fine examples from it. THE BIG HIT features a
few ridiculous, choppy gunfights and an
immature script to connect the scenes. Had it been either more
action-packed or intelligent, it would amount to
more than just spoofing and riffing. As it is, the performances are
engaging, and it's fast-paced enough, but a big hit
I suspect it will not be.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Dumb dud of an HK-clone action movie that isn't satirical enough to
be funny. Walberg's fine; the rest is not.
The more I think about this movie, the more I hate it. THE BIG HIT is a loud,
obnoxious, and doltish-supposed-to-be-funny attempt at a Hollywood Hong Kong
shootsploitation movie that falls smack on its face on nearly every count.
Kirk Wong is the latest director (after Tsui Hark) to be dragged kicking and
screaming into Hollywood. His first U.S. film, THE BIG HIT, plays like a cheap
clone: it looks and smells like it was made by people who had *seen* a couple
of HK action movies, but had no idea how to be *inspired* by one.
Mark Walberg is a hitman who works with his cohorts (Bokeem Woodbine and Lou
Diamond Philips, both wasted) in the employ of a boss figure (played nicely by
Avery Brooks, but with a little too much saliva around the corners of the
mouth). They get into improbably complicated shootouts that, while exciting,
have no more real intrinsic interest than a video game. Targets pop up, get
wasted, get replaced. Reload. The movie also cheats pretty blatantly: one
moment involving Wahlberg appearing as if by magic in an elevator had everyone
groaning.
Wahlberg is strapped, no thanks to one girlfriend who's a gold-digger and
another who's determined to marry him no matter what anyone else says,
including her parents. He goes along with a kidnapping that's supposed to rake
them in a ton of money. Only trouble is, the father of the girl they kidnapped
is dead broke (like we couldn't see that coming) and is also the god-daughter
of their own boss.
All of this is nothing but fodder, however. The movie is a dreary mess. Bokeem
Woodbine's character is distinguished from the rest of the crew by his foul
mouth and his compulsive masturbation. The father of the kidnappee threw all
his money into a movie called "Taste the Golden Spray". One of the plot
elements is an overdue copy of KING KONG LIVES. I am not leaving out very much
here, nor do I think I want to.
Hong Kong movies are very adept at mixing and matching genres and tones
without seeming like a compromise. I think part of that is because, at least
when we deal with a movie of this caliber, there's never a moment when we know
we're supposed to take it seriously. THE BIG HIT keeps attempting to enlist
our emotions in lots of stupid little ways, and then throws in more obnoxious
sight gags. Nobody made a decision early on about what kind of movie they
really were making. If it was a parody, then we didn't need the shapeless and
distasteful material about the future in-laws (a pair of snotty Jewish-parent
stereotypes). If it was serious, then they should have wiped the slate clean
and started from scratch.
THE BIG HIT is not even enjoyably ridiculous. It's the kind of movie you feel
bad for renting with your beer, because you could have bought that much beer
for the cost of the rental and had a better time. I suspect the only reason I
didn't downgrade this film's rating even further was because I'd be wasting
too much venom on it.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading

Author
Christian Pyle
"The Big Hit" didn't live up to its name at the box office, but it should have.
 It's a delightful surprise that left me chuckling even after it was over.
First-time screenwriter Ben Ramsey blends two genres that seem worlds apart to
create, essentially, "Pulp Fiction Meets Ferris Bueller."  You'll find the
twisted, violent humor of Quentin Tarantino's world merged with a
I've-got-to-fix-all-this-before-my-parents-get-home farce, and the disparate
styles blend better than you might imagine.  Of course, this hybrid genre is
not without precedent; 1997's "Grosse Pointe Blank" had some of the same
elements in its story of a hitman going to his high school reunion.  However,
"The Big Hit" has a different feel; it tosses out any sense of realism in favor
of style and fun.
"Marky" Mark Wahlberg, fresh from his comeback in "Boogie Nights," is hitman
Melvin Smiley.  He and some of his hitman buddies come up with a scheme to
kidnap the daughter of a wealthy Japanese businessman.  What they don't know is
that (a) the businessman is broke (he blew all his money making a movie called
"Taste the Golden Spray") and (b) the kidnapee (played by newcomer China Chow)
is the goddaughter of their godfather (Avery Brooks).  When he finds out that
his goddaughter has been kidnapped, the mob boss orders Melvin's partner/rival
Cisco (Lou Diamond Phillips) to hunt down those responsible.  So Cisco has to
kill Melvin before the boss finds out about his own involvement in the
kidnapping.
While all this is going on, Melvin is entertaining the parents (Lainie Kazan
and Elliott Gould) of his fiancee Pam (Christina Applegate).  While Melvin is
making nice with his future in-laws, his angry girlfriend (Lela Rochon) - yes,
he has a fiancee and a girlfriend - deposits the kidnapped girl and two bags of
body parts from a previous hit on Melvin's lawn.  He rushes around frantically
to keep Pam and her folks from finding out what he's been up to.
The whole thing gets really goofy at the end, but the spirit of fun that
pervades the movie prepares you for the silliness.
"The Big Hit" is the first American film by Hong Kong action director Kirk
Wong, and it also has the input of action sensei John Woo, who served as
executive producer.  Wong gives us a big stylized action sequence as Melvin,
Cisco, and friends put their lethal skills to work rubbing out a rival mobster.
The other two kidnappers are played by Bokeem Woodbine, whose character is
developing masturbation as an alternative lifestyle, and Robin Dunne, who plays
the stammering dunce of the group.  Kidnapee Chow is smart and funny; her
character, Keiko, refuses to be intimidated by her captors and begins to hit it
off with Melvin, who neurotically insists that everyone has to like him (and,
yes, someone does point out he's in an odd profession for a guy who wants to be
liked by everyone).  There's also a amusing subplot tossed in with a geeky
video store clerk (Danny Smith) who harasses Melvin to return an overdue copy
of "King Kong Lives."
"The Big Hit" may not be for everyone (some weirdoes don't even find murder and
kidnapping funny).  But I loved it when I saw it last summer, and I've enjoyed
watching it twice more since.  Give it a try if you haven't already.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review:  http://www.wpd.net/madreview/

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, Christina Applegate, Avery
Brooks, Lela Rochon, Bokeem Woodbine, China Chow, Lainie Kazan, Elliot
Gould
Director: Che-Kirk Wong
Producers: Warren Zide, Wesley Snipes
Screenplay: Ben Ramsey
Someone should have warned the producers of this movie, not to cast two
ex-Calvin Klein models and a Federation Starfleet Captain in the same
movie, under the direction of a Hong Kong action flick director. The end
result is a pretty big mess filled with smart mouthed, pretty boys
playing with guns, with little idea of where to put their heads and when
to put on their pants.
I'm referring to the dressing scene where Lou Diamond Phillips, Mark
Wahlberg and Antonio Sabato Jr., bare butts and skin for the world to
see. As if Mark Wahlberg's ending fiasco in BOOGIE NIGHTS, wasn't enough
to define what is not considered the norm for that particular male
appendage! One can feel male egos soar and testosterone drip as each
tries to show off how great they look and how firm their muscles are. If
there were to be a winner - Sabato Jr is undoubtedly the better model in
Kleins.
So where did this go wrong, except for the fact that they hired models
instead of actors? Well, Mark Wahlberg has started an annoying trend of
playing idiosyncratic love-me, I'm so cute' roles (not as annoying as
David Schwimmer). I have to admit that the opening action scenes are
well choreographed and amongst the best this year. However, the rest of
the movie is tediously weighed down by a spineless Wahlberg, a slutty
(unintentional) Applegate, an overactive Diamond Phillips, a pin me up'
Sabato Jr and a kidnapped Japanese girl.
The BIG HIT is a big mess and deserves a big miss.

Author
Jason Overbeck
In The Big Hit Melvin Smiley (Mark Walhberg) has many problems:
He has just kidnapped the daughter of a broke millionaire
He has inept and corrupt partners who scam him of hard-earned money
He has a problem with people disliking him and he has chosen to be a
hitman
His girlfriend milks his money 
And his fiancée is Jewish and has parents who are rough stereotypes.
We as the audience have him beat.  At least he didn't have to sit
through this film.  I would take his spot, any day of the week.  This
film should be used in torture chambers, "Talk or we'll make you watch
The Big Hit!"  To which the probable reply would be "Okay I'll talk,
just don't make me watch that!"  To those who were unfortunate enough to
see The Big Hit in the theatre you should have asked not only for a
refund but for them to pay for years of seeing an analyst.  
I will now attempt to describe the plot so as you read please stay out
of reach for any sharp objects or electric inputs.  Smiley and his crew
Color Me Bad kidnap the daughter of a once rich businessman and attempt
to collect ransom.  They fail to collect money but piss of they're boss
and cause a conflict within the team.
Not much is left to say about The Big Hit except STAY AWAY.  This film
thinks drinking Maalox is unconditionally funny.  It thinks that people
fly 20 feet when shot with a single bullet.  This film is dreadfully
unfunny, horribly uncool and one of the worst films ever made by a human
being.  I would rather listen to Fran Drescher recite the Dictionary.

Author
R. L. Strong
A Sony Pictures Entertainment release of a Tri-Star Pictures
  of an Amen Ra Films/Zide-Perry/Lion Rock production.
   Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips  "THE BIG HIT"
 Christina Applegate, Avery Brooks, Bokeem Woodbine, Lela Rochon, China
               Terence Chang, John Eckert.
 Co-producers, Craig Perry, Victor McGauley, Roger Garcia.. Screenplay,
 We've seen lost of black comedies about gangsters in resent years.
Films such as "2 Days in the Valley",
"Grosse Point Blank", and the film that started it all "Pulp Fiction".
Now we have a new entry in the genre, with Chi-Kirk Wong's humorous send
up "The Big Hit". While the film is far from perfect, it is an enjoyable
exercise in escapism, with tongue firmly in cheek.
 The film opens with Vinnie (Antonio Sabato Jr.) dropping off two bags
of body parts for Melvin Surley (Mark Wahlberg) to dispose of as a
favor. The comedic nature of the film is set up immediately as when
dragging the bags from his car into his bathroom, Melvin complains about
the cheep plastic, which causes blood to leak out onto his driveway.
Melvin lives in a suburban neighborhood, where everyone mows his or her
lawns at the same time. His lover is Chantel (Lela Rochon) who is
constantly whining about money, which Melvin is too happy to supply her.
However, the real surprise is Melvin's fiancie Pam (played with
wonderful glee by Christina Applegate). A Jewish American Princess of
the highest order who is more concerned with her outward appearance and
the impressions of others as to be almost void of her own personality.
Melvin is a man with a distinct problem; he is the complete antithesis
of his surname.
 Melvin is a hit man by profession. But he is so concerned with being
liked that he submits to his friends and co-workers at every turn. After
going on a job, where he does all of the killing while his associates
stand by drinking coffee, Melvin gives up his payment after being made
to feel guilty by Cisco (Lou Diamond Phillips). Their employer, Paris is
a strong man with no determined business affiliation. Moreover, for once
it's doesn't matter.
 The plot takes a turn when Cisco devises a plan for a quick payoff,
kidnapping the daughter of rich Japanese industrialist Jiro Nishi (Sab
Shimono). Unfortunately, Jiro is now bankrupt, having blown his fortunes
on an ill-advised Motion Picture investment, which he also directed and
stared in (a marvelously inventive literal translation of "Taste My
Golden Spray"). Well the kidnapping of Keiko Nishi (China Chow) takes
place. Unfortunately, it turns out that Paris is the girl's godfather,
and he demands revenge. He orders Cisco to find the kidnapper and kill
him. In an effort to save his self, Cisco fingers Melvin.
 Now the plot as stated is not much of a stretch. Nevertheless, the
character writing and situations developed within the plot are so
wonderfully quirky and absurd that they are hilariously charming. "The
Big Hit" is a rarity for an action film, in that its simple plot is just
a means to set up wonderfully comedic character interplay.
 One surprising and welcome performance comes from Elliott Gould as Mort
Schulman, Pam's Father. Mr. Gould brings this little part to such
wonderful life as to be one of the many character highlights of the
film. In fact Mort Schulman could almost be an aged version of Gould's
character Alfred Chamberlain from Alan Arkin's film "Little Murders"
(1971).  Lainie Kazan as Mrs. Schulman is hilariously stereotypical. She
is the ultimate Jewish matron. "The Big Hit" is sure to cause some
concerns with the PC watchdog group. Lou Diamond Phillips rages as
Cisco, eating scenery with more ravenous energy than Peter Sellers could
in his prime. This is not what you would call a great performance.
However, it is a performance of such high satirical tenor that you
cannot help but either be amused or repulsed. Christina Applegate shows
a wonderful sense of timing, both verbally and physically in the film.
Her character of Pam is independent but soon shows that her mother holds
much more sway over her that she is willing to admit.
 This brings us to Mark Wahlberg. His Melvin is a variation on Jim
Carrey's character from "The Mask". A complete milquetoast until called
upon to act violently. While this performance will not go down as one of
his best, ('Boogie Nights' still holds that distinction), Mr. Wahlberg
shows a sweetness and comic flair that up until now was unseen. His
scenes with China Chow (as kidnapped Keiko Nishi) are hilarious,
especially a scene in which, handcuffed together, she helps Melvin
prepare a Kosher Chicken dinner for his future in-laws. As they marinate
and stuff the bird, the erotic electricity becomes so comical as to be
disgusting.
 Director Chi-Kirk Wong has created a marvelously structured comedy/
action film. His knowing references to other Honk Kong films may be lost
on most viewers, but for those who are familiar; these asides are
plentiful and joyously reverent. Director Wong has made a name for
himself as being one of Hong Kong's most notable stylists of action
films. He guided Jackie Chan through one of his best performances in
"Crime Story" and created one of cinema's best police dramas in "Rock
'n' Roll Cop". While there are surly others who can direct an action
scene, we have not witnessed a combination of character and action this
well tuned since John Woo's "The Killer".
 "The Big Hit", while not a great film, is a fine piece of
entertainment.
On a scale of ***** "The Big Hit" rates ***.  It is a surprising dark
comedy with some of the best action moments since John Woo's "Face Off",
and moments of laugh out loud absurdity.
Copyright 1998 R. L Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed without the express
written permission of the author.

Author
Matt Williams
The Big Hit is a ridiculous ultraviolent action spoof.  It does not take
itself seriously, and neither should you.  It's not the typical
action-comedy, but once you get adjusted to its unique rhythms, it
becomes a hilarious satire.
Melvin Smiley (Mark Wahlberg) is a really nice guy.  He just wants
people to like him.  The trouble is, he's a hitman.  He's good at what
he does, but his job leaves him with ulcers.  To show what a nice guy he
is, he's always giving money away.  Two women are taking advantage of
this human ATM: Melvin's fiancee Pam (Christina Applegate), and his
girlfriend Chantel (Lela Rochon).  Melvin would break up with them...but
he thinks they might not like him anymore if he did that.
Another person who takes advantage of Melvin's generosity is Cisco (Lou
Diamond Phillips).  Melvin and Cisco both work as hitmen for Paris
(Avery Brooks), but Melvin typically does all the work (Cisco just grabs
the paychecks). When Cisco comes up with a money-making scheme, he knows
just the guy to help him out: Melvin.
The two of them, along with Crunch (Bokeem Woodbine) and Gump (Robin
Dunne), plan to kidnap Keiko Nishi (China Chow), the daughter of
billionaire Jiro Nishi(Sab Shimono).  But unforeseen complications ensue
which will turn the kidnappers against one another.
If this sounds the slightest bit serious to you, ignore it.  The film is
a complete and absolute spoof.  If you go in expecting a straightforward
action pic (or even an action-comedy), you'll be tremendously
disappointed.
That's not to say that there's not any action in the film.  Director
Kirk Wong delivers several fine action pieces that, although played
firmly tongue-in-cheek, are very thrilling.  However, they are
subservient to the comedy (rather than the other way around). People
expecting a Hong Kong style action-fest are heading for a letdown.
The comedy in the film doesn't aim very high.  It's just a step-or-two
away from the Airplane style of parody.  But there are plenty of funny
moments, mostly character based.  Crunch's self-love affair, Cisco's
stereotypical boat dream, and Marvin's video-store battles are still
bringing me chuckles.
The film does have its failings.  The characters of Pam's parents
(Elliott Gould and Lainie Kazan) aren't nearly as funny as they try to
be. And there are several moments when the dialogue in the film
unintentionally crosses the boundary between bad-funny and bad-bad.
But, for the most part, The Big Hit is humorous when it counts.  Again,
I caution that you must be in the right frame of mind when seeing this
film.  But if you are, you should find it hilarious.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Steve Kong
Are you male, under 19, and have the attention span of an ant?  If you
answered "yes" to all of these questions read no further.  The Big Hit is a
movie for you: go see it now.  For the rest, please read on and see if
you'll enjoy this movie or not.
The Big Hit is the type of movie that requires you to step into the theatre
with the correct mindset: brain in the "off" position and ready for some
stupid fun.
Melvin Smiley (Mark Wahlberg) is a hit man with a heart of gold (wait, I
think I've heard this one before) who is a human ATM machine for two women:
his fiancee (Christina Applegate) and his mistress (Lela Rochon).  Melvin
wants to live a regular life while keeping up with his hit man job -- I've
heard this one before also in Grosse Pointe Blank.  Along with his two
women; he has a group of hit men that are reasonably loyal to him.
Among his "teammates" are Cisco (Lou Diamond Phillips), Crunch (Bokeem
Woodbine), Gump (Robert Dunne), and Vinnie (Antonio Sabato Jr.).  After an
adrenaline-pumping opening reminiscent of a MTV video cut and slashed with
scenes of violence, we are pushed into the main "story" of The Big Hit.
Cisco has picked up a moonlighting assignment for the group.  He wants to
bring in Melvin, but Melvin doesn't want to moonlight knowing that their
boss Paris (Avery Brooks) would kill all of them if he found out.
After finding that his finances are not as healthy as he would like them to
be, Melvin hesitantly signs up with Cisco to go on the moonlighting gig.
The plan is to kidnap the daughter (China Chow) of a wealthy Japanese film
producer and get some ransom.  Sounds easy enough, but there are
complicating matters: the daughter is the goddaughter of Paris and Paris is
not happy about the kidnapping.  Cisco is able to double-cross Melvin and
is now out to kill Melvin to save his own butt.
There are two running gags in The Big Hit.  One involves Melvin, a nerdy
video store clerk, and an overdue copy of King Kong Lives.  The other
involves Crunch, self-love, and is too explicit to mention in a review.
Mark Wahlberg is basically reviving his Dirk Diggler role from Boogie
Nights in The Big Hit.  His Melvin is constantly apologizing.  It works for
the beginning of the film but wears short halfway through.  Lou Diamond
Phillips with a silver-capped front tooth is hilarious as Cisco.  China
Chow is a superb newcomer; I hope to see her in more films soon.  The scene
with her reading a ransom note will have you on the floor laughing.  The
other roles are so minor I don't need to mention them.
The saving grace for The Big Hit is the humor that is woven into the story.
 Director Che-Kirk Wong and writer Ben Ramsey know they don't have a
serious film in hand, so they ham it up.  And they do a good job at it.
This is an action film that knows that it's stupid and doesn't try at all
to redeem itself by trying to be serious.  Had a few other early 1998
action films taken the same route they would have been much better also
(two to mention would be the horrible Firestorm and the wet Hard Rain.)
Kudos to Wong and Ransey for keeping the cheeziness up while keeping the
action rolling.  Look for the scene with Wahlberg, a pair of garbage bags,
his fiancee, the in-laws, a hostage, and a rude dog.  This will have you
laughing out loud.
The action is what anchors The Big Hit, though, and the two main action
scenes are spaced somewhat far apart.  The opening action sequence is
marred by some MTV-style footage that serves only to disorientate the
audience.  The end action sequence is actually quite exciting.  I loved the
amazing car chase with Phillips and Wahlberg.
Worth mentioning is the production design by Taavo Soodor.  The
neighbourhood in which Melvin lives consists of houses that all look the
same and neighbours that synchronously mow their lawns.  Melvin's house is
bright and happy on the inside. His garage holds not only gardening tools
but an arsenal of weapons that could arm a small army.  The office of Paris
is artsy and beautiful.  The room that Chantel, Melvin's mistress, lives in
is satiny.  The production design is top notch.
The Big Hit should be renamed The Moderate Strike; it's funny when it
doesn't have action and has action where there is no plot.  But when there
is no humor, it runs dry, and there are some portions of The Big Hit where
we're just sitting around waiting for the next action sequence.  If you
have two hours to burn and it is matinee time at the local theatre catch
The Big Hit.  Otherwise wait for video.

Author
Chris Webb
Cast: Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, Christina Applegate, Avery 
Brooks, China Chow, Antonio Sabato Jr., Elliot Gould, Lainie Kazan, 
Bokeen Woodbine, Sab Shimono.  Directed by Che Kirk Wong.  Written by 
Ben Ramsey. 
        In 1996, a film called "2 Days in the Valley" made a misguided 
attempt at becoming the next "Pulp Fiction" by intertwining several lives 
amid a ring of smalltime crime, examining the inner humanity of the 
lowlives involed.  Essentially, "Pulp Fiction" borrowed this formula 
from Robert Altman's classic "Short Cuts," but did so successfully.  
Another copycat has emerged in "The Big Hit," a film so derivative of 
genres and directing styles, that the real enjoyment is indentifying 
where you have seen this happen before.
        Four idiosyncratic hit men, Melvin Smiley (Mark Wahlberg), Cisco (Lou 
Diamond Phillips), Crunch (Bokeen Woodbine), and Vinnie (Antonio Sabato 
Jr.), work for ringleader Paris (Avery Brooks).  Unauthorized, they kidnap 
the college-aged daughter (China Chow) of a failed media mogul (Sab 
Shimono) looking for quick ransom.  A problem arises 
when the girl, Keiko, turns out to be Paris' goddaughter, angering him.  
What ensues is a series of double- and triple-crossing that plays out 
like a bad cartoon.
        Sensitive, morally-challenged Melvin is engaged to airhead Pam 
Schulman (Christina Applegate), whose Jewish parents (Lainie Kazan, Elliot 
Gould) disapprove of the pairing since Melvin is Catholic.  Meanwhile, 
wild-and-crazy Cisco is caught between his loyalty to his fellow 
kidnappers and his loyalty to Paris, who asks him to find the 
culprits.  Phillips broods and rants, chewing up scenery, as a villain 
who defies death about as well as Glenn Close in "Fatal Attraction" or 
any enemy in the "Scream" series.  Woodbine ("The Rock") becomes a sight 
gag as in each scene he has a different and increasingly bigger 
hand-strengthening apparatus after denying he enjoys self-pleasure in 
an opening scene.  This is all supposed to be funny stuff.
        Rookie writer Ben Ramsey and accalimed director Che Kirk Wong, 
making his big time American debut, seem to have gained their cinematic 
eye by watching all the movies they could get their hands on.  In one 
scene, hitmen have come to take out Melvin as he and Pam's family sit 
down for dinner.  As they sit there, guns are pulled under the table, 
while a drunken Elliot Gould spews insults and his insides across the 
table.  The Gould part of this scene is reminiscent of Oliver Stone in 
"Natural Born Killers" or "U-Turn."  As the tablecloth is pulled off the 
table, the guns go off in a less-than-spectacular scene that producer 
John woo could have turned into a masterpiece.  The gunfight moves to the 
kitchen invoking memories of "Grosse Pointe Blank."  
        Want a search and car chase?  Borrow from "Law and Order" or "NYPD 
Blue."  Want to tape up the kidnapped?  Watch "Excess Baggage."  Hey, 
what about a slow motion scene of guys walking?  Steal from "Reservoir 
Dogs" which adapted elements from "A Clockwork Orange."  Want to turn 
stuffing a chicken into a romantic encounter?  That pottery scene from 
"Ghost" works.  This film touches Scorsese and video from the O.J. 
Simpson car chase.  It borrows from everything, because it wants to be 
the next "Naked Gun," which is setting its sights far too high.
        "The Big Hit" gives us the spectrum of movie stardom.  Mark Wahlberg 
is a nearly established star thanks to "Boogie Nights," but is green 
enough to make films like this without ruining his potential career.  Lou 
Diamond Phillips and Christina Applegate are in the positions of being 
typecast as a hothead and airhead respectively, and should aim higher.  
TV-ready Gould should stick to his sitcom spots on "Friends" and "Getting 
Personal," while Kazan should book her ticket for a ride on the new "Love 
Boat."  There is always potential for them to return to their heydays 
(both are past Oscar nominees) with some smarter choices.  As Burt 
Reynolds, Robert Forster, and Pam Grier proved last year, it is never too 
late to make a comeback.  The lucky escapees?  Chow and Sabato Jr.  Their 
stars are rising and gain valuable exposure in this high profile film.  
After all, Wahlberg had his "Fear" and underwear model career before 
making an A-list name for himself.
        If "The Big Hit" is a spoof on every movie ever made, then it is 
successful in its inclusiveness.  The sum of these parts, though, makes a 
choppy, annoying movie.  The only truly funny thing about this film is 
its ironic title.

Author
Michael Redman
The United States is touted as the great melting pot. In the grand scheme of
things, it's a relatively new country and once those pesky native inhabitants
were corralled, there was plenty of space for immigrants. Peoples from all
nations moved in and brought their cultures with them, mixing and merging with others.
Centuries ago blacks in New Orleans combined west African religions and
Catholicism to create voodoo. Some Native Americans combined their own beliefs
with ancient Celtic traditions and certain New Age tenets emerged. White kids
in southern Indiana of European descent are dressing like inner city New York
black kids of African ancestry. It's a strange world we live in Master Jack.
Sometimes these cultures blend to give birth to wonderful elegant new
creations and at other times the melting pot creates a bizarre gumbo. "The Big
Hit" is a stew with everything in the kitchen tossed in.
Melvin Smiley (Marky Mark Wahlberg who was the supposedly well-endowed lead
in "Boogie Nights") is a nice guy who wants everyone to like him. You might
think that his chosen profession as a hitman would create difficulties in that
goal. You'd be right.
Chantel (Lela Rochon), his black girlfriend is always after him for more
money which he hands right over. Pam (Christina Applegate), his Jewish fiancee
is used to the finer things in life and demands that he provide them. Business
associate Cisco (Lou Diamond Phillips) falsely claims that he made the bonus
kill and Melvin tosses $25,000 to him. Being well-liked is an expensive
proposition for Mr. Smiley and he's constantly swilling Maalox for his ulcers.
During an action-packed hit, Smiley wades in shooting and blowing up dozens
of gangsters while the other members of his team drink coffee outside and then
burst in pumping bullets into thin air. Theirs is an easy life as Melvin does
all the work and they collect their paychecks.
When Cisco comes up with a kidnapping scheme, he enlists his help although
outside activities are strictly forbidden by Paris (Avery Brooks), their boss.
They pick up fellow hitmen Crunch (Bokeem Woodbine), Vinnie (Antonio Sabato,
Jr.) and Gump (Robert Dunne) and head off to snatch Keiko (China Chow),
daughter of a wealthy Japanese businessman.
In the current cinematic tradition of stupid criminals and crimes gone wrong,
the plan falls apart. Keiko's father is recently bankrupt and has no money for
the kidnappers. The note that she is supposed to read into a tape recorder is
full of misspellings and grammatical errors. Smiley has to hide her in his
house as his future in-laws visit. Even worse, it turns out that she is Paris' goddaughter.
Keiko quickly falls victim to the Patty Hearst syndrome and falls for her
captor. After a few humorous romantic moments, they plan to run away together.
When Paris calls in Cisco to find Keiko and "take care of" her abductors, he
fingers Smiley to save his own hide. The rest of the film is filled with an
absurd number of bullets, over-the-top car chases and wacky comedy.
Director Che-Kirk Wong and Executive Producer John Woo ("Face/Off") do their
best to combine the high energy Hong Kong martial arts films with Hollywood
sensibilities and they often succeed. The action scenes are filled with
energetic and physically impossible deeds. As Smiley does double twists
falling through the air, shooting and tossing grenades, he takes out a dozen
opponents. He's one of the few humans in existence who can outrun an explosive
fireball - several times.
Where the film falls down is several of the attempts to incorporate domestic
humor. The scenes of Pam's parents (Elliott Gould and Lainie Kazan) are lame
and you've seen it all before. The synchronized suburban lawn mowers are
straight out of "LA Story". Most of the ineptness was done better by the Coen
brothers. Crunch has discovered the joys of self-love and spends most of the
movie with hand exercise equipment. This grows less funny each time it appears.
Although those are problems, the film's strength is its knowledge that the
action scenes are ridiculous. There is no attempt to play them straight and
often they are hilarious.
Wahlberg does an adequate job as the assassin trapped in the circumstances of
his own choosing. Phillips takes over the screen as he does his best to play
Gary Oldman. Chow shows some promise and is worth keeping an eye on in the
future. The rest of the actors are either underwhelming or wasted in minuscule roles.
The racial mix is exploited for its stereotypes. WASP Smiley's bevy of babes
are true to their caricature versions. Pam's mother forbids their marriage
because he isn't Jewish and they must protect their heritage. Chantel is only
in it for the money. Keiko dresses in the Japanese fetish schoolgirl uniform.
Gold-toothed Lou Diamond Phillips has somehow become a black man in all but
skin color and has the best scenes in the film. One of the hitmen is as white
as can be but attempts to act black although he can't pull it off. 
While this concept could have resulted in some funny low-grade laughs, with
few exceptions they don't work.
The movie industry has fallen in love with the daft hitman in recent years.
It's an offbeat genre but recently we've been treated to "Fargo" and "Grosse
Pointe Blank" among several others. The idea has resulted in some fine films,
but its era has just about passed. Time for a new concept.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and still doesn't
plan to start wearing his pant down around his knees in gangsta style. He has
enough problems as it is. Email fashion tips to redman@bvoice.com)
[This appeared in the 4/30/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1998
U.S. Release Date: 4/24/98 (wide)
Running Length: 1:33
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, violence, nudity, bad taste)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, Christina Applegate, 
      Avery Brooks, Lela Rochon, Bokeem Woodbine, China Chow, 
      Lainie Kazan, Elliot Gould
Director: Che-Kirk Wong
Producers: Warren Zide, Wesley Snipes
Screenplay: Ben Ramsey
Cinematography: Danny Nowack
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     THE BIG HIT exhibits many of the same characteristics as the most 
over-the-top entries into the Hong Kong action/comedy genre, which 
shouldn't come as a surprise considering that the director (Che-Kirk 
Wong) and executive producer (John Woo) made their reputations overseas 
on those kinds of films.  THE BIG HIT is as irreverent as parodies come, 
and exhibits a great deal more energy than the tired, pun-filled NAKED 
GUN clones.  This movie isn't afraid of venturing into the realm of bad 
taste -- in fact, it revels in it.  There's sure to be something in THE 
BIG HIT to offend just about everyone, but the film is audacious enough 
that I found myself gaining sporadic entertainment from its cheerful, 
cartoonish spoofing.
     THE BIG HIT's lead character is the improbably named Melvin Smiley 
(Mark Wahlberg, last seen wearing a prosthesis in BOOGIE NIGHTS).  He's 
a hit man who has killed about 100 people, but is afflicted with an 
undesirable weakness for someone in his position:  "I can't stand the 
idea of anybody not liking me."  Melvin has a complicated personal life 
-- he is engaged to be married to a ditzy blond (Christina Applegate) 
and has a black girlfriend (Lela Rochon) on the side.  Their financial 
demands have put him in debt, so he joins his buddies, Cisco (Lou 
Diamond Phillips), Crunch (Bokeem Woodbine), Gump (Robert Dunne), and 
Vinnie (Antonio Sabato Jr.), in a kidnapping scheme.  They snatch Keiko 
(China Chow), the pretty college-age daughter of a bankrupt Japanese 
businessman (Sab Shimono).  Unfortunately, she also happens to be the 
goddaughter of crime lord Paris (Avery Brooks), Cisco and Melvin's boss.  
To save himself, Cisco turns against the rest of the gang, going after 
them one-by-one.  Meanwhile, Keiko and the sensitive Melvin fall in love 
and plan to run away together.
     The plot is ludicrous and the acting falls neatly into one of two 
categories:  way over-the-top or simply awful.  Mark Wahlberg is badly 
miscast as Melvin.  His rather bland portrayal of the hitman fails to 
energize certain comic scenes that should have been funnier.  Lou 
Diamond Phillips is the perfect villain for an overblown movie:  it 
looks like he took lessons on scenery-chewing from either Dennis Hopper 
or Gary Oldman.  Christina Applegate, Lainie Kazan, and Elliot Gould are 
all irritatingly bad, but I believe that's actually the point.  I don't 
think the film makers had Oscar nominations in mind when they cast these 
three.  Newcomer China Chow is the only one who shows any promise, and 
that's not saying much.  
     THE BIG HIT's comedy is widely variable -- some of it is funny and 
clever while some is weary and familiar.  During the course of the 
movie's 90 minute running time, THE BIG HIT gives us ethnic caricatures, 
tremendously over-the-top car chases, and jokes involving vomit, 
mutilated body parts, masturbation, hara-kiri, video store clerks, high-
tech call tracing methods, chicken stuffing, and KING KONG LIVES 
(arguably one of the worst movies of all time).  How often you laugh is 
likely dependent upon a few factors:  your mood, your tolerance for 
humor in bad taste, and your willingness to ignore Wahlberg's wooden 
performance and lack of chemistry with his female co-stars.  
     Wong directs THE BIG HIT with more flair than the material perhaps 
deserves.  This is a colorful, kinetic motion picture that never 
threatens to bore even a viewer afflicted with attention deficit 
disorder.  There are a lot of shoot-outs and other action sequences, 
and, while none of them are suspenseful or thrilling, they're suitably 
noisy.  I viewed most of these as takeoffs on more generic testosterone-
and-adrenaline sequences, and, seen on that level, they work.  The film 
also has some fun showing (via instant replay) the way people in action 
movies live through unsurvivable situations.  The less seriously one 
takes things, the better they work.  As low-intelligence entertainment 
goes, this film is very much a hit-and-miss affair.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Josh Hammonds
Capsule: Suprisingly more of a comedy than a straight action flick, which
isn't necessarily a bad thing.  Not exactly Oscar caliber, but one helluva
bullet-riddled good time.  
Extended Review:
You know, I remember when hitmen were evil, murderous scum.  Alas, the times
are a-changin'.  In a recent string of movies, hitmen are suddenly wise-
cracking, fun-loving killers-with-hearts.  This brings us to Hong Kong
director Kirk Wong's first American feature, The Big Hit.  Oddly enough, about
the same time last year a similar film, Grosse Point Blank, was released.
Advertised as a quirky comedy with hints of action, it turned out to have a
suprising dosage of it.  The Big Hit is quite the opposite.  It was hyped as
"the new film from producer John Woo", so one would it expect lots of stylized
killing and action.  However, there's a sore lack of it, which is about the
only thing wrong with The Big Hit.
The film starts out with Mel Smiley and his cohorts doing a job on a white
slaver.  Mel, played by Mark Wahlberg in a dopey, milquetoast role, is a
killing machine; he flips, spins, even breakdances whilst popping caps.
Sadly, he doesn't get a chance to do much of it.  Except for the beginning set
piece and the last 20 twenty minutes or so, the film is in comedy mode.  The
action, at least what there is of it, is prime cut stuff.  Wong, after
numerous Hong Kong features, makes quite a nice U.S. debut.  However, his
pacing is a bit off, with the action sequences only bookending the movie and
not lasting long enough.  They start off electrifying and fresh, but just
kinda stop.  Normally, this would hamper a movie to the point of being
unenjoyable.  Luckily, we have Ben Ramsey's screenplay, a bitingly funny piece
of work.  The only problem is there might be too much humor, one joke makes
you laugh so hard you miss the next few.  Some of best gags include an
Oriental film maker down on his luck and one of Mel's hitmen pals that has
just discovered onanism.  The only problem is how some of the minor characters
are handled, some being there only for a laugh, which sometimes works,
sometimes doesn't.  
Overall, The Big Hit may have it's flaws, but it makes up for them in a
stylishly directed, gut-wrenchingly funny joyride.  Definately one of the
better ways to spend two hours.  

Author
Homer Yen
Here is a movie that sadly follows the Hong Kong-recipe of moviemaking
and storytelling to the letter.  These kinds of movies are marked by an
eye-opening sequence that introduces us to the main characters; a
life-and-death plot in which these characters become involved; the
inclusion of a host of inconsequential characters; ridiculous subplots,
and sunglass-wearing henchmen.  That is not to say that I don't like
Hong Kong influenced movies; however, it is quite obvious that these
moviemakers haven't a clue that the American filmgoer needs more than
hip-hop-talking thugs and stupid sight gags.
Observe the opening sequence.  A band of hitmen are about to storm an
apartment, led by Melvin (Mark Wahlberg) and Cisco (Lou Diamond
Phillips).  They are waiting for their partner to cut off the power so
that they can storm the apartment with the help of infrared goggles.
However, their partner is unsure of which cable to cut.  He is
undecided.  This happens for about 10 seconds.  The audience finds some
humor in his foolishness.  The lights suddenly go out.  Cisco is
surprised and says: "Whoa...let's go!"  And they storm the apartment in
a very nicely executed sequence.
The Big Hit of the title refers to a kidnapping that happens a quarter
of the way through the film.  Needing cash, Cisco devises a plan to
kidnap the daughter (China Chow) of wealthy Japanese industrialist Jiro
Nishi.  However, the daughter is also the god-daughter of Paris (Avery
Brooks), who is Cisco's and Melvin's boss.  Infuriated and insufferable,
Paris commands Cisco to uncover the mastermind of the kidnapping.
During his 'investigation', Cisco singles out Melvin as the ringleader,
and Paris orders his capture and execution.  Melvin must now find a way
to stay alive.
By the way, do you know how the investigation takes place?  Cisco's
partner makes the ransom phone call believing that his call will not be
traced because of a Trace Buster that prevents tracing.  But, Mr. Nishi
has a Trace Buster Buster.  To counter that, Cisco's partner has a Trace
Buster Buster Buster.  But Nishi has a Trace Buster Buster Buster
Buster.  And so on...
There is no doubt that this is an interesting world in which they live.
And there are lots of issues that we'd like to know more about.  How
does Melvin justify his profession to his fiancee?  What goes on among
this clique?  Why is Cisco at odds with Melvin?  There is actually a lot
of potential material that could have been explored, but it seems that
no effort is made to go in that direction, and instead we are given a
not-so-engrossing plot filled with one-liners, silly sight gags,
extraneous sub-plots and tomfoolery.
And, I haven't even mentioned his financee's visiting parents who want
them to separate, nor Melvin's mistress, nor the pimple-faced video
clerk demanding the return of an overdue video and on and on and on.  If
The Big Hit signals the future of Hong Kong style movies that are made
for American audiences, then shoot me now.

Author
Michael Dequina
Although his best-known work is a Jackie Chan vehicle, Hong Kong director
Che-Kirk Wong appeared to be an odd choice to direct a quirky action
comedy; after all, the Chan film in question, 1993's Crime Story, is known
among the Jackie faithful as his "serious" action film, devoid of any
humor.  With The Big Hit, Wong shows he can do a capable action/humor
juggling job.  If only he had a funnier script to work with.
The Big Hit gets off to a very promising start, with a terrific extended
action sequence set in a hotel.  Much of the hyper-choreographed mayhem
owes a large debt to John Woo (who, perhaps not so coincidentally, serves
as an executive producer), but the stylishly staged shootouts work; how can
one not get a rise when hitman Melvin Smiley (Mark Wahlberg), hanging out
of a high window by only his feet, somehow manages to lift himself up and
blow away the baddies?  Writer Ben Ramsey also promises something different
from most action films, introducing a colorful menagerie of eccentric
characters, such as the no-nonsense, if mild-mannered, Melvin's goofy
contract-killing cohorts Cisco (Lou Diamond Phillips), Crunch (Bokeem
Woodbine), and Vince (Antonio Sabato Jr.).
But once Ramsey sets up the main scenario, in which the foursome kidnap
and hold for ransom one Keiko Nishi (China Chow), daughter of a rich
Japanese businessman--a job not assigned to them by their tough boss, Paris
(Avery Brooks)--things come a bit undone.  Those potentially interesting
characters never develop into more than single-trait cardboard cutouts.
Crunch is a compulsive masturbator, constantly doing hand-strengthening
exercises; Vince is a pretty boy lothario, or at least that's what the
press notes say, for he never really exhibits such behavior aside from
hitting on some women in the early-going.  Disappearing as quickly and
conspicuously as Crunch and Vince after making a flashy, brash splash is
Melvin's sassy mistress Chantel, played by a completely wasted Lela Rochon.
It goes without saying that the success of an action comedy depends on its
batting average in both action and comedy.  While Wong shows he can combine
the two elements fairly fluidly, The Big Hit is hampered too many weak
comic attempts.  Ramsey has fun tweaking conventions of kidnapping
thrillers (the ransom message, call tracing), action films (a car that
barely hangs on after being run off of a high road), and movies in general
(sappy Oscar-bait scenes).  But his more straightforward humor falls flat.
A running gag involving Melvin's delinquent account at the local video
store grows old long before its admittedly interesting payoff.  Least
successful is the subplot involving the "German-Irish" Melvin's engagement
to the Jewish Pam (Christina Applegate).   The would-be humorous
head-butting that occurs when her parents (Lainie Kazan and Elliott Gould)
come to visit is tired; the mother, a strict Jew, objects to the pairing on
religious grounds; the recovering-alkie father doesn't care, just as long
as he gets a drink.  In fact, all attempts at a romantic angle don't work.
Wahlberg is paired with three different leading ladies, and he hasn't the
slightest bit of chemistry with any of them, least of all Chow, with whom
he became involved offscreen.  They do have one transcendent moment
together: a hilarious "erotic" chicken-stuffing scene, but the scene works
because of the tongue-in-cheek, "sensual" underscore and suggestive sight
gag, not because of any palpable onscreen sparks between Wahlberg and Chow.
The media audience with whom I saw The Big Hit gave the film a spirited
reception, and its easy-going melding of slam-bang action and oddball humor
could appeal to regular moviegoing audiences.  But as far as I am
concerned, the sporadically effective The Big Hit is not a big miss, but it
doesn't exactly live up to its title, either.
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Too many movies these days aren't smart enough to realize they
would have been infinitely better recast as parodies - FIRESTORM and
HARD RAIN come immediately to mind.  Arguably the best thing that can
be said about THE BIG HIT is that it is smart enough to realize how
dumb it is and to make the most of it.  Never taking itself seriously,
even for a moment, the movie features silly dialog ("Ladies, you're so
fine I want to pour milk over you and make you a part of my complete
breakfast.") and shoot 'em up action played for maximum camp.
     A group of macho hit men lead by Cisco, played in a hilarious
over-the-top performance by Lou Diamond Phillips, kill people left and
right.  Mark Wahlberg, who was the well-endowed porn star in BOOGIE
NIGHTS, is Cisco's number one gun, Melvin Surley.  Mel is a sensitive
contract killer, whose biggest worry is that people will not like him.
Cisco and the other members of his crew like to show off their buff
bodies, and the picture includes some conspicuous rear male nudity to
titillate the audience.
     With the military precision and the weaponry of commandos, the hit
men can take on any challenge.  That is until they decide to pick up a
little money on the side by kidnapping a millionaire's daughter, Keiko
Nishi, played with a delicious mixture of schoolgirl innocence and
tough-woman attitude by cinematic newcomer China Chow.  When she reads
her kidnapper's ransom note, misspellings and all, the scene will have
you in stitches.  Her father, Jiro (Sab Shimono), turns out to be a
bankrupt filmmaker, whose best friend is Cisco's boss.
     Taavo Soodor's set decoration is a hoot.  Mel lives in an upper
middle-class development in which the men engage in synchronized lawn
mowing reminiscent of L.A. STORY.  His garage has all the standard
household tools as well as enough guns to supply a small army.
     The movie has a side plot so ridiculous that it's great dealing
with an obnoxious, pimple-faced, video rental clerk, played by Danny
Smith, who keeps calling and threatening to kill Mel if he doesn't
bring back his overdue copy of KING KONG LIVES.  The clerk has a wanted
flyer posted with Mel's picture on it for being a "video truant."  One
of the other hit men, on the other hand, is a video store award winner,
who has his picture on display for entirely different reasons.  But
this funny subplot is basically unprintable.
     Among the movie's more absurd scenes is a car chase and demolition
derby, during which Cisco uses his car like Paul Bunyan to fell the big
trees in his path.  The movie even uses instant replays to show you
exactly how the characters manage to escape certain death.
     Just to make sure that he's covered every comedic base, writer Ben
Ramsey has a part for Elliott Gould as a hen-pecked Jewish husband who
can't be let near the alcohol or bad things will happen.  Well, lots of
bad things do happen in THE HIT MEN.  And its director Kirk Wong has
the audience laughing at most of them.
     THE BIG HIT runs a fast 1:39.  It is rated R for violence,
profanity and brief nudity and would be fine for teenagers.

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Che-Kirk Wong || Screenplay: Ben Ramsey || Stars: Mark
Wahlberg (Melvin Smiley), Lou Diamond Phillips (Cisco), Christina
Applegate (Pam Schulman), Avery Brooks (Paris), Bokeem Woodbine
(Crunch), Lela Rochon (Chantel), China Chow (Keiko Nishi), Sab
Shimono (Jiro Nishi), Robin Dunne (Gump) || MPAA Rating: R
There are scenes in "The Big Hit" that are so awful, they simply
defy description. The movie is infected with the same kind of
blunderheaded idiocy and misplaced confidence that made "Last
Action Hero" (1993) such a chore to sit through.
Presumably, "The Big Hit" is an action-comedy, a difficult but
not impossible genre to pull off. Movies of this sort require a
fine balance and careful tone, and the comedy is usually meant to
work as catharsis for the violence. "Lethal Weapon 2" (1989) is a
perfect example of an action thriller that was also very, very
funny. Unfortunately, in "The Big Hit," it seems that comedy is
the main motive, and the violence is only intended to punctuate
the laughs. Unfortunately, there are no laughs.
The movie resembles some of the goofy, throwaway ridiculousness
of early Jackie Chan films, but it doesn't benefit from Chan's
incredible stunts and goofy, charismatic presence. Instead, we
are left with a lot of digital effects and Mark Wahlberg, who
must have considered himself invincible after his
critically-acclaimed performance in last year's "Boogie Nights."
However, if he wants to maintain a decent career, he had better
start selecting his projects more carefully - movies like this
are a sure-fire recipe for a long career in the straight-to-video
market.
Wahlberg plays Melvin Smiley, an amiable guy who also happens to
be a professional hitman (see "Grosse Pointe Blank" for the same
character, much better developed). The movie wants us to think,
"Gee how clever and ironic - a guy who can kill without any moral
implications, and yet he can't stand for anyone not to like him."
The fact is, Melvin is so desperate to keep people from not
liking him, that he puts up with both an obnoxious fiancee
(Christina Applegate, with a horrendous New York accent) and an
abusive girlfriend (Lela Rochon ) who is only using him for his
money. His constant bending over backwards to please people makes
him a complete patsy at best, and a thoroughly unbelievable
character at worst.
Melvin is employed exclusively by a crime boss named Paris (Avery
Brooks) as part of a team of hitmen, which also includes Cisco
(Lou Diamond Phillips) and Crunch (Bokeem Woodbine). One day,
Melvin agrees to do some moonlighting with Cisco by kidnapping
the teenage daughter of a rich Japanese mogul named Jiro Nishi
(Sab Shimono) for a million dollar ransom.
However, not only has Jiro Nishi lost all his money producing a
big Hollywood movie (inside joke, get it?), but his kidnapped
daughter, Keiko (China Chow), also happens to be Paris'
goddaughter. So, when Paris finds out she's been kidnapped, he
takes it personally and becomes determined to find out who did
it. Not knowing the Cisco is actually behind the whole scheme,
Paris puts him in charge of rooting out the kidnapper. Of course
Cisco blames the whole thing on poor, innocent Melvin.
Along the way, there are several obligatory gunfights,
explosions, and car chases, plus a literal cliffhanger inspired
by "Jurassic Park," and a completely unconvincing romance between
Melvin and Keiko (who looks like she's barely pushing fifteen).
What the movie passes off as humor resorts to thoroughly unfunny
jokes about overweight Jewish mothers, hara-kiri, drinking
problems, leaking body bags, and a running gag about how Crunch
has recently discovered the pleasures of masturbation, and now
spends all his time doing hand exercises. Not to mention the
pimply video store clerk who is always calling Melvin and
screeching about how he needs to return his copy of "King Kong
Lives," which is two weeks overdue.
This mess of a movie was helmed by Che-Kirk Wong, the latest Hong
Kong director imported by John Woo ("Face/Off"), who also served
as executive producer. Woo needs to stop acting as a conduit for
other directors, and start making more of his own films. Wong,
who directed such films as "Rock'n'Roll Cop" back in Hong Kong,
is completely tone deaf when it comes to comedy. Maybe jokes
about vexatious video clerks and vomiting on other people are
funny across the ocean, but they're not here, at least in the
manner Wong handles them.
Many of the problems can be traced back to the script, which was
penned by obvious freshman writer Ben Ramsey. In addition to his
vague characterizations and uninspired action sequences, Ramsey's
script assaults the audience with his attempts to copy the
vulgar, poetic rhythms of Tarantino or Mamet-style dialogue. What
he comes out with is just a lot of annoying blather, most of
which spews from the lips of Lou Diamond Phillips (whose favorite
phrase is "It's all love") and Robin Dunne, who plays Cisco's
stuttering, black-wannabe assistant. The irritation factor of
Phillips and Dunne combined is almost off the scale, which can
pretty much describe the film as a whole.

Author
Kevin Thomas Troy
absolute zero out of four possible stars
(the money scale: don't go see it even if it's free)
_The Big Hit_ is absolutely awful.  It's supposed to be a spoof
of Hong Kong shoot-em-up movies like _The Killer_, only it's
not funny, and the action scenes are boring.
Here's an example of the movie's humor:  it opens with Melvin
(Marky Mark) helping a friend out by storing a dead man,
contained in two garbage bags, while this friend goes out of
town for the weekend.  They're hitmen, you see.  It's supposed
to remind you of Marvin in _Pulp Fiction_, only it's neither
funny, gross, nor bizarre.  An extended scene follows wherein
Melvin drops the corpse off at his girlfriend's.  There's a lot
of "they're so casual around corpses" jokes, none of which work.
Here's an example of the action:  a hit scene in a hotel,
wherein the hotshot pro killers Melvin works with turn out to
be the three stooges (only not funny).  There's lots of
Executive Producer John Woo ballet gunfight attempts, but it
really doesn't stack up.  The cinematographer uses so many
effects that you just get lost.  It's a nice scene, but it
doesn't measure up to recent displays of this action style,
such as _Replacement Killers_ or _Face/Off_, nor does it come
close to a similarly plotted hit at the beginning of _The
Professional_.
The other action scenes in the movie don't make use of the
special effects in the first one, which is fine, but they're
also very boring.
Characters seem to be motivated by a perverse sense of camp
possessed by director Kirk Wong and screenwriter Ben Ramsey.
For example, an early scene has the kidnapee-- did I mention
this is a kidnapping spoof?  except it's not funny?-- mouthing
off to the bumbling hitmen who have captured her.  She's not
scared, even when one of the professionals waves a gun around
like he's never held one.  Another scene has Lou
Diamond-Philips talking at cross-purposes with his boss-- it
would be funny, except it's so unrealistic that you can see the
screenwriter saying, "It'll be funny because...!"
Racial stereotype jokes, of the "it's so obviously a
self-parody of stereotypes, it has to be funny!" sort are not
funny, especially in this movie.  _Flirting with Disaster_,
maybe, but not here.
A lame running gag regarding a vindictive video store clerk is
a total rip off of the menacing paper boy from Savage Steve
Holland's _Better off Dead_, only in _The Big Hit_, it's not
funny.
The soundtrack beats your ears like a Spew sampler version of
the _Amistad_ score.
Aerial cinematography is bumpy.  They probably thought it would
add a hip, bouncy tone to the various aerial transition scenes,
but it just looks like the poor guy didn't know how to shoot.
The color schemes seem to be lifted from a Joel Schumacher
Batman flick.  They aren't funny, either.
_The Big Hit_ is so bad that its badness extends beyond the
theater and into everyday human relations.  If anyone you know
recommends you see this movie, even on video or something, do
not trust this person with your wallet, children, or personal
information.  If your dentist mentions this movie while
cleaning your teeth, go to the other side of town for that
filling.  Please, believe me.  If you want a hip, witty
contract-killer movie, go see _Gross Point Blank_ or _The
Professional_.

Author
Berge Garabedian
Semi-spoof of all action movies, this film attempts to combine the
humour of Tarantino's scripts with the action of a John Woo flic. Mark
Wahlberg's theatrical follow-up to the highly acclaimed BOOGIE NIGHTS
(7.5/10) has Terrence Chang and John Woo of FACE/OFF (8/10) and BROKEN
ARROW (5.5/10) fame sitting on as executive producers.
PLOT:
Four professional hitmen, who happen to be regular Joes in "real life",
kidnap the daughter of a rich Japanese businessman, in order to extort
some large money from the gentleman. As per usual, the kidnapping goes
somewhat awry, and that's when the cookiness and action takes over. 
CRITIQUE:
Flawed attempt at combining humour and action in one picture. LAST
ACTION HERO (7.5/10) was a film that handled this genre successfully,
but this picture just doesn't have enough real wit, or stand-out action
to merit that moniker. I laughed out loud at some parts, and cringed at
others (like when someone asks one of the hitmen how much money they
make and he replies "we make a killing"....haha, I think not). The
action sequences were all very good, but not enough were spread around
the entire picture. Also, the best scenes are in the first 10 minutes,
and then a very cool action scenario that rolls off the last 20
minutes.
Lou Diamond Phillips was the standout in the cast, whilst delivering a
bad guy rendition that flip-flopped between the Gary Oldman pimp in
TRUE ROMANCE (9/10) and Samuel L. Jackson in PULP FICTION (7.5/10).
Mind you, he did have most of the funny lines in this passable piece.
Wahlberg was so-so, as was the rest of this purposely generated
stereotypical cast. The soundtrack was very good, as was the style of
the picture, but I guess the biggest problem was its lacklustre script
(many weak attempts to correlate the idea of "bad guys doing regular
things" with successful screenwriting didn't pan out). If interested in
this story, I suggest you wait until it comes out on video, since
nothing of great interest is worth the trip to the movie houses for
this so-so adventure through the land of cinema.
Little Known Facts: 
Christina Applegate was one of the last people to see late actor River
Phoenix alive the night that he passed away in front of the Viper Room
(Johnny Depp-owned bar in Hollywood) from an apparent overdose of
drugs.
Lou Diamond Philips' real name is Lou Upchurch, he was born in the
Philippines, and was left by his wife Julie Cypher in 1990 (after four
years of marriage) after she hooked up with singer Melissa Etheridge.
This film was China Chow's first film experience. She has modeled for
designers Calvin Klein and Tommy Hilfiger, and was rumoured to be
dating Mark Wahlberg after the release of this picture.

Author
Chris T. Dias
STARRING: Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, Christina Applegate,
Avery Brooks, Bokeem Woodbine, Lainie Kazan, Elliott Gould WRITTEN BY:
Ben Ramsey DIRECTED BY: Che-Kirk Wong.
 Melvin Smiley (Walhberg) can't stand anyone not liking him.  This is
strange considering Melvin is a professional hit man.  He has a Jewish
fiancée, Pam (Applegate) and a mistress.  The stress of these
radically diverse lifestyles clashing forces Melvin to drink Mylanta
out of the bottle daily.
 He really wants to close down many of these problems but that would
mean hurting people he doesn't want hurt.  Course, you would think of
all the people he killed, most of their families probably don't like
him very much.  Now consider his partners, all of which take advantage
if easy-going demeanor.  One is Crunch (Woodbine) who has just
discovered masturbation.  In fact, he loves it so much, he has decided
to swear off women.  As a running joke, we constantly see him with
some hand gripper, continually pumping up.
 Melvin's best friend is Cisco (Phillips), who uses his friends
vulnerabilities against him, even to the point of getting the bonus
from the last mission from their employer, Paris (Avery Brooks).
 However, Cisco next job is personal.  He devised a plan to seal the
daughter of a famous Chinese millionaire and then ransom her for his
fortune.  Cisco cons his friends into joining, not knowing that this
kidnapping is unauthorized.  Complications further ensue when the
group discovers not only is the millionaire broke, swindling his money
on a film about himself, but that his daughter is the goddaughter of
Paris.
 Soon, favors are pulled and without knowing the truth, Paris calls
upon Cisco to find the kidnappers.  Meanwhile, the daughter, Keiko
(China Chow), was held up at Walhberg's mistress's place but she soon
dumps him and the girl and his place, as Melvin is hosting a dinner
with his fiancée and her two very old-fashioned parents.
 To cover his own rear, Cisco decided to frame his own group.  Melvin
also seems to have a crush on his kidnapped victim.  Keep downing that
Mylanta.
 The Big Hit is more a comedy than an action movie, as the tries to
make fun of itself as it tries to still maintain its own cliché's.
Meaning it seems to know the problems with today's action films but
does them anyway.  Melvin's character seems too one-sided; you can't
understand why he refused to tell some of these people off.  The
script tries to be funny, and it succeeds in many fields.  As an
action film, it doesn't fare well.  The action scenes are good except
there are infrequent and every stunt is in the commercial.  This
leaves very little left over for us to enjoy.  Luckily, the humor kept
me occupied.
 Walhberg is convincing in his role and I especially liked Lou Diamond
Phillips.  In fact, there was no real bad acting in the film.  Yes,
Even Christina Applegate proved her worth.  I especially liked Avery
Brooks as a villain in comparison to his heroic Captain Sisko on Star
Trek: Deep Space 9.
 The directing was good to, with interesting camera work in many
scenes.  One stand out shot shows Cisco smoking a cigarette.  As the
smoke falls from his fingers, the camera move up and past him
surprisingly fast-the cigarette still falling.  It moves right past
him, and follows another Paris.  It stayed in my memory as being very
clever.
 Besides one or two scenes, The Big Hit is forgettable.  In one ear
and out the other.  The acting is good and the film tries, but it
still cannot break free of its own mold...even though, unlike other
films, it knows its fit and enjoys the comfort.  I jus wished it broke
out and explored new things in the genre.  The Last Action Hero was an
action film that poked fun of Hollywood action but it couldn't break
out of its own cliché.  The Big Hit is the same way, forced into
the creaks and crevices of the Hong Kong action-fest.  It acknowledges
its problems, but doesn't fix them.
MINUSES: -LACKLUSTER PLOT -CORNY CLICHES
