Title
Review for Söndagsbarn (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
The sad thing about this film, for Americans, is that it is slow.  It is a
film, like Daniel's father Ingmar, that is given to detail, and the
minute nuances that are still taught at many acting schools.  It is an
outstanding film, probably a bit more "open" than the father's pictures,
which tend to be mired in the emotional upheaval of the characters. Unlike
his father, Daniel stands back, and allows them to look sheepish, and at
times selfish, until the realization hits them, that while they meant well,
they did not do very well.
This is a story, written by Ingmar Bergman himself, about his own growing up
in a religious family, whose motives were not questioned, and whose desires
were very idealistic.  Pu, has an admiration for his father, but it isn't
very clear weather it is because of the rather stern exterior and belief
system, or if it is because the father is right.  The father is not always
right, and as Pu gets older, and now famous, facing his father, the elder
Bergman is having problems coming to grips with his own idealism.  Ingmar
(Pu), has been expressing all of his idealism on film and studying it.  The
father has taken it all in, and is now suffering some terrible delusions,
most of them from feeling like he failed as a father, since the mother asked
for a divorce and left.
The great thing about this, is to watch, in the end, Ingmar's own stern
conduct, in dealing with his father, just when he has reached
a level of fame in the world cinema.  The father has not succeeded, or if he
did he does not feel this way.  And Ingmar is not interested in wallowing in
the garbage, as is not Daniel, in doing this film. It is a bit brutal, in
many ways, but it does force a sort of
therapy on the old man, that is working, however slowly.
Daniel Bergman is showing that he is also a fabulous director, like his own
dad, whose legacy is without question one of the great
accomplishments in the history of film.  Daniel, unlike his father, has the
ability of allowing the camera to move a little more than
his own father, thus making the film a little more bearable for an audience
that is used to fast paced films... but it is STILL painfully
slow, and difficult to appreciate, unless we make a commitment to do so.
Like Sven Nykvist, with Ingmar so many times, Tony Forsberg comes off as a
visual dynamo that makes this film alive.  It is visually striking, and
colorful.  It helps the film live.  With Sven's "quiet" camera, this film
would have been exactly like the father's material ... stoic, but effective.
With excellent acting, and a very well written script, covering some thirty
to forty years, this film can only signify that the younger
Bergman is on the way to try and outdo his own father.  And it helps to have
the father provide a script of his own experience
to help lead the way... similar to the story, isn't it...???
I suppose that the funny thing was to see an actor playing the older Bergman
confronting his own father in 1968.... I think it would have been a bit
"selfish" not to, but it would have added another dimension to the film.....
the Bergman's of today are involved
in a religious offering called film.... the Bergman's of yesterday were
involved in the good book.... and there is a difference in
the end... you must see the film to catch it.

Author
James Berardinelli
     In more ways than one, SUNDAY'S CHILDREN is about fathers and
sons.  Written by Ingmar Bergman and directed by his youngest son
Daniel, the film depicts Bergman's own childhood and his volatile
relationship with his father Henrik.  Here, the names of the past
generation have been changed, but the story that remains is heavily
autobiographical, and forms a trilogy with the elder Bergman's final
directorial effort, FANNY AND ALEXANDER and Billy August's searing and
powerful version of Bergman's screenplay, THE BEST INTENTIONS.
     Most of SUNDAY'S CHILDREN takes place in the 1920s and centers
around the disintegration of the family of young Pu (Henrik Linnros).
His father Erik (Thommy Berggren) and mother Karin (Lena Endre) are at
a crossroads in their marriage--she wants a separation; he won't hear
of it.  Pu's nearly-worshipful attitude towards his father leads Erik
to suggest that his son accompany him on a day-long journey to a
distant parish where Erik is to preach a Sunday sermon.  Pu agrees and,
on the way, experiences something that will soon become a painfully
recurring reality in his relationship with his father--violent,
explosive anger that leads to physical abuse.
     Erik Bergman is SUNDAY'S CHILDREN's representation of Henrik
Bergman.  Karin is Ingmar's mother Anna, and Pu is explicitly revealed
to be the author.  Despite name and actor changes, this is an excellent
followup to THE BEST INTENTIONS (which told the story of Henrik and
Anna's courtship and the early years of their marriage).  The material
is not as potent, but the continuation of the story arc is
unmistakable.
     There are four flash-forwards.  These take place in 1968, and show
a middle-aged Ingmar interacting with his dying father.  The scenes are
crucial to the plot, placing the main story in perspective and giving
emotional resonance to the 1920s sequences.  Knowing the eventual,
tragic path taken by the father/son relationship adds poignancy to the
presentation of circumstances before everything went wrong.  Aside from
the one instance of abuse, the ugliness that was to mark Ingmar's
lifelong war with his father had not yet begun.  And because we see
Erik as such a caring, sympathetic figure, it hurts to recognize what
he will become.
     Like most films scripted by Ingmar Bergman, SUNDAY'S CHILDREN
moves slowly, with the emotional and psychological pressures constantly
building.  This is not a movie for those who are unwilling to sit and
gradually become immersed in the unspectacular lives of a group of
characters.
     While not surpassing his father, Director Daniel Bergman has
managed to make the material his own by crafting a first-rate film.  He
is aided by a superlative cast which includes one of the most natural
under-ten actors to grace the screen in years (Henrik Linnros).  The
credibility of the film is linked inextricably to Pu, and young Linnros
makes his character consistently believable.
     There are numerous parallels between SUNDAY'S CHILDREN and another
currently-available Swedish film, THE SLINGSHOT.  Both take place in
the 1920s and are told from the point-of-view of a young boy.  As good
as THE SLINGSHOT is, however, it lacks a portion of the depth that
forms the foundation of SUNDAY'S CHILDREN.  Each film is worth seeing
in its own right, and various comparisons and contrasts will leap to
mind, but SUNDAY'S CHILDREN is the stronger of the two.  Ingmar
Bergman's days behind the camera may be over, but he apparently still
has a worthwhile story or two left to tell.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
