Title
Review for Rebecca (1940)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
Quiz time: how many Academy Awards for Best Director did
Alfred Hitchcock receive?  Five?  Three?  Actually, none,
although he was nominated on five different occasions.
Well then, how many Oscars for Best Picture did his films
receive?  Only one did, his first American production,
"Rebecca". 
"Rebecca" was produced by David O. Selznick, who had just
finished the most successful film ever, "Gone With The Wind".
How much credit for "Rebecca" belongs to Selznick and how
much to Hitchcock is a subject worthy of study.  Certainly
much credit is due to all concerned, since "Rebecca" is one 
of the greatest films ever. 
"Rebecca" is about a wealthy man (Lawrence Olivier) who has 
recently lost his stunning wife, the title subject.  He wins
the love of reticent, humble beauty Joan Fontaine.  They go to 
live at his fabulous mansion, run by stern headmistress 
Mrs. Danvers, who is pathologically devoted to the late wife.  
Fontaine lives in the shadow of Rebecca, threatening her marriage.  
Then follows many outstanding plot surprises and twists, which 
I would gladly describe except for the unpleasant email that I 
would then receive. 
The cast is outstanding.  Judith Anderson has the role of a 
lifetime playing the foreboding Danvers.  George Sanders plays 
a shady character, and delivers his lines as slyly as ever.  
C. Aubrey Smith is a local constable and is his usual patriachical 
self.  Florence Bates is a delightfully self-important matron. 
The script is marvelous, with exchanges like: 
"They'd give their eyes to see Monte (Carlo)" 
"That would rather defeat the purpose, wouldn't it?" 
A romance, a mystery, suspense, surprises, cast, characters,
cinematography, a story, and script, "Rebecca" has it all 
and may well be Hitchcock's best picture, although 
"Strangers On a Train" is also in the running. 

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alfred Hitchcock
Writers: John Harrison, Michael Hogan, Philip MacDonald, and Robert E.
Sherwood (based on the novel by Daphne du Maurier)
Starring: Joan Fontaine, Laurence Olivier, Judith Anderson, George
Sanders, Gladys Cooper, Nigel Bruce, Reginald Denny, C. Aubrey Smith,
Florence Bates
The Master of Suspense took a slight turn away from international
intrigue to create his American debut film, "Rebecca."  Instead of
spies, conspiracies, and chases involving innocent men and women,
"Rebecca" is a thriller dealing with the depths of the human soul. 
There are no bad guys or good guys in "Rebecca" - just some people who
end up being psychologically wounded one way or another by result of the
death of one woman: Rebecca de Winters.
We never see our title character, but we more than feel her presence. 
In it, we meet a girl who's name we never really find out (Joan
Fontaine), who is the "companion" of a spoiled rich woman -  Mrs. Van
Hopper (Florence Bates) - in the south of France.  There, she meets
Rebecca's widower: the wealthy and depressed Maxim de Winter (Laurence
Olivier, eight years before he would make his version of "Hamlet," yet
looking like he was around 50).  Over the course of a short period of
time (about a half-hour of film time), the two hit it off, and by the
end of her stay there, he proposes to her, and she gleefully accepts.
But although they're time on vacation was full of happiness, returning
to his giant house, Mandalay, begins to set some nasty vibes off. 
Although welcomed into her house nicely by almost all of the servants,
the creepy (not to mention homoerotic) servant Mrs. Danvers, begins to
give her the chills.  Although at first the film looks as though it's
going to go all cheap and have the new Mrs. de Winters just become the
old Mrs. de Winters (who was drowned), the film steers clear of that
notion, although drifts near it from time to time, and instead goes for
something creepier.
The film unfolds beautifully.  We the audience sympathize with the
noveau riche Joan Fontaine, as she's obviously not exactly comfortable
with the rich life.  And we watch as the past of Mandalay opens up, and
we learn more and more about Rebecca and her impact on not only Maxim
(or "Max"), but on other people, most importantly Mrs. Danvers, who is
said to have "really adored the late Mrs. de Winters").
The final half hour would seem cheap and anti-climactic, as it takes a
completely different direction than what was pre-conceived, but
nevertheless deepens the film.  I actually rewound the movie and
rewatched it with the new knowledge I attained from watching the rest of
it, and noticed a whole other depth to the film.
What's remarkable about "Rebecca" is how it obtains suspense through
non-life-threatening situations.  In a sequence where Joan Fontaine is
making a costume for a big ball of hers, we never see what she's
creating, but I actually hoped I didn't think what she was doing, and
felt some tension before finally seeing her creation.  The entire film
is mired with gothic creepiness, creating moments where I was just
afraid because of the feel of the film.
"Rebecca" is not only notable for this distinction, but also because it
is the only one of his films to win a Best Picture Oscar. 
Unfortunately, Hitchcock goes into the same club of extremely talented
directors who have never won an Oscar for their efforts, inclduing such
noteworthy directors as Martin Scorsese and Stanley Kubrick.  Although
"Rebecca" does not show Hitchcock in his element of damn-near-flawless
direction in his typical thrillers, I think the man should have at least
won for this, since his direction is, as it is mostly,
damn-near-flawless.
The film received a total of 11 nominations, claiming some of them (it
was no "English Patient," after all).  Olivier and Fontaine were both
nominated, and justly, but lost, perhaps justly (I don't know who else
was nominated that year).  Fontaine creates a very sympathetic
character, a protagonist we can identify with (in most cases), and care
about.  And Olivier creates a man who has distanced himself from
everyone else, and who's problem we never fully understand, but just
quickly diagnose him superficially with the old "oh, well, his wife just
died!"
Judith Anderson was also nominated but lost, but I think she should have
won for her Mrs. Danvers is one of the most intriguing and bizarre
characters in all of film history.  She is also a distanced character,
but one who possesses a lot of creepiness, as well as some homoeroticism
(there's a scene where she gets so close to Fontaine, it looked like
Fontaine was trying to escape from her because there was some sexual
tension).  This is not just me; many filmmakers claim that this was
intentional.
In a smaller role, George Sanders (who was in some other Hitchcock
films, like "Foreign Correspondent") is a scene stealer as an old lover
of Rebecca's who turns up mostly in the end to start some trouble with
Max.  Why he wasn't nominated, I don't know.
"Rebecca" is one of the more deeper and stranger of the Hitchcock films,
as it deals more with psychological terror than espionnage terror.  It's
an unforgettable film, and further proof that Hitchcock was one of the
best and freshest directors around, and who's timeless classics make him
one of the best directors of all time.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
