Title
Review for Uncle Sam (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Nusair
Picking up "Uncle Sam" from my local video store, I was expecting
a cheesy, low-budget gore-fest.  The packaging contains a 3D
photograph on the front depicting Uncle Sam pointing at the
viewer, with a tagline that reads: "Uncle Sam wants you...DEAD!"
As I began watching, though, I slowly started to realize that
there was a lot more to this movie than shock value.  Yes, 
much of the film has "Uncle Sam" wandering around in a cheap
costume inventively killing innocent bystanders, but surprisingly
enough, there is more to it than that.  In fact, for about the
first 45 minutes, there's virtually no gore at all.  Up to that
point, it's a somewhat serious look at the effects war has on
family members left behind.
See, "Uncle Sam" is a soldier in the Gulf war that presumably
died due to friendly fire, and much of the first half of the 
film is about his family's reaction to the news that he has 
(supposedly) passed away.  Apparently, he was not such a nice man, 
so his sister and wife are actually quite happy that he is dead.
However, his nephew looks up to him as a hero, so he naturally
gets quite upset when folks start bad mouthing his dear old Uncle
Sam (yes, his first name actually *is* Sam).  
Anyway, the rotting corpse of Uncle Sam finally shows up and starts
murdering people.  He mostly just kills people who are foolish
enough to disrespect "the American way of life", such as a gang
of teenagers who desecrate Sam's grave.  His methods of elimination
border on the ridiculous at times (one poor sap is murdered by
being impaled by an American flag), but I suppose that is par for
the course in a movie like this.
Something that really surprised me was the amount of familiar
faces in the movie.  Isaac Hayes has a prominent role as a one
of Sam's old Army buddies, Timothy Bottoms ("Apocalypse Now")
plays a peace loving teacher who meets a gruesome end at the
hands of not-so-peace loving Uncle Sam, and even Robert Forster
(in one of his many low-budget, pre-"Jackie Brown" roles) has a
bit part as a Senator who is killed for no discernable reason.
Fans of the genre expecting a non-stop gore fest out of "Uncle Sam"
will be sorely disappointed.  It would appear as though the 
filmmakers were actually trying to make a serious point on the
nature of war with this movie.  But trying to do that within
the constraints of the horror genre was a big mistake; it just
doesn't work.  About the best way for me to sum up "Uncle Sam"
would be to call it a not-so-successful, but always entertaining,
experiment.
