Title
Review for Whoops Apocalypse (1986)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
WHOOPS APOCALYPSE (Great Britain, 1986)
Director: Tom Bussman
Screenwriters: Andrew Marshall, David Renwick
Cast: Loretta Swit, Peter Cook, Michael Richards, Rik Mayall, Alexei Sayle,
      Herbert Lom
     WHOOPS APOCALYPSE is a hybrid of British humor; I think it could be
described as two parts "Spitting Image," two parts NOT NECESSARILY THE NEWS, a
shot of Monty Python and a jigger of Benny Hill.  While many parts of it work
(more than you would expect, really), it seems to lack a cohesiveness of style.
Monty Python might have been comic guerilla warfare, but it was constantly
loony -- you never got Bob Hope "whoopie" jokes thrown in.
     Basically, this is something of a takeoff on the British/Argentina
situation of a few years ago.  After a small British colony is invaded by its
neighboring right-wing dictatorship, the British invade the country to regain
it.  In the midst of this, an international terrorist kidnaps the royal
princess, provoking the PM (a complete loony, wonderfully played by Peter
Cook) to threaten a nuclear strike against the dictatorship if the princess
returned in 48 hours.  Meanwhile, the President (Loretta Swit) tries to calm
both allies (not wanting to offend either side, since they're both tough on
communism).  Well, you get the idea.
     Best parts include the entire premise that while Cook is off his nut, his
insane right-wing policies are supported without question by the rest of the
country, and the anti-terrorist squad bit, which goes over the top several
times but is generally pretty good.  Much of the humor isn't predictable, and
that goes a long way for me.
     I suspect this will appear on HBO or Showtime sometime soon (if it hasn't
already).  It's certainly worth the time to tape it and play it back, if
only for the closing credits.  Not a classic, but good violent humor where
little children get punched out by Secret Service agents.  My type of film.

Author
Richard Rust
"Whoops Apocalypse" (LWT 1982) the TV show, and "Whoops Apocalypse" (1986)
the movie, last seen on Comedy Central, both try their darndest to
satirize all the moronic excesses that have come to be known as the go-go
80's.  
In their respective times both were probably deliciously dark comedies. 
But today they both, especially the movie version, weirdly resonate with a
dark foreboding that its creators might admire but could never have
imagined.
That's the problem with satire, no matter how outrageous you try to be,
reality has an irritating habit of out doing your invention. Trenchant
comedy that once seem to be on the fringe is surpassed by reality
becoming, with time, quite tame and even naive.
The first attempt aired on London Weekend Television in the early 80's,
when Ronald Reagan, neutron bombs (remember those!) a never too deceased
Leonoid Breshznev and the idea of a Labour Government were the funniest
things around.
The movie version aims its invective at petty Conservative Prime
Ministers, air head Royals, pointless wars in the South Atlantic and the
endless machinations of world governments who ought to know better.
When "Whoops Apocalypse" does work, it pays off rather well.  
"Amazing how they pile up," says Peter Cook as a gimlet-eyed British Prime
Minister.  He is referring to his solution to high unemployment, simply
gather up members of the over populated work force and throw them off a
cliff.
All this is presented as a warm fuzzy photo op. for the press.  "This the
sort of thing you want?" Cook fawns to the camera as he rocks an out of
work engineer back and forth by the shoulders, one last smile, then
wheeeee, down goes the surplus labor force onto the rocks below and up
shoots the psycho PM's popularity in the polls.
The plot of the movie version of "Whoops Apocalypse" revolves around Cook,
a kidnapped princess, Russian missiles in the Caribbean, and Loretta Switt
as the American President trying to keep a British War in South America
from escalating into a nuclear holocaust.
"Well boys and girls, I've got something really important to announce." 
Labour Prime Minister Kev is about to tell his inner circle that he is
indeed the "Man of Steel." So there's no need to worry about all this NATO
jazz, because as Super Man, he'll just pull the entire island of Great
Britain out of harms way should nuclear war come.
In the TV version Labour elects to join the Warsaw Pact, the Ayatollah is
co-opted as a Soviet puppet, literally, and the Shah's younger brother
(??) is stuck in the men's loo on a cross channel ferry, as all countries
try to use him for their own purposes.
Both the movie and the TV show have a recurring G. Gordon Liddy type,
hired by the American President to assassinate the British PM before he
starts WW III.
I believe in both versions the Assassin tries to impress everyone by
holding his manhood over a candle flame, "It's not that it doesn't hurt,
it's that I don't mind the pain,"  he warbles.  
In the movie he fills the PM's bath with acid but Cook gets off with his
life, trading in his right hand for a steel hook.
If the satire lacks the fizz and bite that it surely had when all of this
was au-corrent, then at least you can bask in the manic glow of either
Michael Richards (the movie) or John Cleese (the TV series) who both have
great fun chewing up the scenery as they portray an evil genius and man of
a thousand site gags, I mean faces; the nefarious Lacrobate.
Cleese's set piece is a "demo" tape extolling his great gifts as a world
terrorist and assassin.  The "demo" tape cpntains an 80's version of a
politically incorrect gallery of thugs who supposedly hired Lacrobate to
do their dirty work.  Funny thing is they all look just like Cleese who
renders one of the finest Afrikaner accents I've ever heard.
Richard's incarnation of Lacrobate shuffles Wendy, the Princess  Royal,
around in a gorilla suit and calls her Princess as he tries to smuggle her
into a hotel.  
Yes it might be fatuous and puerile but I'd watch it two or three times
just to make sure.  
"Don't worry," Richards assures the hotel clerk, as the royal gorilla
rattles in its cage, "one Valium suppository and Princess will sleep like
a baby."  Double take by gorilla.
In spite of the jokes that have no shelf life, the movie version of
"Whoops Apocalypse" starts to become very creepy, as we realize that the
90's have rendered the greed and rapaciousness of the 80's rather mute.
Watching the movie version in the 90's you can't avoid the fact that it's
the press who threw the Princess off the cliff, and the Cold War may be
over, but who can outdo Claus Von Bulow, the Menendez brothers and OJ
Simpson for cold blooded idiocy.
No, I guess things were better back in the 80's before the Berlin Wall
fell, the Soviet Union collapsed and the Cold War ended.  At least way
back then we had a shred of belief that we could change things for the
better.
Satire may grow old with the passing years, but the evil that men (and
women) do, seems to grow more hideous as time passes.  
Watching either version of "Whoops Apocalypse" you realize that the
unthinkable nature of the thermonuclear threat has been replaced by the
extremely likely and all too casual horrors of today.  
The unintended message of "Whoops Apocalypse" seems to be that though the
nuclear demon's threat of global destruction has decreased it has been
replaced by a world wide homogenization of evil that guarantees each of us
a personalized dose of terror rather than a world wide global catastrophe.
-- 
Peace, Conversion, Fasting, Penance, Prayer.
http://www.medjugorje.org/
http://www.nd.edu/~mary/Emmanuel.html 
