Title
Review for Congo (1995)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Yamamoto
     Have you ever noticed that stuff happens to ya at the worst time?
Is this some sorta curse someone placed on everyone?  I mean take
today for example.  I had an experiment (no, not that kind--it was one
of those science stuff) going for two days and I was about to take it
off.  And what happens, power goes out and I get stuck in a garage.
     Speaking of being stuck, CONGO came out and I had to go check it
out.  It's about this gorilla who learned how to talk and this
scientist dude who wanted to return her back to Africa.  Of course he
can't find any grants to return the monkey so he gets help from other
sources.
     No nakkid boobs.  15 dead bodies (and 14 same monkeys dying all
over).  147 bullets.  53 on the vomit meter.  No moon shots.  What we
got here are:  Expedition-fu, skinny dippin'-fu, attack of killer
chocolate craving-fu, paranoid dude in charge-fu, Mr. Ed-fu, Dr.
Dolittle-fu, attack of killer fuel prices-fu, sesame seed cake- fu, air
conditioner-fu, and of course attack of killer apes-fu.  Drive in
academy nomination for Dylan Walsh for saying stuff like "what is
that?" and to Earnie Hudson for responding "when moon like that comes
out, every money in two hundred miles thinks they're Elvis."  To Tim
Curry for saying stuff like "help me pick these up" and to Joe Don
Baker after sending a group to a volcano "please use the fire
extinguisher on that".  And of course to Laura Linney for saying stuff
like "Do you remember my promise?"  One and a half star.  Shaggy Bob
says check it out!
     Alien Alert!  Did ya hear about his guy paying some one to rape
his wife so he can watch?  Well, the rapist got caught and the wife
sued the guy.  She won and was awarded $64million.  I dunno 'bout you
but where in the world is a sleazoid like that gonna come up with that
kind of money?  I sure would like to get my hands on that kind of piggy
bank.
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that Reply key now.

Author
Pedro Sena
CONGO is a story, and film, that wants to be appreciated.  But there may be
a problem with it, in that if it isn't the writer's fault, then it is the
director's, in that they can't make up its mind wether it wants to be an
adventure film into the heart of a jungle to find something mysterious, or
another story that uses the jungle as a  backdrop for its own motives, which
are pathetic, and boring.
It's hard to conceive that the writer, who has had many successful works
done into film, would not have considered this option, and stayed away from
the adventure film syndrome.
Basically, it is the story of a group of people that are hired to go after
some diamonds, clean and uncut, in an area in Congo that is historical and
is believed not to exist except in fairy tales, and local folklore.  But,
apparently, the main reason why it is considered to be so mysterious is
because it has,  somehow, kept every single person that has gone near its
spot, thus adding to  its misery.
And the group that is assembled is a variety of misfits that have different
agendas, and all vicious in their own way.  And the leader of the
expedition, is a black man who is actually a mercenary, who is involved in
several political intrigues, some of which involve all the chances he can to
make sure that his group also gets the treat they want. The corruption of
many African states and their government, is just a slight bit in this film.
But the film is no dummy, and the writer no less so. Basically all the
characters are corrupt in their own way.  They are all overly infatuated
with their own agendas. With
the exception of one man, who has come on the same plane to bring a gorilla
back to its own home.  This gorilla is special. It has learned to talk,
through a few instruments, and this communication helps many of them pass
their way through the jungle and into the place they are looking for, which
just
happens to be there unexplored by the human eye.!!!!!
But the expedition that is meant to take this gorilla back to its home, has
problems, and ends up getting added to another group that has different
objectives in the same place.
While CONGO, has its moments, it also has its drawbacks, even if, at the end
a form of justice is served and done.
The best acting work in this film is served by the gorillas ( David Anthony
is magnificent ), who are pretty darn good, and a few small roles here and
there, including Tim Curry.  Aside from that, CONGO is a well designed film,
and technically well done, were it not that all these resources get wasted
in the hands of someone whose direction is questionable, or the book itself
just isn't good enough.  Maybe if it was just another adventure story, it
might have been more interesting.... like reversing the roles, and going to
hire the gorilla trainer and its sidekick, to help along, instead of using
the pretext that
one man is returning this trained gorilla to its roots, which, to this
reviewer diminishes the character of the film.  One can't help wonder if the
Berkeley ( wouldn't you know it !!! ) student that is trying to return the
gorilla also has alterior motives of his own.
The jungle is full of surprises, and a different group of gorillas is also
involved, and they end up getting trampled, along with a complete
destruction of the whole area in general.... they do  archeologists a great
favor by burying the whole thing in the inner part of the mountain amidst an
exploding volcano..... how timely, too....
Use your money on something else, unless you like to see people acting as
gorillas, in which case this movie is excellent.  The gorillas are the show,
not the bad ones.....

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Laura Linney; Dylan Walsh; Ernie Hudson; Tim Curry & Grant Heslov
Congo is based on the Michael Crichton novel of the same name. Laura Linney
plays a scientist whose company has sent an expedition into the Congo to
look for a lost city. While the expedition is in contact with their
employers in the US via a video satellite link, they are attacked. Before
the transmission is cut off, it appears as though the attackers are giant
gorillas.
Linney is told to mount another expedition to find out what happened. Her
character hooks up with another expedition that is also going to the Congo.
This one consists of a scientist who is returning his gorilla, Amy, to the
Congo. Oh yeah, Amy knows sign language and the intrepid scientist has
developed technology that interprets her signs into words. So Amy can speak.
Sound kinda dumb? Well, in the original novel, Crichton pulls it off. The
movie doesn't.
Congo is a disappointment from the get go. Amy, as you might expect, is not
a real gorilla -- and it shows. There are very few scenes in this movie were
you might actually be fooled into thinking this was anything other than a
guy in a bad gorilla suit.
The actors are largely wasted in this movie -- especially Ernie Hudson who
plays the guide, and Tim Curry as the shady treasure hunter along for the
ride. The rest of the cast is almost laughable. It may be as much a fault of
the script as it was of the actors. I suppose if I was an actor, it would be
pretty difficult trying to give my best effort while acting alongside a
talking monkey.  Not to mention the fact that Congo doesn't quite seem to
know if it is an action movie or if it some sort of environmental cause. The
movie seems to instantly switch gears back and fourth from this dangerous
search for the lost city, to some sort of animal rights message that Amy
should be with her own kind in the jungle and not in captivity. Of course
that message is completely forgotten when the killer apes arrive and the
cast starts unloading some heavy firepower into them. I'm not even going to
go into the somewhat schizophrenic killer apes. For most of the movie they
are portrayed as being these highly intelligent creatures, but during the
final climactic scenes of the movie all those brains seem to have gone right
out the window.
Confused? Don't feel bad. So were the filmmakers. The movie isn't a total
disaster; it just could have been so much better considering the source of
the story. Which, in all fairness, is not Crichton's best work. So let's
just say this film is no Jurassic Park. The only high point, and we're not
talking Mount Everest here, is the fact that some of the special effects
weren't half bad. But they weren't good enough to make up for the guy in the
bad monkey suit. My advice? If you are a Michael Crichton fan -- read the
book. Everyone else should stay away from this movie and check out one of
the better Crichton movie adaptations  like Jurassic Park or Rising Sun

Author
pcb@unicomp.net
     To put it succinctly, this movie was a piece of utter trash.  If
you did or did not read the book, you will certainly find it utterly
disappointing.  The plot is extremely *weak*, and the whole main idea
from the book was *completely* changed.  The book was about finding
special diamonds for use in the super-computer industry, which would
set the finder five years ahead of the competition, while the movie
seemed to concern itself with finding the diamonds for use with some
dumb laser, a totally *stupid* idea, and also with the bonds of
father-son love, which has been totally overdone.  They really might
have had something if they had stuck with the book.
     Another MAJOR black eye for this movie was its so called "special
effects."  The gorillas (especially amy) looked more like dogs than
Gorillas, or maybe just people in suits.  Also, some genius over at the
production company thought it would be cool if this gorilla could talk
using virtual reality gloves which interpret sign language into a voice
(a really dumb one, I might add).  This really became unbelievably
stupid when amy began speaking to the other gorillas, and they seemed
to understand her.
     Some idiot also decided that the gorillas would be better if they
just beat up their victims rather than smashing their heads in with a
couple of stone bats.  Now, that would have made the movie *almost*
worth watching if there was some good blood and gore.  Another fault in
the movie was the ease with which the characters found the city of
Zinj.  It seemed that they just bumped into it, while in the book
*major* research was done to find where the probable location of the
city would be.  This made the book more believable, and the movie
totally unbelievable!
     Finally, seeing CONGO was probably the low point of last week.
Conclusion:  Save yourself six bucks on this one, and don't go see it.

Author
Jonathan E Myers
     I was looking forward to CONGO.  I had read the book a couple of
years ago and liked it.  I figured that there was a decent chance of
someone turning it into a good action-thriller movie.  I was wrong.  I
turned out to be the worst movie that I've seen this year.
     CONGO is the story of a giant corporation that sets out on a
desperate search for some unique diamonds located in the remotest
regions of the Congo.  These diamonds are the key to the future for
this company so when the first expedition is mysteriously wiped out, a
new expedition is immediately dispatched.
     The new expedition constists of a Romanian philanthropist, a
primate Ph.D., his talking gorilla, a research assistant, a
communications Ph.D. (the leader), and the African guide.  This group
treks into the Congo to retrieve the diamonds and find out what
happened to the other expedition.
     The special effects were pretty good except for the cheesy ape
costume.  The acting was terrible.  None of the actors seem like they
are doing anything besides walking around and speaking their lines like
they just read them off a page for the first time.
     The screenplay was terrible.  There is absolutely no character
development.  I did not care about the characters at all.  I don't
expect much from an action movie, but this had none.  The plot was
entirely unbelievable.  I can suspend my disbelief a couple of times
per movie, but this one was just too much.  Personally, I wish that I
had not seen this movie.  It was not worth the time or money.  See it
at your own risk.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Best-selling author Michael Chricton, same as his colleague
Stephen King, hadn't got much luck in adaptations of his
books into movies. At least this was the case in 1990s when
all those efforts, with an exception of JURASSIC PARK,
produced disappointing results. The worst disappointment of
them all was probably CONGO, 1995 adventure thriller
directed by Frank Marshall.
The plot begins in the jungles of Central Africa, somewhere
on the border of Congo and its politically unstable states.
R.B. Travis (played by Jon Doe Baker), greedy CEO of
Houston-based corporation, has sent his own son Charles
(played by Bruce Campbell) into the area in order to search
for world's largest diamonds - necessary ingredient for the
lasers his corporation was about develop. When communication
between Houston and Charles' jungle camp gets lost, Travis
hires Charles' former fiancee and ex-CIA agent Dr. Karen
Ross (played by Laura Linney) in order to locate him. When
Dr. Ross arrives in Central Africa she is soon accompanied
by few characters who are going to join her expedition for
their own reasons -Dr. Peter Elliott (played by Dylan Walsh)
is a researcher who wants to bring his talking gorilla to a
natural habitat; Herkemer Homolka is "Romanian
philantropist" who dreams of finding a treasure within a
lost city somewhere in the jungle, while Monroe Kelly
(played by Ernie Hudson) happens to be U.S. mercenary with
his own agenda.
CONGO was supposed to be a combination of late 20th Century
techno-thriller and old-fashioned adventure film about lost
treasures in distant, exotic lands. Unfortunately, Patrick
Shanley's script failed to properly employ both components
and the movie fell flat, not even managing to become a
parody of those two genres. The result is an anachronistic
mess made of cliched characters and situations that looks
like a cheap copy of Indiana Jones films and ends with
unsatisfying deus ex machina finale. Director Frank Marshall
is definitely unable to compensate flaws of such script, and
some actors don't help either, including Tim Curry whose
over-the-top performance looks more irritating than funny.
His colleagues, on the other hand, look mostly
disinterested, probably knowing that even with their best
efforts CONGO won't be a film to be particularly proud of.
Review written on September 19th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Brian Lehr (Brian Lehr)
     Um ... what? Being the sucker for Michael Crichton that I am, I
rushed out to see this on the opening weekend, much as did with BATMAN
FOREVER the following week.  Unfortunately, this film isn't even in the
same league with the Caped Crusader.
     As the movie starts off with a guy finding his friend's eyeball
and then getting killed hinself, the "predictable" suspense just keeps
on coming.  People turn around slowly in fright and then scream so many
times it gets laughable (or in the least, downright boring.  If the
fake gorrila suits don't turn you off, the fake actors should.  I
understand using "nobodys" (except for Tim Curry; love the accent), I
mean ... it worked with JURASSIC PARK.  But as with BATMAN, JURASSIC
PARK towers above this ... not in plot structure or deeper meaning, but
in basic entertainment of the audience.  Frankly put, I didn't enjoy
this movie, no matter how hard I tried, and I have been known to enjoy
many a film despite its lack of plot, etc. (take ACE VENTURA, PET
DETECTIVE).  But you'd think for what is supposed to be a big-money
film they could have gotten better sets than something you might see at
Disneyland.  The cinematography is good, with great shots of the
jungle.  But when we land back on earth for more bad acting and cheesy
lines, you can tell we're in a set again.
     CONGO sacrifices any point and goes for the quick kill, hoping the
scary apes will freak the doubts out of us.  With most of us, that
shouldn't work ... I never found myself truly concerned or frightened
by this movie.  A little startled, perhaps, like you are when a car
backfires, but nothing that stays with you like velociraptors jumping
in your face.  And after a while, even that ran out, as the @*%^#ing
annoying mechanical voice of the main ape's mechanical arm got to me.
She (the ape) looked bored too, not even trying to do sign language,
just hitting her chest in the same way every time, perhaps thinking
"Duh!  This movie is insulting even my intelligence!  Duh!"
     For those of you who have read the book, and just *have* to see
the movie, go ahead; it's your money.  But let me also forewarn you
that CONGO goes on a no-holds-barred charge full speed backward from
the book.  Characters are changed and plots are lost.  But as movie
makers grab hold of certain authors, and then their books, we must be
prepared for stinkers such as CONGO.  And the public doesn't help,
considering the amount of $ CONGO grabbed at the first-weekend box
office because fools like Yours Truly went and saw it before I looked
at the reviews.  In fact, by now we should probably expect them.
     This movie squeezed a reluctant 1.5 (*1/2) apes out of me, mostly
because of a good scene with Ernie Hudson in an airport (one of the
*few* good scenes). "Run man, run!"  Do that when you see this movie.

Author
Raymond Johnston
     After the success of JURASSIC PARK, Michael Crichton's name has
become an industry.  Anything with his name on it has been rushed into
production to cash in the coat tails of his dinosaurs.  In many ways,
CONGO is JURASSIC PARK without the killer reptiles.  Next to the
stunning prehistoric beasts, the killer apes of CONGO are merely just
impressive.
     If you look at CONGO on its own terms, instead of as a limp
pseudo-sequel to the most successful film of all time, CONGO is a good
old-fashioned action/ adventure film.  Director Frank Marshall manages
to recapture feel of old serials, and integrates this completely with
the modern look of the high-tech story.
     What really holds this film together are the performances of two
under-rated stars.  Ernie Hudson plays the guide.  He describes himself
as a great white hunter, who just happens to be black.  He does his
whole role as a cross between Errol Flynn and David Niven.  His black
"white" hunter allows him to address some of the racism inherent in the
African adventure genre.  He points to the falsity of Hollywood
stereotypes several times.  The other characterization holding the film
together is Tim Curry as a supposed Romanian philanthropist.  Curry
evokes the untrustworthy nobility of Bela Lugosi.  Why the other
characters allow him to tag along on the expedition, when it is clear
that is up to no good, is one of the unexplained mysteries of the
screenplay.  If they had kicked him out, however, the film would have
suffered greatly.  Hudson and Curry make this otherwise bland
expedition exiting to listen to when the action is at a lull.
     The science of the story is stripped down to a minimum.  Little of
the high tech nonsense is explained.  Part of it involves a talking
ape, some of the rest the search for the perfect industrial diamond.
Instead of bogging down in explanations of those elements, the
mismatched expedition moves from crisis to crisis quickly.
     CONGO is a series of political and natural disasters that get in
the way of the group and their uncommon goals.  What makes it a cut
above some other recent action films is a raft of good minor characters
and some very droll dialogue in John Patrick Shanley's fast paced
script.  Director Frank Marshall has been a long time associate of
Stephen Spielberg, producing such films as RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK.  He
directs much of the film in Spielberg's style, but thankfully tones
down some of the childish schmaltz that has hindered many of
Spielberg's recent adventure films.
     Every film involving apes has to top the animal effects used in
the last great ape film.  Stan Winston does that here easily.
Considering how many people are credited with designing and working the
apes, that is not surprising.  A few of the ILM special effects in the
last part of the film have a slightly cheesy look, but in a way that
helps to remind one of the classic 1930s African adventure films and
serials that CONGO tries to emulate.
     No doubt many people will find fault with the depiction of Africa
as the land of lost tribes and corrupt governments.  Others will fault
the depiction of apes as carnivorous monsters.  CONGO at least makes an
effort to deflate some of the stereotypes and false notions that are
inherent in its genre.

Author
Teresa Lamb
     After having JURASSIC PARK nearly ruined by reading Michael
Crichton's novel/script, nothing that had anything to do with CONGO
reached the eyes of this reviewer.  This helped CONGO's enjoyment, but
did not save nor make the film anything less than unsatisfying.
Frustration was the word for JURASSIC PARK, with a desire to see some
of the book's subplots developed on screen more than a minor suggestion
of dino breeding by Sam Neil upon finding egg shells.  CONGO leaves
many of the same roads untraveled; even without the benefit of any
extra knowledge possibly supplied by the book.  Continuing the
comparison to JURASSIC PARK, CONGO's cast suffers from the
cookie-cutter class that makes JURASSIC PARK almost unreal or
comic-bookish.  Most actors do fine with such light weight material;
Ernie Hudson (who's been in some pretty awful films recently, THE CROW
(1994, Miramax/Dimension) and NO ESCAPE (1994, Savoy)) shows a slightly
new side with a British accent.  Tim Curry's character remains
strikingly under-developed beyond being the treasure mad explorer who
leaves the film in a painstakingly predictable fashion.  The female
lead is a close clone of Ellie Sadler (Laura Dern) from JURASSIC PARK
and Joe Don Baker is a much gruffer version, but still cut from the
same single-visioned character cloth as Richard Attenborough's Hammond
in JURASSIC PARK.  Even the dialogue mirrors JURASSIC PARK with
pseudo-philosophical/intellectual passages that only provoke laughter
rather than insight.
     Praise can only truly be bestowed upon CONGO's special effects.
Lucas Digital's ILM receives credit for effects of a wide range beyond
those of animatronic gorillas; which do, by the way, appear very
authentic throughout most of CONGO.  The main monkey, Amy, possesses an
ability that is a scientific breakthrough; however, this ability is
sadly seldom demonstrated for audience effect/reaction or to propel the
thin plot.  Other tech credits are top notch with a full deep coating of
Paramount "sheen" on the film giving it a schlock look that greatly
benefits a shallow film like CONGO.
     If you wear your lowest powered thinking caps and curiosity belt
and trade the ensemble in for an extra large, extra buttered popcorn
and super size beverage, CONGO (in the right digital equipped THX
approved theater) might just make for passable entertainment.  Consider
yourself warned!
     Endangered is wrong; we get plenty of films like this one ...
sadly.  2 stars on the Popcorn Summer Scale out of 4 stars possible (we
were feeling quite generous, too!)

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Laura Linney, Dylan Walsh, Ernie Hudson, Tim Curry, Grant Heslov, 
      Joe Don Baker, Bruce Campbell 
Director: Frank Marshall 
Producers: Kathleen Kennedy and Sam Mercer 
Screenplay: John Patrick Shanley based on the novel by Michael Crichton 
Cinematography: Allen Daviau 
Music: Jerry Goldsmith 
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures 
     Since the release of JURASSIC PARK, Michael Crichton has become a 
Hollywood staple.  Rights to each new novel are quickly optioned, and 
the resulting film is on the market as soon as ILM can get the special 
effects done.  CONGO is the fourth adaptation of a Crichton novel in two 
years (following JURASSIC PARK, RISING SUN, and DISCLOSURE), all of 
which performed well at the box office.  Given its position in the 
summer blockbuster race, it's unclear how this latest picture will do, 
but one thing is certain:  this is easily the worst filmed version of 
anything penned by the prolific author. 
     A group of scientists embark on a safari to the heart of the Congo.  
Included are Dr. Karen Ross (Laura Linney), an ex-CIA agent currently 
working for a huge communications corporation; Dr. Peter Elliot (Dylan 
Walsh), a primate expert; Herkermer Homolka (Tim Curry), a strange man 
with a bizarre Romanian accent; Monroe Kelly (Ernie Hudson), a guide who 
knows all the tricks and short cuts; and Amy, Dr. Elliot's prize student 
-- a female gorilla.  Each member of the expedition has a different 
reason for coming.  Dr. Ross is searching for her missing ex-fiance 
(Bruce Campbell) and the experimental laser gun he had in his possession 
when he disappeared.  Homolka is looking for the fabled city of Zinj, 
which hides the diamond mines of King Solomon.  And Dr. Elliot is trying 
to cure Amy's homesickness.  This party braves numerous dangers, 
including attempts to shoot down their air transportation, erupting 
volcanos, and attacks by a cluster of hungry hippos.  But none of this 
prepares them for their greatest challenge:  a troop of extremely 
vicious and unsociable killer apes that make King Kong look like the 
Jolly Green Giant. 
     With CONGO, Paramount Pictures is probably hoping to duplicate the 
success of Universal's JURASSIC PARK.  It isn't going to happen.  
Gorillas, no matter how mean, don't hold nearly the same fascination as 
dinosaurs -- especially when they're really people dressed in ape suits.  
The tongue-in-cheek script by John Patrick Shanley (who wrote 
MOONSTRUCK) is inferior to the more straightforward Crichton/Koepp 
collaboration, and director Frank Marshall is no Steven Spielberg 
(despite having studied under him).  JURASSIC PARK is a solid thriller; 
CONGO is something distinctly less. 
     In the first place, it's difficult to build tension with so many 
plot threads.  The first half of this film is overburdened with 
exposition -- but it's background that lacks character development.  
Ultimately, Amy has a more fully fleshed-out personality than her human 
companions, and she's a creation of Stan Winston's creature shop.  The 
whiz-bang climax, which features a lot of impressive visual effects and 
collapsing sets, is nicely-choreographed, but marred by adventure film 
cliches that get the heroes in and out of life-threatening jams.  With 
its deus ex machina ending, CONGO harkens back to typical B-type 
adventure flicks.  
     Laura Linney, doing her best Indiana Jones imitation, provides a 
too-rare strong female lead who never needs a helping hand from her 
various male cohorts.  In fact, there's no question that Dr. Ross is in 
charge.  The actress gives an able performance, and she still looks 
pretty good after trudging through all that underbrush.  Ernie Hudson is 
equally enjoyable to watch, and seems to be having some fun.  Tim Curry, 
saddled with an unfortunately silly accent, is his usual fatuous self, 
and Dylan Walsh (last seen as Paul Newman's son in NOBODY'S FOOL) fights 
a losing battle against being upstaged by Amy. 
     CONGO's greatest asset is that it's the only pure monster movie/
adventure of the season, and, even obviously flawed as it is, it still 
fills a niche left vacant by the CRIMSON TIDEs, BRAVEHEARTs, and 
BATMANs.  The movie has its moments of high-energy excitement (all 
during the rushed second half), but they don't leave the audience as 
breathless as they should.  CONGO is basically a JURASSIC PARK/KING KONG 
wannabe that never quite makes the cut. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Rob Furr
     Ask yourself this question: "How much would I pay to spend about
two hours in an air-conditioned, dark room?" If your answer is higher
than the price of a movie ticket in your area, then, by all means, go
see CONGO this week.
     That's the only real reason to go see CONGO.  If the temperatures
in your area are above ninety degrees, it's humid, the air conditioning
in your apartment is out, there's only one theatre in town, and you
only have two hours to kill before you have to be somewhere, then it's
possible that going to see CONGO might be worth while.
     It's been a long time since I've seen a big-budget summer action
film as boring as CONGO.  It's been about as long since I've seen a
movie as badly made as CONGO, and, I hope, it'll be even longer since I
see a movie like this again.  (Of course, with WATERWORLD coming out
soon, my hopes are not high.)
     Remember those dreadful cheap jungle flicks from, oh, the
mid-eighties?  THE PERILS OF GWENDOLINE IN THE LAND OF YIK YAK?  That
sort of thing?  The makers of CONGO obviously derived their inspiration
from those films, instead of the jungle action films from the black and
white era that were actually good.  The plot makes as much sense (i.e.,
none,) the characterization is of the same quality (i.e., rotten,) the
acting is of the same caliber (i.e., pretty damn rotten,) and the
effects are just as good (i.e., not very.)
     The story is ... well, I'll try to sum up: An expedition to the
Congo finds really nifty diamons, which can be used to turn a laser
into the Death Star's main gun.  Unfortunately, just as they find the
laser, the expedition gets killed by ugly thingies.  The leader of the
expedition is the son of the evil nasty businessman, who sends his
son's fiance' into the jungle to find the diamonds.  He doesn't care
about his son, he just wants the diamonds, because, apparently, he
needs a laser that can vaporize people on the Moon.  This irritates the
fiance' to no end.  Meanwhile, a primatologist and his buddy (who has
VICTIM stamped on his forehead in big letters from the instant he
appears) decide that their ape, who's learned sign language, wants to
go home.  They can't afford to take her home, until a Rumanian shows up
and offers to pay for the trip.  Meanwhile, the fiance also shows up,
takes over the expedition, and everybody flies to the Congo, where the
evil nasty businessman has arranged for porters and equipment and
guns.  At this point, for no readily apparent reason, things start
exploding.  Things continue to explode for about half an hour, as the
expedition, which is showing signs of Hollywood Conflict, proceeds into
the jungle.  We discover that the Rumanian wants to discover the Lost
City of Zinj, where Solomon got his diamonds from, and he thinks the
ape that's going home knows where it is.  We also discover that Tim
Curry can't do a Rumanian accent, but that's not important right now.
What is important is that nothing much happens for another half an
hour, until the expedition reaches the Lost City of Zinj, and people
start getting their heads ripped off.  One thing leads to another, and
eventually everybody dies except for three people, who escape from the
ugly thingies, the exploding volcano, and the Shaking Hollywood
Disaster Landscape (left over from EARTHQUAKE, I'd assume), in a
balloon, which completely ignores the fact that, during the half an
hour when things exploded, we discovered that the area around the Congo
is filled to the brim with surly people with anti-aircraft missiles who
don't like people flying over the landscape.  Regardless, the evil
nasty businessman gets his, the ape gets laid, and everybody who's
still alive is happy.
     You now no longer need to see CONGO.  You'll note, by the way,
that the ugly nasties, who are the major advertising point of the film,
are pretty damn unimportant.  They rip everybody's heads off, but in
such a way that you don't *care* who ripped whose head off.  For many
of these characters, missing one's head could only improve things.
     However, the plot synopsis only shows one thing--the utter
silliness of the plot, and a silly plot is not enough to make a movie
bad.  What makes this movie bad is the rest of it--*every* aspect of
it is rotten.  The cinematography manages to completely fail at
capturing any sense of spectacle or grandeur.  The special effects are
bad--the people in gorilla suits look like people in gorilla suits,
which, in a film like this, is fatal.  The sets look like sets.  You
can tell immediately when the film moves from shot-on-location to
shot-in-a-warehouse-somewhere.  The acting is boring (except for Ernie
Hudson and Bruce Campbell, who are so much better than the rest of the
actors in this piece of tripe that you feel sorry for them wasting
their talent like this.)
     And, what's more offensive, it's stereotypical Crichton.  Yup.
Mister I-Hate-Science himself is responsible for this travesty.
There's a truly insulting sequence where one scientist, who
theoretically has a doctorate, asks another scientist why he taught an
ape to speak.  The answer is *incredibly* annoying ("No reason," he
says,) and the question is more so--in essence, the screenplay
portrays science as something that is done for either a: completely
ruthless exploitation, or b: aesthetic reasons which will never ever
amount to anything.  I can only imagine what happened to Crichton when
he was young: possibly, he was frightened by Mister Wizard and has
harbored a deep and abiding loathing of anyone daring to figure
anything out ever since.
     The movie doesn't even get bad *enough*, which is the worst bit of
all.  If it had gone through rottenness and out the other side, it
could have been entertaining, if not good.  It could have tried for
camp, for tongue-in-cheek thrills.  It didn't.  It played it straight,
and it's the worse for it, because it is so utterly, unredeemably
boring.  On the Furr Scale (I rate films on ambition as well as quality
- you can't rate EVIL DEAD II on the same scale as THE RIGHT STUFF, for
instance.  An okay movie that tried to be great is different from a
great 'bad' movie.  ROBOCOP, for instance, is a three-star three star
movie; a pretty good movie that aimed fairly high.  HEAVEN'S GATE was a
one-star four star movie; a bad movie that tried to be great.  SOAPDISH
was a three-star two star movie; a very good movie that didn't aim as
high as it might,) CONGO is a one-star three star movie.  Boring, dull,
and uninvolving are the *best* words to describe it--I could be more
descriptive, but that'd make this review R, instead of PG-13...

Author
Roger Crow
Starring Laura Linney, Ernie Hudson and Tim Curry
Screenplay by John Patrick Shanley
Directed by Frank Marshall
     It seems Michael Crichton can't write a note to the milkman these
days without some Hollywood exec snapping up the rights to it.
However, while we'll have to wait a while for the hypothetical "Two
pints please" movie, Frank Marshall steps in to fill the breach with
his version of CONGO which has just been released in Britain.
     This is a film of possibilities and missed opportunity.  Not
having read the novel, I had no expectations so was pleasantly
surprised by the quest for diamonds by a big wig corporation; a super
smart gorilla's return to its home and, based on arachnophobia, the
chance for Marshall to show us whether he can recreate the sense of
white-knuckle panic only really attainable by throwing hundred of
deadly spiders at a wary audience.
     Some might say Marshall had a leg up with his first two films.
Many people are afraid of spiders (arachnophobia) and plane crashes as
in Alive, so the suspension of disbelief usually painstakingly achieved
in other genre entries, Alien and Aliens for example, is already there
in abundance.  Congo, surprisingly, lacks a primal undercurrent other
than "lets have a look round the jungle for some enigmatic monkeys and
a lost civilisation."  The inspiration is clearly evident but the final
message, if ever there is a message in such mainstream potential crowd
pullers, as quiet as a whimper.
     The plot finds hi-tech whiz kid Laura Linney traipsing deep into
the Congo to find her lover (Bruce Campbell).  She joins up with Steve
Guttenberg clone Dylan Walsh who's returning his pet gorilla Amy (a
Stan Winston animatronic creation that still liked like a guy in a
suit) to its home.  Throw in guide Ernie Hudson (hilarious); Romanian
nasty Tim Curry; heat and serve.
     The end result, for the undiscerning, is good fun.  A tightly
scripted ride with John Patrick Shanley's screenplay bristling with
enough hair-raising stunts, gags and frights to keep you hooked.
     Although the studio-based finale looked like, well, a studio based
finale, and the sight of the heroine slicing up loads of simians would
leave Dian Fossey turning in her grave, it's an old-fashioned, cut and
pasted blast.
