Title
Review for Hell Night (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Tom DeSimone.
Cast: Linda Blair, Vincent Van Patten, Kevin Brophy, Jenny Neumann, 
Peter Barton, Jimmy Sturtevant, Suki Goodwin.
1981 - 102 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, profanity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed November 1, 1998.
Now here's a surprise! "Hell Night," which was released in 1981 at the 
time of the big slasher film craze, is actually an effective, well-made 
picture.
The story, like most films in the genre, is simple. For their initiation 
into a fraternity, four college students agree to spend the night in the 
infamous Garth Manor, a mansion in which the family living there was 
murdered years before by the deformed son, Andrew, with the gate locked 
up so they can't escape. While staying at the Manor, Marti (Linda Blair) 
begins to to get to like Seth (Vincent Van Patten), a fellow pledge, and 
as three other students hide outside attempting to scare them, a killer 
lurks around the estate, set on killing them one by one. 
Admittedly, "Hell Night" has an unoriginal story that is like any number 
of other similar slasher films, but what makes this one above-average is 
that, unlike the countless, "Friday the 13th" sequels, which were only 
concerned about violence and gore, "Hell Night" actually tries to be 
scary and suspenseful, and it surprisingly succeeds. The climax, 
especially, is very frightening and well-crafted.
Another plus is that this movie actually features one very good 
performance, by Linda Blair, a previous Academy Award nominee for 1973's 
brilliant, "The Exorcist," who is not only talented, but also a great 
screamer.
What keeps "Hell Night," from being anything particularly special is 
that, when it all comes down to it, it is only a slasher movie, with one 
death after the other, and the characters are pretty much 
one-dimensional. But director Tom DeSimone obviously was trying to break 
away from the norm and make a horror film that was actually good, and 
because of this, "Hell Night" is a worthwhile entry into the 80's 
mad-slasher wave. 
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
