Title
Review for Runaway Train (1985)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jon Voight, Eric Roberts, Rebecca De Mornay, Kyle T. Heffner, 
      John P. Ryan, Kenneth McMillan
Director: Andrei Konchalovsky
Producers: Menahem Golan, Yoram Globus
Screenplay: Djordje Milicevic, Paul Zindel and Edward Bunker, based on a 
      screenplay by Akira Kurosawa 
Cinematography: Alan Hume
Music: Trevor Jones
U.S. Distributor: Cannon
     Long before Keanu Reeves was stuck on board a speeding bus, Jon 
Voight, Eric Roberts, and Rebecca De Mornay were trapped on a runaway 
train.  And, while there are significant differences between Jan De 
Bont's SPEED and Andrei Konchalovsky's 1985 thriller, RUNAWAY TRAIN, the 
films share two fundamental similarities:  ferocious pacing and white-
knuckle excitement.  Each picture features its own take on an 
unstoppable, high-velocity vehicle racing towards its doom.  
     Although SPEED is a very good movie, RUNAWAY TRAIN is a more 
complete experience.  The script is better-written, depending more on 
visceral thrills than those enhanced by special effects (that's not to 
say that RUNAWAY TRAIN is visually defective -- in fact, it's solid).  
The characters are better-rounded, and there is a fascinating 
exploration of man's primal instinct.  RUNAWAY TRAIN belongs to a rare 
genre:  the intelligent thriller.  It will come as no surprise to 
educated movie-goers to learn that the script, credited to Djordeje 
Milicevic, Paul Zindel, and Edward Bunker, is based on an original 
screenplay devised by the Japenese master, Akira Kurosawa.  One can 
almost imagine Kurosawa regular Toshiro Mifune in the role given to Jon 
Voight.
     Not that Voight doesn't place his own indelible stamp on the part 
of Manny, a hardened criminal who is serving a life sentence in a 
maximum security prison in Alaska.  Manny has recently spent three years 
locked in solitary confinement.  Upon his release, he is hailed as a 
hero by the rest of the prison population.  One of his most ardent fans 
is Buck (Eric Roberts), a dumb, garrulous, cocky rapist whose job 
pushing laundry carts becomes a critical element of Manny's escape plan.  
With Buck tagging along, Manny makes his way through the sewers under 
the prison, out into the cruel Alaskan wilderness, and to a remote train 
station.  There, the two stowaway on a 4-engine train headed south, 
unaware that the engineer has died of a heart attack, and the only one 
else on board is Sara (Rebecca De Mornay), a female maintenance worker.  
The train is out of control and rushing down the tracks towards a 
collision with destiny.
     RUNAWAY TRAIN uses a mix of diverse elements to create a highly-
suspenseful whole.  There's the nasty Warden (John P. Ryan) who yearns 
for a one-on-one confrontation with his most hated prisoner, and is 
willing to risk his own life to get on board the speeding train.  There 
are the men at the railroad control station, desperately trying to 
divert other trains out of the path of the speeding engine, while 
weighing how important three lives are compared to the economic cost to 
the railway.  Most importantly, there are the characters aboard the 
train and the taut dynamic that exists between them.  We see a microcosm 
of humanity at its most base and noble through them, as their desperate 
circumstances drive them to acts of terrible brutality and surprising 
heroism.  RUNAWAY TRAIN closes with an apt quote from Shakespeare's 
"Richard III" that reinforces another of the film's themes about the 
animalistic nature of human beings: "No beast so fierce but knows some 
touch of pity.  But I know none, and therefore am no beast."
     The most electric scene of the film takes place around the three-
quarters mark, and reveals key, primal aspects of each individual's 
personality.  It's a showdown between Manny and Buck over machismo, 
sacrifice, and friendship.  The two circle each other, Manny with a 
knife, Buck with a wrench.  "I thought you was my friend!  Don't make me 
kill you, Manny!" shouts Buck.  Manny sneers.  Although his hand is 
badly injured, it never occurs to him that Buck is a real threat.  
Meanwhile, along the periphery of the struggle, the seemingly-mild Sara 
screams at Buck, "Kill him!"  It's a raw moment that not only keeps us 
on the edge of our seat, but gives us real insight into how these 
characters react in such dire circumstances.  What follows after, as the 
film arcs to a climax, is believable because of what emerges during this 
confrontation.  
     The three lead actors all give strong performances, and are ably 
assisted by a solid supporting cast.  Jon Voight captivates in one of 
the most memorable screen roles of his distinguished career, imbuing 
Manny with both a fierce energy and a surprisingly keen intellect.  This 
is definitely not a common, stereotypical criminal.  Eric Roberts, 
playing against type as a mentally-limited individual, presents Buck 
almost as a puppy dog who follows Manny around.  Rebecca De Mornay 
abandons her glamorous image for layers of dirt and ragged clothes.  
Although De Mornay is not known for her range, she is singularly 
effective in this part.
     When RUNAWAY TRAIN was produced, the action genre was undergoing a 
change from character-driven movies to pyrotechnics-based flicks.  Of 
the thrillers developed after this one, only a select few -- DIE HARD and 
perhaps one or two others -- have achieved this level of 
tautness without compromising the intelligence of the plot.  Best of 
all, in more than a decade since its release, RUNAWAY TRAIN has aged 
exceptionally well.  It is just as compelling today as it was during the 
winter of 1985-86.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
This movie garnered Oscar nominations for both stars Jon Voight (Best
Actor) and Eric Roberts (Best Supporting Actor) at the 1986 Acadamy
Award celebrations. Director Konchalovsky creates an intense thriller
that takes two escaped convicts, slaps them on an unmanned train
barreling down some tracks at lightning speeds, and surrounds them with
the wonderful white world of winter.    
PLOT:
Con of steel Manny (Voight) gets let out of the "hole" after three
years of solitude in a maximum-security Alaskan prison. Soon enough, he
escapes the terror of the jail and its psychotic warden, alongside a
prize-fighting, dimwitted prisoner named Buck (Roberts), and hops onto
the nearest train. Unfortunately for either escapee, the train suddenly
loses its engineer, picks up excessive speeds, and hurdles down the
wintery tracks without brakes or a final destination.
CRITIQUE:
Gritty, suspenseful, stylish, overlong thriller that combines chompin'
good dialogue with solid acting performances by its main leads. Despite
the fact that I found both performances by Voight and Roberts a little
"overdone" at first, I eventually saddled into their tough guy
characters, and forgot to pay attention to the actors themselves
(always indicative of great performances). The story lends itself to
deep interpretations, none of which I will expand upon in this review,
but needless to say that the gist of the plot bleeds around freedom,
and the harsh price that many people are willing to pay for it.
The directing of this picture was highly stylized and wonderfully
achieved, while its cinematography was as sweet as the winter
wonderland that it chillingly portrayed. The dialogue was fresh (see
Little Known Facts below for possible reasons behind its authenticity),
and the acting was strong by both main men. On the down side, I do
think that the picture could have been cut by about fifteen to twenty
minutes, with some of the later scenes dragging on a little, and the
soundtrack was a little too synthesized for my predilection, but hey,
it was the eighties...what do you expect?! 
The final scene of the movie is also a classic shot that should stick
in your mind for years to come, with the accompanying music (Very
TITANIC-like (7/10), if you ask me. Hmmm...I wonder if James Horner
ever watched this cool flick?) icing the somber cake over which it
played. This film is definitely nacho material, and lends itself
greatly to newer condiments such as sour cream and/or ketchup (for
tomato fans). Overall, I would say that this movie is a little
overlong, authentically acted, wonderfully shot, and quite suspenseful.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Co-writer of this script, Edward Bunker is also known as Eddie Bunker,
who is also known as the actor who played Mr. Blue in RESERVOIR DOGS
(9/10). Eddie Bunker is a convicted bank robber, who was the youngest
convict ever to be sent to the San Quentin penitentiary at the time of
this conviction. At one time, he was on the FBI's Ten Most Wanted List.
He also makes an appearance in this film as Jonah. The script was based
on a story written by famed director Akira Kurosawa.
Eddie Bunker also acted in director Andrei Konchalovsky's 1989's film
TANGO & CASH.
Eric Roberts' famous sister is the PRETTY WOMAN (7.5/10) herself Julia
Roberts. In February, 1995, Eric was arrested and charged with spousal
abuse.
Jon Voight is the father of actress Angelina Jolie, who in 1995 married
"Sick Boy" from TRAINSPOTTING (8.5/10) Johnny Lee Miller in a black
rubber dress (she wore the dress, not him :))
