Title
Review for Doc Hollywood (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A good director turns out his most
     commercial but least interesting film.  Michael Caton-Jones,
     the director of SCANDAL and MEMPHIS BELLE, tells the story of
     a big city doctor stranded in a small town in South Carolina
     who finds himself bewitched by the locals.  Pleasant but
     predictable.  Rating: 1 (-4 to +4).
     This whole film is something of a riddle and the riddle is what is
Michael Caton-Jones doing directing a film like this?  First, Caton-Jones is
British and DOC HOLLYWOOD is about small-town life in South Carolina.  That
cannot be a subject about which Caton-Jones is particularly expert.
Probably the closest Caton-Jones has ever been to the American South is
watching reruns of "The Andy Griffith Show."  That television show's
Mayberry has more than a passing resemblance to Grady, South Carolina.  But
Caton-Jones worked on ABSOLUTE BEGINNERS in a minor but formative capacity.
He went on to direct SCANDAL and MEMPHIS BELLE.  Each of these films was set
a generation or so back.  Each had notable actors but no big stars.  Each of
these films took something of a risk presenting what could have been an
unpopular viewpoint.  (An interesting piece of trivia: Mandy Rice-Davies
played in ABSOLUTE BEGINNERS, Bridget Fonda played in DOC HOLLYWOOD, and in
SCANDAL Bridget Fonda played Mandy Rice-Davies.)
     The story of DOC HOLLYWOOD is far from original: big-city boy meets and
falls in love with a small-town of interesting and eccentric characters.  I
have seen that plot attributed to Frank Capra, though I myself cannot think
of a single Capra film with a plot that seems to me all that similar to DOC
HOLLYWOOD.  I will, however, point out that this film has a strong
similarity to Bill Forsythe's LOCAL HERO.  I would claim that LOCAL HERO is
by far the better film, but if I were from Scotland I might well prefer a
film to show me exotic South Carolina.  The title is a nickname for
Dr. Benjamin Stone (played by Michael J. Fox), who is headed for a lucrative
cosmetic surgery practice in Beverly Hills when an accident and the damage
it causes forces him to spend some time in Grady, South Carolina.  You can
probably figure the plot from there.  Boy meets town.  Boy hates town.
Audience loves town.  Boy meets girl.  Girl hates boy.  Audience loves girl.
Boy loves girl.  Girl starts to like boy.  Boy starts to like town.  Boy,
girl, and town live happily ever after.  Together.  Audience leaves happy.
     I can be as silly as the next guy and I liked the town and laughed at
the jokes.  The town is likable.  The town is lovable.  What's not to love
about a town where blacks and whites, men and women, city folk and rednecks
all sashay together in perfect harmony, where never is heard a bigoted word
and nobody looks twice at gays.  This Southern town is the Ku Klux Klan's
worst nightmare come to life.  And the plot doesn't bear much thought
either.  One of the characters pays a minor podiatry bill with a pig whose
value is probably ten times the size of his debt.  He could easily have sold
the pig, paid his bill, and had a big piece of change in his pocket.
     Then there is the incredible stretching Michael J. Fox.  He has a lot
of scenes together with female lead Julie Warner.  Somehow when you see
full-length shots of the two of them she is perhaps an inch taller than he
is.  In every close-up she has to reach up to a Michael J. Fox who has a
good two or three inches on her.  This film is willing to find endearing all
sorts of eccentricities which Grady, South Carolina, accepts without batting
an eye, but would rather create a distraction than break the taboo that the
boy has got to be taller than the girl.  The film has people joke about how
short Dr. Stone is, but of course he finds a soulmate who is even shorter.
     DOC HOLLYWOOD is entertaining and pleasant but the audience gets none
of the value of seeing itself through someone else's eyes that they would
get from a Louis Malle film such as ATLANTIC CITY.  I rate it a flat +1 on
to -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     DOC HOLLYWOOD is a movie directed by Michael Caton-Jones.  The
screenplay is by Jeffrey Price, Peter S. Seaman, and Daniel Pyne, based
on the book "What? ... Dead Again?" by Neil B. Shulman, M.D.  It
stars Michael J. Fox, Julie Warner, David Odgen Stiers, Woody Harelson,
and Bridget Fonda.  Rated PG-13, for mature humor and brief nudity.
     DOC HOLLYWOOD is being called by the local newspaper critics
Southern Exposure; apparently the plot is virtually identical to the
current hit TV series "Northern Exposure."  You tell me, since I live in
a TV-free zone (as I like to mention from time to time), but it does
sound remarkably similar.  A young, hot doc on his way to major bucks
instead gets stranded in a looney-bin hick town.  In Fox's case, the
town is Grady, S.C., (admirably played by Micanopy, Fla.), a town
apparently as TV-free as my own living room.  The fantasy nature of DOC
HOLLYWOOD is most evident in the lack of TV or radio or newspapers or
anything else that might connect the loonies of Grady, "The Squash
Capital of the South," "the buckle on the Bible Belt," with the outside
world.  Once Fox misses the freeway access, he and we are in a Twilight
Zone episode, and if you find yourself looking for a pre-cancerous Rod
Serling to smoulder out from behind a porch post saying "For your
consideration," you are on the correct wavelength.
     It's also a little hard to accept Fox as a hotshot, since the only
reason we're given to accept his status as a major surgical talent is
his show-room perfect 1956 Porsche.  On the other hand, Fox is cute,
effortlessly funny, energetic, and entertaining.  (And I note with some
pleasure that neither disease nor accident nor violence is necessary to 
change this snotty, heartless, little prick into a real mensch -- unlike
THE DOCTOR or REGARDING HENRY.)
     Other cast members are well chosen.  Bridget Fonda is the mayor's
daughter, who will do anything to get to L.A.; her performance has a
kind of Fifties ambience to it -- sexy, innocent, open, devious -- and I
find myself liking her a lot.  The mayor is David Ogden Stiers, to whom
the years since the end of M*A*S*H have not been particularly kind, but
who is still capable of a kind of all-out, pedal-to-the-metal
performance.  Julie Warner is very attractive; the first we see of her
is a skinny dipping scene that is probably more than a trifle
gratuitous; it just doesn't make sense dramatically, but as an excuse
for showcasing her beautiful breasts and nates I'm sure many of the
audience felt it worked.  Woody Harelson puts in an interesting
performance as the insurance man who wants to sign up Warner for a life
policy; he also gets off a major funny at the expense of Ted Danson, his
co-star on "Cheers," as I understand it.
     The movie also has a couple of amusing cameos: the director plays
the maitre d'hotel in a Beverly Hills beanery and the head of the
plastic-surgery that Fox wants a job at turns out to be an uncredited
and entirely appropriate choice.  This is not quite the secret as the
ROBIN HOOD cameo, but I can stand not spoiling for you.
     Caton-Jones, the director also of MEMPHIS BELLE, seems quite
comfortable with his Southern locale, despite his own Scottish
nationality.  Unfortunately, the scriptwriters were less than original
overall.  They did manage to come up with a few scenes that really
worked, such as the ultra-romantic scene of Fox and Warner dancing at
the town squash festival, and the tone of the movie in general light,
harmless, and it moves along at a fairly good clip.  It's a little too
long, a little too predictable, a little unmotivated here and there, but
it still manages to provides some entertainment.  And right now in the
dog days of summer releases, that's a lot.
     I recommend DOC HOLLYWOOD to a tolerant viewer who's looking for
some late summer entertainment.  But pay matinee prices, that's all it's
worth, but it is worth that much.
