Title
Review for Santa Claus Conquers the Martians (1964)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Sanford
 If you're looking for something that really scrapes the bottom
of the Christmas barrel, you could scarcely do worse than the immortal
"Santa Claus Conquers the Martians" (1964), which used to pollute
neighborhood theaters annually as a kiddie matinee during the 1960s. I
was among the millions of innocent kids taken to see this when I was a
toddler, and it's a miracle I ever set foot in a theater again.
 "Martians" tells a warped tale of lonely Martian youth who seem
to be growing up in the Valley of the Dolls. All their meals come in
pill form and "sleep spray" is used to help them get their rest. When
the young ones appear even more lifeless than usual, Kimar (Leonard
Hicks, who intones each line with such seriousness you'd think he was
doing Shakespeare), the Martian leader, embarks on a trip to Earth to
kidnap Santa Claus (John Call, who staggers around as if Santa has been
chugging a little too much pre-holiday eggnog).
 A trip to another world would probably be a welcome change of
season for Santa, since Mrs. Claus comes off as an old scold ("Go finish
painting those hobby horses!" she barks at Santa), while Santa himself
seems a bit, shall we say, out of it, promising a TV reporter he'll be
using his reindeer "Prancer, and Dancer, and Donder, and Blitzen, and
Vixen and Nixon" to make the annual deliveries. "Wowee wow!" the
intrepid journalist responds.
 Santa is eventually spirited away to Mars, along with Earth
kids Betty and Billy, who sound like they came straight outta Newark. In
her film debut, Pia Zadora plays a cute little Martian girl with the
same vacant stare and expressionless line readings that would become her
trademark in her performances as the world's most vapid sex kitten in
movies like "Butterfly" and the infamous "The Lonely Lady."
 Although the title would seem to promise a rousing battle
between Saint Nick and the space invaders, excitement turns out to be in
short supply. Santa eventually "conquers" Mars by teaching everyone
Christmas carols and opening a toy factory on the Red Planet. There's
also a disturbingly perky theme song, "Hooray For Santa Claus," which
goes "Hoo-ray for Santy Claus/Yea yea for Santy Claus/. . .When we hear
sleigh bells ring/Our hearts go ting-a-ling!" Oh yeah, I got your
ting-a-ling right here, buddy. . .
 It's all about as heartwarming as a documentary about
reconstructive bowel surgery, a procedure you may need should you choose
to sit through all 82 minutes of "Santa Claus Conquers the Martians."
James Sanford
