Title
Review for Bronx Tale, A (1993)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Calogero is growing up in the Bronx in
     the late 50s with two father figures.  One is his honest,
     hard-working, biological father and the other is a likable
     hood who takes Calogero under his wing.  Robert DeNiro
     directs the film as well as playing the honest father while
     the screenwriter of the semi-autobiographical story turns in
     a winning performance as the hood.  Rating: low +2 (-4 to
     +4).
     When I think of Robert DeNiro these days, I mostly think about an
interview he gave about GUILTY BY SUSPICION.  His comments about the
blacklisting era were so shallow and so lacking in information and insight
that at the time I assumed he was a person with few talents other than
line-reading.  Now I have to reassess that conclusion after seeing his
directorial debut.
     Romantic love triangles are a staple of the film industry.  For Robert
DeNiro's directorial debut he has chosen a story with a different sort of
love triangle, one of paternal love.  Calogero has two father figures in his
life.  His true father (played by DeNiro) is a poor bus driver.  That does
not get a lot of respect in the Bronx Italian community in the late Fifties.
What does get respect is being a hood like the local neighborhood boss Sonny
(Chazz Palminteri).  One day Sonny kills a man and nine-year-old Calogero
lies to save his idol Sonny from the police.  From that point on Sonny
adopts Colgero, after a fashion.  Both he and Lorenzo, Colgero's real
father, want what is best for the boy, but Lorenzo is a straight arrow and
wants his son to have nothing to do with the hood.  In spite of his own
profession, Sonny wants to keep Colgero honest and put him on the path to
success.
     Francis Capra is a little too sharp playing the nine-year-old Calogero.
He is just a bit overly clever in his repartee with his parents.  But then
screenwriter Palminteri is actually writing about himself so might be a
little willing to exaggerate his own verbal prowess when he was Calogero's
age.  And Calogero does have  to be a little devious in how he balances his
two father figures.  The second part of the story has Calogero (now played
by Lillo Brancato) seventeen years old and romantically interested in an
attractive Black girl (Taral Hicks).  The story comes to involve tensions
between the Black and Italian communities in the Bronx.  Now to Calogero,
Sonny seems to be the only sane and tolerant person in the Italian
community.
     The story of A BRONX TALE is based on the Palminteri's semi-
autobiographical play which he used to perform as a one-person show.  The
details of life in the Bronx and the style of storytelling are reminiscent
of GOODFELLAS and DeNiro even has a cameo for Joe Pesci.  Just as earlier
this year Mel Gibson proved he had a better hand at directing than most of
us would have expected, so too DeNiro's style is surprisingly good for a
first-timer.  He has a very sure hand at combining music into the action.
His direction shows this in one of the first scenes of the film in which a
montage of scenes from a stickball game are synchronized to a do-wop song.
     But the real show-stealer is Palminteri himself as Sonny.  The same
stage presence that worked for him doing the story in his one-man show
translates to charisma on the screen.  Like Joe Mantegna in HOUSE OF GAMES,
Palminteri is the central attraction whenever he is on the screen.  As the
hood, Sonny is magnetic while the audience expectation is that he will at
some point do something nasty and his relationship with the boy will break
down.  That may or may not happen, but the character is real enough to
transcend stereotypes and the story of the relationship probably more
interesting and credible than most fiction writers would have made it.
DeNiro proves himself as an accomplished director his first time around.  My
rating is a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Robert De Niro, Chazz Palminteri, Lillo Brancato, 
           Francis Capra, Taral Hicks
Director:  Robert De Niro
Producers:  Jane Rosenthal, Jon Kilik, and Robert De Niro
Screenplay:  Chazz Palminteri based on his play
Music:  Butch Barballa
Released by Savoy Pictures
     It's New York City in 1960:  the Fordham neighborhood.  Living at
East 187th Street is the family of Calogero (played at age nine by
Francis Capra and at age seventeen by Lillo Brancato).  Calogero's
father Lorenzo (Robert De Niro) believes that a man should work hard
for a living, and thus refuses to be involved in anything that has
illegal undertones such as working for Sonny (Chazz Palminteri), the
local "boss".  Calogero has different views from his father, however.
He idolizes Sonny and, when given a chance to help him beat a murder
rap, Calogero willingly takes it.  A grateful Sonny brings the 9-year
old under his wing and, despite the protestations of Lorenzo, a bond
develops.  Soon, Calogero has two fathers--each giving different
advice and neither much respecting what the other has to say.
     Robert De Niro has appeared in some of the greatest gangster films
of the past two decades, working for directors such as Francis Ford
Coppola (THE GODFATHER PART 2), Brian DePalma (THE UNTOUCHABLES), and,
of course, Martin Scorsese (GOODFELLAS).  As a result, it shouldn't
come as much of a surprise to anyone that De Niro has chosen this genre
for his first behind-the-camera motion picture.
     A BRONX TALE covers precious little new ground, but the
presentation of the material is anything but ordinary.  Sure, on the
surface, it's another gangster movie, but the story--like the
deeply-realized characters--is multi-layered.  A BRONX TALE could
almost be accused of tackling too much, and perhaps its few failures
are because the scope of the plot is so vast, but the film has
incredible vision and packs a legitimate emotional wallop.  The
feelings generated are not the manipulative strains mastered by a
virtuoso of melodrama, but the heartfelt stirrings of a well-directed,
superbly-written motion picture.
     While there is violence in A BRONX TALE, it isn't the focal point
of the movie (curiously, most of the truly violent scenes are pretty
much bloodless--we see graphic beatings, but little blood).  Instead,
as they should be, the characters are kept in the center.  The three
principles--Calogero, Sonny, and Lorenzo--are all highly believable.
This is as much a credit to the writing of Chazz Palminteri and the
direction of Robert De Niro as it is to the quartet of fine actors
giving the performances.
     If the movie takes a wrong turn, it's in trying to incorporate an
anti-racist theme by having Calogero fall for Jane, a black girl.
Today, mixed race relationships are subject to various tensions and
pressures, but that's nothing compared to how it was in 1968, and A
BRONX TALE isn't nearly as successful when it tries to put these issues
in perspective as it is when dealing with the complex relationship of
Calogero and his "two fathers."  That's the part of the film that
really sparkles.
     De Niro successfully varies the tone, keeping it light and playful
at times; dark and somber at others.  He is a master of visual
foreshadowing--there are several instances when he lets you know
what's about to happen before it occurs.  While the cinematography
isn't nearly as masterful as in Scorsese's GOODFELLAS, it's more than
adequate for this picture.  There's also a nice, unexpected cameo at
the end which further reinforces the Scorsese connection.
     A BRONX TALE is an absolute triumph for De Niro, and proof that
all his years of watching the best in the business haven't been in
vain.  As good as De Niro is in front of the camera, it's now possible
to hope that this is only the first of many opportunities on the other
side.  If what is yet to come has any of the promise shown by this
debut, we may be witnessing the birth of yet another great directing
talent.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Aaron Michaels
Directed by Robert De Niro. Written by Chazz Palminteri (based on his
play). Running time: 122 minutes. Rated R (for language and scenes
containing violence).
A Bronx Tale reminds me a lot of Goodfellas. It stars Robert De Niro who
also directed. It also has a cameo by Joe Pesci. I thought I even saw
Martin Scorsece as a priest at a confessional. I began to think that
this movie took it's style and grace from Goodfellas. Then it hit me
that it reminded me of
Goodfellas because A Bronx Tale is almost as great.
Lorenzo (Robert De Niro) is a working man. He has a city job as a bus
driver and makes enough to let his wife and son live well in an
apartment in the Bronx. He never got in the popular gangster business
that ruled the area. The apartment he lives in in near a busy bar that
is home to many of these
gangsters. He tells his 9 year old son Calogero (Francis Capra) to never
go in there and to stay on his stoop in front of the complex.
In a discussion earlier Lorenzo talked to his son about talent. Calogero
asks him who was the best baseball player of all time. Lorenzo tells him
it was Joey D(iMaggio) because he has class and talent. Calogero asks if
he has any talent. Lorenzo says that he has all the talent in the world
and just needs to
use it wisely.
Calogero witnesses a shooting while sitting on the stoop commited by the
local main gangster Sonny (Chazz Palminteri who also wrote the script).
When confronted by a police officer who is shown a line of suspects and
asked who shot. The lineup consists of some of the workers and some
gansters who were the bar. Sonny is in the lineup. Calogero walks past
the line saying that none of the men commited the murder.
Lorenzo takes him upstairs to get him ready for bed. Calogero asks his
father if he did the right thing. Lorenzo says "You did a very good
thing for a very bad man."
Cut to the late 60s. Calogero (now nicknamed C by Sonny and played by
Lillo Brancato) now is 17 years old and one of Sonny's "men". Lorenzo is
shocked that his son has not listened to anything he has said through
the years. C now has become everything Lorenzo hates. A gangster who
wants
his money the second he asks.
A Bronx Tale is actor Robert De Niro first directed film. He does a
great job directing himself and others. Some of the scenes such as a
fight in the bar are very nicely edited and staged to music that sets
the mood. Palmenteri also does a great job as Sonny and is both
frightening and fatherlike in the same instant. Lillo Brancato is a
great find and plays his part very well. He is a charming young actor
who I hope has a good career.
The film is also suprising funny. It is probably the most upbeat ganster
picture if you don't count Jonny Dangerously (which I don't). There is a
great scene in the first 20 minutes where C narrates the people young
Calogero meets in the bar. Some has nicknames like Coffeecake (the look
of that man's
face) and Whispers (everything's a secret to him).
The film ends suddenly and makes me ask for more. It is noticably very
short considering Goodfellas was about 20 minutes longer. Still A Bronx
Tale fills it's tight 2 hours with as much as it can. I wanted to spend
more time finding out what happens to C. I doubt a sequel will be made
but I'd still like to know.

Author
Chuck Dowling
A Bronx Tale (1993) ***** out of ***** - C:Robert De Niro, Chazz
Palminteri, Francis Capra, Lillo Brancato.
"A Bronx Tale" marks the directorial debut of Robert De Niro, who is in my
opinion, the finest actor working today. And if his next directing effort is
as good as this one, he'll be one of the finest directors as well.
The story involves a impressionable young man, Calogero, who grows up during
the 60s in the Bronx, under two different influences. One is the
neighborhood gangster, Sonny (Palminteri), and the other is his bus driver
father, Lorenzo (De Niro). De Niro was very wise to play the role of Lorenzo
instead of playing Sonny, as most would have expected him to do.
Lorenzo tries to protect his family and teaches his son how to stay safe in
the outside world. It is a difficult task, however, as Calogero learns that
just being seen with the most popular guy in town brings respect and gifts.
Lorenzo tells his son that the only reason Sonny is in the position that
he's in is because he is feared by the neighborhood, not loved.
On the other hand, Sonny steers Calogero away from the life and dangers of
organized crime, and warns him to avoid the immature behavior of other boys
in the neighborhood who think that they soon will be gangsters too.
To complicate matters further, Calogero falls for a very respectable black
girl in a world where the Italian and black cultures do not interact. Both
Sonny and Lorenzo have mixed feelings about the subject, making Calogero's
life choices even more difficult.
Palminteri's script is on a completely different level from most gangster
films, offering much, much more than just crime and bloodshed. The
characters are very human, very believable, and therefore, very compelling
to watch. The actors, most of whom are complete unknowns, do an outstanding
job. De Niro's direction is excellent, proving that he has learned much from
the great talent he's worked with over the years. He fills the film with
details, and a minute into it, the world he has recreated seems perfectly
real. Unbelieveably, the film didn't receive a single Oscar nomination, and
it should have had many.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Robert DeNiro, Chazz Palminteri, Lillo Brancato,
           Francis Capra, Taral Hicks.
Screenplay:  Chazz Palminteri, based on his play.
Director:  Robert DeNiro.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Give this to Robert DeNiro--he's been paying attention.  After
working with some of the finest directors of his time, DeNiro proves
he's learned what goes into directing a good film with his first
helming effort, A BRONX TALE.  While his style frequently bears more
than a passing resemblance to frequent collaborator Martin Scorsese,
he's adept enough to get away with it, and adds enough of his own
vision to make him credible.  Hang all of this on a strong story about
a young man learning about life from two mentors and you have a solid,
entertaining two hours at the movies.
     A BRONX TALE is set during two years in the Bronx.  In 1960,
impressionable 9-year-old Calogero (Francis Capra) is fascinated by
Sonny (Chazz Palminteri), the neighborhood crime boss.  His father
Lorenzo (Robert DeNiro), a bus driver, tries to steer Calogero away
from Sonny's hangouts, but with little success.  Eight years later, a
now 17-year-old Calogero (Lillo Brancato) is still associating with
Sonny, as well as a group of young toughs nurturing a hatred for the
blacks beginning to appear in their neighborhood.  He continues to
weigh the advice coming from Lorenzo and Sonny, including advice
concerning his attraction to Jane (Taral Hicks), a young black girl,
and concerning the best path towards success.
     A BRONX TALE has been adapted from a one-man play by Palminteri,
and it has made an exceptional transition to the screen.  It doesn't
feel stagy like last year's adaptation of A FEW GOOD MEN, and has an
easy flow, even between the 1960 and 1968 segments.  Palminteri's
script is full of colorful characters and evocative period atmosphere,
and the first half in particular is also quite funny.  However, I was
far less engaged when the tone took a turn towards the overly serious
and focused on racial tensions.  The romance between Calogero and Jane
felt forced, and ultimately I didn't think the climactic racial
confrontation worked.  The film had established such a unique and
interesting central triangle of Calogero, Sonny and Lorenzo that I was
disappointed when that conflict took a back seat.
     The appeal of that conflict is part character, part performance.
The two father figures are complicated characters portrayed by two fine
actors.  DeNiro has the less showy role of Lorenzo, a hard-working man
trying to teach his son respect for that hard work.  Yet he is not a
faultless blue-collar angel.  At times, DeNiro plays Lorenzo as just as
concerned with his son's opinion of him as he is about Calogero's
well-being.  He also discourages his son's interracial romance, saying
people should "stick to their own."  Palminteri handles Sonny just as
deftly.  While a brutal figure capable of laying out a group of Hell's
Angels, he also lectures Calogero on the importance of staying in
school and staying away from his trouble-making buddies.  Calogero's
moral uncertainty is real because the good guy and bad guy in A BRONX
TALE frequently exchange hats.  Francis Capra is very good as the
mischievous young Calogero, but I was less impressed by Lillo
Brancato.  He's a bit too blank, and adopts too many DeNiro mannerisms
(Brancato won the part by doing an impression of DeNiro).  Jane is
written basically as a "type," and Taral Hicks looks painfully
uncomfortable a great deal of the time.  The combination of these two
weaker performances only added to my antipathy toward the romantic
subplot.
     Robert DeNiro's direction, as I've noted, owes much to Martin
Scorsese; indeed, an early scene introducing the nicknamed regulars at
Sonny's bar is lifted straight out of GOODFELLAS.  DeNiro also displays
Scorsese's gift for pacing and crisp images.  But this is more than a
knock-off job.  DeNiro's tone is lighter, more affirming and
optimistic.  In that respect, A BRONX TALE perhaps bears more
resemblance to the current KING OF THE HILL than it does to
GOODFELLAS.  It's a flawed film, but does considerably more right than
it does wrong.  A BRONX TALE is a coming-of-age fable in which Robert
DeNiro shows he has come of age as a filmmaker.

Author
Simon Doherty
This was the first film to be directed by legendary actor Robert De Niro 
and it is a promising debut.  Based on a stage play by Chazz Palminteri, 
it is very watchable, but a lack of depth prevents it being a great film.
The structure is similar to the first part of Goodfellas, following an 
Italian, Calogero Anello, and his growing association with the gangsters 
in his neighbourhood from age 9 to 17.
De Niro plays his father, a bus driver who shuns involvement with the 
criminals and wishes his son would do the same.  Palminteri is the local 
boss who takes Calogero under his wing.  These performances are the high 
points of the film; both are compelling and completely believable.  As a 
result the film tends to drag when neither are on screen, especially 
during Calogero's romance with a local black girl.  Francis Capra plays 
the teenager capably, but cannot carry the subtler emotional scenes on 
his own.
The influence of Martin Scorsese on De Niro's direction is apparent.  The 
(fairly limited) violence is handled in a similarly startling and 
unflinching way, and talk-overs are used extensively.  However, the 
narration is less effective here than in Goodfellas.  The lines are not 
delivered with the panache of Ray Liotta, and occasionally intrude on the 
story.  In one scene particularly, when bikers enter the local bar, a 
voice-over is used when the images would have been sufficient to tell the 
story.  This breaks the tension that had been developed and weakens the 
impact of what follows.
Overall, though, the film sustained my interest and created some 
memorable scenes and characters.  Hopefully De Niro will tackle some less 
familiar material; he has the potential to develop a style of his own.

Author
Joan Ellis
     A BRONX TALE is the splendid product of an actor/director without
an ego.  Robert De Niro plays Lorenzo, a man who protects his family in
their third floor walkup and teaches his son how to stay safe in the
outside world.  This family's outside world is a one block stretch of
the Bronx dominated by Sonny, a tall, cool small-time mobster who runs
the neighborhood from the local pub.
     Although De Niro surfaces from time to time to reaffirm the
presence of a loving father, he hands the movie to his son, Calogero,
and to Sonny.  You can feel director De Niro, hat in hand, taking a
deep bow in their direction as he tells them to go for the brass ring.
     And they do.  Francis Capra is thoroughly appealing as the young
Calogero, Lillo Brancato convincing as his older self, but it is Chazz
Palminiteri, who steals the show with a dazzling performance as Sonny.
He also wrote the screenplay.  But let's start at the beginning.
     DeNiro opens his movie with a slow, rolling invitation to enter
the world of 187th Street. The close harmonies of a doo-wop group pull
us slowly toward the bar that serves as Sonny's command post.  Two
minutes into the film, this world seems absolutely authentic.
     When Calogero does Sonny a life-saving good turn, the mobster's
personal code kicks in: I owe him one.  Shortening Cologero's name to
C, Sonny tutors him in the ways of the street while protecting him from
its darker side. C now loves a father and a mentor who, despite mutual
distrust, give him the same advice in different words:  Rise above it,
get out, stay alive.
     Sonny's unspoken vow to protect C is not an easy one to keep.
Eight years later, C falls for a strong, dignified black girl in a
world where the Italian and black cultures have moved from suspicion to
belligerence.  With his father's and Sonny's words ringing in his head,
C joins the neighborhood losers for a short, fateful moment.
     Chazz Palminteri is both superb and original as Sonny.  We, and
probably he, know he's small-time.  His power derives, as power usually
does, from the fact no one knows what he will do next.  Will he or
won't he?  It's the question that makes lackeys of everyone around
him.  There is not one false note in Palminteri's performance, and if a
hood can have grace, this hood has it.
     The lone sour note comes near the end when C moralizes about
lessons that were delivered with great subtlety throughout the film.
Just ignore him, and prepare for the credits.  After acting and
directing with great restraint, Robert De Niro can barely wait to thank
everyone from "Grandma" to "Pizza Parlor." His gratitude is a warm,
classy salute to the grand cast of non-professionals who make this
movie work so well.

