Title
Review for American Pimp (1999/I)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher Null
     Such is only one of hundreds of truly great lines in AMERICAN PIMP,
the rather self-explanatory documentary from the Hughes brothers (MENACE
II SOCIETY, DEAD PRESIDENTS).  As a documentary, PIMP displays uncommon
humor, as its over-the-top subjects probably don't realize they're being
mocked, preferring instead to bask in the limelight of the movie being
made about them.
     As expected, these guys are utter jokes, as are their "hos."
Everything you may suspect about the pimp trade, as it turns out, is
absolutely true.  They wear gold jackets with 'gator skin shoes.  They
drive Rolls Royces.  They treat their employees very badly, and they
keep all the money.
     As such, there's not a lot of insight into "pimpology," as all the
stereotypes are validated.  To be sure, the tales of Rosebudd, Fillmore
Slim, and Too $hort (among others) are worth the price of admission for
their entertainment value, but this is the same ground covered in HBO's
"Pimps Up, Ho's Down" last year.  (Also of note: the HBO documentary was
widely trashed as being phony: Not so.)
     Still, it's amazing the Hughes brothers got these stories out of
these characters.  Intercutting the film with classic 1930's-1990's
blaxploitation films and TV shows is pure genius and offers some of the
best moments in AMERICAN PIMP.  Like they say, it's all Mack.
Director: Allen Hughes, Albert Hughes
Producer: Allen Hughes, Albert Hughes, Kevin J. Messick
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 AMERICAN PIMP (director/writer: Allen and Albert Hughes;
 cinematographer: Albert Hughes; editor: Doug Ray; cast: Rosebudd,
 C-Note, Charm, Gorgeous Dre, K-Red, Too Short, Jade, Latrice, Spicy,
 Filmore Slim, Danny Brown, Bishop Don Magic Juan; Runtime: 86;
 MGM/Underworld Entertainment/Seventh Art release; 1999)
A documentary from the twin Hughes brothers, Allen and Albert (Dead
Presidents, Menace II Society), about street pimps, all of whom are
African-American. An offscreen interviewer questions them about their
lives and profession. It is mostly the pimps who do the talking for
their ho's, and the egotistical and flamboyant way you would expect them
to be, is what you get. I learned that the word "bitch" is their
favorite word, as it seemed to crop up in every sentence they used. It
makes for a film with no surprises or nothing fresh to say, but if one
has a sense a humor for what their lifestyle is about, then some of what
they rap about might seem amusing. They seem to all want to be thought
of as businessmen, in the business because it is the easiest way for
them to make big money. It's also a power trip, accomplished by
manipulating the girls to work for them, mostly by humiliating them and
keeping them in place. This sleazy pic, soon became grating and wore out
its welcome to my unreceptive ears. These verbose pimps had a smart
answer for everything and never knew when to shut their face.
The Hughes brothers used as their pimp role models, the feather-hatted,
fur-coated, diamond ring-wearing, gold chain wearing, flashy
Cadillac-cruising pimp of the late '70s blaxploitation movies--like The
Mack and Willie Dynamite. Also used as reference, was  Iceberg Slim's
best-seller Pimp, The Story of My Life. We meet pimps such as: Fillmore
Slim, C-Note, Charm, K-Red, Gorgeous Dre, Bishop Don Magic Juan, and
Rosebudd. They readily discuss their business arrangements: including
percentages, lifestyles, knockin (stealing another pimp's ho), and the
thrill they get from women giving them money. These dudes needed no
prompting to talk, as they just love to brag about about themselves.
"Priests need nuns,'' yaps C-Note, a San Francisco pimp. "Doctors need
nurses. So ho's need pimps.'' As he tries to persuasively make the same
case all the other pimps in the film make; that the girls need them to
show them the ropes, how to make money, to be their security blankets,
protectors, and counselors.
The race issue was brought up right from the film's onset, as a number
of white interviewees, regular citizens, note that their impression of a
pimp, is that he's the lowest form of human. While, we are told, in the
black community, the pimp is looked upon as a successful entrepenaur,
riding around in fancy cars, flashing wads of money, dressed in a
flamboyant style, where his snake-gaiter shoes might cost him a grand,
and where he boasts Hollywood style status in the community. We also see
that the black pimps have a number of white girls in their stable and we
see how they treat them like dirt, as the film implies that this could
be payback for the days of slavery, of master and slave relations.
The film was all about pimp style and their projected image, as they run
a hard-sell riff about the virtues of their work. There are different
styles of pimping, but the film mentions them only as being "macks" and
"players" or "real pimps" and "perpetrator pimps," but no further
clarity is attempted. It is also failed to get the women's side to this
story of abuse, primarily taking the pimp at his word. The film could
never get to the core of what makes the pimp think in such a perverted
way as he does, as the filmmakers were taking for a ride by the pimps,
who were looking only to pose in front of the camera and say their
thing, hungry for their 15-minutes of fame. The only laughs I got out of
this bleak look at an American subculture, was hearing how a few pimps
retired and what they are now up to. Danny Brown became a blues singer
so he could keep his pimp's wardrobe. While a Hollywood pimp called
Rosebudd, married his ho and turned square, working to support his wife
and daughter as a telemarketer.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
