Title
Review for Chill Factor (1999)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Jamey Hughton
Chill Factor is a carbon copy of Speed with one notable exception:
instead of a speeding bus, we now have an ice cream truck. The truck is
driven by Arlo (Cuba Gooding Jr.) and Mason (Skeet Ulrich), who have
been instructed by a dying scientist to transport a deadly chemical
weapon to a military base by the name of Fort McGruder. This particular
weapon (nicknamed `Elvis') must be kept below a temperature of 50
degrees, or else the shockwave will goo-iffy everything in a mile
radius. That would be pretty nasty.
The power of Elvis is revealed in the opening scene, as Dr. Richard Long
(David Paymer) conducts a test on an isolated tropical island. Long
accidentally melts 18 soldiers and defoliates virtually the entire
island, due to an enormously miscalculated safety distance. The
commanding officer, General Brynner (Peter Firth), is sentenced to 10
years in prison for the murder of his troops.
Upon his release, the General is intent on tracking the good doctor
down, snatching Elvis, and selling the weapon to the highest
international bidder. Protecting the fate of the world is a drifting
hamburger flipper (Ulrich) and a feisty ice cream delivery man (Gooding
Jr.), who must elude Brynner's men and get Elvis to safety at Fort
McGruder. All the while, of course, they must keep the weapon below 50
degrees. This proves to be tricky. Among the wild adventures Arlo and
Mason partake in is a trip down a tree-covered mountainside in a boat,
and a fist fight on top of a moving vehicle. They also crack a few dozen
witty retorts that we are supposed to find amusing.
To put it simply, I'll use a clever pun: Chill Factor should be put on
ice. Director Hugh Johnson has mixed elements from Speed, Broken Arrow
and the Lethal Weapon series to create a lifelessly bland cocktail of a
chase movie. When there is some occasional action, the audience seems
oddly detached from it. Perhaps that's because we've already waded
through a pool of clichés and boring dialogue; all material that's been
used before, and with a lot more spice. Take the villains, for example.
They are typical stereotypes of every terrorist that has ever walked the
silver screen. They speak lines that have been recycled profusely from
one movie to the next, divulge important plot details while holding
their enemies at gunpoint, and act in very predictable ways.
The tag-team of Gooding Jr. and Ulrich sounds much more exciting than it
is. Frankly, I'm not sure I can accept Cuba as an ice cream man. I
suppose it's better than him dressed like a giant hot dog, selling jumbo
frankfurters on a street corner. Gooding displays one single emotion in
this movie, which is frequently on display in lines like `I'm gonna get
on yo ass like last year's underwear!' and the incessant sputtering of
`Oh, sh*t!' This is virtually the same character he played in Jerry
Maguire and As Good as it Gets. But where Gooding was once an exciting
actor, he now seems dull and endlessly monotonous. At least he's a bit
more captivating than Ulrich, who has all the film's worst dialogue, but
does nothing noticeable to enliven his character. The supporting cast,
which includes every personality you expect to pop up, is also wasted.
To be fair, there are a few brief moments of serviceable action. And I
did chuckle a few times. One example is when Ulrich (an employee at
`Darlene's Diner') is at the counter when Brynner walks through the
door. `You own this place?' the General asks.  `Yeah,' Ulrich says.
`They call me Darlene.' These little tidbits of humor are (mainly)
welcome in this weak, disappointing wreckage of an action film. As a
Speed clone, it could have benefited from a lot more suspense and
perhaps (God forbid) even some decent writing. Sadly, I walked away from
Chill Factor only wondering how much fun it could have been.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton
    http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
Up-to-date Movie Reviews written by
        a Published Teen Columnist
http://moviething.com/members/movies/movieviews
>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>
                    TOP TEN 1999
 http://moviething.com/members/movies/movieviews/index85.shtml
                    TOP TEN 1998
 http://moviething.com/members/movies/movieviews/index133.shtml

Author
Steve Rhodes
Like a cook who uses only leftovers, Hollywood, once its finds a hit
formula, keeps looking for ways to reblend the same basic ingredients.
When they've exhausted the sequel approach, they look for variations on
the same recipe.
SPEED was a gigantic hit, so how about movie in which the threat is a
chemical weapon that goes lethal above 50 degrees?  Blend this using the
tried and true buddy formula.  Sprinkle in lots of action and
explosions.  Voilŕ, a hit.  Or so Warner Brothers hopes in Hugh
Johnson's CHILL FACTOR starring Cuba Gooding, Jr. and Skeet Ulrich.
As the story opens, civilian scientist Dr. Richard Long (David Paymer)
is going to be making a safe test of a new deforestation bomb.  At the
last minute he decides to turbo charge the chemical cocktail.  When it
comes time to start the test, the computer simulation of his tweak isn't
completed yet, but the milquetoast doctor manages somehow to bully the
tough Major Andrew Brynner (Peter Firth) into going ahead anyway with
the experiment, even if it puts his troops in jeopardy.  When it goes
horribly wrong, Brynner is sent to prison for 10 years for dereliction
of duty while the scientist, who feels really terrible about killing all
of those soldiers, keeps on working for the government.
The body of the movie happens 10 years later after Brynner is out of
prison.  He shows up to steal the substance -- it's called Elvis so the
script can make lots of jokes -- from Dr. Long.
Drew Gitlin and Mike Cheda's hackneyed script is likely to draw groans
as it constantly insults the audience's intelligence.  Dr. Long, an
accomplished fly fisherman, uses his hobby for giving lessons in life to
his friend, Tim Mason (Ulrich).  "Power without caution is death," Dr.
Long lectures Mason as they fish.  Huh.
The director's cliched staging includes bathing the bad guys in constant
heavy dark shadows and the good guys in bright lights.  When Brynner
greets his sleek, covert troops at the beginning of their mission to
steal Elvis, he has but one order.  "We all know what we have to do, so
let's do it," he says in a bit of inspiration that has them locking and
loading.
"If the road to hell is paved with good intentions, we know you'll find
your way there quickly," Brynner sneers at the doctor when he sees him
for the first time after prison.  "It's not such a bad place.  I know.
I was there."
The movie has more than enough logical holes for a whole fleet of ice
cream trucks to drive through, which is what Mason and Arlo (Gooding)
use to get Elvis away.  Although Brynner and Co. have a host of high
tech weaponry, fast motorbikes and sleek cars, they have trouble keeping
up with a 30-year-old ice cream truck.  Maybe the scene in which they
installed afterburners on the truck got left on the cutting room floor.
Less than a minute after watching the ice cream truck go past, riders on
2 super fast bikes go after it.  Hours later they will finally catch up,
but Mason, a soda jerk, proves to have fighting skills superior to those
of these military covert ops types.  The director loves this part as it
provides lots of opportunities for blowing up things like tanker trucks
and creating demolition derby style accidents.
Brynner's people, besides being surprisingly bad shots, make one bad
decision after another.  And time and again, the old truck outruns their
clearly faster vehicles.
Some of the stunts are fun.  Watching Mason and Arlo, like BUTCH CASSIDY
AND THE SUNDANCE KID, jump thousands of feet to the river below is
exhilarating.  In CHILL FACTOR they put them in a metal boat for the
jump to slightly disguise the rip-off of another picture.
As the chase is on, the villains are on-line to their potential
customers around the world, holding a $100,000,000 plus auction.  Ah,
the power of the Internet.
Poor Cuba Gooding, Jr., as he did in INSTINCT earlier this summer, plays
one half of a strong two person lead in an otherwise preposterous and
ridiculous movie.  As Mason and Arlo yell and bicker with each other,
there are a few nice laughs.  Too bad their characters are stuck in such
an otherwise awful movie.
"Quit limping around like that," an embarrassed Arlo tells Mason.
"Excuse me, I've got a bullet in my leg," Mason barks back.  Mildly
humorous comedy, however, cannot makeup for such a ludicrous rehash of a
movie.
CHILL FACTOR runs 1:42.  It is rated R for violence and language and
would be fine for teenagers who don't have squeamish stomachs.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Walter Frith
Buddy action movies.  I turned on 'Hooper' with Burt Reynolds the other
night, and he, along with Jan Michael Vincent, portray two stunt men who
aren't exactly close friends, but they respect each other's role in the same
profession.  The good ol' boy movies that Reynolds made famous in the 70's
affected and continue to affect action movies today.
No better example of this is the 'Lethal Weapon' series, which are the buddy
action genre's example of how great a formula can work if it's done
properly.  New and inventive situations eventually run out but flourish when
the ideas are fresh and well in hand.
Sometimes fate chooses us and not the other way around.  In 1996's 'Broken
Arrow', two air men in the military split up a long standing friendship.
One is the good guy (Christian Slater), the other (John Travolta) is the bad
guy.  Travolta's character becomes involved in a plot to steal nuclear
weapons and sell them back to the government while Slater's character tries
to stop him.  Three years later, with 'Chill Factor' we have a movie with
the same type of plot.
Cuba Gooding Jr. is such a great actor.  His Oscar winning role in 'Jerry
Maguire' hasn't seen him in a great role since.  Like Rod Steiger and George
Kennedy, he may suffer from the Oscar curse which plagues people with no
great role after winning the award.  In 'Chill Factor', set in Montana (but
filmed in Utah and South Carolina), Gooding Jr. plays an ice cream delivery
man named Arlo who becomes involved in a plot along with diner shop server
Tim (Skeet involved) to stop a vengeful military man named Capt. Andrew
Brynner (Peter Firth) who is looking for payback after serving a long prison
sentence and is now planning to use a deadly chemical weapon on innocent
people.
Sent to prison a decade earlier, blamed for letting a military experiment go
wrong, Capt. Brynner wants quick cash by holding the deadly weapon and
threatening to use it.  Shades of 1996's 'The Rock' come to mind.  Also, the
chemical that will cause the catastrophe, nicknamed Elvis, will unleash its
fury if it drops below 50 degrees.  Kind of like that bus in 1994's 'Speed'
that would explode with a bomb attached to it if it dropped below 50 miles
per hour.
The movie is layered with a pretty entertaining pace for a film of its kind,
probably the only thing that will save it from being a totally abysmal
failure for something done before and now seen over and over again.  Part
action, part comedy, all complete hokum, 'Chill Factor' suffers from the old
adage that the odds are not in its favour.
The scenery is under used in 'Chill Factor'.  A golden opportunity is wasted
to use the spectacular mountain scenery of a very visual state like Montana.
The action scenes are close up and well edited but not from a lot of
different angles you would expect to really make a movie move.  Virtually
every mode of transportation construction way is used.  There are scenes on
bridges, highways, and rivers.
Making his big screen debut as a director is Hugh Johnson.  His vision shows
some promise.  The characterizations in 'Chill Factor', although stereotyped
on the part of some, are clearly defined.  The film's screenplay by Drew
Gitlin and Mike Cheda is nothing more than a novelty with many plot holes.
A cell phone even works in a tunnel in this movie!!!  I also wondered while
viewing it if it was little more than a marketing tool to boost the career
of Skeet Ulrich.  He has had some small roles in a few movies and this was
perhaps an attempt to break him into the big time.  He has had noticeable
roles roles in 'The Craft', 'The Newton Boys' and 'As Good As It Gets' and
hasn't quite found the star making role he is striving for.
The plot holes that make 'Chill Factor' impossible to recommend are simple.
Two ordinary guys are not going to be able to stop a vicious military man
and his gang where all of them are highly trained experts in weaponry, hand
to hand combat and military strategy.  At least for many of those involved,
it won't exactly end their careers but it won't do anything to advance them
at the same time in a film that is almost impossible to review where the
ways to describe it seem to be repetitive.  The film makers drew first blood
in that category.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
greg king
A contemporary variation of the classic Wages Of Fear, with
plenty of chases and mindless action thrown in for good measure.
In 1987 scientist Raymond Long (David Paymer) developed a new
chemical weapon for the US military that created a fierce heat wave
capable of stripping the flesh off humans and destroying all plant
life in its path.  But when 18 soldiers were killed after an
experiment went horribly wrong on an isolated pacific island, the
disgraced Colonel Bremmer (Peter Firth) took the fall and spent ten
years in the military prison at Fort Leavenworth.  Upon his release,
Bremmer plots to steal the prototype of the weapon, cutely nicknamed
"Elvis", and sell it to the highest bidder on the open market.
The mortally wounded Long manages to make off with the weapon
before Bremmer can get his hands on it.  He gives it to Tim Mason
(Skeet Ulrich, who played the gay hustler in As Good As It Gets), his
fishing partner and a "hamburger jockey" at a local diner.  Mason has
to get the weapon to Fort McGruder before Bremmer can get his hands on
it.  And, most importantly, he has to keep it cold - below 50 degrees
Fahrenheit - or else it automatically detonates, wiping out everything
within a hundred mile radius.  That's where Arlo's ice cream delivery
truck comes in handy.
Arlo (Cuba Gooding jr) is a disenchanted, ex-employee of an
ice cream delivery firm, and initially reluctant to become involved in
this dangerous task.  These two mismatched, reluctant heroes transport
their volatile cargo over twisting mountainous roads, trying
desperately to outrace Bremmer's heavily armed private army, and the
dim-witted local sheriff who thinks Mason is a terrorist.
Chill Factor is a rather clichéd, formulaic odd couple
action adventure.  However, it does provide some thrills, and moments
of excitement and tension that make it better than most of these
straight-to- video thrillers.  Director Hugh Johnson maintains a
reasonably fast pace throughout, not giving audiences much time to
dwell on the implausibility of the whole thing.
The performances are also better than one normally finds in
this type of film.  Gooding brings plenty of his usual smart arse
humour and scene stealing style to an otherwise fairly one dimensional
and clichéd character, and his presence lifts the film.  Ulrich is
new to action films, but he seems to have pumped himself up for this
role, and he handles the more physical elements quite comfortably.
And Firth, who hasn't been seen on screen much lately, is having a
fine old time as the villainous Bremmer.
Chill Factor may not be brilliant stuff, but it certainly
turns up the heat for a couple of hours of diverting fun and
excitement.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     For nearly 15 minutes, CHILL FACTOR actually warrants comparison to
the film it tries so hard to bring to mind.  The sequence occurs on a
switchback section of highway, where our protagonists -- Mason (Skeet
Ulrich) and Arlo (Cuba Gooding Jr.) -- are trying to escape our villains
-- a military unit headed by renegade army man Maj. Andrew Brynner (Peter
Firth).  Mason is trying to get a dangerous and volatile chemical
defoliant known as "Elvis," which must be kept below 50 degrees to avoid a
deadly explosion, to a military base, and has commandeered ice cream
delivery driver Arlo's truck for the job; Brynner wants to auction the
weapon to the highest foreign bidder.  As the wreck of a truck rattles
along the two-lane highway, the passengers must contend with members of
Brynner's team jumping on board, a blown-out section of blacktop over a
precipitous fall, and close-encounters with other vehicles.  For 15
minutes, it's almost SPEED with a thermometer instead of a spedometer.
     During that 15 minute chunk of the film, director Hugh Johnson does
everything an action film director needs to do, offering plenty of close
calls and nervous laughter.  Unfortunately, those 15 minutes occur smack
in the middle of the film, between 45 minutes of excruciating introductory
exposition and 45 minutes of alternatingly absurd and tedious conclusion.
The burst of action seems like it's going to be the payoff for sitting
through one of the longest, least interesting prologues to an action film
_ever_, a prologue which lays out Brynner's feud with "Elvis's" creator
(David Paymer) in exhaustive detail.  Then, almost before you get a chance
to enjoy the few thrills CHILL FACTOR can provide, it sends Mason and Arlo
on a leisurely paddle down the river so they can bond over their past
mistakes.  And it's all downstream from there.
     It might have been at least remotely worth sitting through all that
exposition if the characters or performances hadn't made you want everyone
involved to end up chemically defoliated.  Cuba Gooding Jr. is rapidly
turning into one of the most aggravating Oscar-winning actors in history,
a one-note performer who widens his eyes and tightens his jaw to express
practically every emotion (the direction of the corners of his mouth is
the only hint as to his mood).  His work in CHILL FACTOR borders on the
embarrassing, a frantic collection of over-the-top reactions that would
make Martin Lawrence and Chris Tucker blush.  Skeet Ulrich could only hope
to register an emotion of any kind, using a flat delivery for even flatter
lines.  And Colin Firth squints and rasps his way through the villain
role, never quite sure whether he should be a moustache-twirling melodrama
baddie or tormented soldier with shattered patriotism.
     The absence of a sympathetic hero and solid villain damage an action
film, but they're not always fatal.  It can even get away with ridiculous
plot developments, like the idea that a toxic chemical gas could be
contained inside a traffic tunnel by blowing up both sides of the tunnel
(creating the ever-effective pile-of-rubble vacuum seal).  But there is no
way an action film can get away with so little action.  CHILL FACTOR just
sits there, inert, for nearly its entire running time, even forgetting
during its best moments to remind us of the status of its key plot
element's rising temperature.  It's hard to believe that a film this
weightless would waste so much time on setting up the premise, then never
exploit the premise.  If you want to want to imagine CHILL FACTOR -- and
imagine why it's not even worth the time of a true-blue action fan --
think of SPEED, with 90 minutes of the film set at a bus stop.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I heard actor Skeet Ulrich discussing this film in a couple of interviews,
and in both instances, he felt the strange compulsion to compare it a little
series of films called LETHAL WEAPON. Now, I personally remember those films
as A) starring a major motion picture star B) being funny C) having great
action sequences D) great chemistry E) decent character development.
Hmmm....okay...now on to my review of CHILL FACTOR.
PLOT:
A graveyard shift regular working Joe and ice cream truck driver fall onto a
malicious plan by an ex-Army general, to propose a nuclear device to
international prospects. When the device suddenly falls into their reluctant
laps, they must keep it cool on ice, and rush it over to an Army base,
before the contraption ticks over 50 degrees Fahrenheit, and kills millions
of people.
CRITIQUE:
"SPEED on an ice-cream truck" is probably the pitch that was used to sell
this one-tone movie to its backers, but unfortunately, the only way that
anyone could compare this film to that tension-filled, original two hours of
cinema, is in its distinct honor of being the complete opposite of what that
film, and the LETHAL WEAPON movies, stood for. This film is seasoned in
cliches, with plenty of badly written dialogue, over the top acting from
Cuba Gooding Jr., zero chemistry between the two leads, and horribly tacky
bad guys, tossed in to complete an overall bad movie recipe. My friend and I
enjoyed watching this movie to a certain extent, because some of the lines
in it were so bad and obviously "written", that we just had to crack up.
That, and the formula for the film's script which followed the proverbial
1-2-, and you guessed it...3 scenario! And what about all those catchy, hip
names to get us to relate to the characters...."Elvis" and "Nighshift", oh
what talent lies in the minds of these screenwriters (And yes, it actually
took two guys to come up with this regurgitated drivel).
It is unfathomable to me as to how actors Skeet Ulrich and Cuba Gooding Jr.
got involved in this one-week-old-blue-cheese-smelling project. Did they
actually think that it would boost their careers, or did they know that the
script sucked, but discounted any fall from grace, knowing full well that
the stack of cash in their back pockets would pad their fall? Most probably
the latter. Have you seen either FLED or  BULLETPROOF? Well, despite the
slight differences in plot, the essentials are basically the same here. You
get a black guy and a white guy being chased by a bunch of people, having no
choice but to work together to get somewhere, hating each other at first,
but over time, learning to respect one another as individuals. Yawn. Add to
that, the fact that our film actually has bad guys who are all dressed in
black, drive black cars and black vans, and run around with all kinds of
telecommunicative devices sprinkled around their head. Not too conspicuous,
eh? Call me a party-pooper, but as much as I like a nice cheezy movie as
much as the next guy, this film just doesn't even try to do anything
original or reasonably entertaining. One cool scene with a boat careening
down a mountainside, and another with a nuclear device obliterating
everything on an island, do not a fun, buddy-action flick make.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This is NOT a little known fact or anything, but damn, is it just me or does
Skeet Ulrich look an awful lot like great-looking actor Johnny Depp? Skeet's
real-life nicknames include Chester, Skeeter and Mosquito. He stands 6'1",
was born in North Carolina, and got married in 1997 to that sex-kitten
actress from CLAY PIGEONS (7.5/10), Georgina Cates. They own a farm together
in Virginia and seven dogs. Skeet has a long scar on his chest from
open-heart surgery done when he was 10 to correct a ventricle defect.
Actor Cuba Gooding Jr. was born in the Bronx, New York. In 1984, he
break-danced during the closing ceremonies of the Olympic Games in Los
Angeles. He stands 5'10".
Actress Hudson Leick, who plays one of the "bad guys/girls" in his movie, is
better known from her role as "Callisto" on the popular TV series "Xena:
Princess Warrior".
This film reportedly had a budget of $40 million?? I'm not exactly sure
where all this money went, but it certainly did not register onscreen.
Interestingly enough, director Hugh Johnson, who makes his big screen debut
with this film, was the cinematographer on the 1996 film WHITE SQUALL and
the 1997 Demi Moore vehicle, G.I. JANE (6.5/10).

Author
Homer Yen
The summer season for movies is fast approaching an end.  As I think
back about the summer offerings, there has been a dearth of the
standard shoot-em and chase-em movies compared to last year.  There
were a fair share of comedies, a handful of mature dramas, and a
stunning showing for scary films.  But where were the standard staples
of summer?  The prototypical action flick was probably rarer this year
because studios finally figured out that audiences are craving for
movies that titillate the senses or tickle the funny bone.  Gratefully,
the standard shoot-em up fare is moving towards extinction.  Perhaps
these films will find their future as straight-to-video releases. 
Although `Chill Factor' is probably as competent as any other summery
action film, this is also a film that you'll probably see at your
neighborhood Blockbuster's within eight weeks.
In this film, the U.S. government has been secretly testing a chemical
weapon that can evaporate human flesh within a matter of seconds.  The
problem is that scientists have been unable to control the energy of
this chemical reaction.  The only thing that they do know is that the
chemical (which looks like blue, semi-gelatinous crystals) must be kept
cold, less than 50 degrees.  Otherwise, the chemical reaction would
start.  There's nothing as cleansing as a radioactive facial.  If an
enemy nation were able to get their hands on it, they could easily wage
a destructive war guaranteeing themselves that their enemies will all
dissolve into dust.  There's an overly elaborate set-up to introduce us
to the person that wants to steal and auction it off to the highest
bidder (in this case, a vindictive former Army officer).  With his band
of hired mercenaries, they infiltrate a top secret research facility to
make the theft.  
The bandits are unsuccessful, and the chemicals wind up in the hands of
two average citizens.  One is Tom (Skeet Ulrich), a brooding guy who is
overcome by a sudden wave of patriotism.  He must deliver the chemicals
to an Army base about a day's trip away.  But he must keep the
chemicals cold.  Luckily, he meets up with Arlo (Cuba Gooding, Jr.) who
just happens to be an ice cream truck driver.  Arlo has nothing better
to do with his life, and despite the fact that transporting the
chemicals means almost-certain death, he grudgingly decides to help
Tom.
What does sustain the film is Gooding's fun nature.  There's a certain
charm that he has when he yelps his dissatisfaction at their
deteriorating situation.  Another ongoing joke seems to be that Tom and
Arlo can only flee using very unlikely getaway vehicles, including a
beat-up ice cream truck and a UPS brown van.  But with the villain hot
on their trail, Tom and Arlo face a series of challenges in order to
stay alive.  Driving along a narrow ledge high atop a mountainside and
tobogganing down the side of a mountain are just some of their wild
getaways.  And though they face such overwhelming odds at surviving,
they still manage to buy ice along the way to keep the chemical cool. 
The movie is predictable and formulaic from beginning to end.  It has
its light moments (thanks to Gooding) and a relatively brisk pace, but
beyond that, this film is about as exciting as the Vanilla in Arlo's
ice cream truck.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
A silly little action flick, The Chill Factor preaches that `Keeping
Cool is a Matter of Life and Death.'  But they don't mean `cool' like
the Fonz - they mean literally cool, like Hillary Clinton.  In the worst
and most unintentionally hysterical rip-off of Speed yet, the film's two
stars race across Montana to get a deadly biological weapon to an Army
base before  get this  the temperature of the chemical hits fifty
degrees.
The weapon, called Elvis, was created over ten years ago by an Army
scientist, played by David Paymer (Payback).  I think his name is
actually Dr. Richard Long (or directory style - Long, Dick), but I'm not
sure.  While isolated on a tiny desert island, Long tested a very small
amount of Elvis before his computer was done compiling data on the
deadly agent.  Originally intended to affect a 200-yard radius around
the test site, Elvis instead engulfs the entire five-mile island,
killing all eighteen men that were not located within the safety of the
control building.
Long escaped with a slap on the wrist, but his Colonel (played by Peter
Firth, Mighty Joe Young) is tossed in Leavenworth for ten years.  Of
course when he gets out of the clink, he wants to kill Long, steal Elvis
and sell it to foreign countries for - insert Dr. Evil voice here - 100
million dollars.  So Firth heads to Long's current research facility in
Jerome, Montana with a group of ninja-types.  Long story short, the
doctor lives long enough to get Elvis out of there, and Elvis ends up
with Long's fishing buddy Mason (played by Skeet Ulrich, The Newton
Boys), who works the late shift at Darlene's Diner.
Learning about Elvis' temperature restrictions, Mason commandeers an ice
cream delivery truck and, together with its driver (played by Cuba
Gooding Jr., Instinct), the two spend the remaining hour and a half
running from the Colonel and his garrison of black-clad foot soldiers.
Ulrich has the charisma of an orange and Gooding is like Martin Lawrence
turned up to eleven.  Shouldn't Oscar winners be held to higher
standards than the slop he's been pushing?  The only way this could have
been worse is if Jared Leto and Master P were cast in the leading roles.
Among the film's highlights are Ulrich and Gooding, Jr. using a rowboat
to sled down the face of a mountain, which at first sight is a straight
drop-off, but when they're actually hurtling down the hill it has
somehow transformed into a less dangerous forty-five-degree angle.  And
there is the obligatory fight on the roof of the ice cream truck as it
races in and out of tunnels bored into the mountain, which relegates the
bad guy to a Wile-E.-Coyote-type fate.  Are people still entertained by
this?  Thanks to the weapon being nicknamed Elvis, there are also quite
a few witty lines like `Elvis has entered the building' and snappy
comebacks to questions like `Where's Elvis?':  `Dead, last time I
checked.'
Not to be confused with the 1990 Gary Crosby pic of the same name, or
the short-lived 1972 Robert Culp/Eli Wallach televison series, Factor is
the directorial debut of Hugh Johnson (insert additional penis joke
here), who was previously the cinematographer on G.I. Jane.  The film
was scripted by Drew Gitlin and Mike Cheda, the former in his debut and
the latter the screenwriter for something called The Shape of Things to
Come, a sci-fi thriller that only played in Canadian theaters when
released in 1979.  Plus, his name is almost a type of cheese, so that
should tell you something, too.  (1:42 - R for violence and language)

Author
Michael Dequina
Note to struggling actors everywhere: if you think winning an Academy
Award will make your career spring to life, look at the career of Cuba
Gooding Jr.  While he has appeared in small roles in two decent films
(_As_Good_As_It_Gets_, _What_Dreams_May_Come_) in the scant two years
since he won his Supporting Actor Oscar for _Jerry_Maguire_, the lead
roles he has landed have been less than satisfactory: in the overwrought
melodrama _Instinct_ and now in the routine buddy actioner
_Chill_Factor_.
Even more depressing about Gooding's involvement in _Chill_Factor_ is
that he's relegated to token wisecracking African-American sidekick to
ever-so-vanilla Skeet Ulrich, who has the true starring role here.  Or
perhaps that is a good thing since this tepid action comedy is not
exactly one would be proud to headline (though Gooding is top billed). 
Ulrich's Tim Mason is the central character, a young diner worker in a
small Montana town who comes into the possession of "Elvis," an explosive
chemical substance.  As instructed by a scientist friend, Tim must
deliver the chemical to a military station in a town 90 miles away before
some baddies can use it for their nefarious purposes.  The catch?  The
chemical must remain frozen, for at 50 degrees, it combusts.  Enter Arlo
(Gooding), ice cream delivery man, who is dragged into the dirty affair
when Tim decides to use his refrigerated truck for transport.
Thus begins one long chase, where our mismatched duo bickers and bonds
while pursued by evil military types (led by Peter Firth and _Xena_ and
former _Melrose_Place_ vixen Hudson Leick) in cars and on motorcycles. 
It's all fairly routine, but director Hugh Johnson is able to come up
with a couple of diverting action sequences, namely one where Arlo and
Tim must steer the truck on a narrow, blown-out mountain roadway; and
another where the two ride a boat down a steep hill.
What neither Johnson nor Gooding and Ulrich can redeem is the limp
banter given them by writers Drew Gitlin and Mike Cheda.  Most of the
laugh lines are given to Gooding, and, to his credit, he obviously
attempts to infuse as much punch into them as is humanly possible. 
Unfortunately, this results in a way over-the-top performance that can
best be described as a feature-length riff on his famously energized
Oscar acceptance speech.  But at least he displays some signs of life,
which cannot be said for Ulrich; as in the awful _Touch_, the last film
he was called on to carry, Ulrich makes for a flavorless, uninteresting
presence that is much too weak on which to hang an entire picture.
_Chill_Factor_ is a competently made studio assembly-line product, and
that ultimately is the problem.  Without anything remotely extraordinary
to its credit, it is taken in by the eyes with relative ease, but leaves
nothing of substance to penetrate any deeper.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE CHILL FACTOR" (Warner Brothers)
          In this wannabe action-thriller, the mid-August tranquillity
of a tiny tropical atoll in the South Pacific is shattered when a
covert scientific military research operation, code name "Elvis," goes
terribly wrong. As a result, only the scientist who invented the
formula and a disgraced Army officer remain alive. Skip ahead ten
years to a hot summer day in the tiny town of Jerome, Montana, where
two young men - Cuba Gooding Jr. (Oscar winner for "Jerry Maguire")
and Skeet Ulrich - are in the wrong place at the wrong time. When the
guilt-stricken scientist (David Paymer) is murdered by the villainous
Major (Peter Firth), these two hapless guys must transport the toxic
and potentially combustible chemical weapon and safely deliver it to
Fort Magruder, 90 miles away. Only, they have to keep it frozen, and
the only refrigerated vehicle available is Gooding's ice-cream
truck. Of course, the Major's tactical team is in hot pursuit of
"Elvis on ice." Kind of reminds you of the concept "Speed," doesn't
it? Plus a French thriller called "Wages of Fear" with much the same
plotline. The profanity-laden screenplay by Drew Gitlin and Mike Cheda
is dumb and derivative, and novice Hugh Johnson's directing is
by-the-numbers, relying on violent hand-to-hand combat, macho gunplay,
and loud explosions. And how is it that everyone seems to know
everyone else's cell-phone number when I can't even remember my own?
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Chill Factor" is a
numbingly stupid 3. It's toxic, all right.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Chill Factor" rips off the basic premise of Jan De Bont's
1994 nonstop action picture "Speed."  In that eye-popping
spectacle, Keanu Reeves plays an elite SWAT-team cop who
is targeted by a psycho mastermind (Dennis Hopper), and led
onto a city bus triggered to explode if its speed descends
below 50 miles per hour.  Similarly in Hugh Johnson's thriller
"Chill Factor," menacingly blue crystals to be used for
chemical warfare must be kept on ice as they are
programmed to detonate when their temperature climbs to 50
degree Fahrenheit.  The plot focuses on a terrorist who is
determined to make off with a single canister of the powerful
device--which, if set off, could literally melt down every
inhabitant in a large city and then some--and to auction the
crystals off to the country with the highest bid beginning at
$100 million.
   Dazzling stunts, nick-of-time heroics, and big stakes come
with the territory of action-adventure movies.  Any big-studio
director can stage a few good vehicle crashes (though some,
like John Frankenheimer for "Ronin," could set new standards
for the cliche).  Any qualified stunt person can scale rocks,
turn acrobatic somersaults and leap through fire.  What
makes an action movie stand out are characters who make
sense, villains with clever dialogue, and plots ("Breakdown"
for example) that deviate from the routine.  "Chill Factor" has
the eye-popping stuntwork and some dazzling Utah scenery,
but the dialogue is particularly clunky, the heroic team lacking
in chemistry and credibility, and most of all the story is hitched to 
that same ol' paint-by-the-numbers race against the clock.  Hugh
Johnson, making his debut as a feature-film director,
unashamedly throws in one of the hoariest of cliches, the
villains who lose out because they talk too much while they
have the potential heroes facing the barrels of their guns.
   Let's assume that the powers who today hold onto some of
the most devastating weapons of war are all reasonable
people, at least smart enough to know that using their
arsenal of major firepower would be suicidal. We still must
confront the possibility that madmen could seize some of the
nasty stuff from their keepers.  In "Chill Factor," a half-crazed
army major who is thrown into Ft. Leavenworth prison for ten
years for an incident he did not trigger is determined to get
revenge on his country by purloining a weapon so lethal that
a simple canister could painfully end millions of lives.
The story opens on the Pacific territory of Horn Island
where the U.S. army is engaged in covert operations, testing
an agent of chemical warfare designed to cremate people for
miles.  Though the test is supposed to cover a very limited
area, an error by scientist Dr. Richard Long (David Paymer)
unleashes all the fury of the device known as Elvis,
destroying the entire island and killing eighteen servicemen. 
Major Andrew Brynner (Peter Firth) takes the rap and is
sentenced to Ft. Leavenworth prison for ten years while Dr.
Long, whom the major considers too valuable a person to
incarcerate, is free to continue his research.  When Brynner
is released at the end of his sentence, he sets out with
accomplices to steal the weapon and to sell it to the country
that bids the most, but is repeatedly frustrated by the efforts
of two average fellas, ice cream truck driver Arlo (Cuba
Gooding, Jr.) and drifter/hamburger-flipper Tim Mason (Skeet
Ulrich).  As the crazed Brynner chases Arlo and Mason
across a good deal of Montana (actually filmed in some of
the country's most scenic areas in Utah), the two heroes in
the ice cream truck bond as they face the usual obstacles:
dumb redneck-issue sheriff and his silly accomplice; vicious
dog; failing motor; dangerous cliffside roads; villains with
bazooka and determination.
   Cuba Gooding, Jr. gives a manic performance which
presumably was thought to be comical but is actually an
embarrassment.  His character, Arlo, issues such manifestos
while under the stress of the chase as, "I shoulda let that dog
bite me...I coulda got rabies and I coulda went to the hospital
and had a pretty nurse."  As Tim Mason, Skeet Ulrich has
that determined look of a man who is doing a wonderful
service for his country as he plans to foil the villains using the
home-spun philosophic advice taught to him while fishing with
his mentor.   Dr. Long, his fishing companion, warned him:
"Power without caution is death--turn the power of the hunter
against him," while scheming to catch the trout with some
specially designed bait.
   Like so many of its predecessors, "Chill Factor" features a
race against time.  A Fahrenheit thermometer is attached to
the chemical bomb to warn its keepers to keep the canister
chilled below 50 degrees.  This bomb is so smart that it
knows to detonate at exactly that temperature. When the dial
says 49.9 degree (as you knew it would), the bomb behaves.
How is this weapon so intelligent that it would inevitably
discharge in just one more tenth of a degree?  Fortunately for
it and for the 3 million people in Seattle who owe their lives to
two average guys, the weapon is smarter than those
responsible for this derivative, uninspired film.

Author
Dustin Putman
`Been there, done that.' Despite the, albeit malnutritious, entertainment 
value of the new action-comedy, `Chill Factor,' directed by Hugh Johnson, 
making his feature-film debut, those four words constantly were ringing into 
my ears. Cliched, far-fetched, and basically `Speed 3' with a twist, the 
kicker this time isn't a bus or cruise ship that can't slow down below a 
certain speed, but a deadly biological weapon that must stay below fifty 
degrees, or else it will mean the end of the whole state of Montana. Where 
the original 1994 `Speed' rose above its overbaked genre, thanks to non-stop, 
expertly-shot action scenes that kept audiences on the edge of their seats 
throughout, `Chill Factor' unfortunately only includes a twenty-minute 
set-piece right in the middle of the film that even remotely equals up to its 
birth mother, and then it stops in its tracks for the remainder of the 
102-minute running time. Luckily, it doesn't overstay its welcome, and 
remains a solidly diverting, if generic, way to spend a few hours.
Jumping right off with a frighteningly realistic prologue in which the 
malicious Major
Andrew Brynner (Peter Firth) is the cause of the destruction of a whole 
military island, and deservedly is shipped off to prison, the picture 
fast-forwards ten years, when Brynner is released and immediately sets a plot 
into motion that includes selling the lethal chemical for $100 million to 
some international baddies. Stalking the scientist/creator (David Paymer) at 
his lab and shooting him, they discover that he has escaped with the 
chemical, nicknamed `Elvis.' To make a long story short, `Elvis' falls into 
the hands of Tim (Skeet Ulrich), a short-order cook, and Arlo (Cuba Gooding 
Jr.), an ice cream delivery man, who are instructed to transport it to Fort 
McGruder before Brynner and his nasty henchmen can catch up to them. And, oh 
yeah, Tim and Arlo have no choice but to keep "Elvis" below the magic 
temperature of 50 degrees, or KABLOOM!
`Chill Factor' is the exact type of film that, like clockwork, is always 
released on the first weekend of September each year. Last year, we were 
blessed with the godawful
Jean-Claude Van Damme no-brainer, `Knock Off,' and in September of 1997 was 
the
mediocre, if better-than-expected, Steven Seagal film, `Fire Down Below.' At 
least
sparing us with the overall badness of `Knock Off,' `Chill Factor' is still 
nothing more
than an unoriginal, professionally-done action movie. No attempt is made to 
raise above this sub-par level, and that is part of its slight charm. It's 
doubtful director Johnson or screenwriters Drew Gitlin and Mike Cheda 
expected greatness to come from this film and, therefore, it gains a sort of 
innocent quality whose only purpose is to entertain the viewer for the 
remainder of its running time. Sure, more suspense could have been injected 
into the pacing in order for it to really take off, but you can't expect 
everything when you're dealing with such an obvious studio effort.
The question remains, though. Why has Cuba Gooding Jr. fallen on such 
blatantly
desperate hard times? A Best Supporting Actor Academy Award Winner for 1996's
`Jerry Maguire,' Gooding Jr. has followed this career high point up with last 
year's
thought-provoking `What Dreams May Come,' which stuck him in a minor role, 
and this past summer's cinematic snooze-fest, `Instinct.' Now, with `Chill 
Factor,' he has
resorted to playing the type of stock jokester black man role that is often 
seen with rising stars (Eddie Murphy in 1984's `Beverly Hills Cop,' Chris 
Tucker in 1998's `Rush Hour'), rather than someone who long-since established 
his talent and wide-range with 1991's gritty, touching, `Boyz N the Hood.' 
Gooding Jr. too often appears on autopilot here, and you can't help but feel 
bad for him, since he clearly is capable of doing far more challenging work. 
Together, with Skeet Ulrich, they make a reasonably likable heroic duo, and 
are fun to watch most of the time. Ulrich alone, however, is as bland as 
could be, nowhere near as effective as he was in 1996's `Scream,' and only 
sells a single one-liner for maximum laughs: When Brynner comes into 
Darlene's Diner, Tim's place of employment, he asks him if he owns the 
restaurant. `Yeah,' replies Tim, `everyone calls me Darlene.'
`Chill Factor' sets up its basic premise in the first half-hour, which is the 
most
well-written section of the film, then turns into an adrenaline-pumping 
actioner for the
middle thirty minutes, and then drags itself out in the final one-third 
simply to qualify as a full-length feature. From beginning to end, we watch 
the characters, story, and screenplay go strictly through the conventions of 
an ordinary action film, hoping for the moment when a twist or abrupt spark 
of intelligence will occur. They ultimately never come, but those fans of 
mindless action movies won't be disappointed. After all, you could do a lot 
worse in the early-September movie season. You could also do a lot better.
