Title
Review for Coyote Ugly (2000)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Steve Rhodes
COYOTE UGLY is a romantic comedy produced by Jerry Bruckheimer.  Enough 
said?
The film is one long sexual tease that flaunts the MPAA rules.  
SHOWGIRLS was NC-17, but COYOTE UGLY comes in at just PG-13 since the 
women keep their skimpy clothes on.  This means that lots of preteens 
will discover wet T-shirts and provocative dances, maybe inspiring some 
to grow up and become exotic dancers.  The picture is directed by David 
McNally, whose previous work was herding lobsters who were advertising 
beer in the most popular commercial at the 1999 Super Bowl.  
Okay, let's put the rating argument aside for the moment.  
The film, which is so noisy that you may need earplugs, nominally 
concerns an aspiring song writer, Violet Sanford (Piper Perabo, last 
seen as FBI agent Karen Sympathy in THE ADVENTURES OF ROCKY AND 
BULLWINKLE).  Violet leaves her widower father, Bill (John Goodman), to 
travel the 42 miles from her home in New Jersey to a cliché of a 
flea-bit room in New York City.  "I put pepper spray in your purse," he 
tells her.  "Even if you're not sure, start spraying."
Needing money, she becomes a "coyote."  Coyotes are women too wild to 
work at Hooters.  Coyotes spend their time dancing on the top of the bar 
at a place called Coyote Ugly (don't ask), which is run by a 
tough-as-nails blonde named Lil (Maria Bello from PAYBACK).  Other 
coyotes include Cammie (Izabella Miko) and Rachel (Bridget Moynahan).  
Violet, whom they nickname Jersey, takes the place of Zoe (Tyra Banks), 
who is leaving a life of shaking her booty in order to go to law school.  
Gina Wendkos's script is full of such gems.  Another is that Violet can 
only sing when no one is there or when the lights are out.  Guess what 
will happen during her big stage fright scene?
The bar is always a mob scene.  The women spray the crowd with water 
hoses to rile them up.  And they spray each other to get the men hot 
again.  They even set fire to the bar to liven up the place even more.  
Generally, however, they dance as seductively as possible in cheesy, 
little outfits.  They should have premiered the movie at Hugh Hefner's 
Playboy mansion.  (The movie's only sex scene starts besides a cord 
board cutout of President Clinton.)
Lil hires Violet solely because Violet looks like a kindergarten 
teacher, which she is sure will make the men horny.  (Following the 
movie's sexual tease theme, Lil tells Violet her main rule for her 
workers is, "You are to appear to be available but never be available.")  
Introducing her to the salivating males, Lil says that Violet is not 
only a kindergarten teacher, but an ex-nun as well, "who's tired of 
being the only virgin in New York City."  Lil likes to make her 
announcements at the bar using a bullhorn. 
While not cavorting on the bar with her coworkers, Violet is involved in 
a romantic liaison with an Australian named Kevin (Adam Garcia).  This 
whole subplot is a throwaway designed to kill time between the erotic 
dance numbers.  The lovers never take their clothes off so that the 
movie can keep its coveted PG-13 rating.  They wrap themselves in sheets 
after sex so that we won't be shocked.  This is pretty insulting to the 
audience's intelligence since the bar scenes push limits left and right.
The thin plot, which makes soap operas seem profound in comparison, has 
an utterly predictable conclusion.  It's really just a music video 
brought to the big screen in order to rake in the big bucks.  For adults 
desperately searching for any guilty pleasure they can find, this may be 
the movie for them.
COYOTE UGLY runs 1:35.  Officially it is rated PG-13 for sensuality.  It 
would be acceptable for older teenagers.  (Together with NUTTY PROFESSOR 
II, also rated PG-13, these two films in current release make a mockery 
of the PG-13 rating.)
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
Adding a new finale, a flashy musical number at the hip, rowdy
bar where the exhibitionistic young women work, caused this Jerry
Bruckheimer film to almost miss its August 4th opening date. And - who
knows? - perhaps it was the only fitting conclusion to this cinematic
amalgam of Hooters, "Cocktail" and "Flashdance," written by Gina
Wendkos and directed by David McNally, a veteran of TV
commercials. Newcomer Piper Perabo stars as a naive, 21 year-old
aspiring New Jersey singer-songwriter who ventures across the Hudson
River to seek fame and fortune as a barmaid in Manhattan's gritty,
high-energy Coyote Ugly bar, strutting her seductive shots-and-beer
stuff under the watchful eye of bar owner Maria Bello, who mandates:
"You are to appear to be available but never be available. Other
tantalizing, dancing "coyotes" include Izabella Miko, Bridget Moynahan
and model Tyra Banks. Coyote Ugly's a treasure chest (pardon the pun!)
of unruly, bizarre behavior - like hosing down the crowd if someone
orders water, even setting fire to the bar - but that's about the only
interesting thing in this otherwise dull, wretchedly cliche-filled
movie. Predictably, there's a skeptical guy Piper falls for - Adam
Garcia.  Her apartment gets robbed and her nice-guy, widower dad,
played by John Goldman, is hospitalized - yawn! There's a sexual tease
with tight, revealing costumes but no nudity. It's rated PG-13. The
sound-track rocks loudly even if it doesn't exactly roll - with singer
LeAnn Rimes dubbing Piper Perabo's voice and making a cameo appearance
near the end of the film. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Coyote Ugly" is an undulating, sappy 3. If you want to find the REAL
Coyote Ugly watering hole, it's on 10th Avenue in the East Village.

Author
Jon Popick
In Cocktail, Tom Cruise's character became a bartender because he
dreamed of owning his own bar and becoming a millionaire.  In Coyote
Ugly, Piper Perabo slings drinks because she has in insatiable urge for
hard liquor and man-meat.
Well, that's not true at all.  If you've seen Ugly's trailer, you'd
think the film was about a bunch of slinky bartenders who can't get
enough men.  But Ugly is only rated PG-13, and its characters don't ooze
sex any more than a Britney Spears video.  The closest thing to nudity
in the film is Perabo's shadow in a dressing room.
Will guys be disappointed with Ugly after being assaulted with the
promise of sex and various state of feminine undress in the film's
marketing campaign?  It's a distinct possibility, since Ugly actually
plays like a chick-flick by portraying men as knuckle-dragging
Neanderthals and women as the cooler, calmer sex.  Where the hell is
Russ Meyer when you need him?
Perabo (The Adventures of Rocky & Bullwinkle) plays Violet Sanford, the
daughter of a New Jersey tollbooth collector (John Goodman, What Planet
Are You From?).  Although she suffers from stage fright, Violet dreams
of becoming a successful songwriter - a career that her deceased mother
attempted and failed before Violet was born.  Her career ambitions take
her from a job in a suburban pizza parlor to a filthy, cramped Chinatown
apartment.
Violet quickly learns that the big city chews up and spits out girls
like her on a regular basis.  Everyone she meets seems to be a bitter,
failed musician.  Before you know it, she's chased off an open mike
stage by a pair of drunken hecklers and, of course, her grimy apartment
is burglarized.  Down on her luck and out of money, Violet ends up
taking a job from Lil (Maria Bello, Payback) who owns a popular bar in
Manhattan's meat-packing district.  The catch is that she has to wear
skimpy outfits, flirt with the customers and perform bar-top dances with
her sexy co-workers Zoe (supermodel Tyra Banks), Rachel (Bridget
Moynahan, Sex and the City) and Cammie (Izabella Miko, in her film
debut).
Predictably, Violet is horrible at her new job, but slowly becomes as
skilled and popular as her co-workers.  She even develops a relationship
with an Australian expatriate named Kevin (Adam Garcia, Wilde).  Their
romance is fairly interesting, despite being one of those typical
Hollywood affairs, with the girl initially hating the guy until he
finally wears her down with his relentless pursuit.
Perabo, who at times is a dead-ringer for Julia Roberts, can do the
sweet and innocent thing really well, but her character is oddly written
to be intermittently a naďve pussycat and a quick-talking hard ass.  It
left me scratching my head.  In most
inexperienced-person-goes-to-the-big-city films, the character stays
green until the final reel.  But not in Ugly.  The supporting roles are
all flimsily sketched, but Aussie actress Melanie Lynskey (But I'm A
Cheerleader) is a stand out based on her chunky Jersey accent alone.
Ugly is the directorial debut of David McNally, and its script was
written by Gina Wendkos, who is best known for a little-seen 1992 Jami
Gertz film called Jersey Girl (which was described as a Cinderella story
with big hair).  The picture was produced by Jerry Bruckheimer (Gone in
60 Seconds, Armageddon), who usually makes huge summer blockbusters with
flimsy female characters.  Ugly isn't Bruckheimer's only venture away
from his typical testosterone-driven resume  the producer's football
flick Remember the Titans hits theatres next month.
Interestingly, Ugly uses the Gloria Gaynor song `I Will Survive' in one
of its major scenes, as does The Replacements, which opens one week
after Ugly premieres.  Also of note is a pet cat that mysteriously
appears in Violet's apartment.  Country crooner LeAnn Rimes appears in
the film's final scene, which makes no sense at all even after you find
out that Rimes provides the voice for all of Violet's singing scenes.
In short, Ugly is kind of like an all-night drinking binge  it's a fun
blur while it's happening, but you'll barely be able to remember it the
next day.
1:40 - PG-13 for adult language, mild violence and some light sexual
content

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Remember Tom Cruise and Brian Brown as rival bartenders juggling
bottles of booze in "Cocktail"?  Remember how stupid that looked?  And
remember the scantily-clad dancers of "Flashdance" getting doused with
buckets of water?  Well, "Coyote Ugly" does those films five better (or six
better if you count John Goodman), since here we have Piper Perado, Maria
Bello, Tyra Banks, Melanie Lynskey, and Izabella Miko doing the Absolut
spinning and jiggling thing while pouring pitchers of Perrier all over
their semi-naked torsos.
        No, Goodman doesn't flip Jim Beams or wear anything particularly
risqué in the film but he *does* get up on the bar and start gyrating with
the rest of them.  And the central character's love interest, played by an
Australian actor named Adam Garcia, proves *he* can get up on that bar and
start shimmying along with the rest of them too.
        What seems to have started life as a Victoria's Secret photo shoot
quickly deteriorates into one heck of an embarrassing movie.  Violet
(Perado) is a South Amboy hopeful who tries to make it big as a songwriter
(not a welder) in New Jack City.  As naďve as they come, she's fobbed off
by music producer's receptionists by the scorn-ful and has her apartment
robbed hours after touching down in Chinatown.  And, like her mother before
her, she gets stage fright whenever she tries to do the open mike night
thing.  When she sees a trio of babe-a-licious barkeeps thumbing through a
stack of $20s in an all-night diner, Violet simply has to check out this
bar they call Coyote Ugly.  Lil (Bello), the no-nonsense owner, agrees to
give Violet an audition but Violet blows it.  Still, Lil gives Violet
another chance.  A riot breaks out (riots are the order of the day at
'Ugly's, since the staff are relentless in flaunting their sexual wares,
flambeeing the bar, and soaking the patrons with diet Sprite--this is
certifiable behavior in case I didn't mention it) but Violet successfully
subdues the crowd by singing along to Blondie's "One Way or Another" on the
jukebox.  She's hired!  And cured, since this little episode gives her the
confidence to sing in an amateur talent contest where her Dad (Goodman),
the junk food-eating, laundry-impaired toll collector, comes to see her and
is as proud as punch.  The End.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Dennis Schwartz

COYOTE UGLY (director: David McNally; screenwriter: Gina Wendkos;
cinematographer: Amir Mokri; editor: William Goldenberg; cast: Piper
Perabo (Violet Sanford), Adam Garcia (Kevin O'Donnell), Maria Bello
(Lil), Melanie Lynskey (Gloria), Izabella Miko (Cammie), Bridget
Moynahan (Rachel), Tyra Banks (Zoe), Del Pentecos  (Lou, The Bouncer),
Michael Weston (Danny), John Goodman (Bill Sanford); Runtime: 94; 2000)
This is one of those films that you feel ashamed you saw. The characters
appear to be not as bad as they seem, or as good as they seem--they just
seem to be vapid. It is a film that has no direction or sense of what it
wants to say, except to look good like commercials do and with the hope
that it can be accepted as a "feel good" movie by the kind of public
that will see anything in the summer as long as the film moves fast.
Everything about this film is a sham, from the repulsive bar it
highlights to the inane relationship it features. It felt like I was
dropped into a pit with some of the most obnoxious types you would ever
want to meet and was told that the only way to get out of this trap, was
to shake my ass like they do.
The producer who brought us this piece of schlock is the schlockmeister
himself, Jerry Bruckheimer, the producer of such feeble projects as
Flashdance, Top Gun, and Armageddon, who has lived up to his low
standards with "Coyote Ugly."
Violet (Piper Perabo) is an aspiring songwriter from South Amboy, New
Jersey, who lives with her widower dad, Bill (John Goodman). She is a
wholesome girl, with no noticeable tattoos, body piercing, or drug
habit. She also has a pleasing voice, except she freezes when she has to
perform in public. Her mother was a singer, but didn't pursue her goal
when she got married to her NJ State toll booth collector husband, and
she told Violet that she always regretted not taking a chance and
pursuing a musical career. Violet is the same age as her mother was when
she went to the Big Apple, but changed her mind upon her husband's
insistence. Now that Violet is off to the city, having quit her job in
the pizza parlor, her dad worries about her safety, offering her the
sound advice, "Don't hesitate to use the pepper-spray." His role is to
be an adult, crack some jokes, try to give the film a heart, and not to
seem too embarrassed when he is reduced to shaking his ass on top of
that ugly frathouse dream bar the film has created to do its Flashdance
formula film again, but this time without fresh music or script.
After her lifetime friend Gloria (Melanie) helps her move into a shabby
apartment in Chinatown, the hardship of breaking into the business hits
home, as she gets rebuffed in all her efforts to get her demo tape
listened to. A bartender plays a cruel joke on her when she tries to get
info from him, telling her that Mr. Kevin O'Donnell (Adam Garcia) is a
record producer. When she hands him her demo tape, she finds out that
he's only a hamburger flipper, which is only one job among the many jobs
the handsome Australian orphan needs in order to survive in this
expensive city. His only noteworthy habit is collecting rare comic
books. After the shaky start they get off to, he turns out to be a nice
guy (he doesn't come onto her like an animal) and she slowly realizes
that he's handsome and available, so this uninteresting romance
predictably takes place while she forges ahead with her career plans.
Everything seems to be going wrong for Violet--but, to make matters
worst, when she returns to her apartment, her place has been burglarized
and ransacked. With little money left, she goes with her head down to an
all-night diner and the kindly owner, feeling sorry for her, gives her a
free piece of pie. She gets all enthused when she overhears the loud
conversation of three supermodel types dressed like sluts and sees them
wave around the wads of money they earned, and finds out that they are
dancing bargirls in an East Village bar called Coyote Ugly, which
features the Western look and Charlie Daniels Band type of country
music, where the girls shake their asses on top of the bar and when not
stomping on the bar, flirt with the sardine-like customers who are
cramped together, screaming their heads off in some maddening bar scene
fit for imbeciles. The girls are hired to lead the men on sexually but
are not allowed to go further than that or date them.
The bar is run by the bold, blonde hussy Lil (Maria Bello), who hires
her on the spot as one of the dancing bargirls clad in sexy halter tops.
The other star bargirls are Rachel (Bridget Moynahan) and Cammie
(Izabella Miko), who are seen dancing atop the bar-which at times is in
flames, doing slick moves when mixing drinks, such as tossing glasses up
into the stratosphere, and squirting a hose full of water at their too
eager customers. Because of all the trickery involved, doubles for the
bargirls were used. Zoe (Tyra Banks), one of the other star bargirls,
has just quit to shake her ass as a law student. The bouncer trying to
control the sexually crazed, drunken crowd of men and women, is Lou. It
seems odd to have only one enforcer in a place that is built for
trouble, but then again, hardly anything about this film made sense.
The film ends on this supposedly endearing note, as Piper Perabo
innocently exclaims, "What do you do when you realize all your dreams
have come true?"
The film was about Violet trying to convince her boyfriend and her
father that the bar job she has is not as bad it seems. By the film's
end, she will make it in the musical field, lose her fear of performing
in public, go out with her nice boyfriend and reconcile with her lovable
dad. But, I'd like to see Violet try and convince anyone who is not
brain dead that this film has a modicum of intelligence in it. An actor
could only hope to come out of a film like this unscathed, that Piper
Perabo does, is a credit to her, which is probably due to the innocent
kindergarten teacher look she conveys. The film received a PG rating,
despite its image of a bar from hell. But there are no hot sex scenes to
satisy an audience it might be appealing to... . I haven't a clue who
this movie will please, but it sure isn't me.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ross Anthony
A struggling singer-songwriter moving to New York in search of fame finds a
cute Aussie boyfriend and a bar to dance on.
Here's a comment from a theatergoer:
"It was all right. It had a lot of good-looking people. It could have made
it."
Here's a comment from me.
"I made it (through, that is)." Admittedly, this was not a film that I
eagerly awaited screening. Skinny ladies in tube tops two sizes too tiny
spraying an inebriatedly rambunctious bar crowd with various spirits just
didn't catch my eye on the trailers (go figure). But if it caught yours, be
forewarned these are relatively minor segments of the film (likewise, Tyra
Banks' part).
Nor is this a film about four women. Rather, one modest, stage-frightened,
but determined girl from Jersey dominates the production. Can she make it on
her own in the big bad city? Can she keep her young Mel Gibson? Can she
impress her KFC eating father (John Goodman)?
Aside from pretentiously false modesty, Piper Perabo does a smashing job
with this near-cardboard character. Adam Garcia also is endearing, with the
Coyote Queen, Maria Bello, pulling down her hard, but caring role with both
fists. Tyra is fine. (Read in any inflection you prefer).
But the film caricatures the reality of song or beer selling, the
father/daughter relationship and even performance, be it music or buttocks.
Some of the wet bar dancing is fun (never too sexy), but the film really
only captivates when Violet (Perabo) plays her music. Unfortunately, that
only happens twice during which the filmmakers insert a time-passes-by
sequence over the music that moves the picture along with the kind of beat
and heart we've been waiting for. More songs from our leading lady would
have prettied up this coyote. A grittier realism would have also elevated
the tension level - as is, we never really worry about anyone.
FYI, as explained by the bar owner herself, "Coyote Ugly" is the term one
might use for the less than appealing appearance of your one-night-stand
laying in bed with you the morning after. "You'd rather chew off your arm
than risk waking him."
Still, I enjoyed Piper Perabo and would like to see more of her (now, stop,
you know what I mean!) in films to come. Additionally, I did pull out my
dusty six string and bang around on it a while when I got back from the film
... that's worth more than a "C."
Coyote Ugly. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Piper Perabo, Adam Garcia, Maria Bello, John Goodman, Tyra Banks,
Melanie Lynskey, Izabella Miko, Bridget Moynahan, Michael Weston, LeAnn
Rimes.
Directed by David McNally.
Written by Gina Wendkos.
Produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, Chad Oman at Touchstone (C)2000. Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B-
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com

Author
Brandon Herring
Starring:  Piper Perabo, Maria Bello, Adam Garcia, John Goodman, Melanie 
Lynskey, Izabella Miko, Bridget Moynahan, Tyra Banks, Del Pentecost, Michael 
Weston.
Jerry Bruckheimer has struck gold in his career. He has many action 
blockbusters on his hand, for instance already this year he as the $95+ 
million grosser "Gone in 60 Seconds", and in the past we've seen movies from 
him such as "Con Air", "Armaggedon" and more. Now he returns to his 
"Flashdance" route and has produced "Coyote Ugly" a "Flashdance" meets 
"Cocktail" type movie, but minus the male in "Cocktail" and add the female 
character from "Flashdance" and boom you have "Coyote Ugly" a glitzy, 
well-directed, plotless feature that is admittedly entertaining.
Violet Sanford (Piper Perabo) has been writing songs for along time her life 
now.  She has always wanted to go to New York, 42 miles from the house she 
has lived in for 21 years, and write music and make it big in the world. She 
leaves the house and her loving father (John Goodman) to go to New York, 
everyone's dream place to live and try to make herself something. She gets a 
job at a bar entitled "Coyote Ugly" which you will find out what exactly that 
means when you watch the movie, but this is no ordinary bar to say the least 
"Coyote Ugly" is a bar where the waitresses dance on the bar, to hip music 
while horny men (and women) watch and cheer them on.
After she doesn't find much success in her music career, she is given this 
job as a fluke, and quickly and fortunately becomes very popular. People come 
nightly to see her, she has friends in the Big Apple, and success as she 
always wanted, though not the success she quite wanted. Violet then meets a 
handsome young man named Kevin O'Donnell who is well played by Adam Garcia. 
The two hit it off, but he is a bit skeptical about her dancing on this bar, 
while guys throw money at her. He is an australian cook at a greasy fast food 
bar, and her life in New York begins.
What really disappointed me about "Coyote Ugly" was the plot, of course if 
you really want to call it a plot. This so called plot is to thin, that you 
can virtually see through it. It was virtually your usual; want to go to New 
York to make it big type movie, and really doesn't work. I was entertained 
throughout the film, but in the last thirty minutes the movie takes a 
devastating turn to the worst and turns sappy and overbaked. This movie would 
have been really good had it have a solid plot, and even from the trailers 
you can even tell there wasn't much of a plot.
Besides being full of cliches, "Coyote Ugly" still delivers the goods. The 
direction by David McNally is very well done, and the bar scenes are 
extremely glitzy and glamorous and I found myself at times dancing (a little) 
in my chair. Well-edited and timed, these scenes are the highlight of the 
movie, and are extremely sexy and almost erotic at times. In a way its a bit 
like "Cocktail" and "Flashdance" in these scenes, they are very well 
utilized, and mixed with some great music we have. One scene with water is 
definitely the highlight of the bar scenes. 
Acting department is credible, with Piper Perabo being the standout, her 
first big starring role (besides this past summers "Rocky and Bullwinkle"). 
Perabo is a talent, and in this movie its shows, even though she isn't really 
given that much to work with, what she has she uses well and brings out her 
character the best she can. She is a beautiful and talented actress, who is 
on her way to bigger things. Of course the supporting cast Maria Bello as 
Violet's boss Lil, is great too, and she has an edge to her that makes her 
character even more likable. John Goodman is as always a great actor, and 
doesn't disappoint here, he is comical and great to watch on the screen. The 
rest of the coyotes give good if somewhat bland at times performances.
Even with these flaws "Coyote Ugly" is in its own way a good movie. It never 
stopped entertaining me, and I was actually getting into it, somewhat despite 
there was little plot. The acting and bar scenes are really what make this a 
good film. It wouldn't be hard to recommend this movie, but I really can't 
say I loved it.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by David McNally. Screenplay by Gina Wendkos. Starring Piper
Perabo, Adam Garcia, John Goodman. Running time: 100 minutes. Rated AA by
the MFCB. Reviewed on August 11th, 2000.
Is there a story used more often in Hollywood films than the underdog who
makes good? I doubt it. We've seen it so often now that we know what
beats the film will hit even before it does. There's the optimistic 
opening, followed quickly by our hero getting a taste of sobering reality.
But our hero proceeds undeterred, slowly moving up in the world and
probably acquiring a love interest along the way. Then we hit the false
dawn, as everything seems to be going our hero's way when, suddenly,
everything goes wrong. Usually, this is linked to a complication in the
romantic subplot, and often to our hero misinterpreting an innocent
situation. Our hero spirals to his or her lowest ebb, about to give up
hope entirely. But then, out of the blue, there is a sudden source of
inspiration -- often a sacrifice or about-face by another character -- and
the hero gives it one last go. Everything ends in triumph -- and, of
course, a cuddly reunion with the love interest.
The underdog scenario is so familiar it almost feels like one of the
family. But so familiar, too, that it is difficult to get really worked up
about this kind of movie. Virtually every twist, every possible variation
has already been played out; the capacity for invention in the genre is
approaching nil. We cannot judge the movie on how creative it was, how
much it surprised us or affected us, because it is difficult to be
surprised or affected when you can guess where the film is going half an
hour ahead of time. Instead, the responsibility falls on the shoulders of
the filmmakers to take this timeworn concept and turn it into something,
if not novel, then at least entertaining.
The newest underdog movie is "Coyote Ugly", and the shoulders in question
belong mostly to Piper Perabo. Perabo plays Violet Sanford, an aspiring
songwriter who leaves her small hometown to go to New York City, where she
hopes to make a name for herself. What Violet doesn't realise is that she
can't just walk up to a record company and hand them her demo tape --
illogically, she needs to make a name for herself first. Unfortunately,
Violet has tremendous stage fright, and can't work up the courage to sing
her songs to a live audience. Meanwhile, she meets Kevin (Adam Garcia), a
charming Australian whom she mistakes for a club manager. Out of the
awkward meeting springs a budding romance, but one that is hamstrung by
Kevin's unwillingness to disclose his own secrets.
Violet gets a job working at a raucous bar called the Coyote Ugly, run by
tough-talking Lil (Maria Bello). At the Coyote Ugly, drinks are only
served straight and in shot glasses, and the bartenders are sexy women who
hop up on the bar to dance, spray the customers with water, and light
things on fire. Slowly, Violet begins to find a home at the Coyote Ugly,
but this brings her into conflict with both her father (John Goodman) and
Kevin, who thinks Violet is using her bartending job as an excuse not to
pursue her songwriting dreams.
What "Coyote Ugly" has going for it is a pair of charming performances
from Perabo and Garcia, who have a lot of screen appeal both together and
individually -- particularly remarkable since both are basically newcomers
to feature films. Perabo did a good job in a rather thankless role in
this summer's "The Adventures Of Rocky & Bullwinkle"; here she's on
somewhat surer ground. In some ways, Violet is rather unbelievable
character -- I found her complete naivete about the workings of the music
business hard to swallow, and I kept wondering why she didn't just go out
and find a singer to collaborate with (it's not like every songwriter has
a good voice, after all!). But Perabo manages to make Violet work; I look
forward to the day that she gets to sink her teeth into a more substantial
character. Garcia, for his part, demonstrates great comic timing and a
strong on-screen presence.
The script by Gina Wendkos -- another relative unknown -- has a number of
funny moments and nice little touches, like Kevin's comic book habit
("It's manly," he insists, while Violet counters that "it's sweet"). But
it also hews very closely to all the genre cliches, and at times
feels obscenely contrived. Plot developments jump out of nowhere for the
express purpose of manipulating our emotions, like a scene (never referred
to again) where Violet's apartment is broken into, and the emergency money
left her by a friend is stolen. Great movies slip such incidents
seamlessly into the flow of the film. That you can so easily see the
puppeteer's strings in "Coyote Ugly" is indicative of how much Wendkos and
first-time director David McNally still have to learn.
I was also disappointed that, given the movie's title, the Coyote Ugly bar
and its staff was used more as a backdrop than a pivotal element. The
bartenders, even Lil, are permitted very little development, which is
unfortunate because I got the impression that there were some good
characters and enjoyable performances lurking there, trying to break out.
It's unfortunate that more attention is instead paid to Goodman's
character, who is never much more than a convenient plot device. Although
Goodman is always fun to watch, he's pretty much cruising in neutral here,
playing his role like the first cousin of his Dan Conner character from
the sitcom "Roseanne".
"Coyote Ugly", then, is a fun, lightweight, but ultimately forgettable
entry into the summer roster. For the many neophytes who contributed to
it, it may well be looked back on in ten years' time as a good beginning
which paved the way to much better things.
If nothing else, viewers should keep an eye out for a cameo appearance by
Tara McLean, one of Canada's best but most underpromoted 
singer-songwriters, as an open mic night singer early in the film.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/CoyoteUgly.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
COYOTE UGLY (2000)
Rated PG-13; running time 94 minutes
Genre: Drama [I guess.]
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0200550
Official site: http://studio.go.com/movies/coyoteugly/index.html
Written by: Gina Wendkos, Jeff Nathanson
Directed by: David McNally
Cast: Piper Perabo, Maria Bello, Adam Garcia, Izabella Miko,
John Goodman, Tyra Banks, Bridget Moynahan, Melanie Lynskey,
Adam Alexi-Malle
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamscoyote.html
Oh, I had all manner of Spiffy Things to say about COYOTE UGLY in this
customary Leadoff Bit of mine - but I think I'll just cut to the chase
with the one thing that kept overwhelming me throughout my whole time
watching it:  **YAWN**
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Fame!  I wanna live forev...oops, wrong flick.
A mere 42 miles away from The Big Apple is still too far a distance to
travel for Violet Sandford (Piper Perabo), a semi-orphaned songwriter
who loves her Dad (John Goodman), but needs to prove that she can Make
It There.  Violet strikes out on her own, the naivete that surely comes
from living a mere 42 miles away from The Big Apple, firmly in place.
Of course, she soon learns that in the Mean Streets, it's a Dog-Eat-Dog
world - and if she is indeed going to Make It, she'll have to develop a
fiercer Bite.  That, and stop being so gullible: a trait that made her
fall for the oldest trick in the "new girl in the Big City" book when
she's led to believe that smooth-talking busboy Kevin O'Donnell (Adam
Garcia) is a music club owner.  Though even that connection might not
have done her much good: see, she has this big stage fright Issue.
Seems like Violet just can't get a break.
Enter the women of Coyote Ugly, a "bar" that sells more Funky Diva
Attitude than it does booze.  When Violet overhears Coyote Divas Zoe
(Tyra Banks), Cammie (Izabella Miko), and Rachel (Bridget Moynahan),
talking about how well they're paid for doing their combination
bartender/dancer/Funky Diva Routine, Violet convinces bar owner Lil
(Maria Bello) to let her become a Coyote, which might possibly become
the avenue for her break into Show Bidness.
And on tomorrow's episode of "All My Young And Restless Children"...
The Upshot:
Sorry, fellas; I know that many of y'all were chompin' at the bit to
find a non-violent antidote to the ubiquitous Chick Flicks that you seem
to think dominate movie screens.  But to those who think that some
anorexic-looking Victoria's Secret-wearing ubermodels shaking their
booties on a bar provides that long-needed salvo, I ask you: is that
really the best you could do?
And I say it for a reason other than the one those of you who liked this
flick, might like to believe.  Nope, I ain't hatin' on those ubermodels
because they're Beautiful.  If I could be said to be hatin' on them at
all, it's because "Coyote's" characters and their Issues were downright
BORING.  Snooze-worthy, ABC Afterschool Special-boring.  And the worst
thing about the movie trailers wasn't that they gave away the whole plot
["Plot?  We don' need no stinkin' plot!"]; it's that the trailers pretty
much showed all the movie's titsnass - which was the best, and most
briefly shown, thing about this otherwise trite flick.
I can just picture that first meeting by this movie's Powers That Be,
when they heard about the real-life Coyote Ugly bar..."Hey guys!", I can
hear them saying; "there's this great tittie bar over yonder where the
girls jump up on the bar and get down, get funky, get loose, like TGI
Fridays On Steroids, woohoo!  Yeah, and they pour more liquor on
themselves and on their customers than into the liquor glasses!  Doesn't
it sound Kewl?  Shouldn't we make a Movie of it?  Huh, storyline?  Who
needs a storyline?  Let's just throw a few shots of titsnass in there,
that'll make the horny 14-year-olds start buying tickets, yeah!  Ok, ok,
I guess we need some type of storyline, gosh darn it.  Lesseee...nah,
let's not bother with telling the story of how these girls came to be
Coyotes; we just need 'em for tittielation.  I got it: let's throw in an
Obligatory Love Story between Violet and Aussie Dude Kevin!  And let's
have Kevin's past be Mysterious!  And let's not forget to throw in
something about her mother's Tragic Past and how it becomes Violet's
Performance Anxiety Issue!  And hey, d'ya think we might be able to work
those backstreetnsync98degreesboys in there somewhere?  No...ok then,
let's just roll with what we've got, we'll make a Mint!"
And as is usually the case, the short-sightedness of Hollywood types
that see only dollar signs in front of their eyes when they're reading a
script, screwed this pooch.  They could've had an interesting, yet
entertaining, look at the Stuff that made the real Coyote Ugly what it
is [from all reports lately, a tourist attraction overrun with
mouthbreathers who can't differentiate reality from movies.  But I have
little sympathy for the bar; hell, what'd they expect?]  "Who needs to
bother with that real-life thing?", Mr. Hollywood probably said; "We got
titsnass!"  Which would've been fine - except they didn't even have much
of *that*; certainly not much more than they showed in the giveaway
trailers.  And minus the titsnass, the movie was one big snoozer.
The actors, confined within the limitations of the script and direction,
["Ok girls, shake your booties! Ok, Cut!  Ok Piper, you and Adam do
something Mushy And Romantic here!  Ok, Cut!] perform their dubious
tasks adequately, though Piper Perabo just does nothing for me.  She
played naive as Just Plain Dumb, and the results of each of her actions
were telegraphed a mile away [show of hands for those who know the
answer to this one: what happens when you let your best friend store a
big wad o' dough in your paper-thin-walled apartment's refrigerator?
Thought so.]  John Goodman's Big Lug Dad was amusing at first, but
eventually wore as thin as Violet's walls.  Bridget Moynahan showed some
gusto as Scary Spice...er, Rachel, but it all really amounted to lame
setups to show how well Violet could Overcome.  Only Maria Bello showed
up with any semblance of subtlety; her Lil was understated at first (if
she was one of "Charlie's Angels", she'd be The Smart One), and I had
high hopes for her.  Until the writers dashed my hopes upon the Wall Of
Happy Endings.  bah.
Hey, I don't see nuttin' wrong/with a little bump-n-grind.  But too
little, in a movie that's played up to be about Strong Chicks Owning
Their Sexuality (but doesn't even come close) just grinds my gizzard.
Forget the Brittany Spears angle and the dialogue even a porno writer
would eschew; lets have more tittielation, Mr. Hollywood!
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
I have to give the filmmakers some credit in their adding a new twist on
Diva's "Brotha Rule" in the form of Tyra Banks' character Zoe [though, I
reckon that should really be the "Sista Rule", eh?]. And as a bonus (as
well as an aside to Diva and Tanya), I got my first taste of the "Spot
The Spot" game, in the form of the ObBlack wedding guest dancing with
one of White guests (and trust me: it was mere Background Noise.  If
those two characters were dating one another, I'm Barbara Bush).  You're
right, Diva and Tanya: playing "Spot The Spot" can be fun!
[I'll explain later, via email, to those who are curious about whathell
"Spot The Spot" means]
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Take away the titsnass, and you have an "ABC Afternoon Special" story.
They should do all the gawkers a favor, and wrap all the titsnass up in
a bright red 15-minute-peepshow bow.  Better yet, save the peepshow
quarter, and just watch the commercials.  Same difference.
COYOTE UGLY (rating: flashing redlight):
Christina Agiluerra, Brittany Spears, Leann Rhimes...same difference.

Author
Chad Polenz
There's been so many movies about dreamers who have to face reality and can't 
deal with it. "Coyote Ugly" is kind of the opposite - the heroine shoots for 
the stars and makes it without trying very hard. Original idea, but the 
story's execution is not. 
Piper Perabo stars as Violet - a young girl from New Jersey who writes songs 
but has a bad case of stagefright. She figures she'll succeed if she moves to 
New York City and gives a tape of her music to some producer there and things 
will happen. There's quite a few scenes of Violet getting rejected over and 
over and they're quite funny. You're either laughing at how naive she is or 
how naive the filmmakers are to think we'll sympathize with her. She's not a 
ditz, but it's really hard to believe anyone could think getting a record 
contract is as easy as walking into a building and asking the receptionist to 
give the company president a tape. 
Eventually Violet ends up getting an "audition" to work in the all-girl bar 
"Coyote Ugly." It's a wild bar with some very sexy barmaids who dance on the 
bar and set things on fire and spray the crowd with water and basically act 
like strippers only they keep their clothes on. Twice Violet screws up and 
twice she redeems herself to the amazement of Lil (Maria Bello), the owner 
and manager who's kind of a prick for the position she's in. 
The middle act of the film centers around Violet's work at the bar and her 
developing relationship with Kevin (Adam Garcia) - an Australian guy who 
keeps flattering and impressing her but never opens up about himself. The two 
make a cute couple until Kevin gets into a scrum at the bar trying to protect 
Violet from some drunken horny guys. 
That's the thing with romantic comedies - they just can't stay cute and 
funny, there has to be that element of drama that's rather unnecessary. More 
dramatic subplots keep popping up throughout the second half including a 
serious conflict between Violet and her father (John Goodman) and her attempt 
conquer her stagefright. Do I really need to elaborate on the third act and 
the ending? 
That's what bogs the movie down - we can see through it and easily make 
predictions. The characters need more background and color, the screenplay 
needs less plot cliches and more scenes of pure dialogue and direction needs 
more focus. What we end up with is merely satisfactory. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-3CE5-1508DD89-39CFE751-prod3 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Laura Clifford
"Coyote Ugly" is an enigma. With its bevy of babe bartenders one might be led
to believe that this is a T&A "Cocktail." The pretty, principally femme cast is
sure nice to look at and there is the promise of some skin. But it's a promise
unfulfilled. That's because "Coyote Ugly" is, in reality, a chick flick
masquerading as a guy movie. So, gentlemen, be warned.
>From the press material, "Coyote Ugly" is "a sexy, romantic comedy [that] is
one girl's wild adventure in the big city." If that doesn't sound like a blurb 
for a girly movie, I don't know what is. I wasn't even fooled when we enter the 
club, Coyote Ugly, and see Zoe (super model Tyra Banks), Rachel (Bridget 
Moynahan) and Cammie (Izabella Miko) shake their stuff atop the bar to blaring 
rock music. My practiced cinematic eye noticed that, while bare mid-drifts and 
shoulders abound, there is no actual skin (the aforementioned T&A) to be seen.
What the film gives us is a routine, but sweet, rags-to-riches tale of a young
woman from the wilds of New Jersey who heads to the Big Apple to find a career
as a songsmith. But, for Violet Sanford (Piper Perabo) (and nearly everyone
else in the world) the industry is an unpenetrable monolith that will only 
allow you to break in to the biz if you have an agent - and you can only get 
an agent if you already broke into the business. She is totally discouraged 
that she can't get her songs sung, making her quest seem a failure. Then, her 
apartment is broken into and what little she has is stolen. It's a tough life 
for the babe-in-the-woods and it looks like she'll have to head back home to 
the security of her father, Bill (John Goodman). First, though, she meets a
handsome young man, Kevin (Adam Garcia), and, at the same time, gets a tip to 
check out bar named Coyote Ugly for a job.
Coyote Ugly is owned and operated under the iron hand of Lil (Maria Bello), a
good-looking, tough-as-nails lady who oversees the goings on in the bar and
with her popular barmaids, babes all. The girls shag drinks for thirsty patrons 
at an astonishing rate, line dance on the bar and, generally, have a good time 
making money. Violet, nicknamed "Jersey" by Lil, is reluctant, at best, while 
working the busy bar. She is almost fired by Lil, more than once, but the owner 
sees something in Violet and keeps her on. Meanwhile, Violet and Kevin get 
kissy face and he helps her overcome the stage fright that keeps her from 
becoming a star.
You can guess where this adolescent "A Star Is Born" is heading right from the
start. First time scripter Gina Wendkos uses her first-hand experience in the
real Coyote Ugly to get the mood and raucous commotion of the bar and the
sequences there are slickly done and exciting - we do have gorgeous women in
slinky outfits dancing for us, after all. The rest of the story is pretty well
traveled stuff and offers nothing original. "Flash Dance," "Fame" and other
music-based inspirational flicks came to mind while watching "Coyote Ugly."
Piper Perabo has a sweet, almost virginal, girl-next-door presence with her
ever present smile and plucky, if a bit too tentative for someone trying to 
make it in the NYC music biz, demeanor. A more aggressive character would have 
been more appropriate, I think, but that would detract from the fairy tale feel 
the filmmakers are going for. Newcomer Adam Garcia, another transplanted
Australian, is good looking and provides the right note to his Kevin, a really, 
really nice, hard working kid. Of the Coyotes, Maria Bello comes off as the 
most three-dimensional character in the bar, making Lil a tough-but-fair sort. 
John Goodman is solid as the caring Dad and isn't given enough screen time, but 
the actor makes the most of it. The girls in Coyote Ugly are all gorgeous. I'm 
not sure they can act, but who cares?
First-time helmer David McNally does a decent job moving things along,
maintaining a brisk pace that keeps things from dragging. It helps that he has
the support of director of photography Amir Mokri ("Slamdance"), who gives the
film a good look, throughout, and lends some excitement to the lensing within
the bar. Production designer Jon Hutman ("The Horse Whisperer") gives Coyote
Ugly and New York a look that more idealistic an better looking than the real
thing. Costume designer Marlene Stewart ("Enemy of the State") does a terrific
job of giving the impression, for the guys in the audience, of scanty clothes,
but actually pulls off a certain unexpected modesty.
"Coyote Ugly" is decent, chick-oriented fun that has enough eye candy for the
guys to keep them from complaining too much afterwards. I give it a B-.
I thought this was going to be the cinematic equivalent of a visit to Hooters,
but it's really just a more PC 90's version of the 1980's "Flashdance" by way 
of "Cocktail" - "Flashdance" for the artiste with a dream combined with
female empowerment motif and "Cocktail" for the flashy bar moves combined with 
profession endangers romance plot.
Violet Sanford (Piper Perabo, "The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle") takes
care of her dad (John Goodman) in New Jersey but is ready to take a stab
at her dream of moving to New York City to become a songwriter.  Best buddy
Gloria (Melanie Lynskey, "Heavenly Creatures") helps her make the move, lends
her some cash and returns to their hometown.  Soon Violet finds out that the
only way she can get anyone to listen to her songs is to sing them herself,
but she suffers from the same stagefright that nipped her deceased mom's
songwriting career in the bud.
Violet gets hoodwinked by a club bouncer into thinking the grill guy is
the music promoter and pushes a cassette on Kevin O'Donnell (Adam Garcia, 
"Wilde").  The slick Australian tries to use the situation as a pickup,
but soon he's smitten by both the girl and her talent.
Violet hits bottom when her crummy walkup is ransacked and Gloria's monetary
gift is stolen.  Desperate for a job, she finds herself getting an 'audition'
from Lil (Maria Bello, "Permanent Midnight"), the tough cookie owner of
Coyote Ugly, a bar where the vampy barmaids rule the roost, dance on the
bar and swing from exposed ceiling pipes.  This provides the means for 
Violet (nicknamed Jersey by Lil) to come out of her shell and find her voice,
but also sets up conflict with her protective dad and new boyfriend Kevin.
Written by Gina Wendkos (TV's "Wiseguy"), "Coyote Ugly" capitilzes on a 
real New York hot spot while going through familar, predictable paces.  Some
of the dialogue, especially in early scenes, is stiff and unnatural ('Bless
me father, for I have sinned' says Violet as she dons a crop top for her
second night as a Coyote - I think this was supposed to be deep.)  However,
as the film progresses it does manage to engage on a sheer entertainment
level for a number of reasons.
This could be a starmaking vehicle for Piper Perabo, whose fresh faced beauty
and wide smile resemble Alanis Morissette crossed with Julia Roberts.  That 
said, producer Jerry Bruckheimer's "Flashdance" only took then newcomer 
Jennifer Beals so far.  Perabo is certainly likeable, however, once she gets 
past some awkward scripting.  (Country star Leann Rimes provides Violet's 
appropriately Lillith Fairish vocals and gets a cameo at the film's end.)  
Adam Garcia is a find as her romantic foil - he's streetwise against her 
naivety, yet sexy, sensitive and supportive.  Maria Bello is a standout as 
tough bar owner Lil - she can handle just about anything and looks good doing 
it.
The film is well choreographed (Travis Payne) and tightly editted (William
Boldenberg, "The Insider").  The bar scenes snap, crackle and pop, whether
customers are being hosed down for ordering water or just gaping in awe at
the help gyrating above them (the ladies get their due, too, when Coyotes
decide to auction off available men at their whim).  Rest assured, all this
is presented as good, clean fun.
The other Coyotes - Cammie (Polish actress Izabella Miko in her U.S. film 
debut), Rachel (Bridget Moynahan, Natasha of TV's "Sex and the City") and
Zoe (Tyra Banks of Victoria Secrets' catalogue) are merely types, with
Zoe departing the action when Jersey comes aboard.  Goodman is sweet as
Violet's dad even if their relationship plays a bit too good to be true for 
real life.  New Zealander Lynskey is solid and sports a mean Jersey accent
as Violet's ultra supportive friend.
"Coyote Ugly" isn't great cinema by a long shot, but it's a summer flick
with a hip soundtrack that achieves its modest goals.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
     It's 1993.  Some Hollywood bigshot reads an article in GQ magazine
about a nutty bar called the Coyote Ugly in Manhattan.  They only have
women bartenders, see, and they, like, dance on the bar with fire and
stuff!  And they don't serve water.  If someone orders water they hose
down the crowd!  Holy mackerel, what a nutty place!
     And then someone says, What a nutty place... for a movie!  Cart in
a screenwriter who invents a story about, say, a puppy-eyed girl from
New Jersey who winds up working at the Ugly while trying to make it as a
songwriter.  Make up some obstacles: she has stage fright, she gets
robbed, and her dad is fat.  Pop in a troubled love interest.  Toss in a
bunch of heaving-bosomed women to dance on the bar, get Jerry
Bruckheimer to produce, spend $40 million on advertising, and the
movie's done!
     But oops, someone forgot to make the movie any good along the way. 
Cliché-infested and so utterly tired and worn out as to make itself
appear a relic of the early 1980s, Coyote Ugly is just plain bad.  It
almost seems like they decided to take a real-life place and tried to
build a movie around it.  Er, uh, wait a minute...
     Piper Perabo, one of the most frightening newcomers to hit
Hollywood in the last decade, plays our young heroine, who faces
obstacle after obstacle en route to what must ultimately become
ridiculous success beyond her wildest dreams.  Note to Piper: Let's see
if we can't dye the eyebrows to match the hair, shall we?  Perabo's role
is so badly acted it would be cause for raspberries galore were it not
for an even worse script.
     Newcomers like Adam Garcia (the love interest) and wannabes like
Maria Bello (the bar owner) do their best with lines like "I could tell
you, but I'd have to kill you," but to no avail.  Their hearts aren't in
the movie, and for good reason: No nudity.
     Er, I mean: A really awful story that feels ripped from The Bold
and the Beautiful.  Does fat dad (John Goodman) really need to be
hospitalized to build drama?  Would someone really rob poor Piper's
rodent-infested Chinatown apartment?  Would anyone really stop fighting
in an all-out bar brawl to listen to the girl sing-along with the
jukebox?  I'd say all that was missing in Coyote Ugly was a wedding, but
they squeezed one of those in there too.
     For those not following along, Bruckheimer is essentially trying to
remake his own Flashdance, which made an incredible $95 million back in
1983.  They even dump water on the bartenders, "Maniac" style.  And I
think it's safe to predict that Perabo's career will likely follow that
of her predecessor, Jennifer Beals.  In other words:  Hello, Cinemax!
     Come to think of it, that's probably where most people will end up
seeing this movie.
http://studio.go.com/movies/coyoteugly/synopsis.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
This film can now officially be crowned as the first "trailer-tease" that I
have ever witnessed. What's a "trailer-tease", you may ask? Well, consider
another derogatory term that some men use to describe some women who tease
them sexually and then give them NOTHING in return (starts with a C, boys
and girls). Of course, my first clue should've been the PG-13 rating.
It's sad too, because this really could have been a great movie had they
concentrated more on the bar, the chicks, the sex, the swearing, the
drinking, and all of the other fun stuff that the trailer makes you think is
packed into this movie. Unfortunately, the movie itself concentrates more on
the sappy ho-hum plot about this small-town girl trying to make it in the
big city. Yawn...
PLOT:
A small-town girl moves to the big city with hopes and dreams of making it
as a singer/songwriter. But when times get tough, she gets a job at a local,
rowdy bar and starts kinda liking her new digs. At the same time, she falls
for a guy who's intent on helping her singing career take off.
CRITIQUE:
Uneven. Splashed with various energetic bar scenes, this movie loses power
when focusing on its sappy plotline. Its awesome soundtrack makes you want
to get up, toss a few shots back and grab your neighbor by the hand, but not
before the awful music sung by the main character drains us right out of it
again. Boy, I sooooo wish this movie took place entirely in the bar, focused
more on all of the girls and included some authentic swearing and sexual
gratuity (okay, maybe not so much the last two items, but definitely the
first two!). Unfortunately, the high energy of the bar, its music, its
bartenders and its clientele are a lot of fun to watch when they do frolic
across the big screen, but the sad-sack love story and regurgitated "I wanna
be a star" byline, just zoom you right back down this rollercoaster ride.
And where the hell was Tyra Banks?!? How dare the filmmakers spray her
assets across the posters, the website, the TV commercials and barely give
her ten minutes of screen time? More Tyra, people!! And what about the rest
of the girls? They're all so pretty but what's their story? God knows,
because this movie focuses solely on the lead big-lipped girl named Piper
Perabo, a semi-interesting character, who unfortunately is not enough to
carry an entire movie.
I will offer my thumb up to this film's extremely potent soundtrack, the
excellent gritty look and feel of New York City, the bar itself, and its
high, high energy level when in the bar! Too bad that my thumb has to do a
loop-de-loop for the film's stinky "real music" sung by the lead, the
by-the-numbers story of her trying to "make it in the big city" and the lack
of character development for any of the other girls! (they're people,
too...sniff, sniff). If you really want to see a good movie about a
small-town girl trying to break into the music biz, rent THE THING CALLED
LOVE, a wonderful drama featuring River Phoenix's final performance, and
thank me in the morning (Note: the music in that film is country...you have
been warned). Overall, I really liked the performances in this film: Maria
Bello was perfect as the tough lady running the unruly bar, Perabo was good,
but after seeing her in ROCKY & BULLWINKLE, I'm hoping that she gets rid of
that "confused, shy" look real fast, cause it's already getting old. The
Australian love-interest was also effective and John Goodman perfect as the
overweight daddy with a big heart. And look for a very funny scene featuring
Ellen Cleghorne as a pissed-off secretary. You go, girl!
In the end, I would probably recommend this movie to anyone who doesn't mind
being titillated for little bits and pieces, only to be brought back down by
the reality of the very hokey plot. Great fashions, great soundtrack...the
bar scenes alone might actually be worth it, but prepare to take those blue
balls home, fellas!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Pay close attention to the man portraying a photographer in this film
because he is none other than ARMAGEDDON, THE ROCK and PEARL HARBOR
director, and Jerry Bruckheimer favorite, Michael Bay.
Yes, there really is a COYOTE UGLY bar in New York City. It is located on
1st Avenue in the heart of the East Village, and has been around for about
10 years. The bar in the movie is similar in design to the real one, but
many other drinking establishments were visited in Manhattan and surrounding
areas, in order to devise the look of the film's fictionalized bar (wow, I
wonder whose "difficult" job that was?).
All the singing done by Piper Perabo in this movie was voiced by singer
LeAnn Rimes, who also makes a cameo appearance near the end of the film.
This is director David McNally's motion picture debut. He joins us from the
world of television commercials (a Bruckheimer prodigy from TV
commercials...who would have guessed?), with his most popular one featuring
a certain "Lobster" in a Budweiser commercial. He dropped out of college to
tour with his popular Canadian rock band "The Pinups" (Uuhm, I'm Canadian
but I ain't ever heard of them) and even directed a couple of Celine Dion
music videos (but we forgive him, don't we?).
THE COYOTES:
Piper Perabo won the title role in this film after an extensive
cross-country search. She's a graduate of Ohio University, and was actually
born and raised in Toms River, New Jersey.
Maria Bello is probably best known for her role as the passionate and
headstrong Dr. Anna Del Amico on TV's "ER".
Izabella Miko makes her American motion picture debut with this picture,
even though she has been working virtually her entire life. Born and raised
in Poland, she aspired to become a professional dancer and at the age of
seven began studying at the Chopin Music School.
Bridget Moynahan is probably best known for her recurring role of Mr. Big's
fiancee Natasha on the HBO series "Sex in the City".
Tyra Banks, probably the best-known of the coyotes (and for her coyotes!),
is an international fashion icon whose image can be seen around the world
(so why not give her more screen-time, you dummies!?). She is a model, an
actress and an author.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Coyote_Ugly_ (PG-13) no stars (out of ****)
To give credit where credit is due, the team over at Disney sure knew
how to market _Coyote_Ugly_.  Five women wearing the best "fuck me"
expressions they could get away with on a PG-13 ad pout seductively on
the poster, huddled up very close together as the tagline teases,
"Tonight, they're calling the shots."  The trailer takes the pandering a
step further, showing these women in action at the titular New York
nightspot, where not only do they serve the drinks, they also serve as
the in-house entertainment: dancing atop the counters, groping each
other, lighting fires, and--on really special occasions--spraying each
other with water and splashing about.
With a promotional campaign like that, the studio had no trouble
attracting long lines of recruited seatfillers to sweeten the press
screening audience.  But as tantalizing as the advertising is, it begs
one eensy-weensy question: just what exactly is this film _about_?  As
the film as it wheezed its hackneyed way to its clichéd conclusion, it
became plainly obvious why Disney went out of its way to skirt (yes, pun
intended) the issue: _Coyote_Ugly_ is, quite simply, one of the corniest
movies I have ever seen.
While there are a few high-energy bar scenes (more on those later)
strategically placed to wake dozing audiences along the way,
_Coyote_Ugly_ is actually the story of Violet Sanford (Piper Perabo), a
21-year-old from small-town New Jersey who moves to New York City in
hopes of becoming a songwriter.  But reality comes crashing down hard for
this bumpkin, and soon she finds herself with only a couple of dollars
and a lot of unwanted demo tapes to her name.  Enter Zoe (Tyra Banks),
Cammie (Izabella Miko), and Rachel (Bridget Moynahan), the women of
Coyote Ugly--whom Violet encounters at an all-night diner as they
celebrate the imminent departure of Zoe, who is off to (no joke) law
school.  Some convenient turns of the plot later, Violet (now nicknamed
"Jersey") finds herself behind and on top of the counter at the insanely
popular saloon under the watchful eye of tough-as-nails owner Lil (Maria
Bello, who must now be kicking herself for leaving _ER_)--and the amorous
watch of Kevin O'Donnell (Adam Garcia), a fry cook desperately  smitten
with Violet.
Anyone familiar with the oeuvre of producer Jerry Bruckheimer (as in a
number of his efforts, the director here, music video vet David McNally,
is but a faceless puppet) knows that action is where his interests and
strengths lie, not anything resembling human emotion.  So--all salacious
reasons aside--_Coyote_Ugly_ only exhibits any signs of life during the
slickly staged and edited bar scenes.  These are the only scenes with
real energy and spark, and--not surprisingly--Bruckheimer and McNally
seem the slightest bit interested in what's going on (audiences will
likely share that sentiment).
Unfortunately, it's the "emotion" that drives the script by Gina Wendkos
(rewritten many times over by a number of uncredited scribes, including
Kevin Smith--who, I must stress, is _not_ responsible for the labored
comic book references in the film).  The press notes call the film "a
sexy romantic comedy," which in this case means trotting out all the
usual clichés in Violet and Kevin's romance.  Violet's ambition drives a
wedge between them, as does his lack of it; and there's the trusty
climactic moment where she catches him in a not-what-it-seems moment with
an unknown blonde.  Also intended to add an emotional dimension is
Violet's relationship with her widowed father, toll booth attendant Bill
(John Goodman).  Goodman is funny and warm, but he's at the mercy of a
script riddled with such "dramatic" dialogue such as "This is the first
time I've ever been ashamed of you!" and the powerful "But you're my
daughter!"
Then again, just about everything in _Coyote_Ugly_ is hard to believe,
the most unbelievable being the fact that a worldwide talent search
resulted in the casting of Perabo.  Granted, her character already lacks
credibility as written--Violet believes she's cursed with "stage fright
DNA" (her deceased singer mother had the same problem); the great
"talent" we're supposed to respect and root for is her ability to churn
out assembly line bubblegum pop--but Perabo does nothing to remedy that. 
She smiles; she shakes her groove thing; she crinkles up her face in a
vain attempt to squeeze out some tears.  I don't know what exactly you
call that, but I know it's not called "acting"...
...making her the perfect "star" to anchor _Coyote_Ugly_, which
practically dares the every viewer not to hang his or her head in
disbelief at every turn.  My breaking point finally came around midfilm,
when Violet, on the roof of her apartment building, guitar and keyboard
in tow, struggles to write a folksy ballad.  Suddenly, her concentration
is broken by the hip-hop music booming from an apartment across the
street.  After a pause, she starts singing and has a eureka--her lyrics
fit the beat!  Excited, she runs to her keyboard and starts playing
along.  What talent!  What brilliance!  What complete, utter bullshit!
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
John Beachem
Violet Sanford (Piper Perabo) has just reached an important decision. She's 
going to leave her small New Jersey town where she's lived her whole life, 
and move to New York city so she can become a song writer. Violet's father, 
Bill (John Goodman), is less than pleased by the idea, but wishes her luck. 
So Violet heads off, finding that the music industry isn't quite as easy to 
break into as she expected and winds up searching for a job. She hears about 
a bar called Coyote Ugly, where the waitresses pull in several hundred 
dollars a night. After speaking with the owner, Lil (Maria Bello), Violet 
gets a job working with the flirtatious Cammie (Izabella Miko); the 
practicing lawyer, Zoe (Tyra Banks); and Rachael (Bridget Moynahan), who 
hates Violet's guts from the start (for reasons which are never explained). 
Violet also meets a slightly goofy Australian, named Kevin O'Donnell (Adam 
Garcia), who she falls for immediately. Violet tries to fit in at the bar, 
working as a coyote, but at the same time all she wants to do is write her 
songs. The problem is, in order to get her songs published, she has to sing 
them herself, and she finds she has the worst case of stage-fright 
imaginable.
I know that plot summary may have sounded involved, but the film is 
basically two things: girls dancing on a bar top; and sappy, coming of age 
melodrama. One of the biggest problems with "Coyote Ugly" is that, like all 
teen movies of the past ten years, it is so bogged down by cliche after 
cliche that it saps any enjoyment out of the movie. It's hard to have fun at 
a movie when you know exactly how everything is going to turn out well in 
advance. In fact, the lack of any surprises is really the only thing holding 
"Coyote Ugly" back. It has a decent enough cast, a somewhat interesting 
premise, a soundtrack I'm sure some audience members will love (though I'm 
not one of them), and the sort of cheesy romance that teenagers fawn all 
over. Yet glancing around the audience at my showing, I noticed that most of 
the teenagers this movie was directed at seemed bored out of their minds. 
Granted, when the girls were dancing on the bar, the guys in the audience 
were at full attention; but between these scenes, when the action was away 
from the bar and the melodramatic elements set in, peoples' eyes seemed to 
become heavy (I know mine did) Chatter would start up amongst members of the 
audience until the action returned to the bar. So the breakdown is: girls in 
bar, movie is somewhat entertaining; girls out of bar, movie is a bore.
Piper Perabo, previously seen in the horrendous "The Adventures of Rocky and 
Bullwinkle", seems to have a bizarre dilemma facing her. In Bullwinkle she 
was just about the cutest actress I'd ever seen, but she seemed incapable of 
acting. In "Coyote Ugly" some of her cuteness seems to have vanished, but 
she managed to gain some acting talent. Maybe someday she'll reach an 
equilibrium. The supporting actresses, save Maria Bello, are never given 
enough screen time to make much of an impression. Maria Bello turns in an 
okay performance, but she was far more entertaining as Rosie in "Payback". 
Newcomer Adam Garcia, on the other hand, delivers quite a good comic turn as 
the requisite boyfriend from the big city. He actually seemed to possess 
quite a good sense of comic timing, and I hope a better future script will 
allow him to shine. Finally, we have the great John Goodman. Goodman has 
proven, time and again, that he is one of the best, most underrated comic 
actors working in Hollywood (see "The Big Lebowski" if you want proof). 
Whenever he's on screen in "Coyote Ugly" (which happens a lot less often 
than it should have), the movie shines. Whenever he's gone, you'll find 
yourself checking your watch, waiting for him to come back (either that or 
checking it, waiting for the movie to end. I always get those two confused).
As I sat and watched the girls' activities in the bar, several questions 
continuously ran through my mind. First, and perhaps most important, how do 
these girls serve anyone when they seem to do nothing but dance on the bar 
and humiliate the customers? Second, is this actually the kind of place that 
would be popular? Don't get me wrong, watching the girls dance is nice, but 
they also do things like spray water in peoples' faces, cut peoples' hair 
off, knock the occasional customer out, and other humiliating activities. 
Maybe it's just me, but I wouldn't want to hang out there. Third, how can 
they afford to stay open when more alcohol seemed to end up on the bar, on 
the girls, or on the customers, than was actually paid for. Finally, how 
could this bar be allowed to stay open when there were constant brawls 
breaking out, fires being lit in a building filled with alcohol, and far too 
many people inside for it to be considered safe by public officials (such as 
the cops and fire marshals who stop by). These types of plot inconsistencies 
probably won't bother everyone, but they sure grated on my nerves.
Obviously, one of the primary elements to "Coyote Ugly" is going to be the 
music, since the film purports itself to be about girls dancing. While the 
music wasn't to my liking, being comprised entirely of popular songs by 
people like LeAnn Rimes. I prefer my music more like the kind found in 
"Gladiator", but that wouldn't have been quite appropriate to this film. 
Still, the audience seemed to be enjoying the soundtrack (though they could 
have just been enjoying watching the girls dance), and I'm ashamed to admit 
that I caught my foot tapping at one point near the finale. By the way, what 
are the odds of "I Will Survive" being a major song in two movies released 
within a week of each other? Weird, huh? One thing I was most worried about 
after seeing the previews was the movie's dialogue. Thankfully the dialogue 
was bad ("So what do you do when you realize all your dreams have come 
true?" ouch), but usually not painfully so (for painful dialogue, see "The 
Perfect Storm"). There's an "R" rating hiding behind the "PG-13" stamped on 
the front of "Coyote Ugly", but Jerry Bruckheimer keeps things carefully 
restrained, most likely so as not to lose any audience that can't attend an 
"R" rated film (not that that stopped anyone from going to the stupid "Scary 
Movie"). "Coyote Ugly" runs 100 minutes, but it shouldn't have been any 
longer than 90. I'd recommend the film to fans of teen movies and give it a 
slightly generous three out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
