Title
Review for Careful (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael Brooke
Directed by Guy Maddin.
Written by George Toles and Guy Maddin.
Canada, 1992, colour, 100 mins.
Starring Kyle McCulloch, Gosia Dobrowolska, Paul Cox.
     There are few film-makers whose work is instantly recognisable
from a five-second clip taken out of context, but Canadian director Guy
Maddin joined this select group with his very first feature, the
black-and-white silent film TALES FROM THE GIMLI HOSPITAL (1988), a
series of shaggy-dog stories told by hospital patients suffering from a
strange disease that causes their skin to crack.  ARCHANGEL (1990) was
more ambitious, an epic set in the trenches of World War I, still in
black-and-white, but this time with a post-synchronised soundtrack.
     On the surface, CAREFUL (1992) is a tribute to German "mountain
films" of the late 1920s.  Future director Leni Riefenstahl started her
career as an actress specialising in this genre (Hitler was a fan), in
which strapping young lads and lasses go up Alpine peaks for thrilling
adventures.  Despite the surface pastiche (including a deliberately
crackly soundtrack and colour that looks like hand-tinted monochrome),
Maddin's film couldn't be more different from its sources.  The opening
narration sets the scene: the people of the Alpine village of Tolzbad
show obsessive caution at all times, lest a sudden noise or movement
cause avalanches to come and destroy them.
     Needless to say, this repressed environment is a natural breeding
ground for secret passions and obsessions.  Johan neglects his studies
at the famous Tolzbad Butler Gymnasium (Tolzbad's stifled atmosphere
lends itself to servility) because of his incestuous obsession with his
mother Zenaida.  His fiancee Klara is similarly infatuated with her
father, but he spurns her because of his lust for her sister
Sieglinde.  And Zenaida has a long-standing relationship with the
mysterious Count Knotkers, who lives in the remote castle in the
mountains, and who hires Grigorss, Johan's brother, as a butler.
Watching over all this is Franz, the cobwebbed older brother of Johan
and Grigorss, shut up in the attic because of the painful memories he
evokes.  And he is in turn regularly visited by the ghost of his
father, a blind swan-feeder, who gives him premonitions of terrible
things.  But Franz is both mute and possibly insane, so the ghostly
warnings go unheeded--and this melodramatic stew predictably leads to
misunderstandings, duels and suicidal plunges galore.
     What is fascinating about CAREFUL is the way that director (and
co-writer, cinematographer, editor and designer) Maddin shows the same
degree of obsession behind the camera that his characters show in front
of it.  Directors who love old films so much they want to imitate them
are nothing new, but Maddin loves them so much he wants his films to
look like old prints of old films (where most films deteriorate through
repeated projection, CAREFUL improves!)--which is, after all, how
Maddin (currently in his thirties) would have seen German mountain
films in the first place.  It's more than pastiche--you get the
impression that Maddin genuinely believes that this is how films should
be made, and that cinema hasn't really developed since the late 1920s.
     He has a point--1920s directors like Abel Gance (NAPOLEON, LA
ROUE) often showed a far greater visual sophistication than most of the
film-makers who followed him, and none of Fritz Lang's American films
ever recaptured the grandiose excesses of his German epics (DESTINY,
SIEGFRIED, METROPOLIS).  And although others have picked up on the
artificial Expressionism pioneered by the makers of THE CABINET OF
DR.CALIGARI, few before Maddin have embraced the techniques so
wholeheartedly.
     It's almost impossible to imagine him following compatriots David
Cronenberg and Atom Egoyan into the mainstream, as his work is so
strange it makes the average David Lynch film look like 'Baywatch'.
But one hopes that his enlightened backers will continue to fund his
bizarre visions.  CAREFUL is a giant step forward for Maddin in that
it's very accessible and enormously entertaining (the earlier work was
often too self-consciously precious, and the budgets painfully low).  I
for one shall treasure moments like the giant blue Alpenhorns
serenading the summer, or Zenaida's instructions to "lower the
sheepskins" in order to provide adequate soundproofing before dancing
to scratchy violins, or Johan's scrupulous closing of the gate behind
him before his fatal plunge, or Grigorss dripping candle-wax onto the
face of the dead Countess Knotkers and trying to repair the damage -
plus Maddin's frequent mock-Gothic intertitles solemnly announcing
"Such is the moonrise in Tolzbad" after one of Franz' father's ghostly
visitations.  If Hollywood's recent output is just too brain-numbingly
repetitive, give Maddin's films a try--at least you can guarantee that
there's no-one else out there quite like him.

Author
Max Hoffmann
Rating: 9 (on a scale of 1->10)
(I'd give it a 10, but it's very low-budget)
Seen: Mon Oct 11, 93, SF's Castro Theatre
Written and Directed by Guy Maddin
Cast: Kyle McCulloch, Gosia Dobrowolska, Sara Neville, Brent Neale,
      Paul Cox and Jackie Burroughs.
     The USA Film Festival described this as Twin Peaks directed by
Erich von Stroheim.  Not a bad description. It's an uproarious satire,
in the vein of YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN ... but the film often so
beautifully duplicates the material it parodies that your breath is
taken away. It's a little like reading a hysterical comic book, and
finding original paintings by old masters salted throughout!
     This brilliant Canadian film heavily borrows from the high-camp
expressionism of German silent films, especially the "mountain" films
of Leni Riefenstahl.  Anyone who's read FROM CALIGARI TO HITLER will
recognize dozens of scenes in this film as near carbons of stills from
the book. Perhaps more than any other films before or since, German
silent cinema created compelling images that tap into universal race
consciousness, portraying grainy, moving archetypal images all of us
vaguely recognize from dreams or nightmares. Because of this, CAREFUL
will often take your breath away with unexpected moments of quiet
majesty and beauty. But there are plenty of laughs in between, (with
"sick," 70's style National Lampoon-like humor). If you've never
laughed at seeing an eye poked out, leave political correctness at the
door and give this film a whirl!
     The soundtrack if often deliberately scratchy or muffled, and in
several scenes easter-egg like colors are used that resemble the early
two-strip technicolor process. Ominous title cards are used to
introduce scenes. This bizarre film is salted with unexpected dialogue
like this:
     BOY: "My, aren't you the frisky one today."
     GIRL: "Even the reindeer are such, when Spring is coming!"
     Enough of the aesthetics, what is the film supposedly about? The
action takes place in the 19th century alpine village of Tolzbad, that
is so precariously poised under constant threat of avalanche that
villagers have learned to communicate only in whispers. Animals have
had their vocal chords removed, and gramophones have lambs wool stuffed
in the horn.  Villagers keep time to the "sound" of silent instruments
at a "concert."  There are handful of soundproof ice caves where the
villagers can frolic and shout, letting out their pent up, pagan
passions. The film is clearly a biblical parable about repression.
Jackie Burroughs does a brilliant bit part as the puritanical teacher,
who closely resembles the Cloris Leachman role in YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN.
     All of the characters display a surface naivete; actresses speak
in the perky, breathless voices reminiscent of badly dubbed post-war
European B films, "strapping" young sons still wear short pants'd
school uniforms. The film quickly descends below the surface to show
the village as a cauldron of incestuous flirtations, violent
retaliation and explosive "family secrets."  The plot follows an arc of
forbidden loves and passions, leading to retribution on a biblical
scale. What may appear to the modern audience as "cheap" special
effects are actually loving recreations of how ghosts and visions were
portrayed in silent and early talking German films. Many of the images
are unforgettable, like the "trolley" cars pulled by oxen, or the mine
workers wearing crowns of flickering candles. Some closeups resemble
early Garbo or Dietrich films of the 30's.
     One of the most fascinating  and bizarre films you could see this
year, watch for it at your local Art/Repertory house. It demands
multiple viewings. Take a friend; this is definitely a film you'll want
to dissect over several capuccinos. Don't expect this film to come out
on video, considering its limited screenings.
