Title
Review for Desperado (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Clark Goble
     Despite the hype that DESPERADO has received in the media and on
the net I still went in with some trepidation.  After all, the main
people praising Rodriguez were fans of the Hong Kong school of
directing: lots of bodies and guns that never run out of ammunition.
     The movie actually surprised me.  The first half was excellent.
The best description I could give is to say it is Clint Eastwood's
spaghetti westerns as done by Quentin Tarantino.  The first half of the
film is craftily put together with an excellent eye for both humor and
suspense.  The bar fight that opens the film is an excellent "dream
like sequence" that sets the stage for what was to follow.  The main
bar room brawl in the first half of the film is one of the best done
sequences of this sort since the original RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK.
     Unfortunately, as good as the first half of the movie is, it does
not begin to make up for the second half.  Rodriguez seems to have run
out of plot and by then all of the cameos are dead.  What we are left
with is a typical action movie without a plot.  The twists in the movie
end up being silly and the action sequences seem more like the A-Team
trapped in a guitar factory.  Only the A-Team gunfights seem a little
more realistic.  It is one thing to be over the top but quite an other
to go completely overboard.
     I really hope we get to see more of Rodriguez direction: he has
great talent.  Unfortunately, what we have as a first product is an
other example of the paucity of good scripts in Hollywood.
/// Clark Goble /// cgoble@fiber.net ///

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Let's face it: since WATERWORLD floated by, the summer movie
season has grown *very* stale. With no new eye-candy for four weeks
straight, we've had to sustain ourselves on the quasi-nutritional value
of cheatin' husbands, traveling chocolate salesmen, and computer-
generated serial killers.  Sigh.  Thank God for DESPERADO.
     The freewheeling sequel to EL MARIACHI--director Robert
Rodriguez's notorious $7000 debut--stars a cool Antonio Banderas as the
returning Guitarist with No Name.  He's a man in black with revenge on
his mind, and an arsenal in his case.  (The woman he loved was killed
in the first film.) So, he spends the entire story shooting drug
dealers; sort of a Tex-Mex version of the Punisher, if you will.
     There isn't much of an emotional core to DESPERADO.  Rodriguez is
having too much fun finding new and innovative ways to pay homage to
John Woo.  (And Sergio Leone... and Sam Peckinpah...)  Some may wince at
the body count--at least 100 graphic killings is a fair estimate--but
it's all played for laughs.  Big, broad, Hispanic laughs that, for me,
recall the physical comedy of Blake Edwards and his PINK PANTHER
films.  Sick, slick fun.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 8/25/95 (wide)
Running Length: 1:46
MPAA Classification: R (Extreme violence, nudity, sex, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Antonio Bandaras, Salma Hayek, Joaquim de Almeida, Steve Buscemi,
      Cheech Marin, Quentin Tarantino
Director: Robert Rodriguez
Producers: Bill Borden and Robert Rodriguez
Screenplay: Robert Rodriguez
Cinematography: Guillermo Navarro
Music: Los Lobos
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     When we last saw him, he looked like Carlos Gallardo and spoke Spanish.
Now, some two years later, the mariachi has returned, toting his weapons-
filled guitar case and extracting sighs of longing from dark-haired Mexican
beauties.  Only this time, he looks like Antonio Bandaras and speaks
English.  The reason is obvious: Columbia Pictures gave writer/director/
producer Robert Rodriguez a budget to work with, something he didn't
previously have.  The results might lead an observer to judge that there's
an inverse relationship between money and quality.  For, while EL MARIACHI,
the so-called "$7000 wonder", was an energetic, thrill-a-minute ride,
DESPERADO is bloated and overlong.
     Gone is the guitar-strumming mariachi.  He has been replaced by a cold-
hearted, steely-eyed killer who goes from town-to-town blowing away drug
lords who have any connection to those who killed his beloved Domino.  Most
of the action in DESPERADO takes place in and around the Tarasco Bar, where
Cheech Marin's bartender serves the worst beer in Mexico, and where lowlifes
like the pickup guy played by Quentin Tarantino come in to tell long-winded
jokes before getting shot.  The Tarasco Bar is not known for its drinks;
it's a front for the operations of drug kingpin Bucho (Joaquim de Almeida),
the latest target of the mariachi.  After learning from his friend Buscemi
(played by none other than Steve Buscemi) that Bucho is in town, the
mariachi takes his guitar case to the Tarasco and shoots up the place.  This
incident gets Bucho's attention and he sends out an army of hitmen.
Meanwhile, the mariachi is hiding out in a bookstore run by the beautiful
Carolina (Salma Hayek), awaiting an opportunity to strike the final blow in
his war of revenge.
     Violence abounds in DESPERADO, with a shootout roughly every five to
ten minutes.  Rodriguez has an undeniable flair for choreographing
bloodshed, and his stylish gunfights give nods to the likes of Sam Peckinpah
and John Woo.  The same vein of sardonic wit that ran through EL MARIACHI is
in evidence here; Rodriguez is simultanously satirizing and paying homage to
this sort of film.  Unfortunately, DESPERADO is twenty minutes longer than
the director's debut, and the added length results in a stagnant pace.
Also, the crude look of EL MARIACHI (which was part of its charm) has been
replaced by something more polished.  At times, DESPERADO almost has too
much atmosphere for its own good.
     The cameos are the most interesting element of this film.  Cheech Marin
has the best of them, playing a foul-mouthed bartender.  Steve Buscemi is
the mariachi's only friend, and Quentin Tarantino is briefly on-hand doing
his usual shtick.  The stars of EL MARIACHI are not forgotten -- most of
them appear in a dream sequence/flashback, and Carlos Gallardo, who was the
original title character, shows up as one of the mariachi's gun-toting
cohorts.
     The real problem with DESPERADO, however, is that this sequel is
without purpose and may be the most unnecessary follow-up since the second
CROCODILE DUNDEE.  The entire story was told in EL MARIACHI; adding another
one-hundred six minutes is excessive, especially considering that there's
nothing noteworthy about the continuation.  Yes, Antonio Bandaras and Salma
Hayek are pleasant to watch, and the movie is never boring, but that's the
best Rodriguez can offer in his sophomore effort.  And, sadly, for all but
those who glory in cinematic bloodletting, it's not enough.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Eric Grossman
     Robert Rodriguez is living the dream of the independent
filmmaker.  His first feature, EL MARIACHI, made for $7000, was picked
up by a major studio and not only received tremendous critical acclaim,
but it made some money too.  From that success, Rodriguez, has now
written, directed, produced and edited his first, relatively big budget
($6 million) picture, DESPERADO, which stars Antonio Banderas as El
Mariachi, the guitar playing gunslinger from Rodriguez's breakthrough
film.
     It's not supposed to be a sequel but it feels like one, except
this time the picture is less grainy, the actors and production values
are much more polished, and the direction and editing far more slick.
The story is pretty simple, too simple in fact.  El Mariachi is out to
avenge the death of his family and he can't stop until he finishes off
Bucho (Joaquim De Almeida), the drug king-pin who is responsible.  In
the process, he meets a love interest, Carolina (Salma Hayek), who runs
a book store and gives El Mariachi refuge after he is shot numerous
times.
     He has a friend, Buscemi, named appropriately for the favorite
character actor of the latest wave of American auteurs (who's leader is
Quentin Tarantino of PULP FICTION fame), Steve Buscemi.  Buscemi's
relationship with El Mariachi makes absolutely no sense and one gets
the impression that Rodriguez put him in mostly because fans of the new
directorial breed expect to see him there.  And just in case Buscemi
wasn't enough, Tarantino, who figured out the best way to get cast in
a movie was to make your own and/ or become friends with other
filmmakers who would cast you, also makes an appearance.
     Rodriguez has talent, no doubt about it, although in his valiant
attempt to be at least one of the leading auteurs of the 90s, he has
spread himself too thin.  When making a low budget film, it is often
necessary to do everything yourself; after all, you are often the best
you can afford.  But Rodriguez has moved up to the big time and when
you run a bigger ship, you need to delegate and you need extra
perspective.  David Lean and Alfred Hitchcock did not do everything
themselves but no one doubts that they were the authors of their films
and even Francois Truffaut, the man most responsible for the auteur
theory (which, simply stated, is the idea that the director is the
author of the film and responsible for its personal and world views),
allowed others to fill key positions.
     There are moments in this film where Rodriguez shows remarkable
style.  The gunfights, the shots of El Mariachi as he enters the bar
with the deep bass and surround sound shaking the theater.  "Cool
stuff" as the film students who will no doubt notice this might say,
but to what end?  The script is thinner than the paper it was printed
on and that makes the film seem almost interminable between the fight
scenes.  Being an auteur is not about moving your camera around, it's
about moving your audience.
     The characters in DESPERADO are intended to be complex, but how
can they be in the cartoon world that Rodriguez creates?  Banderas has
presence and many women I know will see this movie just because he is
in it, but his character is neither mysterious nor very charming (and
if anyone really shot a pistol the way he does in this picture, they
wouldn't be able to hit a barn).
     The rest of the cast, Hayek and Almeida, are fine.  They don't do
anything wrong but the movie does not allow them to distinguish
themselves.  Although obviously talented, Buscemi, with his big eyes
and fast mouth, isn't much more than a sight-gag this film.
Ironically, one of the film's best performances was by Cheech Marin
(from Cheech and Chong), who finds a relaxed, humorous tone for his
role as the short bartender.
     Long on style but short on story, DESPERADO misses, but if you are
interested in following the early career of a promising filmmaker, go
see it.

Author
Christopher Null
     Quentin Tarantino and Robert Rodriguez seem to have two things in
common: an affection for old surfer-style tunes, and an unconditional
love of blood.  Both play heavy parts in Rodriguez's eye-popping new
flick, DESPERADO, the $8 million sequel to his $7,000 first feature, EL
MARIACHI, which lives up to the hype surrounding it.
     In DESPERADO, Antonio Banderas takes the role of the mariachi with
no name who leads a charmed life while everything around him dies.
This sequel is the story of his quest for revenge against the men who
killed the woman he loved and shot him in the hand.  El Mariachi
travels from town to town with a guitar case full of ultra-powerful
weapons, in search for tough guy Bucho, leader of the thugs.  As he
closes in, things get bloodier and bloodier until the final showdown
where everything is revealed.  Along the way, he encounters Carolina
(Salma Hayek), his newfound love interest, who saves his life more than
once through some impromptu surgeries.
     Banderas is simply incredible in his role as the man of few words
and many bullets.  Steve Buscemi, Cheech Marin, and Tarantino all have
solid supporting parts, mainly for much-needed comic relief, and Hayek
is passable in her role, although her romance with Banderas seems a
little forced.  (I suspect meddling from the studio gave birth to the
steamier scenes).
     While the black comedy of DESPERADO is good, Rodriguez is still a
better director/editor than writer, and the wickedly cool gunplay
sequences are clearly the prime reason to see the film.  Although not
for the faint of heart, the seriously gory fights that El Mariachi gets
into are spectacularly arranged and innovatively photographed, and they
bring new life to the action movie genre.  Unfortunately for other
action filmmakers, Rodriguez has raised the stakes and is clearly now
"the one to beat."  He even manages to work in an anti-drug message for
the kids in the audience.
     DESPERADO is faithful to the backstory of EL MARIACHI, and even
Carlos Gallardo, the original man in black, returns as Banderas's right
hand man.  The only thing missing is the best "character" from the
original: the dog, who rode off into the sunset with Gallardo at the
end of EL MARIACHI.  I guess you can't have everything.
     For raw entertainment value, DESPERADO is one of the best bets to
come along in months.  Be warned, though: there's enough blood here to
fill a swimming pool.  And on the big screen, you'll feel like you're
swimming in it.
-Christopher Null / null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Film Critic, Screenwriter, Novelist (Mailing list available)

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Antonio Bandaras, Salma Hayek, Joaquim de Almeida, Steve Buscemi,
Cheech Marin, Quentin Tarantino Director: Robert Rodriguez Screenplay:
Robert Rodriguez
I like a man who goes to confession, after he's just killed thirty drug
dealers in one of the noisiest gunfight, showdowns I have seen on
screen.
The sound of ricocheting bullets is still ringing in my ears, days after
I finished watching this movie; and the amount of ketchup splashing from
mouths, noses and puncture wounds, would have made the tomato industry
very happy.
Give me a Marguerita, light me a Cuban cigar and put on the 'Gypsy
Kings', and you have for yourself 'Desperado'.
Ooops! I forgot to mention, also bring along your arsenal of explosives
in a guitar case; your ten millimetre machine gun in another guitar
case; your secret rocket launcher in yet another guitar case; your
heroin in the guitar; your little boy who carries the guitar with the
dope; your librarian who stashes dope for the heroin dealer; the beer
that tastes like piss; and two brothers who are as different as night
and day.

Author
Jeff Inman
     Here's the deal with reviewers today.  They're all still ticked
off about WATERWORLD and how it didn't really turn out to be as bad as
they were hoping.  But for all those millions they wanted more.
Naturally!  Hey!  Where's my sensurround-character-development-slackjaw-
scintillating-plotline?  But, it was an okay movie.  At least the
Kostner character didn't fawn all over the babe, ya know what I'm
saying?
     So, now they're still mad.  They're out for blood.  And here comes
DESPERADO, made, quite obviously, by that guy who made El MARIACHI for
a measly seven thousand bucks.  Let's see if he's got The Hollywood
Disease.  Well, sure enough, all the doctors are telling you that the
patient has a bad case.  Oh, they chortled along for the beginning
part, but soon as they finished their popcorn, whaddaya know?  "This
movie has lost all its steam!" The director got caught in the "typical"
problem of action pictures.  All dressed up and nowhere to go.
     This movie is full of the kind of life that Hollywood has been
needing for years.  Violent?  Yeah, it's violent.  So?  So, it's
violent.  Is the violence "realistic"?  Get outta my face with your
"realistic"!  No.  Not exactly.  But guns run out of ammo at
inopportune moments, and the good guy, or bad guy, whatever the hell he
is ... he kicks some butt and has a good time doing it, and I had a
good time watching.  I'll wager that real live guys don't comb back
their ponytails just 30 minutes after having knives inserted into their
shoulder muscles.  But who asked ya?  And the babe is lovely.  Or did I
say that already?  She's a winner.  I'd like to thank her, sometime.
     So, we got your basic plot elements: guns (we're talking twin
Ruger .45s, MAC-10s, M-16s, etc, and of course, the eminently
respectable Desert Eagle .44), gorgeous women, plenty of bad guys, and
this special new element that you weren't expecting: humor.  No
fooling.  I know you're probably imagining the typical lame Hollywood
excuse for a joke where the smoke clears and the Good Guy mouths some
ironic one-liner that you've already heard ten times.  But that ain't
it.  I better not describe it.  Trust me.  There's humor here.
     Is it an all-time classic like THE SEVEN SAMURAI?  No.  Okay?  It
is not a 10, like THE SEVEN SAMURAI.  But only 3 or 4 movies have ever
been made that could compare with THE SEVEN SAMURAI, so get away from
me with your little numbering system.  It isn't a 10.  Maybe 7.5.  But
I run a tough scale.  I don't go giving out 10's every day.  Not even
9's.  You ask: what about LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE?  6.5!  Ha!  So, now
you're asking, okay wise-guy, I suppose you loved TERMINATOR.  Well,
okay.  Yeah.  TERMINATOR's an 8.  We could go on like this, but if you
aren't convinced to go see DESPERADO yet, then forget it.  And if you
are convinced, then okay.  No need to argue.  They should make more
movies with this kind of quirkyness, originality, and style.
