Title
Review for Malcolm X (1992)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Ron Hogan
1)  The film begins with an invocation, a call to prayer which summons
Malcolm X to speak to the congregation.  And then the screen is filled
with the American flag.  Remember that the most significant film to
begin with that image was PATTON, and you're on the right track as to
what's at stake in MALCOLM X.  This film is nothing short of the first
black biographical film epic.  Most biographical films begin with some
sort of testament to their authenticity, usually in the form of a title
that says that the events are based on reality, sometimes through
voice-over.  PATTON had its subject directly address the film audience.
JFK relied on an extensive documentary-like overview.  MALCOLM X has
Malcolm address an audience, that might very well be us (on the symbolic
level, which is what I meant with PATTON as well), but significantly,
Malcolm X isn't seen.  Could it be that his words are more important
than his image?
2)  As the American flag burns, the film keeps returning to the
videotaped footage of Rodney King being beaten by LAPD officers.  I was
wary of this material before going to the film, wondering how it would
be handled, if it might just be in for inflammatory purposes.  This is
not the case.  It serves to underline the words of Malcolm in a way that
simply seeing him speak would not have done.  And, when Lee later shows
the violence against blacks that took place during the civil rights
movement, the viewer is struck by the similarities.  Spike Lee's point
is that things haven't changed for the black people since Malcolm X's
time, and the Rodney King footage is a very persuasive argument.
3)  After the overture, the film proper begins with a sweeping track
shot that eventually finds Spike Lee, and follows him down the streets
of Roxbury.  In a sense, the camera never really stops moving until the
film is done.  Oh yes, there are several static shots, probably more
than half the shots in the film, if one bothered to count.  But the eye
is drawn to the way the camera swoops and glides and revolves around its
subject.  Lee has always made the most of the incredible talent that
Ernest Dickerson possesses as a director of photography, and MALCOLM X
is Dickerson's highest accomplishment yet.  While the dance numbers in
SCHOOL DAZE seemed stagy and artificial, in MALCOLM X they overflow
with energy and exuberance.  Lee and Dickerson's control over the film
medium shows in every image.
4)  Malcolm X at one point states that he chose the name X because in
mathematics, it represents the unknown; as a black man, his past had
been taken from him so that he didn't know who he really was.  In the
broader sense, any life is unknown.  The biography or biographical film
can show the outward events, and surmise the inner life of the subject
from those events, but no matter how convincing, we have to remember
that it's only an inferential hypothesis.  In some of the ways the
camera moves around Malcolom, swooping in from different angles,
spinning around him, never staying in one place for very long, there may
be a suggestion of the kind of probing that goes on in the biographical
effort, the attempt to dig into Malcolm X's life and find out what was
at his core.
5)  The flashbacks into Malcolm's childhood, and the life of his
parents, are disjunctive at first.  They come abruptly, with no warning.
In the overall scheme, though, they establish an effective psychological
and symbolic link between Malcolm and his father.  The juxtapositions
become more meaningful each time they occur; the pieces fall into place
with each scene.  And the voice-over narration that accompanies some of
those flashbacks, and many other scenes, ground the film in Malcolm's
identity, making it the center of the picture.  Many of those
voice-overs seem to be straight out of the autobiography; as I mentioned
in step one, Malcolm's words appear to be his legacy.  The image, as
close as it is to the original, is not an icon to be worshipped, but a
reference point to what *is* important.
6)  While MALCOLM X is the history of Malcolm X, it's also the history
of black America.  Malcolm is there as a center around which the history
revolves, a focal point.  So it is through him that we learn about Joe
Louis, about zoot suits, about Jackie Robinson, and other key events.
7)  And through him that we get a history of black music.  Music has
generally been a strong suit of Lee's, but in MALCOLM X it improves
along with the rest of his talents.  The highlights include Lionel
Hampton, Ella Fitzgerald, Billie Holiday, and more.  Special attention
should, however, be called to the use of John Coltrane's "Alabama" for a
montage of the civil rights violence and Junior Walker's "Shotgun" as
the conspirators stake out the dance hall where they plan to kill
Malcolm.  And the full orchestral score that Terence Blanchard has
written for the film is as epic in scope as the subject demands.  The
music over the confrontation with the police is one of the most
effectively scored scenes of any film in 1992.
8)  I've already mentioned that the Rodney King footage is used in a
strong comparison with the civil rights violence of the '60s.  The use
of media footage from the period illustrates the conditions against
which Malcolm X was fighting.  It also works as a way to ground the film
in historical reality.  The 'imagined' life of Malcolm X is given
credibility not only through Denzel Washington's strong physical
resemblance, but through the art of surrounding that imaginative
material with footage that we already accept as the real thing.
9)  This technique was employed very effectively in JFK, and Lee has
taken some very useful lessons (and some graciously donated footage)
from that movie.  Like Oliver Stone, Spike Lee uses several different
types of film stock in the film.  Black and white film is used to
suggest television newscasts, no doubt recreating broadcasts that did
take place.  (In JFK, it was easier to tell, because we'd all seen
Oswald getting shot in reruns; we knew what it looked like, and we knew
that it was recreated accurately.  I rather doubt the majority of the
public is equally familiar with the media coverage of Malcolm X).  Then
there's the use of what looks like Super-8 in some scenes, and the
setting of most flashbacks in paler hues than the bulk of the film.
Film is a medium waiting to be manipulated, and Spike Lee is rapidly
becoming one of our best experts.
10)  The film began with an invocation.  It closes with a eulogy--and
the documentary footage of Malcolm X that had been missing until then.
Ossie Davis repeats the same words he spoke at Malcolm's funeral, and in
his words (and a special scene that follows), we are reminded that
Malcolm X is dead, but his legacy remains.  His life, like any life
deemed worthy of biography, serves as an example for all of us.  Much of
the talk around the film centers on Malcolm's separatist positions, but
MALCOLM X does present the tolerant Malcolm X that was emerging before
he was snuffed out.  It shows where Malcolm was heading--the footsteps
in which today's generation of black Americans would, it is implied, do
well to follow.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Spike Lee's MALCOLM X is a mammoth 201-minute film about the black
Islamic leader that may not always be doing what Lee intended it to do.  The
film does say a lot about Malcolm, both positive and negative, but not
nearly as much as one would expect for a film almost twice the length of
most feature films.  The film tells in approximately equal thirds about 1)
his youth and his drift into crime; 2) his "redemption" and his association
with the Nation of Islam; and 3) his break with the Nation of Islam, their
campaign against him, and his murder, very likely at their hands.  This
should have given the audience a very good understanding of the man, but the
screenplay by Arnold Perl and Spike Lee does not use its time well.  At one
point it stops the action dead for an extended dance production number.  It
also spends far too much time with Malcolm X's great good buddy, Shorty, who
just happens to be played by Spike Lee.  In addition, many of the events
shown in the film are of questionable authenticity.  For example, my
understanding is that Malcolm's mother denies that her husband was murdered,
unlike how it was shown in the film.
     The film opens with Malcolm's youth.  Malcolm (played by Denzel
Washington) begins as a teenager trying to straighten his hair with the help
of Shorty.  The film then jumps around in time, never giving us a really
good feel for what years things are taking place.  We see something of his
earlier youth with his family harassed by the Ku Klux Klan.  Those scenes
include one amazing shot that ironically seems to romanticize the Klan,
riding off into a huge moon on the horizon.  Again it is a sign that Lee is
not fully in control of this film.  Malcolm eventually moves first to
Boston, then New York, then Boston again, embarking on a life of crime cut
short by a prison sentence.
     In prison, Malcolm is recruited by Baines (played by Albert Hall) for
the Nation of Islam.  Malcolm is impressed by Baines's questionable
rhetoric.  (His description of why Muslims eat no pork is a real corker!  As
for his claims that Islam has a great in-built respect for blacks as
people...  am I the only person who remembers there was a huge Arab slave
trade in Africa even well after slavery was abolished in Europe and the
Americas?  In fact, I believe that the reason Swahili is still so widespread
in Africa is that it was the language created from Bantu and Arabic for the
Arab slave trade.  That fact just does not seem to square with a large black
movement to champion Islam.)  Malcolm leaves prison with an abiding belief
in Elijah Muhammad--very well-played by Al Freeman, Jr., who played Malcolm
X in ROOTS II--and in the precept that all whites are devils.
     The film than covers Malcolm's rise to and fall from power in Elijah
Muhammad's Nation of Islam.  Here it becomes unclear exactly what the film's
attitude toward the Nation of Islam is.  While Malcolm appears in some ways
to be doing very positive things, he behaves and presents his viewpoints
very differently in front of blacks than in front of whites.  Lee seems to
be attacking the Nation of Islam for hypocrisy.  Eventually when Malcolm
starts presenting the same vitriolic message to the whites that he was
giving to the blacks, it starts the rift between Malcolm and the Nation of
Islam.  It may be hard for much of the audience to cheer statements like,
"The Earth belongs to us ... the black man," or banners that say, "We must
protect our most valuable property ... our women."  Malcolm also rejects
integration entirely in favor of complete separation between the black and
white races.
     In the final third of the film, Malcolm's views shift entirely.  He is
no longer an advocate of racial separation, but of racial harmony through
Islam.  He is willing to accept that there may be good whites in the world,
as long as they are also good Muslims.  He is no longer willing to follow
Elijah Muhammad and founds his own rival Muslim black sect.  This leads to
the tragic events of which the audience is probably already aware.
     The film concludes by showing documentary footage of the real Malcolm
X.  Often historical films shy away from showing documentary footage of
characters they have portrayed by actors.  Perhaps it is to avoid confusion
about if it is indeed the same person.  Or perhaps showing the footage would
be inviting criticism of how well or badly the actor was made to look like
the actual person.  Lee's use of real footage of Malcolm X shows that
assumption may well be underestimating the audience.  After the footage,
several black celebrities are seen wearing caps bearing the "X," though it
is not clear which set of Malcolm X's sets of beliefs they are claiming to
espouse.
     The performances in MALCOLM X are generally quite good.  Denzel
Washington very quickly becomes Malcolm X for the audience.  Al Freeman,
Jr., is very believable as the founder of a huge movement.  Angela Bassett
and Lonette McKee are both very moving as Malcolm's wife and mother,
respectively.  Only notably out of place is Spike Lee himself playing
basically the same jazzy character he played in SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT, or
comically fainting on hearing his prison sentence.  There is much he could
have cut from the film to actually improve its effectiveness and his own
performance heads the list.
     MALCOLM X teaches some history and presents some ideas, but does
neither well enough to justify its length and hoopla.  Lee's dream project
falls short of some of the films he made preparing for it.  I rate MALCOLM X
a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Malcolm Austin
     Personally, I think the most significant aspect of this movie is
the likelihood that, given the discussion about the film and its
subject, millions of people will finally learn how to spell "Malcolm."
But that's just me.
     As usual, Spike Lee the director has far outshone Spike Lee the
media twerp.  This movie is an excellent portrayal of the continuing
evolution of a man's thought.  It is marred by a few touches of
oliverstonism, such as vague (and unsupportable, from the movie's
internal evidence) intimations that the CIA was involved with Malcolm
X's death, and a tacked on prologue and epilogue, featuring the Rodney
King film intercut with a burning American flag, and, in the most
unintentionally horrific scene in modern filmdom, Nelson Mandela
lecturing to school children.
     But in between these lapses into political dreck, there is a truly
outstanding movie.  It is testament, I think, to the craft of this film
that, despite its three-and-a-half-hour length, I didn't even glance at
my watch until almost three hours had gone by.  Like other great
biographical epics, such as LAWRENCE OF ARABIA, or PATTON, this movie
just doesn't seem as long as it is.
     Spike Lee has largely muted his style in this movie, so it almost
looks like "typical" Hollywood fare.  However, there remains evidence of
his directorial flare.  Most notable is the very different looks he
achieves for different parts of the film, as Malcolm X's story unfolds.
The flashy Harlem beginning contrasts with the austere prison scenes,
and the lush photography of Malcolm's years with the Nation of Islam,
and finally the spiritual and almost surreal period of Malcolm's hadj,
and the final period of his life afterwards.
     Without more research, I can't say how accurate the portrayal of
Malcolm X is, but as myth-making, this film is wonderful.  It is easily
Spike Lee's most impressive accomplishment.
-- 
=Malcolm Austin==w:(212)703-6134==h:(914)633-3966==maus@fid.morgan.com=====

Author
Raul Cairo
     It is difficult to insult or even to belittle a director such as
Spike Lee.  It is also very difficult to talk negatively about what is
the best film Spike has directed to date; however, Spike's latest
attempt into the art of cinema is something less than is to be desired.  
     Spike is bringing to life the story of a man who was everything 
he wanted to be, but realized somewhere along his life that he did not
know who he truly was.  After seeing MALCOM X I felt like I had just
ran a marathon rather than coming out from seeing a movie.  The longest
3 hours and 22 minutes of my life occurred while I watched MALCOM X.  I
truly, truly, deep in my heart feel that this movie could have been
great, just as long as this movie would be shorter.  
     The only big major flaw that this movie suffers from is that 
Spike Lee concentrated too long on Malcom's life before he started to
preach the Muslim faith.  Everyone knows the hard hitting speechs of
Malcom and this movie should have concentrated just on his faith, his
going into the Muslim faith and following the words of Elijah
Muhhoamid, and then later being turned away.  
     To me personally the important aspects of the movie was everything
that happened to Malcom after he comes out of jail, and it is there
that the movie should have begun.  
     I don't wish to knock the directing, or even the acting.  Denzel 
Washington gives the performance of his life, in what could be the most 
important role of his life, bringing the spirit of Malcom X back to
life.  And Spike Lee has definitely poured his heart and soul into this
project, however the one mistake he made was to drag out this life
story, as well as drag out this film.  But if one thing you can
definitely realize with this film is that Spike Lee has such an
admiration for this guy, that he was capable enough to go to the limits
in making this film and for that I do commend him.  In short, on a scale
of 1 to 10 I would have to give it a 6 for the fabulous directing, and 
for Washington's perfect portrayal of the civil rights activist.  But
this is fair warning if you are easily bored or even twitchy while you
watch a film, you should really think twice before you go and see this
film.

Author
Rob Slater
[This article originally appeared in two parts in soc.culture.jewish,
and examines the film MALCOLM X specifically from a Jewish perspective.
I have combined the two into one, but labeled the second section, which
deals mostly with applying the teachings of Malcolm X to Jewish issues.
I am including it because it points out how the story in MALCOLM X is
applicable to a wider range of issues than some might think.  -Moderator]
     Spike Lee's latest work is a 3-1/2 hour expose on Malcolm X.  I
will attempt to summarize the movie and discuss the issues that it
presents as it relates to Jews.
     The first part of this article will deal with the actual movie.
Despite that I am no movie critic, I will make a feeble attempt at
reviewing the movie.  In the second half, I will discuss some of the
issues that the movie examines.
     But first a kevtch.  Did it have to be so long?  Lee appeared on
Larry King and said to present the life of Malcolm X in only 2-1/2 hours
would be a travesty.  Fair enough.  But there could have at least been
an intermission.  End of my kevtch.
     Over all, the movie was a very powerful portrayal of one of
America's misunderstood citizens.  I actually studied Malcolm X's life a
few years ago.  I wanted to know more about this man that many
African-Americans have rallied behind.  After reading his autobiography
(which Lee based his movie on) and several of his speeches, I felt I had
a good idea of who this man was.
     Nonetheless, there is something about having him coming to life in
front of your eyes (albeit through the body of Denzel Washington).  I
felt that I had a reasonable understanding of the man, but nonetheless,
I learned about the man and his philosophy through the movie.
     For those of you who do not know who Malcolm X is or much about
him, Malcolm was a leader in the civil rights movement in the early 60s.
He was a Black Muslim and a follower of Elijah Muhammad.  He helped
build up the Nation of Islam (now run by the notorious Louis Farrakan).
Later he became disenfranchised with Elijah and the Nation.
     He was tragically assassinated in Harlem on February 21, 1965, by
several African-Americans.  Some say they were under the pay of the
National of Islam.  Others say the government.  We will probably never
know.
     The movie starts with Malcolm's early years.  The son of a Baptist
preacher, he was soon orphaned because his father was brave enough to
stand up to (and shoot at) the Klan.  A child welfare organization broke
up his family.  Malcolm went to a boarding school.  He was a very
successful student.  He became class president and aspired to become a
lawyer.  But his school master put an end to that.  He suggested that
Malcolm X become a carpenter instead.
     Later on, Malcolm X was a numbers runner for a crime gang in
Harlem.  He dated a white girl named Sophia.  After a disagreement with
his boss, he fled for his life in Boston.  There he robbed a senior
citizen of all of his possessions.  He was later caught.  He was
sentenced to a minimum of ten years.
     While in prison, he met Ernie Baines.  There he learned about black
nationalism and Islam.  He started corresponding with Elijah Muhammad.
By the time he was released, he had become quite an accomplished Moslem.
When he was released, he went straight to Chicago to meet with Elijah
himself.
     He quickly rose in prominence in the Nation of Islam.  Starting as
a street preacher and winding up as the Nation's star minister, Malcolm
X proclaimed Elijah's message of hate and division perfectly.
     He called other more moderate Black leaders "Toms" (a reference to
the main character in the book UNCLE TOM'S CABIN.  Uncle Tom is
considered by many African-Americans to be a sell out to whites).  He
also regularly referred to all white people as devils (and yes, he made
it clear, *all* white people).  He even threw in some antisemitic remarks
for good measure.
     All was good and well until Malcolm discovered that Nation of Islam
and Elijah Muhammad did not meet the standards they had set for others.
Malcolm X also was tangled up in a power struggle in the Nation.  These
two events caused him to leave.
     Malcolm X formed his own Black Muslim organization.  He immediately
tried to separate himself from Elijah and the Nation of Islam.  He no
longer chastised other African-American leaders and even invited whites
to support his organization (more on this in my next note).  He went to
Egypt and Mecca and learned that all men (all Muslims at least) were
equal and that the politics of race were the politics of hate.
     He came back and started to form another Black Muslim organization.
It was at this point that he urged African-Americans to arm and defend
themselves by "any means necessary."  But Malcolm was quick to add that
defense does not mean attack.
     Upon his return to America, his past came to haunt him as well.
His house was attacked.  He immediately blamed the Nation of Islam.
Later he stopped blaming the Nation because he was convinced that they
were not acting alone.  And finally, just as he was about to give a
speech defining his new Black Muslim organization, he was assassinated.
     So, what is in it for Jews?  Nothing, directly.  But the movie will
serve at least two purposes.  One, it will clear up a lot of
misconceptions about Malcolm X's life.
     But the second reason is more important.  By portraying Black
nationalism, the movie allows us to examine Jewish nationalism.
Malcolm's preacher father urges African-Americans to go back home to
Africa.  Is this so different than what the Zionists urge Jews to do?
Malcolm loves Blacks because of who they are.  Is this so different that
many Jewish leaders?  Malcolm urges Blacks to form their own economic
cooperatives -- Blacks helping Blacks.  Is this so different from the
Jewish community's special requirements on businesses it frequents (i.e.,
kashrut, schnatz-free cloths, shomer shabbos stores)?  [Moderator's note:
these are terms for various aspects of Jewish religious rules.]
     In fact, it is fairly easy to draw parallels between the movie
MALCOLM X and the call for Jewish nationalism.  Just replace
African-Americans with Jews.  Africa with Israel.  Islam with Judaism.
Mecca with Jerusalem during one of the four pilgrimage holidays.  And
Malcolm X with Kahane or your favorite Jewish leader.
     Perhaps MALCOLM X will encourage some Jews in Hollywood to make a
movie on Kahane.  No, I think will be a long time before we see a movie
on Jewish nationalism.  Can you say "shanda fur der goyim" [Moderator's
note: "shame before the Gentiles," a common Yiddish expression when a
Jew does something potentially embarrassing]?
     Until then, I would strongly encourage you to go see this powerful
movie.  Despite that your knees will be sore after sitting in a cramped
movie theater for 3 hours and 21 minutes, it is really worth it.
Part 2 -- Multiculturalism and Racial Division
     One of the bigger themes presented in MALCOLM X is the issue of
multiculturalism as opposed to racial division.  Malcolm dealt with the
very issue of whether it is always appropriate for one ethnic group to
help another.  And if it is not, when it is it appropriate.
     Malcolm takes two views on this.  The first view was developed
while he was a follower of Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam.  He
is approached by a collage age white student while visiting Harvard.
She insists that she is a good person despite being white.  She asks him
(quite pathetically, in my opinion) what she can do to help his cause (I
wonder how much did she really knew about herself).  Malcolm says
"nothing" while not even slowing down to look at her.
     Clearly at this stage in his life Malcolm is convinced that whites
are the root of all evil and he wants nothing to do with them.  Blacks
must help themselves, because no one else will do it.  Furthermore, no
one else wants it done.  This era of Malcolm's life is not as
interesting as when he breaks off from Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of
Islam.
     When he does, he rethinks his policy of chastising other Black
leaders and turning away whites all together.  But he still makes an
interesting point.  When asked by a reporter what his policy is now on
white sympathizers, Malcolm makes a very interesting statement.  He
states that while white support (especially financial support) is
appreciated, Blacks must first "find and define themselves" and start
helping themselves before others can help them.
     This point is a huge one, and many hours could be spent discussing
it.  I remember attending a discussion at the University of Illinois
about Black-Jewish relations.  After a very tense hour of accusations
flying back and forth, one of the leaders of a Black militant
organization stood up and made a point.  "Why do all of you Jews want to
help us?  We don't even know who we are ourselves!  Let us define
ourselves, our needs, and our goals.  Then we can figure whether we need
your help.  And if we do, how you can help us."
     I had a follow-up conversation with the gentleman a few days later.
He made the following point:  Every time some tries to help
African-Americans, they invariably try to define African-Americans the
way they see them.  For once, African-Americans ought to define
themselves.
     A very similar argument could be made about Jews.  We are so eager
to help others that we rarely help ourselves.  Look at some of the
people who are at the forefront of inter-ethnic relations.
     I dealt with one person in Chicago who knew next to nothing about
being kosher.  Or who Rashi was.  Or what the Torah said.  And what it
did not say.  Nonetheless, he was more than willing to help others "as a
Jew".
     This last phase really ticks me off.  The number of outrageous
statements made "as a Jew" is incredible.  One of my favorites, made by
an animal rights activist, is "As a Jew, I do not see how we can
tolerate the slaughter of animals."  This girl was completely oblivious
to the fact that the Torah requires us to make animal sacrifices.
     It is also pathetic what Jews know (or do not know) about our
homeland -- Israel.  I know Jews who cannot find Jerusalem on the map,
but can effectively criticize its being in Jewish hands.
     But the root of the problem is Jewish pride itself.  After Bradely
Smith was able to run his Holocaust denial piece in the campus
newspaper, I wanted to have a booth in the commons with pictures of
Holocaust victims.  This idea was struck down.  I was told by a friend
that this would be over asserting our Jewishness.  I think she felt this
was some kind of sin.
     This can go on and on.  The point being, that I find it amazing
that Jews are more than willing to help others when they barley know
themselves.  I only wish that Jews spent more time learning about
themselves and helping themselves.
     Now do not get me wrong.  Knowing everything there is to know about
Judaism does not (and perhaps should not) be a prerequisite to forging
inter-ethnic relations.  There have been many Jews who have achieved
great accomplishments with out knowing a damn thing about Judaism.  So,
it would be naive for me to state the only effective Jewish activist is
the one who knows Judaism.  But, I will state than any Jewish activist
can improve his/her efforts by studying Judaism.
     In fact, this could be generalized to any activist (i.e., Jew,
Native American, Martian, etc).  The more you know about yourself, the
more you will be able to help others.  I am not the first one to have
come to this conclusion.  Many sociologists have beat me to it.
     I think Jews tend to help the other guy (in this case,
African-Americans) because it is so much easier to analyze and solve the
problems of others than it is helping yourselves.  If in fact we were to
really help Blacks, what would we do?
     The biggest problem African-Americans are facing is the rampant
crime and violence in the inner cities.  Over 23% of all
African-American males between 20 and 29 are in trouble with the law for
committing real crimes (as opposed to crimes of identity, i.e., being
Jewish, Black, etc).  From which chapter in Jewish history can we draw
lessons about how to handle this problem?
     What if "Super Jew" landed in the middle of Compton (something that
no Jewish leader that I know of has ever suggested or tried) and tried
to put an end to the violence?  What would (s)he do?
     I think many Jews who go out there and try to solve the world's
problems are using their activism as a crutch.  They subconsciously do
not want to know about their own problems and thus study others' and try
to solve theirs.
     Finally, a few words on multiculturalism.  In short, I think that
it is a wonderful thing.  But I think that few people are prepared for
it.  The premise for multiculturalism is, that as the melting pot,
America ought to reflect all the cultures of the people who live here.
All of that is nice and swell, but we first need to define what it is we
are.
     Nothing angers me more than when some Jew is told by an
African-American what Zionism is (or at least what Farrakhan defines
Zionism to be) and the Jew stands there defenseless.  Yet at the same
time don't you think that most African-American leaders must be angered
when innocent Jews try to help (tell) African-Americans how to solve
their problems?
     Yes, we should share our culture with others.  But first we must
understand ourselves.  Yes we should help African-Americans with their
problems.  But first we must understand and start to solve our own
problems (i.e., assimilation, intermarriage, general ignorance of things
Jewish -- both religion and Israel, etc).
     We need to understand ourselves and start solving our problems.
African-Americans need to do the same.  Then, and only then, can we
begin to share our cultures with each other and begin to help each
other.  I think Malcolm X would agree.

Author
Dave Gross
     Spike Lee has moved decisively from the ranks of "promising up-and-
coming filmmaker" to "great filmmaker" with his terrific three-and-a-
half-hour epic retelling of the Malcolm X story.  This film demanded a
scope and a gestalt far beyond anything Lee had attempted before -- and
Lee has responded by reaching new heights in respectfully translating
this myth to the screen.
     Malcolm X was a human being, though his legend is so powerful and
compelling that future generations will probably be skeptical and call
his life fiction.  Like a similar epic film, "Gandhi" (from which Lee
almost certainly took some inspiration), "Malcolm X" had to be
translated from an already powerful myth into a compelling film.
     But a myth is more emotional than visual.  To tell a myth with
actors and film threatens to debase the spiritual, faith-like grandeur
of the story and replace it with vulgar biography and journalism.  Spike
Lee's triumph (and his improvement over "Gandhi") is that he preserved
both Malcolm the myth and Malcolm the man.
     He has help from Denzel Washington, who plays Malcom X in the film.
Washington plays a number of roles in the film -- Malcolm Little,
drowning in the excesses of drugs and crime; Malcolm X, the upright
disciple of Elijah Muhammad, converted in prison; and Malcolm, changed
and enlightened after his pilgrimage to Mecca.  Washington has the range
to play all of these men within a man, and he shades the transitions
between them with care.  There are probably many academy awards in this
film, but this actor has a lock on one.
     What the critics and the press will be wagging their tongues about
in the coming weeks will probably be Lee's Oliver Stone-like retelling
of the assassination.  The orthodox take on the killing is that Malcolm
X was assassinated on the order of the Nation of Islam, a group which he
had recently broken ties with and which was jealous of his influence and
power.  Spike Lee has included the U.S.  government in the conspiracy --
a theory that is plausible, though it is a textbook violation of Occam's
razor.  All in all, this new theory constitutes an unnecessary
distraction from the myth, and its inclusion was a temptation Lee should
have fought.
     Another point of interest is the cameo appearance by none other
than Nelson Mandela (can you think of any other director with the
international stature and respect it would take to get someone like
Mandela to appear in their film?)
     Also, the opening sequence, in which a burning American Flag
alternates on the screen with scenes from the Rodney King beating will
be seen by many as unnecessarily inflammatory.  It is clearly Lee's
attempt to make the case that the story of Malcolm X is current events
-- not history -- and by this standard, the inclusion of the King
beating footage is not only justified but necessary.
     But the more important revelation about this film is that Spike Lee
has clearly bought into the moderate line about Malcom X -- that his
redemption as a hero came when he returned from his hajj filled with a
new spirit of interracial brotherhood and respect, and conciliation with
more moderate civil rights leaders.  The Malcolm X who appears in
posters and whose speeches are excerpted on rap albums is almost always
the earlier, angrier, racist Malcolm X.  The Malcolm that Lee
sympathizes with is a Malcolm who has moved beyond this, demanding
respect without lowering himself to racial hatred.
     That this moderate version of the Malcolm X myth is the one that
made it to the screen is the real news.  In this video age, the Malcolm
X myth fashioned by Spike Lee may well replace in importance the myth
told to Alex Haley in THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X.
     And, aside from the cinematic triumph of Spike Lee, it is this fact
that will be the legacy of MALCOLM X the film.

Author
Jon Webb
     This film is an assembly of symbols of racism and politics in this
country.  It opens with two of the most powerful symbols in recent
years: the Rodney King videotape, and a burning American flag.  Clearly,
Spike Lee is trying to grab hold of our political consciousness and move
us.
     The movie is really about three people: Malcolm Little
(a.k.a.  Detroit Red), the hood and dandy; Malcolm X, the follower of
Elijah Muhammed; and the anti-racist who rejected black separatism after
a pilgrimage to Mecca (whose long name I do not recall).  The tone and
direction of the film changes significantly with each incarnation of the
man -- it is really three movies concatenated.
     I liked the first two parts of the film better.  The final
conversion is just not convincing (frankly, I thought it was motivated
by political convenience -- he needed a power base outside the Black
Muslims), and the heart of Denzel Washington's character seems to have
disappeared following the return from Mecca.  (Though it was interesting
actually seeing Mecca, a rare experience; to make this film, some of the
crew actually had to convert to Islam.)  He seems to simply be waiting
for the assassin's bullets.
     This is Spike Lee's master work, the one film he has been moving
towards all these years.  Its length and breadth will make it the
starting point for many in their understanding of what Malcolm X was
about.  It admirably fills that role; it is part historical documentary,
part a course on the issues that moved Malcolm X.  But it is not really
moving in itself.  In Spike Lee's recent films (e.g., SCHOOL DAZE,
JUNGLE FEVER), he explicitly calls on us to wake up to what is
happening to African Americans, and in this film he tries to do so in
every way possible -- by the use of charged symbols like a burning flag
and the JFK assassination, by including actual appearances by
controversial people like the Reverend Al Sharpton and Nelson Mandela,
by showing us the most powerful possible images of African Americans
being brutalized -- still, for me, it was not enough.  Lee tries to
include everything he can think of, but in the process he loses focus.
I found the fairy tale HERO more moving politically than this film.
     Denzel Washington turns in an admirable performance.  It wasn't
until the end of the film, when we see actually footage of Malcolm X
talking, that I realized how good it really was: he has his smile down
just right, his laugh.  The man who plays Elijah Muhammed is also very
good; just the right combination of saintliness and power.  I also
admired the performance of the woman who plays Betty Shabazz, at least
before she married Malcolm X and became somewhat strident.

Author
Max Hoffmann
STRONG POINTS: brilliant direction, strong cast, tight script, the
story itself, art direction and cinematography.
COLD SPOTS: (minor complaint) a poorly placed musical soundtrack that
often distracts from critical dialogue.
     The incredible spiritual journey and transformation of Malcolm X
would make fascinating viewing, even if you rewrote the story and took
away the fact that he was Black, or that it took place in America.  His
message still applies to many situations beyond Blacks and racism,
(listen to his "house nigger" speech on TV in light of gays in the
closet, or women and the "glass ceiling" in corporate America!)  Latent
racism has crept into most mainstream reviews, and many white critics
are threatened by this film because:
--      he found genuine redemption and salvation without Jesus
     Director Spike Lee avoids most of the pitfalls common to
biographies or historic epics, be they docu-dramas (JFK) or episodic
(GANDHI).  Spike doesn't over dwell on childhood flashbacks to "explain"
the adult character's motives, he doesn't attempt to reconstruct well
remembered historical encounters that clone newspaper photos.  And most
importantly, he *never* loses sight of his character's humanity or
dignity in favor of the "sweep" of history.
     A ground breaking first for American films *and* Lee, is that he
allows the main character's spouse to remain a significant presence and
influence throughout the film.  Typical Hollywood treatment would have
allowed Malcolm about five minutes for a "love story," we'd see his wife
again when she gives birth to their first child, she'd walk in the room
and place her hand on his shoulder saying something significant after a
threatening phone call, and then she'd show up again for the deathbed
scene!
     Instead, Malcolm's wife walks into camera range, and STAYS there as
a significant and compelling presence through the second half of the
film.  Her keening widow's wail at the end of the film will stick with
you for hours if not days after the film ends.  Spike never loses sight
of any of his character's humanity of dignity.  You will experience
their losses on a very visceral level.
     The film and story certainly have a grand sense of history,
(especially for any of us old enough to remember the latter years of
Malcom X).  But the characters don't turn into plaster saints or
pseudo-biblical prophets.  Contrary to what you may hear in some reviews
or commentaries, Spike Lee *does not* stoop to his own brand of racism
by painting all the white characters as "devils" or whatnot.  The
attitudes shown by the whites in Malcolm's life are a brutally honest
reflection of America at that time.  The death of Martin Luther King
gave many Americans the same kind of myopia about the late 60's that
JFK's death created over his lack of ability as a president.  Spike
throws a little Windex on the lens of our collective memories and shows
it like it was/still is ... warts and all.  Which is why many older
viewers will be offended by what they'd prefer to forget.
     I'm going to skip over comments on actor's and performances--they
are *all* brilliant.  Most magazine reviews have singled out Denzel
Washington as Malcolm, and rated the film weak overall, with comments
like Spike is out of his element in a sweeping historical film of this
scope.  NOT!  Although he'll probably get passed over at the Academy
Awards, Spike has essentially *reinvented* a nearly dead art form.  The
lion's share of credit goes to the dedication and courage of this one
man who successfully fought to bring his vision, intact (in all of its
3.5 hours of glory), to the screen.
     Frequently, in powerfully emotional scenes with Malcolm X behind a
podium, Lee gently tones down Denzel's performance to ensure that we
really listen to the words of one of the greatest Americans that ever
lived.  This film will send millions of young blacks and whites to their
nearest library or bookstore to find out more.  If this film
accomplishes nothing more than that, it will go down in history as one
of the most significant films of the last quarter of this century.
