Title
Review for Children of the Corn (1984)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Corn is the operative word here, in one of the many truly 
awful movie versions of Stephen King literature. This time, a thirty 
page story is turned into a full-blown movie that fits right in with 
the very worst slasher flicks of the 80's. Peter Horton and Linda 
Hamilton (I can only assume she did this movie right before THE 
TERMINATOR) play a married couple innocently driving through 
Nebraska when they hit a kid who stumbles onto the road.
        But this isn't just your average, ordinary, everyday 
roadkill accident. "Look at his throat. It's been slit. He was dead 
before we hit him." (So he was dead when he walked onto the road? 
Talk about your dead kid walking.) They take the kid to the nearest 
town, a charming but empty place called Gatling. Peter and Linda 
wander around the town and into an abandoned house ("There's 
something not quite right about this place.") before doing the 
logical thing -- logical only in a horror movie, that is -- splitting 
up. That way, when Linda hears a noise downstairs, she can walk 
slowly dowt a dozen 
times in the slasher tradition, "Bert, is that you? ...Bert? ...Ernie? 
...Big Bird?"
        At least in the King story, the mystery of the town wasn't 
given away in the opening scene. There was at least a little suspense 
in the written version, but in the CHILDREN OF THE CORN 
movie, we know all along just what Peter and Linda are getting into. 
Gatling is inhabited by a bunch of kids who killed all the adults on 
orders from their resident prophet, Isaac, the only supernatural thing 
about him, from what I can tell, being that he sounds like he's on 
helium.
        This movie, like many others in the 80's, carries a strong 
religious bias, with the crazy kids all named after Bible characters 
(Malachi, Amos, Job, etc.) and Linda's fate eventually being to 
hang on a crucifix made of corn husks. It's all so absurd it can't be 
taken seriously for a minute, especially Peter's climactic speech 
about how blind they all are for following Isaac the "holy roller." 
According to Peter, "any religion not based on love and 
compassion is false!"
        Interestingly enough, this speech comes after the corn 
monster (He Who Walks Behind the Rows) swallows a couple kids 
up. Even though it's obvious there is some supernatural basis for the 
kids' behavior, the screenwriter still decided to have the adult hero 
chew the kids out for their behavior. In reality, it's everyone 
involved with this movie and the two sequels that should be 
chewed out -- at the least. If it were up to me, I'd hang them 
all up on corn husk crucifixes.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
