Title
Review for Good Burger (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Luke Buckmaster
>From zero stars (bomb), to five stars (a masterpiece): One star
With every new children's film comes a regurgitated fear that lurks
inside my hate-bone.  A fear of plot failure and cornball acting.   Of
flat jokes - and even flatter dialogue.  Yes indeed, these are the
movies that squeeze every last gag from a worn out sponge - praying that
the critics will label them as "kids material" so that adults will be
blissfully ignorant of them.  In Good Burger, a Nickelodeon film, my
fears were back as I witnessed a tasteless, immature and half-fried glob
of film-fat.
If that comment sounded a little farcical, then you'll have to forgive
me - but Good Burger deserves it entirely.  You see, I work at a
McDonalds store (no joke).  I know what it's like to accidentally open a
packet of sundae mix at the wrong time and have it dripping off my body
from shoulder to toe.  I know what a burger looks like with a litre of
ketchup on top of it, because I've dropped a container of it on one.  I
know the satisfaction of giving a hungry customer the meal he was been
waiting on, just for him to say "Tell you're manager that he's fucking
useless if he can't produce a Big Mac."
But I've still been able to look back and laugh in disbelief - at those
good memories that were actually nightmares to experience at the time.
But I look back on Good Burger in exactly the same frame of mind as to
when I watching it - disgruntled, irritated. It's not that I have a deep
and profound respect for my job (you don't get much as a burger cooker
or chicken fryer), but rather that Good Burger had a potential gold mine
of gags to play with but doesn't utilize any of them.
The basic scenario of Good Burger goes something like this: the lazy,
self-seeking Dexter (Kenan Thompson) finds himself in dept of more money
than he can possibly repay after wrecking his school teachers car on the
first day of summer vacation.  After much reluctance, he vows to get a
job until the dept is paid off.  Enter "Good Burger," a no frills fast
food outlet that becomes the hippest place to be when extravagant worker
Ed (Kel Mitchell) unleashes a secret sauce to the public.  But the
store's scandalous competitor, "Monolith Burger," will stop at nothing
to get hold of the ingredients of Ed's sauce.
Dexter and Ed also find themselves in other unpredictable situations
including being trapped in an insane asylum with their 77-year-old pal
Otis (Abe Vigoda).  This in particular is a cruel and insensitive
scenario, which demonstrates the film's tendency to make fun of
everything and anyone just for the hope of drawing a laugh.
The director, Brian Robbins (who co-created the Nickelodeon show for
which the film is based, "All That"), is only partially to blame for
Good Burger's lack of raillery and effective composition.  In the end,
it boils down to the team of writers responsible for All That - they
have not succeeded to sufficiently convert the television show to the
big screen.  Whilst it may be appropriate to occasionally show a
"Nickelodeon sketch comedy" style gag, too many becomes plain annoying -
and if they aren't very good from the start - well, the fats in the
fryer.  If I want to watch an hour and a half of Nickelodeon, I'll
arrange to get cable TV - but if I'm going to the cinema, I need
something better.  I need something that will hold my attention -
something that is worthy of being on the silver screen in the first
place.
I have no doubt that even my McDonalds manager, Steve, would be able to
shed more light on this greasy, pointless film.
To give you some sort of idea of how bad Good Burger's gags come; I'll
leave you with a scene involving Ed and an evil Monolith Burger
employee:
Monolith Burger Guy: You better watch your butt!
Ed: [Tries for 5 minutes, spinning round and round in circles] I give
up. There is no way a guy can watch his own butt.

"How ironic - my crusade against television has come to an end so
formulaic it could have spewed from the power book of the laziest
Hollywood hack."  --Sideshow Bob
Subscribe to my movie reviews mailing list!  Simply reply to this email
with the subject as "Subscribe:newsletter"

Author
Steve Rhodes
     For those of you who thought GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE was too subtle
and who found DUMB & DUMBER too intellectual, don't give up --
Nickelodeon has just the movie for you, GOOD BURGER.  With the two
stars from Nickelodeon's TV series "All That," the film provokes
constant laughter.  Although the adults may be somewhat surprised, and
perhaps a bit embarrassed, at how hard they laugh at the story's
ridiculous humor, the six to eleven year old target audience will have
no such reservations.
     "Welcome to the Good Burger, home of the Good Burger, can I take
your order?" chirps the extremely likable guy with the "I'm Ed" button.
Ed, whose IQ might be too low to measure, is played with a sweet
charisma by Kel Mitchell.  The other half of the "All That" series,
Kenan Thompson, plays the somewhat brighter kid named Dexter.  Whereas
Ed is so dedicated to his fast-food position that he sleeps and even
showers in his Good Burger pen stripe uniform and hat, Dexter is just
there to make enough money to pay off the damages he caused to the car
of his teacher, Mr. Wheat.
     Sinbad clearly enjoys playing the minor role of Mr. Wheat.  With
the world's worst Afro hair and outfits with sequined, foot long
lapels, Mr. Wheat remains firmly stuck in the 70s.
     Ed's stupidity borders on legendary status.  ("If you ask me, the
guy's a few tacos short of a combination plate," is how one character
so aptly puts it.)  When a customer complains that the hamburger he
ordered "with nothing on it" was just a bun, he yells at Ed, "I'm
reporting your name to the manager!"  Ed, with his raspy Bill
Paxton-style voice, incongruously explains, "The manager already knows
my name."
     Later in the film when Ed is threatened with, "You better watch
your butt!", he spins around trying.  "I give up," he finally
concludes.  "There is no way a guy can watch his own butt."
     The heart of the film is the war between Good Burger and the new
competition across the street, Mondo Burger. Mondo Burger is run by the
nefarious Kurt, played by Jan Schweiterman as a cross between a Nazi
and a cult leader.
     Steven Jordan's candy-colored design for Mondo Burger is exactly
how Disney might redesign a Planet Hollywood to bulk it up and make it
more playful.  Natasha Landau's costumes include shiny plastic
jumpsuits with big zippers for the Mondo Burger staff.  The resulting
look reminds one of WILLY WONKA AND THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY.
     First-time screen writers Kevin Kopelow and Dan Schneider went for
a completely outlandish comedy without a hint of social relevance, and
they succeeded.  People all around us were laughing hard and often,
albeit not as much in the second half when the show begins to run out
of fresh gags and falls back a few times on that perennial favorite of
slapstick, food fights.  But even then, director Brian Robbins manages
to find new ways to stage them.
     This terminally silly film has an undeniable charm.  Kel Mitchell
as Mop haired Ed is a character I'll not soon forget.  Although the
show is one I expected to hate, I fell for Ed and his band of idiots.
     GOOD BURGER runs a fast 1:34.  It is rated PG for a few mild
profanities.  The show would be fine for all ages.  My son Jeffrey, age
8, and his friend Steven, age 9, thought the movie was "really, really
funny."  Steven's favorite scene was of the exploding burgers, and
Jeffrey's was the one where Ed preferred miniature golf over being
alone with a sexy woman.  I can't believe I'm recommending this film,
but I am.  There were plenty of laughs, well worth ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
A movie review by Michael J. Legeros
Copyright 1997 by Michael J. Legeros
     GOOD BURGER is just as juvenile as anything I've seen since, oh,
ERNEST RIDES AGAIN.  What can I say about this one?  It kept me awake,
made me laugh more than once, and held my interest long enough that I
didn't walk out.  (And my reward for sticking it through?  A late ap-
pearance by George Clinton as a mental patient who gets down with ward-
mates in a funky asylum jam.) This Nickelodeon co-production-- based on 
the shows "Kenan & Kel" and "All That"-- is probably perfect fare for 
anyone under the age of, say, ten.  Lots of agreeably stupid stuff, 
performed by a colorfully charming cast, and with nothing particularly 
offensive, unless you overreact to the occasional use of "ass," "hell," 
or "sucks." But, shit, that's nothing worse than the language used on 
your average episode of "The Simpsons." And don't miss the animated 
short that precedes, about a quartet of superhero dolls that have to 
fight an attacking baby (voiced by Harry Connick Jr.!) when he threat-
ens a concert performance of... the Kiss action figures.  Pretty funny.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Good Burger (1997) **** out of ***** - Cast: Kel Mitchell, Kenan Thompson,
Sinbad, Abe Vigoda, Dan Schneider. Written by: Dan Schneider, Kevin Kopelow
and Heath Seifert. Directed by: Brian Robbins. Running Time: 95 minutes.
Before seeing this, I was probably the most anti-"Good Burger" person
around. The previews seemed to be all I needed to see to judge that this
just wasn't worth my time. Well, for once the previews worked AGAINST the
film, as "Good Burger" is surprisingly very funny.
"Good Burger" is smart to point out it's ridiculousness very early on. It
immediately lets you know how silly it's going to be, and it stays constant
throughout. Not much of a plot to really speak of (It's all about a war
between two rival hamburger stands, one a small town mainstay, the other a
massive corporate monster), but the huge amount of comedy that actually
works kept me entertained. And aside for a little bit of minor league
profanity, it's a fine film for the family.
The cast is extremely likable, with only the main character as an exception.
He's doing a sort of James Brown impression for the whole film, and it's
awfully annoying. Thankfully, he does get some good jokes, so his character
isn't a total loss. Abe Vigoda was an odd casting choice, but even that pays
off well. And there are numerous cameos (no one earth-shattering though).
"Head of the Class" fans take note, the film co-stars and was co-written by
Dan Schneider who played Dennis on the show, and director Brian Robbins
played Eric. [PG]
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Mike Borzumate

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
    I accidentally saw Good Burger when I was trying to go to Nothing to
Lose.  Hint:  The "Camillus Mall -- Route 5" is neither in Camillus nor on
Route 5.  It would take you at least a half hour to figure that out on
your own, and you would miss Nothing to Lose and be forced to see Good
Burger too.
    As for the movie, it is overall fairly enjoyable.  It does suffer from
several weak performances and weak filler, but there are much worse movies
this summer (Batman & Robin!  Wee!  What a waste of $7.50!!!).
    I can't point to any one actor as having a performance that really
"worked".  They were all fairly competent, but none really excited me.  I
was especially disappointed by Abe Vigoda, who looked very old, very
tired, and very bored.  I did like Shaq, who does a great job just being
himself.
    The movie starts out strong, with strong action and comedy bits, but
then falls flat and drags through the middle to a nearly-believable
ending.
    The target audience for this film appears to be 13-15 year olds.  So
take one of them with you and laugh when they do.  Otherwise, wait until
it moves to the cheap section of your video store.

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.
