Title
Review for Corsa dell'innocente, La (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Manuel Colao, Francesca Neri, Jacques Perrin, 
           Federico Pacifici, Lucio Zagaria 
Director:  Carlo Calei 
Producers:  Franco Cristaldi and Domenico Procacci 
Screenplay:  Carlo Calei and Gualtiero Rosella 
Music:  Carlo Siliotto 
Released by MGM 
In Italian with subtitles 
     FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT is director Carlo Calei's feature debut,
and if certain elements of the movie have a familiar feel, it's no
accident.  Mr. Calei is an unabashed admirer of American filmmakers
such as Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg, and he has made use of
several of those mens' cinematic techniques to enrich his own movie.
     The "innocent" of the title is Vito (Manuel Colao), the ten year
old son of a family of criminals.  When there's a falling out with some
"associates" over the kidnapping and murder of a millionaire's son, a
massacre ensues in which every member of Vito's family is killed.  The
boy's quickness and intelligence are the only things that save him.
But the killer (Federico Pacifici) knows about Vito, and when he learns
that the child is headed for Rome, the chase is on.  During a journey
that is as much a moral trek as a physical one, Vito must confront the
deeds of his family and attempt to make what little recompense he can -
all while his own chance of survival becomes dimmer by the moment.
     The same kind of pulse-pounding excitement evident in one of
1993's most popular American thrillers, THE FUGITIVE, can be found in
FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT.  Except during several character-building
sequences (most of which work surprisingly well--many of the players
in this story, especially Vito, have depth and breadth), this film is
driven by adrenaline, and whenever the action slows for a while, you
can be sure that another fast-paced scene is just around the corner.
The result is a mostly-linear story that passes at an amazing rate.
     Mr. Calei borrows many of his most stunning visual images from
Martin Scorsese, including a "blood flower" that depicts beauty in the
midst of gut-wrenching horror.  The "boy's view" camera angles (from
Spielberg) are utilized exceptionally well--enough to be interesting,
but not enough to overexpose the viewer to the technique.
     Sounds, like sights, are on the director's pallet.  Footfalls,
breathing, gunshots, lightning--these all come across with startling
clarity, complimenting the visuals and emphasizing the tension.
     Unfortunately, the last third of FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT suffers
from script-related problems that dampen the strength of the climax and
conclusion.  Plot contrivances conspire to stretch the credulity of the
audience.  On one occasion, Vito suddenly acts in an atypical (and
almost inexplicable) manner that seems designed to move the story in a
certain direction.
     The "child in danger" premise can, if handled properly, produce a
tautly- effective thriller.  Barring a few flaws, director Carlo Calei
has done so with FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT.  The viewpoint here is that of
a boy whose guilt is by blood, not deed, and we are given an
opportunity to witness an added dimension to the genre:  this blameless
child's inner battle with remorse even as he flees for his life.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
There are films that are done just for fun.  And then there are films that
are made to make a point.  And once in a while you get a film that is much
more than a film.  It is not only a meaningful exercise in the use of the
cotton celluloid, but one of those moments when the human spirit and
strength stands out, in such a way, that is truly magnificent.  And
rewarding.  And despite all the drawbacks, all the bad times, there is
something to be said for those who have the will, and the inner strength to
survive.  The child is this poignant, and sad, story, is just such a one.
Amidst the Italian wave of kidnappings of children ( the innocent ) for
extortion of the richer parents, some make it, some don't.  The majority
does not.  And the extortions continue.
The film starts out with what appears to be a vengeance murder of some sort.
The retaliation ends up getting the whole family killed, with the exception
of the young boy, who manages to outwit the killers.  And he hides in the
countryside, and ends up in
various spots. some of which have been places where other children
previously  abducted have met their ill fated death.  This child happens to
find a backpack of one of the dead children and takes off with it.  And he
sets about getting to the whereabouts of this dead child's family.
The story takes him to Rome, where he ends up in the house of a cousin, who
is also involved in the mess, and gets himself killed as well.  The kid,
disappears again, but this time he came up, by accident with the loot from
another extortion.  The kid makes his way to where he wanted to go.  And all
is well, and seems to be working alright.  He stops by a harmless kid soccer
game in the street, and eventually sneaks his way into the well to do
family's house, and the dead child's room.  Eventually the mother discovers
him, and in her emotional state, she thinks that this is the right child.
The father realizes it's not.  And there is another phone call saying that
the father should bring the money with him to exchange for the child. The
kid sneaks in the car and goes with the father.  The rest of the story I
will leave with you all, because it is a magnificent story of the strength
of the human spirit, and its ability to do the right thing.
There are many outstanding moments in this film.  It treats the visionary
aspect of the character's mind with respect.  And it helps use that ability
to keep the young man alive.  As if saying that those who use those
abilities will make it.  Those who do not
are bound to be hurt.  During a train ride, the kid gets his face caressed
ever so gently by a young child, the appearance of which recalls immediately
a guardian angel.  The smile of this little girl pretty much says it all.
This kid is blessed, and will make it, somehow.
Despite the gruesomeness  of the film, it is violently brutal, and
intentionally so, the child has grown to become a much stronger entity.  Be
it based on a slight amount of fear or not, the resiliency with which this
kid works and thinks is quite above average.  A product of a system that is
threatening kids like him, he manages to transcend it, and take it to
another level.
Few films will do something so powerful, and yet so magnanimously great.  It
isn't a film that was made to be a super hit, or to tell people that
something is really screwed up.... mainly GREED.  But it does so, by just
being who it is, rather than preach, and that is a small treasure in its own
right.
In the middle of it, there are many humanitarian moments, and odd ones.  The
church getting caught in the middle is an example of the helplessness that
many adults feel.  The priest does what he can.  The rest is providence, and
not much that he can do about it.  But there are those who really defy the
odds, even if innocently so.
The victory is one to remember, and one of those films that just forces many
of us reviewers to run for their keyboards. If you don't you just ain't
human enough.
Absolutely outstanding film, despite its sad content.  Extremely violent,
but concise, and clear, in how it deals with it's violence.  Those that are
in it for the brutality of it, get
it the harshest.  The rest seem to fall innocently.
If you can stand it, and appreciate the victory of the power of beauty and
right, this film is for you.  If it is simple entertainment you crave, go
for a swim somewhere else.  This
is a film for the strong.
5 GIBLOONS
(c) Copyright Pedro Sena 1994. All Rights Reserved
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association

Author
John Walker
My form of "rating": I think I "remembered" I was watching a film
    about two or three times.  And that was not to have thoughts or
    worries from outside intrude.  It was just, for a second or
    so, to realize how awed I was and then to be grabbed back into the
    film itself.  A second form of "rating" is to ask how many times
    images from a film pop up in my mind.  It's still happening with
    FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT, months after seeing it--images of
    innocence, vulnerability, and an incredible resolve.
     Fortunately, it's out on video now, and I'm afraid that few of you
would have been able to see FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT even if you'd known
about it.  It's distributed by MGM/UA; it wasn't at the "independent"
video store near where I live, but I was able to rent it at
Blockbusters.
     As far as the big screen is concerned, though, if other places
were like D.C., you would have had to check the individual theater
listings religiously--which is a habit of mine.  There were no ads,
no reviews.  That set my intuition alarms screaming, and I decided I
*had* to see it.
     Nonetheless, I want to thank James Berardinelli
(blake7@cc.bellcore.com) for his review in rec.arts.movies.reviews.  He
is both to be praised for reviewing it and congratulated for finding a
screen where it was playing.
     I have a quibble, however, in that I don't think he praised the
film *enough*, which is partially why I'm writing this.  But many of
you may find his review more balanced and informative than this one.
     Another reason I'm writing this review is that "Sight and Sound"
(U.K.) had a review that struck me as singularly off-base.  Even their
usually reliable synopsis mis-reported a crucial event on screen.  (See
"Comments requiring a spoiler," after the main review.)
     The center of FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT is ten-year-old Vito (Manuel
Colao).  The men of his family are kidnappers and murderers in
Calabria; they murder two members of a competing family, then are
slaughtered in turn along with his mother, grandmother, sister, and
brother.  Vito sees some of this, sees all the bodies afterward.  He is
is able to hide and save himself.
     His father, left for dead, tells him to go to his brother, then
dies.  Vito goes to the cave where his brother is with a boy Vito's
age--Simone (Sandro Barletta), the only son of rich parents, who is
being held for ransom.  There he finds both dead, and is seen by a
member of the other family--a scar-faced, irrational goon (Federico
Pacifici) who will hunt him for the rest of the film.  He runs,
escapes.  He goes on the run to Rome, carrying the dead boy's
knapsack.  He's going to meet another member of the family, Orlando
(Lucio Zagaria), a cousin, I think.
     That pace will continue.  If he gets a period of peace or apparent
safety, it will be followed by more threat, more running.  In the
periods of relative calm, he will learn something about the
consequences of what his family has done, or we will learn something
about the murdered Simone.
     Many on the net, and among reviewers, thoroughly despise the HOME
ALONE sagas.  But they don't really investigate why these films were
and are so popular.  The critics of these films point out how unreal
they are, but fail to see that it is precisely the sheer impossibility
that makes them appealing.
     The HOME ALONEs do not so much ignore reality as defy it.  We know
what would have happened to us if we'd been in Kevin McAllister's
shoes: we'd have had a bullet in the head, and that would have been the
end of us and the flick.  The HOME ALONEs are not merely statistically
unlikely, they are intentionally impossible to the point of being
straightforward fantasy.
     FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT deals with a similar threat in a way that
*might* be possible.  Statistically, virtually all kids in situations
like Vito's are found and murdered with everyone else.
     But not *always*.  Kids do hide, do escape, do survive.
Throughout, FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT *might* be possible.  I found only
one place where probability was stretched.  (Discussing or refuting it
would be spoiler territory.)  But we should recognize that *all* such
films--*even* *if* *based *on* *fact*--stretch probability.
     Even in a film taken scrupulously from history, we have to realize
that history is written by survivors.  In certain situations, survival
is *improbable*.  "They" might have survived the battle, the attack,
the plague, or whatever, but *you and I* would probably be dead.  In an
odd way, a "realistic" story and a "fantasy" serve the same purpose--to
let us ignore or defy the facts, if only for a couple of hours.
     So is FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT merely another chase/adventure
flick?  Excitement, adventure, missing death by inches, so nothing is
really known until the end?  (FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT doesn't depend on
the usual adventure conventions.  There's no star power here.  Vito's
survival is in no way guaranteed.)
     The difference between FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT and an ordinary
chase flick is the character, the kid, Vito.  Colao is slightly built,
conveying both fragileness and stamina.  He has a hang-in-there spirit,
but no magic, no special skills.  More to the point, though, Vito is
*decent*--in a world that is fundamentally insane.
     But Vito is tied to all this horror by blood.  They're *his*
family that kidnapped a boy much like himself.  Seeing Simone's mother
and father (Francesca Neri and Jacques Perrin) on TV, he realizes more
and more what his family has really done, what they were really like.
     Berardinelli's review was good at pointing out this element of
morality.  But there's another dimension that I can't do much more than
mention without giving spoilers.  Vito is governed by *honor*.  There
are some things he cannot do even if he really wants to.  There are
other things he *must* do regardless of the consequences to himself.
     And part of that is *family* honor.  They're still his family.
His father may be a murderer, but he's still his father.  The others
are still his family.  What is Vito to do when he realizes that?  Turn
away from them in disgust or hatred?  Or embrace their corruption as
his own?  Those are certainly the options that loom largest for most
people confronting such a situation.
     *You and I* would either reject the criminal or embrace the
crime.  Vito, however, looks for something else.  And that may be the
most important improbability.
     We're looking at a kid who is called upon to play a role that most
adults would shrink from, and to confront real moral questions that
most adults would prefer to pretend aren't there.  And he does so, not
as a sort of stainless hero, but as a thoroughly ordinary kid somehow
rising to the need.
     Suffice it to say that whenever he seems to be acting foolishly or
pointlessly or suicidally, he is governed by honor.  He can't restore
Simone to life, but if he can do anything for the murdered boy's
parents, he must.  He *owes* it to them, and to his family.  To
Simone's parents, because they are his family's victims; to his family,
because by aiding the victims, he reduces their dishonor.
     If the moral aspect distinguishes FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT from an
adventure/chase film, it is also different from the ordinary
child-in-danger idea.  No one is out to save Vito.  Yes, well meaning
adults are there.  The authorities make it clear they're on his side,
but that family-honor thing will hardly help him see them as his
natural allies.  Except (perhaps) for the parents of Simone,
non-hostile adults are really just walk-ons in his life.  They offer
him choices or threats.  What happens is up to him.
     The director is Carlo Carlei; he and Gualtiero Rosella wrote the
screenplay.  The "Sight and Sound" review notes Carlei's "misguided
attempt to fuse the racy realism of American film-making with the rural
poetry of his native country's tradition."  I will certainly agree that
one powerful element of FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT is the continual
juxtaposition of beautiful, apparently serene, surroundings with the
repeated violence aimed at destroying Vito.  (And the music by Carlo
Siliotto reinforces this dichotomy.)  But both the violence and the
beauty are the backdrop, not the heart.
     The heart is Vito, a completely vulnerable core of decency and
truth.  The continual attack by hatred and violence, the beauty of the
countryside, and the bustle of the city are meaningless without Vito.
And FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT works out Vito's choices with a logic that
takes that core of decency and truth seriously.
     Spoilers concern the film's climax and ending.
     I dislike writing a review of this sort of film after having seen
it only once.  I wrote most of this just after seeing it, but I decided
to pass on it, given Berardinelli's basically sound review.
     Then the April "Sight and Sound" had a synopsis that demanded a
reply.  Personal matters kept me from finishing the review, but now the
video is out--which verified my recollection of what appeared on
screen, as opposed to how it was described in "Sight and Sound."
     For those of you not familiar with "Sight and Sound," toward the
end there's a section of short reviews.  Along with each review is a
complete credit list and a complete synopsis.  Note: *synopsis*--not
one of those vague indications of subject matter we usually get, but a
brief telling of the *whole* story--your Compleat Spoiler.  It is one
of the magazine's towering virtues.  I frequently disagree with their
point of view, but if I had to suggest one film magazine on the planet,
it would probably be "Sight and Sound."
     But as priceless as I think their synopses are, they can be
dangerous, simply because they purport to be simple recitations of
events.  In this case, "Sight and Sound" majorly screwed up their
report of the ending of FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT.  And that
misunderstanding appears to have colored the entire review by Peter
Aspden.
     Note: I don't think this was at all ill-willed, or dictated by
cinematic ideology.  And it could well be what Aspden *thought* was
presented on screen.  As we'll see, it's not that the conclusion is
simply wrong.  Rather it's one of three possibilities.  The mistake in
the review was to take something clearly presented as a "vision" and to
respond to as if it were a reported fact.
     In brief, the ending is that Scarface has convinced Simone's
father that Simone is alive.  The father has gone to pay the ransom,
and very likely to get himself killed.  Vito hides in the car.  There's
a confrontation.  Vito tells them that he told the father that Simone
is dead and not to bring the money.  After Vito promises to take them
to Orlando's money if the father is released, Vito, Scarface, and
Scarface's partner leave.  Vito tricks them, escapes for a while, but
is shot just before the police show up, killing Scarface and the
other.  The ambulance takes Vito away.  Then, in the words of the
"Sight and Sound" synopsis:
     "Finally, Vito sits at Simone's desk, having taken the place of
the dead child."
     The opinion piece picks this up, extensively criticizing Carlei
for such a sentimental ending.
     Notably, in the car, Vito has asked Scarface why he killed
Simone--and is told that his brother did it, to prevent Scarface from
getting him (and the ransom).  Vito's "blood guilt" is higher than we
or he thought.
     In any event, we see Vito shot, and fall.  We see him have a
vision of him and his family alive, reunited and happy, at a table with
Simone and his parents.  Simone says words from an astronomy book of
his that Vito has read: "Sea of Tranquility."
     Then we see the rescue workers take Vito away.  We see the father
standing by, thoughtful.  (We saw previously that the mother wanted to
keep Vito as what most of us would interpret as God's replacement for
Simone.)  Then we get a vision of Simone's desk, and Vito fades in --
*exactly* where we had previously see Simone as Vito envisioned him.
He turns, and smiles.
     Okay, doesn't that mean that Simone's parents took Vito in?
     The problem is that this is a *vision*, presumably Vito's.  And in
case there is any doubt that it is a vision, it is an almost *precise*
reprise of the vision that Vito had when he went into Simone's room.
There, the desk stands against the far wall.  Simone fades in, looking
thoughtful.  At the end, we see the same desk, although now Vito fades
in, smiling.
     "Sight and Sound" may reply that this can reinforce the
replacement idea.  Doesn't the first vision sort of predict it?  Isn't
Simone welcoming Vito home?
     Well, at least we have a less straightforward announcement of the
happy ending than the review would indicate.  But let's deal with what
are presented as facts on screen.  Yes, the father looks thoughtful.
But we have nothing more than that: adoption is only a *possibility*.
A more likely, "realistic" outcome is that Vito will be returned to the
children's home where the authority's put him.  (Because of a scene
there, we can view that as actually a rather happy ending, and not
opening all the more tragic possibilities of a boy who will always
remind his parents of the murdered Simone.)
     So, first, there are at least *two* possibilities.  The vision is
just that: Vito's hope, having as much reality as the one that
immediately preceded it, his family's happy reunion.
     Unfortunately, there is a third possibility.  I said that Simone
might be *welcoming* Vito.  Well, *where is Simone*?!
     The vision is presented, cinematically, *as a vision*.  Carlei
does everything but hang out a neon sign saying, "Hey!  This is a
vision!  See?!"  As such, the scene is inherently ambiguous.
     And Carlei has piled ambiguity on top of ambiguity in those last
few minutes.  In the vision of the families reunited, Vito looks for a
smear of blood on his father's shoe--blood he saw before his father was
killed, and which he could later conclude was from a murder.  It's no
longer there.  Well, how is blood washed out--except by blood?
     At the end, after we see Vito in the chair, the last thing before
the credits is a fragment of a poem:
     Do I need to point out that, at least in the imagery of the
English language, something like "to sleep in your tiny bed" is
frequently read as implying death?
     And finally, what were Simone's last words in the vision?  "Sea of
Tranquility."  Interestingly, at the end of the credits, those words
are repeated--by *Vito*.  Again, where is Simone?
     By misreading--by denying--the ambiguity presented on the screen,
by taking what is shown to be a vision as if it were a fact, the "Sight
and Sound" synopsis and review certainly give us a tidier, happier
story.  Maybe it is even one that *I*, personally, *want* to be the
case.  I can ignore the more somber possibilities it might open up in
the future, and focus on the redemption achieved by love and
rectitude.
     But the screen does not give me that ending as certain.  If you
want to do an "economics of interpretation," arguably, the return to
the children's home is a good middle ground.
     But what is shown on *screen* also permits a darker, sadder
ending--one that squares tragically with the whole theme of honor and a
growing connection between Simone and Vito.  Vito can *not* annul his
family's crime.  In such a darker reading, the deed, once done, can
never be undone: it can only be recompensed in blood.
     Vito has sustained a serious bullet wound.  We can assume he's
alive as he's taken away.  That's *all* we can assume.  We simply are
not shown that he indeed survives.  That he is shown last in a *vision*
is not, traditionally, very encouraging.
     I will go even further.  Note that I'm talking about what appears
on screen.  For all I know, the "Sight and Sound" review may have been
completely correct about Carlei's intentions.  Carlei and Rosella may
very well have wanted us to believe that it is absolutely undeniable
that Vito was adopted by Simone's parents.
     I don't care.  That's *not* what they put on *screen*.  On screen,
we have a vision, not a report.  On screen, we have ambiguity and
conflicting signals.  Between the director/screenwriter and the
*screen*, I will believe the screen.  And certainly between a reviewer
and the screen, I will believe the screen.  And, here, the screen is
ambiguous in what it tells us.
     Why, you ask, do I rant on about what is, in any event, one
possible interpretation of the ending?
     One reason is that it shows the effects of a perfectly honest
failure to notice things on screen in the last a few minutes of a
film.  The whole film is changed.  Aspden's denunciation is expressed
almost totally in terms of the ending.  (And, again, I don't blame
Carlei.  It was clear that the last scene was a vision--not to mention
all the other ambiguous elements.)
     Second, it shows the distinction between what we see on screen and
how we interpret it.  Once the screen announces that something it is a
"vision," for instance, the game of interpretation becomes noticeably
more complex.
     The third reason is that we frequently fail to see the moral and
the "metaphysical" when they are presented to us as things people
actually live.  The modern mind wants to have little speeches to warn
us that an act is ethical.  Ethics, morality, honor, duty--these are
things we regard as "political" or "policy" decisions.  They are
somehow divorced from the things we do every day.  That they could be
*lived*, that they could govern every decision, and be reflected in
every action--well, we don't seem to swallow that too easily.  We don't
recognize it even when someone rubs our noses in it.
     The theme of honor is one of the most traditional in literature.
It is also one of the grimmest.  That alone should warn us against too
quickly assuming there will be a happy ending--even for a genuine hero
like Vito.
     Having said that we should not assume the best, I should also say
that neither should we assume the worst.  Sometimes, in films as well
as in life, we just don't know.  Then, we must rely on hope.
