Title
Review for Life as a House (2001)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Irwin Winkler's LIFE AS A HOUSE, one of the very best films of the year,
George has some big problems.  In an incredibly nuanced and Oscar-caliber
performance, Kevin Kline plays George, an average Joe who lives in a shack next
to multimillion dollar mansions above the Pacific ocean.  (In a part worthy of a
supporting actress nomination, Kristin Scott Thomas plays Robin, George's
ex-wife.)
The first of his difficulties occurs when George is fired from the job that he
loves.  For the past twenty years, he has been planting fake grass and adding
the other accoutrements in his construction of physical architectural models. 
But computers have now rendered his job obsolete.  It may make good business
sense, but it rips George's heart out.  As anyone who has ever lost their job
knows, this can be almost unbearably painful.
And that isn't even close to the worst thing that happens to George.  He finds
out that he has an incurable disease.  Don't worry, this isn't one of those
manipulative disease-movie-of-the-week weepers.  You'll certainly find many
tearful moments in it, but the marvelous script by Mark Andrus (AS GOOD AS IT
GETS) is uplifting and funny as well as poignant and honest.  Part of this comes
from George's attitude, which is to treat his last four months on earth as a
great opportunity.  The other part comes from the richness of the script, which
gives a whole host of featured and minor characters rich stories of their own. 
In a fairly standard length film, it packs more into the narrative than most
miniseries and does it without ever rushing.  The actors are marvelous, making
each of their problems palpable.
The biggest challenge that George faces isn't his job or his illness, it's his
son, a rebellious teen named Sam (Hayden Christensen, Anakin Skywalker in STAR
WARS: EPISODE II), who could be the perfect date for Leelee Sobieski's alienated
character in MY FIRST MISTER.  An utterly unhappy 16-year-old, Sam spends his
time huffing, sniffing, smoking and worse.  Dress in rebellious black, he has
long since served notice on the world that he's one of the walking dead.  He
wants nothing to do with his father with whom he doesn't live, or his mother and
stepfather, Peter (Jamey Sheridan), whose house he occupies.  To say that his
relationship with his parents is strained is an understatement.  "What kind of a
mother can't stand her own son?" Robin asks George in a telling, confessional
question that has no proper answer.
George is full of secrets, his illness being one.  Those about him take his
weight lost as some sort of fluke.  After all, he has always had a rugged,
grizzled look.  Another secret concerns his undying love for Robin.  "Love is
not enough," he tells her as one of the reasons for the dissolution of their
marriage, "not even close."
In this most unusual and imaginative story, George decides his and Sam's
salvation will come from building a house that summer.  He'll tear down his old
shack and erect one based on one of his models.  Sam wants no part of this
endeavor, but in a variation on the tough love system, George requires that Sam
at least stay with him and watch.  Without computers, cable, Internet or drugs,
Sam is absolutely lost.  George doesn't even have an indoor shower.  This,
however, proves to be an opportunity for Sam, as it allows him to connect with
the girl next door, Alyssa (Jena Malone), who has a fully functional indoor
bathroom that she is quite happy to share.  Mary Steenburgen is wonderful in a
small part as Alyssa's mother.
All but the most cynical should be moved by the transformation in Sam, George,
Robin and all the rest of characters.  This upbeat story is almost as good as
the downbeat AMERICAN BEAUTY.  Common to both are the richness of their
narratives and of all the characters.  When it's over, you may be like me.  LIFE
AS A HOUSE made such an impression on me that I had trouble moving.  What a
wonderful story it is.
LIFE AS A HOUSE runs 2:08.  It is rated R for " language, sexuality and drug
use" and would be acceptable for teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 26, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Life As a House, which had its world premiere at the Toronto International
Film Festival, was described in the program book as being reminiscent of
Parenthood, It's a Wonderful Life and The Parent Trap, but the film reminded
me of a previous Toronto world premiere - American Beauty. Now, let's not
get carried away here, because House couldn't carry Beauty's jockstrap.  The
similarities are only in the content, not the quality.
Kline (The Anniversary Party) plays architect George Monroe, who, like
Lester Burnham before him, suffers daily at a job he no longer feels
passionate about, but gets fired in one of the film's opening scenes.  On
his way out of the building, George collapses and is taken to the hospital,
only to find out there's a cancer present that will devour him from the
inside out within a few months.  He is also father to a dark, brooding
teenager named Sam (The Virgin Suicides' Hayden Christensen, who will soon
be the dark, brooding Anakin Skywalker), who huffs gas and asphyxiates
himself when he jerks off.
Unlike Lester, who sort of knew he was going to die and suffered a midlife
crisis instigated by employment issues, George has been divorced from Robin
(Kristin Scott Thomas, Up At the Villa) long enough for her to have squirted
out two new kids with her current husband, the cold, unloving Peter (Jamey
Sheridan, Law & Order: CI).  And although he lives in a ritzy suburban
neighborhood like Lester, George's house is a shack, which is a painfully
ridiculous metaphor for both his rotten life and decaying innards.
Knowing he'll be pushing up daisies soon (and keeping his illness a secret
from everyone), George decides it's the perfect time to bond with his
rebellious son as the two - get this - tear down the shack and build
George's dream house.  Sam, of course, hates the idea, but soon changes from
a pierced, dyed, black-clad, perpetually headphoned rent-boy into a normal,
well-adjusted kid with no makeup and no attitude.  After all, what angry,
distant teen wouldn't relish taking a crowbar to his father's house?
Sure enough, the montage of the two building the new home soon follows, but
George and Sam are joined by neighbor Colleen (Mary Steenburgen) and her
daughter Alyssa (Jena Malone), and soon, even ex-wife Robin shows up with a
hammer in her hand.  As the house gets closer and closer to completion,
George's health gets worse and worse, but he feels better on the inside, and
that's all that counts, right?
House's neatly telegraphed story (penned by As Good As It Gets' Mark Andrus)
offers precious little that we can't see coming a mile away (or that we
haven't seen a bunch of times before).  The only thing remotely surprising
here is the amount of sex.  I don't want to give anything away, but there
are all kinds of combinations going on - May-December, December-May,
December-December, May-May and so on.  It's supposed to lighten things up, I
guess, but some of it gave me douche chills.
Although it's totally schmaltzy, House is still somewhat stirring, due to
its performances (especially Kline and the always reliable Malone). Director
Irwin Winkler (At First Sight) doesn't do anything special with the
formulaic script, unless you weren't expecting to see scenes where George is
doubled over with pain.  Oscar-winning cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond keeps
everything bathed in a nice, warm light.
2:08 - R for language, sexuality and drug use

Author
Norm Schrager
The good news for George, a middle-aged, washed up architect, is that an
enormous life change has motivated him to connect with his horrible
teenage son and build a house by the ocean.  The bad news is that the
change is terminal cancer.  The good news for moviegoers is that Irwin
Winkler's Life As A House is filled with sharp, solid acting, a decent,
sometimes harsh, script, and a few surprises.  The bad news is that
anything worth seeing here lives within an uneven sap of a film, unable
to break free from the traditional Hollywood devices.
But much of Life As A House is completely watchable.  Mark Andrus's
script (he's written As Good As It Gets and the underrated, rarely seen
Late For Dinner) appears cookie-cutter: he gives us the lazy, lonely,
eccentric nobody (Kevin Kline); his estranged family, including
beautiful ex-wife (Kristin Scott Thomas) and alienated teen (Hayden
Christensen); and his predictably uptight neighbors, pissed off that his
ramshackle of a house has stood in their beautiful oceanside
neighborhood for twenty years.
But Andrus gives the telling a hard edge from the get-go, which keeps
Life As A House interesting in the first act.  Kline, who we're used to
seeing as generally kind-hearted, blurts to neighbor Mary Steenburgen,
"How far did you just have to stick your head out the window in order to
see my dick?!" after he uses God's ocean as his own personal
receptacle.  In the same introduction, George's son Sam (Christensen,
soon appearing as a little-known character called Anakin Skywalker),
wearing heavy eye makeup, sniffs glue, applies a noose, and attempts to
pleasure himself.  This is stuff I'd expect from David O. Russell (Three
Kings), not Irwin Winkler (The Net).
Life As A House goes south, however, as soon as young Sam, softens for
his Dad. When George, upon getting the news of his impending demise,
decides to replace the old shack, he forces Sam to spend the summer with
him.  The fact that he's erecting a house at the same time he wants to
build a relationship with his son, and reconstruct his emotional
architecture as well, is painfully blatant.  At the very least, however,
Andrus's script is smart enough to make mention of the parallel: Sam, in
being asked to help knock down the house says to George, "You're just
trying to tear down your father."  George's reply: "You should try it." 
[See also the title of the film... -Ed.]
Andrus's reputation for good dialogue, and there is some above-average
stuff here, must have convinced some name actors to take wasted, bit
parts.  Steenburgen, Scott Bakula, Jamey Sheridan, and Sam Robards
could've probably taken meatier, more meaningful roles elsewhere (even
if Steenburgen does get to show off her finely-aged body).
And as competently good as Kline's and Christensen's performances are,
(and I believe Christensen is a real find), they're overrun by
poorly-timed, heart-tugging music, and choppy direction (will somebody
please stop the overuse of slow-motion!?).  Winkler alternates between
the standard camera setup you've seen before, and a feigned attempt at
Altmanesque, herky-jerky "verité."  It's messy.
There are a few sequences -- one in particular has a variety of
characters jumping into each other's beds -- that definitely raise
eyebrows and keep the proceedings interesting.  But for every leap into
exciting waves of edgier content, there are too many jumps into the
giant movie ocean of mediocrity.
Reviewed as part of our Boston Film Festival coverage (feature story
coming soon).
Director: Irwin Winkler
Producer: Rob Cowan, Irwin Winkler
Writer: Mark Andrus
Starring: Kevin Kline, Kristin Scott Thomas, Hayden Christensen, Mary
Steenburgen, Jamey Sheridan, Jena Malone, Sam Robards, Scott Bakula
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
