Title
Review for Why Do Fools Fall In Love (1998)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
One-time 50's teen phenom crooner Frankie Lymon has his life immortalized
via the recollections of three women who all claim to be his wives and the
rightful heirs to his estate.
CRITIQUE:
Interesting, highly stylized movie featuring a groovy soundtrack packed with
many of the funnest hits from the 50's, with some decent performances from
its four stars (despite some obvious prosthetics for their "older" looks)
and an overall authentic feel of the era. Afterwards, I will say that I was
somewhat disappointed to find out that some of the events taking place near
the end of the film were slightly dramatized for effect ("made up" for us
lay people, see Little Known Facts below), but still enjoyed its quick pace,
sometimes heavy-handed but generally creative directing style, and great
rockin' tunes. This film should definitely be seen by all those who are
interested in the music of that era, and/or anyone excited about any of the
film's main stars. Laurenz Tate specifically gives an exceptionally
well-rounded performance as the ill-fated Frankie Lymon.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Word on the street is that the wives never really bonded in real life as
shown in the film.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Why_Do_Fools_Fall_in_Love_ (R) *** (out of ****)
As the summer popcorn season winds down, and the weightier fall/holiday
season begins, here arrives a smoothly executed "transition" film, which
tackles some fairly serious subject matter in a fun, entertaining,
guilt-free package.  _Why_Do_Fools..._ centers on the court battle between
the late doo wop singer Frankie Lymon's (Larenz Tate) three
wives--glamorous singer Zola Taylor (Halle Berry), petty thief Elizabeth
Waters (Vivica A. Fox), and demure schoolmarm Emira Eagle (Lela Rochon)--
for his estimated $4 million estate .  Testimony-stemmed flashbacks
chronicle Lymon's quick rise to fame as the lead singer of the Teenagers
(famous for the classic title song), his equally quick fall into obscurity
and drugs, and the circumstances behind his untimely death.
Director Gregory Nava's recreation of Lymon's late '50s-early '60s
performances are exuberant, buoyed by Tate's charismatic performance,
which, in turn, provides a sympathetic anchor when things turn dark.  The
lighter court storyline is a bit more cliched and stereotyped, with all the
verbal catfights between the women, but the appealing trio of Berry,
Rochon, and especially Fox (in the showiest role of the three) make the
proceedings enjoyable.  These two contrasting sides, Lymon's tragically
short existence and the battle between the three widows, are meshed
together with ease into a pleasing cinematic confection by Nava, a proven
hand musical biographies (_Selena_).
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "WHY DO FOOLS FALL IN LOVE" (Warner Bros.)
 What could have been a caustic, witty farce becomes a sudsy
soap opera as the life of a doo-wop singer of the '50s & '60s, Frankie
Lymon, unfolds on the screen - as seen through the eyes of his three -
count 'em - three widows. As the story begins, Frankie's dead and
they're in court vying for a stake in his royalties. Each must prove
to the judge why she is the rightful heiress. The first claimant is a
glamorous, classy rhythm 'n' blues star (Halle Berry) who was singing
with the Platters in 1955 when she became involved with Frankie
(Larenz Tate). an up-and-coming teenage sensation from Harlem with a
big hit record, "Why Do Fools Fall in Love." Their romance lasted
until she went out on an extended foreign tour and he consoled himself
with heroin. After becoming a crazed junkie, he fell in with a crass
shoplifter (Viveca A. Fox) whom he impulsively married in Mexico. His
third wife was a prissy Southern schoolteacher with admirable domestic
skills (Lela Rochon), whom he met and married while he was in the
Army. The narrative by screenwriter Tina Andrews is episodic and
uneven, offering three "Roshomon-like" interpretations yet never
delving deep enough into Frankie Lymon's real, erratic persona, and
director Gregory Nava goes for gloss rather than grit - until the last
15 minutes when the disparate wannabe heiresses begin to bond over
their mutual involvement with this bigamist - or trigamist. Utilizing
Frankie Lymon's own music, as he recorded it, there are Golden Oldie
tunes a-plenty and some amusing antics by Little Richard, who toured
with Lymon. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Why Do Fools Fall
in Love" is an indulgent 4. Why did they make it so muddled? It could
have been a black music biz's "First Wives Club."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When Joseph Smith urged Mormon men to take many
wives, he did so because he believed in rescuing bodies in
limbo waiting to be born.  But bigamy is a no-no, contrary to
the laws of the fifty United States, a prohibition which gives a
platform to Gregory Nava's movie "Why Do Fools Fall in
Love."  "Fools" is a movie with lots of pizazz, edgy
performances, and many humorous turns focusing on a court
case involving a young man who took three wives, each of
whom was in the dark about her real status.  Nava, suiting
Tina Andrews's script to the wide screen, sorts the movie into
two area: one, the stories told in court by the three women
about their relationship with the man of their dreams; the
other, the uneven career of teenage sensation Frankie
Lymon, who made a smash debut at the age of thirteen with
his de-wop hit, "Why Do Fools Falls in Love."  We come away
from the movie more fully understanding why so many
celebrities have taken to drink and drugs--not so much
because they're available and affordable with their high
salaries and royalities, but more because they cannot endure
the tedium off the stage, away from the enormous high they
get from the hysterical cheers of their rabid fans.  In Frankie
Lymon's case, his death from a heroin overdose at the age of
twenty-five was brought on by a more permanent recess from
the showbiz platforms: when his do-wop style of singing went
out of fashion, buried by the Beatles, by the Motown sound,
and by the unique style of Jimi Hendrix, his career was over. 
Watching others make good while he was out pounding the
streets and scorned by his producer, he fell into a funk that
could be alleviated only by heroin.  We identify with him not
because we are dopeheads or because we've had
spectacular careers pleasing the teeming crowds.  But we
know how it feels to be out of favor, out of a job, disregarded
by those who mean something to us.
   When photographer Ed Lachman shifts in the final scene to
a black-and-white cut of the actual Frankie Lymon performing
the title song at the age of thirteen, the singer seems even
smaller and younger than we expect. Given the rudimentary
camerawork at the time and the absence of knock-'em-dead
sound systems, he looks like nothing special.  Larenz Tate, a
handsome actor who has turned in spellbinding performances
in movies like "Menace II Society" and "Dead Presidents" 
makes the '50's singer larger than life, one whose appeal to
women of all races is perfectly understandable.  Lip-synching
to "Fools" and especially to Johnny Mercer and Matt
Malneck's wonderful song "Goody Goody," Tate chews up the
scenery in the generous number of clips featuring his
appearances before screaming, hand-clapping crowds of most
young whites.  In one such performance for live TV, a blond
teenaged girl leaps to the stage and begins jitterbugging with
the singer.  While it's difficult for us in the '90's to believe, the
show was cancelled because Lymon was "dancing with a
white girl."  The electricity in the air is so palpable each time
Tate takes on the role of Lymon on the concert stage that we
wonder how do-wop could ever have gone out of fashion.
   The principal action, however, takes place in the courtroom
of Judge Lambrey (Pamela Reed), who is hearing a case
brought against Lymon's estate by the three women who
claimed they were his wives.  The women are so different
from one another that while we have no doubt that all were
captivated by the charismatic singer, we wonder how they all
appealed equally to Lymon.  Zola (Halle Berry) seemed his
obvious choice.  A successful performer with the Platters, she
is all showbiz glamour with obvious common ground with her
husband.  Elizabeth (Vivica F. Fox), however, seems cheap, a
petty thief who spent time in jail for shoplifting stupid items
like perfume, but one who is willing to sell her body on the
streets to raise money for her beloved.  Emira (Lela Rochon)
is taken in by the man's charm like the others, but what would
Lymon want with a high-school English teacher, a prissy one
at that? 
  As the women tell their stories in turn, trying to convince the
court that each has the primary claim on the estate. they take
us through Frankie's brief career, though (unfortunately for the
clarity of the story) not in chronological order. He begins his
calling with a group that take on the name the Teenagers and
becomes its head.  They wholly impress a record producer,
Morris Levy (Paul Mazursky), who signs them up but, as we
learn toward the very end of the story, rips them off by
grabbing for himself an unfair share of the royalties (he is
actually listed along with Lymon as the writer of the title
song).  When the number of gigs goes down to zero because
of changing styles, Frankie becomes desperate, shoots drugs
and gets into trouble with the pushers whom he cannot pay,
and though his name is still recognizable by the American
people he approaches his mid-twenties, he is out of the
limelight for so long that he might as well be dead.  
   Nava generously allows us to see Lymon relating in turn to
each of his wives, in one case having to break up a catfight
between two of them in Zola's lavish California home when
she discovers Elizabeth in his arms in Zola's own pool.  
   Of the three women, we probably root for Emira to win the
case. She is the girl scout of the threesome, one who is so
unused to alcohol that when the two other women have her
unwittingly drink a concoction known as Long Island iced tea,
she loses her chillout and carries on outrageously with her
courtroom enemies.  Halle Berry looks stunning as always
though with an excellent make-up, wig, and costume job she
appears 15 or 20 years older than she did in "Bulworth."  Paul
Mazursky is fine as the conniving record producer who
probably symbolizes the stature of quite a few in his
profession at the time--people who cynically stole millions
from their trusting clients through mischievous contracts. 
Larenz Tate, though, is the showstealer, looking enchanting
when in the height of his powers and a miserable wreck when
down and out.  
   When we learn at the conclusion what has happened to
Lymon's estate, it's as though we knew it all along. The
lawyers do the collecting, the clients are the pawns. 
Ironically, the film will probably not be seen the kids who are
the prime audience for the cinema in general, those who are
the same age as the hero of the story.  It takes place in an
era they'd consider ancient history and deals with a singer
whose career was over so quickly that few are likely to
recognize the name.

Author
Matt Williams
Why Do Fools Fall in Love is an unusual biopic...one that isn't terribly
interested about its subject.  It's more concerned with the various
other lives which are intersected and thrown into turmoil.
Why Do Fools Fall in Love tells the story of singer Frankie Lymon
(Larenz Tate), who in 1955 wrote his first smash hit (the title song),
at the age of 13.  However, his star burned bright and brief.  He
quickly spiraled into despair, drugs and death.
The film takes place in 1986, and reveals Frankie's story in
flashbacks.  Many years after his death, Diana Ross performs a
best-selling version of Why Do Fools Fall in Love...adding many dollars
to Frankie's previously bankrupt estate. Soon, there is not one, but
three separate women who each claim to be Frankie's widow, and entitled
to the fortune.
One woman is Zola Taylor (Halle Berry), a singer with The Platters, who
toured sometimes with Frankie.  Another is Elizabeth Waters (Vivica A.
Fox), a shoplifter who helps Frankie through the lowest valleys of his
life.  The third is Emira Eagle (Lela Rochon), a somewhat prissy
schoolteacher who loved Frankie during his final days.
It's difficult to point out exactly where Why Do Fools Fall in Love goes
wrong. For starters, it drags on about a half an hour too long.  Each
woman tells her own story about Frankie Lymon, and by the time you've
reached the second one, you're ready for the film to end.
The film tries to portray Frankie in three different lights, as seen by
each of his three "wives".  However, the pictures they paint aren't as
surprisingly dissimilar as they claim to be.  Add to that the fact that
Frankie never truly emerges as a compelling enough character for a two
hour biopic, and you're in for a long sit.
Still, although Larenz Tate is somewhat undefined in his role, the three
lead actresses give it a good try.  None of them are quite convincing in
their "middle-aged" scenes set during the 1980s, however.  Of the three,
Vivica A. Fox has the juiciest role, and is quite convincing as the
unlikely target of Frankie's love who would (and does) do anything to
prove her devotion.
Why Do Fools Fall in Love has an interesting concept, but is poorly
executed. The film should have put more focus on Frankie, and why he was
the way he was. Instead, we are left with a collection of fading
memories that are never quite as vibrant when told second-hand.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
James Sanford
        Groupies, take heed: Marrying a musician may ultimately
benefit your lawyer more than it will you. That's the message of ``Why
Do Fools Fall In Love?''  about the three-way battle for the estate of
singer Frankie Lymon, who died at the age of 25 in 1968 from a heroin
overdose.
  In his wake, Lymon left behind a trio of women all claiming
to be his legitimate widow: Zola Taylor (Halle Berry), a singer with
the Platters; Elizabeth Waters (Vivica A. Fox), a good girl gone
wrong; and Emira Eagle (Lela Rochon), a strait-laced schoolteacher
from Georgia. Certainly, considering what each lady had to put up with
while being around the former teen idol, each was entitled to some
kind of monetary compensation.
  The picture ``Fools'' paints of Lymon is woefully incomplete
- writer Tina Andrews can't seem to put her finger on exactly what led
to Lymon's heroin addiction, for instance - but what's shown is
unflattering and sad.  An overnight success with his racially mixed
group The Teenagers in the late 1950s, the sweet-voiced Lymon fell out
of favor with the public almost as quickly, thanks to his forbidden
dance with a white girl on national TV and his ill-fated attempt to go
solo. Like many teen idols, he was effectively washed-up before age
20.
  In what can only be read as an attempt to spice up his
otherwise dreary life, Lymon first romanced Taylor, then married
Waters before setting his sights on wholesome Eagle. All were won over
by Lymon's charm and attentiveness. Taylor and Waters would later
suffer greatly for their association with him. While Lymon once sang
``I'm Not A Juvenile Delinquent,'' offstage he was a junkie, a thief
and a user.
  Berry, Rochon and Fox are all far more believable as young
women than they are in the sequences set in the mid-1980s in which
director Gregory Nava allows each to ham it up disconcertingly. As
Lymon, Larenz Tate capably handles a difficult character whose
behavior ranges from beguiling to bizarre, but the true highlight of
the cast is the incomparable Little Richard, playing himself with
panache.
  ``Fools'' turns up the occasional insight into how this
irresponsible man wormed his way into the hearts of three very
different women, but more often than not Andrews' screenplay can't
decide if it's a cautionary tale about the perils of marrying a
has-been or a rowdy ``you go, girl'' celebration of sisterhood. The
movie's timeline is pitifully tangled from the very start, when Waters
hears Diana Ross' ``new'' cover of the Lymon-penned ``Why Do Fools
Fall In Love?'' in 1985 - four years after the record went gold. In a
scene set in 1964, Waters and Lymon listen to Otis Redding's ``Try A
Little Tenderness'' on the radio; an astonishing feat considering the
song wasn't recorded until 1966.
  When it comes to recreating the Alan Freed rock-n-roll shows
of the 1950s and the deliciously tacky go-go look of TV's
``Hullabaloo,'' the movie scores. But the courtroom battle that forms
the dramatic centerpiece of the film is not exactly a nail-biter; it's
a clear case of ``Smart-Mouthed Women, Foolish Choices.''

Author
Bob Bloom

 Why Do Fools Fall in Love (1998) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Larenz Tate,
Halle Berry, Vivica A. Fox and Lela Rochon. Directed by Gregory Nava.
 Somewhere amidst the fragmented chaos that is Why Do Fools Fall in Love
lurks the germ of a terrific movie.
 Unfortunately, director Gregory Nava and writer Tina Andrews have
overreached their objective. Instead of the multitextured story they were
hoping to film, their film is a jumbled, unfocused undertaking.
 Why Do Fools Fall in Love centers on the life of one of rock 'n' roll's
early idols, Frankie Lymon, whom with his group, The Teenagers, rose to the
top of the charts in early 1956 with the film's title song. The recording
was one of the first big hits of the rock era.
 However, Nava's movie concentrates not on Lymon's life but the aftermath
of his death. The main plot follows the court battle for Lymon's estate
waged by three women from diverse backgrounds, each claiming to be Mrs.
Frankie Lymon.
 The women are Zola Taylor (Halle Berry), a successful singer who was a
member of that legendary group, The Platters; Elizabeth Waters (Vivica A.
Fox), a welfare mother whom Frankie meets when he saves her from a
shoplifting charge; and Emira Eagle (Lela Rochon), a schoolteacher Frankie
meets while serving in the Army, long after his singing career has peaked.
 The story is told mostly in flashback as each woman testifies about her
life with Frankie.
 Despite the various perspectives on Lymon, we never get a clear picture of
whom Frankie Lymon is. This is because Nava and Andrews emphasize the three
women, their attempts to win in court and their relationships with Lymon.
 The film creates a jigsaw puzzle that, at the end of nearly two hours,
still is missing pieces.
 We learn that Lymon had an alcoholic, abusive father and that his singing
stemmed from his need for love and acceptance. We discover that his later
heroin addiction is a result of the decline in his career.
 Nava's attempts to recreate the '50s era are inadequate. Also, we get no
time frame of the events in Frankie's life or at what age the various women
entered his life. For example, Frankie was only 13 in '56 when "Why Do
Fools Fall in Love" rose on the charts. He died in 1968 at 25.
 We also learn very little about these women. What, for example, attracted
the already-successful Zola to this upstart street kid from Harlem? Why do
we never see or hear any more about Elizabeth's daughter, despite the fact
that the clothes Elizabeth was stealing were for her child? What unknown
change of heart causes Emira, who throughout the trial seems to hold the
other women in contempt, to suddenly decide to bond with them?
 Why Do Fools Fall in Love skips over these points in favor of flashy
camera angles and tricks, slick set design and various musical set pieces.
 However, the three actresses compensate for the flimsy material they are
handed. Berry, as Zola, is the most colorful and theatrical of the trio.
Fox, so spunky as Will Smith's lover in Independence Day, brings that same
spark of grit to the role of an average person at first swept up in the
lure of celebrity, then willing to sink to the depths to help her man.
 What's puzzling is that the three women are so self-sufficient that it's
difficult to comprehend why they continue to allow Frankie to take
advantage of them.
 Larenz Tate as Frankie sparkles, but we never see the allure that
captivated these women. Tate's Frankie is a charming heel who for the most
part thinks only of himself and of ways to recapture his very brief life in
the limelight.
 Determining fact from fiction is another problem, even though the movie
feels more like a rock fable than musical history. There is no way to
gather Frankie's age when he took up with any of his wives.
 Why Do Fools Fall in Love is an entertaining look at a vibrant time in
music history. It's sassy, loud and joyful, just like the music it
celebrates. It is just too bad that the sound wasn't the film's main focus.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Why Do Fools Fall In Love (1998)
Halle Berry, Vivica A. Fox, Lela Rochon, Larenz Tate, Paul Mazursky, 
Little Richard, Pamela Reed, Alexis Cruz, David Barry Gray, Miguel A. 
Núńez Jr., Richard Clifton Powell, Lane Smith, Ben Vereen, Paula Jai 
Parker, Marcello Thedford. Written by Tina Andrews. Directed by Gregory 
Nava. 117 minutes.
Rated R, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Traditionally, the last few weeks of summer trigger the release of an 
avalanche of weak films from the major studios, as the powers that be 
desperately try to squeeze whatever money they can from moviegoers still 
hungry for air-conditioned diversion. While most of these leftovers lack 
ideas or a distinctive point of view, "Why Do Fools Fall In Love" suffers 
from the opposite problem. Presenting the biography of singer Frankie 
Lymon, writer Tina Andrews and director Gregory Nava juggle too many 
ideas and points of view, resulting in a film that, while sporadically 
entertaining, mostly serves as a frustrating example of disjointed 
storytelling and missed opportunities.
The film prominently features a court battle between three women over the 
estate of Lymon, their late husband. Beneath that elaborate framing 
device lies your basic rags-to-riches-to-disaster pop music tale. Frankie 
Lymon and the Teenagers hit the big-time in the late '50s with the film's 
title song, a catchy doo-wop number which remains a staple of oldies 
stations. Lymon became a star and went solo, falling into a life of 
womanizing and drugs, leading towards the inevitable downfall. 
We've seen variations of this story before (in "The Buddy Holly Story," 
"La Bamba" and "The Doors," to name just a few), but Lymon's situation 
contains relatively fresh thematic potential. The phenomenon of rock and 
roll was manufactured by white businessmen by stealing rhythm and blues 
from the people who created it. For years, they made stars of white 
singers covering songs originally written and performed by black artists. 
When black performers were finally allowed to take their place in the 
mainstream spotlight, it was only under the rigid control of white 
management. 
Lymon was one of many artists marginalized due to race. Having achieved 
fame against the odds, he then found his star fading as the '60s British 
Invasion hit, making all other forms of music passé. Once again, young 
white kids ruled the charts with sounds derived from black musicians. 
"Why Do Fools Fall In Love" becomes quite interesting when examining this 
theme. Indeed, one of the film's most poignant scenes comes on the stage 
of the pop music show "Hullabaloo," as Lymon stands in the wings, staring 
in astonishment as The Kinks perform before a screaming crowd, while he 
waits to appear as an "oldies" act.
Lymon's attempts to maintain a career in an entertainment world where 
race and rapidly changing musical tastes work against him makes 
compelling viewing, but the production only devotes a few minutes to that.
 Director Nava is so busy navigating through the film's convoluted 
structure that he fails to deal with the issues raised by the story. The 
women's court battle should have been a mere framing device, but instead 
it takes over the film. In the height of irony, Frankie Lymon becomes a 
marginal figure in his own biography. 
Over the course of its 117 minutes, "Why Do Fools Fall In Love" tries to 
be several different movies. It's a man-bashing, female bonding flick as 
the three ex-wives discuss Lymon's flaws. It's a glossy bio-pic using 
spinning newspapers to flash headlines as it shows Lymon's meteoric climb 
to stardom in a dreamy retro-world. It's a melodramatic soap opera, 
showing the singer's abusive behavior as drugs swallow his being. It's a 
sassy courtroom comedy, with judge Pamela Reed allowing ex-wives Halle 
Berry, Vivica A. Fox and Lela Rochon to act more like guests on "The 
Jerry Springer Show" than plaintiffs in a court case.
Mostly, it's a superficial mish-mash of styles and tones that frequently 
entertains, but never fully satisfies. The songs are good and Larenz Tate 
gives an energetic performance as Lymon. There are a number of effective 
scenes, and it's a treat watching Little Richard play himself on the 
witness stand in a memorable cameo, testifying in both the legal and 
evangelical sense of the word. What a shame that age prevented him from 
playing himself throughout the film, because the actor portraying Little 
Richard as a young man is terrible (an actor imitating Redd Foxx and 
stand-ins for The Kinks are even less convincing).
Structural problems and bad impressionists aside, the fatal flaw is in 
the framing story itself. By focusing on the ex-wives instead of Lymon, 
viewers are asked to become emotionally involved with three characters 
squabbling over a dead man's money. As the film progresses and the women 
turn increasingly mercenary, sympathizing with their plight becomes 
extremely difficult. It's like being led outside to see a horse, then 
being presented with its carcass and urged to cheer for the vultures 
circling overhead.
At the end of the film, a picture of the real Frankie Lymon appears 
onscreen and I was struck by two things. First, he looked much younger 
than the actor who played him and second, after watching a film 
purportedly devoted to his memory, Frankie Lymon remained a stranger, 
just another rock and roll casualty, even in his own movie. 

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Give Gregory Nava and Tina Andrews an "A" for effort.  If "Why Do
Fools Fall in Love?" isn't completely successful, it's only because the
creators' vision is too grand for the constraints of a two-hour movie.
The film tries to be everything: a mystery, a comedy, a drama, a love
story, a documentary, a character study, a concert film.  That's a tall
order, but what's remarkable is how close Nava and Andrews come to
actually pulling it off.  The movie is compelling; even if portions of it
are slightly uneven, it remains solid (and touching) entertainment.
        The film is based on the life of Frankie Lymon, the teen
singer who hit the Top Ten with "Why Do Fools Fall in Love?", a catchy
tune he penned with one of his schoolmates.  Rendered obsolete by the
British Invasion after a brief flash of stardom, Frankie descended into
drug abuse, poverty, and obscurity.  Several years later, having never
regained his former fame, he died of a heroin overdose.  He was only 26
at the time.
        We can all agree that this tale is a tragedy, but an additional
factor makes Lymon's story even more fascinating: he left behind three
women, all claiming to be his wife... and none realising they weren't
alone in this claim.  Since Frankie's music publisher owes the Lymon
estate an estimated four million dollars in back payments, it's easy to
understand why each woman wants to be named his heir.
        Contrary to the romantic-comedy impression projected by the
movie's trailer, "Why Do Fools Fall in Love?" is basically a courtroom
drama focusing on the three wives' attempts to prove their cases.  Along
the way, we'll see numerous flashbacks of each woman's memories of
Frankie, which, although contradictory, help to show us different facets
of who he was.  But we know the truth is buried somewhere in their
testimonies, which is exactly why the story is so interesting.
        We learn via flashback of Frankie's early days and success, and
see first-hand how charming he could be... as well as his darker, more
manipulative side.  Perhaps most importantly, we witness just how
valueable music was to him.  Lymon didn't sing for the money; he sang
because his soul demanded it.  In these early concert scenes, Lymon
(flawlessly portrayed by Larenz Tate) is energetic.  He doesn't so much
SING the music as CHANNEL it to the audience.  His happiness is so
apparent, his joy for performing so all-encompassing and contagious, that
even if you don't like his songs, you'll respect the attitude with which
he shares them.
        The film skips nimbly through the thirteen years encompassing
Frankie's first brush of success, his relationship with all three women,
and the circumstances leading up to his death.  Occasionally, important
details are glossed over (Frankie reportedly causes a "national scandal"
by dancing with a white girl on television... but what are the exact
details and repurcussions?), but on the whole, things move along at a
pleasantly brisk clip.  There's no time to get bored while Frankie's on
the screen.
        The flashback footage is effective, and does a great job of
capturing the frantic early days of rock and roll.  The costumes,
hairstyles and scenery are a sight to behold, and seeing them through
Frankie's eyes, we're caught up in the wonder and excitement of a by-gone
era.  Because of this intimate portrait, we're able to sympathize with
him when his career goes sour.  I was impressed and surprised by how much
the filmmakers made me care about him.
        The film's photography is not without artistry, either.  Remember
those incredible transitions in "Titanic," used to simulate the passage
of years?  Well, "Why Do Fools..." employs one such moment that's the
equal of anything in Cameron's epic.  It's the 80s, during the trial.
Little Richard (in a scene-stealing cameo) is on the witness stand,
discussing his friendship with the late Mr. Lymon.  As Richard talks about
the days he spent on the road with Frankie, the camera slowly pans over to
a nearby window... but the sights outside are clearly those of 1955.  We
zoom outside, revealing a large auditorium.  Displayed proudly on the
marquee: "TONIGHT ONLY!  LITTLE RICHARD!  THE PLATTERS!  FRANKIE LYMON AND
THE TEENAGERS!"  Excited teens hurry into the theater, and after a moment,
so do we.  The camera "runs" along, just another excited teen, as we dash
into the auditorium and discover The Platters on stage.  The camera spins
around, giving us a full view of the crowded theater; then, we're swept
onto the stage.  We drift over to the wings where we discover the young
Frankie, waiting to go on.  After a moment, The Platters conclude their
lovely song, and Lymon hits the stage.  We're right there with him as he
and The Teenagers, his backing group, perform a show-stopping rendition
of "Baby Baby."  The camera swoops dramatically around the group in a
grand circle, and there we remain until the song's conclusion.  Frankie
waves to the audience, then he's off the stage... and only then do we
realise that all these events, beginning with Little Richard's appearance
on the witness stand, were depicted via one single unbroken shot.  It's
one of the most memorable camera movements I've ever seen, seamlessly
bridging twenty years of American history without so much as a jump cut.
        So exciting are these scenes that the courtroom story becomes a
bit of a bore.  It doesn't help that the three women are clearly only
after Frankie's money; even in the flashback scenes, with the exception
of his third wife, Emira (Lela Rochon), none of the women truly seem to
love him.  Frankie's first wife, Zola Taylor (Halle Berry), is too hung
up on her career to give him much time (she's a vocalist for The
Platters).  Second wife Elizabeth (Vivica Fox) honestly seems to prefer
her dog.  Frankie and Emira, on the other hand, have a strong chemistry
when they're on-screen together.  She's sweet, unassuming, and cares
deeply for Frankie; in turn, he worships her and uses her presence as an
inspiration to clean up his act... or at least try.  Unfortunately,
Emira's last line in the movie capsizes the whole illusion.  Greed
corrupts everyone in the end, apparently.
        One thing that initially bothered me about the film was the fact
that Frankie's personality is never concretely defined.  Since we get to
know him only through the eyes of three self-serving women, there is an
abundance of confusion, contradictions, and accusations.  Why does Frankie
feel the need to marry three women?  We don't know; even at the time of
his death, the matter is left wide open.  This disappointed me as I left
the theater, but having mulled the matter over at some length, I no
longer think that way.  The story is told through the rememberences of
three women; since THEY don't know the games Frankie was playing, it
occurred to me that the movie CAN'T convey the answer.  Not only is this
not a flaw, as I originally thought, but it actually adds a degree of
realism uncommon in a biographical film.  Director Nava and screenwriter
Andrews were wise not to make Frankie into a saint.  He may be a shadowy,
mysterious person, but through this movie (and their reverence), I feel
that I know him a little better.
        One final note.  The day after seeing this film, I bought the
"Frankie Lymon's Greatest Hits" CD.  As I've grown familiar with these
tunes, I've realised that this movie is probably unneccessary: we don't
need a biography on Lymon to discover who he is, because everything you
need to know about him is in his voice and his music.  The women, the
the drugs, the financial setbacks... none of that matters.  In a hundred
years, Frankie Lymon won't be remembered for anything but his sweet voice,
his incredible showmanship, and a talent which self-destructed all too
quickly beneath the pressures of public life.  Today, for the first time,
I mourn a true rock and roll original.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.

Author
Joy Wyse
It's interesting that the credits of Why Do Fools Fall In Love show that
it was written by Frankie Lymon and Morris Levy, because that's what the
movie is all about.  Following Frankie Lymon's death, the song once again
becomes a hit and each of Frankie's  three widows decide to see Morris
Levy for the widow's share of the royalties.  
They go to court where the story unfolds as each one states her case for
Judge Lambrey, played perfectly by Pamela Reed.  Just as you are really
getting into Zola's story [Halle Berry], you are interrupted by Elizabeth
[Vivica A. Fox].  At first, you resent her, but then, you start seeing her
side of the story.  The same goes for Emira [Lela Rochon].  It seems that
Frankie was a different person with each wife.  Who was Frankie, really? 
It is interesting to see his biography unfold.  It points out the racial
barriers that minorities encountered.  In those days their audiences were
totally Caucasian.   It is probably a concept that today's teens can't
comprehend.
Some of the best moments in the film include Little Richard.  He is
hysterical when testifying in court and he makes some very valid
statements on the treatment of performers by producers.  In flashback
scenes the young Little Richard [Miguel A. Nunez, Jr.] is a perfect
replica. 
The music that is featured will get to everyone.  From Tutti-Fruitti  to
California Dreamin.  Even if the movie weren't as great as it is, you'd
get your money's worth from the soundtrack alone.
It is definitely one of the better pictures of the year.  Everything
about it is good: plot, direction, script, acting, score, costumes, sets,
etc.  The different sets of Zola's house overlooking Los Angeles will stay
in your mind.
I won't tell you how the judge rules, but I will add that I wondered
about Herman Santiago.  He is the one who originally wrote the title song
with Frankie.  His name was on the original record.  In searching the
Internet, I found that he, and another of the performers, did file suit. 
However, their claim was denied because they waited too long, after
turning 21, to file their claim.  It doesn't seem fair.
I definitely want to see this again, if not in a theater, I'll probably
buy the video.
It gets an A- in my books.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I can understand why screenwriter Tina Andrews latched onto the story
behind WHY DO FOOLS FALL IN LOVE for fifteen years.  From a commercial
standpoint, it has a great hook:  the real-life story of three women who
all claimed to be the legal widow of Frankie Lymon, lead singer of the
1950s doo-wop group the Teenagers (whose signature hit serves as the
film's title).  From a writer's standpoint, it offers the intriguing
contradiction of its main character, a troubled soul who was a different
man for each of his three different brides before dying of a drug overdose
in 1968.  It's a story with sex, drugs _and_ rock 'n' roll, as well as
colorful characters a-plenty.  Sure enough, this bio-pic offers loads of
curb appeal.
     Unfortunately, Andrews and director Gregory Nava (SELENA) make a big
mistake in their approach to the material -- they decide to turn it into a
rock 'n' roll RASHOMON.  The framing story opens in 1986, with three women
-- former Platters singer Zola Taylor (Halle Berry), petty thief and
single mom Elizabeth Waters (Vivica A. Fox), and schoolteacher Emira Eagle
(Lela Rochon) -- all making a legal claim to be Mrs. Frankie Lymon, with
rights to his musical royalties.  A hearing commences in which each
claimant tells the story of Frankie (Larenz Tate) as she knew him, from
teen star to has-been, from heroin addict to soldier.  The flashbacks
cover 13 years of Frankie's life, with widely varying perspectives on the
man each of the three women married at some point, but none of them
divorced.
     Somewhere buried in that narrative is an interesting -- if somewhat
trite -- entertainment industry life story, the story of a street kid from
an abusive home who becomes dependent on the love he receives from
audiences and women.  Larenz Tate does a fine job of capturing Frankie's
electrifying stage presence, as well as his sheer joy of performing for a
crowd.  In fact, the high-energy performance scenes are generally the
film's best, with Frankie's unbridled on-stage enthusiasm contrasting
sharply with the conservative choreography of his artistic contemporaries.
Tate also has the thankless job of creating a character out of piecemeal
recollections, yet the character still comes together as someone you want
to know more about.
     If only wanting made it so.  Only occasionally does WHY DO FOOLS FALL
IN LOVE hone in on the question of who Frankie Lymon really was.  Too
often Andrews and Nava take off on dead-end tangents -- a vamping,
self-indulgent cameo by Little Richard as himself; the hit-and-run
accusation that Frankie's manager/producer Morris Levy (Paul Mazursky)
cheated him out of millions; broadly comic female bonding sessions which
turn Zola, Elizabeth and Emira into the First, Second and Third Wives'
Club.  When they finally do get around to Frankie himself, they offer
psychologically convenient devices like a shattered mirror in which
Frankie sees his fragmented visage.  The individual snapshots of his life,
including such potentially provoactive subjects as his naive disregard for
1950s social conventions, never seem designed to develop into a complete
portrait.
     Ultimately no one, not even the three women with whom he shared a
life, seems interested in understanding Frankie.  That's what's most
disappointing about WHY DO FOOLS FALL IN LOVE:  it's not really a
biography of Frankie Lymon.  The film-makers are usually more interested
in getting inside the the heads of the three women -- providing tart
dialogue for the three talented lead actresses while making them
sympathetic, mis-used you-go-girls -- than getting inside Frankie's head.
Sure, they violate point of view when it serves their purpse to show
things none of the narrators could have seen, but mostly they point out
how Frankie's enigmatic behavior hurt others, not how he hurt himself.
It's a cop-out to start telling a character's story, then shrug your
shoulders and claim not to have any idea who that character is.  Tina
Andrews spent fifteen years waiting to tell the story of a potentially
fascinating rock 'n' roll tragedy, but all she could come up with was a
great big "I dunno."
