Title
Review for 1941 (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Martin Wendelborg

1941 followed a pair of huge hits from Steven Spielberg, "Jaws" and "Close
Encounters of the Third Kind". The script, originally entitled "The Night
the Japs Attacked" was written by two then fresh-out-of-film-school writers
named Robert Zemeckis and Bob Gale, who would later find big success in a
Spielberg-produced movie named "Back to the Future".
The plot, loosely based on actual events, concerns a panic that arises in
Los Angeles when they think they are under attack by Japanese bombers. The
characters, plots and subplots are numerous and the locales plentiful. In a
movie with so many characters, some are bound stick out more than others.
John Belushi plays "Wild Bill" Kelso, a fighter pilot in pursuit of what he
thinks is a Mitsubishi Zero; Slim Pickens plays a christmas tree vendor,
Hollis Wood, who is captured by a wacky Japanese submarine crew, including
the commander (Toshiro Mifune) and a German officer (Cristopher Lee); Dan
Aykroyd plays Sergeant Tree, who doesn't like to see Americans fighting
Americans; Treat Williams is Corporal Sitarski, who hates eggs.
Any story in "1941" can be overlooked, as it is just an excuse to create
crazy, off-the-wall set pieces and incredible situations. As a comedy, it
is largely hit-and-miss. Unfortunately it is more miss than hit, but
especially John Belushi manages to create some hilarious moments throughout
the film. It's a shame he's in it as little as he is. Spielberg and company
seem to have worked from the attitude that "bigger, faster, more" equals
"better" and it shows as the movie goes from one big set-up to the next.
"1941" can be appreciated on this one point. You must struggle hard to find
a movie this big, crazy, immature and uncontrolled. One scene, especially,
stands out as great after seeing it - a huge fight scene at an SCO dance.
Appreciation for the other craziness, which includes cannons, airplane
chases, ferris wheels, submarines and gas stations, is variable. There is a
lot of screaming, shouting and general noise throughout the movie.
Other good points to "1941" include terrific special effects, great
production design, and a superb score by John Williams.
However, the spectacle and pace of "1941" can be very tiring, which is
probably why it to attract crowds at the box office. Too often,
possibilities for humor are killed by the uncontrolled pounding of gags
taking place. The whole movie feels like a young, successful filmmaker out
of control, which might not be too far from the truth about "1941". Still,
for the very reasons it doesn't quite work, "1941" is truly a one-of-a-kind
movie.
Available on laserdisc from Universal Home Video is an extended cut of
"1941" which includes many new scenes with Bobby DiCicco, and also cut
scenes of less than subtle sexual references (including a scene where Ned
Beatty tells his daugter to show the soldiers "a good time".)

