Title
Review for My Life (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Bruce Joel Rubin himself directs the
     fourth film in his "Dying and the Death Experience" series.
     Michael Keaton plays a dying public relations executive who
     videotapes life lectures for his yet unborn child and the
     tapes lead him to resolve the unfinished business of his
     youth.  Some good believable human drama here is sabotaged by
     gratuitous mysticism about the nature of death.  Rating low
     +1 (-4 to +4).
     Bruce Joel Rubin has previously written the story of BRAINSTORM and
screenplays of JACOB'S LADDER and GHOST, each exploring its own mystical
view of life after death.  His latest film focuses a little more closely on
the dying experience itself.  Bob Jones (Michael Keaton) had a sad childhood
filled with disappointments and he has tried hard to bury that past.  But
now he is heading for the biggest disappointment of all.  Just when his life
was coming together with his beautiful wife (Gail, played by Nicole Kidman)
pregnant with their first child, Bob was diagnosed as having terminal
cancer.  Now in his days remaining he is taking all of his fatherly advice
and putting it on videotape as a legacy for the child that he may never
know.  Bob wants to be sure his child knows who Bob was.  But Bob himself is
not sure who he is.  He has intentionally buried his unhappy childhood in
the Russian immigrant community of Detroit.  As part of that burial he had
even changed his name to Jones from Ivanovich as part of his escape from the
past.  Now that he is dying he must come to terms with that past in his few
remaining days, or he will never finish that business.
     Rubin's script is often moving, as we would expect.  It would be
difficult to make a film that shows the dying process in such detail without
being moving and at some level manipulative.  But surprisingly here the
experienced Rubin has problems with the very mechanics of script-writing.
There are places where the script just does not convey what is going on.
For example, the first time we are aware that Gail knows about the tapes,
she is watching a tape about herself and she is angry.  Why?  Is she angry
about the project of making the tapes?  Is she angry about the content of
this particular tape?  It is not clear from the script.  And with the writer
being the director, if Rubin thinks the idea is conveyed, nobody can
overrule him.  Gail's mother is an important character in the plot, but for
several scenes it is unclear if she knows about her son-in-law's condition
and the interpretation of those scenes makes knowing important.
     This is a story that might well have been done better in other hands,
in spite of Rubin's fascination with death.  Rubin's previous films assumed
a life after death.  In some senses that was the whole point of GHOST and
JACOB'S LADDER.  MY LIFE did not need any mystical metaphysics to tell its
story and it would have been a more poignant story without the nice
comforting mystical view of life of life after death.  However, Rubin gives
in to the temptation to philosophize about survival of the soul and mystical
healing processes and in doing so he kills much of the credibility the film
had.  This is a film that will get people thinking about the death
experience and it is probably fairly accurate to the famous Elisabeth
Kubler-Ross studies of the psychology of dying, but it also throws in some
metaphysical fantasy without leaving it clear that it is fantasy.
     MY LIFE has many good points, but often Rubin's screenplay betrays them
and compromises.  My rating would be a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Michael Keaton, Nicole Kidman, Haing S. Ngor.
Screenplay/Director:  Bruce Joel Rubin.
     It seems clear that Bruce Joel Rubin has a death fixation.  Or
more precisely, a life after death fixation.  After the smash romantic
thriller GHOST and the suspense mystery JACOB'S LADDER, Rubin had
already staked his claim to status as Master of Metaphysical
Melodrama.  Now comes his feature directorial debut, MY LIFE, which
again ventures into issues of life and death.  The results are
extremely mixed.  When MY LIFE scores, it scores big; when it misses,
it misses big.
     MY LIFE opens with public relations man Bob Jones (Michael Keaton)
beginning a very important project.  Suffering from terminal cancer
while his wife Gail (Nicole Kidman) is pregnant with their first child,
Bob decides to make a series of videotapes so that his unborn child
will know its father.  However, as the project progresses, Bob realizes
that he may not be the man he thinks he is.  In fact, there are parts
of his childhood he can't even remember.  A visit to a Chinese faith
healer (Haing S. Ngor) leads him to examine the unresolved issues of
his past, including his stormy relationship with his parents (Michael
Constantine, Rebecca Schull) and brother (Bradley Whitford).  As he
senses his time running out, Bob struggles to face his failings and
disappointments, and to rediscover his life while he still has it.
     To his credit, Rubin avoids the glycerine-soaked excesses that
plagued GHOST.  This isn't a big-screen version of a "disease of the
week" TV-movie; it's a contemplative, almost spiritual story buoyed by
the small but crucial role of the healer played by Haing S. Ngor.  Ngor
projects a serenity which permeates the film, the effect of his
splendid scenes with Keaton lingering long after the scenes themself
end.  In fact, MY LIFE may be surprisingly over-subtle when it requires
a moment of real catharsis.  Too much of Bob's struggle is kept beneath
the surface, and as a result I was left with a truckload of questions
about who Bob Jones really was.
     By far, the best thing about MY LIFE is Michael Keaton.  Those who
remember his impressive performance in CLEAN AND SOBER know that Keaton
can be a fine dramatic actor when he has good material, and MY LIFE
provides him with some fine moments.  The best are those which play to
his cocky comic sensibility.  There is real charm to the scenes of
Bob's videotaped instructions to his yet-to-be-born son on such vital
issues as shaving, basketball and entering a room.  When it comes to
the more serious elements, Keaton doesn't have as much to work with.
MY LIFE is supposed to be about a change in Bob Jones' life, but we
don't get a clear enough picture of who he was before his illness to
make it evident that there has been a change.  Rubin ignores the basic
dramatic rule of "show, don't tell" by having another character say
that Bob "isn't exactly an example of an examined life."  That's a
quality I just don't feel I *saw*.
     MY LIFE also caught me just as I had reached my breaking point in
terms of tolerating saintly cinematic wives/girlfriends with no
discernible personalities of their own.  Nicole Kidman's Gail is a
complete blank, spending far too much of the time radiating dangerously
high levels of understanding.  I was left completely untouched by the
crucial love story because I never believed that there were two human
beings involved.  Instead, I saw one human being and one porcelain
figurine with lots of hair.  Kidman's one genuine moment, a very funny
line in the middle of Gail's labor pains, was shocking because it was
the first time Gail seemed to be made of flesh.  The fact that it's
Bob's story doesn't mean that Gail can't be well-written, and she is
not.
     In spite of my distaste for the love story, I was ready to be far
more positive in my recommendation of MY LIFE until its final fifteen
minutes.  The conclusion is too drawn out, and Rubin inexplicably has
Bob's big moment with his parents played out over the phone.  After a
solid opening, alternately entertaining and introspective, MY LIFE just
peters out.  Bruce Joel Rubin the auteur didn't have enough other
people pushing him to flesh out his characters or fill in the holes in
an otherwise affecting story.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Michael Keaton, Nicole Kidman, Bradley Whitford, 
        Haing S. Ngor, Michael Constantine, Rebecca Schull
Director:  Bruce Joel Rubin
Producers:  Jerry Zucker, Bruce Joel Rubin, and Hunt Lowry
Screenplay:  Bruce Joel Rubin
Music:  John Barry
Released by Columbia Pictures
     Bob Jones (Michael Keaton) is dying.  His kidney cancer has spread
to his lungs and the doctors are telling him that the best he can do is
enjoy the few months remaining to him.  With his wife Gail (Nicole
Kidman) four months pregnant, Bob's chances of living long enough to
see the birth of his only child are slim-to-none.  In a last-ditch
effort to find some shred of hope to cling to, Gail persuades her
husband to see a Chinese healer, Mr. Ho (Haing S. Ngor), whose
advice--to let go of all the pain and anger within--leads Bob to
explore his own past even as he makes video tapes of his last days for
his offspring.
     The commercials for MY LIFE make a big deal out of this as being
"from the creators of GHOST," and for good reason.  Much of the same
heartwrenching, occasionally cloying, sentiment is present here.  Those
who hate tear-jerkers should resolutely avoid this film; MY LIFE will
leave that crowd retching in the aisles.
     Actually, when the film tunes down the manipulation, it has some
genuinely moving and emotionally honest moments.  Ironically, the most
"real" scenes are those of Bob videotaping himself.  His confessions,
reflections, and comments seem far more genuine than any of the
numerous melodramatic scenes that have Bob actively confronting the
realities of life and death.  MY LIFE lays it on thick in the drawn-out
final fifteen minutes, and this hamstrings the project somewhat (you
could hear a lot of nose-blowing in the darkened confines of the
theater).  Not that this is a surprise; fifteen minutes into the movie,
it's pretty obvious how it's going to end.
     Overall, the scenes that work outnumber those that fail, and
that's reason enough for a die-hard cynic like myself to admit
grudgingly to having liked MY LIFE.  There's enough intelligent stuff
contained herein to keep most viewers from dwelling on the maudlin
shortcomings.  This is no UNTAMED HEART, with an impossible-to-accept
premise and cringingly bad overacting; MY LIFE may have obvious
intentions, but at least it's skillful in presenting them.
     Michael Keaton does a fine job as Bob Jones, and it may be the
quality of his performance that makes much of MY LIFE work.  Certainly,
even his most ridiculous scenes (such as where he storms into his
doctor's office and informs him:  "You can't take away my hope!  It's
all I have left!") aren't too painful to sit through.  Nicole Kidman's
success is more sporadic.  Coupled with finely-acted moments when it's
possible to feel Gail's grief, there are times when Ms. Kidman doesn't
bring enough substance to her character.  This may be as much (or more)
the fault of the writing as that of the actress, though, since it's
hard to be consistently sincere uttering the occasional dumb line.
     Haing S. Ngor is so good that the scenes featuring Chinese
mysticism seem less foolish than they might otherwise.  This is
important, since much of MY LIFE's skeleton is formed from these
sessions and what comes out of them.
     It's difficult to predict how tear-jerkers will perform at the box
office since this, more than any other class of motion picture, brings
out the public's fickle nature.  MY LIFE isn't a Russian tragedy, so
there's exhilaration amidst the heartbreak, and the gallows humor
manages to avoid being tasteless.  Those who go to this film expecting
to like it probably will, and those who don't, won't.  Few will be
apathetic, however.
     MY LIFE is good schmaltz--decent entertainment that has no qualms
about mucking around with the audience's emotions (thus making it a
prime "date movie").  In addition to being far too blatant about its
motives and having a plot that offers almost no surprises, the movie
suffers from an unfortunate case of "cuteness".  Stone-hearted
movie-goers beware--many of you will loathe this film, and those that
don't will probably have a hard time justifying how you could actually
like it.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Jon Ridge
     It was, I believe, just around three years ago that a certain
screenwriter by the name of Bruce Joel Rubin produced what ultimately
became one of the most popular films of the year.  You know the movie.
Add to that one of the most talked about movies of its year, JACOB'S
LADDER, and what you've got is a very talented individual.  Now, in
1993, Rubin has created yet another heart-wrenching and emotionally
stimulating script by the name of MY LIFE.  The difference this time
round is that in addition to writing the film, Rubin is credited with
directorial status in order to give his film the touch of magic it
needs.
     The story surrounds an advertising executive named Bob Jones.  As
the film opens, right from the get-go, Jones has been diagnosed with
cancer in his lungs.  To complicate matters in his life even more, his
wife, Gail (played beautifully by Nicole Kidman), is pregnant with
their first child.  And knowing that he may not be around long enough
to see his baby's birth, Jones decides to video the part of his life he
is currently living so that his child will have something by which to
know him.  A sweet notion.
     However, Bob isn't willing to simply rest on his laurels.  No, he
goes through the full gamut of emotions from denial to confusion to
final acceptance.  This is a wonderful Michael Keaton performance,
totally unlike anything he has shown audiences as of yet.  And not only
does he he bring poignancy to his dying-man role, he brings forth humor
as well, so even the most cynical of cynics can appreciate something
about his performance.  Beside him all the way is Nicole Kidman.
Kidman is a gorgeous actress, always it seems.  And she has never been
prettier than she is in MY LIFE.  Of course, she can also act, and that
gives her role of the wife a touching bit of emotion in itself.  Gail
stands by her husband through the roughest of times, with ample
opportunity to leave at any time if so desired.  But that isn't what
she wants, and Kidman is the right actress to play the part of loving
wife.  When she tells Keaton, "You're the love of my life," we have no
choice but to believe her.
     In a way, MY LIFE is a bit of a let-down.  I kept wanting a little
grit along with all the poignancy, and the bit involving Keaton's toy
shopping spree and rollercoaster ride at a park really have no place in
such an otherwise heart-tugging movie.  But I can't complain; for
everything this film lacks it also has a lot to appreciate and an
awful lot to like.  Just try and keep from smiling when Keaton and
Kidman try hard to get their newborn to sit upright without falling
over.  Just try to keep from crying your eyes out when Keaton finally
tells his father that he loves him.  Just try and not walk away from
this film with an affirmation of life.

Author
Jeremy Krug
     Absolutely amazing.  They say you never really know how much
something means to you until someone takes it away.  Similarly, some
people never learn how to live until they lose their life.  It is
amazing the things which we keep bottled inside, afraid to show anyone,
little things that tear our emotions to shreds, just because we can't
let go of them; such as anger, hurt, and fear.  And what do we do, if
we have lived our entire life like this, and suddenly found that our
life is about to end, and we are not really sure of what is important,
and whether all that we have done was right, or wrong.  That's the
general idea that I picked up, I won't go into any plot because you
haven't seen it yet, and I don't want to ruin things.  Most people that
I asked said they felt Nicole's acting was a little rough at first, but
it certainly improved by the end.  That is something you would have to
decide for yourself, other people thought she did a fine job
throughout.  You also asked if you should bring a box of tissues
along.  I personally haven't been able to cry in a very long, but this
movie made me feel as though I would.  The guy next to me cried three
different times, he told me, and most of the rest of the audience
joined him.  Yes, bring the tissues, especially for your lady-friend,
this is one movie that will wet the driest of eyes.  The subject of the
movie is very original, the writing, acting, and screenplay are all
just remarkable, and the cinematography brings it all together in one
nice, big, emotional, teary-eyed package.  See it, and enjoy it.  It's
definitely one of a kind.
