Title
Review for Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Brian Koller
Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977)
"Stars Wars" and "Close Encounters of the Third Kind" were
both released in 1977, and were enormously successful films,
both critically and commercially.  This began a new era
in Hollywood, in which special effects became much more
important as a lure to bring customers to the theater.
The plot has aliens visiting the Earth with a fleet of
enormous, glowing spaceships.  Scientists learn how to
communicate with the aliens through musical and mathematical
codes.  The U.S. Government, of course, launches a massive
conspiracy, inventing a deadly nerve gas leak to force citizens
away from the site of the alien visits.
Richard Dreyfuss is well cast as an average man who sees
the flying saucers one evening, and soon loses his job, his
sanity, and his wife (Teri Garr).  Melinda Dillon is a
mother of a young boy (played by wide-eyed and mute Cary Guffey)
who is abducted by the aliens.  Dreyfuss and Dillon are
compelled to visit Devil's Peak, not knowing why, where
they become part of the alien's landing ceremony.
Steven Spielberg wrote and directed "Close Encounters".
As with his later film "E.T.", the aliens are benevolent,
and the special effects are used to create a mood of
childlike wonder.  This mood is ultimately manipulative,
however, and the jaded viewer may not be especially
impressed with hairless, big-eyed, unisex aliens and
glowing spaceships.  Ethical considerations, such as
the rights of aliens to kidnap whomever they wish for
close inspection, are not addressed.
Tellingly, "Close Encounters" won the Academy Award for Best
Cinematography, but was not nominated for Best Picture
or Screenplay.  While it is a very good film, it is not
outstanding.  The story succeeds as a drama, but there is
more form than content.
There are two major versions of "Close Encounters",
with perhaps fifteen minutes of differing footage.
After the film's release and great success, Spielberg
reassembled most of the cast and filmed new scenes
including the interior of the alien spaceship.  Some
other scenes in the original version were cut or
replaced.  I have not seen this latter version.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dragan Antulov
Steven Spielberg is now considered as one of the Hollywood
deities, because of the rare capability to deliver both huge
commercial hits, like JURASSIC PARK, and "Oscar"-awarded
critical triumphs like SCHINDLER'S LIST. However, in the
1970s Spielberg built his reputation by creating works of
art that could slip in both categories. One of them is CLOSE
ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD KIND, extremely popular and
influential science-fiction spectacle. Unfortunately, it had
a bad luck to be released in the same year as STAR WARS.
Although both films have a lot in common (ground-breaking
special effects, brilliant score by John Williams) their
future was different; one became an unstoppable cult
phenomenon, and another almost forgotten and stuck forever
in its shadow.
When Spielberg began work on that project, he was already
established as a bright new Hollywood star due to his
previous commercial hit, JAWS. Together with other young
directors of his "New Hollywood" generation, like Kauffman,
Carpenter, Hill and Millius, he exploited the great creative
freedom of 1970s, when even the mainstream producers dared
to experiment. Ironically, it was Spielberg himself whose
later commercial success would established new unwritten
rules of "blockubuster" philosophy. But in the mid 1970s,
many things were different; Spielberg was young and eager to
use Hollywood resources for his very personal and artistic
movie.
Although very personal, Spielberg's screenplay was partly
based on the book "UFO Experience" by Dr. J. Allen Hynek and
in many ways inspired by the popular urban mythology of
extraterrestrial visitors to Earth that began to grow in the
world after WW2. Spielberg was not only inspired by the
mythology, but his movie also gave the mythology itself a
huge boost, unmatched until the contemporary era of X-FILES
and the Roswell anniversary. That was partly because he made
the movie very realistic using the authentic UFO-related
incidents as the element of the plot. The story begins with
one of such incidents - team of international scientists
come to the Sonorra Desert in Mexico to find the U.S. Navy
planes of who went missing decades ago during the famous
Flight 19. Such events coincide with the UFO incident
witnessed by Roy Neary (Richard Dreyfuss), power company
worker from Muncie, Indiana, who later becomes obsessed with
his experience. Because of his obsession he loses his job,
family and sanity, but his loss is nothing compared to the
experience of Jillian Guiler (Melinda Dillon), single mother
whose son becomes the victim of alien abduction. In the
meantime, the scientists decipher the strange signals from
outer space and U.S. government, in co-operation with the
French, led by Lacombe (Francois Truffaut) begin with the
preparation for ultra-secret project. When the news of the
poison gas leak in the middle of Wyoming reach Neary, he
finally sees some sense in all his visions and begins the
perilous journey toward the centre of endangered area. There
he is joined by Jillian who shared the similar visions. Two
of them must break through military pickets and reach their
destination to find whatever is there.
Spielberg here shows great mastery by using the very same
techniques of JAWS to make completely different effects. The
slow, gradual yet very disciplined series of dramatic
incidents - "close encounters" - is set in order to bring
the viewer to the great revelation in the finale. But,
instead of the fear and horror we had to endure during the
JAWS, we are now overwhelmed by the sense of boyish wonder.
Throughout the movie the viewer knows that something big,
magnificent and wonderful is about to happen, and great
magician Spielberg delivers his promise in the end. The last
sequence, with its, even in this age, impressive special
effects by the great virtuoso Douglas Trumbull, would leave
many mouths open.
One of the great virtues of this film is its optimism.
Aliens, who almost always get portrayed as the monsters in
science-fiction cinema, are here benevolent and harmless
creatures and the first contact between them and humanity is
a beginning of something wonderful. It is very ironic, when
we consider that the two classic SF movies that visually
inspired Spielberg actually told quite different story -
Howard Hawks' THING and Byron Haskin's WAR OF THE WORLDS
presented extraterrestrials as the threat to the mankind.
Spielberg's humane approach and faith in the future also
lies in great contrast to the pessimistic mood of its era;
the only hint of the contemporary gloom is post-Watergate
portrayal of government as conspiratorial towards the
public. But, even such government is much more harmless
compared to the murderous and chain-smoking Men in Black
that became the stereotype thanks to X-FILES and its more
cynical and disturbing visions.
There lies the main, and probably the only flaw of this
great picture - lack of conflict, and consequently, lack of
drama. The movie has few excitements or even action scenes
(especially the last that may be an interesting homage to
Hitchcock's NORTH BY NORTHWEST) but generally, almost
everyone - Neary, Jillian, government, aliens - are the good
guys. Despite such shortcomings, the actors were good and
manage to bring multidimensionality to their simple roles.
Richard Dreyfuss is very convincing as a ordinary, yet nice
guy, who sinks into insanity only to rediscover himself in a
grand finale. Melinda Dillon was, on the other hand,
nominated for "Oscar" as a struggling mother, yet she was
overshadowed by Teri Garr as Neary's long-suffering wife
Ronnie. Apart from visual wonders of this film, Spielberg's
semi-official composer John Williams again excels by his
beautiful music, this time using the simple melody both as
the element of a plot, and as the basis for his score.
The aliens, who are the main subject of this film, were
visually very convincing. Too convincing, one of my
acquaintances in the UFO-researching circles said. According
to him, the depiction of extraterrestrials as grey-skinned
little people with big eyes was so accurate, that it managed
to freak out powerful government figures interested in
suppressing the truth about UFOs. So, they later approached
Spielberg and ordered him to make another movie with alien,
this time designed to be anything but the real life. The
result was E.T., for many years the biggest commercial hit
of all times, yet less inspirational for UFO enthusiasts.
Anyway, whether the viewer believes in existence of
extraterrestrials or UFOs, CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD
KIND remains the great movie, and one of the rare uplifting
experiences in modern cinema.

Author
Max Scheinin
Released 1977
A Steven Spielberg film, "Close Encounters Of The Third Kind". 
Starring: Richard Dreyfuss, Teri Garr, Melinda Dillon, Francois Truffaut,
Bob Balaban, Cary Guffey.
Rating: ****
Near the end of Steven Spielberg's awe-inspiring journey Close
Encounters Of The Third Kind ( CEOTTK ) something wonderful for
humanity is happening; we are coming into touch with aliens. They are
benevolent creatures, interested only in helping us. The contact scene
is truly thrilling. Rarely does a hollywood production come this close
to perfection. CEOTTK is about watching out society grow into
something different from the outside. It's most remarkable.
In the entire history of cinema there have been maybe four great films
about contacting aliens, a suprisingly small amount, considering the
subject matter and what you would excpect hollywood executives to do
with it. when I say a great film I mean a film that accomplishes
everything it wants to, and overcomes all the tasks it sets for
itself. One standard a film of the 'contact' genre must set for itself
is to inspire awe. And thus the four movies: Stanley Kubrick's
remarkable not-so-much-film-as-excperience, 2001: A Space Odessey,
Spielberg's CEOTTK, Spielberg's E.T. The Extraterrestrial, and most
recently, Robert Zemeckis's Contact. Otherwise we see comedies such as
Men In Black and Mars Attacks!, spoofs like Mystery Science Theater
3000: The Movie and dumb "entertainments" like The Fifth Element (
easily the worst film I have seen this year, thus far ).
CEOTTK is a study of our universe.It is a reflection of ourselves: we
claim to be so immensly powerful and big, but if they ever do come
will we be ready?

Author
Walter Frith
By 1977 director Steven Spielberg had already established himself as a world
class filmmaker with 'Jaws' in 1975 and his big screen debut in 1974 entitled
'The Sugarland Express'.  While the former was obviously the more popular,
many of Spielberg's fans also recall an ingenious television movie he did in
1971 entitled 'Duel' which is a cult favourite among many film fanatics,
myself included.  Born in Cincinnatit, Ohio in 1947, Spielberg achieved
greatness in the art of filmmaking before he was thirty years old.
Undoubtedly the greatest creative mind working in film in the last twenty
five years, Spielberg's films invoke debate everytime someone asks "What is
his masterpiece?"  Is it 'E.T., The Extra-Terrestrial' (1982)?   This was a
gentle and loving film about the child in all of us and a moving, simplistic
fantasy with religious implications done in a most tolerable fashion.  Is it
'Schindler's List' (1993)?  This harrowing story about the holocaust and one
of the most original looking and important film of the twentieth century was
the film that earned Spielberg recognition among his peers with seven Academy
Awards including Best Picture and Best Director for Spielberg himself.  I
suspect that if you ask Spielberg what the crowning achievement in his career
is, he will vote for this one and rightfully so.
But what about 'Close Encounters of the Third Kind' (1977)?  It too is a
subject for debate when considering what exactly is Spielberg's masterpiece.
Written as well as directed by Spielberg himself, the film was a creative
odyssey which was released the same year as the phenomenal 'Star Wars' and
the strength of 'Close Encounters' along with most films that year was
diminished quite a bit by George Lucas' vision of other worlds aside from our
own.  Like Stanley Kubrick's '2001: A Space Odyssey' (1968), 'Close
Encounters' was a motion picture well ahead of its time.  Also like '2001',
'Close Encounters' failed to secure a Best Picture nomination but Spielberg
like Kubrick for '2001', respectively, was nominated as Best Director.  The
creative culture lessons of the 1950's showed beings from another planet as
mostly hostile towards Earth with 'War of the Worlds' (1953) and 'Invasion of
the Body Snatchers' (1956).  These films acted as metaphors for communism as
the cold war reached its peak in the 1950's.  Even 'The Day the Earth Stood
Still' (1951) has a classic presence in motion picture history as it serves
as a message for peace among Earthlings with drastic consequences from other
worlds if that cannot be attained.
It has been reported that like 'Star Wars' and the recently released twenty
fifth anniversary edition of 'The Godfather' (1972) that 'Close Encounters'
will get a release sometime later this year for its twentieth anniversary.
It was a huge box office success for its time and will undoubtedly do well
again as its closest ally (television's 'The X-Files') will serve as an
unintentional promoter because its subject matter is obviously a parallel to
'Close Encounters' but the television series takes it one step further by
implying government conspiracies and colonies of aliens living among the
people of Earth.  'The X-Files' is definitely about having a close encounter
with aliens and while there is no direct connection between it and 'Close
Encounters', they are distant cousins whether they want to admit it or not.
Richard Dreyfuss stars in 'Close Encounters' as a working man from Indiana
who is confronted on a dark road one evening by an alien space ship which
causes his vehicle to disrupt in many different ways and as the film develops
Dreyfuss becomes obsessed with meaning of his encounter and becomes involved
with a single mother (Melinda Dillon) who has lost her little boy to an alien
abduction.  Throughout the course of the film there is a constant theme of
preparation for an alien visit as two men (Bob Balaban and the late Francois
Truffaut) supposedly two scientists with government connections, travel to
distant places like Mexico and India to follow up with people who have had an
alien encounter of some sort.  There is the development of language and
communication as hand signals and musical riffs are used to make contact with
the the extra-terrestrials who would surface in the film's hypnotic climax
set at Devil's Tower in Wyoming.
With eight Oscar nominations and one win for the searing cinematography by
veteran cameraman Vilmos Zsigmond as well as being voted a special award for
Sound Effects Editing, 'Close Encounters of the Third Kind' is definitely one
of Spielberg's finest films and is one of the most original movies dealing
with the concept of determining what exactly this man's masterpiece is.  The
debate continues.....     

Author
James Brundage
Around a quarter century ago, a nerdy little kid fresh off the success
of some shark movie decided he wanted to turn his focus to little green
men.  And somehow he turned out one of those rare films that imprints
itself into the cultural psyche so far as to be able to be referenced by
just about anyone (whether they've seen it or not).
But just in case you really are from another planet and have no clue
just what the hell I'm talking about, the year was 1977, the director
was Steven Spielberg, and the movie was Close Encounters of the Third
Kind.  Per the film, there are three kinds of alien contact, two of
which nobody really cares about.  The third kind is the close, personal
relationship forged between man and alien when a person gets abducted...
and, well, that's the focus of most of this film.
Roy Neary (Richard Dreyfuss) starts out as an angry father in a job he
doesn't seem to care for all that much, all of which is changed when
some friendly aliens give him a sunburn and give his town a lightshow
that puts concert pyrotechnics to shame.  This experience makes Roy a
little off-kilter; he begins sculpting shapes he's never seen, having
the feeling that he should be going somewhere soon.
In the meantime Claude Lacombe (François Truffaut) is going about the
globe picking up planes and ships that disappeared a half century ago,
and he finds them in the middle of the desert, to boot.  And with
mysterious fly-bys happening to modern day aircraft around the world...
well we don't need rocket scientists to figure out what's going on.
Close Encounters is really such a simple movie that it doesn't warrant a
helluva lot of discussion.  Were it not able to hit our cultural
pressure points so well, it probably would have faded off the of
cinematic map -- but Spielberg is nothing if not adept at punching our
buttons and making us puppets in his hands, and Close Encounters is no
exception.  While, storywise and on filmmaking levels, Close Encounters
might not be the greatest film ever, I'll be damned if when you're
watching the aliens communicate through music, you don't feel like it
is.
Director: Steven Spielberg
Producer: Julia Phillips, Michael Phillips
Writer: Steven Spielberg
Starring: Richard Dreyfuss, François Truffaut, Teri Garr, Melinda Dillon
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
