Title
Review for Elephant Man, The (1980)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chris Loar
As David Lynch's first commercially viable film, THE ELEPHANT MAN is an   
odd -- but nearly perfect -- blend of the conventional and the   
idiosyncratic.  What's remarkable about it is that, despite its   
mainstream appeal, it's still emphatically a film by David Lynch; it   
jettisons all of the mawkish sentimentality that might well have burdened   
a film about the travails of John Merrick, Victorian England's Elephant   
Man, and replaces it with a complicated meditation on voyeurism and   
ethics.  To my mind, this is one of Lynch's most successful films; the   
discipline of adhering to a conventional storyline makes his style here   
less solipsistic and self-indulgent than it has sometimes been elsewhere;   
and the credible characters of Dr. Frederick Treves (Anthony Hopkins) and   
John Merrick (William Hurt) make the picture more emotionally involving   
than, say, WILD AT HEART.
The film tells the tale of the unfortunate John Merrick, an Englishman   
afflicted with a rare congenital deformity; he has a profoundly misshapen   
skull, and most of his body is covered with fleshy growths and tumors.   
 He's on exhibit in a sideshow when he is rescued by Dr. Treves, who   
reacts to him with a mixture of pity and fascination.  And because that   
pity is tainted, the rescue itself is somewhat ambiguous; Dr. Treves   
initially assumes Merrick to be an imbecile, and puts him on display for   
his colleagues.  Later, as Merrick begins to open up to his new   
caretaker, the two begin to develop a friendship, and Treves begins to   
introduce his friend to members of polite society.  But that friendship   
and those introductions are also, arguably, tainted; as Merrick begins to   
enter polite society, he does so as a spectacle and a curiosity rather   
than as an active member of society.  Or so Lynch seems to argue.  What I   
admire most about this film is its refusal of easy sentimentality; there   
is no triumph here for Merrick.  Even in one of the final sequences, when   
Merrick attends the theater and, for the first time, is a spectator   
rather than a spectacle, there is no victory -- for immediately after the   
performance, the audience turns and looks to him, and it's HE that   
receives the standing ovation.  For a child of the carnival, there is no   
easy escape from the freakshow.
All this might not have worked were it not for some fine acting,   
including some first-rate work by Hopkins and Hurt.  Hurt, in particular,   
is excellent, even under what must have been fifteen pounds of prosthetic   
makeup; his dialogue shows a perfect sense of timing, and his body   
manages to convey debility mixed with a blend of self-hatred and pride.   
 Hopkins is nicely modulated as the morally confused doctor.  And there   
are some fine secondary parts; the virtually unknown Michael Elphick is   
particularly good as a night porter who profits by humiliating Merrick.
The film is also a technical marvel.  It's shot beautifully in black and   
white by Freddie Francis (a onetime director of horror films; he went on   
to win an Oscar for his work on GLORY), and Lynch's more expressionist   
tendencies are blended nicely with a relatively conventional visual   
style.  The soundtrack, too, makes excellent use of Lynch's trademark   
sound effects; hisses, clanks, and other sound effects blend with the   
dialogue to give the production a rather eerie effect.
Lynch's work since ELEPHANT MAN has increasingly veered back towards the   
arty self-indulgence of ERASERHEAD -- which isn't altogether a bad thing,   
and has resulted in some spectacular films.  (Indeed, some, such as BLUE   
VELVET, are clearly superior to ELEPHANT MAN.)  But this film -- by   
demonstrating that unconventional filmmaking can find a home in the   
bottom-line world of Hollywood melodrama -- is in some ways his most   
important achievement.

Author
Kevin Patterson
The Elephant Man (PG, 1980)
Written by Eric Bergren, Christopher DeVore, and David Lynch. Directed by
David Lynch. Starring Anthony Hopkins, John Hurt.
        The Elephant Man  is based on the true story of John Merrick, a man
born so horribly disfigured that he was put in a carnival freak show, where he
got his nickname "Elephant Man." Assumed to be a complete imbecile and
exploited by the freak show owner, his plight was ignored until he was taken
to the hospital for beatings from his owner. It was there that Dr. Frederick
Trieves discovered that Merrick was in fact quite intelligent and could hold
conversation like anyone else; painfully aware of his own humiliation, he had
always been afraid to speak.
        Fine performances are turned in by Anthony Hopkins as Dr. Trieves, the
well-meaning physician who nevertheless realizes he is walking a fine line
between genuinely helping Merrick and using the case for the sake of notoriety
among the medical community, and by John Hurt as Merrick. Hurt successfully
plays his character as someone who is very grateful for the chance finally to
experience life as a human rather than as an animal in a zoo and approaches
everything with both the wonder of a child and the wisdom of an adult. It is
this characterization that, more than anything else, makes The Elephant Man 
such a powerful story: it is impossible not to sympathize with Merrick.
Director David Lynch, who is well-known for his bizarre films, appropriately
puts aside his usual weirdness here to concentrate on the story; he in fact
possesses an almost equal flair for emotional intensity, which serves this
film well.
        There are two minor flaws in The Elephant Man- first of all, the
sequence in which Merrick is kidnapped by his former owner and put back in the
carnival is merely glossed over; he escapes and returns to Dr. Trieves almost
immediately. I can't help but think that to be dragged back to his status as a
circus freak after years of building up his self-respect from nothing must
have been more significant in the life of the real John Merrick; this deserved
more time. (On the other hand, this part does at least pave the way for what
is perhaps the climax of the film, when Merrick finally has the courage to
declare, "I am not an animal! I am a human being!") Second of all, many of the
transitions between scenes suffered from inexplicably choppy editing. I am not
someone who usually notices that kind of thing in a film, but it's kind of
hard not to notice that the screen is starting to fade out while a character
is still talking.
        These small problems, however, do not change the status of The
Elephant Man  as a classic drama and a wonderfully told story of the strength
of human dignity. Hats off to Hurt, Hopkins, and Lynch for this one.
