Title
Review for Grapes of Wrath, The (1940)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jude Wanniski
Memo To - Website browsers, fans & clients
>From - Jude Wanniski  http://www.polyconomics.com
Re - #6 "The Grapes of Wrath"
Continuing with the "movie list," here is number six of the ten 
films that most shaped my life. These are not my favorite films. 
They are the movies I've seen that have had the greatest 
influence on my thinking, my character, my life. Some are 
favorites that I enjoy watching over and over again, which you 
can tell as you read each entry. Try to think of your own 
experiences with films and how they influenced the course of 
your life. It makes life more interesting to be aware, as you 
live it, to know how things such as books and films and magazine 
articles alter your path in significant ways. Sometime last year 
the Sunday NYTimes "Arts and Leisure" section had a piece on how 
difficult it is to think of a movie that may have changed 
history. The only movie they could think of was a silent film by 
D.W. Griffith, Birth of a Nation, which had a scene about the 
KuKluxKlan that the author believes changed national thinking 
about the KKK. How silly. Each of the ten films listed here 
changed my history, and if I had not seen them, I would not have 
helped change history in the ways that I have. Films don't move 
masses. They move individuals who move masses.
6. "The Grapes of Wrath" (1940) I was only four when this Henry 
Fonda flick hit the silver screen, and I rather doubt I saw it 
then, but did see it the first of many times before I was 10. 
Fonda was my maternal grandmother's favorite actor, not least 
because he almost always played a fellow who tried to help the 
poor folks and bravely confronted social injustice. (Note he 
also stars in Movie #1 on my list, "The Ox-Bow Incident."  
"Grapes of Wrath" is a Great Depression story, about 
down-and-out Okies leaving the dustbowl in search of the 
land-of-milk-and-honey in California in a rickety truck. They 
encounter ups and downs along the way and find the going rough 
even when they get to California. The scene that hit me hardest, 
as a little kid, takes place in a highway diner where they stop 
to buy half a loaf of bread, as I recall. One of the little 
Okie kids asks a waitress for a penny candy, because that's all 
he has. She looks at the ragamuffin and sells him a candy, while 
two husky truckdrivers look on waiting to pay their bill. They 
tip her a dollar, with one telling the waitress that he knows 
the candy she gave the kid cost a nickel. As the men walk out, 
she shakes her head and smiles: "Truckdrivers!" From that 
moment,it's a film moment that still occasionally inspires me to 
sudden impulses of generosity and a definite bias toward the 
Teamsters Union. 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 

Author
Brian Koller
"The Grapes of Wrath" tells the story of the Joads,
a displaced Oklahoman sharecropper family, and one of
many forced to abandon their lands due to the Dust Bowl
and the Great Depression.  Based on the Pulitzer Prize
winning novel by John Steinbeck, the film succeeds in
depicting the poverty, to the extent of starvation, of
the homeless Okies.  There are other messages as well:
the difficulty in maintaining a family in the face of
adversity, the low value placed on the lives of migrant
farm workers, and the injustices of the capitalist
system.
Let me explain that last remark.  "The Grapes of Wrath"
is a pro-socialist film.  Socialism was at its zenith
during the Great Depression, when it seemed that capitalism
may have failed.  Franklin Roosevelt was a socialist
President, and the poor saw Big Government as a lifeline
from their jobless despair.  "The Grapes of Wrath"
condemns the faceless banks for foreclosing on the Okies,
the agricultural growers for cheating their low-paid
workers, and local police forces for their brutality
and affiliation with the capitalists.  When the Joads
finally arrive at a Government-run camp, it is as if
they have reached heaven.
Fresh from his success with "Stagecoach", John Ford
directed "The Grapes of Wrath", and almost deserved his
Best Director Academy Award (I think Hitchcock should
have won for "Rebecca").  The black and white cinematography
by Gregg Toland is excellent, with extraordinary footage
of the deep poverty of the migrant worker camps.
Henry Fonda stars as Tom Joad, a hot-tempered ex-con
who returns to his family just in time to join it on
a desperate job-hunting expedition to California.
Jane Darwell gives an excellent performance as his
mother, who tries to hold the dissolving family together
as matters go from bad to worse.  John Carradine
plays a colorful, half-mad preacher.
Fonda was nominated for Best Actor, and Darwell won
Best Supporting Actress.  "The Grapes of Wrath" was
nominated for Best Picture, and Nunnally Johnson was
nominated for Best Screenplay.  Johnson did a
reasonable job in distilling the lengthy novel into
a filmable version, changing the ending and jumbling
the chronology to soften the novel's pessimistic message.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
