Title
Review for River's Edge (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Moody film by director Tim Hunter and scriptwriter Neal Jiminez has an
unsettling premise, but is populated with characters that are so
dysfunctional they'll have you shaking your head in distanced
amusement.  But maybe that's the point.  Story has serious societal
comment interspersed with black comedy: a teenager (Daniel Roebuck)
kills his girlfriend and leaves her corpse on the river bank.  His
high-school friends, including Matt (Keanu Reeves) and Clarissa (Ione
Skye Leitch) find out, but their reaction is largely unemotional. 
Ironically, the only member of the group to get worked up about the
incident (Crispin Glover) has sympathies that lie not with their dead
schoolmate but with her killer.
RIVER'S EDGE is about failure to communicate at every human level; the
dead girl might as well be the toy doll or the blow-up dummy that also
serve as friends/lovers and similarly end up pitched into the river. 
It would appear that Reeves, who at least supports his little sister,
is the chosen moral voice of this story,  but there's also his high
school teacher, who laments the loss of values he remembers as a
student himself in the 60s.  And then there's the reclusive, paranoid
Feck (Dennis Hopper), an unlikely choice for moral spokesperson, who
is one of only two characters (the other is Reeves) to make an act of
judgment upon the killer.  Feck provides a warped contrast between
generations - he too once killed a girlfriend, but at least in the
60's it was done for love.  It's a generation gap exemplified by
Reeves' family, none of whom understand each other, all of whom ignore
each other.  Suitably, his 12-year old brother - the harbinger of the
generation to come - is even more morally void than the teenagers
surrounding him.
Hunter's film portrays society breaking down on every scale, whether
it is generational, familial, or individual.  What it says about its
characters can be summed up by a design Reeves wears on his jacket -
that of a peace sign superimposed over a skull.  It is so arbitrary an
icon that one can see how ideally it reflects the inability of Reeves
and his friends to recognize choice.  When the teenagers speak of
hitting the road (just like EASY RIDER) we know they have no intention
of doing anything more than talk of it; when Leitch's teacher tells
her that progressive times mean that she and her friends are destined
to become career girls, she looks as if she'd rather not have any such
opportunity handed her.  It's not difficult to see these characters
still living in their town twenty years in the future.  Certainly
that's the case for Hopper's Feck, who has spent twenty years isolated
inside his own house - it's he and Glover who steal the show and
provide the most eccentric moments in the film.  Subdued photography
by Frederick Elmes and score by Jurgen Knieper maintain a cool,
barren, neutral atmosphere.  Most disturbing aspect of film is that it
was based on a real-life incident in central California.
