Title
Review for Prince of Darkness (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A very demanding and very rewarding
     horror film.  Horror and science fiction combine together to
     make a film for real long-standing horror film fans only.
     Lots of old stuff but a lot that even the long-time fans have
     not seen before.  The last half-hour is a let-down, but it is
     hard to imagine an ending fitting the buildup.  Rating: +2
     A lot of horror films are coming out about now.  Released in one
weekend are both PRINCE OF DARKNESS and NIGHT FLYERS.  Earllier this year
Clive Barker directed and wrote HELLRAISER.  BELIEVERS, based on a respected
horror novel, came out this year.  Then there were a number of minor pieces
of the NEAR DARK ilk.  Horror, I understand, sells well on videocassette, so
it is pretty tough for a horror film to lose money.  I was vaguely aware
that the aforementioned PRINCE OF DARKNESS was from John Carpenter, but he
has had a spotty career.  I like his DARK STAR, HALLOWEEN, THE THING, and
maybe a few others.  His most recent, BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA, was a
good idea that went amazingly bad.  But then things are not always what we
expect.  PRINCE OF DARKNESS, for example, turns out to be the best thing
that Carpenter has ever done.  It may well be the fantasy film I will want
to remember from 1987.
     For 2000 years the Brotherhood of Sleep have kept secret what
Christianity was *really* about--have kept secret the true nature of evil and
of the Devil, a secret with roots far older than humanity.  Now, 2000 years
after they discovered the secret, it is becoming important to understand it
once more.  The laws of physics are changing and the focus of all that is
happening is one small rundown church in Los Angeles.  There a group of
scientists, their graduate students, and a priest are trying to unravel the
mystery of what is happening.  And what is happening will tie together
particle physics, mathematics, and orthodox Christianity.
     PRINCE OF DARKNESS has everything it needs but the payoff.  The final
third of the film is good Carpenter-style suspense, but it fails to live up
to the promise of the first two thirds of the movie.  If it had, this would
have been an excellent science fiction film as well as a good horror film.
As it is, PRINCE OF DARKNESS is rich in ideas and has some good suspense to
boot, but doesn't quite deliver.
     I really enjoyed the film, but have to give this film a qualified
recommendation.  It takes a lot of effort just to understand as much of what
is going on as the director wants to show you.  There are many scenes that
are deliberately disturbing and a lot more that are violent, though it has
been pointed out to me that there is very little actual blood.  If you
haven't seen many horror films, you may not find this one worth your effort;
there are a lot of other good films out there.  If you have seen a lot of
horror films, you will recognize little ideas here and there from (are you
ready?) DRACULA, THE EXORCIST, THE THING, THE QUIET EARTH, THE LEGEND OF
HELL HOUSE, THE NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK, FIVE MILLION
YEARS TO EARTH, THE KEEP, and THE TERMINATOR.  Yes, there are recognizable
ideas inspired by each of these, yet there are so many new ideas in this
horror film that the familiar ones are outnumbered.
     The name of the man who crafted all these ideas into a single
screenplay is Martin Quatermass.  Perhaps that is a pseudonym and even a
film reference.  Since some of the images, like the marauding street
schizophrenics, are reminiscent of images out of Carpenter's ESCAPE FROM NEW
YORK and ASSAULT ON PRECINCT 13, it is at least conceivable that the film
was written by Carpenter himself.  In any case, it is often hard to follow
exactly what is happening; the film makes the audience work a little.  And a
little knowledge of paradoxical 20th Century physics helps to set the
atmosphere (that's a remarkable statement all by itself!).
     If you are tired of seeing old ideas rehashed in horror films, PRINCE
OF DARKNESS will show you a lot you haven't seen before.  You people (and
me) who wanted to see a horror film of power in Clive Barker's HELLRAISER:
sorry, Barker didn't deliver, but PRINCE OF DARKNESS is what you were
expecting.  I'd give it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     DISCLAIMER:  As might be obvious, a film that audaciously plays with
ideas will appeal to me more than to the viewing public at large.  A prime
example is LIFEFORCE, itself a film that gave a science fictional alternate
interpretation to traditional beliefs.

Author
Bert S. F. Lo
     Anyway, I know all you John Carpenter fans have been waiting years now
since THE THING for a real Carpenter horror flick.  Well, PRINCE OF DARKNESS
isn't it.  The premise of the rebirth of Satan on Earth is very badly set up
with a lot of absurdly bad metaphysics and theology.  The horror and suspense
are nil--people  stupidly wander off alone and you just know they're going to
get it.  First you see them walking down the hall, then all of a sudden,
somebody appears from the side of screen and stabs them, breaks their neck, or
spits at them and then the scene is over (this last part, from the appearance
of the second person to the end of the scene, typically lasts 1.5 seconds).  By
the way, in case you're wondering "Spits at them?", well, that's supposed to be
scary but as you can already tell just by reading about it, it's so stupid, you
want to laugh every time it happens.  There is no gore whatsoever.  However, if
you're into disgusting things, this movie might be for you.  There are a lot of
shots of worms and bugs and maggots and all those fun things.  There's a nice
long sequence in which one of the characters walks around with the worst skin
affliction you've ever seen.  And there's one really funny scene in which a man
standing up is being eaten by zillions of bugs and his body parts start to fall
off.  Actually, a lot of the movie is so bad that it's funny.
     Other comments: the music never stops and it gets really annoying really
fast; the intro credits are interspersed with the beginning of the movie so
that it takes about 10 minutes before they're all done with; the acting is
really lame (most of the actors I recognized from TV series), the worst being
Donald Pleasance as a priest; and, finally, this movie has the highest Asian
count--3--among all movies (I know of) in which the characters' races were
irrelevant.
     Rating? 0 on -4/+4, $1/Cable on $(1st view/2nd view) and maybe 2 on S&N.
