Title
Review for Seven-Per-Cent Solution, The (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Blurring the line between fiction and real history isn't
just an accidental consequence of few recent Hollywood
epics. Some authors actually see it as an intriguing
creative experiment. One of such experiment is TIME AFTER
TIME, movie that featured historical character of British
author H.G. Wells equipped with the most famous fruit of his
fiction - time machine. Nicholas Meyer, director of this
film, obviously likes these experiments, judging by his
novel THE SEVEN-PER-CENT SOLUTION, in which he paired
fictious character of Sherlock Holmes with one of his most
famous real life contemporary. The novel was adapted for
screen in 1976 and directed by Herbert Ross.
The story is set in 1891, year that corresponds with the
time when Arthur Conan Doyle, real-life creator of Sherlock
Holmes, tried to kill off his most successful creation (and
was forced to revive him three years later, after being
pressured by multitude of angry fans). Meyer's novel and
script give an alternative explanation for the three-year
absence of Holmes, using some subtle hints given by Doyle.
In the beginning of the film Sherlock Holmes (played by
Nicolas Williamson) is obsessed with Professor Moriarty
(played by Laurence Olivier), whom he accuses of being head
of all-powerful criminal organisation. Holmes' partner
Doctor Watson (played by Robert Duvall) actually finds
Moriarty to be nothing more than pathetic old man, who used
to be Holmes' nemesis in childhood as his mathematics tutor.
The real reason for Holmes' paranoid delusions lies in his
decades-long cocaine addiction, which recently entered
terminal phase. Watson wants to cure his friend of such
affliction, but late 19th Century medicine is still unable
to cope with such complex psychological problems. The only
glimmer of hope lies in young and controversial physician
from Vienna named Siegmund Freud (played by Alan Arkin), who
recently published scientific article about cocaine
addiction. Watson tricks Holmes into travelling to Vienna,
where Freud would use his new psychiatric methods in order
to cure the detective from his addiction. The treatment is
successful and Holmes, recuperated and refreshed, is ready
to return the favour by offering to help another of Freud's
patients - famous actress Lola Deveraux (played by Vanessa
Redgrave). She had recently escaped bunch of mysterious
captors who had abducted her and drugged her with cocaine.
Both Holmes and Freud feel personally motivated to find the
perpetrators of this crime and join forces in order to solve
this mystery.
THE SEVEN-PER-CENT SOLUTION has anything a good period film
should possess - small army of very talented British actors,
great care about period details, attractive Viennese
locations, and finally, very intriguing script with lot of
references interesting to history buffs. British cast, led
by always reliable Nicol Williamson, is supported by
excellent Robert Duvall (whose British accent seems genuine,
at least to the untrained ears belonging to the author of
this review) and very good Alan Arkin. Unfortunately, the
general impression of the film is not that good. Basically,
the plot is interesting in the first half, when we are
exposed to the dark, unexplored side of Sherlock Holmes
character and Meyer's often amusing revisionist speculations
about the true background for Doyle's original stories. But,
later, when Holmes finishes his business with Freud, film
doesn't stop and instead we are witnessing standard, and
rather weak crime mystery, saved only with few humorous
remarks. In it Holmes and his friends must use their muscles
more than Holmes' brain, but the action isn't that
spectacular, and the finale, that even features
swashbuckling scene is more corny than realistic. However,
general impression of the film is more than good - great
care about period details and obvious fondness authors feel
for the Gilded Age made this rather charming, although
imperfect example of Hollywood craftsmanship.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
