Title
Review for Hard Target (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     Take a deep breath and prepare to suspend your disbelief, because
in bringing us this summer's first (and probably only) pure action
film, Jean-Claude Van Damme and John Woo have given new meaning to the
word "preposterous."
     Chance Boudreaux (Van Damme) is a down-on-his-luck ex-merchant
marine who got blacklisted after dumping a drug-smuggling captain
overboard.  Now, he's forced to eek out a living doing whatever odd
jobs he can find on the docks and streets of New Orleans.  One day, he
spies a lady in distress (Yancy Butler) and, using his rather
impressive kick-boxing techniques, rescues her from a gang of would-be
muggers (and rapists?).  In return, she offers him a job:  help her
find her father, a homeless vet who has disappeared.  What Natasha and
Chance's search turns up, however, turns out to be a dark and deadly
secret that makes them the prey in a vicious cat-and-mouse game run by
the evil and ruthless Fouchon (Lance Henriksen).
     HARD TARGET is, in essence, an example of the victory of style
over substance.  When it comes to the "typical" criteria by which a
film is judged, this movie fails badly.  Its characters are
poorly-developed, the plot is the pinnacle of absurdity, and the
acting, at best, is well over-the-top.  Nevertheless, on the most
basic, visceral level, the film succeeds.
     Those who went to LAST ACTION HERO and left disappointed because
they expected a straight action film, will likely accord redemption to
the summer of '93 because of HARD TARGET.  Albeit with a thinner plot,
this is the kind of no-holds-barred chase, fight, and shoot-out picture
that has become a Schwarzenegger staple.  Van Damme has an accent, the
charisma, the physique, and the lack of acting skills.  Really, unless
you're paying the check, it's hard to tell the difference.
     At the helm of HARD TARGET is John Woo, who is
internationally-known for not pulling punches when it comes to violence
(the two films he is best known for are THE KILLER and HARD BOILED).
Indeed, he doesn't merely direct this movie, he choreographs it,
turning simple fight sequences into ballets of bloodshed.  It's
compelling, albeit a little disconcerting, to see violence so lovingly
and carefully photographed.  HARD TARGET isn't some hack job--a lot of
effort went into crafting the picture.  Snipped and put back together
to avoid an NC-17, the film still offers a lot of mayhem and murder.
It would have been interesting to see the cut that represented Woo's
initial vision.
     There is perhaps a little too much slow-motion photography, and
the score, while capturing the flavor of Louisiana, often becomes
intrusive.  Early in the film, it seems that every time we're treated
to a shot of Van Damme, he's walking towards us in slow-motion with his
overcoat flapping in the breeze while an unnecessary blast of music
blares from the theater speakers.
     The first half of the film occasionally slows up for some silly
exposition, but by the mid-point, the hunt is underway, and it's all
action from there.  If, by five minutes into the movie, you haven't put
your brain into park, this is going to seem like an utterly ridiculous
effort.  Those who are willing to get into the spirit are in for a
roller-coaster ride directed by a master and acted by someone who knows
how to kick higher than most people can jump.
     I'm not going to say much about the plot, because it's far too
contrived to be worth mentioning.  Suffice it to say that if the
success of HARD TARGET depended on it, the movie would be sunk.  Even
for the action-oriented film-goer, there are a few moments too hard to
swallow (where's the "S" on Van Damme's chest?).  If nothing else,
they're good for comic relief which, fortunately (or should I say
"hopefully") seems to be Woo's intent.
     Lance Henriksen enjoys himself immensely.  He's fun to watch, but
he goes so far over-the-top that I'm not sure it would be justified to
call what he does a "performance".  Regardless, he provides an
excellent and much-needed counterpoint to Van Damme's ho-hum
delivery.  The hero, after all, is good with his kicks and punches, but
not his lines.  Yancy Butler does a poor job, even considering the
company she keeps.  Someone who can make Van Damme look like a drama
school graduate really needs to take some acting lessons (although,
admittedly, there's a scene with a snake where she's fantastic).  And
couldn't they have gotten someone a little more lively than Wilford
Brimley for Chance's lunatic uncle?
     Anyway, you pretty much get the idea.  Without the elegant
technique of John Woo, HARD TARGET could have been a real dud.  It is
not a good alternative to more intelligent thrillers such as IN THE
LINE OF FIRE and THE FUGITIVE, but that's not the market it's aimed
at.  However, those that enter a darkened theater showing this film
with a reasonable idea of what they're getting themselves into, are
likely to emerge satisfied.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Jon Ridge
     For just a couple of years now, a certain film director has been
doing for action films what Marisa Tomei did earlier this year for the
"love interest" character in film--breathing life into it.  If you've
not guessed by now, the man I'm talking about is none other than John
Woo.  The only problem is that Mr. Woo has been doing his thing over in
Japan, and not in the U.S. of A.  Woo's THE KILLER had so much word of
mouth in Japan, that once the film arrived in the states in 1990 it was
welcomed with a massive dose of critical praise.  Well, the wait is
finally over.  John Woo is here, and his American debut goes the
distance to prove that he is here to stay.
     The story is particularly simple:  A Vietnam vet is murdered by a
group of trigger-happy hunters--partial to that race of human
beings--and the man's daughter goes looking for him.  It seems he was
homeless, and to get the proper tour of her father's homeland, the
daughter enlists the help of a down-and-out sailor named Chance
Beaudreaux (played by Van Damme).  Chance needs two-hundred bucks to
ship out of New Orleans, and figures that by taking this young and
innocent woman up on her offer, he can get what he needs.  To convince
her that he's the man for the job, Chance fights away some homeless
thugs looking to rip Natalie(the daughter, played by Yancy Butler) off
of a few hundred dollars, using his fists and feet to crush bones like
nothing you've ever seen in a Van Damme movie before.
     Natalie is definitely convinced.  She and Chance soon discover
that her father was murdered, and this leads them to cross paths with
the leader of the afore-mentioned group (played by Lance Henriksen).
*and* we get another murder-of-a-homeless scene.  The vet who's killed
this time is someone Chance knew as a friend, and--well, you can
probably figure out the rest.
     The story *is* simple at heart, but it isn't really the story
that's important here--it's the story*telling*.  This is a dynamite
action film.  Director John Woo uses techniques--like slow-mo,
quick-cut, and freeze frame--that other directors have either taken for
granted or have been too afraid to use, and creates an entirely new
kind of action movie that most American audiences have never seen
before.  It's exciting stuff, and it has a truly explosive impact to it
(especially in the climax, at an empty warehouse in the bayous).  The
characterizations *do* leave much to be desired--Van Damme has one
grimacing expression plastered on his mug at all times (does this guy
*ever* smile...?), and Yancy Butler doesn't have much to do here--but,
again, these things are nothing more than serviceable to John Woo's
unique directorial style.  He's a master at this kind of movie making.
     If you see HARD TARGET, but still want more Woo, check out some of
his earlier Japanese work (like THE KILLER and HARD BOILED).  These
movies all have one thing in common: a superior artist at work.  I can
compare Woo with Quentin Tarantino in that the two are fresh forces in
Hollywood who do not need or want to concede with any Hollywood
standards.  TARGET's ear-slicing scene had to be trimmed in order for
the film to attain an R-rating.  And perhaps that's saying something,
too.  Woo has a little to learn about the United States as far as
movies are concerned, and the MPAA and censorship.  But it's far from
too late, and if Woo keeps up the good work he might even be able to
break down the MPAA's standards on violence in the movies.
