Title
Review for Simply Irresistible (1999)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Steve Rhodes
Have you ever been so head over heels in love that you felt like you
were floating?  That happens, quite literally, to Amanda and Tom, played
with great romantic chemistry by Sarah Michelle Gellar and Sean Patrick
Flanery, in director Mark Tarlov's romantic fairy tale, SIMPLY
IRRESISTIBLE.  In an age of ironic movie titles, it is refreshing to
have one that is completely true.
Although Gellar comes most recently from a teen movie background, SIMPLY
IRRESISTIBLE is unabashedly adult, even its very mild PG-13 rating means
that it would be fine for kids younger than teenagers.  It's also a
feel-good movie that isn't ashamed of emphasizing the upbeat and
optimistic part of our souls.  There isn't a dysfunctional family in
sight, and the characters are the sort of nice people that you'd like to
get to know better.
The story starts off with shades of YOU'VE GOT MAIL as Amanda's New York
City restaurant, The Southern Cross, is about to go bankrupt due to
rising rents and dwindling clientele.  The Southern Cross is a lowbrow
place that's been in Amanda's family for 70 years.  The waitresses lug
big pitchers of iced tea, and the plates don't match.
Across town, Tom manages an upscale department store that is spending 4
million dollars just to open a small, four star restaurant within it.
Tom's currently dating a Julia Roberts lookalike who has perfect skin
and hair and knows it.
One day, Tom happens by Amanda's establishment with Miss Million Dollar
Looks in tow.   Through a bit of almost accidental magic, Amanda
instantly learns to cook meals that are so irresistible that they send
people into ecstasy.  A few bites and Tom can hardly control himself,
especially after he tastes her pičce de résistance, the dessert.  ("I
love desert," she says.  "It's the whole point of the meal.")  He falls
hard for Amanda, which pleases her no end.
Being on different ends of the economic scale, Tom and Amanda don't do
much about their infatuation at first.  The movie's most enchanting
scene occurs in their next meeting after that first meal.  In his
restaurant, currently under construction, she looks at him, and, with a
come-hither look, she motions him over with her index finger.  Soon they
are dancing to romantic, big band music like in an old Fred Astaire and
Ginger Rogers movie.  They don't understand what is happening to them
(joint hallucination perhaps?), but they enjoy it.
The movie has a strong supporting cast that enriches the story.  HIGH
ART's Patricia Clarkson plays Tom's humorous and love-starved assistant.
HAPPINESS's Dylan Baker plays Tom's stiff boss and the owner of the
lavish, family department store.  And as Amanda's assistant cook and
love advisor, Larry Gilliard, Jr. shares the script's best comedic lines
with Clarkson.
Similar to LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE in its love of food and its
association of eating with loving, SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE is not a movie
you should attempt to watch on an empty stomach lest you get such a
ravishing hunger for great food that you are forced to leave the
theater.  And whatever you do, don't you dare let your spouse see it
alone.  The story puts such a romantic trance on the audience that your
other half is liable to fall in love with the stranger in the next seat.
SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE runs a breezy 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for brief
sexual references and would be fine for any kid old enough to be
interested in romance.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Simply_Irresistible_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
They say that the way to a person's heart is through his or her stomach,
so one would think that before _Simply_Irresistible_, a food-centered
romance would have hit the big screen...
...oh, I forgot--_Like_Water_for_Chocolate_ got there first.
Then allow me to rephrase: one would think that one would come up with a
romance that was not only food-centered, but a fantasy where the besotted
chef's emotions magically manifest themselves in her cooking...
...oh, I forgot--_Like_Water_for_Chocolate_ covered that, too.
That leaves writer Judith Roberts and director Mark Tarlov with nary a
fresh idea between them, and stars Sarah Michelle Gellar and Sean Patrick
Flanery with nothing fresh to work with.  The latter fact is especially a
shame, for Flanery and the luminous Gellar are wonderfully matched as,
respectively, wealthy department store manager Tom Bartlett and the young
woman he eventually falls for, a mediocre chef at a struggling New York
restaurant named Amanda Shelton.  The two Meet Cute at a street food
market, where a mysterious stranger sells Amanda a basket of crabs, one of
which is magical (!) and pinches Tom's leg.  Forcing a meeting between
Amanda and Tom is just the first trick up the crab's sleeve, for he turns
Amanda into a master chef, winning the hearts of many, not least of all
being the commitment-phobic Tom's, with her divine culinary masterpieces.
This setup plays about as dreadful as it sounds, with only the appeal and
chemistry of Gellar and Flanery keeping it watchable.  But around the
midpoint, with the appearance of the object of its original
title--_Vanilla_Fog_--_Simply_Irresistible_ starts to develop some low-key
charm.  At this juncture, Tarlov and Roberts appear to realize that the
mere presence of magic does not a magical film make.  As exhibited in
Alfonso Arau's absolutely enchanting 1993 film _Like_Water_for_Chocolate_,
fantasy elements must be firmly rooted in the characters and story in order
to really work, and once the fog appears and lifts, the emphasis is placed
less on the magic than the characters, and as such that element feels more
like a necessary part of the story and not an arbitrary gimmick.
Even so, it's too little too late--the damage caused by the unpromising
opening and the annoying plot device of the crab (which, like the stranger
who sells it to Amanda, is never explained) is done, and the effectiveness
of _Simply_Irresistible_'s latter half merely serves as a glimpse of what
might have been had the filmmakers been more focused.  As such, this murky
and ultimately bland effort lives up to that former title--_Vanilla_Fog_,
indeed.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Greg King
SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE (PG).  
(Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Mark Tarlov
Stars: Sarah Michelle Gellar, Sean Patrick Flanery, Patricia Clarkson, 
Dylan Baker, Christopher Durang, 
Betty Buckley, Christopher Durang, Larry Gilliard jr
Running time: 96 minutes.
I've seen three romantic comedies in the space of as many
days, and Simply Irresistible is easily the best of the lot.  It is
charming, magical, enjoyable and, yes, irresistible.
It's a bad week for Amanda (Sarah Michelle Gellar, from Buffy,
and the recent teen drama Cruel Intentions, etc).  The family
restaurant is being forced to close after seventy years, because it
cannot pay its bills.  But thanks to some timely intervention from a
mysterious stranger and a magical crab (don't ask!), Amanda's fortunes
take a turn for the better.  Suddenly, her emotions are somehow
captured in her cooking, and the restaurant becomes successful again.
Her culinary treats also begin to work their magic on everyone
else.  Amanda catches the eye of the handsome Tom Bartlett (Sean
Patrick Flanery, from the Young Indiana Jones series, etc), an
executive at a famous department store which is on the verge of
opening its own exclusive restaurant.  Tom is an inveterate womaniser
who always breaks up his relationships after the fourth date.  He
chooses Amanda's restaurant as the scene of his latest public split
from his current girl friend.  The gastronomic magic somehow brings
Tom and Amanda together, although he wastes far too much time trying
to analyse events rather than just going with the flow.
Meanwhile, Amanda's tasty treats also manufacture a passionate
romance between Tom's secretary (Patricia Clarkson, from High Art,
etc) and the store's humourless owner (Dylan Baker, from Happiness,
etc).
The central plot heavily borrows from the wonderful Mexican
film Like Water For Chocolate (1992), in which a woman imbued her
cooking with her emotions, but first time writer Judith Roberts adds
her own winning ingredients to the mix.  The result is a charming,
mischievous, sexy, witty and simply irresistible comedy that should
work its magic on audiences.  Mark Tarlov, a producer whose diverse
credits include Christine to Serial Mom, makes his directorial debut
here.  He keeps things moving along at a jaunty pace that suits the
material.
The likeable cast deliver delightful performances.  In
particular, Gellar and Flanery strike sparks, and their obvious
chemistry lifts this light weight soufflé.
Audiences who love this sort of thing should immerse
themselves in this thoroughly enjoyable concoction.  If you go along
with the film's delightfully off beat premise and don't question where
the magic is coming from, then Simply Irresistible works a treat.

Author
Jamie Peck
SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Gellar's Amanda finds herself falling for harried Henri Bendel exec Tom 
(Sean Patrick Flannery of Powder) around the same time she discovers an 
uncanny ability to mystically manifest emotions in her cooking, a secret 
ingredient that arouses both his interest in her and the public's in her 
tiny TriBeCa eatery. All this love and sorcery have a lot to do with the 
telekinetic crab that also figures into the story, a tale that at times 
plays like an American spin on 1993's Mexican classic "Like Water for 
Chocolate." Several differences: One, "Like Water" didn't have a 
telekinetic crab, and two, "Like Water" was a good film. 
"Simply Irresistible," on the other hand, is about as challenging as an 
Easy-Bake Oven. Amateurishly staged scenes cancel each other out in 
their badness, from an embarrassing seduction in a literal vanilla fog 
to an impromptu dance sequence where Tom and Amanda do their best Fred 
and Ginger - though Fred and Ginger never took part in anything this 
garish. The intrusive musical score distracts from the flat dialogue at 
regular intervals, but it's not like you're were going to miss much. In 
fact, take away the few instances of salty language and this has 
made-for-Disney Channel written all over it. 
But a majority of "Simply Irresistible"'s resistibility factor has less 
to do with the afore-mentioned overkill than the bland leads - Tom and 
Amanda are so thin and ambiguously defined that there's just no fun 
rooting for their inevitable "happily ever after." Nor do the 
otherworldly powers that serve to bring them together make sense, so 
we're left with a ho-hum relationship based on enchanted eclairs; it's 
not going to last long, people. Perhaps sensing this, the filmmakers 
have piled on weird supporting characters for acting vets like Betty 
Buckley, Dylan Baker and Patricia Clarkson, but they don't go anywhere 
either. 
In fact, nothing in "Simply Irresistible" goes anywhere save for Gellar, 
and she doesn't go somewhere so much as you wish she'd go _somewhere_ - 
like to a better movie. Already proving major talent with relatively few 
big- and small-screen roles, she's the sole reason this overcooked 
souffle isn't completely fit for the garbage disposal, looking smashing 
in her Todd Oldham-designed duds and investing much more in her 
perfunctory part than she ever gets in return. It's certainly a dish 
best not served in it's current condition, but one can only guess that, 
without Gellar, "Simply Irresistible" would be strictly unwatchable.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 20th Century Fox
 Director:  Mark Tarlov
 Writer:  Judith Roberts
 Cast: Sarah Michelle Gellar, Sean Patrick Flanery, Patricia
Clarkson, Dylan Baker, Christopher Durang, Larry Gillard
   One of the running gags in this movie is that men
think of sex 278 times a day...that you can tell when a
gentleman in contemplating its joys when he tightens his belt
or puts his hands in his pockets.  While no one is taking a
guess on the figure attributable to women, I'd cut the digits in
half and say that people think of food 139 times a day and
sex the remainder.  We don't wonder that sex has been the
favorite theme of theater and film since Agamemnon's fooling
around cost him his life and Medea's husband Jason's
adulteries cost him his children.  But perhaps only one out of
forty movies shows people enjoying food.  They may be
eating to create busywork at the director's insistence, but
centering a film around a meal is as rare as displaying actors
in the bathroom.
   We're grateful, then, that "Simply Irresistible" has come
along, a paean to great food, a film that equates fine dining
with sexual ecstasy.  In no way, though, is Mark Tarlov's
work in the same class as the 1966 stroke of genius, "Big
Night," which substitutes Stanley Tucci for Sarah Michelle
Gellar as that film's gourmet cook.  While "Simply Irresistible"
is on the right track, exchanging flotation and magic for the
earthier tones of "Big Night," the film is simply too repetitious,
featuring two actors who simply do not make chemistry
together and, in the case of Ms. Gellar a nasal voice that is
the equivalent of fingernails making their way up a
blackboard.
   Sorcery is in the air from the earliest scene, as Christopher
Durang plays Cupid in the guise of a seller of crabs and a
taxi driver.  He starts the sparks flying, assuring a meeting
between Amanda (Gellar) and a man who will become her
gentleman caller, Tom (Sean Patrick Flanery).  As with
virtually every romantic comedy, the two must be made to
split up each time they get together.  In "Simply Irresistible"
the fear of vulnerability takes the place of geographical
estrangement: Tom, who is opening a large, elaborate
restaurant uptown from Amanda's SoHo eatery, has worked
his dating problems out on his computer and has discovered
that he loses every prospective partner the fourth time out. 
He is as determined to avoid the mistake with Amanda as
Amanda is bent on keeping his attention.
   Gellar, who made a name for herself as Buffy the Vampire
Slayer on TV, comes across like an 18-year-old kid to
Flanery's urbane, alpha-male restaurateur.  As Amanda,
Gellar plays a chef whose long-established restaurant is
about to go under simply because she cannot cook, but
under the spell of a crab that Cupid has left in her kitchen,
she has fallen in love.  Her cooking suddenly takes on
inspirational wizardry.  She makes caramel eclairs that gives
those who eat them unadulterated euphoria, while her Crabs
Napoleon bring customers in by the score.  When she dances
with Tom, the floor takes on the qualities of a large ballroom
with mirrors, filling with fog that literally transports the lovers
to the ceiling.  Is this what you were like when you first fell in
love?
    Opening shortly before Valentine's Day, "Simply
Irresistible" is a date movie that probably seeks a twenty-
something audience.  The romance is old-fashioned, the sort
that market researchers  say is craved by youth now tuning
out the edgy, satiric comedies about love.  Its principal
attractions are the side roles, particularly Larry Gilliard Jr. as
Amanda assistant chef Nolan, who is easily the most
amusing fellow in this slight work, while Dylan Baker, so vivid
in Todd Solondz's "Happiness," is foolish to the point of
embarrassment.  For the most part, this eclair is no "Like
Water for Chocolate."

Author
DeWyNGaLe
SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: B-
Amanda is a young, innocent girl who works at her mother's restaurant.  They
have been in business for seventy-five years, but now bigger businesses are
opening, taking away customers.  Amanda feels responsible for the lack of
customers, considering she's the cook.  At the market, she encounters a strange
man who sells her some crabs.  When she gets back to the restaurant, she can
magically cook!  In the market, she also met another man named Tom, played by
Sean Patrick Flanery.  She learns that he is opening up a fancy, expensive
restaurant.  He learns about her restaurant as well.  Now, Amanda is seeing Tom
a lot.  All of these good things started happening to her when she got those
crabs.  She doesn't think much of it, except she is very happy! Tom's
restaurant seems like something out of a fairy tale.  It is in a store that
seems like it is from a fairy tale as well.  Throughout the film, they continue
to build it.  Tom is very nervous about the opening of it. 
Gellar does a nice job as the role of Amanda, but the character had no depth. 
We didn't know any background on the character at all, except she couldn't cook
very well before she got a crab.  Gellar was mis-cast as this role.  In my
opinion, she wasted a lot of time on effort on this film.  Her talent is above
this level of movie.  Flanery's character of Tom is extremely annoying.  We
don't know anything about him, except that he is rich.  Flanery gives a
terrible performance.  It didn't seem like he was putting any effort into the
role of Tom.
Amanda continues to cook wonderful meals, which is drawing crowds of people
from all over to her restaurant.  She couldn't be happier.  Now, strange things
are going on with her and her cooking.  In one scene, she and Tom float because
they ate one of her dishes.  Fog fills the room.  These effects are extremely
corny and cheap.  She discovers at a dinner party that what she is feeling is
going into her food.  If she is upset, the people who eat it are upset.  It was
a pretty good concept, it just could have been portrayed a little bit better
and a little more realistically.  The film should have deleted the entire magic
plot line and made it about Tom and Amanda, or they should have had the plot
about Amanda and saving her restaurant.  They don't both work together very
well at all.  It plays like a Bewitched episode, only 95 minutes long.  The
music throughout the film is very corny as well.  These are the key problems in
Simply Irresistible.    
Nothing is ever explained in Simply Irresistible, and that gets extremely
annoying.  It certainly wasn't extraordinary, but it was certainly enjoyable. 
The ending and beginning were extremely stupid, but the middle seemed to be
pretty good.  Simply Irresistible did do what it was supposed to do.  The goal
of romantic comedies is to keep you in suspense about whether the two main
characters are going to be together or not.  Unlike She's All That, I found
myself wanting the two to get together.  Sarah Michelle Gellar saved this film
from being horrible.  Some of the parts in the film are extremely humorous, but
some of them have been used way too many times and aren't funny anymore. 
The Bottom Line- Simply Irresistible wasn't exactly irresistible, but not
resistible either.    

Author
Susan Granger
Talk about misleading advertising! This clumsy comedy fails on almost all fronts, and here's why. Sarah Michelle Gellar, who plays TV's "Buffy the Vampire Killer," and Sean Patrick Flannery, who plays TV's "Young Indiana Jones," both need a truly stellar vehicle to make the crossover from the small screen to movies - and this isn't it. She plays an inexperienced chef and restaurant owner who, magically, is able to cook her sensuous passion into glorious cuisine after she meets this man of her dreams. This idea worked for Mexico's erotic, enchanting "Like Water for Chocolate," but it falls like a soggy souffle here. According to the contrived script by Judith Roberts, briskly but routinely directed by Mark Tarlov, Gellar inherits a failing 70 year-old TriBeCa restaurant, the Southern Cross, from her mother. Playwright Christopher Durang plays a cab driver Cupid as he, magically, utilizes an elusive crab to engineer a "cute" meeting between Gellar and Flannery in a Manha!
ttan Farmer's Market. Flannery's a self-absorbed retail executive in charge of opening a trendy new restaurant called Jonathan's in Fifth Avenue's tony Henri Bendel, and his temperamental French chef is giving him grief. Can you guess what happens?
Gellar's Crab Napoleon enchants him, but the standard ingredients are all measured out: no surprises, no spice, no zest, no originality. Only some stalwart supporting actors - Betty Buckley, Dylan Baker, Larry Gilliard Jr., Patricia Clarkson -  are trying the best they can. And, if you've seen "You've Got Mail," you'll find the plot similarities striking. Not that it's not pleasant. It is - but so bland that, if you go, you'll soon crave something else.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Simply Irresistible" is a quite resistible 3. Back to the kitchen for something with more gusto.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Mark Tarlov.
Cast: Sarah Michelle Gellar, Sean Patrick Flanery, Patricia Clarkson, 
Christopher Durang, Larry Gilliard Jr., Dylan Baker, Betty Buckley.
1999 - 95 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for profanity).
Reviewed February 6, 1999.
Blatantly borrowing elements from 1993's "Like Water for Chocolate" and 
1991's "The Butcher's Wife," "Simply Irresistible" attempts to be a 
whimsical romantic comedy but, more often than not, comes off as 
laughable, leaving you to wonder why rising star Sarah Michelle Gellar 
(T.V.'s "Buffy, the Vampire Slayer") would choose such an obviously 
inept film project to waste her time on.
Things get off to a bad start right from the onset as Amanda (Sarah 
Michelle Gellar), a young woman who runs her late family's struggling 
New York restaurant, runs into a mystery man who forces a bushel of 
crabs on her and then vansihes into thin air. While out shopping, she 
also meets Tom (Sean Patrick Flanery), a charming, handsome man, who 
happens to be planning a ritzy restaurant for the department store he 
works for, and later when he decides to drop by her dive, called 
Southern Cross, for lunch, she somehow makes a delicious crab dish for 
him, even though she is known to not be a very good chef. Suddenly, 
Amanda finds her restaurant, on the edge of foreclosure, rejuvenate to 
life as customer begin to swarm for her food, which strangely causes 
everyone immediate jubilation when it hits their mouths. Are Amanda and 
Tom destined to be together? And is it not just because of the magical 
food, but because they really, truly like each other? And what exactly 
is going on with the food she is making? Does it have anything to do 
with that pesky crab she got that sits on the shelf in the kitchen 
somehow assisting her in her food preparation?
"Simply Irresistible" is a ridiculous and just plain goofy romantic 
fantasy that's as flimsy as a slice of bologna. It takes one joke---that 
people who eat the food are taken aback by it in most unusual ways---and 
recycles it over and over again until the film has reached an 
appropriate running time of 95 minutes. Add in a music montage every ten 
minutes (these are actually the best scenes in the movie, which 
certainly tells you something about the film itself), and what you've 
got is an utterly empty, if not necessarily boring, excursion. 
The cast of "Simply Irresistible" is fairly good, but it is the 
supporting characters who are the most interesting. Patricia Clarkson 
(1998's "High Art," in which she played a drugged-out lesbian) is a 
standout as Tom's colleague, and is thankfully given a few funny lines 
of dialogue. Also of note is Larry Gilliard Jr., as Amanda's cooking 
assistant and buddy, who is allowed to create a seemingly full character 
out of only a handful of scenes. Of the main stars, Sarah Michelle 
Gellar is fine, but really does often look like she's struggling through 
the unmistakably clumsy material, and if Sean Patrick Flanery plans on 
keeping a film career in the future, he has certainly got to pick better 
projects than this.
The bottom line is that "Simply Irresistible" is the exact opposite of 
its deprophesized title, and when the movie got to the point where the 
characters began to float in mid-air (an unamusing plot device that was 
repeated in the stupid last scene), my mind checked out from the 
characters and the romance. When I think about it in hindsight, I should 
have checked out in the very first scene, where the point of the action 
was for Gellar to crawl under tables looking for a runaway mechanical 
crab. Now, that certainly is what I'd call magical!
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putmam
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Fontaine Lien
"Simply Irresistible" Review
by Fontaine Lien (saitiau@aol.com)
More Reviews: http://members.aol.com/saitiau/cinema.html
Okay, bear with me y'all, cause first off I have to get this off my chest:
WHAT THE HELL IS UP WITH THAT DAMN CRAB???
Whew.  Okay.  Cause that same clip shown over and over again was
beginning to get on my nerves towards the end, as cute as the crab maybe. 
Even I know that you need more footage than *that*.  And that wasn't the
only thing getting on my nerves.  The cutesy gimmicks, saccharine sweet
score / soundtrack and the pretty young faces of Sarah Michelle Gellar (as
Amanda) and Sean Patrick Flannery (as Tom) might have held some appeal
during, oh, say the first 10 minutes of the movie.  At first the movie
moves along at a quick, interesting pace.   It is speedily established that
something magical is about to happen to Amanda when she encounters a
totally random fairy godfather type person on the street, whose
aforementioned crab follows her everywhere and just *doesn't* die.  A
ridiculous concept, yes, but at this point I'm willing to accept it because
I'm willing to accept that this is how Amanda's life is changed, how her
powers are received.
Later on, the movie can't seem to decide whether these powers come from
this fairy godfather or from Amanda falling in with Tom. And this is why
the clips of the crab were annoying; they weren't just repetitive, they
were out of place and unnecessary.  The plot stumbles along at an uneven
speed, sometimes dwelling too long on a particular development (Amanda
suddenly becoming a great chef, her falling in love with Tom, etc.),
sometimes moving on too quickly for its own good.  Some places the plot
just doesn't make sense, sometimes it's way too contrived (the crab bit,
for example), and sometimes too corny (Peaches emitting dry ice.  Can't
beat that).  All in all the plot seemed fragmented, unconnected.  Not
romantic at all, and only funny in some places.  So, okay, do the magic
powers come from the crab?  Or the fairy godfather?  She can *float* now
too?  And all of a sudden, instead of just making dry ice come out of
peaches, she can put her emotions into her food?  Tom all of a sudden just
accepts Amanda's "witchcraft" in the end?  Would people really dine in a
restaurant that resembles life after death in Tupac's video?  WHAT THE
HELL IS UP WITH THAT DAMN CRAB?  It is unfortunate, because I liked the
basic premise of the movie, until it became too fantastical and tiresome. 
The film seemed to skirt around a serious theme or at least *a* theme for
a while, but towards the end it resolved to show us long flashback clips
and 5 minutes of people crying at their tables.  The humor was good in
some places (Nolan gets the funniest bits, including that
incomprehensible, totally random thing with the dolls).  Gellar and
Flannery are qualified actors, and Gellar has a particular charm, but I
much prefer her playing the saucy Buffy (or even Annette in the upcoming
"Cruel Intentions") than this sorry excuse for a character.  It's almost
funny sometimes to see these two trying so hard to make the dialogue
sound better than it is, or trying to make the relationship seem more
plausible.  The supporting character Nolan was a highlight, though he
reminded me a bit of Kevin in "You've Got Mail" (see footnotes).  And, as
always, typical of a chick flick / romantic comedy, there's a seemingly
endless romantic soundtrack in the background, cued up at all the right
places.   This sort of got on the nerves after a while, too.  
"Simply Irresistible" is not hard to understand, light, funny in some
places, and generally disappointing because it can't draw the line between
romance and protracted SAP, between humor and tired slapstick.  And how
could I refrain from making a pun? . . . "Simply Irresistible" is all too
easy to resist.
* Did anyone else think this was a tad bit similar to "You've Got Mail" (or
"The Shop Around the Corner")?  Business rivals fall in love.  Female
counterpart's business is in danger of being shut down.  Female as mother-
like figure guiding her.  The annoying, hysterical ex-girlfriends.
 * I _really_ like Sarah Michelle Gellar's wardrobe. 

Author
Mac VerStandig
Simply Irresistible is not only an extraordinary romantic film, but it 
is an incredibly entertaining, fun, and flat out enjoyable movie as 
well. In a time when filmmakers have committed to making bold moves and 
trying to declare political statements in their works, it is a real 
pleasure to see freshman director Mark Tarlov make a debut film that 
audiences can truly enjoy. And although this film may not be 
intellectually challenging, or the type of production that forces people 
to struggle with themselves over issues that effect their day to day 
lives; it is nice to get a break from that type of cinema once in a 
while.
The plot that Judith Roberts has created is the key force behind this 
film. Amanda Shelton (Sarah Michelle Gellar) has inherited her mother's 
restaurant in New York City which is really little more than a room with 
some tables, a kitchen, and a few regulars who eat lunch there daily. 
Amanda is the head chef, and although her food is bland, simple, and 
unoriginal, she has managed to make ends meet. However, as early as the 
second scene, only after the memorable first scene where she chases a 
crab up her destined lover's leg, Amanda discovers that her rent has 
been raised and she will be forced to close.
After the movie quickly does away with the necessary background 
information, the enchanting love story begins. Amanda runs into the man 
whose leg she had pursued earlier, a wealthy man named Tom (Sean Patrick 
Flanery), who is opening up a $4 million restaurant uptown. And, as a 
matter of the obvious, they fall madly and deeply in love. From there it 
is just a series romantic and comedic moments that will enlighten all 
that see this film. The key to enjoying this wonderful comedy is 
suspending all belief before the film ever begins. Certainly not 
realistic, you must come to the understanding that it is all far-fetched 
fiction filled with magic, and that is why it is so uniquely joyful to 
view.
Acing is very rarely a factor in romantic comedies, and therefore is 
often limited to that of a second class nature. That certainly would 
have been acceptable here, and the film probably would have worked with 
anyone in the lead roles. But the casting was brilliant, and the acting 
is truly grade A. Teenage sensation Sarah Michelle Gellar, better known 
to her fans as "Buffy the Vampire Slayer," is absolutely charming in her 
lead role. She surely has a future in the film business, despite what 
some skeptics may say. Dylan Baker has a supporting role in this film 
that shows us that he can act in non-dramatic productions as well. Any 
doubt of his comic ability, after his Oscar caliber performance in 
Happiness, should be shed now, and hopefully Hollywood will accept him 
as a mainstream actor soon. However, despite those 2 great performances, 
Sean Patrick Flanery outdoes everyone. Often similar to Michael J. Fox, 
he is absolutely marvelous, and one of the pillars that holds this film 
so strong.
Overall, Simply Irresistible is a wonderful film. Filled with moments of 
magic, romance and comedy alike, it is a pleasure to watch. I applaud 
Director Mark Tarlov for making a film that is the way the movies were 
meant to be: Entertaining!
CHECK OUT THIS REVIEW AND MANY OTHERS AT HTTP://WWW.MOVIEREVIEWS.ORG

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Sarah Michelle Gellar and Sean Patrick Flanery
Synopsis:
SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE is a lighthearted romantic comedy about the magic of
two people getting together in New York. Beautiful young Amanda (Sarah
Michelle Gellar) has inherited a tiny, quaint, corner restaurant which
has been in the family for 70 years. But she's a terrible cook and the
business is foundering. Miraculously Amanda's luck takes a turn for the
better, and she's suddenly turning out culinary masterpieces that
literally cast magical spells on the people who eat them: desserts that
make people turn giddy and fall passionately in love or appetizers that
cause tears of joy. Amanda meets a dapper but commitment-phobic young
hunk named Tom (Sean Patrick Flanery). Will the romantic magic hold?
Will the two soulmates get together in the end despite a few misgivings
and misunderstandings?
Opinion:
Magical food and magical romance? SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE is a warm and
delectable Valentines Day charmer about the fun, coincidence and
enchantment of meeting someone special. You can probably guess the main
outlines of any comedy about romantically destined soulmates, but in the
case of SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE it's delicious watching it happen, and the
sweet story leaves you with a happy melting feeling at the end. Bring
your significant other. Happy eating.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
LARRY MCGILLICUDDY
Simply Irresistible tries really hard to recapture the feel of an old-
fashioned romantic fantasy. In fact, it tries too hard. The film 
wants to be soft, cuddly, and loveable, and succeeds only in being 
incredibly stupid. I'm usually kind to this sort of film, especially 
when there is a wonderfully charming lead performance such as Sarah 
Michelle Gellar delivers here. Unfortunately, her performance is 
comppletely wasted since the film does not provide her with a leading 
man that is a tenth as interesting as she is.
Gellar stars as Amanda, a chef at her small family restaraunt that is 
going out of business. One reason is that she can't cook very well at 
all. One day some guy gives her a crab (I'm not making this up), and 
all of a sudden crazy things begin to happen such as her food 
actually tasting great. People start flocking to her restaraunt and 
she has a hard time keeping up with all the customers.
Sean Patrick Flanery is an upper class businessman who is planning on 
opening his own restaraunt. He stops by Amanda's one day and is 
entranced by the food, eventhough his girlfriend breaks up with him 
at the same time. Amanda is instantly attracted to him and they begin 
to fall for one another. This is helped by the magic of the food, 
which creates a thick vanilla fog, and has them floating off the 
ground.
Flanery's character is one of the most confusing leading men in a 
romantic comedy in quite some time. At first he loves the fact that 
they are rolling around kissing in the vanilla fog. When they start 
to float, it's too much for him. He claims that he wants to be in 
control of his own destiny, and refuses to be with her alone again. 
Whenever she tries to get near him, he shouts at her and calls her a 
witch, like he's in Salem or something. What the hell is this guy's 
problem? Who wouldn't want to roll around and kiss Sarah Michelle 
Gellar in thick vanilla fog? Who wouldn't want to be holding her as 
the two of you float off the ground? It doesn't help that Flanery has 
absolutely zero charisma. His character annoyed me so much at times I 
had to look away from the screen.
Surprisingly, the only other interesting performance comes from 
Patricia Clarkson, as Flanery's assistant. I very much disliked her 
annoyingly mannered performance in High Art. But here she strips away 
all the extra baggage and allows her natural personality to come 
through. I found her to be rather charming in a classy, sophisticated 
way. Clarkson and Gellar do their best to make this featherweight 
film palatable, but they receive very little help. 
The film does have some nice photography. They sure got the look of a 
old-fashioned romance right. But the most important thing in any 
romance is chemistry, and despite Gellar's best efforts, there is 
none to speak of. Other than some nice photography and two fine 
performances, Simply Irresistible offers nothing for even the least 
discriminating of viewers.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Author
Luke Buckmaster
SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE
Cast: Sarah Michelle Gellar, Sean Patrick Flanery, Patricia Clarkson,
Dylan Baker, Betty Buckley, Larry Gillard Jr.
Director: Mark Tarlov
Screenplay: Judith Roberts
Australian theatrical release: April 29, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 stars
Who would have thought that a film about Sarah Michelle Gellar learning
how to cook would be as fun and amusing as Simply Irresistible?  Yup,
it's true.  Long time producer Mark Tarlov reveals a lively energy in
his first attempt as a director and creates a film that is, pretty much,
irresistible.  It would be pretentious to consider any of this film's
elements as fresh or original, but they certainly feel that way thanks
to Geller's appealing performance and Tarlov's direction.  The film
comes together very well, with a cute central romance that is a nice
blend of passion and fun, with a little touch of magic thrown in for
good measure.
Amanda Shelton (Sarah Michelle Gellar) is the owner and chef of a small,
homely restaurant that she inherited from her mother.  The restaurant is
about to go bust because Shelton's cooking skills leave a lot to be
desired.  Tom Bartlett (Sean Patrick Flanery) is a suave executive for a
famous department store, and the two first meet at a food market thanks
to help of a mysterious crab seller.  Sure enough, they bump into each
other again and love is in the air.  Suddenly, Shelton can now cook, and
cook very well.  Her dishes are so irresistible that Bartlett's boss
(Dylan Baker) chooses Shelton to cook for an important corporate dinner
at the launch of a new department restaurant.  Shelton begins to grasp
her unique ability to evoke emotion through her food, and an outrageous
night of chaotic dining unfolds.
Simply Irresistible is film colored by bright and adorable performances
and shaped by a screenplay that never makes the mistake of taking itself
too seriously.  The relationship between Shelton and Bartlett is too
shallow to be believable, but it's a cute bit of fantasy fluff that
doesn't feel dated or too modern.  Though sometimes frustrating in its
simplicity - the film purposely frustrates viewers by prolonging the
final get together - watching Gellar and Flanery in these flatteringly
good-natured roles is a treat.  Simply Irrisistible is a surprisingly
enjoyable picture with a kind-hearted temperament and a sweet,
sentimental aftertaste.  It restores faith that there is a little bit of
magic in life that, like love, doesn't always make a lot of sense.
Neither does this film, I suppose, but you won't hear me complaining.


Author
James Sanford
"Simply Irresistible" begins with Sarah Michelle Gellar picking up a
case of crabs.
Actually, that's not entirely true. Despite being almost two hours
long, "Irresistible" never really goes anywhere. It just dawdles
along, never becoming interesting enough to pay attention to or bad
enough to walk out on.
It's a perfect example of a "wallpaper movie," the kind of film that
serves as pleasant background noise while you're doing something more
productive, such as making out or learning all the latest
gossip. After all, how dazzling can a romantic comedy be when Cupid is
a crustacean?
"Irresistible" sets up Gellar as Amanda Shelton, a restaurant owner
who somehow finds the dough to dress in Todd Oldham creations, even
though her business is going down the tubes. Salvation arrives in the
form of Tom Bartlett (Sean Patrick Flanery), a go-getter who's just
spent $4 million to open a swank new eatery on the top floor of the
Henri Bendel department store in New York. Tom and Amanda are brought
together when one of the aforementioned crabs crawls out of its case -
with the help of some laughably obvious wires - and attaches itself to
a leg of Tom's expensive pants.
A conversation with the rich and hunky Tom puts Amanda's hormones into
overdrive, and when she returns to the kitchen she quickly shatters
her reputation as a third-rate chef. In no time at all, she's gone
from making soups that taste "like bleu cheese and dirt" to whipping
up steamed cockles with grapefruit sauce.
The elegant entrees are the real stars of "Irresistible" and receive
much more flattering photography than either Gellar or Flanery, both
of whom often look like they've just returned from an all-night frat
party.  "Irresistible" strives for the kind of effortless sparkle of a
"Breakfast at Tiffany's," but its weirdly harsh lighting and dull
camera work would be better-suited to a documentary on heroin addicts.
That the movie has any allure whatsoever is due entirely to the
comfortable chemistry Gellar and Flanery generate, particularly inthe
scenes that have nothing to do with the silly story. Every so often
they have a moment together that's so charming you wish the rest of
the film could magically rise to the same level, much in the same way
Amanda and Tom float onto the ceiling of her kitchen at one point.
Judith Roberts' screenplay is an uncertain brew of equal parts
"Witches of Eastwick," "Pretty Woman" and "Big Night," although its
most obvious inspiration is director Alfonso Arau's 1992 classic "Like
Water For Chocolate." At least three scenes from that film are
reprised almost verbatim - including the one in which the heroine's
tears fall into a sauce and provoke crying from everyone who tastes
the dish - with no credit given whatsoever to Laura Esquivel, who
wrote both the novel "Chocolate" was based on and the
screenplay. That's simply reprehensible.
