Title
Review for Man qing shi da ku xing (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
Hong Kong. 1994. Director - Bosco Lam. Production Company - Wong Jing's 
Workshop Ltd.
Plot: After a man is discovered having been given an aphrodisiac so 
strong it caused his penis to explode, his wife and a scholar are 
dragged before a judge, both protesting their innocence, and charged 
with adultery and conspiring to kill the husband. But unknown to them it 
is the judge's own son and the scholar's wife who added the aphrodisiac 
to a medicinal prescription and the judge now conspires to frame and 
torture the two innocents into confession.
The title may give the mistaken impression that this is either a film 
about sadomasochism or a study in human degradation along the lines of 
`Salo or 120 Days of Sodom'. But in fact it is neither - what it is is a 
rather funny Hong Kong sex comedy, along the lines of the recent body of 
films that popped up following the success of `Sex and Zen' (1991). Hong 
Kong sex comedies are, like all Hong Kong films, nothing at all like 
their Western counterparts. They show as much upfront as do any of the 
likes of `Basic Instinct' or `91/2 Weeks' but there is a remarkable lack 
of either the seriousness or underlying puritanical guilt that lurks 
beneath most Western erotic films. Hong Kong sex films are able to 
balance onscreen erotic set-pieces and comedy with an effortlessness 
that Western directors have so far failed to find. The (pardon the pun) 
climax of the film here involves the heroine masturbating her husband's 
ankle-length member to a deadly ejaculation that showers her in blood 
and kills him, a set-piece that manages to be both hysterically funny 
and quite tender at the same time. The film is much ruder and cruder 
than the delightful `Sex and Zen' was but when it is funny it is very 
funny. There is a highly amusing sequence parodying the likes of `The 
Tai Chi Master' and the `A Chinese Ghost Story' and `Swordsman' films 
which routinely have martial arts combatants flying through the air and 
bouncing of trees, with a married couple whose connubial couplings 
competitively take place in mid-air, bouncing off trees and adapting 
impossible martial maneuvers. Even the scenes of torture in the film 
manage to be more comic and disarming than they do disturbing.
Screening at the Christchurch 1998 Incredibly Strange Film Festival
Reviewed by Richard Scheib

