Title
Review for Antonia (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     According to VARIETY, when ANTONIA'S LINE was premiered at Cannes,
"only women buyers and press were allowed into the first screening.
Even the film's male producers were excluded from the good- humored
solidarity screening."  (Please don't confuse this policy with sexism.
This is, of course, a blow for equality of the sexes and should in no
way been seen as justifying anyone else's policy of discrimination by
sex.)  Indeed, ANTONIA'S LINE is a sometimes good-natured, often very
angry story looking at four generations of women running a sort of
communal farm in what is probably Holland or Belgium.  As the film
opens Antonia (Willeke Van Ammelrooy) is an old woman is an old woman
who is still apparently healthy but knows that this is her final day
alive.  In flashback she remembers the preceding forty or fifty years.
The story picks up after World War II when Antonia returns to this
unnamed village, the site of her youth.  With her she brings with her
teenage daughter Danielle (Els Dottermans).  Together they start to run
a farm.  Sebastian, the farmer who runs a neighboring farm expects he
will acquire the two ladies in a manner not unlike the way he acquires
cattle.  In fact, like cattle is how he and his sons treat his own
homely daughter Deedee (Marina De Graaf), showing her off in the local
pub by holding up her breasts to accentuate them.  But when Deedee's
own brother rapes her, it is the Antonia's farm that acquires Deedee.
And so begins the communal farm that takes on all comers willing to
work.  The farm is, of course successful and never has any agricultural
problems.  The only problems we see come from Sebastian's sons.  But
that is only to be expected because men will be men.  Just made that
way, I guess.  Not that all men in the village are bad by any means,
but when there is trouble it is generally caused by a man.  One is
given the impression that if there were no men around everything would
just go swimmingly.
     Danielle decides to have a daughter and has a friend arrange a
one-night stand with a hunk in a local town.  (Please don't confuse
this with the way men use women as sex objects!  This is just an
example of what an unfeeling society forces a woman to do if she wants
to have a man's child but then never see the man again.)  The product
of this union and enlightened child-rearing techniques is a child who
is both a brilliant mathematician and a composer of music.  There are
more problems (including another rape) to come.  But through it all
tolerance and enlightened thinking are more than a match for any
problem that arises.  Before we are done there are four generations of
women on the successful farm.
     The makeup design by Jan Sewell is terrific.  Antonia ages forty
or fifty years in the course of the film and yet one never doubts that
she is the age she is playing at the moment.  The same goes for other
women in the film.  I would be very curious to the actual age of the
various actresses.  I suspect they must be young because it is easier
to make a young person look old than an old person look young.  The
acting must be good because it takes more than makeup to make these
people look the right age.  The casting is also very good with people
who look like people you might find in such a town.
     This is a film that I tried very hard to like but there is just
too much sanctimony here.  This is a film with strong virtues, but at
heart there is also a lot of sexism here.  It is really hard to respect
a film that condemns sexism on one hand while practicing it on the
other.  I guess on balance I would give it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Willeke Van Ammelrooy, Jan Decleir, Els Dottermans, 
      Thyrza Ravesteijn, Dora Van Der Groen, Marina De Graaf
Director: Marleen Gorris
Producers: Hans De Weers, Antonino Lombardo, Judy Counihan
Screenplay: Marleen Gorris
Cinematography: Willy Stassen
Music: Ilona Seckaz
U.S. Distributor: First Look Pictures
In Dutch with subtitles
     ANTONIA'S LINE, director Marleen Gorris' fourth feature film, won 
the Most Popular Film Award at 1995's Toronto Film Festival, and it's 
not hard to understand why.  This small Dutch film is a heady, life-
affirming mixture of drama, comedy, romance, tragedy, philosophy, and 
art.  In an era when the concept of "the family" is being eroded, Gorris 
underlines the importance of community.  And, by confronting death from 
the atheist's point-of-view, she shows that even though we all have only 
"one dance to dance", death is in one sense a new beginning, as the 
grave transforms corpses into fresh nutrients for the soil.
     Opening shortly after the end of World War II and continuing for 
over forty years, ANTONIA'S LINE introduces us to four generations of 
women -- Antonia (Willeke Van Ammelrooy), her daughter Danielle (Jan 
Decleir), her granddaughter Therese (Els Dottermans), and her great-
granddaughter Sarah (Thyrza Ravesteijn).  The film begins in the post-
war Netherlands with Antonia returning to the village of her birth.  In 
her company is her young daughter, whose initial impression of the town 
is that it's an unpromising place.  Antonia, who left twenty years ago, 
has come back to bury her mother and take over running her inherited 
farm.
     The movie progresses by highlighting various episodes in the lives 
of the characters.  Aside from Antonia's family, we're introduced to 
many of the town's other residents:  Farmer Bas, who carries a torch for 
Antonia; Crooked Finger, a student of Schopenhauer and Nietzsche; 
retarded Deedee, who is raped by her own brother; Mad Madonna, who bays 
at the full moon; a man known only as "the Protestant", who desperately 
loves his howling neighbor; and many others.  Together, these misfits 
and outcasts form Antonia's tight-knit community -- those friends and 
neighbors who are always ready to support one of their own, regardless 
of the circumstances.
     Gorris imbues each of her characters with a sense of uniqueness, 
and we come to care about them, whether they're around for the entire 
film or just a small portion of it.  The story flows smoothly from event 
to event, balancing such disparate elements as madcap humor (Danielle's 
vision of her grandmother rising from a coffin and breaking into a 
chorus of "My Blue Heaven") and shocking violence (two rapes).  The only 
obvious flaw in the structure of ANTONIA'S LINE is its over-reliance 
upon a voiceover narrative; there are times when the plot is too easily 
advanced by telling instead of showing.
     ANTONIA'S LINE is a thematically rich motion picture, with a visual 
style similar to that of Dennis Potter's work (PENNIES FROM HEAVEN, THE 
SINGING DETECTIVE).  In addition to the evident message about the 
importance of community, the film challenges different philosophies 
about death, from those of Schopenhauer to those of the Catholic church.  
It condemns the hypocrisies of organized religion while endorsing the 
concept of "church" as a gathering place.  It celebrates painting, math, 
music, and all forms of creative expression.  And it gently advances the 
director's feminist agenda, illustrating that women can thrive (not just 
survive) without men.  Antonia doesn't want a husband and Danielle's 
lover is a lesbian.
     The final lines of ANTONIA'S LINE are:  "And, as this long 
chronicle draws to a conclusion, nothing has ended."  Such is often the 
case for life stories brought to the screen with heartfelt realism.  
Aided by a fine cast giving unaffected performances, Gorris has 
fashioned a rare and wonderful world capable of provoking both laughter 
and tears -- sometimes at the same time.  

Author
Pedro Sena
It is films like this that redefine what films are made for. And it typifies
the attitude that is the European community, versus the American style of
action pictures that are vacuous. They may have a lot of clever things in
it, but they have little substance.
ANTONIA'S LINE may not have much action, the film is very slow, but it does
have charm, character, passion, and beauty, and on top of it, a magnificent
story, and outline.  Antonia has moved back into town, because her mother is
on her final days. She has come into town without a husband, and with a
daughter of marrying  age.  They both immediately become the talk of the
town and the immediate
attention of all the members that want to mix with the two women. But,
unlucky for them, both women are independent and do not spend much time at
the usual lifestyle of mating and making children,  which seems all that the
whole community has to live for.
The town is an incredible hodgepodge of characters, that are totaly out
there, which makes the film even more enjoyable. And how they all blend in
is rather funny.  Antonia's daughter, one day decides that she wants a
child, but does not want a husband. They end up in the city, where her
daughter visits a brothel and gets together with a man who is one of the
owner's favorite lovers, and probable father of at least one of her
children. Of course, the daughter gets pregnant and this starts the film on
chapter two. We find that the daughter is gay, and she now lives with her
friend. And other matches are made in the village, including one young man
who is a bit slow. And eventually, Antonia also gets in the mood, and takes
on a lover, a man about her age, who has a miriad of sons, and no wife to
help him raise his children. She has not allowed anything to come to pass
between her and him, for years. And when it finally happens, the film is all
aglow. Everyone is happy, and everyone has a lover/wife/husband and  the
there are no worries anywhere.
And then the film turns. Antonia's grandchild grows to be a young woman that
is head and shoulders above most of anyone, and has a tutor, who is the
town's lonely man, always buried in his books and studies. In school the
young lady even embarrasses a teacher because he is not capable and
intelligent enough to see what is happening. The whole class ends up leaving
the room, after the girl's lead.
But this girl, one day meets a rather somber moment in life. She gets raped
by one of the village guys, who thinks that he is better than most. And this
is dealt with in a very harsh manner, but considering what he did, it may be
thought of as some sort of justice.
The film progresses, and ends on a somber note. The town's tutor, is a sad,
disappointed man, who apparently had fallen in love with Antonia, but she
did not respond. He has his only smile in the whole film in the beginning
when she returns to the village.  This kinda brings the film to an end.
Antonia's grandgranddaughter, is the one telling us the story, and we
finally notice why the characters are so
strange. They are basically seen through a child's eyes, and the
punishments, and the events all come and go with the same horrific flavor
that this film brings forth. It seems that the events are all very
important, and  they all have serious consequences as to the chain of
events.
But none, take away from the enjoyment of this film. It just won't quit,
even in the end, when you shut the video player down, and the film is still
in your mind... wonder what all this is about. By the style of directing and
story telling, the film is not about anything in particular. It covers three
generations, and it displays problems that each of these generations has had
with its own growth and time. But these
problems never stop the growth of it all. and as the film says in the end,
nothing "has come to an end".... except this fine film, with so many
excellent moments.
Of special interest and fun here, are the priest and his turn around. He is
probably set up, because he is a dirty old fart anyway, but it is all for
the best. And who he ends up with is a treat. One could say that there are
meanings here and there, but all in all, these are understated as a part of
the whole picture, which is the whole film. Yes, we can say that there are
pointed moments, and statements, but when one does that, this film loses
some of its really precious moments. Like Antonia's daughter and grand
daughter always seeing things happening... in the oddest of moments... and
these bits are so enjoyable that it is hard to fault a film for anything
else.
Well thought out, beautifully written, and worth seeing.
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Filled with almost a dozen of the most fascinating characters who
comprise the story of this utterly intriguing film, Antonia's Line does
not waste a moment as it moves from its beginning to its conclusion
when Antonia (Willeke Van Ammelrooy) dies.  The story, in parts, is
narrated by Sarah, (Thyrza Ravesteijn ). Antonia's great-granddaughter
who, with family and friends stand around 88-year- old Antonia's bed as
the old woman says that today is her last day of life.  Before she
dies, she reflects in her mind's eye on her long and full life and,
through one long flashback, we see that life and the people whom she
encountered on the way to this fateful final day.
     All of these people have experienced their own lives, most of them
filled with excitement, passion, hard work.  Here we have one
beautiful fairy tale.  There is Antonia's longtime friend known as
"Crooked Finger " (Mil Seghers) . . . and Olga, the Russian (Fran
Waller Zeper) whose three jobs consist of cafe-owner, undertaker and
midwife.  There is Farmer Daan, (Jakob Beks), the chauvinist landowner
who believes women have no other purpose in life than to breed.  He
has a retarded daughter, DeeDee (Marina De Graaf).  The town has other
retarded inhabitants such as Loony Lips (Jan Steen). and poor Mad
Madonna (Catherine Ten Bruggencate) who, because she cannot marry the
love of her life (Paul Kooij) as he is a Protestant, howls at the moon
at night.  The Village Priest (Leo Hogenboom) is fire and brimstone
but has his own fire burning within him  And there is Bas (Jan 
Decleir),
a farmer who despite having lived in the town for 20 years is still
considered a "newcomer."
     Marleen Gorris, who wrote and directed the film, maneuvers the
film's characters like a virtuoso juggler, never for a moment missing a
beat.  Not to be missed.

Author
Steve Rhodes
      ANTONIA'S LINE (ANTONIA) is a film from The Netherlands that is
one of the nominees for best foreign language picture of 1995.  For
completeness sake, the others are: ALL THINGS FAIR (Sweden), DUST OF
LIFE (Algeria), O QUATRILHO (Brazil), and THE STAR MAN (Italy).  Why
they left out the wonderful SHANGHAI TRIAD (China) and THE PROMISE
(Germany), I have no idea.  ANTONIA'S LINE is the story of about fifty
years in the life of a Dutch woman named Antonia (Willeke Van
Ammelrooy) and of her family.
     The film starts in what appears to be the present.  Antonia is
getting out of bed, which is a little hard for her that day since she
has decided that it is the day she will die.  The coming of death
focuses her mind on the past and on her mother's death.
     The story flashes back about fifty years.  Antonia is taking her
daughter Daniklle (Jan Decleir) with her to witness the death and then
the burial of Antonia's mother.  It is right after the end of World War
II, and the banners of freedom and liberation are flying everywhere in
Holland.  Soon we find out how whimsical this film will be.  Antonia's
mother refuses to die.  In fact during her funeral, she rises out of
the coffin and starts singing "My Blue Heaven" in English.  This type
of craziness can work in a well constructed movie, but the script by
Marlene Gorris is a mess.  There are numerous other examples of
eccentric behavior.  A typical one is the woman who opens her window to
howl at the moon, which disturbs the man who lives in the apartment
below her.  He hits the ceiling with a broomstick and looks like he is
ready to kill her.
     The funeral is a beautiful Roman Catholic service full of incense
and ceremony, but Antonia quickly proclaims that she thinks it is "all
rubbish."  As is popular in the modern cinema, the church is ridiculed.
In a scene that will be repeated innumerable times throughout the
picture, a man is mean and insensitive to others less powerful than he.
In this case, it is a priest who pushes an altar boy in front of the
entire congregation during the service.  As a sex, we learn in this
mean spirited film, that we men are brutish at best.  The only
exception seems to be mentally retarded men who come off as being
victims along with most of the females.  A one sided view of life that
makes the men in the audience want to leave in the dark by the side
exit of the theater before the lights go up in fear that one of the
women will cry out, "there goes one of them, get him".
     Antonia is a match for males of any age.  When she comes across a
five year old throwing a rock at a mentally handicapped man known as
Loony Lips, she takes the little boy and leaves him hanging on a hook
in the woods where he can not get down by himself.  The director
(Marlene Gorris) wants you to feel no sorrow for the kid even if the
show's heroine does put the kid in a scary and life threatening
situation.  He did throw that rock remember.
     Later in the show there is a rape scene that is punished as well,
but I will not go into the details of that punishment.  We also have
men hitting a mentally disabled girls on the head just for pure
meanness.  In this type of world, it is perhaps not surprising that
when Daniklle announces she wants a baby, she is not interested in a
man at all.  This conundrum is solved by find a friendly female who has
a brother who promises to have sex with Daniklle and then leave
forever.  Daniklle does it with him in complete boredom.  From there
the story moves on and includes Antonia's granddaughter Therese (Els
Dottermans) and her great-granddaughter Sarah (Thyrza Ravesteijn).
     There is no story to speak of.  The film is more an eclectic
collection of incidents in Antonia's life.  Each is like a
self-contained morality tale where we learn about the purity of women
and evil of the men who victimize them.  If the film had attempted more
balance, perhaps I could have gotten beyond its pedantic messages, but
as constructed, I felt like the defendant in a Kafka trial, and I kept
wanting to cry out, "I'm not guilty!"
     On a positive note, the Dutch scenery is lovely and the
cinematography (Willy Stassen) captures it well.  The director, while
too oppressive for my taste, did demonstrate a high degree of control
and is not afraid to take risks with crazy antics.
     ANTONIA'S LINE runs 1:33 and even less would have been better in
my book.  It is in Dutch with English subtitles.  The film is not rated
but is most certainly an R movie.  There is sex, nudity, and violence
especially rape scenes.  I would not let teenagers go unless they were
mature, and I would want to discuss it with them afterwards if they did
go.  I do not recommend this movie, and I give it a single *.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
