Title
Review for Hairspray (1988)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 25 October 1998 with Laura at the American Museum of the Moving
Image for $16 (part of missed double feature)
If you take John Waters's word as the Gospel Truth, and as far as I can
see, there is no reason you ought not to, music was a lot more fun before
the Beatles "came along and ruined everything." Hairspray is a homage to
that era, when dances had names and watched them on local versions of
American Bandstand. According to John Waters, all the dances you see in
Hairspray were ones he "knew and did them drunk at home with his friends."
Because Hairspray is campy and a lot of fun, the teens are very clean cut,
sober, and if they are addicted to anything, it's hairspray and mirrors,
and yeah, dancing.
For those of you who have somehow missed the last ten years, or simply
never saw Hairspray,  its the simple story of the Turnblads versus the von
Tussles. A hefty Tracy Turnblad (Ricki Lake in her movie debut) auditions
for the Corny Collins show, much to the ire of bitchy Amber von Tussle
(Colleen Fitzpatrick), who's on the Student Council and doesn't like too
much competition, or fat girls.
It's also 1962 and segregation is still in high gear; the Corny Collins
show still has a "Negro Day" and there is no interracial dancing. But as
luck would have it, Tracy's best friend Penny Pingleton (Leslie Ann
Powers) falls in love with Seaweed (Clayton Prince), a black boy. He's the
son of Motormouth Mabel (played by Ruth Brown herself), who is determined
to teach the white children how to dance the "Bird" as well as integrate
NOW.
And so the fun ensues. Tracy becomes a celebrity, does ads for Mr. Pinky's
Hefty Hideaway store for big gals, and even woos Amber's boyfriend, Link
(Michael St. Gerard). The girls squabble, and eventually, so do their
parents. Divine and Jerry Stiller are Tracy's parents, Debbie Harry and
Sonny Bono are the von Tussles.
When it was made, Hairspray was the most mainstream and tame of John
Waters's movies, with Female Trouble and Polyester being the most
representative of his body of work. Hairspray still retained the
"shocking" aspects that were Waters's trademark--close ups of zits being
exploded, rats crawling over a foot during a makeout session in an alley,
a time bomb in a up hairdo. It's all a lot of fun, though, if not a little
unreal. In real life, integration didn't happen; the show was run off the
air by parents who were "more racist than the kids," according to Waters.
Speaking of racist parents, Jo Ann Havrilla is a scream as the hyperracist
mother or Penny Pingleton, who goes nuts in a black neighborhood and
literally incarcerates Penny to keep her from her black beau.
Pia Zadora and Ric Ocasik appear as beatniks. Shawn Thompson as Corny
Collins; Mink Stole as his sidekick Tammy. Writer and director John Waters
appears as the doctor who tries, unsuccessfully to hypnotize Penny into
only liking white boys. 
At the museum, John Waters spoke about Hairspray and his work in general,
and took questions from the audience. One thing that shocks just about
everybody is that Hairspray is now a staple of children's parties. Waters
said that he is often recognized by children as "the doctor from that
movie." He also says that Ricki Lake had just been turned down for a job
by the Gap before he cast her in the movie, but he knew she was destined
for greatness (or a least fame--have you seen Mrs. Winterborne? Not
great, not at all). 
He's also a little more than shocked to discover one of his movies on the
AFI's Top 100 films-of-all-time list.
He also noted that Divine, who looked like a lot of the woman in the
Baltimore neighborhood in which he grew up (also depicted in Hairspray),
died shortly after the movie was released, and her fame was about to be
fulfilled. He also told us that people leave donuts, dresses, and
eyemake-up on Divine's grave.
On his years of working with Divine, he summed it up best: It was a
combination of "Divine's extreme beauty and my mental illness."
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Mike Watson
Hysterical racist housewife to funky black lady in downtown record
shop:  "Don't you try your voodoo spells on me you...you...NATIVE
WOMAN!!!!"  For quotable quotes, no one does 'em like John Waters.
After two decades of outrageous, confronting, often hilarious and at
times plain disgusting movies, The King Of Camp and Prince Of Puke
delivered his first mainstream film with HAIRSPRAY.  And though it's
no shockfest, it remains one of his most likable and enduring films,
possibly the finest of his long career.
This affectionate, funny tribute to teenage life in early-60's
Baltimore has such an innocent feel-good vibe that fans of Waters'
earlier trash classics may, ironically, be a little shocked.
HAIRSPRAY tells the story of "pleasantly plump" Tracy Turnblad (Ricki
Lake) and her ambitions to be a star on The Corny Collins Show, the
cool TV dance show that's the be-all and end-all for Baltimore's
glamour-crazed teens.  Her wacky parents (played wonderfully by Divine
and Seinfeld star Jerry Stiller) and shy best friend Penny stand by
her side as she battles bitch teen queen Amber Von Tussle for both the
star spot on the show and the love the teen hunk Link.
The soundtrack is spiced with great songs, and the some of the dance
routines are nothing short of sensational.  For me, the most powerful
sequence is when our white heroes pay their first ever visit to a
black dance club.  Immediately you see - no, feel - the difference
between the black and white styles as Waters charges the scene with an
incredible sensuality and sexual energy.  It really is an exhilarating
moment.
With HAIRSPRAY Waters has clearly toned down his infamous shock
tactics of earlier films - you'll see no eating dog shit, obese
lesbian lovemaking or dicks being cut off here.  Thankfully his way
with dialogue, his love of trash, and his endearing sense of camp
remain.  The outrageous hairdos, the silly teen lingo, the "Hefty
Hideaway" fashion boutique, Penny's hysterical Puritan mother - his
unmistakable touch is everywhere.
This is a comedy, no question.  But what surprises is that it's a
comedy with a strong moral awareness.  Amongst all the laughs and
driving the film at its centre is the issue of black/white
segregation.  It's a fact of life in the lives of these characters,
but not for long if Tracey Turnblad and her friends have their way.
Their growing awareness of the obscene injustice of it all eventually
leads them to full-on revolt, and you can bet your beehive hairdo that
you'll be cheering them all the way.
This is what elevates HAIRSPRAY above just about every other retro
comedy to come out of Hollywood in the last two decades.  It's not
just entertaining, it's actually very touching.  John Waters'
compassion for black people, fat people, outcastes and fringe-dwellers
gives this film tremendous heart.  I've watched it four times and I
still find it one of the most genuinely uplifting films I've seen.  Of
course, it's also riotously funny, and with those two magic
ingredients combined the writer/director has delivered an unmistakable
classic.  

Author
Peter van der Linden
     Film director John Waters has always pioneered his own distinctive brand
of American "cinema verite," but his latest work HAIRSPRAY marks a radical
departure from his earlier style.   Any film which is directed by John Waters
has to be interpreted in its wider context; without such a perspective the
imagery can appear unusually frank.  HAIRSPRAY represents a big (and I think
unfortunate) step towards mainstream Hollywood.
     Ostensibly about a 1960's teenage dance TV show, HAIRSPRAY is based around
a formative period in Waters' own teen years.  As his recent book explains,
Waters has always felt vaguely alienated from society, and he values every
opportunity in his films to confront society with itself.  Waters' films have
always centered, some would say obsessively, on aspects of the human condition
which polite people usually do not discuss in public.
     HAIRSPRAY is different, shunning overtness for commercial appeal; it can
be loosely characterized as a GREASE remake.  The plot is elemental, concerning
the triumph of good over evil, of substance over style, of character over the
superficial.  The casting is excellent, placing such untalented no-hopers as
Debbie Harry, Pia Zadora, and Sonny Bono in undemanding roles well-suited to
their abilities.   Longtime Waters fans will be treated to a double appearance
of Divine; in the normal housewife role; and most surprisingly, dressed as a
man, realistically depicting a 300-pound redneck TV station manager.   And look
out for Waters' own cameo appearance as a manic psychiatrist, wielding such
essential aids to modern medical diagnosis as the spinning disk, and the
cattle-prod!
     Directors often become boring or mawkish when they film
autobiographically.  For example, consider the last half-dozen Woody Allen
films.  It's because they wrongly assume that the audience will love the
subject as much as they do.  Waters veers near to committing this error here,
and it is unlikely that HAIRSPRAY will be well-received by the same people who
revered his earlier works such as PINK FLAMINGOS or FEMALE TROUBLE.  It just
doesn't have the inventiveness of POLYESTER.
     Lacking the ferocity of Fassbinder, or the triteness of Andy Warhol, but
sharing the sexual ambivalence of both, John Waters has for the past 20 years
been an "enfant terrible" within the American film industry.  With this latest
film, he is declaring his future direction to be unashamedly Hollywood-bound.
But it's a long way from Baltimore to Sunset Boulevard, and unless Waters is
careful, he's liable to end up where he's headed.

Author
Craig Good
     The death of Divine was made all the more untimely by his two-err de farce
performances as both the bad guy and the heroine's hefty mother in HAIRSPRAY.
While the young actress who plays his daughter is frighteningly good in her
role, Divine dominates and sets the tone for one of the most enjoyably silly
movies I've seen in ages.
     Director John Waters serves up what may be the best 1962 movie ever made.
This is what I call "Hang Ten" filmmaking: many of the scenes are right out on
the edge without tripping over themselves.  The soundtrack is easily the finest
of its genre: it's impossible to tell which idiotic novelty numbers were
written for the film and which were genuine Sixties issue.
     The art direction, repleat with 65,536 colors not found in nature,
compliments the bright, saturated photography.  Some (Some? Try most!) of the
wardrobe in this film will have you simultaneously laughing and reaching for
the Dramamine.  If you manage to retain your higher brain functions while
slapping your knee, you just may notice a surprising amount of depth (I mean in
the film, not the hairdos).  While many movies shoot themselves in the foot
trying to deliver The Message, ignoring Sam Goldwyn's advice about Western
Union, HAIRSPRAY deftly pokes fun at The Message and still manages to deliver
it.  Of course, there isn't a moment of doubt about where the film's sympathies
lay.  It just doesn't go overboard in that department.
     The greatest strength of the film is the casting.  It's perfect.  I mean
there isn't a character out of place anywhere.  Besides the formidable presence
of the late Divine, we have Jerry Stiller as his husband, Sonny Bono and Debbie
Harry as the White parents of The Spoiled Brat, and Pia Zadora (in her best
performance *ever*) with Rick Ocasek in a cameo.  Even Waters himself shows up
as the technically up-to-date psychiatrist.  He has described this group as a
"dream cast", and explained that you don't ask for a Sonny Bono *type*, you ask
for Sonny Bono.
     The budget for HAIRSPRAY may be high for John Waters, but he clearly
knows his craft well enough to deliver a lot of bang (and hairspray) for the
buck.  If you have any memory at all of beehives, cars with fins, or line
dances then by all means check this out.  If you choose not to see HAIRSPRAY
the Council will see it as a character flaw and not let you in the club.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The world is coming to an end: cracks are forming in the Earth's
surface, mountain-sized chunks of ice are falling from the sky, John Waters
has made a family film, oceans are boiling over.  Well, one out of four is
actually true.  And I know which one you probably think is true, but you're
wrong!  No, as unlikely as it seems, John Waters has made a family film.
This is the same John Waters who made PINK FLAMINGOS in which super-obese
transvestite Divine eats what the doggie leaves behind (and I don't mean
leaves behind in the dish).  And gang, it wasn't trick photography and a
Tootsie Roll.  It was done so lucky(?) audiences could tell it was the real
thing.  Since then and until Divine's recent death, Divine has appeared in
most, if not all, of Waters's films, perhaps indicating that Waters has some
sort of conscience, though more likely indicating that Waters's gross-out
film require the services of someone who will do just about anything for
money.  Waters's films are mostly about bad taste.
     Of late Waters has been trying a new formula to make more profitable
films.  Most of his films have become "cult classics" but have had small
audiences because of their subject matter and, in particular, their X
rating.  But Waters has long known that all bad taste need not be
scatological.  He made the R-rated POLYESTER and now the PG-rated HAIRSPRAY.
As part of the new formula, Waters intentionally picks out acting talent(?)
that most of his viewing audience considers to be a joke.  POLYESTER
featured--along with Divine--Tab Hunter.  HAIRSPRAY features Sonny Bono, Pia
Zadora, Jerry Stiller, and Debbie Harry.
     In 1962 Baltimore, nearly everybody watches THE CORNY COLLINS SHOW, a
sort of locally produced version of American Bandstand.  The politics of
choosing what teenagers will be dancing on the show reflects the politics of
the time.  There is a power structure determining who will show up as a
dancing teenager on the program and making sure that blacks show up only on
the once-a-month blacks-only show.  The story is about two teens vying for
the Number One spot and about the people trying to keep the show segregated
against those trying to integrate the show.  And it is all done with a
bizarre but not all that exaggerated view of the fashions and hair styles of
1962.  Waters finally has a film that could have mass appeal.  Rate it a +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.
