Title
Review for Return of the Texas Chainsaw Massacre, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Texas Chainsaw Massacre: The Next Generation
A review by Joe Chamberlain
Starring Renee Zellweger; Matthew McConaughey; Robert Jacks; Tonie Perensky
& Joe Stevens
There is a rule when it comes to movies. A sequel is never as good as the
original. There are very few exceptions to this rule, and Texas Chainsaw
Massacre: The Next Generation is not one of them. Now if you also take into
consideration that the original Chainsaw Massacre was a REALLY bad movie,
and that this isn't even the first sequel to it, you have a recipe for a
very painful viewing experience. Don't be fooled by the presence of up and
coming talents Matthew McConaughey (A Time To Kill) and Renee Zellweger
(Jerry Maguire). They made this movie before they were stars. Judging by
their performances they also made it before they took any acting lessons.
It's a wonder they ever worked in Hollywood again after appearing in this
turkey.
Apparently the producers of this film realized just how bad it was, because
it sat unreleased for years until someone decided that they might be able to
capitalize off the success of McConaughey and Zellweger. Apparently the two
young stars were none too happy about this thing ever seeing the light of
day. And I don't blame them, they would have been better off if this had
been some sort of porno flick starring the two of them. Unfortunately for
them it is a horror film in which Zellweger plays your typically stupid
horror film character. While McConaughey plays a guy who wears a mechanical
brace on his leg that he controls with a television remote control. (Hey,
don't say I didn't warn you.) To make matters worse, Leatherface, the
chainsaw wielding maniac, who was never the scariest of psychopathic killers
at the best of times, has now become a full blown cross-dresser, and spends
the entire movie in drag. There is a plot to this movie but it isn't worth
mentioning. Let's just suffice to say that a group of teenagers are in the
typical wrong place at the wrong time and are left to the mercy of remote
control man (McConaughey) and his lipstick wearing chainsaw revving
half-witted sidekick. Man, I can't get over just how bad this movie is.
This film has absolutely no redeeming qualities. Even the obligatory topless
babe shot wasn't enough to hold my interest for more than 2 seconds. The
writing is bad, the direction is even worse, but both of those things look
good in comparison to the acting. This is the sort of movie that they should
make people in prison watch. A guarantee you, if criminals thought that they
would be subjected to this film they would never break the law again.

Author
David Nusair
Starring Matthew McConaughey, Renee Zellwegger
I'm going to start this review off with a hypothetical question.  Let's
say you've just been in a car accident, and the driver of the other
vehicle is unconscious.  Your friends have left to go get help, and you're
waiting to see if the victim wakes up.  A tow-truck comes along, and the
driver hops out of the truck to see what's going on.  He then proceeds to
kill the unconscious victim by snapping his neck.  Do you:
A) Run away screaming for your life, staying away from the main road,
B) Run away (but not too fast) and stay on the main road even when the
   madman in the truck starts following you, *stop* to catch your breath, 
   try to negotiate with the psycho, and when that fails, start running
   away again, all the while *staying on the main road*?
If you answered "a", you are far more intelligent than the screenwriter of
"Texas Chainsaw Massacre: The Next Generation" and will likely hate this
movie.  However, if you answered "b", prepare to enjoy a film made with
idiots like you in mind!
"Texas Chainsaw Massacre: The Next Generation" is being called a sequel,
but it's really more of a remake of the original.  There's a few changes
here and there, but it's essentially the same (even the infamous
"meathook" scene has been re-created.)  The story opens with four
teenagers hitting the road on the night of their prom, and somehow ending
up in the middle of nowhere.  Needless to say, they soon encounter
Leatherface and his nutty family.  Much carnage ensues.
To call this movie inept would be putting it mildly.  In addition to the
laughably idiotic situation I mentioned in my hypothetical question, there
is a moment towards the end of the film where one of the baddies is killed
by an airplane that literally comes out of nowhere.  It just swoops down
and kills him with its wheel.  No explantion is given as to who was flying
it or why he/she is going around killing people with the planes wheel.
The dialogue is even more atrocious.  Zellwegger, who is kidnapped by "the
family" early on, keeps trying to have normal conversations with these
people.  When you're surrounded by maniacs wielding chainsaws and dead
corpses, I would think that rationality would go out the window.  Speaking
of going out the window, there is a scene in which Zellwegger jumps out a
window.  Apparently, the stunt double had a little trouble, because she
visibly gets stuck in the window.  The director quickly cuts to a wide
shot where the stunt double *doesn't* get caught in the window.  This was
one of many glaring inconsistencies.  There are so many, in fact, that if
I were to name them all, this review would be several pages long.
The only reason I am giving this movie one star instead of no stars is
because of Matthew McConaughey.  He plays a member of "the family" with a
hydraulic leg (home-made, I might add) and is so completely over-the-top,
you can't help but be amazed by his performance.  He obviously had a lot
of fun with this part, and it really shows.  He makes Jack Nicholson's
portrayal of the psychotic inn keeper in "The Shining" look restrained in
comparison.
For a horror movie, "Texas Chainsaw Massacre: The Next Generation"
contains surprisingly little gore.  In fact, in contains none.  There's a
little blood here and there, but that's as far as it goes.  Which leads me
to believe that the budget must have been *astonishingly* low, and it
shows.  Everything about the movie looks cheap, from the sets to the
costumes.  Especially Leatherface.  Once frightening and nightmare
inducing, he's now as terrifying as Dame Edna.
Do yourself a favor and take a pass at this remake.  Check out the far
superior original instead.
