Title
Review for Die Hard (1988)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Well, it starts out with Bruce Willis (taciturn New York cop) in his
wife's LA office in expensive high-rise office tower housing big executive
Christmas party.  He's in his undershirt, making fists with his toes in the
carpet, like any white male during the holiday season.  But wait!  What's this?
Big black trucks with ominous music heading for the Century City tower!  Guys
with Germanic accents!  A terrorist who looks like Huey Lewis!  Explosions!  A
younger clone of David Warner!  Surface-to-surface missiles!  Dumb Feds!  Smart
street cops!  The dickless guy from GHOSTBUSTERS being dickless again!  Lots of
fashionable swearing!
     Actually, DIE HARD is pretty entertaining.  It's like a two-hour plus
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE episode, livened a bit by good action photography, a decent
score (except for a one-minute excerpt of James Horner's Marching Klingon music
at the end), Willis' conversations with an LA street cop and a limo driver, and
competent attention to detail throughout, except for the conclusion, which
sacrifices a lot of logic to provide domestic bliss and one last thrill.  It's
popcorn entertainment at it's very best, i.e.  plastic-thin but will keep you
happy for the duration.  70mm and Dolby stereo help a LOT.
     The thing that separates melodrama from drama is how well written the
characters are, and if it's acted, how good are the performances.  In
TRAVELLING NORTH, the answers are respectively good and very good.  Leo McKern
plays a retiring civil engineer in his seventies who retires to the northern
shore of Australia with women who is younger than him by a decade or two.
McKern is a grouchy old socialist who can be quite a tyrant with his new
companion and his neighbors.  What's more, his health begins failing him, and
his SO is torn between staying with him in an almost servile capacity as his
health fails (and his temperament gets worse) and visiting her daughters from a
previous marriage living in Perth, who are having their own problems.  The film
deals with intelligent people having a relationship in their twilight years,
and all in all it does it quite well.  The dialogue is fine, understated and is
never over-dramatic.  McKern puts in a very fine non-Rumpole performance, and
his fellow actors and actresses put in an honest day's work.  I came out of
TRAVELLING NORTH strangely refreshed; it's not a big film in any sense, but it
is a quietly satisfying one.
     All I can say is that *this* is comic genius, to watch Tom Hanks play a
thirteen-year-old in a man's body.  The credit shouldn't go to Hanks alone, of
course; the script and the direction by Penny Marshall give out for no more
than four or five minutes in the entire film, and the whole principle twist of
the film -- that a boy of thirteen can prosper by seeing the world in his
adolescent terms -- is carried out beautifully, rather like a variation of
Peter Sellers' Chauncey Gardner's trip through high society.  What's more,
Marshall and Hank's constantly underline how much of the "adult" world of
business inherits the foibles of the child's playground.  The theme is
constantly spotlighted, but always in a way clever enough not to breed
familiarity (and thus contempt).  And there are some beautiful bits here: the
first check, the meeting on the "building transformer," and the decoration of
Hank's apartment.  The cocktail party scene should definitely be remembered
come Oscar time, if only for the corn and caviar jokes.
     Enough verbiage.  I laughed my *ass* off through this film, and the
audience gave applauded it at the end (pretty good for a film in its eighth or
ninth week).

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John McTiernan
Writers: Jeb Stuart and Stephen E. De Souza (from the book "Nothing
Lasts Forever" by Roderick Thorp)
Starring: Bruce Willis, Alan Rickman, Bonnie Bedelia, Reginald Vel
Johnson, William Atherton, Paul Gleason, De'voreaux White, Alexander
Godunox, Robert Davi
"Die Hard" is the most riveting, most stunning, most exciting action
film I have ever seen.  It's an intelligent game of cat-and-mouse,
complete with some proposterous situations, a lot of carnage, some male
bonding, one strong woman, lots and lots of one-liners, and it even has
a villain coming back from the dead for one last kiss goodnight.  "Die
Hard" is a classic film which set the trend for most action films,
although none has ever been as amazing as this one.
Bruce Willis set the trend for his wise-cracking lovable protagonist on
"Moonlighting," and he carried it over to the action genre nicely.  He
plays John McClaine, a New York cop who's suffering from a little bit of
workaholicism, as his family has left him so his wife (Bonnie Bedelia)
can have a great job working for a big Japanese business corporation,
which is located in a tall 40-story building in the middle of L.A.  He
decides to come and visit them for Christmas, and arrives at her office
spacious office, while she goes out to the party.  A couple minutes
later, the party is taken over by some nasty terrorists, led by the
German revolutionary, Franz Grueber (brit actor, Alan Rickman, in his
trend-setting role for American films).  But in the pandemonium, John
escapes up a flight of stairs with his gun.
Franz wants all the money in the safe in the giant building, and he
kills the president of the company when he refuses to tell him where
they are.  Meanwhile, he plays the cat-and-mouse game with John, albeit
a claustrophobic and bloody game, as John manages to take them on
one-by-one (sometimes in pairs and trios, by the way), and alert the
police and media.  What results is a tense, tight, and funny thriller,
which is totally gripping from the first minute to last.
Bruce, who is in more bad films than good, gives his best performance,
even though it lacks the depth of his "12 Monkeys" or "Pulp Fiction"
characters.  He shows he's a totally formidable action star, up there
with the likes of Wesley Snipes and, well, now John Travolta and Nicolas
Cage - not Schwarzenegger and Stallone, because Willis isn't some
superman.  He is shot a lot, although sometimes you just have to hold
your belief because even though he's shot and cut and stuff, he still
manages to beat up some bad guys at the end.  Nevertheless, Willis is
amazing in what would become the "Bruce Willis role."
We also get a commanding performance from Alan Rickman as the leader of
the terrorists.  He also became the trend-setter for the villains, as
Willis became the trend-setter for the good guys.  As Franz, Rickman is
funny, creepy, and intelligent, all at the same time.  His performance
also has some form of depth - he's such a well-dressed and proper
villain with his cool suit and suaveness, but as he admits at the end,
it's all a cover-up since he's, at heart, just a thief, although "an
exceptional thief."
And "Family Matters"'s Reginald Vel Johnson plays a cop who sadly
stumbles onto the scene, and ends up becoming the only friend John has
on the bottom, as most of the cops and agents turn out to be jerks,
schmucks or asswholes.  He and Willis have great chemistry, even though
they really only have one scene where they're together, since they
communicate by radio throughout the film.  Their's is the essence of
male bonding in movies.
And we even get a lot of humor.  Willis is a geyser of smart-aleckdom,
joking around the whole movie, coining phrases with style, and sharing
some good old jokes with some of the few people he comes in contact with
during the film.  Rickman is also hysterical, becoming funnier as we get
to know him.  And William Atherton appears as a jerk, obsessive reporter
who tries to cover what happens, and inadvertantly endangers the lives
of McClane and his wife.  But it's all in good fun.
Featuring stunning action sequences, amazing scenes, and a direction
that's so taut that the tension is almost gripping.  It's not just a
stupid action film; it's an intelligent game that is probably one of the
greatest times I've had watching a movie.  But what do you expect from a
film that stars Bruce Willis?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Kramer
     Well...looks like DIE HARD made it out before A FISH CALLED WANDA...I have
no doubt in my mind these will be two of the most remembered movies shown in
national movie theatre chains this summer (ROGER RABBIT being the third,
probably...but who can tell?)....  Thumbs up from me and my friends, although I
must say it's probably going to be far more impressive if you see it in 70mm so
you get the "bigger-than-life" feel...and the big sound, of course.  It was
impressive.  Still, this one should hold its own in normal movie theatres as
well.
     Bruce Willis.  The man "is an enigma"?  No.  He is a jerk.  Or, used to
be.  He started off really hot in MOONLIGHTING and kind of sputtered out.  We
won't even mention debacles like THE RETURN OF BRUNO and so forth.  However, in
DIE HARD the director probably said "Don't be doing Seagram's Wine Cooler
acting in here, or you're outta this flick."  Must've been a convincing
director.
     In my mind (and I'll bet the rest of you will feel the same as well),
Willis does a damned convincing job.  The character in which he is cast feels
pain, and goes through it for the people depending on him, and coincidentally
for the audience.  You can even feel for him.  In certain places, the acting
seems a bit contrived (as in when he seems to be going crazy going "what'll I
do?"), a bit pushed.  Other places (few as they were) were annoying with the
wonderful one-liner "Yippee-ki-ay, m*therf*cker!"  However, as a whole, he does
a damned convincing job in his role.
     Which is this: John McClain is a NYPD cop, either accidentally invited to
an office Xmas bash in LA, or he has gone out there to visit his separated wife
and kids...or both.  I'm still unclear on this; it'll come to me.  As he enters
the office tower where the party is going on (cutting out the first 15-minute
hullaballoo), an ingenious subplot is unfolding: a crafty, incredibly
knowledgeable team of experts want to get their hands on a lot of valuable
goodies locked inside a very tricky "safe" inside this building.  I won't relay
more detail because many of you probably have not seen this movie yet.  In
short, the team seals off the building from the inside, effecting a hostage
situation.  It's McLain's/Willis' job to get the people out in one piece, among
other things.  I've said too much already...go see it.  It's a another must
this summer.  It seems to be a little *too* high on action...seems to be
something happening every minute after the first 20...which is probably why the
few people who *were* somehow bored with this movie didn't leave (I'd guess 3,
out of a theatre of 1,000 or so).  The slow-motion cliffhanger sequence (sky-
scraper-hanger? ;^)) near the end was extremely well done in my opinion....
(Shhh!  Ok, ok...)  The amount of enforcer help summoned near the end seems a
bit ludicrous to me, as do the FBI agents attitudes....
     It has a fairly talented cast...not too many faces I recognized, but the
main baddie has a face from somewhere I am sure, and is *very* cold and *very*
calculating...a perfect villain, especially considering what he was supposed to
be portraying.  And one of his cronies, is that guy with the wonderfully...
*stormy* (good word!) face that was also the conductor in MONEY PIT (an
amusing, but strange comedy to see at 4AM)...I forget his name.  I am almost
100% positive he is Germanic.  But he is wonderful.  The end bit was a
*little* (cough...HA!) hard to believe, but...;^).  I remember now.  Alexander
Godunov.  He also co-starred in WITNESS (tri-starred?  4-starred?)

Author
Christopher Null
If I were teaching a film class at a college (a shuddering prospect, I
know), Die Hard would be studied the way Citizen Kane and Potemkin are. 
It's a perfect action movie in every detail, the kind of movie that
makes your summer memorable.
Unfortunately, star Bruce Willis, director John McTiernan and company
couldn't duplicate the heart-pulling thrill of the first one with two
increasingly mediocre sequels.  Die Hard 2 and Die Hard With a Vengeance
suffered because of stuffing thrills and spills in every crevice, to the
point where I expected the Road Runner to make a cameo.  Everyone
involved seemed to forget that simplicity made the original so
riveting.  There's one flawed New York City detective trapped in a
skyscraper with only his wits and some firearms to stop a band of
talented international terrorists.
That cop is John McClane (Willis), who visits Los Angeles at Christmas
time to see his kids and hopefully make amends with his estranged wife,
Holly (Bonnie Bedelia).  When McClane drops in to visit Holly at work,
they get into an argument.
As Holly and McClane make like the Bickersons, the aforementioned group
of kick-ass terrorists led by the ruthless Hans Gruber (Alan Rickman in
a career-making performance) take over the skyscraper.  Gruber's
request:  The building's namesake, Takagi (James Shigata), must hand
over millions of dollars in bonds he has stashed away.
Everyone is accounted for and locked in, except for McClane, who is the
only hope to save his wife and her co-workers.  The phone lines are
dead, terrorists abound like gossipy secretaries, and McClane is
barefoot and alone.
Screenwriters Jeb Stuart (The Fugitive) and Steven E. De Souza
(Commando, one of my favorite Schwarzenegger movies) do a masterful job
in detailing the McClane character, so he doesn't come across as some
robotic one-man wrecking crew.  He crawls through the building's air
conditioning system.  He grabs whatever weapons he can (including a bag
of explosives) and he bleeds. We can root for him.  Minus the killer abs
and the extensive police experience, this guy could be any one of us.
Stuart and DeSouza make McClane additionally human by supplying him with
some of the funniest dialogue in action movie history (Emergency radio
operator:  "Attention, whoever you are, this line is reserved for
emergencies only." McClane:  "No fucking shit, lady?  Do I sound like
I'm ordering a pizza!").  And Willis helps his own cause by giving a
performance that blends comedy, heroism and pathos without preening or
overacting.
And the supporting characters are amazing:  Reginald VelJohnson (before
doing a lengthy stint in TV purgatory with Family Matters) shines as the
L.A. cop who counsels McClane via radio as he plots his next move. 
Rickman is so good here -- he has the perfect combination of charisma
and malice -- that the other main villains in the two sequels (William
Sadler and Jeremy Irons, both good actors) were about as vicious and
threatening as my grandmother.
In all this talk about performance and cinematic theories, you might
think I'm reviewing a Woody Allen film.  But part of Die Hard's appeal
is in its awesome action scenes:  McClane running barefoot through
shattered class, an overly eager terrorist trapping our hero under a
conference room table, McClane jumping from the fiery skyscraper roof,
tethered by a fire hose.
I have a feeling I'll be watching Die Hard sometime again in the near
future, as this summer's crop of action movies don't appear at all
engaging.  They don't seem to offer something for everyone the way Die
Hard does, which gives me all the more reason to start organizing that
film class.
Director: John McTiernan
Producers: Joel Silver, Lawrence Bender
Writers: Steven E. De Souza, Jeb Stuart
Starring: Bruce Willis, Alan Rickman, Reginald VelJohnson, Bonnie
Bedelia, Alexander Godunov, Paul Gleason, Hart Bochner, De'voreaux
White, William Atherton
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jamey Hughton
`Die Hard' may seem like an unusual choice for a Christmas review, and I
suppose it is. Bruce Willis stars as John McClane, a NYC cop who finds
himself planted in the middle of a elaborate terrorist situation at a
towering high rise in Los Angeles. McClane weaves his way through the
bowels of the building, navigating elevator shafts and various air ducts
with a machine gun slung over his shoulder and a bag of explosives in
hand. Plenty of terrorists are pumped full of lead, and a lot of sh*t
gets blown up. It's a great deal of fun.
But what does this have to do with Christmas? Here's my argument: all of
these events occur on Christmas Eve, and after this berserk
rollercoaster ride of mind-blowing stunts and white-knuckle action comes
to a close, the festive selection `Let it Snow' plays over the closing
credits. Pretty Christmasy, eh?
Just one refreshing thing about this influential action extravaganza is
the hero at the center of the action. McClane is not only a clever cop
able to evade oncoming gunmen in a constant game of cat-and-mouse - he's
also got a sense of humor. Leading the international pack of terrorists
is the cool and collected Hans Gruber (Alan Rickman) and his infuriated
right-hand man Karl (Alexander Godunov), who is seriously PO'd at
McClane for killing his little hooligan brother. These guys have got a
lot of suave, professional tactics - not to mention a truck load of
impressive artillery. But even while he is constantly flirting with
death, McClane always has a witty comeback for his foreign opponents,
and Willis is fluent and enjoyable as he barrels his way through
punchline after glorious punchline. Stacked up, all of this makes John
McClane one of the most memorable action heroes to recently grace the
silver screen. Yipee ki-yay, indeed.
`Die Hard' is quite possibly the most efficient action movie ever
constructed. It's a red-blooded thrill ride, featuring components that
are perfectly in place, and it's flawless precision in capturing a
terrorist situation has been the basis for numerous clones and cheap
imitations that have since followed. Examining the layout of the film,
you realize this is how every action film should be assembled: with a
pace that never lags, characters and dialogue that crackle with
cleverness and intensity, and action that is both exciting and
believable. From just about every angle you examine it from, this film
is rollicking good fun. Upon it's release in 1988, although it wasn't
the inaugural example of it's kind, `Die Hard' set new and exciting
standards for the action/adventure genre.
I suppose, if there a noticeable defect in the film, it lies within the
supporting cast. And even that is admirable given the typical population
of stereotypes usually associated with the genre. Both Bonnie Bedelia
(as McClane's wife and fellow hostage) and Reginald VelJohnson (as a
fellow cop negotiating from the outside) are solid in their roles. Alan
Rickman, as the deviously sly terrorist Hans, is not only the best
villain in the `Die Hard' series - he's also one of the finest and
well-constructed in film history, a structural model for all other bad
guys to follow. Rickman, who combines dry wit with sinister
intelligence, is an absolute pleasure to watch. The bad news arrives
with the introduction of police chief Dwayne T. Robinson (Paul Gleason),
a pompous jerk determined to be an obstacle in every relevant matter.
The character is annoying, but Gleason plays it well. Afterward, though,
a pair of even bigger pricks - FBI agents, of course - arrive at the
scene and take charge with a stunning amount of incompetence. Add this
to a whiny gung-ho reporter (William Atherton), a weasily drug-abusing
co-worker (Hart Bochner), and a bunch of ornery terrorists armed with
automatic weapons....is there actually a likable supporting character in
the movie?
Of course, but never mind that little detail anyhow. `Die Hard' delivers
the goods in plausible suspense, adrenaline-pumping action, and
stupendous special effects to such a degree you almost beg for mercy.
Director John McTiernan has created the action movie of the century,
squeezing every ounce of possible excitement out of the premise, which
(in all fairness) is rather simple. It's the one to challenge....the big
kahuna.....the cream of the crop. And it also makes a great stocking
stuffer.
Comments Appreciated!  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Steve Kong
Well, what can you say about the film that set up it's own genre? This
film, though may not have been the first of it's type, was the one that
spawned a whole slew of copy cats who used the high-concept of "Die Hard in
a ."
This is the first film of the Die Hard Trilogy. It is Christmas and John
McClane (Bruce Willis), a New York cop is flying into LA to see his kids
and his estranged wife (Bonnie Bedelia). As he waits to talk to her
privately in the new Nakatomi building where she works and where the
company is holding its Christmas party, all hell breaks loose as terrorist
seize the building. McClane escapes the grasps of the terrorists but stays
in the building to wreak havoc on the terrorists' plans. Unknown to the
terrorists McClane is also staying in the building to save his wife who is
part of the group taken.
Outside the building we have a set of stock characters, except for one. The
stock characters include a bumbling police chief whose only job seems to be
to act stupid and disagree with everything McClane says, a pair of dumb FBI
agents whose job seems to make the life of the terrorist much easier, and
an ambulance chasing reporter who goes to extremes to get the live story. I
think most of these outside stock characters could have -- should have --
been removed to ease the story. The only things these characters do is slow
up the story and ruin the pace. The only character outside of the building
that seems normal and developed is Reginald VelJohnson's Sgt. Al Powell.
Inside the building is one of my most favourite bad guys, Hans Gruber (Alan
Rickman). Gruber is an educated man who exudes calmness while he secretly
has his reasons for leading the terrorists into the building. Gruber though
is not a man to play with; he is ruthless and will go to any extreme to get
it.
The action in Die Hard has to be seen. It is some incredible action and
director John McTiernan shows that he can shoot action sequences well.
There is the famous scene with Willis jumping off the top of the building
with an explosion behind him. But, if you thought that was exciting wait to
you see how McTiernan continues that sequence and gets you to the edge of
your seat. There are other well set up action sequences in Die Hard that
have this stand out quality.
The performances that I loved were those of Bruce Willis as John McClane
and Alan Rickman as Hans Gruber. And though Willis is supposed to be the
lead character of Die Hard, it is Rickman who steals the show with is
controlled insanity as Gruber.
Die Hard made it's own genre that everyone tried to follow, but there is
only the one true Die Hard. Don't miss this film.
"Yippee-ki-yay, motherf*cker!" - John McClane.
