Title
Review for Wong Fei-hung (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Brundage
The West has Billy the Kid and the East has Wong Fei-hung... and if ever
the twain shall meet I will lose all faith in humanity and moviemaking. 
[Check out Shanghai Noon. -Ed.]  Wong Fei-hung, arguably the biggest
folk hero in Chinese legend and cinema, has shown up in various movies
and dime novels in China since the 1930s.  In America, he's just begun
to make a real dent... showing up via Jackie Chan in The Legend of
Drunken Master and Jet Li in Once Upon a Time in China.
Master of just about any kung fu style out there and massive opponent of
imperialism, the legendary Wong Fei is pretty much there whenever China
needs him, and, when one of China's anti-imperialist generals goes off
to resist the French Occupation of Vietnam, Wong Fei is set to train a
local militia to ensure that the West doesn't overrun the country while
the General is away.  Wong, with the help of many a militiaman with a
strange-translated nickname (like Porky or Buck Teeth), attempts to do
so, but this being a movie, something had to go wrong.  In this case,
his militia men get involved in a street fight with a local mobster,
Leung Fu (Biao Yuen), and just happen to fight their way into Wong
Fei-hung's diplomatic dinner with the Americans.
Needless to say, this doesn't help Wong's standing with the Westerners
at all, and various pressures are placed upon him to bend to the rule of
the West.  Assassination is attempted, Wong's Aunt-in-Law ends up facing
the threat of prostitution, his men are told not to fight yet are
continually attacked... pick your reason, Wong Fei-hung just can't stay
out of it.
Compound this with the fact that Wong Fei-hung is pitted against yet
another Kung Fu Master, Iron Robe Yim (Yee Kwan Yan) in a challenge of
honor, and Wong's just not having a good week.
Movies about Wong Fei-hung always tend to be filled with allegorical
symbolism, and Once Upon a Time in China is no exception.  Wong is the
traditional man who wishes for privacy, yet finds, like China did, that
sticking to yourself doesn't mean others wont bother you.  Iron Robe is
a member of the Boxer Rebellion, sure that bullets cannot beat Kung Fu
until he finds himself shot with one.  Buck Teeth is the Chinese that
can live well within Western culture and thus finds himself an outcast
in his own.
The film's most interesting character ends up being Iron Robe, who,
although he doesn't show up until halfway through the movie, is
portrayed as a broken man from the start, making it one of the few times
that you actually sympathize with the "bad guy" in a Kung Fu movie.
Like Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, Once Upon a Time in China raises
the bar for a genre often thought of as meaningless dribble, showing
that a Kung Fu movie can be more than just spectacular fight sequences. 
Of course Wong Fei-hung doesn't ever disappoint in that aspect, either. 
One particular fight that takes place on a series of ladders in a
warehouse can leave even the most seasoned Kung Fu vet with his jaw
dropped... and, if not for the overwhelming political message, why the
hell else are you gonna see the movie?  Once Upon a Time in China is
art, and you can feel free to tell yourself you're seeing it for that,
but a few hundred words of explanation later, I only have three words
that sum up the entire film: It's fucking cool.
Director: Hark Tsiu
Producer: Hark Tsiu
Writer: Hark Tsiu, Kai-Chi Jun, Pin-Yin Tang, Yui Ming Leung
Starring: Jet Li, Rosamund Kwan, Biao Yuen, Jacky Cheung, Steve
Tartalia, Kent Chang, Yee Kwan Yan
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Once Upon a Time in China (1991)
Jet Li, Rosamund Kwan, Yuen Biao, Jacky Cheung, Steve Tartalia, Kent
Cheng, Yee Kwan Yan. Music by Romeo Diaz, James Wong. Screenplay by Yiu
Ming Leung, Pik-yin Tang, Tsui Hark, Kai-Chi Yun. Directed by Tsui Hark.
In Cantonese with English subtitles. 128 minutes.
Rated R, 3.5 stars
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"Once Upon a Time in China" is considered a classic in its country of
origin. First released in 1991, the film was popular enough to spawn a
number of imitators, not to mention five sequels. Watching the original,
it's easy to understand why. The sprawling adventure showcases the
charismatic Jet Li and features romance, intrigue, picturesque settings
and a string of remarkably inventive fight scenes. What's not to like?
Jet Li stars as the legendary Chinese hero Wong Fei-Hong (nearly 100
films have been made about the icon, including Jackie Chan's "The Legend
of Drunken Master"). The actor does his own stunts (with some wirework
to jazz up the proceedings) and the results are spectacular. In addition
to the amazing battles, the story offers an interesting look at another
culture.
Set in the late 19th century, "Once Upon a Time in China" (in Cantonese
with English subtitles) shows a populace under siege from the outside
world. More and more often, colonial forces from the United States and
Britain turn up on native shores. Their presence is intimidating, to say
the least, but the indigenous people have no intention of succumbing.
Their resistance ranges from small (neighborhood musicians play and sing
at top volume to drown out the hymns of western missionaries) to
full-scale military face-offs.
The head of a healing clinic, Wong is asked by a general in the Black
Flag army to teach the locals self-defense by training them in the art
of kung fu. Things get complicated with the arrival of Wong's "Aunt" Yee
(Rosamund Kwan), just back from a two-year stay in the West. Despite her
title, Yee and Wong are not related and romance simmers between the two
(watch for a lovely bit of shadow flirting from Yee).
As for bad guys, there are too many here to keep track of. A gang from a
neighboring town tries to extort local businessmen, corrupt government
officials abound, and then there are those nasty foreigners. I tried to
keep up with them all, but soon gave up. My advice to you is to keep
your eyes on Wong, his comrades and Yee, and just watch the fireworks.
You can sort out the particulars on subsequent viewings.
And you will want to watch it again. While early segments of "Once Upon
a Time in China" contain some embarrassing low comedy, Jet Li's
performance, coupled with his kung fu wizardry, carries the viewer
through any shaky patches. The fight scenes are the main attraction, of
course, and the film delivers the goods again and again. My favorite is
a segment where Wong and his foe use ladders in a breathtaking duel.
Have fun choosing your own.
