Title
Review for In Crowd, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Susan Granger
         The kindest way to describe this teensploitation movie is to
call it "a time waster." Violence-prone nymphomaniac Adrien Williams
(Lori Heuring, looking just like Madonna) has spent time in a
psychiatric hospital learning to come to terms with "erotomania" and
her troubled past. Nearly recovered and on the recommendation of her
physician (Daniel Hugh Kelly), she emerges to build a quiet,
anonymous, new life as a lowly cabana-girl at an exclusive seaside
country club. But she's too lovely not to be noticed by "the
in-crowd," a privileged clique led by perky, psychopathic Brittany
Foster (Susan Ward, looking just like Denise Richards), whose lip
gloss glows for the tennis pro (Matthew Settle) who, predictably,
flirts with Adrien. Amidst the simmering feuds, there are lethal
secrets that threaten to emerge. Is this world-shaking, or what?
Directed by Mary Lambert ("Pet Sematary"), this wannabe girl-on-girl
thriller is definitely a hard-bodied loser with great credit going to
the imbecilic, homo-erotic screenplay by Mark Gibson and Philip
Halprin. Even the climactic cat-fight between Adrien and Brittany
isn't clearly delineated since it's photographed by Tom Priestley in a
storage room with gloomy, dim lighting.  The message of the movie:
appearance isn't everything...i.e: all that glitters is not gold. Duh!
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The In-Crowd" is a sluggish,
ludicrous, barely tolerable 1. It gives melodrama a bad name - and
it's not gonna get better on video.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Mary Lambert.
Cast: Lori Heuring, Susan Ward, Nathan Bexton, Matthew Settle, Laurie 
Fortier, Kim Murphy, Daniel Hugh Kelly, Ethan Erickson, Jay R. Ferguson, 
Katharine Towne, Erinn Bartlett, A.J. Buckley, Tess Harper.
2000 - 108 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for violence, profanity, brief nudity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 23, 2000.
"The In Crowd" is the type of film that is usually banished by its studio to 
the second or third week of January, an annual dumping ground for lackluster 
movies that have next to no chance of succeeding financially, or otherwise. 
The fact that it is being released in mid-July says even less for the faith 
its studio, Warner Brothers, has in it, as it will surely be buried even more 
quickly amid the bigger, flashier summer pictures. And once word gets out on 
just how bad it really is, expect it to exit theaters in another week and be 
nestled in video stores by the end of the year. Why didn't everyone just save 
themselves the money, count their losses, and send this one straight to 
cable, where it belongs--just barely.
Set at a ritzy country club beach resort, Adrien Williams (Lori Heuring) has 
gotten a job for the summer as one of the club's staff members. Just released 
from a mental institution where she has resided in recent years for as-of-yet 
unknown circumstances, Adrien yearns to get her life into order, and working 
at the resort is her first step back into the real world. The problem is, the 
world she has just stepped into is about as authentic as a plastic Christmas 
tree, and most of the people just as artificial.
Soon, Adrien has been befriended by the beautiful, socially powerful Brittany 
(Susan Ward), who draws her into the lifestyle of her snobby friends, all of 
whom seem to bathe in their family's money without any goals of their own, 
aside from getting wasted by booze and drugs. Brittany and Adrien seem to 
make the perfect match, until they both grow an attraction for their hunky 
tennis instructor, Matt (Matthew Settle). When Matt takes a stronger liking 
to the more genuine Adrien, Brittany's thin facade of kindness and stability 
begins to slowly shatter, and her new friend turns into her next target.
"The In Crowd" is a thoroughly disposable psycho-thriller aimed at the teen 
demographic, and one of the very worst theatrical films of its type in recent 
memory. At a needlessly long 108 minutes, the film meanders along with often 
nowhere to go, all leading up to a conclusion that can easily be telegraphed 
by the twenty-minute mark. The clumsy screenplay, by Mark Gibson and Philip 
Halprin, is shallow and strictly generic, and the unfocused direction, by 
Mary Lambert, practically screams, "first-time filmmaker." The problem is, 
Lambert is a veteran, having previously made 1989's "Pet Sematary" and its 
1992 sequel, and seems to have lost here whatever vigor and style she had for 
her profession to begin with.
With a decidedly large cast of characters, it would take only extraordinary 
actors to pull off the one-dimensional roles that have been written for them. 
Unfortunately, most of them are clearly inexperienced (it doesn't take the 
help of the Internet Movie Database to figure this one out), and the only one 
that really stands out is Susan Ward (TV's "Sunset Beach"), as the 
potentially unhinged Brittany. Usually over-the-top in her portrayal, this 
acting choice works because she is the only one to add any true energy to her 
scenes. The one exception is Nathan Bexton (1999's "Go"), having fun and 
hamming it up as Bobby, the sole good guy of the "in" crowd who, nonetheless, 
is an undoubted alcoholic.
In the central role, Lori Heuring (1998's "The Newton Boys") is passable, but 
too often underacts to the point of nausea, or fails in trying to sell her 
more dramatic moments. While physically fetching, her overall blandness and 
obvious confusion in the motives of her character show through far too often 
than they should. All other actors more or less blend into the background, an 
amazing feat considering how many prominent supporting players there are, 
including Matthew Settle (1998's "I Still Know What You Did Last Summer"), 
Ethan Erickson (1999's "Jawbreaker"), Katharine Towne (2000's "What Lies 
Beneath"), Laurie Fortier (1996's "To Gillian on Her 37th Birthday"), Kim 
Murphy (1998's "City of Angels"), and Daniel Hugh Kelly (1999's "Chill 
Factor").
It would be relatively easy to go on about how the film is really a drama 
that ruined any chances it had at being successful by letting itself be 
awkwardly molded into the form of a cliched, predictable thriller, or how the 
movie is so badly lit that the movie appears as if it was filmed with no 
source of light other than the sun, but why bother? When it all comes right 
down to it, I honestly would be hard-pressed to come up with five positive 
things, no matter how minor or inconsequential they may be, to say about "The 
In Crowd." 

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
After toiling around on the beach all day, this film seemed perfectly fit to
cap off my nite. Packed with a bevy of beauties, impeccably shaped men,
beach parties and rich phoniness, the film appeared genuinely set to deliver
thrills, chills, T&A shots, steamy sex scenes and a tiny bit of cheesy fun.
PLOT:
A girl with head issues is released from a psychiatric hospital and given
another chance to re-enter society as the "summer help" at a rich, snooty
country club. Soon enough, she is taken into the fold of the inner rich,
snooty kids who seem to enjoy her company. It isn't long before the truth of
the matter unfolds, and things begin to get real nasty.
CRITIQUE:
Lots of hard bodies, not enough T&A, a semi-interesting setup, not enough
unpredictability, a few decent actors, but not enough good ones make this
film watchable and somewhat of a guilty pleasure, but certainly not good
enough to recommend on any sort of enthusiastic level. Sure I enjoyed
watching the boys and girls frolicking around on the beach. Sure I liked the
whole "which girl is the bigger psycho bitch" angle which kept popping in
and out of my head during the whole movie. And sure I did enjoy the whole
over-the-top Denise Richards/Carmen Electra look-a-like performance by Susan
Ward, but all in all, the film just didn't click enough points of interest
to be considered anything more than a teen soap-opera filmed for the big
screen. In fact, as much as I did get into some of the story's original
setup, I couldn't help but predict every coming moment as the film stepped
forward.
And where was all the action? For a thriller, this film sure did spend a lot
of time on the getting-to-know everyone scenario, and not enough on the
actual moments of tension or suspense, all of which were conspicuously
absent. Sure, I was never really bored during the flick, enjoyed the
grandiose phoniness of the queen bitch and her make-up clad sprinkle
girlfriends, and the performance put forth by Bobby aka Nathan Bexton. But
other than the main trio, the rest of the cast was basically just a bunch of
stale, one-dimensional characters, which under these circumstances didn't
bother me. With the focus on the primary two girls, the cardboard cutout
designation of the secondary players just didn't seem to matter that much to
me. The film definitely does not need to be seen on the big screen, but
might be enjoyed on a smaller level, if you're bored at home one night,
looking for a little cheesy fake fun, and like the ol' crazy bitch on the
loose type flicks, rent it and get a bonus shot of Susan Ward's breasts to
boot (although more sex and definitely more skin would have appreciated by
this film's teen target audience...what were they thinking?). But I guess
that's why the lesbian under-and-overtones were tossed into the mix, eh?

Author
John Beachem
Adrien Williams (Lori Heuring) has just been released from a mental 
institution after her primary doctor, Henry Thompson (Daniel Hugh Kelly), 
recommended her release. She now has a job working at a country club until 
she gets back on her feet. At the club she meets a group of elite young 
snobs led by Brittany Foster (Susan Ward). Brittany soon takes Adrien under 
her wing for reasons we never fully understand. As Adrien becomes more and 
more immersed in Brittany's world she begins to suspect a conspiracy of 
sorts, dating back a few years, and involving Brittany's sister who left the 
country. Brittany's friend, Kelly (Laurie Fortier), keeps hinting about it 
to Adrien, as though it were eating her up inside. Once Brittany finds out 
that Adrien suspects her of something, she turns all her attentions to 
destroying Adrien's life, and she proves quite adept at doing so.
There's a whole lot more to this plot, mostly involving relationships 
amongst the other members of the in crowd. You know, the sort of soap opera 
like plot twists of so-and-so is seeing so-and-so behind her back, but she 
is actually cheating on him with blah blah blah. My head began to hurt after 
about fifteen minutes of trying to follow this, so I finally gave up and 
wrote "everyone is seeing everyone behind everyone's back". I think the 
primary reason it was so difficult to keep track was because all the members 
of the in crowd looked alike. All the guys were tall with brown hair and 
goofy looking expressions, and all the girls were well-endowed, blonde 
(except Brittany and Kelly; I think so we could keep track of them), and 
constantly clothed in bathing suits. That, by the way, about covers the 
film's good points. The only reason anyone should see this is to watch a 
bunch of beautiful people run around on the beach for over an hour and a 
half.
Because the actors are all interchangeable, there really isn't much point in 
covering their acting skills, but I'm going to give it a try anyway. Susan 
Ward (apparently from "All My Children", imagine that) and Lori Heuring 
("The Newton Boys") are the only two given a chance to display any acting 
skills, and both appear to possess none. Lori Heuring looks half dead 
throughout the film, which I suppose was intentional to show how disturbed 
her character was, but she might have overdone it just a smidge. Susan 
Ward's idea of acting evil seems to be: sitting off to the side, murmering 
false platitudes, conspiring against everyone, and keeping a small, fake 
smile on her face. Oh, I suppose that does sound fairly evil doesn't it? Yet 
somehow Susan Ward botches the attempt so badly, she looks comical rather 
than evil. The only other actor worth mentioning is Nathan Bexton (last seen 
talking to a cat in "Go"), who spends most of the film twitching violently 
in a corner or drinking alcohol by the gallon. Everyone else is either given 
no screen time (Daniel Hugh Kelly) or isn't required to act much beyond 
being a jerk (everyone else).
So how does the script itself fare? Well, you name the teen movie cliche and 
it's probably present. We get the classic mark of all modern teen movies: 
popular music playing all the time, even when it's completely inappropriate 
to the mood of the scene. We get every cliched bit of foreshadowing 
imaginable: from the characters being introduced at the exact spot where you 
know the final conflict is going to take place; to the emphasis on creaking 
stairs that you know are going to be important later on. It also follows 
that grand teen movie tradition of being a touch on the predictable side. By 
that, I mean half the time I could guess what characters were going to say 
before their mouths opened. Last, but not least, we have the two staples of 
all brainless teen films: a three minute exposition explaining the plot at 
the start; and an ending that everyone knew was bound to happen in exactly 
the way it occurs.
To be perfectly honest, I'd never heard of Mary Lambert before seeing this 
movie, and now I see why. Apparently, she was the one responsible for 1989's 
reprehensible Stephen King adaption "Pet Semetary". I must have put a mental 
block over her name without knowing it. Her trademark travesties in "The In 
Crowd" appear to be three fold: first, she sticks in lesbian undertones 
amongst several of the girls for no apparent reason (there is one brief 
explanation of some of this, but doesn't account for it all); two, the 
camera work is horrendous - jumping around from scene to scene with no 
consistency (think Oliver Stone's "technique" doubled and used all the 
time); last, the pacing is nonexistent, speeding way up during scenes that 
could have been vaguely interesting if they had tried, and slowing down at 
points in the movie no one could care less about. I'd recommend "The In 
Crowd" to two groups of people: those who love teen movies (assuming such 
people exist); and those who just want to stare at people in bathing suits 
for over an hour (I know those people exist). The movie runs 100 minutes, 
which is about an hour and a half too long. I give it a sadly generous two 
out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/JohnBeachem.htm,
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_In_Crowd_ (PG-13) * (out of ****)
"What would you do to get in?"  Apparently not much at all--that is, if
Warner Bros.' poster for _The_In_Crowd_ is posing the question to
audiences in reference to seeing this youth-aimed thriller.  At the
showing I attended in the middle of a very hot summer afternoon, there
were only about 15 people in the auditorium, including myself.  Still,
that's about 15 more people than will show up a week for now, for it
won't be long before this sloppy, predictable potboiler finds itself
completely on the outs with paying moviegoers.
We first meet heroine Adrien (Lori Heuring) as she is being discharged
from St. Anastasia's, a mental institution.  (The reasons for her stay is
one of the film's not-terribly-enticing mysteries.)  Thanks to a kindly
doctor (Daniel Hugh Kelly), Adrien gets a job at a swank country club
that's a popular summer hangout among the elite college crowd.  While
most of this "in crowd" turn up their nose at Adrien, the group's
ringleader, "luscious brunette" Brittany (Susan Ward) takes a
surprisingly immediate liking to Adrien.
Of course, the reasons for Brittany's interest in Adrien are shrouded in
secrecy, and once they are revealed, audiences will have trouble either
keeping themselves from rolling their eyes or stifling a yawn.  But for a
while, director Mary Lambert and writers Mark Gibson and Philip Halprin
suggest something a bit more provocative.  The two initially bond after
Brittany fakes a suicide attempt in a pool, and Adrien "saves" her with
some mouth-to-mouth.  Later, Brittany bails Adrien out of trouble with
her boss by implying she had her hands full--with her.  Then on a hot
night on the dance floor, the two seem a lot more interested in getting
down with each other than a guy who manages to squeeze his way between
them.
But this is a PG-13 movie, so this bit of shameless (and, I must admit,
rather amusing) audience pandering doesn't go quite far enough to give
the entire film a kinky watchability.  Before long, Brittany spies Adrien
having coffee with the hunky tennis pro (Matthew Settle) she'd had her
eye on, and suddenly all the warnings Adrien had been given about
Brittany's true nature  appear justified.  People start to have
mysterious accidents, and Adrien finds herself in danger of being sent
back to the loony bin.
Theoretically, _The_In_Crowd_ should build some momentum at this point,
but the plotting is so pedestrian and the execution generally so ho-hum
that it's impossible to care.  So one is left to savor the few guilty
pleasures available: some campy catfighting between Adrien and Brittany,
and the lightly entertaining performance of _Sunset_Beach_ alumna Ward,
who plays a vixen with verve.  Like the others, there's no real meat to
the character of Brittany (the fact that one of her defining
characteristics is a weakness for lip gloss says it all), but at least
Ward has some fun with her part.
Moviegoers, however, will find it just about impossible to have much fun
with _The_In_Crowd_.  It's fairly slow-moving, and after a long buildup,
the promised thrills never arrive.  Unfortunately for Warner Bros., the
hoped-for teen audience will never arrive, either.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Steve Rhodes
"Welcome to the lives of the rich and tasteless," Bobby (Nathan Bexton)
tells Adrien (Lori Heuring) as she enters her first party hosted by
members of "The Club."  The club is an exclusive beach and sports
facility where wealthy kids, not currently in rehab, like to play and
party.
Actually, "the rich and boring" would be more apropos.  Tasteless would
have been a decided improvement.
THE IN CROWD, lamely directed by Mary Lambert from a vapid script by
Mark Gibson and Philip Halprin, isn't the teen comedy that you might
expect.  It is a ploddingly plotted thriller that moves slowly in creaks
and groans.  So devoid of energy, the movie will have audiences calling
out suggestions for the characters.  In ours, some of the audience's
catcalls would have been an improvement.  To be fair, almost any change
would have been an improvement.  It is easy to see why the movie wasn't
screened in advance to critics.
The title refers to Adrien's lack of status since she isn't one of "the
in crowd."  Recently released from a mental institution -- where she was
placed somewhat capriciously -- she is effectively on parole to work at
the club.  If she gets fired, it is back to the hospital for her.  She
will, of course, prove to be just about the sanest person in the story.
As the lead princess, Brittany (Susan Ward) sets her eyes on Adrien and
fakes a suicide just so that she can get some mouth-to-mouth action from
her.  Closet lesbianism is one of the movie's few subplots.
The superwealthy, we find, have incredible bodies -- with waists the
size of small tree limbs, tans over every millimeter of their skin and,
in the case of the girls, prominent breasts.  It is amazing what money
will do for you.  Brains and manners, however, don't seem to come with
riches.
People will die, but you will not care.  People will be falsely accused,
and, again, you will be completely indifferent, as there isn't a genuine
moment in the story.
The movie does ask two important questions.  Does excessive use of lip
gloss lead to deviant behavior, and what is the proper gift for a recent
rehab graduate?  The answers are yes and a brand new Hummer.
THE IN CROWD runs a long 1:40.  It is rated PG-13 for violence,
sexuality, language, drug content and brief nudity and would acceptable
for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 
