Title
Review for Baunsu koGALS (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Foong Ngai Hoe (Yukino Yoshi)
BOUNCE KOGALS (1997)
Directed by: Masato Harada
Staring: Hitomi Sato,Jun Murakami,Kaori Momoi,Koji Yakusho,Shin
Yazawa,Yasue Sato,Yukiko Okamoto
GROWING PAINS
---------------------
Masato Harada's somewhat of an enigma. The director literally works in
Los Angeles half of the year, and everytime he returns to his native
Japan, he finds so many things which upset him that they invariably find
their way into his films.
Written and directed by Harada, his latest film, the 1997 Bounce KoGals
(a.k.a. Leaving) takes on the issue of enjo kosai - teenage girls who
prostitute themselves in order to buy branded clothes and bags. KoGals
are these cool trendy teenagers and Bounce is the story of two bubbly
KoGals in Shibuya, Tokyo.
Jonko leads a group of high-school girls involved in escort services.
Unlike most, she doesn't sleep with her clients, preferring to use her
mix of charm and guile instead. Jonko's just struck up an understanding
with Oshima, a yakuza gangster who's none too pleased that high-school
part-timers are threatening the underworld's traditional sex industry.
Raku is a street dancer who occasionally does some escorting. She's
fallen out with Jonko earlier over the latter's methods, but both remain
fond of each other. Lisa Togo, a 16-year-old girl from Sendai was
brought up in the U.S. Back in Japan for almost a year, she wants to run
away to New York. She's been working in a convenience store for a year
to save for her trip, and her air-ticket will expire in a day's time.
Hoping to earn some fast money before flying off, Lisa stops over at
Shibuya to sell her panties at a burusera shop (a fetish shop selling
and buying girls' school uniforms and panties) where she agrees to
feature in a video. The money will help her survive when she's in New
York. Lisa meets Raku at the shoot, but things then go awfully wrong
when two thugs turn up to break up the video shoot. Lisa flees with
Raku, but not before losing the money she has painfully saved. Eager to
help Lisa out, Raku introduces her to Jonko, and the pair head off to
earn enough to finance Lisa's trip before the next day. But their plan
turns awry, and the yakuza are soon after them.
Harada doesn't absolve girls like Jonko or Raku for what they do, but he
reaches beyond the sensationalism to portray a kind of subculture which
goes beyond loose-socks, pokeberu (pagers), cell-phones, and Gucci bags.
These are girls who get together to share and giggle at each other's
experiences. Beneath their cynicism, the KoGals come across as normal
teenagers who happen to be more acute to the opportunities around them
than their male clients.
"Men are becoming more like children these days, so we become the
grown-ups," Jonko argues.
In one instance, an 80-year-old war criminal proudly retells his grisly
war exploits to Lisa; in another, a bureaucrat gets his kicks making the
girls clean the toilet. Coming out of the station, Lisa also gets
harassed by a married man old enough to be her father. Shibuya through
Harada's camera comes across as a suffocating place for the teenage
girls to live in, where almost every man the three girls run into -
regardless of age or occupation - is either a sex pervert or an
indifferent onlooker. Ironically, even Jonko's father picks up
high-school girls.
The greater irony, though, is that those who do care are outcasts
themselves - Oshima, a yakuza, and Sapp, a teenage punk working as a
'talent scout'. A Japanese businessman can be rotten beneath his suit
and soft demeanour, while KoGals, punks and yakuzas are the ones with
principles.
One might accuse Harada - who reportedly was upset by what he saw in one
panty-shop - of stereotyping men in Bounce by turning them into deformed
caricatures. But again, the film deals with a nation of men infamous for
its lolita-complex (or loli-con, as it's called in Japan), and a city
where the peddling of soft-porn featuring children as young as 12 is
widespread.
"It's a scary place to live in today," Lisa counters Oshima when the
yakuza lectures her. Bounce protests on behalf of these girls by shaking
an angry fist against the society and media which the director sees as
being equally guilty, if not totally.
Harada's compassion towards the KoGals in his film is tinged with much
rue and sadness. Jonko, too headstrong for her own good, soon finds
herself and her friends in trouble with the yakuzas. But one character
who leaves an impression is Mura, Jonko and Raku's friend who finds it
hard keeping up with the rest. The film starts with her at a clinic
waiting for an abortion, and ends with the girl tragically losing her
left eye after being attacked by a client. The dressing down Oshima
gives Jonko later at the hospital is probably one of the high points of
the film that'll stay in my mind for a while. There's nothing glamorous
about the KoGal lifestyle, and ultimately it's the more reserved Lisa
who teaches Jonko and Raku a thing or two about life.
For their part, the actress-trio Hitomi Sato, Yasue Sato, and Yukiko
Okamoto put in memorable performances as Jonko, Raku, and Lisa
respectively. The chemistry between them lends much credibility to a
story hinged on the three girls' camaraderie. As it is, I ended up
feeling for them, and their tearful farewell in the end was as painful
for me as it probably was for them in the story. Veteran actor Koju
Yakusho (Lost Paradise, Shall we Dance?) was also impressive as the
somewhat fatherly yakuza Oshima.
The direction is wonderful, with the film switching seamlessly between
the crowded streets of Shibuya to the seedy and claustrophobic premises
where KoGals operate, and then to the serenity of the parks and temples
where the girls (and the film) pause only occasionally to reflect.
This is one of Harada's best films to date. True, it lacks the action
Kamikaze Taxi has on-screen, but as a social-drama, Bounce pulls no
punches, nor does it try too hard moralising the issue. It only retells
the threesome's story as we follow them from one encounter to encounter.
Yet when it's over, none of us can remain unaffected.
Poignant but optimistic, Bounce is a beautiful subcultural coming-of-age
film that's probably one of the best to have come out of Japan in 1997.
