Title
Review for "V" (1983) (mini)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Independence Day ripped off the far superior 1983 TV miniseries, V,
correctly assuming that the public has only a short-term memory.  The
pervasive image of flying saucers hovering over every major metropolitan
city in the world is undeniably creepy, especially when the visitors are
not our friends.  V's mice-munching lizards, disguised in human form as
soap opera-friendly actors in bright red Nazi uniforms, wore false
smiles and were much scarier than any computer generated menace proposed
by ID:4.
What we're quick to forget is that TV movies from the early 80's were
actually pretty frightening, what with Ronald Reagan threatening to bomb
the Russkies and all.  The Day After caused many a sleepless night as
Jason Robards marched through a nuclear nightmare.  While the good guys
ultimately score a point for justice at the end of V, much of the film
is devoted to the insidious alien plot to corral humans into
concentration camps for food.  Yum, yum, yum.  A few supporting
characters get picked off in the first hour or two when they try to
prove that "the truth is out there."  We're gonna snatch you, and then
we're gonna eat you!
Marc Singer and Faye Grant make for credible freedom fighters, playing a
news cameraman and doctor, respectively, but it's the aliens who make
the deeper impression.  Jane Badler's perpetually shrewish Diana was a
Lady Macbeth for the space age, and even better was Richard Herd as
John, the kind-faced and soft-spoken politician who speaks of peace in
his marmalade voice while innocents are being rounded up in Earth's
ghetto and natural resources are being plundered.  Sly bastard.
Memorable subplots include the teenage girl (Blair Tefkin) who becomes
impregnated by a swell looking alien (Peter Nelson), the smug young
opportunist (David Packer) who turns traitor in exchange for a snazzy
red uniform (and ultimately gets his just desserts, heh heh), and the
wise old Holocaust survivor (Leonardo Cimino, in a small but memorable
performance) who lets us know, in case we didn't figure it out already,
that this is a ham-fisted allegory.  Indeed, writer-director Kenneth
Johnson had originally planned V as a World War II series, but when the
networks balked he simply made them alien invaders.  Clever, no?
As cool as V was, there are still a fair share of ridiculous scenes.  I
could never abide Robert Englund's cutesy alien, much preferring him as
Freddy Krueger.  V also didn't have the budget to pull off the elaborate
final showdown between alien spaceships and gun toting freedom fighters,
and there are some truly corny Star Trek moments with Marc Singer
running around the alien spacecraft (read: wobbly set) with friendly
alien Martin (Frank Ashmore).  Nostalgia does strange things to a man,
though -- it makes him more forgiving.  V remains a surprisingly
engrossing affair.  (Avoid the sequel and lame TV-series that followed.)
Director: Kenneth Johnson
Producer: Daniel H. Blatt, Kenneth Johnson, David J. Latt, Robert Singer
Writer: Kenneth Johnson
Starring: Jane Badler, Michael Durrell, Robert Englund, Faye Grant,
Richard Herd, Peter Nelson, David Packer, Neva Patterson, Tommy
Petersen, Marc Singer, Blair Tefkin, Michael Wright
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
