Title
Review for Left Behind: The Movie (2000) (V)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
The plot for Victor Sarin's LEFT BEHIND: THE MOVIE involves nothing less 
than world peace, world government, world currency and the world's food 
supply.  And these are just the minor issues.
As it opens, GNN reporter Buck Williams (Kirk Cameron) breaks the story 
of unknown forces from all over the world staging massive air-strikes on 
Israel, but the confusing script quickly discards this subplot.  Based 
on the first of a series of best selling novels by Jerry B. Jenkins and 
Tim LaHaye, the story is really about the end of the world as we know it 
after the chosen few, actually the chosen 142 million -- plus or minus a 
few souls -- have ascended into heaven.
Neither as bad you might fear nor as good as you might hope -- see THE 
RAPTURE for a successful picture with similar themes -- LEFT BEHIND: THE 
MOVIE alternately intrigues and baffles the viewers.  Sometimes watching 
it makes you think that you need a secret decoder ring to be able to 
grasp the intricacies of the confusing plot.  (Whether detailed 
knowledge of the Bible would clear up many of the movie's mysteries is 
debatable.)
After the potential world war starts in Israel, the real excitement 
begins.  There is panic in the streets and in the air after people 
disappear en masse.  All of the young children and many adults vanish in 
an instant, leaving their clothes and other worldly possessions behind.  
Typical of the disasters that ensue is a big traffic accident caused by 
a truck driver who goes AWOL while driving his big rig down a highway.  
In the air, passengers on Buck's flight disappear, causing pandemonium.
When people realize what is happening, some of them return to their 
religious roots to look for an answer and for consolation.
"If you don't put your faith in God, you will be deceived," Rayford 
Steele (Brad Johnson), a repentant adulterer, warns Buck.  This proves 
to be prescient advice, when Buck has to deal with nothing less than the 
Antichrist himself.
"You get so wrapped up in life that one day you wake up and realize 
you've missed it," Rayford tells his daughter Chloe (Janaya Stephens).  
This painfully true sentiment is like much of the movie, which is 
overacted but true to its principles.  The story has much to say.  It is 
a shame that it couldn't have done a better job of it.
LEFT BEHIND: THE MOVIE runs 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for violence and 
would be acceptable for kids around 9 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Based on the best-selling novel, Left Behind is the latest in an
assembly line of Evangelical thrillers from Cloud Ten Pictures. 
Considering the success of The Omega Code, there's a surprisingly large
audience of zealots who dream of screening films with "spiritual value"
nationwide.  And apparently, all that hard work is paying off.
Let readers be warned in advance, if you're part of the camp which tries
to catch the "so bad it's good" movies filmcritic.com cheerfully slams
on a weekly basis (and I mean you, Battlefield Earth), do yourself a
favor and avoid Left Behind.  Even if your interest is akin to mine,
approaching the entire affair as a postmodern joke, your contribution is
paving the way for more of this generic, bible-thumping crap.  With this
kind of marketing campaign, every dollar counts.
Having said that, I really wanted to enjoy Left Behind.  The premise has
all the makings of a crackerjack apocalyptic epic in the vein of Stephen
King's The Stand crossed with The Omen.  If handled right, this could
have been the mainstream alternative to Michael Tolkin's chilling
end-of-the-world melodrama, The Rapture.
On an international flight, half of the passengers vanish mid-air.  This
is not an isolated incident.  Around the world, Christians have
mysteriously disappeared without a trace.  It seems the Book of
Revelations has cracked wide open, and the newly departed are spared
seven years of tribulation during the Antichrist's rise to global
power.  Those who have been left behind must struggle in the ultimate
battle between good and evil, which will no doubt be further documented
in the inevitable string of sequels.
Don't tell me that doesn't sound exciting, even to heathens such as
myself.
My interest abruptly waned the moment a freshly scrubbed Kirk Cameron
appears on the scene as opportunistic news correspondent Buck Williams. 
We're asked to buy Kirk Cameron as a hardcore journalist covering an
international crisis in the Middle East?  Named Buck Williams?  When
Buck places his camera in the middle "of the shit" as bombs burst in
midair, it's difficult to shake the thought that this pathetic former
star hasn't aged a day since Growing Pains.  His behavior, his goofy
smile, his curly locks of hair are all exactly the same.  I guess some
things never change, even after you're Born Again.
Buck pursues a conspiracy that goes all the way to the United Nations. 
Will he be able to warn idealistic scientist Chaim Rosenzweig (Colin
Fox) that his "Eden formula" which could end world hunger may land in
the wrong hands?  Sure enough, there's a missing disk, a car explosion,
an attempted assassination, and shifty men in black who plot
Armageddon.  These familiar genre requirements are as lifeless as they
are predictable, shot with all the bland mushiness of late night cable
television.
Indeed, Left Behind could easily be confused with less ambitious fare
were it not for the preachy subplot involving the tormented pilot (Brad
Johnson) of that ill-fated international flight mentioned earlier.  When
his wife and son disappear in the Rapture, he falls to his knees begging
forgiveness.  If only he had listened when Jesus was knocking on the
door to his heart.  It's not long before Buck joins him as a soldier in
God's Army.
After the end credits scroll on Left Behind's home video release, Kirk
Cameron provides a public service announcement encouraging viewers to
tell everyone they know to see this movie.  My only request for the
Christians who happen upon this article: Don't settle for less.  Go to
the Left Behind website and demand quality scripts which address your
theological concerns.
Of course, the built-in audience will see these movies whether or not
they receive a critical bitch slap.  After an initial release on video
to spread word of mouth, Left Behind has found its way into the 20 top
grossing theatrical releases during the week it opened nationwide. 
Let's hear it for the Almighty Buck.
Director: Victor Sarin
Producers: Ron Booth, Joe Goodman, C. Robert Neutz, Ralph Winter
Writers: John Bishop, Joe Goodman, Paul Lalonde, Alan B. McElroy 
Starring: Kirk Cameron, Brad Johnson, Janaya Stephens, Clarence Gilyard,
Jr., Colin Fox, Gordon Currie
http://www.leftbehind-themovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
