Title
Review for Yekhai (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Felix Kreisel
Montreal 1996
The recently concluded Montreal World Film Festival is one of the better
known venues of the cinema world. It attempts to promote a wide range of
filmmakers from many countries by requiring as little as possible in
promotion expenditures. This year the Festival organizers paid special
attention to current Russian films and even gave a special prize in the
category of the Russian Cinema of Today. This writer was able to view a
number of the more significant films presented at the Festival. Preceding
my impressions I have included the official descriptions provided by the
Festival organizers.
Director: Georgy Shengelia. Script: Alexei Timm. Based on the play
"Yekhai!" by Nina Sadur. Photography: Ilia Diomin. Editor: Edward Gimpel.
Music: Roman Zagorodniuk. Sound: Yuliia Yegorova. Cast: Vladimir Il'yin,
Tatiana Kravchenko, Larisa Shakhvorostova. Producer: Konstantin
Slobodchikov, Roman Burimov, Oldmore Image.
One long winter evening, Piotr Gavrilin, a rural bulldozer operator,
suffers a fit of depression. He feels that his life is senseless. He has a
good wife, some savings for his retirement and his children are all grown
up and living on their own. But one thing appears to have gone missing from
his life: love. For other people this may just seem like the onset of
middle age: for Piotr it is a full-blown crisis. His wife won't give him
any money for drink, his boss doesn't appreciate him and among his old
friends only the goat has remained faithful. The only way out for Piotr
seems suicide. He lays down on the railway track and waits for the next
train. But fate would have it that the locomotive is driven by a former
actor from the local drama group and he manages to stop the train in time.
Act Two is about to begin.
This movie was the gem of this Festival. It was funny, sad, wise,
insightful. Gavrilin, played by Il'in, lost more than love, he lost a sense
of purpose. Yes, his wife is very different from the thin, shy adorable
girl he married. She snores in bed, watches Mexican soaps and only seems to
care about money, and more money. But it is his whole neighborhood, his
village and his country which have changed drastically, and for the worse.
He walks out of the house onto the evening street after a quarrel with his
wife, and realizes that he is completely alone, except for his pet goat.
All his neighbors have their TVs on and are watching some idiotic foreign
(or foreign inspired) shows. His workmates release themselves through
weekend drunken binges. The former factory head, who has now become the
president of the production association in which Gavrilin holds a share, is
screwing the workers out of their stock in the enterprise while at the same
time he is also screwing his private secretary right there in the office
(this scene is reminiscent of the hilarious portrayal of the state
governor, played by Mel Brooks, in the movie "Blazing Saddles").
   The acting by Il'in is superb, he has a fantastic screen presence. When
in the middle of the night he pulls out an old photo of his wife and tries
to find with a magnifying glass the lost beauty on the face of the snoring
woman lying in bed next to him, we feel the full weight of years and bad
experiences which had stunted her personality, just as they ravaged her
body. When his wife's TV turns out to be more important than their
relationship, Gavrilin hacks up the Sony with an axe. When life loses
meaning, Gavrilin decides that it will take a whole train to separate his
head from his body, lesser methods of suicide won't do.
   The driver of the oncoming train is also a real character. He was
formerly an actor in a workers' club and has a real love for the theater,
for words and their effect on a person. He turns to Goethe's "Faust" to
find a way to convince Gavrilin that life has its own reason, that
knowledge, even knowledge of one's frailties and mortality, is precious. To
see these workers' hunger for reason, for truth, their appreciation of
Goethe's poetry is truly optimistic. When the bulldozer driver and the
train driver discuss their lives and loves we see ourselves in them, we too
search for happiness.
   This adventure ends when a woman track inspector finds the stopped train
and takes the fellow philosophers to her house for dinner. Gavrilin's wife
and goat also turn up in the end.
   The director, alas, finds happiness in a retreat from society, in a turn
of a lonely woman track inspector to God. Religion has for many Russians
become their last desperate hope. What a pessimistic outlook this is.
-- 
Iskra Research -- Historical research and publication of Marxist classics
in the Russian language.
Address: PO Box 397142, Cambridge, MA 02139-7142; e-mail: fjk@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/fjk/iskra.html
