Title
Review for Hot Shots! Part Deux (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Gregory N. Bond
[Again, just released locally but probably old news to many of you.
FLYING HIGH was released as AIRPLANE! in the U.S.]
     This is made by (one of) the same people who did FLYING HIGH, TOP
SECRET and the original HOT SHOTS.  Like all of the above, it is chock
full of sight gags, one liners, running jokes and not very subtle
parodies of other movies. I noticed among others: Just about every
RAMBO film, a huge swipe at BASIC INSTINCT, CASABLANCA, TERMINATOR 2,
ROBIN HOOD - PRINCE OF THIEVES (and most other sword-and-valour
flicks), APOCALYPSE NOW, SPACEBALLS, STAR WARS, and probably a dozen
more that I couldn't exactly place.
     The basic story is RAMBO 2 done over: got to get the hostages out,
this time from Iraq.  Plenty of gags about Hussein, none of which are
complimentary.  Lloyd Bridges is completely over the top as the
befuddled U.S. President, Charlie Sheen with a fair bit of added bulk
does a good line in brooding, and a bunch of look-alikes in various
supporting roles.  I found that as a whole it worked better than the
previous HOT SHOTS, with more laughs and a more even production.
However, the style is not universally favoured.  If you are the type
left cold by FLYING HIGH, this movie is not for you.
     All in all it works very well, and I laughed a lot.  Worth a look
at $7.50 prices, certainly worth it for a video night.  Rated M for
some fairly heavy sexual innuendo, but no skin shown.
The Second Test at Lords on the Sid and Nancy scale.
--
Gregory Bond  Burdett Buckeridge & Young Ltd Melbourne Australia

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  5/21/93
Running Length:  1:27
Rated:  PG-13 (Sexual situations, brief nudity, mock violence)
Starring:  Charlie Sheen, Valeria Golino, Lloyd Bridges, 
           Richard Crenna, Brenda Bakke, Miguel Ferrer
Director:  Jim Abrahams
Producer:  Bill Badalato
Screenplay:  Jim Abrahams and Pat Proft
Music:  Basil Poledouris
Released by Twentieth Century Fox
     Since being inexplicably dumped by Ramada (Valeria Golino), the
love of his life, Topper Harley (Charlie Sheen), the earstwhile hero of
HOT SHOTS!, has retreated into a monastery to contemplate the meaning of
life.  His time of solitude comes to an end, however, when his good
friend and former superior, Colonel Denton Walters (Richard Crenna), is
captured by Saddam Hussein, and a sexy female CIA operative (Brenda
Bakke) arrives at the monastery to recruit Topper for the rescue
mission.  Biceps bulging and guns blazing, Topper charges into Iraq,
letting nothing get in his way.
     Two years ago, I gave the original HOT SHOTS! a scathing review,
calling it "one of the most unfunny and sophomoric movies" of the
year.  Fortunately, while PART DEUX is just as silly and dumb as it
predecessor, it manages a more humorous edge.  As a result, the sequel
is more watchable than the original.  Better than the actual film,
however, is its theatrical trailer, which shows a number of scenes not
in the finished product (they look to have been produced explicitly for
the trailer).
     What HOT SHOTS! did for TOP GUN, PART DEUX does for the Rambo
movies.  Charlie Sheen has bulked up impressively for this role and,
with unbound hair hanging to his shoulders and ammo encasing his body,
he looks eerily like the posters of Sylvester Stallone from the second
and third FIRST BLOODs.  Then there's Richard Crenna, here in a role
that's obviously a sendup of the one he played in the other series.  Of
course, PART DEUX doesn't stop with Rambo, getting its digs in at
dozens of other targets ranging from the easily-lampooned BASIC
INSTINCT to LADY AND THE TRAMP.
     Bad puns, double entendres, and dumb sight gags abound (what else
would you expect from Jim Abrahams and Pat Proft?).  With as many as
there are, it's only to be expected that quite a few are duds.
Unfortunately, a disproportionate number of the failures occur during
the last third of the movie, causing PART DEUX to be unbalanced.  The
first hour is decently paced as the humor keeps it afloat, but the
final portion of the film is occasionally tedious.
     There are a couple of real winners in PART DEUX.  Most memorable
are a cameo by Martin Sheen, a spoof of SEA HUNT featuring the original
star (Lloyd Bridges), a slapstick gathering of the living presidents,
and an on-screen digital "body count" meter during the climactic raid
on Saddam's fortress.
     Sheen and Golino wade through this film with gloriously deadpan
expressions, playing it straight no matter how outlandish the story
becomes.  As is true of Leslie Nielsen in the NAKED GUN pictures, this
is one of the film's assets.  Satire often works best when it's
intentionally modelled after bad drama.  Oddly enough, one wonders if
the Rambo films were the best choice for a spoof, since the second and
third installments came close to self-parody in their own right.
     Nevertheless, not enough of PART DEUX gels to make it an
unqualified success, even for its genre.  There are too many instances
when the film is too obvious in its attempts at humor.  Forcing jokes
more often leads to them falling flat than working and, in PART DEUX,
this happens on several occasions.
     Those that enjoyed the original HOT SHOTS! will doubtless be
entertained by the second part, as will moviegoers who laughed their
way through LOADED WEAPON ONE.  The stuff of PART DEUX is not AIRPLANE
material, but it has its high points, and as a mindless summer evening
out, it will certainly deliver what's expected from it.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Being objective in writing a film review is nearly impossible even
under ideal circumstances.  Perhaps major film critics are able to be
objective about the films they write about, but I doubt even that is true.
My approach to the problem is periodically to remind people that I am
writing about one person's experience with a film on one viewing--their
mileage with a film may vary.  Now, while this inescapable subjectivity is
enough of a problem with a film such as HOWARD'S END, it is far worse with a
no-holds-barred comedy such as HOT SHOTS! PART DEUX.  Anybody builds up a
resistance to a style of comedy eventually.  My experience with Monty Python
is that the earliest episodes I saw were, and still are, hilarious; episodes
seen later lack that zing.  Other people seem to have shared this
experience: in spite of seeing episodes in a different order, they also find
that what they saw before they became jaded are funny for them, but not so
much what they saw later.
     HOT SHOTS! PART DEUX is the latest in the sub-genre of film and
television satires punctuated with rapid-fire gags.  I would claim the sub-
genre was invented in 1976 with James Frawley's BIG BUS.  But the sub-genre
came to be led by Jim Abrahams, David Zucker, and Jerry Zucker, who did an
extended skit, "Fistful of Yen," in KENTUCKY FRIED MOVIE (1977).  They made
the 1980 film AIRPLANE!, and the 1981 television series "Police Squad."  One
or more of the triple has been involved with many similar comedies since.
Abrahams without the Zuckers directed BIG BUSINESS and WELCOME HOME, ROXY
CARMICHAEL, then returned to the AIRPLANE! style with the original HOT
SHOTS! and now HOT SHOTS! PART DEUX.
     HOT SHOTS! PART DEUX begins by parodying, almost to the point of
remaking, the first part of RAMBO III.  However, the problem is not in
Afghanistan but in Iraq, where Saddam Hussein is holding American hostages
and several teams of would-be rescuers, including Col. Denton Walters
(played by Richard Crenna), an old commander of Topper Harley (played by
Charlie Sheen).  (Trivia question: what was the inspiration for Col. Denton
Walters's name?)  Topper Harley leads the rescue attempt.
     Of course, a good deal of the fun is noting the film and/or television
allusions and/or rip-offs.  There are nice bits borrowing from CASABLANCA,
LADY AND THE TRAMP, and a particularly clever gag on APOCALYPSE NOW.  But
how funny is the film?  I would say it is funnier than the "Naked Gun"
films, but not as funny as AIRPLANE! or HOT SHOTS!  But again, what is and
is not funny is very subjective.  I give HOT SHOTS! PART DEUX a low +1 on
the -4 to +4 scale.  (Avoid the closing credits if you have not seen THE
CRYING GAME.)
     [Trivia answer: Richard Crenna played Walter Denton on radio and
television in "Our Miss Brooks."  His character was a dim-witted teenager
who talked as if he had peanut butter on his tonsils.]
