Title
Review for Amazon Women on the Moon (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1987. Directors  - Joe Dante, Carl Gottlieb, Peter Horten, John Landis 
& Robert K. Weiss, Screenplay - Michael Barrie & Jim Mulholland, Producer - 
Weiss, Visual Effects - The LA Effects Group, Production Design - Ivo 
Cristante. Production Company - Westward Productions.
(In order of appearance): Arsenio Hall (Apartment Dweller), Monique 
Gabrielle (Taryn Steele), Lou Jacobi (Murray), Griffin Dunne (Doctor), Peter 
Horten (Harry Landers), Michelle Pfeiffer (Brenda Landers), Steve Guttenberg 
(Jerry Stone), Rosanna Arquette (Karen), Steve Forrest (Captain Steve 
Nelson), Joey Travolta (Butch), Sybil Danning (Queen Lara), Robert Colbert 
(Blackie), Forrest J. Ackerman (President of the USA), David Allen Grier 
(Don Simmons), B.B. King (Himself), Henry Silva (Himself), Belinda Balaski 
(Beatrice Pitnik), Steve Allen (Himself), Rip Taylor (Himself), Henry 
Youngman (Himself), Ed Begley Jr (Griffin), Matt Adler (George Bailey), 
Ralph Bellamy (Mr Gower), Kelly Preston (Violet), Marc McClure (Ray), 
Corinne Wahl (Sherrie), Carrie Fisher (Mary Brown), Paul Bartel (Doctor)
A number of well-known comedy directors - Joe ("The Howling", "Gremlins") 
Dante, John ("The Blues Brothers", "Kentucky Fried Movie") Landis and Carl 
("Caveman") Gottlieb - came together to make this grab-bag of comic 
sketches. The sketches self-consciously delve through various popular 
culture and genre parody without ever really amounting to anything 
particularly funny. There are a couple of segments that are amusing - a 
Landis-directed skit in which Arsenio Hall becomes accident prone all at 
once in his apartment; and a "Ripley's Believe It Or Not" send-up which asks 
the question: Was Jack the Ripper really the Loch Ness Monster ? The "Son of 
the Invisible Man" piece, parodying the 1940s "Invisible Man" sequels, in 
which Ed Begley Jr goes dancing around naked thinking he is invisible, and 
the title story parodying fifties B-grade outer space films, would probably 
have sounded funny on paper, but seem terribly belaboured on film. On the 
other hand there is that which would have sounded pretty juvenile on paper 
too, ranging from the instantly forgettable - the literally interpreted 
"Video Pirates" piece, one about a lonely bachelor who finds a participatory 
dirty video - to that which goes on at length to no - one where Rosanna 
Arquette's computer throws Steve Guttenberg's pick-up lines back at him - or 
quite awful points - Griffin Dunne's thoroughly terrible acting as a doctor 
who misplaces Michelle Pfeiffer's baby.
VISIT THE SF, HORROR AND FANTASY FILM REVIEWS DATABASE at:
"http://www.fortunecity.com/lavender/fullmonty/706/index.htm"

