Title
Review for Bad Moon (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1996. Director/Screenplay - Eric Red, Based on the Novel `Thor' by 
Wayne Smith, Producer - James G. Robinson, Photography - Jan Kresser, 
Music - Daniel Licht, Visual Effects - VIFX (Supervisor - Gregory L. 
McMurry), Special Effects Supervisor - Gary Minielly, Werewolf Effects - 
Steve Johnson's XFX Inc, Production Design - Linda Del Rosario & Richard 
Paris. Production Company - Morgan Creek.
Mariel Hemingway (Janet Harrison), Michael Pare (Ted Harrison), Mason 
Gamble (Brett Harrison)
Plot: Anthropologist Ted Harrison returns from an expedition to India 
and goes to stay in a caravan out the back of his sister Janet's house. 
But while away Ted was attacked and gored by a werewolf and each night 
transforms into a werewolf, handcuffing himself to a tree in the woods 
to restrain the wolf. But Janet's dog Thor takes a dislike to this 
invader in its domain and a territorial dispute between the two ensues.
Eric Red wrote two of the best horror films of the 1980s - `The Hitcher' 
(1986) and `Near Dark' (1987). Since then Red has progressed to become 
director of his own material with the kidnap thriller `Cohen and Tate' 
(1988), the horror film `Body Parts' (1991), the thriller `Undertow' 
(1996), and this. None of Red's directorial efforts are bad films by any 
means. But the relative failure of any of them to set the movie-making 
world alight either with directorial panache or dazzling innovation 
leave one with the increasing suspicion that the successes of `The 
Hitcher' and `Near Dark' belonged more to the bravura style that their 
respective directors brought to the projects than any native talent upon 
the part of Red.
`Bad Moon' is a werewolf film. Red offers a rather amusing spin on the 
theme - that of the werewolf and the dog of the household squaring off 
in a dispute over whose territory the place is. And Red conducts it 
quite competently directorially - he even manages to get a performance 
of sorts out of the usually wooden Michael Pare. But it is just that in 
many other aspects the film disappoints and leaves you wondering just 
how much more it could have been. Part of the problem here is its length 
- a surprisingly short 80 minutes which leaves it feeling dramatically 
rather slight. Red barely sets up the situation than he seems to almost 
cursorily jump to the climactic showdown. One cannot help but think 
another whole middle act would have filled the film out to a far more 
dramatically satisfying whole.
The most disappointing aspect of the film are the werewolf effects. It 
is not that there is anything wrong with them - they are technically 
impeccable and have an impressive fluidity of movement. But the end 
effect is thoroughly unconvincing - the werewolf looks like one of those 
plastic Classic Creature kitset models. And any effectiveness is 
considerably undercut by the actual transformation scenes which resort 
to cheap and unconvincing morphing effects. I am becoming increasingly 
of the opinion that the morph is a special effect that has run its 
course. For all the innovation in digital effects technology that 
`Terminator 2: Judgment Day' introduced in 1991 with the morph there 
have been a bare handful of films which have justifiably used it since - 
organic shapes simply do not transform with the fluidity of a morph. But 
for the sake of cost-effectiveness the morph now seems to have now 
supplanted air-bladder transformation effects. But despite such classic 
physical makeup effects films like `The Howling', `An American Werewolf 
in London', `The Thing' and `Fright Night' still retain an infinitely 
greater edge over the eminently forgettable digital effects 
transformations in films like this and `From Dusk Till Dawn'.


Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 11/1/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:20
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, gore, nudity, sex, mild profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
     With certain movies, it's possible to tell immediately that you're 
watching something memorably bad.  With others, you have to wait a 
little longer.  In BAD MOON, it takes approximately three minutes.  The 
first shot -- a stunning widescreen view of a mountainscape, complete 
with mist-shrouded jungle -- is actually quite impressive.  It's what 
happens shortly thereafter that makes it apparent how low the standards 
of quality are on this production.  After a brief sex scene (is it 
possible to have a horror film without at least a little bare female 
flesh?), we're treated to our first view of a werewolf.  At that 
supposedly-chilling moment, I started laughing so hard that I nearly 
fell out of my chair.  In this era of morphing, CGI, and other 
futuristic special effects, BAD MOON put someone into an exceptionally 
cheesy-looking wolf man suit.  I spent a good portion of the rest of the 
film looking for the zipper.
     It's this kind of movie that somehow restores one's faith in 
Hollywood -- they can still make movies that are so completely awful 
that, on a masochistic level, they're a riot to watch.  People 
occasionally ask me why I venture into films that I fully expect to be 
bad; this is the reason.  And, as an added bonus, BAD MOON doesn't drag 
its hideousness out to the point where it becomes unbearable.  At just 
eighty minutes (seventy-five if you ignore the end credits), it's over 
before the urge to walk out becomes irresistible.
     BAD MOON starts out in the jungles of Nepal, where photojournalist 
Ted Harrison (Michael Pare) is on an expedition.  One night, while he 
and his girlfriend are having some fun in a tent, the camp is attacked 
by a half-man/half-wolf (it's actually stunt coordinator Ken Kirzinger).  
Ted's girlfriend is shredded and, before he can use his shotgun, Ted is 
bitten.  Of course, as everyone knows, "even a man who is pure in heart, 
and says his prayers by night" is susceptible to lycanthropy when chewed 
on by a werewolf.
     Some months later, Ted's sister, Janet (Mariel Hemingway), and her 
10-year old son, Brett (Mason Gamble), visit him at his Pacific 
Northwest home.  Janet notices a change in her brother, and, worried 
about his well-being, she invites him to live with her.  Not long after, 
Ted takes her up on the offer (for some inexplicable reason, he thinks 
"the love of [his] family" will cure him).  No sooner has he arrived, 
however, than strange, bloody things start happening.  Only the family 
dog, Thor, is suspicious that Ted might not be the same man he used to 
be.
     There are a few points I'd like to raise about this movie.  First 
of all, even though Ted claims that it doesn't take a full moon to force 
the transformation of a real werewolf, in this film, the moon is always 
full.  On at least three consecutive nights, we're shown shots of it, 
hanging in the sky, emerging from behind clouds, full and round.  I 
would think such a bizarre astronomical event would cause far more 
interest than the comparatively mundane occurrence of a man changing 
into a werewolf.
     Secondly, in order to stop his dangerous transformation, Ted 
handcuffs himself so that his arms are wrapped around the trunk of  a 
tree.  Not a bad idea, right?  But how does he get free in the morning?  
If he still has the keys, then why doesn't he use them as a werewolf?  
And if he doesn't have the keys, how does he manage to escape once he's 
turned back into human form?  Somehow, I don't think we're supposed to 
think about this.
     Finally, it's pretty amazing that on the one morning Ted is 
spending some quality time with Brett and Janet, a werewolf movie just 
happens to be on TV.  We learn all sorts of interesting information 
during the ensuing discussion between Brett and Ted.  For instance, to 
kill a werewolf, you don't have to shoot him with a silver bullet.  
Blowing his head off with a shotgun will do the job just as effectively.
     The actors probably shouldn't have played their roles quite so 
solemnly.  A little more tongue-in-cheek would have improved the tone 
immeasurably.  Then again, almost anything would have accomplished that 
aim.  I'm not sure why BAD MOON didn't go straight to video.  Don't 
worry, though, if you're planning to subject yourself to it in that 
medium -- it will arrive there faster than a speeding bullet, silver or 
otherwise.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
