Title
Review for Within the Rock (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Tim Voon
Directed by Gary J. Tunnicliffe
Cast Xander Berkeley, Caroline Barclay, Bradford Tatum, Brian Krause,
Barbara Patrick
Written by Gary J. Tunnicliffe
Buried WITHIN THE ROCK, lies man's darkest nightmare. A creature with an
acquired taste for rotting flesh and teeth sharp enough to crush a man's
skull. It was trapped 2 million years earlier and labelled ‘The Reaper
of Souls', by an ancient civilisation. They couldn't destroy it, so the
creature was captured and sent hurtling through space in a cage, with
vain hopes that the beast would perish in the void. Instead, it lives.
It hibernates, waiting to bestow death on those who embrace it. Mankind
will be its next prey.
This almost sounds like the beginning of a story used to scare children
at night or on Halloween. Usually, I'm easily frightened and the mention
of Easter bunnies with fangs or Santas with pick-axes will give me
nightmares; but this horrible alien that goes on feeding frenzies,
actually made me laugh. Not so much because it munched on human heads
with great graphic detail, but because it's rubber suit reminded of a
humorous tele-add about ‘sun tan lotion' and lobsters on the beach. It
just goes to show how important costume design is in a movie.
A moon called ‘Galileo's Child', is hurtling through space towards the
Earth. Unless the course of the moon is deviated, the projectile will
destroy our home planet. A small group of miners and scientists have
been assigned the duty of planting explosives beneath the moon's
surface, in order to alter its course. They are falling behind schedule
and finding an alien on board doesn't make the job easier.
This movie makes a vain attempt to recreate the feel of ALIEN, but sadly
lacks the funding or directing skill to make it much more than it is.
The fact that it has a relative nobody cast and mediocre quality script,
doesn't help get it of the ground either. So here comes another B Grade
Pic that hits the C Grade shelves at the video store.

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1996. Director/Screenplay - Gary J. Tunnicliffe, Producers - 
Stanley Isaacs, Scott McGinnis & Robert Patrick, Photography - Adam 
Kane, Music - Tony Fennell & Rod Gammons, Music Co-ordinator - Helen 
Gammons, Digital Effects Created by Eugene Jeoung, Additional Digital 
Effects - Post Modern Digital (Supervisor - Jim Tibbits), Spaceship CGI 
Effects - Corbitt Design, Battle Scarz Sequence Created and Designed by 
Nicholas Edgar, Special Effects Supervisor - Wayne Beauchamp, Creature 
Effects/Key Props - Image Animation International (Supervisor - 
Tunnicliffe), Production Design - Deborah Raymond & Dorian Vernacchio. 
Production Company - 360 entertainment/Le Monde Entertainment/Prism 
Pictures.
Caroline Barclay (Dr Dana Shaw), Xander Berkeley (Ryan), Barbara Patrick 
(Samantha `Nuke-em' Rogers), Michael Zelniker (Archer), Bradford Tatum 
(Cody Harrison), Duane Whitaker (Potter), Brian Krause (Luke Harrison), 
Calvin Levels (Banton), Dale Dye (General Hurst), Earl Boen (Michael 
Isaacs)
Plot: In the year 2019 a moon, nicknamed Galileo's Child, is discovered 
heading on an impact course with the Earth. A team of spacefaring 
drillers are sent up to plant a nuclear warhead that will divert the 
moon's course. But during the course of the drilling the team uncover an 
alien tomb and unwittingly revive a creature that has been placed there 
by an alien people millennia ago and now starts slaughtering them.
`Within the Rock' is the directing and writing debut of Gary J. 
Tunnicliffe. Tunnicliffe is probably better known as a makeup effects 
supervisor at the Image Animation facility, being responsible for work 
on the likes of `Candyman', `Lord of Illusions' and `Blade'. Tunnicliffe 
makes a potentially interesting debut.
The film's premise seems to have been borrowed outright by this year's 
mega-budgeted `Armageddon'. There are an alarming number of similarities 
between the two films - in both films a group of roughnecks are landed 
on an astral body that is on a collision course with Earth in order to 
drill to its core and plant a nuke to divert its path. Of course the 
part of the story that `Armageddon' didn't borrow is the latter 
two-thirds where the film turns into yet another copy of `Alien'. But 
the similarities are enough to make one wonder. The set up in the first 
third is by far the better part of the film - the basic idea is 
established with a certain verisimilitude, the characters are given a 
certain degree of rounded depth over the usual faceless victims that 
fill most `Alien' clones and the discovery of the tomb has an 
appropriate sense of eeriness.
But unfortunately once its monster is unleashed the film travels down 
all too familiar grounds. It had sort of given the hope it might 
actually be a little bit more than a run through all the familiar 
cliches with its potentially interesting premise but the creature 
effects, the suspense set-ups and twists are all too familiar. And the 
film emerges as nothing more than another routine B-budget `Alien' copy. 
The plot never makes it too clear at times exactly how some of the plans 
to defeat the creature are supposed to work. There are also moments of 
plotting that are quite silly - like when an alien language in binary 
code is translated and instantly emerges as Old Testament English. The 
film has been made on a clear cut budget - we see little of the 
asteroid, we do see its explosion but never the ship landing on it. 
Nevertheless the film shows Tunnicliffe is capable of better things. 
Certainly the film is a better debut than Tunnicliffe's fellow Image 
Animation supervisor Bob Keen made the same year with the amazingly 
silly `Proteus'.

