Title
Review for Broadcast News (1987)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jason Overbeck
James L. Brooks made Broadcast News based on people he met in the news
industry.  What he created with that material is one of the best films
of the eighties, a smart, romantic and honest film about the love
triangle of three people serious about the new they provide.
Tom (William Hurt) is not educated, yet he is attractive and good on
camera causing his status to rise. Aaron (exceptional and funny Albert
Brooks) is the ideal reporter, educated and able to write wonderfully
but has some problems on camera causing him to be overlooked. Jane
(Holly Hunter) is a news reporter who has long been friends with Aaron
and yet falling in love with Tom.  Yet Tom 'personifies everything shes
been fighting for,' in the job of trying not to seel out and become
entertainers instead of educaters.  The fact is that Jane has her
biological clock ticking with reckless disregard and she is attracted to
Tome (as long as he doesn't talk).
This is the setup for what could have been a standard sitcom type film
but rises to become one of the most honest and telling portraits of love
and the relationship of men and women.  The acting, directing, and
especially writing is so smart and snaps perfectly into place.  Small
scenes work.  Not one point is off in this film, I wouldn't change a
scene.  James L. Brooks proves to be one of the best writers in the
business and continues to prove it later with As Good As It Gets.  This
film doesn't know the meaning of easy way out.  This film has too much
respect for us.  Watch a film like Titanic and then watch this or Say
Anything... and you will notice that great honest movies will leave you
feeling more impact when the characters misstep or take the direction
that you wouldn't advise.
I'm reviewing this movie in 98 and it is had not to incorprate the
modern times into the review.  I noticed the=at the delima revolving
around Jane in this film was Style or Subsatnce, much like the Best
picture Oscar race this year, Titanic Vs. LA Confidential.  Titanic was
all style lacking the substance of most great films, including LA
Confidential which may not have been as astesticly appealing but at
least didn't insult us by being pretensious.  Putting Broadcast News on
tht level adds a new level to a film which just gets better and better
and better.

Author
Craig Good
     Let me blurt it right out:  BROADCAST NEWS is one of the best films of the
year.  It's common for the studios to hold their Oscar hopefuls for Christmas.
We should be hearing about this film again in February.
     The cast is fabulous.  Albert Brooks gets most of the film's many funny
lines and delivers a poignant performance as the well-educated reporter who
just can't make it on camera.  William Hurt shows yet another facet of his
talent by playing the well-meaning but shallow sportscaster who is hurtled
toward the anchor desk by sheer dint of good looks.  He's not really an
airhead, but he is, as we say in the trade, just a little behind the audience.
My favorite discovery was Holly Hunter (if she isn't nominated then the Academy
has less soul than even I suspect).  As the obsessive-compulsive news producer
she dominates the film while she tries to dominate her job.  There is also what
amounts to a wonderful cameo by a well-known actor, but I don't want to spoil
it for you.  You'll know what I mean when you see the film.
     The intelligent script is fairly littered with gems.  I heard so many good
lines, many of them in background conversation, that I can't begin to remember
them all.  It makes me want to rent it on video and sit down with a note pad
and a remote control.  As the story is told of the developing love triangle all
three characters are brought out as sympathetic, breathing human beings.  We
wind up liking them each so much that we don't want any of them to be hurt.
But the bittersweet nature of the comedy starts to appear near the end when we
realize that in a triangle *somebody* has to lose.  The ending surprised me and
may disappoint some, but rings very true.
     BROADCAST NEWS is refreshingly well-researched.  Everything about the
frenetic, neurotic nature of television is right on the money.  Most people
will probably think that it was all exaggerated for the movie.  I hope at least
that they learn something about what goes on behind the little glass screen.
But don't go just to get educated.  Go to enjoy yourself.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A winning romantic comedy also takes
     some reasonably good shots at the television network news
     business.  James L. Brooks (TERMS OF ENDEARMENT) has made an
     adult film with solid characters.  Rating: +2.
     In fairly short order Twentieth Century Fox has brought out two "what
goes on behind the scenes" films each by a director of a film that won an
Oscar for Best Picture.  Each is a glossy, high-budget production and that
is where the similarity ends.  Oliver Stone's WALL STREET is unoriginal and
predictable and has poorly developed characters.  What WALL STREET has to
say about the world of high finance you already know.  You probably already
know everything about network news you will learn from BROADCAST NEWS, but
along with the social statement you will get three interesting characters in
one of the best love-triangle films since PHILADELPHIA STORY.  Nobody is
reduced to being "the other man" or "the woman."  Instead you have three
well-defined characters who do not grow tiresome.  BROADCAST NEWS is 131
minutes long, but characters like these could have carried a film twice as
long.
     Holly Hunter--every bit as energetic as she was in another great
comedy, RAISING ARIZONA--plays Jane Craig, a high-tension news producer who
usually works with reporter Aaron Altman (played by Albert Brooks): high IQ,
low charisma.  Along comes the network's new anchorman Tom Grunick: sincere,
hard-working, and good-looking, but he doesn't always understand the news
he's reading.  Any bets who Jane ends up with?  Don't bet.  This is not a
pat, predictable comedy of the type we get so many of these days.  The
characters are three-dimensional and have minds of their own.  James L.
Brooks wrote, produced, and directed the film, undoubtedly getting backing
on the strength of his TERMS OF ENDEARMENT.  I personally did not respond
well to the characters in that film, but BROADCAST NEWS offers a much better
choice.  Two of the three leads are supposed to be highly intelligent and
Brooks manages to write them so they really seem to be, as well as all three
being just quirky enough to be real.
     BROADCAST NEWS is a sign that the film industry is starting to recover
from the post-STAR WARS decade and is starting to go back to making films as
adult audience can appreciate.  I would hope it would be nominated for Best
Picture at least, though it would not be my choice to win.  Rate it a +2 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Walter Frith
Politics, talent, attitude and perseverance can be crucial factors when
pursuing a career in the media.  In a business loaded with constant
restructuring, downsizing and often a push towards flash over substance, the
factors listed above along with ethics and some perky romantic escapades are
examined in James L. Brooks' 'Broadcast News'.  Brooks, the man responsible
for creating several successful television series ('Taxi' etc.) made a
successful transition to the big screen as a talented filmmaker who won three
Oscars in one night for 'Terms of Endearment' as that film's producer,
director and screenwriter based on Larry McMurtry's novel.  That was 1983 and
it would take Brooks four years to follow-up that film with 'Broadcast News'.
 I myself have worked in the media and having worked in the field himself,
Brooks was right on target in his depiction of three characters (William
Hurt, Holly Hunter and Albert Brooks) and their different personalities
leading to their eventual destinies in the workplace.  Their destinies in the
field of romantic endeavour also come into play and 'Broadcast News' has a
most generous and satisfying conclusion.  
Set in Washington, D.C., Hunter plays a producer for a major network while
Brooks is the enormously talented but under appreciated news reporter
constantly by her side who has the film's best lines.  Enter a future
anchorman (William Hurt) who knows almost nothing about the business of news
or understanding its impact and clarity but manges to land on his feet
because of what his employers feel is his attractive face.  Enraged by the
network's choice of flash over substance, Hunter turns sour at the thought of
having to work with him. Their is a constant rivalry between Hurt and Brooks
as Brooks despises everything Hurt is about and isn't shy about showing his
true feelings.
At a party for station employees at the home of one of the network's
wealthier participants, a call is made informing them that a major story has
broken overseas involving an attack on a U.S. military base in Sicily by the
Libyans and everyone races to get to the station and go on-air for live
breaking news.  It's one of the film's best scenes as Hunter is given the job
of executive producer for the segment and Brooks is shunned from any coverage
of the assignment at all and from home he phones in to Hunter his knowledge
of Libya and U.S. military aircraft and she relays it through the microphone
connected to Hurt's earpiece and he immediately relays it to the viewing
audience.  While he's watching television those immortal words are spoken by
Brooks "I say it here, it comes out there."
Towards the film's climax, which is the downsizing and frustration of the
employees affected, 'Broadcast News' reaches into the personal lives of its
characters and contains some of Brooks' best work as a director.  'Broadcast
News' in many ways was better than 'Terms of Endearment' for its use of
personal relationships done more cleanly than the soap opera atmosphere of
'Terms of Endearment.'  On its tenth anniversary and in the aftermath of the
media circus of both O.J. Simpson trials and the current Oklahoma City trial,
'Broadcast News' shows you what the evening nightly news doesn't
always......and that's detail !
