Title
Review for Cyborg 3: The Recycler (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Tim Voon
Certification:  USA:R  MPAA reasons. Rated R for non-stop violence, and
for some nudity.
Directed by Michael Schroeder
Cast :   Zach Galligan, Khrystyne Haje,  Richard Lynch, Andrew
Bryniarski, Malcolm McDowell, Michael Bailey Smith, Evan Lurie, Bill
Quin, Rebecca Ferratti, William Katt, Dave McSwain, Margaret Avery.
Written by Barry Victor, Troy Bolotnick
Enjoyment can be derived from what is considered B-Grade action
thrillers, with bad acting, embarrassing dialogue and numerous plot loop
holes.
The story revolves about the end of the 'Golden Age' between the humans
and cyborgs, in which humans now hunt the cyborgs for their spare parts.
The free cyborgs have hidden themselves in a secret location called
'Cyborg Town' which the bounty hunters are unable to find.
We are then introduced to Cash a female cyborg who is able to have
children, this is when the plot gets a bit hairy, and the laughs begin.
Supposedly her human lover\owner dies after successfully mating with
her. She is supposed to be an older model who has been around for awhile
so one wanders how well her eggs are holding out; she feels an energy
drain, wants an abortion, but then decides to keep the baby so goes
looking for a hermit scientist whilst being chased by human bounty
hunters who are intrigued by her spare parts.
If your mind isn't quite boggled by the complexities of this plot, mine
is.
Anyway, she finds the scientist, he takes her to Cyborg Town for
protection, opens her up like a dishwasher because her first trimester
is over, whips out what looks like a fly spray can which is supposedly
her womb, and passes it around to all the other cyborgs to have a good
gawk at in order to inspire a patriotic will to fight the human bounty
hunters who are breathing down their necks.
One wanders how the foetus is going to advance the next two trimesters
in something as small as that, or why the cyborgs, who are made
completely of machinery are so afraid of the humans. Whatever happened
to the precedence set by 'Terminator'. I'm shaking my head with great
disbelief at this point, but the story must go on.
The cyborgs finally gather enough courage to make a stand against the
human bounty hunters, a fight ensues in which the cyborgs win, but not
before the foetus in a can is tossed about as ransom by the chief bounty
hunter, who gets shot by Cash the mother, but the foetus in a can is
squished to death by the bounty hunter's last ounce of strength.
I figured at this point that perhaps the writers were trying to make a
statement about the unfairness of life.
But alas, when all the cyborgs are looking glummed face at not having
saved the foetus, Cash  smugly states that she hid the real foetus in a
can and the one that was squished was only a fake.
At this point I truly believe that there is no justice in this world.
Anyway, this movie was so bad that it was mildly entertaining.
