Title
Review for Hamam (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Strand Releasing
 Director: Ferzan Ozpetek
 Writer: Ferzen Ozpetek, Stefano Tummolini
 Cast: Alessandro Gassman, Francesca D'Aloja, Carlo Cecchi,
Halil Ergun, Serif Sezer, Mehmet Gunsur, Basak Koklukava,
Alberto Molinari, Zozo Toledo, Ludovica Modugno
   Pop psychologists say that you can't get away from
yourself; that no matter where you travel, you always have
yourself for company, and so a neurotic in Canada will be 
disturbed in Australia.  Director Ferzan Ozpetek, using a script
he co-wrote with Stefano Tummolini, challenges that prevalent
belief.  In "Steam," an Italian-Turkish co-production known as
"Hamam" in Turkish and "Il Bagno Turco" in Italian,
workaholic Franceso (Alessandro Gassman) makes a
business trip from his office in Rome to a neighborhood in
Istanbul, falls in love with the history-saturated city, and
resolves to stay for a while.  He becomes a hero to the
working-class folks in the neighborhood by saving their
homes.  But does the city change him as well?  Unequivocally
so.  So much does Francesco evolve from an uptight designer
who finds nothing strange about taking cellular phone calls at
the dinner table that even his termagant wife grows to like
him.
   The story, which contains elements of melodramatic Italian
opera, has mythic resonance, entailing the role of fate and
family history and reflecting the cultural duality of its director. 
The bilingual Ferzan Ozpetek, who is at home in the manners
of Turkey and Italy, has fashioned a fable-like narrative about
characters from two distinct civilizations who alter one another
profoundly in the course of a few weeks, empathizing with
one another even before they have gained sufficient
vocabulary for reasonable verbal communication.  When
Francesco receives word from the Turkish Embassy in Rome
that he has inherited some property from his recently
deceased expatriate aunt, he flies to Istanbul fully expecting
to sell off the land at the best price he can get and return
home.  When he discovers, however, that the buyer is intent
on devouring and displacing an entire neighborhood, he
reconsiders his options.  After learning that the business 
bequeathed to him is a defunct Turkish bath, he resolves
lovingly to refurbish the place with the help of a band of new
friends he has acquired.  Though the 19-year-old Fusun
(Basak Koklukava) flirts openly with the handsome Italian,
Francesco ultimately pairs off with another man, Mehmet
(Mehmet Gunsur), who has introduced the staid businessman
to the pleasures of his flesh, the relaxing steam of the Turkish
bath serving as an aphrodisiac.  When Francesco's wife
Marta (Francesca D'Aloja), a buttoned-down woman who has
enjoyed a two-year affair whenever she could get away from
her husband, discovers Francesco in flagrante, she is at first
furious but ultimately accepting of the new man which the
Istanbul environs have made of him.  
   Before tragedy strikes, photographer Pasquale Mari takes
us on a tour of the renowned city, setting his camera on a
ferry that cruises the Bosporous; one of the major bazaars of
the town; a circumcision ceremony involving two boys of
about seven who "become men" without the benefit of
anesthesia in a ceremony complete with belly dancers; a
dining table which features the delicies of Armenia and Turkey
in a thoroughly amicable family setting; and to the hilly,
residential streets surrounding the once-prominent hamam. 
Any in the audience with the preconception that Muslim
countries are alike in their sexual repressiveness will be set
straight by indications of a tolerance of homosexuality and the
open participation of women in dance, physical work, and high
finance.  Alessandro Gassman does a credible job of
changing his character virtually overnight while as his
argumentative wife, Francesca D'Aloja projects a similar
metamorphosis during her own short visit to the country.  
   It's easy to see why the Turkish government and people
would be eager for Americans to see a movie which glorifes
their country to such an extent that it appears like a modern
Shangri-La.  The one scene involving the physical affection
which Francesco has developed for Mehmet is so fleeting and
in such good taste that few liberal Muslims could possibly
object. Supporting performers like Zozo Toledo as an
intermediary handling the affairs of the bath and Basak
Koklukava as a woman who decides she will marry only for
love add depth to this tale, which shows that even as much of
Europe has given up the manana attitude for the rat race,
there are still large pockets of land where a laid-back attitude
can have a salubrious effect indeed.

Author
Seth Bookey
Review of Hamam (1997, Italian and Turkish with English subtitles; a/k/a
Steam: The Turkish Bath)
"Go like the tide and come back like the tide," says a Turk to a visiting
Italian in Istanbul. That's the tone of *Hamam*. Life is slow and easy in
this crowded, ancient corner of Istanbul (not Constantinople), and
presented as a pleasant alternative for the stressed out and skinny
Westerners looking to unwind, get real, and live fuller lives. 
Whether this is true or not of Turkey, this is the reality of *Hamam*.
Francesco (Alessandro Gassman) inherits a building in the Turkish capital
from an aunt he's never met. He leaves his shrill wife Marta (Francesca
D'Aloja) back in Italy while he goes to wrap up his aunt's affairs. But he
sure does take his time when he realizes three things. First, his property
included a steam bath, a hamam. Second, he discovers that Zozo (Zozo
Toledo), who is pressuring him to sell, is working for a woman who wants
to tear down the whole area and build a conference center and office
complex. Oh, third, he's gay. He figures this out when the son and
daughter of his aunt's servants eye him pruriently, and the son (Mehmet
Gunsar) wins. Shades of *Boudu Saved from Drowning*...
An interesting device is the narration of his aunt's letters to his
mother, which were returned unopened. "One must be happy in life; one
must," she tells her sister. They are estranged, but we never find out
why. Like a prescient Auntie Mame, she sees ahead to the adult Francesco
as someone with "eyes that see desires and strong arms to accomplish
them." And that's what happens. Once in the bosom of his aunt's servants'
family life, where he becomes one of them, he decides to restore the hamam
to its former glory; it faded as the hamam's went out of vogue, probably
due to indoor plumbing and increased Western influence. Francesco's
restoration efforts are seen with a voiceover of the aunt's letter that
details her own restoration of the building years earlier.
Because Italian moviegoers are treated to Intermission, the film had the
"part one/part two" markers. This is interesting, as it delineates two
distinct movements in the film: Istanbul's seduction of Francesco, and
having to face the wife with his new life when she turns up after
Francesco stays there a wee bit too long.
*Hamam* succeeds in its storytelling, accentuating the cultural
differences with humor (the Italians are told constantly they are too
skinny) and observation (women "share secrets" by yelling out the windows
to each other; circumcisions are a public event, but the boys are about
ten years old). The music is also very stirring, sweeping you up
feverishly in what seems like an otherwise quiet lifestyle.
Pushed to gay audiences with a sexy poster of two towel-clad men facing
away from the camera, very little sex, much less male pulchritude, is
offered to us. Pushed to straight audiences with a photo of the couple,
there is very little of them together until the second half.
Like *When the Cat's Away*, Hamam shows the small unsung joys of living in
a metropolitan enclave facing "urban renewal" and changes in a way of life
that doesn't need changing. And despite an appalling human rights record,
life in *Hamam*'s Turkey looks mighty appealing.
Directed by Ferzan Ozpetek and original music by Aldo De Scalzi and Pivio.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 STEAM-TURKISH BATH, THE (HAMAM) (director/writer: Ferzan Ozpetek;
 screenwriter: Stefano Tummolini; cinematographer: Pasquale Mari;
 editor: Mauro Bonanni; cast: Alessandro Gassman (Francesco), Mehmet
 Gunsur (Mehmet (Memo)), Francesca d'Aloja (Marta), Halil Ergun
 (Osman), Serif Sezer (Perran), Basak Koklukaya (Fusun), Zozo Toledo
 (Zozo); Runtime: 96; Strand releasing; 1997-Italy/Turkey/Spain)
The film opens in Rome, Italy, and a stressed out couple, both
attractive, fashionable and slender, Marta (Francesca d'Aloja) and
Francesco (Alessandro Gassman), are seen running a successful interior
decorating business. He learns that his aunt, someone that he hardly
knew because she lived for many years apart from his mother, has just
died and left him her house in Turkey. He journeys to Istanbul to sell
the property, and learns from his Turkish lawyer Zozo that the property
has a hamam (Turkish steam bath) attached to it.
In the exotic confines of Istanbul, passions that have been closed to
the young man in Italy, open up as he feels the warm breeze and quickly
settles into the slower pace of life, and relishes in the kindness of
the Osman family who ran the hamam for his aunt. The aunt married a
Turkish man who died and she soon afterwards used the money she acquired
to become the first western woman in Turkey to operate a hamam, which by
tradition is an exclusively male place.
Aunt Anita fell in love with the Turkish way of life, and fixed up the
run-down hamam she bought in the center of town, that under her care
became respected as one of the best in the city. Occupying her house is:
the kindly patriarch Mr. Osman (Ergun), his sensitive wife Perran
(Sezer), their college-aged, very attractive and sweet daughter Fasun
(Basak), and her sensual brother Memo (Gunsur).
Hoping for a quick sale and an early return back to his thriving
business, he runs into problems, as he believes he can't trust his
lawyer, whom he thinks is delaying the sale because he is trying to
knock down the price. Then the woman who wants to buy the hamam from him
tells him she is buying up all the property in the neighborhood to build
a trade center, and he impulsively decides not to sell. And, even
though, he is told that the hamam is now out of fashion and the one he
has inherited needs lots of repairs, he decides to remain and restore it
to its traditional beauty. He is also told that the woman he refused to
sell to is very dangerous.
The family helps in the hamam renovations and they also get him
acquainted with the delicacies of Turkisk food, which they serve him in
generous portions. Meanwhile, Francesco tours the ancient city streets
to absorb the city's rich culture and reads his aunt's old letters she
sent to her sister that were returned unread, describing her
appreciative love for such a filthy city like Istanbul. In one letter
she tells his mother "One can be happy in this life, Giuliana; one
must."
This has a deep emotional affect on Francesco, as he realizes that he
was not happy in Italy, there was something missing in his life. Here he
found an inner peace and a replacement family for his recently deceased
parents. He also can't get over the way Fusun looks at him in an
admiring and loving way, while Memo initiates him into the pleasures of
the hamam, where he also finds comfort in his arms.
Unable to communicate with her gentle husband, Marta arrives in Istanbul
to tell him about her new plans for a divorce -- and of the affair she's
been having with their business associate Paolo for the last 2 years.
Warning: spoiler to follow in next paragraph.
After Francesco agrees to give her what she wants, the warning Zozo gave
him comes true, as he gets knifed to death in the street. But the film
ends in a surprising way, as something bizarre happens to Marta and she
has a change of heart and becomes the replacement hamam owner for his
aunt, also falling in love with the city.
It was a strange emotional love affair that this film offers its
protagonists -- a love affair with a city rather than with another. The
film presents a lesson on the old and new cultures of both Italy and
Turkey. The director Ferzan Ozpetek is of Turkish birth and spent two
decades living in Italy, and these are his realistic observations of
both cultures. But for a film about passion, this one was very reserved,
showing no nudity or sensual scenes, in fact very little passion.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
