Title
Review for Kiss the Girls (1997)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Ashley Judd, Morgan Freeman, Cary Elwes, and Gina Ravera 
Ingredients: 
kindly forensic cop psychologist, brave young lady doctor, devious
serial killer/kidnapper, abducted young women, trees, mist
Synopsis:
In this intelligent, suspenseful thriller Washington DC police
psychologist Dr. Alex Cross (Morgan Freeman) and spunky North Carolina
physician Kate McTiernan (Ashley Judd) team up to match wits against
‘Cassanova,' a devious rapist/killer whose identity remains a mystery
until the movie's last scene.
Alex's college-aged niece Naomi (Gina Ravera) is the most recent victim
in a series of abductions of women, three of whom have already turned up
dead.  The police attribute the murder/rapes to a methodical serial
rapist/killer who thus far has left no prints, fiber, semen, or hair.
Believing the remaining women and his niece might still be alive,
softspoken Alex begins a dogged investigation.
Meanwhile beautiful Dr. Kate McTiernan (Ashley Judd), is stalked,
drugged, abducted, and imprisoned by Cassanova. Kate manages a desperate
escape into the forest, but because of the amnesiac effects of the drug,
she can only remember vaguely when she is questioned at the hospital by
Alex. What's worse, Kate is wracked by guilt for leaving the other
prisoners behind. 
Natural allies, Kate and Alex join forces to locate the abducted women
and solve the mystery of Cassanova's identity. But are they hunting
Cassanova, or is Cassanova hunting them?
Opinion:
The mood is set by careful cinematography and plot. For example, the
rapist attacks on a stormy night; the heroes launch their assault on the
villain's lair at dusk; light symbolizes escape, and; trees and fog
symbolize confusion. 
‘Kiss the Girls' hooked me into trying to figure out the identity of the
(masked) serial killer, because of its grim suspenseful mood, solid
characters, believable clues, and the occasional clever plot twist. I
left the theater for the most part satisfied, with the gears and clues
still clicking away in my head.

Author
Alex Fung
KISS THE GIRLS (Paramount - 1997)
Starring Morgan Freeman, Ashley Judd, Cary Elwes
Screenplay by David Klass, based on the novel by James Patterson
Produced by David Brown, Joe Wizan
Directed by Gary Fleder
Running time: 120 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   In terms of filmgoing, there is little which wounds the heart more
   than watching an accomplished talent having their services wasted in
   an unambitious film project.  It was maddening enough to suffer
   through Mira Sorvino wallowing through a determinedly generic MIMIC a
   few months ago, but the suspense-thriller KISS THE GIRLS is a far
   more egregious offender, ensnaring the stellar talents of Morgan
   Freeman and Ashley Judd in a formulaic film which proves to be far
   beneath them.
   I sat through the screening stupefied, bewildered as to what could
   have drawn these two gifted performers to this project.  Mr. Freeman
   is surely one of the truly great actors currently working -- his mere
   presence onscreen commands attention like no other American actor,
   and his marvelously expressive voice conveys bountiful wisdom. 
   Meanwhile, Ms. Judd is one of today's most exciting young actors,
   turning in a flurry of astonishingly accomplished performances since
   her feature film debut in Victor Nunez's RUBY IN PARADISE -- not even
   the sheer brevity of her turns in Wayne Wang's SMOKE and Oliver
   Stone's NATURAL BORN KILLERS (where her footage was ultimately
   excised for the domestic theatrical release) could prevent her from
   outshining the vast majority of lead performances seen in recent
   film.  What on earth could these two have seen in KISS THE GIRLS
   which would have drawn them to the film?
   It surely couldn't have been David Klass' screenplay, which is
   woefully uninspired and formulaic -- one can literally tick off every
   tired convention in KISS THE GIRLS like a checklist.  The film opens
   most unpromisingly with the obligatory scene to establish the prowess
   of Washington D.C. forensic psychologist Alex Cross (he faces a
   suicidal woman) -- which, incidentally, seems rather superfluous with
   Mr. Freeman onboard as the character; it goes without saying that the
   instant he appears onscreen, the audience immediately associates his
   character with supreme competency -- and continues to throw in every
   hoary staple of the serial killer thriller genre: the stakeouts, the
   taunting messages from the killer, the near-captures, chase scenes
   galore, preferably on foot in some gloomy, obstacle-ridden area.  To
   capitalize on the cyber-craze, there's even an Internet reference
   (although thankfully it's not as overblown as it was in Jon Amiel's
   otherwise superior genre entry COPYCAT).  While it's bad enough that
   the screenplay by Mr. Klass is so by-the-numbers, what's even worse
   is the lack of interesting or inventive dialogue to buoy the film; in
   every aspect, this is a remarkably bland script.
   Many have drawn parallels between Mr. Freeman's similar character
   types in David Fincher's SE7EN (where he plays veteran homicide
   detective Somerset) and in KISS THE GIRLS, but despite their shared
   genre, there is clearly no comparison between these two vastly
   disparate films in terms of effectiveness -- only one of these films
   generates anything remotely close to resembling a facsimile of
   suspense or tension.  It's rather abysmal that the inherently
   gruesome situation of a crazed abductor on the prowl can wind up
   being so bla, and rather amazing that the film's protagonists do
   not prove to be compelling, even when they're placed into jeopardy.
   One ends up watching KISS THE GIRLS with a great deal of disinterest.
   KISS THE GIRLS focuses on the hunt for a North Carolina man (who goes
   by the name Casanova) that "collects": he methodically stalks,
   kidnaps, imprisons and rapes (and occasionally kills) young, pretty,
   college-age women. The film attempts to intrigue by teasing at the
   killer's identity; until the film's climax, his face is
   systematically obscured, although anyone not lulled by the film's
   sheer familiarity into a comatose state should realise his identity
   within the first fifteen minutes (and, if not, the tactless lingering
   shots on Casanova's alter-ego by sophomore feature film director Gary
   Fleder should be a sure giveaway), but one can hardly even care who
   he is, given the lacklustre attention paid to him in the film.  For a
   serial killer/rapist film, KISS THE GIRLS is mighty disinterested in
   the serial killer; Casanova's actions are obviously supposed to be
   construed as monstrous and lurid, and yet the film distinctly
   neglects him and never really delves its focus into his twisted
   world.  We can't even really stir up much compassion for his captives
   either, as we barely see them onscreen and they barely register.
   When one contrasts Brooke Smith's terrifying struggle in the well in
   Jonathan Demme's THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS with KISS THE GIRLS' group
   of imprisoned girls catatonically assembled in the killer's chamber
   of horrors while Alex's niece Naomi Cross (Gina Ravera) plays the
   violin, it is clear how much the filmmakers here have missed the
   mark.  Even the subterranean dungeon, glimpsed all-too-briefly, lacks
   any foreboding aura of dread or menace.
   Kate McTiernan (Ms. Judd) is a interning med student who's snatched
   from her home by Casanova in the early goings, and locked into a
   dungeon-like cell.  Forbidden to call for help and warned not to try
   to use any of her kickboxing arsenal on him, she naturally does both.
   (The scene in the dungeon where Kate persuades her unseen fellow
   captives to reluctantly call out their names in an act of defiance to
   Casanova is meant to be powerfully haunting and creepy, but frankly
   reminded me of a television commercial.)  After Kate unloads on
   Casanova and manages to escape from the dungeon, she finds herself in
   a madly dashing through a nondescript barren forest, her abductor in
   hot pursuit.  Even Kate's flee through the woods, clearly intended to
   echo the similar scene in Tobe Hooper's classic THE TEXAS CHAIN SAW
   MASSACRE, is merely a pale imitation: the sequence in Mr. Hooper's
   film depicted terror in its most primal form; in KISS THE GIRLS, it
   just looks like cinematographer Aaron Schneider kept falling over.
   In fact, Mr. Fleder, whose first film was THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN
   YOU'RE DEAD, seems to be a fan of using disorientation as a
   substitute for dynamism, both in Kate's escape scene and in her
   kickboxing scenes, where a flurry of shots of flying fists, swinging
   legs, and sweaty torsos make do in place of a choreographed,
   simple-to-follow kinetic sequence.  It's distracting and nonsensical,
   and ultimately makes for rather aggravating viewing.
   By the climax of KISS THE GIRLS, I had gone from shaking my head in
   disbelief to holding it in disgust, as the heroes and the villain
   face off in typical fashion, and seem to lose 50 I.Q. points along
   the way.  The predictable battle-to-the-death conclusion is tired
   material, and this film takes the policy of dispatching the villain
   in an original fashion to ridiculous new ends; as the heroic music
   swelled in its aftermath, it was all I could do from laughing aloud.
   There are a lot of leaps in the storyline for KISS THE GIRLS, and
   numerous characters who essentially serve no point are are probably
   carry-overs from the novel (which, clearly, I haven't read).  The
   film's strengths are predictable -- the performances of Mr. Freeman
   and Ms. Judd, who customarily turn in solid, professional work and
   manage to elevate the film to near-mediocrity; they're literally the
   only reason to catch KISS THE GIRLS.
   So why did Mr. Freeman and Ms. Judd sign on for this project?  I'm
   guessing here, but it's probably the case that they were both fans of
   James Patterson's best-selling novel, which served as the source
   material for the screenplay.  I, however, would like to delude myself
   into believing that they had signed onto this project for the
   opportunity to work with each other, and that consequently KISS THE
   GIRLS didn't end up being a complete waste for them.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"I'll never forget you.  You're too weird."
        - David Krumholtz, ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES

Author
Harvey S. Karten
KISS THE GIRLS
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Paramount Pictures/Rysher Entertainment
 Director:  Gary Fleder
 Writer:  David Klass
 Cast: Morgan Freeman, Ashley Judd, Cary Elwes, Tony
Godlwyn, Jay O. Sanders, Bill Nunn, Brian Cox, Alex
McArthur, Richard T. Jones, Jeremy Piven, William Converse-
Roberts, Gina Ravera, Roma Maffia
   Handsome, smooth, clean-cut, professional, respected guys
do not rape, molest, or otherwise harass women. They can
get all the attractive women they want by perfectly legitimate
means.  Right?  Wrong, of course.  "Kiss the Girls" shows
that idea for the mere myth that it is.  Why would a
good-looking man who plays by society's rules in every other
way--getting the necessary training to enter a prestigious field,
dressing smartly, patronizing the right places--want to
persecute those whom they can easily attract? To demean
them.  Theories abound as to why they have this need, but
according to the killer in David Klass's adaptation of James
Patterson's novel directed by Gary Fleder, the craving is
primal.  Men may hide the fancy from themselves, but deep
down it's there.  
   With such reasoning, perpetrators of heinous crimes try to
gain just a little sympathy from the audience.  In "The
Peacemaker," Dusan Gavrich (Marcel Iures) justifies the
blowing up of the U.N. by the pain he feels when he sees his
daughter gunned down in his native Bosnia, a crime he
blames on the western powers.  In "Air Force One" Ivan (Gary
Oldman) condemns the U.S. for the deaths of 100,000 Iraquis
in the Gulf War, giving him the excuse he needs to hold the
president of the U.S. hostage.  In "Kiss the Girls," a kidnapper
feels the need to bring strong, professional women down to
size, and so he "collects" people of talent, including a talented
violinist and an intern in a Durham, North Carolina hospital. 
Unfortunately for him the violinist is the niece of a crack
D.C.P.D. forensic psychologist, Dr. Alex Cross (Morgan
Freeman) and the doctor, Kate McTiernan (Ashley Judd) is a
willful kick-boxer who does not take victimization lying down.
   "Kiss the Girls" is a police drama which at times, particularly
in a climactic scene, can hold the audience at tight rein in
some edge-of-the-seat theatrics, as a psychotic killer and
tormenter uses his considerable wiles to destroy the cunning
of a master at penetrating the criminal mind.  The story
begins by establishing Dr. Cross's skills, as he talks a woman,
who has just murdered her husband, into handing over a gun
which she has virtually swallowed, safety off and ready for
action.  Cross, a ultra-smooth, best-selling author who drives
a Porsche, takes a personal interest in a case when his neice
Naomi Cross (Gina Ravera) si reported missing from her
Durham college campus.  The local police suspect that she is
one of eight women who have vanished, two of whom have
been been found tied with sophisticated knots to trees in a
woodland, sexually violated.  The Durham police assigned to
the case Nick Ruskin (Cary Elwes) and Sikes (Alex McArthur),
report that the killer is known to his victims as Casanova.
   The situation takes a new turn when Kate is abducted from
her isolated home and taken to a hidden cave in the woods,
placed in a room by her masked captor and told not to try
escape or communciation with the other women he is holding.
   The plot thickens when it is discovered that this killer seems
to be bi-coastal, committing crimes in Los Angeles as well as
North CArolina, a situation which had not occurred in the U.S.
since the 1920s.  At one point, however, we see the hands of
the criminal pecking out commands on the internet,
transmitting a picture of one of his victims and receiving an
answer from yet another person who feels that Kate is a very
good specimen indeed.
   "Kiss the Girls" takes internet pornography several steps
beyond the pale as two offenders seem to be comparing their
activities.  They share a common interest in collecting harems
of women in much the way a group of nerds might discuss
their accumulation of geckoes on web sites.  
   "Kiss the Girls" is elevated above the usual police drama by
the class which Morgan Freedom affords it.  As a forensic
psychologist he loses his temper only once--when a suspect
seems to confess to the crime and taunts him about his niece. 
His presence reminds us immediately of his role in "Seven,"
which this film seems to use as a rough model, which
features Freeman pursuing a weirdo who is out to punish
perpetrators of the seven deadly sins.  Like that 1995 work,
"Kiss the Girls" is well crafted, intelligently written, well acted
and unsettling, wallowing in the depths of human depravity
and at times putting the audience in the place of voyeurs to
perverted activities.  Ashley Judd is looking good here: pity
that she takes a back seat for a good part of the ride, putting
her talent at kick-boxing to practical use only toward the
conclusion.  While "Kiss the Girls" is neither as gory as
"Seven" nor as intense as another fine feature about serial
killers, "The Silence of the Lambs," it forces us to know a bit
more about sick minds than we may wish to. Rated R. 
Running Time: 117 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
James Sanford
KISS THE GIRLS (Paramount)Directed by Gary Fleder
Based on James Patterson's best-seller, "Kiss The Girls" comes on like an
intelligent, intense psychological thriller, and for about half an hour you
might suspect you've found the new "Silence of the Lambs," or "Seven '97."
But like a good-looking blind date who promises dinner and a movie, then
takes you to Burger King and "Wishmaster," the spell dissipates quickly,
leaving you feeling seduced and abandoned.
Put the blame partially on Patterson and screenwriter David Klass.  After
an arresting set-up involving a voyeur who kidnaps bright young women and
imprisons them in an underground lair, the story turns into a flat
combination of John Fowles' "The Collector" and "Silence," with scraps of
the far-superior "Copycat" thrown in to no good effect. Morgan Freeman,
excellent as always, plays Dr. Alex Cross, a forensic psychologist from
Washington D.C. who travels to Durham, N.C. to probe the disappearance of
his niece. Down South he runs into snickering cracker cops (are there any
other kind in second-rate movies?) who try to give him the brush-off, and
Cross, despite being hundreds of miles outside of his jurisdiction,
determines to investigate the kidnapping personally.
That's just the first of many incredulities the audience is asked to
swallow. Even more improbably, Cross teams up with a civilian, a doctor
named Kate McTiernan (Ashley Judd) who's the only victim to have escaped
from this covetous captor, who identifies himself as "Casanova." The
multi-layered relationship that appears to be developing between Cross and
McTiernan is by far the most original and intriguing aspect of "Kiss The
Girls," but the movie largely ignores it, choosing instead to trot out the
usual cat-and-mouse games and an anti-climactic trip through a haunted
house that's hauntingly similar--and inferior to--the finale of "Silence."
 Only the charisma of Freeman and Judd (who's rapidly developing into a
reliably solid performer) keeps the movie afloat and the audience awake,
since the excellent supporting cast (Cary Elwes, Jeremy Piven, Tony
Goldwyn, etc) is woefully underutilized. Cross' frequent snafus make you
wonder what this man is doing calling himself a cop, but Freeman's poise
and intelligence allows you to give the guy the benefit of the doubt.
Though McTiernan is called upon to behave almost as recklessly and
unconvincingly, Judd gives the woman a daunting sense of conviction.
 "Kiss" is further hobbled by the
look-at-me-I-just-got-out-of-film-school style of director Gary Fleder
("Things To Do In Denver When You're Dead"), whose motto seems to be "when
in doubt, shoot it with a jiggly hand-held camera." Several scenes in the
film also feature pointless slow-motion, the trademark of many a desperate
director, and those who like to spot continuity flaws will marvel at how
McTiernan's scarred face heals almost overnight and how Cross emerges from
a dunking in a well with remarkably dry clothing.
 James Sanford

Author
James Brundage
In "Loaded Weapon 1", William Shattner said : "Irony can be pretty ironic,
can't it?". Before, it was simply a statement that lodged itself in my mind
because of its utter absurdity. Now it has entered my repertoire of
quotations that can actually be used for something.
What possible use can something that stupid have? Good question, with a
mediocre answer. The only use I could come up with was to help describe my
loathing for a movie a million times more idiotic than the … unique quote.
And what idiotic movie is it that I describe? The one that evoked such pity
for having to put that on an actor's resume?
The movie, without further ado, is "Kiss The Girls", a new serial killer
movie on the market. Its just your standard killer-sees-girl,
killer-stalks-girl, killer-abducts, tortures, and murders-girl story that
we've seen a million times before, and, believe me, this ain't "Silence of
the Lambs".
Question number two : why all the irony? The fact is, I had every reason to
love this movie : I lived in the area where it was filmed, I read and loved
the book, and I respect and admire the actors, actresses, and director. But,
hey, its just the death throes of this years Summer of Irony (movies that we
all thought would be good but were really horrible). The simple fact is that
this is a movie that I wouldn't see again if it was on HBO on a summer
Saturday (and I'll watch anything on TV on a summer Saturday).
What made it so bad? Was it the cliché? The complete failure to make
characters who I cared about? The dearth of a villain I either hated or
liked? Or was it the fact that the movie was so downplayed that it annoyed
me completely? It was actually a combination of all of these wretched
attributes that made me focus my antipathy through the lens of rhetoric and
set my target sight on writing a disparaging review of this idiotic movie.
The movie opens nice, actually, giving an eerie title sequence in which the
killer talks to one of his victims about his first three murders, a sequence
so well done that you can't help feel a chill down your spine (looking back,
however, the newest preview of "Titanic" sent more of a chill, buy, what can
you do?). This single sequence, if placed in the middle of the movie, could
have turned around my opinion and made me pack up my sniper's rifle.
Sadly, this is the beginning and from there it degrades into nothingness,
going well past zero. It has great action sequences (kudos to the
cinematographer, Aaron Schnieder) and good performances from the actors
(Morgan Freeman as Alex Cross, Ashley Judd as Kate McTiernan), but that's
all it has to offer me as a viewer.
But then there was the worst part, the absolute zero of the movie. The fact
prevails that it downplays the sensationalism that ran rampant in the book:
one of the only things that just shocks you into continuing reading. That's
the final straw, the bullet loaded and the safety off. Ready. Aim. Fire.

Author
Marty Mapes
** (out of 4) Forgive me for being blunt, but KISS THE GIRLS is a sexist
and chauvinistic movie. 
The movie introduces Detective Alex Cross, a forensic psychologist,
talking down a suicide attempt (damsels rescued: 1). It also introduces
us to the bad guy leaving a woman to the wolves, tied to a tree in the
middle of a forest. The movie introduces us to one more person, Kate
McTiernan, who is already a doctor at the age of about 24, so it
appears. She specializes in brain trauma, so it's ironic that she's also
a kickboxer. (Maybe it's her way of drumming up clientele.) 
Turns out that Cross' niece has been abducted recently, probably by the
bad guy we saw at the beginning. Cross takes a few days off from his
duties in Washington D.C. to see if he can help the boys in North
Carolina with his niece's case. He learns that one of the kidnapper's
M.O.s is that he targets strong women. 
Not too long after that, Kate is abducted by the faceless bad guy, in
spite of her kickboxing ability. He puts her in a cave-like room where
Kate hears several other women being held. (Nine "strong" women are no
match for one man.) The kidnapper psychologically torments the women. He
breaks their wills and forces them to submit. But before Kate's will is
completely gone, too much luck and not enough strength allow her to
escape the cave system into the surrounding wilderness. When she is
finally cornered, she doesn't kick the kidnapper in the groin like she
learned in class. Instead she jumps into a raging stream, taking her
chances with the elements. 
THIS PARAGRAPH GIVES AWAY BITS OF THE ENDING. Cross and Kate become the
team that will investigate the crimes and track down the kidnapper. When
it comes time to face the kidnapper, Cross singlehandedly rescues the
nine "strong" women (damsels rescued: 10). But the movie has a coda. The
bad guy slipped away and at the end, Kate will face her captor one last
time. "Strong" kickboxing Kate will face a stabbed, lacerated bad guy
and still require another man to rescue her (damsels rescued: 11! Hooray
for the men! Our women are safe!) 
To be fair, I didn't hate this movie. It was no worse than many
mainstream films. There was even a scene or two that made me jump in
surprise. But the movie was so careless that I couldn't forgive it. 
For example, Cross is a forensic psychologist, but he knows more about a
drug that the kidnapper uses than our medical doctor (she is only a
woman, though). 
Also, Cross made some major mistakes in dealing with his psychologically
abused victims. The kidnapper spoke to them without revealing his face.
His was a calm, faceless voice. When Kate is rescued, one of the first
things Cross does is approach her from behind in a calm reassuring
voice, just like the kidnapper did. Another victim was forced to play
her violin for her kidnapper. After her rescue, cross gives her a new
violin. Just what a traumatized victim needs: a little reminder of her
torture. 
Finally, in Cross' raid on the kidnapper's hideout, he says that logic
dictates there should be no FBI involvement. He never explains why this
is so, and he was probably wrong. But then he couldn't be the knight in
shining armor, could he? 
In addition, the filmmaking was uneven. The movie did have a good "look"
to it, but it was often disrupted by a single bad element. For example,
the cave-rooms where the women were held looked like they were recycled
from the original Star Trek TV series. And there were times when the
sound editing was clunky and unsubtle. 
I suppose this movie could have earned a lower rating, but somehow, all
these flaws didn't congeal until after the movie was over, so the
experience itself wasn't that bad. Still, that's hardly a reason to see
this movie.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
**** (out of 4)
Directed by Gary Fleder
Starring Morgan Freeman, Ashley Judd, Cary Elwes, Jay O. Sanders, Bill 
Nunn, Tony Goldwyn, Jeremy Piven
Great characters can carry a substandard story very far. If you can 
become involved in them, it overshadows the weaker plot aspects and makes 
a movie entertaining. On the other hand, if you have a solid, if somewhat 
familiar story, great characters can make that movie a memorable viewing 
experience and one of the most entertaining films of the year. Kiss the 
Girls is that kind of movie.
Morgan Freeman stars as Alex Cross, a forensic psychologist who comes to 
North Carolina to investigate the disappearance of several young women, 
one of whom is his own neice. Cross is a quietly intense man who could be 
ready to break out in rage at any moment.  The police chief warns him 
about not overstepping his bounds in one of the more cliched scenes in 
the movie, but as the movie progresses there is no attempt to derail 
Freeman's involvement in the investigation.
All of the kidnap victims are beautiful, strong, and talented women in 
their 20's So the first time we see Ashley Judd appear in the movie, we 
know what's going to happen. Judd plays a lonely medical intern who 
trains at kickboxing. She is kidnapped from her house, in a terrifyingly 
effective sequence that would make Wes Craven proud.
The kidnapper's dungeon has an errie and creative design. While spending 
time in the dungeon, Judd goes through a range of emotions and this is 
when her character really start to take focus, and Judd gets to display 
her expansive range. Then in an absolutely brilliant suspense sequence, 
Judd makes her escape, blinded by the first sign of light and lost among 
the dizzying pattern of the forest. The sequence ends with an effective 
lift from the Fugitive.
>From then on, the movie takes the form of a buddy movie, as Freeman and 
Judd team up to find this mysterious kidnapper. The teaming up of two of 
the most natural actors in Hollywood proves to be a terrific casting 
decision. Freeman and Judd work off each other like seasoned pros and 
their unforced chemistry in every scene is fascinating.
Kiss the Girls does run into a few problems, but it's hard to remember 
them now. With such talent on hand, the flaws are remembered for a couple 
minutes and then are just an afterthought, if that. Gary Fleder shows an 
impressive ability in staging his suspense and action sequences, and in 
between, he lets Freeman and Judd do their stuff, unhindered by lame 
pseudo-fancy camera shots that many younger directors think make a great 
film these days. Kiss the Girls may have a story with some familiar 
aspects, but the execution is near perfect from all involved.  Let's get 
Freeman and Judd together in another movie immediately.

Author
Bryant Frazer
       Imagine, if you like, that SE7EN's Detective Somerset (Morgan
       Freeman) has come out of retirement. He's been drawn back
       into the homicide department by the disappearance of his
       beloved niece. The investigation draws him out of the
       previous film's nameless city to the relative serenity of
       North Carolina's Research Triangle, where he finds that his
       niece's case fits into a pattern of abductions of beautiful
       young women. Three of them have been found dead -- molested
       horribly and left in the woods to be eaten by animals -- but
       Somerset guesses that the others are being held captive by a
       "collector" of some sort. Set on stopping this guy, who has
       taken the vile nom-de-crime of "Casanova," Somerset puts his
       considerable compassion and wisdom to work at cracking the
       case. I guess you could call this fictional movie EIG8T.
       But in a nutshell, that's pretty close to what's going on in
       KISS THE GIRLS. Instead of Somerset, we have Washington,
       D.C.-based forensic psychologist Alex Cross, the protagonist
       from a series of crime novels by bestselling author James
       Patterson. Since he's also given flesh-and-blood presence by
       the formidable Freeman, the film already has echoes of SE7EN,
       which can't hurt since the latter film was a surprise smash
       hit. Even taken on its own, it's hardly a bad idea for a
       movie. Patterson's novel earned wide praise from fans of the
       genre, who praised the novel's characterization and were
       impressed by the story's twists and turns. The movie, I'm
       afraid, is another story.
       Fortunately, Klass and director Gary Fleder (the forgettable
       THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD) are blessed with
       fine performances by Freeman and Ashley Judd, two actors who,
       I suspect, were more or less put on autopilot for this one.
       Freeman turns in an expert, off-hand performance that recalls
       the serene wisdom of Somerset. (Freeman's a good enough actor
       that he really doesn't need the early scene where he talks
       the gun out of a suicidal woman's mouth just to demonstrate
       his character's sensitivity and compassion.) Much as I enjoy
       that character, I'd like to see Freeman stretch out a little,
       and here's hoping that I'll get my wish in the next few
       months, when he stars in Steven Spielberg's AMISTAD and the
       not-a-disaster-movie-*really* HARD RAIN.
       As a thriller, KISS THE GIRLS is by the numbers. We've got
       the fish-out-of-water-with-a-badge, a cop who's gone outside
       his jurisdiction because he has a personal stake in the
       investigation. We've got the killer's hidden lair, which the
       cops must discover in a race against time to save his next
       victim. And while the scenes (two of them!) where Kate kicks
       righteous ass without the help of a male rescuer are
       tremendous crowd-pleasers, they're staged without much
       ingenuity. Judd plays Kate strong and smart, but I would have
       liked to have seen more emphasis on the smart. The so-so
       cinematography and catch-as-catch-can editing technique are
       augmented by a distracting sound mix that, if you see the
       movie in digital sound, has those already cliched wooshing
       noises careering through the movie theater in an attempt to
       whip up a sense of unease.
       We've also got the obligatory yucky relationship between
       Casanova and his pretty female victims. Their trauma is only
       hinted at -- I think a better (and probably darker) movie
       might have given us a longer look inside that makeshift
       prison block, and would have forced us to care about the fate
       of those women. (I'm told that the novel included a subplot
       allowing Kate a relationship with one of Casanova's other
       victims that's missing here.) Instead, the movie barely
       acknowledges their pain, and seems only fleetingly concerned
       with fleshing out the character of Casanova (the most
       unsettling insight coes from a scene where we find out that
       he's an Internet geek, swapping photos of his victims by
       email). I wanted to loathe him, but found myself not moved
       much by anything he did. Perhaps ironically, the unconvincing
       treatment of the villain and his deeds makes the movie's
       queasiest touches -- a post-mortem photo of one of the
       victims, badly battered, or the attempted rape scene in the
       final reel -- seem uncomfortably gratuitous, or even
       titillating. For a picture that deals with a sexual
       psychopath who I'd imagine makes Hannibal Lecter look like a
       gentleman, KISS THE GIRLS plays as pretty light
       entertainment.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Directed by Gary Fleder
       Written by David Klass
       Based on the novel by Richard Patterson
       Starring Morgan Freeman and Ashley Judd
       U.S., 1997
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Author
Boyd Petrie
Kiss the Girls (1997)
Rated R for terror, violence, language, and suggested sex.
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Ashley Judd, Cary Elwes, Tony Goldwyn, Gina Ravera.
One of the biggest cliches of any serial killer film is also one of the most believable.  You know, the one
where the detective looks at a wall of pictures and other police information, and suddenly spots the clue
which reveals who the killer is.  Sure, it's been used over and over, but for some reason, it is always fun to
watch.  This cliche pretty much describes the level KISS THE GIRLS works on: overused, but always fun.  One of
my personal rules about watching a film is not how original the film is, but how it goes around giving its
story.  This rule applies highly to KISS THE GIRLS.
There is something psychologically stimulating in a well-crafted serial killer movie, and KISS THE GIRLS is
certainly well made.  However, the whole film screams of unoriginality, and so it relies on the power of its
actors and the technical detail to pull it through.  Well, not only are the actors capable of pulling it
through, but they add so much to the film that nearly every flaw is covered up.  Unfortunately, one of the
most revealing and rather insulting choices by the filmmakers (one that SEVEN, a film a lot like this one,
knew not to make) was to put the name of the killer in the opening credits.  That may give the actor credit
for the role, but throughout the film, hidden in my mind, I was waiting for him to appear on screen, which
spoiled the mystery.  However, credit must be given to the director for suspending this knowledge through most
of the film.  
Plotwise, KISS THE GIRLS shows almost no originality.  We are introduced to Detective Alex Cross (Morgan
Freeman), a forensic psychologist, and immediately we are given the cliched scene establishing him as the
hero.  He gets a call about a woman who has shot her husband and is now threatening to kill herself.
Obviously Cross succeeds at getting the gun, but this scene is quickly forgotten during the next scene.  At
his house, Cross is told that his neice, Naomi (Gina Ravera), has been missing for four days.  This provides
the motivation for Cross to find the killer, but we are never given a chance to establish the relationship
between the two, and as a result, we can't sympathize with Detective Cross.  However, what makes KISS THE
GIRLS slightly original is the introduction of one of the abductees... before she is abducted.  Dr. Kate
McTiernan (Ashley Judd, the actress of the Judd family) is a smart, athletic woman, and because of these
traits, becomes a target for Casanova--what the serial killer likes to call himself.  Because of these
character-developing scenes, we care for McTiernan, making the abduction scene all that more suspenseful. 
After being abducted, McTiernan wakes up and finds herself in a cell somewhere in the woods.  Remembering that
the killer gave her certain rules, she decides to break one of them by calling out.  When Casanova comes to
punish her, she breaks out and escapes by jumping over a waterfall.  After she is found, she begins to help
Cross find his neice.  From this moment on, KISS THE GIRLS takes on the form of every other serial killer
film, as the two leads search for the rest of the victims held captive. 
Many people will compare this film to 1995's SEVEN, another killer film starring Morgan Freeman, but I presume
that the similarities are intentional.  The screenplay, by David Klass, is adapted from the novel written by
James Patterson, and yet I don't quite see how this story could have worked in novel form.  What makes KISS
THE GIRLS so good is the acting and the technical and visual impressiveness.  The cinematography, by Aaron
Schneider, is reminiscient of SEVEN, and sometimes I felt that many of the shots were trying too hard to
impress us.  Sometimes a simple shot is the best one.  However, many of the shots are stunning, and unlike
SEVEN, most of them take place during the day, in sunlight.  The scene when Ashley Judd is running through the
forest is extremely well done, in more than one way.  The camera work is terrific, but the editing makes this
scene work so well.  The chaotic and MTV-type cutting gives the audience a sense of confusion and unawareness,
exactly what Judd's character is experiencing. 
However, the best aspect of KISS THE GIRLS is its actors.  Morgan Freeman is one of today's most powerful and
believable actors.  Detective Cross is a very good character for him, although it is just a similar one to the
character in SEVEN.  Because of Freeman's powerful presence, he carries half the film by himself.  The other
half is carried by Ashley Judd, one of today's most promising dramatic actresses.  In fact, her performance is
better than Freeman's, if that is even possible.  Her character is more original than Freeman's, and she
handles it wonderfully.  We finally have a female character in a movie like this who does more than just
scream.  The supporting cast is highly underdeveloped, but the cast members do as much as they can with it.
Cary Elwes portrays a cop in North Carolina, and unfortunately has scraps for a character.  Tony Goldwyn fairs
slightly better, but we don't really get to know his character either.  Gina Ravera gives a good performance,
but again she isn't in many of the scenes.  So as a result of all these small supporting parts, the weight of
the film lies on the two leads, and they do a phenomenal job.  Some of the best acting of this genre, and some
of the best acting of the year.
Two other essential aspects of the film are quite good.  Director Gary Fleder does a good job of controlling
his actors, but the second half of the film loses believability, especially during the revelation of the
killer.  He also doesn't handle the suspenseful scenes as a better director would have, losing a lot of
tension during many scenes.  However, to his credit, he does manage a terrific first half.  Part of the blame
falls on David Klass.  I'm sure the book developed many of the lesser characters more, but Klass focuses on
the two main parts.  While this may give the two leads more screentime, many of the small characters are
one-dimensional, and the killer, when revealed, is extremely implausible.  Thanks to the smart dialogue
adapted from the novel, KISS THE GIRLS always seems intelligent.  None of the conversations are laughable, and
all move the plot forward without seeming forced.  One of the biggest problems I had with the movie was the
motive of the killer.  I blame this mainly on the casting director, because the killer's motive is because of
rejection from women (or so I assume from the opening monologue), but the killer himself is very attractive
(One of my friends is a, shall we say, big admirer of the killer).
KISS THE GIRLS is rated R for terror, violence, language, and suggested sex.  With all the implausibilities of
this film, and with the mediocre second half, KISS THE GIRLS somehow manages to thoroughly entertain.  In
fact, I had the urge to see it again just for the performances.  The cinematography adds a lot of mood to the
already creepy tone, and the script is usually smart.  This is clearly one of those movies which rely on the
acting to pull it through.  Morgan Freeman is possibly today's most convincing actor, and Ashley Judd adds
another notch on her acting belt.  I must also say that I loved the ending.  The showdown between good and
evil was quite tense, and the resolution of the scene makes almost anyone cheer.  Perhaps it may not be
possible, but most of the film isn't anyway.  

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 17 October 1997 with Lynne and Sandy for $7.75 at the Port
Washington Cinemas.
There is something compelling about *Kiss the Girls* that transcends its
inherent misogyny and depiction of depraved behavior. You want to find out
how they catch the man who is kidnapping beautiful and talented women and
who kills the ones who break the rules--his rules. Along the way, though,
you are imbued with a certain uncomfortable feeling that also transcends
the movie. Unless you're a serial killer yourself, there is nothing
entertaining about women being held captive and forced to do things
against their will, despite the porn industry's images that counter that
idea.
The movie is very carefully set up to make you want to care about finding
the killer. Alex Cross (Morgan Freeman) is a police psychologist whose
niece is kidnapped in the Research Triangle in North Carolina. Kate
McTiernan (Ashley Judd) is an doctor who is passionate about her work and
very gutsy and forthright. This, according to the movie's epistemology,
makes her ripe for being the next victim. But she manages to get away, and
insists on helping Alex find the culprit. 
This is where the movie takes a few unbelievable turns--why on Earth would
these characters not *once* think of calling for backup? In New York City,
if a cop is even thought to be shot, 40 officers arrive on the scene in a
variety of vehicles. Why wouldn't an experienced detective call for back
up? Because making sense and making suspense do not always mix... 
Ashley Judd really stands out at Kate. One aspect that I really enjoyed
was that when she escapes, runs through the woods, falls off a cliff and
suffers hypothermia -- it looks real. It's not like other filems where
heronines do all of it without scratching a nail. Her run through the
woods is full trips and falls and a lot of bruises; you are there with her
every step of the way, and that really makes the audience empathize. 
What is disturbing throughout the film is the idea that somehow these
women made themselves victims simply because they were smart and therefore
visible. There is probably a good reason why there are so few female
serial killers, and this movie shows why, in so many ways. It's offensive
in that it is implied that compliant women are safe and the victim is to
blame.
Along the way, a few red herrings are tossed our way to "enhance" the
mystery, but formulaic movies defy these efforts.
Also starring were Cary Elwes, Tony Goldwyn, Bill Nunn, and Gina Ravera.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Walter Frith
To get a stamp of approval in making a motion picture thriller you have to
address three basic points of interest.  Is it original?  Is it predictable?
 Do you care about the characters involved?  This is pretty much the rule for
all movies but with thrillers there is a tendancy for the tension factor to
run higher than other films.  'Kiss the Girls' pretty much succeeds as a
clever film but it borders on repetition in many circumstances.
The story begins in Washington D.C., and Morgan Freeman plays a D.C. police
oficer but his official title is forensic psychologist and his niece is
missing and the worst fear of the family is that she's dead.  His search
takes him to North Carolina where the audience witnesses the abduction of a
young doctor (Ashley Judd) and she is taken to a forest hideaway where the
abductor has imprisoned young women separately like in a jail and taunts them
with promises of his sexual prowess.
As a movie critic I refuse to write spoiler reviews so you'll have to see the
rest of this movie to follow its sprawling second half.  Morgan Freeman plays
the role of the cop in much the same fashion he did in 1995's 'Seven' and
since I despised that film, I tried to look deeper into the merits of this
film.  It does have good psychological tension and Freeman does carry the
story well for most of the film and much credit should be given to Ashley
Judd whose portrayal of the victim is very convincing.  
I don't know about you but the one thing I hate the most in story telling
whether it's a book, play, television piece or big screen movie is the red
herring factor.  If you don't know what that means it refers to throwing
something at the audience without them seeing it coming.  One of the most
intense recent examples of this was in 1996's 'From Dusk Till Dawn' which
started out as a great crime story but took a bizarre and ridiculous turn at
becoming a vampire flick with junky results.  'Kiss the Girls' has a unique
visual style and impressive direction by Gary Fleder who hints at what may
occur next without it being a dead giveaway.
'Kiss the Girls' re-unites Morgan Freeman with Cary Elwes who both appeared
in the American Civil War classic 'Glory' from 1989.  Other members of the
cast include Tony Goldwyn and Jay O. Sanders.  This movie is not recommended
for anyone that has ever had a criminal encounter involving abduction.  It is
vividly shocking and contains chilling scenes of terror which is not for all
tastes.  For others, you'll find it hard at times to leave your seat.

Author
Mike Watson
Come on Hollywood, surprise me.  Stop giving us these poorly written
thrillers with banal dialogue, sketchy characters and plots as
predictable as the sunset.
The always watchable Morgan Freeman plays a detective who becomes
personally involved in a case involving missing girls.  Personal,
because his niece is one of the victims.  It's a slobbering
psychopath, of course, but this time there's a twist.  Freeman notes
that each of the young women who've disappeared are all strong willed,
assertive, and more successful in their careers than the average girl.
We soon learn that the guy calls himself Casanova, whose aim is to
"dominate" these modern gals by imprisoning them in some dungeon and
keeping them as his personal harem.  Anyway, one of the women manages
to escape (Ashly Judd) and teams up with Freeman to...well, you know
the rest.
A brief glance at the plot to SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, with which this
film is constantly being compared to by the hype merchants, may
suggest LAMBS also has a fairly predictable story.  Perhaps, but that
film also has superbly drawn characters and smart dialogue.  So lets
not insult a great movie by taking the comparisons any further, okay?
And as for comparisons to SEVEN...oh please!
KISS THE GIRLS is based on the novel by James Patterson and written
for the screen by one David Klass.  Maybe the novel was a stinker to
start with, but whatever the case, it's the writing that's clearly at
fault here.  One, these characters have very little to say that's
engaging or interesting.  Two, the script has no sense of humour.
Three, while the notion of a psycho's victims being smart, successful
women is an interesting twist, the execution isn't even half as good
as the idea.  Thus, Ashly Judd comes across all out of focus, instead
of being the heart of the story.  We can't feel her rage.  Some
atrociously written casual exchanges between her and several male
characters are supposed to remind us that she's the no-bullshit 90's
type, but these conversations barely register.  
And as for Freeman, KISS THE GIRLS is his second dog in a year: first
CHAIN REACTION, now this.  For an actor of his calibre, this is most
worrying.
Young director Gary Fleder scored a hit a few years back with his
quirky Pulp Fiction-esque THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOUR DEAD.  But
what can he do with material as resolutely mediocre as this?  Not
much, and you can hardly blame him.  There's a few well-staged chase
scenes through the forest where the camera whirls, dives and jumps,
and the effect is startling.  But the script is beyond rescue.  What
hurts most is that Hollywood continues to get away with serving up
this tripe, safe in the knowledge that jaded audiences will lap it up.
Complacency rules: it's been so long since we saw a mainstream
American thriller that delivered juicy characters, real surprises and
consistently sharp dialogue.
The only consolation for this viewer is that my ticket to the movie
was a freebie, positive proof that the best things in life AREN'T
free.... .

Author
Jason Overbeck
I hate films in which the good guys don't ask for help of others (FBI)
because the killer needs to get away to preserve the standard film
running time! That is one thing that made KISS THE GIRLS such a mixed
experience, how can a film be so stupid and smart at the same time?
Morgan Freeman is chasing a serial killer that seems to be collecting
girls. Ashley Judd is the average kick boxing doctor who escapes from
Casanova's (killer's name) pad, an advanced labyrinth of mazes and
doors.  Her escape is one of the most exciting scenes in the film
because she is drugged and being chased and unable to dodge every tree. 
By the end of the chase she looks like Sly at the end of a Rockey pick
and is ready to tell the police everything she knows, but she doesn't
know much.  She convinces Freeman to take her with him (!!) and the film
begins to disable.
Too bad. Individual scenes are so good that they deserve a honest,
smarter movie to use them.  And the Acting is first rate, with Judd
showing she is one of the freshest and best new actresses around and
Freeman is sharp in a role that didn't deserve him. Gary Fleder,
director of this and the under-rated Things To Do In Denver When You're
Dead, has style to burn. Unfortunatly the film does burn.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Gary Fleder
Writer: David Klass (based on the novel by John Patterson)
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Ashely Judd, Cary Elwes, Tony Goldwyn, Jay O.
Sanders, Bill Nunn, Brian Cox, Justina Vail, Jeremy Piven, Roma Mafia
America seems to have a disgusting fetish for serial killer films.  Of
course, I'm no hypocrite; I love them too.  But I only like them when
they're intelligent, non-formualtic, and perhaps even satirical,
carrying a strong message about something.  "Kiss the Girls" is none of
these.  A formulatic yet atmospheric film, it seems to walk on the fine
line between cliche and original filmmaking.  But at the end, the film
trips, and lands on the cliche side.
"Kiss the Girls" deals with a serial killer who's not actually a serial
killer.  He's a collector of fine-looking women, who he cages, rapes,
injects drugs into, and all-around worships...but in that crazy,
psychotic fashion.  We see him, but we only in shadows, and only with a
funky mask over his face, like he were some romantic Phantom of the
Opera.  We also hear him in a deep whisper, and one can only guess that
we see him throughout the film.
We are introduced to forensic psychologist, Alex Cross (Morgan Freeman,
giving the film some well-needed clout), and in the most cliched way
possible: on a case where we witness his forte.  He talks some women out
of killing herself, from which we learn: a) he's a gentle man, b) he's
more intelligent than everyone else we're gonna meet, and c) he's gonna
have to do the same thing again towards the end, but break his own
rules.  I'm only saying this because I thought that when I saw the
scene.
He begins investigating our designated sicko, who calls himself
Cassanova, and meets some other detectives and whatnot, including the
southern-accented Nick Ruskin (Cary Elwes), a guy named Kyle Craig (Jay
O. Sanders), among others.  The actors all do a good job of looking
creepy, but we all know who it is the first time we see him/her anyway.
We also meet Kate McTiernan (Ashely Judd), a beautiful, highly
intelligent med student, who also takes kickboxing (which, by the rules
of cliche, will help her in a couple spots).  She's soon taken hostage
by Cassanova (she has to - she lives in a giant house all by herself,
which she dimly lights just so she can't tell that anyone's there).  And
predictably enough, she escapes in an escape so simple that you wonder
if the killer LET her go on purpose.
Predictably enough, she's teamed with Alex, and the two are doing some
investigating together.  While the first half wasn't actually bad in
establishing mood, this half is a complete mess, as they journey all
around, pick up convenient clues, and even follow a lead (Tony Goldwyn -
I thought he was dead).  The film has what seems to be a nice close, but
we HAVE to have a big cliche-ridden struggle between the two leads and
Cassanova, who turns out to be exactly who I thought it was from the
beginning.  He has a stupid motive, which tries desperately to be
satirical of something, but ends in a big cliche.  I left in utter
disgust.
There are some good things, though.  The film does well with some
atmosphere in certain places, and some key scenes ARE well-directed. 
Her drug-induced escape scene is handled wonderfully, and even her
kidnap is pretty creepy.  And, of course, Morgan Freeman is awesome. 
When is this guy not awesome, though?  The only reason he was cast was
to give it some merit, and he does give it a great edge that wouldn't be
there with any other actor.  Freeman is one of those actors who everyone
likes merely because of his presence, and also because he always nails
his performances.  This is no exception.  Judd is also pretty good too,
but we already knew that also.  But what is Cary Elwes doing here?  I
like the guy, but he's suffered the same kind of fate Anthony Perkins
suffered after "Psycho": he can't do any role convincingly since he was
so awesome in "The Princess Bride."  I found myself laughing at his
performance and for the wrong reasons.  Poor guy.
Director Gary Fleder (of "Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead," the
title to which was better than the movie) tries to make a creepy,
atmospheric picture, but makes a film which lacks in some of the better
elements, particular origninality, and a killer whom one finds
themselves respecting.  Cassanova is a crap serial killer, not because
he's not really one, but because he's not really that fascinating.  He's
crazy, and that's all.  Hannibal Lecter and "Se7en"'s John Doe were more
than that.  They walked the fine line between brilliance and insanity. 
Cassanova is way on the insane side, and is thus not a great killer.
"Kiss the Girls" was a let-down, particularly because the previews made
it look like it may actually stand a chance against such brilliant
serial killer films as "The Silence of the Lambs" and "Se7en."  But it
doesn't, and ends up just another one of those cheap thrillers, with a
bit of clout from the acting.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Morgan Freeman, Ashley Judd, Cary Elwes, Tony Goldwyn, 
      Jay O. Sanders, Bill Nunn, Brian Cox, Alex McArthur, 
      Richard T. Jones, Jeremy Piven, William Converse-Roberts, 
      Gina Ravera
Director: Gary Fleder
Producers: David Brown and Joe Wizan
Screenplay: David Klass, based on the novel by James Patterson
Cinematography: Aaron Schneider
Music: Mark Isham
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Every time audiences are presented with a reasonably well-made 
serial killer movie, they line up for it.  Why?  Human beings are 
irresistibly fascinated by the lurid, the horrifying, and the depraved, 
and what could be more attention-grabbing than an individual who murders 
repeatedly in sick and twisted ways?  Of course, serial killers (both 
real and fictional) have provided material for countless movies, but 
most of those are artless hack jobs, replacing tension and intelligence 
with gore and cliches.  So, when a movie comes along that's a cut above 
the usual, it's worth making note of.  KISS THE GIRLS is such a film.  
     I'm not saying that KISS THE GIRLS is a great motion picture, nor 
am I arguing that it's the best of its kind to come out in recent years.  
But it features a pair of well-developed characters, the plot contains 
some clever twists and turns, the dialogue is reasonable, and director 
Gary Fleder (THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD) keeps the level of 
tension and intrigue high.  Put together, all of that adds up to a 
worthwhile motion picture.  Fans of SEVEN, COPYCAT, and SILENCE OF THE 
LAMBS will likely agree that their $8 admission for KISS THE GIRLS is 
well spent.
     KISS THE GIRLS wouldn't be nearly as involving without the two 
strong performances of the leads.  Morgan Freeman, in a role not unlike 
the one he essayed in SEVEN, plays Dr. Alex Cox, a Washington D.C. 
forensic pathologist who travels to Durham, N.C., when his niece, Naomi 
(Gina Ravera), disappears.  Freeman plays Alex as an insightful, 
confident investigator with powerful emotions bubbling just beneath his 
calm, carefully-controlled exterior.  Despite a less-than-enthusiastic 
greeting by Durham's chief of police, Alex learns that Naomi is the 
eighth young woman to disappear recently, all of whom fit the same 
description:  intelligent, strong-willed, college-age, attractive, and 
talented.  Three are already dead, but Alex suspects that the primary 
interest of the killer (who calls himself "Casanova") is not murder.  
Instead, the doctor sees him as "a collector."
     Disappearance #9 is Dr. Kate McTiernan (Ashley Judd), an intern at 
the Carolina Regional Medical Center.  As Kate, Judd adds another 
impressive performance to a growing resume.  The actress plays her 
character as outwardly-tough and self-sufficient with an inner core of 
vulnerability.  She may be a target, but she refuses to be a victim, and 
it's hard to miss the fire in her eyes.  Nevertheless, vulnerability, 
whether emotional or physical, is something she has a hard time coping 
with.  One night, Kate is abducted from her house and brought to a 
lightless room where she is bound and drugged.  But, by taking her 
masked captor unawares, she escapes in what is one of KISS THE GIRLS' 
best filmed-sequences (it uses a never-stationary camera and a numerous 
point-of-view shots to convey Kate's anxiety in the midst of a menacing 
forest that is concealing Casanova as he pursues her).  Later, after 
surviving a fall into a river where she nearly drowns, Kate joins forces 
with Alex for one purpose:  to bring Casanova to justice.
     One thing I appreciate about KISS THE GIRLS is its willingness to 
spend time developing the characters before jumping into the main story.  
During the first twenty minutes, we gather information about both Alex 
and Kate.  Later, the relationship between these two is developed in an 
intentionally ambiguous manner.  There are times when it manifests 
itself almost as a father/daughter bond, but, on other occasions, 
there's a sense of latent romance.  However, the film underplays this 
dynamic to avoid wandering off on a tangent.
     Despite being consistently involving, KISS THE GIRLS, based on the 
best-selling novel by James Patterson, has its share of flaws.  On 
several occasions, the film's blatant ignorance of real-world police 
procedures strains the viewer's credibility.  I found it hard to accept 
that one man, even if he is a brilliant and respected police 
psychologist, could carry on an unsanctioned investigation in such a 
high-profile case (especially considering that a key member of his team, 
Kate, is a civilian and a witness).  I also have a gripe about the end 
scenes, which are overly familiar.
     With one exception, the acting is solid.  That exception is Cary 
Elwes, who has been playing a parody of his previous self ever since 
starring in Mel Brooks' failed Robin Hood spoof, MEN IN TIGHTS.  
Although Elwes only portrays a small-town cop, and doesn't steal any 
scenes, he's never particularly believable, and every time he's on 
screen, he sticks out like a sore thumb.  Other, more effective 
supporting actors include Brian Cox as Durham's chief detective, Bill 
Nunn as one of Alex's associates, Jay O. Sanders as the FBI agent in 
charge of the official investigation, and Tony Goldwyn as a West Coast 
plastic surgeon who may in some way be involved with the crimes.
     The film makers, with a nod to the success of SEVEN, have 
apparently decided to mimic the grim atmosphere and in-your-face 
cinematography of that movie (light, darkness, and shadow are used to 
great effect here).  Stylistically, KISS THE GIRLS is very similar, and 
the presence of Morgan Freeman only heightens the connection.  Even 
though there are vast plot differences between the two, both are well-
made and are likely to appeal to the same kind of audience.  So, much 
like SEVEN, KISS THE GIRLS makes for a suspenseful, if somewhat bleak, 
two hours.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Steve Kong
Kiss the Girls is not quite SE7EN, but not quite bad either. Kiss the Girls
is a good serial killer movie that entertains for two hours.
After seeing the previews, I thought Kiss the Girls might be a blatant
rip-off of SE7EN. It has Morgan Freeman, who was in SE7EN and it has an
intelligent serial killer whose identity is not known. Also, it is a movie,
like SE7EN, that is more interested in why the killer is doing what he is
doing more than about catching the killer. Catching the killer is only the
means of driving the movie forward.
Morgan Freeman is Dr. Alex Cross, a forensic psychologist. He finds himself
going to Durham, North Carolina to help out on an abduction case, the
abducted happens to be his niece. What he finds when he gets there is that
his niece is only one of many girls kidnapped by a serial rapist and killer
who calls himself Casanova. Ashley Judd is Kate McTiernan the only woman to
escape from Casanova (she knows kickboxing). Together Cross and McTiernan
go on the hunt for Casanova.
The movie is somewhat predictable. The most predictable is the identity of
Casanova, whom I guessed correctly after the credits finished. (Director
Gary Fleder should have taken note that David Fincher chose to not include
the name of the actor portraying the serial killer in SE7EN during the
opening credits). By the time the end rolls around, Fleder throws the
audience a fake bone to try to trick us into thinking that Casanova is
someone else, but it doesn't work.
It is quite easy to think that a comparison can be drawn between Kiss the
Girls and SE7EN, but the differences are there. Here's some: the ending to
SE7EN was quite a surprise and quite shocking. The ending to Kiss the Girls
is of the standard Hollywood fare. John Doe in SE7EN had a clear-cut
purpose for what he was doing. Doe had a message that he was preaching.
Casanova has a purpose to his madness also, but it is not so clear.
Casanova does spread the word of what he does, but he has no message that
he wants to preach. Though Director Fleder handles the director's duties
just fine, he doesn't come close to making the film look as good as Fincher
does.
With all this said, Kiss the Girls in the end is entertaining. This is
because of the great performances by the two leads. Freeman is always a
command presence on screen, and that does not change here with Kiss the
Girls. His performance is intense. Judd adds yet another great performance
to her list of great performances. She does very well in Kiss the Girls.
Though not as good as SE7EN, which Kiss the Girls will inevitably be
compared to, Kiss the Girls is nonetheless entertaining. It has its
frightening moments and its share of action. And it comes as a fairly
interesting film about a serial killer. This is a Don't Miss film, though
see it at a matinee showing. 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Morgan Freeman, Ashley Judd, Cary Elwes, Tony Goldwyn, Jay O.
Sanders, Bill Nunn, Brian Cox, Alex McArthur, Richard T. Jones, Jeremy
Piven, William Converse-Roberts, Gina Ravera Director: Gary Fleder
Screenplay: David Klass, based on the novel by James Patterson
If a movie contains mostly kidnapped girls, dead corpses, cops and a
psychopathic rapist known as Casanova, who are the prime suspects? I'll
give you a clue. It's not the ones in the morgue, its not the ones in
chains, its not the ones who need to lower the toilet seats to pee, so I
guess that leaves the ones who have a "Johnny", and like donuts and
coffee.
Not only does our Casanova have time to imprison his kidnapped girls in
a prison cell Harem, he has time to feed them home made sandwiches with
lettuce, ham and tomato, nicely sliced down the centre gourmet style.
This rapist who likes lots of sex, also has time to hold down a full
time job, write beautiful cursive on bulletin boards, and communicate
with others of his type on the Internet.
So I'll give you a quick run down on how I would have captured this
rapist without much ado fuss. I would have surfed the Net, browsed News
Groups like alt.sex.bondage, matched those subscribing to the group to
the vicinity of the missing girls - and Wella a suspect! It sure beats
having to find some unheard of Benzodiazepine drug in the MIMS.
Other annoying factors. The only victim to escape from Casanova is a
female doctor (Ashley Judd) who nearly loses her life in the process. 24
hours after being certified fit to leave the hospital, she's up moseying
about the woods where she nearly died without any worries. Next she's
gallivanting around town looking for the killer, trying not to be
conspicuous, but wearing exactly the same hair style when first eyed by
her rapist.
Equally annoying is the violin player (Gina Ravera) victim who plays
Bach for her tormentor to hear. Not only does she play the music
beautifully her performance is almost flawless. After being repeatedly
raped one would imagine that it would have some dampening effect on her
musical ability, no matter how talented. When rescued, her Uncle (Morgan
Freeman) gives her back the same violin with new strings. She smiles at
takes the instrument happily. One would have thought that this
instrument is the last thing this girl would want to see, when it serves
as a constant reminder of her abuse.
Most annoying of all we have eight girls dressed in lovely black silk
dresses, sitting in a circle as Casanova walks around the room fondling
them. Considering they are unchained, eight females should have no
problems overcoming a single male. Sure they've been psychologically
beaten into submission, but sooner or later the "battered wife" syndrome
is bound to emerge, and believe me any one of them could have the
strength to kill the bastard.
As for Morgan Freeman, this is the stupidest role I have seen him in.
His character is non-objective, renegade and too maverick for a police
psychiatrist. It's surprising that his dumb actions didn't get him
killed in the movie. I mean what does a doctor know about shooting guns,
entering the enemy camp virtually alone, unassisted and without backup?
Then again all the doctors in this movie are presented as moronic
persons - they are either raped, bungling investigations, drugging
girls, or collecting their feet.
If you wanted to watch something of this genre worth while, see Silence
of the Lambs again. The only thing "Kiss the Girls" will leave you with
is a recurrent case of cold sores.

Author
Bill Chambers
starring Morgan Freeman, Ashley Judd, Cary Elwes, Jay O. Sanders
screenplay by David Klass, based on the novel by James Patterson
directed by Gary Fleder
(If you like this review, and you must have more, visit
FILM FREAK CENTRAL
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Set/7504
It's getting better.)
Morgan Freeman teamed with Brad Pitt in the best movie of 1995, David
Fincher's neo-noir Se7en. (I can't believe I just used a bullshit term
like "neo-noir".) Just two years later, America's Best Actor is
headlining another serial killer chiller thriller, but in Kiss The
Girls, he takes an unfortunate step backwards from shock to schlock.
Freeman stars as Alex Cross, a forensic psychologist who points out,
presumably for police terminology-challenged audience members, that
his job is to figure out "the how's and why's." When his niece is
kidnapped in North Carolina's Research Triangle by a deranged killer
who calls himself Casanova, Cross assists the small-town homicide
detectives in tracking down the murderer's whereabouts. Assisting
Cross is Kate, the woman who got away (Judd), a doctor who, like each
of the victims, is young and gorgeous, but not as weak.
By the third scene, the screenplay isn't working: why, exactly, did
the filmmakers choose to have Cross travel from Washington to North
Carolina instead of setting the case in his hometown, since the shift
in location does little to slow down his investigation? More
ridiculous contrivances abound. At one point, Cross believes he has
discovered the killer's identity, and he decides to tail him for an
evening. All evidence then has it that this is their guy. So, they
stake out his home, armed with guns. Who does? A S.W.A.T. team,
perhaps? No, just Cross and two police officers, with the perky Kate
waiting in the car. Casanova is one of the most wanted men in America;
the F.B.I. have been trying to capture him for months, yet it never
occurs to Cross and company to call for back-up. The outcome is both
tragic and idiotic.
Most unbelievably is that the hick cops (no pun intended) and the
F.B.I. are always waiting for the next body to show up. Why? Because
the dead women always appear in the same place, a nice little Miller's
Crossing-y section of a forest. So why aren't any of them patrolling
this area instead of twiddling their thumbs? Worse, they can't find
Casanova's hideout; how many dungeons can there be in these woodlands?
The characters are as lazily conceived as the plot. Can we please have
a moratorium on will-they-or-won't-they black man-white woman
relationships, a la The Pelican Brief? Had this film featured Harrison
Ford in the role of Cross, you can bet your eight-fifty he'd have
bedded Kate by the end of act two. Cross, we assume, is intelligent,
authoritative and wise, but only because Morgan Freeman is playing
him. Ashley Judd, an agreeable screen presence, unfortunately lacks
Freeman's worldliness, so Kate remains a nice but bland girl-next-door
type who goes kickboxing after work.
Director Fleder made the little seen but delightful Things To Do In
Denver When You're Dead. Kiss The Girls does shine at times, too:
Freeman's first scene, in which he talks a suicidal woman out of
shooting herself, is a great way to introduce his character. And the
opening credit sequence is outstanding (though it continues a
dispiriting trend, a la Mimic, of having opening titles more involving
and inventive than any scenes in the film that follows them). Fleder
has some visual flair, but so what? Kiss The Girls is littered with
overblown, over-directed scenes, too many supporting characters, too
many plot holes... Denver was pretty well written: witty, sad and
scary. It's clear that Fleder is a craftsman, only as strong as his
script.
Ah, but Morgan Freeman... why he would be attracted to this material,
especially so soon after appearing in the defining masterpiece of the
genre, is curious. But he does more than just make Kiss The Girls
watchable whenever he's on screen; he makes it compelling, and he
deserves better.

Author
Berge Garabedian
Gary Fleder's sophomore film after THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE
DEAD (7/10) explores the seedy world of the serial killer.
PLOT:
Forensic doctor and cop Cross gets heavily involved in a serial
killer's dossier, after his niece becomes one of the psycho's kidnapped
victims. Kate also gets nabbed by this lunatic (the self-professed
Cassanova), but quickly escapes and teams up with detective Cross to
locate her sick captor and the rest of the victims.
CRITIQUE:
Eerie, dark and effective serial killer thriller. I like to call it
SEVEN (8.5/10) "light". It certainly has a lot of the qualities of
SEVEN, with the competent acting of Freeman, a pretty neat and at times
claustrophobic directing style, and a decent "who donnit" twist. Mind
you, that's about where the similarities end. This film goes deeper
into the "backdoor" shenanigans of said killer, and shows his
techniques and despicable methods of capture. The scene in which Judd
gets kidnapped by the psycho is also very terrifying.
The premise of the film is good, and so is most of the build-up,
although I did find some of the methods used to find the homicidal
maniac a bit far-fetched, the overall film worked for me on a suspense
level. The bad guy was totally creepy and mysterious. The plot twists
were good, but admittedly full of holes. And the style and acting in
the film was top-notch (I'm also a big Ashley Judd fan, so sue me!).
On the down side, I guess that it was a little too much like SEVEN and
SILENCE OF THE LAMBS (7.5/10), but without their great plot lines or
extreme suspense. Also, the plot did contain many holes, the ending was
weak, and Elwes' Southern accent was awful. But overall, it still works
as an effective thriller with some thrills, a couple of chills, and a
good night of fun stuff!   
Little Known Facts: 
Ashley Judd's mother and sister are country singers Naomi & Wynona
Judd. She had a role in Oliver Stone's NATURAL BORN KILLERS (8/10), but
it was left on the cutting room floor. The movie does contain evidence
that she was in it though. She is fluent in French and once dated Bobby
DeNiro, Matt McConaughey, and Mickey Bolton.
In the early seventies, Morgan Freeman became widely known for his role
as Easy Reader on PBS's educational television program, The Electric
Company.
Cary Elwes' real name is Ivan Simon Cary Elwes. He was born in London,
England. 

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Not the narrative juggernaut that SE7EN was, but a smart and
well-wired thriller nonetheless, with sterling performances all around.
KISS THE GIRLS had many people muttering "SE7EN knock-off" when the trailers
ran for it. It's understandable: Both films feature Morgan Freeman on the
trail of a serial killer of fiendish intelligence and cleverness. There, the
similarities end. KISS THE GIRLS is not the monster that SE7EN was, but is a
well-made and intelligently assembled movie that packs a good deal of power.
>From the moment Morgan Freeman appeared on the screen, no convincing is
needed to tell us that Alex Cross, his character in GIRLS, is not Detective
Somerset from SE7EN. He is not rehashing the role; this is a new character
built from the ground up, and it's a testament to Freeman's skill as an
actor that we can sense this instantly, just from the way he sizes up a
roomful of evidence and talks down a suicidal woman.
Cross's niece has gone missing, and he journeys to North Carolina, fearful
that the girl may have become the victim of a serial killer who bills
himself as "Casanova". He is right, and he also makes a slew of educated
guesses as to the killer's m.o.: Casanova isn't so much a killer as a
collector, and is hard at work throwing the cops off the trail with
deceptive murders.
Then there's a huge break in the case: a doctor, Kate McTiernan (Ashley
Judd, her best role so far), manages to escape from the lair where she and
several other kidnapped girls are being held. She is full of guilt over not
having been able to free the other girls, but Cross is determined to find
Casanova as well. They're a nice team; they break out of the one-up/one-down
dynamic that so many movies like this set up.
There's a great deal more to the plot than would be fair to reveal in a
review. I will say that the movie has one piece of deception in store that
seems out of keeping with its ambitions. For most of the way, KISS THE GIRLS
is content to give us a solid story that springs out of the motivations of
the characters, known or unknown -- in other words, it's not critical that
we know who the killer is. Then in the final act, we find out that it's
someone we've already been introduced to, and that slightly undermines what
came before. It's not a fatal mistake, and there are probably many people
who won't object to it, but it seems somewhat tacked-on.
Despite this, KISS THE GIRLS makes a fine addition to a small list of movies
that intelligently explore the concept of obsessives and serial murder, and
that do it with characters that are no less compelling and interesting than
the one being chased.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     KISS THE GIRLS has one of our best actors, Morgan Freeman (SEVEN)
as well as an excellent actress, Ashley Judd (RUBY IN PARADISE).  These
two actors alone, make it an interesting film.  But to be fair, I think
director Gary Fleder, whose last picture was the uniformly panned
THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD, would have been hard-pressed
to make a bad film with these actors.
     Perhaps it is the TV-movie-of-the-week quality script by David
Klass, based on a novel by James Patterson, that should reap most of
the blame for not being able to fashion a credible story line out of a
promising concept.  I have a fairly high tolerance for implausibility,
but a film that has you and your wife counting the unbelievable parts
at the end is a bad sign.  But still, the movie is entertaining and the
acting good.
     As Dr. Alex Cross, a Washington, D.C. forensic psychologist,
Morgan Freeman comes close to repeating the role he played in SEVEN,
but his performance in KISS THE GIRLS is not one of his better ones.
The director has all of his actors on a short leash, which he uses to
pull them back when they become too emotionally involved.  Dr. Cross,
who comes to Durham, North Carolina to help out when his niece
disappears, remains remarkably dispassionate throughout most of the
investigation.
     When Dr. Cross arrives on the scene, he finds that there is a
serial killer on the loose who has taken his niece.  In the first of
many unbelievable parts, he meets Chief Hatfield (Brian Cox) who runs a
large and seemingly all-white police force.  If you've been in the
South recently, you know this is no longer true.  The chief invites him
in, but warns him to stay out of the kitchen.  This hint at racial
prejudice is never subsequently developed.
     As soon as Dr. Cross sees the board of the missing women, a few of
whom have already been found dead, he makes a miraculous deduction. He
says of the killer, who calls himself Casanova, that "killing's not his
ulterior motive -- he's a collector."  The police then start looking to
find where the women are hidden.
     Although the common characteristics of the women are that they are
gifted individuals, for example, Dr. Cross's niece is an accomplished
violinist, they share the usual stupidity rampant in bad scripts.
Ashley Judd plays an intern named Kate McTiernan who is a kick-boxing
expert.  When she hears someone in her house one dark and stormy night,
she doesn't call 911 nor does she turn on any lights.  Instead, she
walks around in the dark looking for the intruder, who, of course,
captures her and takes her to his lair.
     In a scene straight out of the harrowing South African prison
drama INSIDE, Kate tries to speak through the slit in her cell-like
door to the other incarcerated women.  Using her kick-boxing expertise,
she later escapes.  Although she runs through a cave and jumps into a
waterfall, she manages to forget both of these key facts in her many
debriefings.  Both could have been important clues to the hiding place.
     Judd's part is smaller than it seems.  In many of the scenes she
has little to do other than stand around, and her acting talent is
largely wasted aside from her few meaty scenes.  Incongruously, she
tags along with Dr. Freeman and a friend who go on their own into the
dense forest looking for the killer.  Why they didn't get lots of
back-up is never fully answered.
     The director is fond of having characters look straight at the
camera with the "I'm the one" look.  And several twists are almost
advertised in advanced with neon signs.
     My favorite of the ridiculous parts has two cars tailing the
suspected killer for tens of miles.  How far do they stay back? --
about six car lengths and with no cars between them.  This master
killer, who makes almost no mistakes, never notices.
     KISS THE GIRLS runs 1:58.  It is rated R for bloody violence, a
little profanity, and adult themes.  The show would be fine for
teenagers and probably could appear unedited for television.  The
performances by the leads are just barely enough for me to give the
show a mild thumbs up and ** 1/2.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 30, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
KISS THE GIRLS
(Paramount)
Starring:  Morgan Freeman, Ashley Judd, Cary Elwes, Jay O. Sanders, Tony
Goldwyn, Bill Nunn.
Screenplay:  David Klass, based on the novel by James Patterson.
Director:  Gary Fleder.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I'm thinking of putting together a self-help book which would assist
talented performers trying to come to terms with making a terrible film.
I'd call it something like "Smart Actors, Foolish Choices," or maybe "Why
Bad Movies Happen to Good People."  Within its pages would be testemonials
and guidance, reminding the readers that they're not alone in making the
isolated career blunder.  Tom Hanks had his BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES,
Anthony Hopkins had his ROAD TO WELLVILLE, Michael Caine had...okay, bad
example.  For an actor wallowing in "What was I thinking?", the healing
could begin.
     Of course, my motives wouldn't be entirely altruistic.  My research
might also help me understand how films like KISS THE GIRLS come to pass.
Morgan Freeman, the most talented American actor in films, stars as Alex
Cross, a Washington, D.C. forensic psychologist investigatig the abduction
of his neice in North Carolina by a serial kidnapper calling himself
Casanova.  Ashley Judd, the most promising dramatic actress of her
generation, plays medical intern Kate McTiernan, who escapes from Casanova
and helps Cross with the investigation.  Somewhere in this trite,
uninspired psycho-thriller, two gifted actors found something worth
exploring.  I wish I could figure out what that thing was.
     It's not just that KISS THE GIRLS trots out the over-used serial
predator as its villain, or that it relies on a "surprising" revelation of
the villain's identity; both devices can be used effectively, and have
been in recent years.  KISS THE GIRLS doesn't work because there's no
reason to care about who Casanova is, what he does, or what he's going to
do.  Director Gary Fleder never generates any tension or simmering menace,
assuming that murky cinematography will do his work for him.  Perhaps he
spends so little time on the tone because he has a hard enough time
keeping the viewers focused on the basic facts of the plot.  Some of his
narrative leaps are utterly baffling, sending audience members into a
frenzy of muttered "Who's he's" and "Where are they now's."
     To be fair to Fleder, his directionless direction matches the
directionless script with which he's working.  The characters in KISS THE
GIRLS are so thinly defined that it never seems to be about anything but
plodding along until it's time to unmask Casanova, yet even that major
plot point is ineptly handled.  Screenwriter David Klass doesn't bother to
drop the faintest clue about who Casanova might be, to the extent that he
could have been picking a name out of a hat when Casanova finally shows
his face.  Worse still, Klass doesn't bother to explore the villain's
motives.  After all, there's something unique about a serial criminal
whose primary goal isn't murder.  Shouldn't we care _why_?
     The only bright spots in KISS THE GIRLS, not surprisingly, are the
performances by Freeman and Judd.  Freeman brings the weight of years to
every role he plays, radiating the wisdom of a man who has seen a lot and
learned from every bit of it.  Where there is only a body in a suit,
Freeman creates a character.  Judd has a bit more to work with as a strong
woman recovering from the trauma of abduction, and she injects plenty of
fear and determination into her scenes.  Even then, the script doesn't
pull us into Kate's emotions.  It's hard to believe there was anything on
the page which made these characters -- or this by-the-numbers story --
seem appealing, but Freeman and Judd took them on anyway.  Maybe these
parts were the best they could find.  Maybe they suffered severe brain
cramps at critical moments.  In either case, they need our support.  I
feel their pain...I had to _watch_ KISS THE GIRLS.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     KISS THE GIRLS is a textbook example of how to ruin a good story.
Gary Fleder (THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD) directs this
torturously sanitized adaptation of James Patterson's bestseller about a
D.C.  forensic psychologist (Morgan Freeman) who comes to Durham, North
Carolina, after his Duke-attending niece goes up missing.  Turns out
that the D.P.D. (and the F.B.I.) have been sitting on a series of
kidnappings and murders, of college girls from all around the area.
What Freeman's character surmises is that "Casanova," as he calls
himself, is actually a collector who's keeping these young women alive
for various sundry, sordid purposes.  (And of which the graphic details
are nearly entirely omitted.  With the exception of a wee bit of gore,
the creepiest images in this movie are safe enough to be shown on the
Disney channel.) Before long, Freeman's character has a partner-in-
crime-control, a medical student (Ashley Judd) who escapes from the
kidnapper-killer's underground lair with an assist from some convenient
kick-boxing skills.  An older black man as an action hero?  A slasher
victim who fights back??  And the barest whiff of a romance between the
two???  Admittedly, this is non-standard fare for Hollywood, which makes
the movie's many, many failures all the more regrettable.
     On the up side, Morgan Freeman is his expectedly excellent self.
He brings the necessary weight to the story and without enduring the
humiliation of having to spout one-liners, such as, say, "you've been
pasteurized." Ms. Judd, who should be but isn't the other anchor at the
story's core, fares far less better.  She's a good actress saddled with
an only-okay characterization.  (In the novel, as I recall, she suffers
much more abuse before her escape, which adds an edge to the character
that's missing from the filmed version.) And so, with two talented
actors at front and center, KISS THE GIRLS never becomes unwatchable--
no matter how hard Fleder tries to kill the non-mood, be it through bozo
casting (what the Hell is Cary Elwes doing here?), atrocious southern
accents on the part of the supporting cast (what dialect is Brian Cox,
one- time Hannibal Lecter in MANHUNTER, speaking in the minuscule role
of Durham's police chief?), giggle-inducing shots of the disguised
villain, way too many moonlight foot chases, and an underground dungeon
that, truth be told, looks more like an amusement park ride than a Civil
War-era leftover.  Sigh.  I suppose that the biggest disappointment is
the lack of local color.  Short of a shot or two of Duke, Durham, and
the RTP, you'd never know that KISS THE GIRLS was filmed around here.
