Title
Review for 8 Seconds (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Tak
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     8 SECONDS--you only have to hang on to the back of that bull for
a mere 8 SECONDS.  Son of a small Oklahoma rancher, Lane Frost (LUKE
PERRY) was an acknowledged artist at managing that time with poise and
style.  As his reputation grows, he, his wife Kellie Kyle (CYNTHIA
GEARY) and his family must learn to cope with all the pressures and
hardships of the newfound fame.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     Although not a Disney film, 8 SECONDS certainly reminded me of
one.  Lane Frost was a god-honest rodeo cowboy, and Hollywood loves
cowboys right now, which perhaps explains the lovable, light treatment
of some heavy issues.  There's plenty of drama, but it's all easily
resolved and doesn't seem to have weight or consequences to it.
     The one issue that *is* dealt with is very heavy-handed.  Lane has
a strained relationship with his father.  Dad is very proud of him, but
incapable of praise other than through well-meaning critiques, even
when Lane's done it all.  Letting people know how you feel is an
important message, but seems rather cliched here.
     The rodeo action in 8 SECONDS was pretty exciting and well filmed,
though I suspect that many of the 8 second rides are a bit drawn out.
There's not much effort to explain anything about rodeo, we just know
that Lane Frost does it and he's damn good.  Why?  I don't know and it
really wasn't all that important for the story.
     My favorite over-heard comment about this movie: "Yeah, I liked
it, even though it was high on the cheese-factor."
     Yep.  We get cheatin' hearts, life on the road, and hard drinkin'
buddies who are tough as nails but, gosh, deep down they really *care*.
Lane is portrayed as a hard working, patient, generous, kind, and
usually thoughtful man.  He takes the time to talk to the little kids at
the rodeos because he "...wishes that someone had taken the time to do
that for him."  Gosh ....hearts are a-meltin' everywhere.
     In another scene, Lane and buddies have returned from a bar where
he abstained from drinking, "No thanks, I'll have a Coke please,"
literally causing a bar-brawl.  Lane endures buddy Tuff's ensuing
drunken accusations while calmly flossing his teeth.
     The other big fault of 8 SECONDS was the hurried feel.  They've
included all kinds of life messages and end up sacrificing quality for
quantity.  Near the end, one important scene got a collective "Whaa?!?"
as the audience mentally scrambled to incorporate this newest
development.  The important details of that scene were only explained
by an unseen, hard-to-hear rodeo announcer in the background a few
scenes later.  Maybe the film makers shoulda followed Lane's
advice--"do the best you can in those 8 seconds and then get off".
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     You might be disappointed by the cheese and shallow treatment if
you go to see 8 SECONDS and pay full price.  You'll have a much better
experience as a $1.99 rental experience.  While an inspiring story of
an outstanding sportsman, put 8 SECONDS on your VCR list.
