Title
Review for Savage Innocents, The (1959)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
     Doozy of a film by Nicholas Ray, unlike anything else he'd done in
Hollywood.  Straightforward tale of life in the Arctic circle finds
Inuit hunter Inuk (A believable performance by Anthony Quinn) trying to
settle down with a wife and make sense of his recent contact with white
traders who have established a post several months journey from his
hunting grounds.  Story could have been incredibly trite but the
intelligent screenplay (by Ray) manages to keep one step ahead.  The
only times it falters is when an unnecessary and annoyingly folksy
narrator (you'll feel like strangling him), who could have been lifted
straight out of a True-Life Adventure, keeps interrupting and
explaining the characters' behavior.  This wouldn't have been done if
the film had been made today, but the film-makers apparently felt the
need to inform the audience that they had done their homework on Eskimo
lifestyles.  Also, the narration serves to add a documentary flavor to
their story.  But why bother?  Probably because the producers did not
want to be stuck with a film centered around characters that viewers
found too alien and were unable to identify with.  Perversely, the
voice-over nearly spoils any authenticity the film tries to maintain.
Besides, it's more fun listening to the quirky speech patterns of the
Inuit characters than any narrator (they do not have the personal
pronoun "I").  This dialogue, more than any other device, molds the
film's distinctive, alien milieu.
     When Inuk and his wife--whose point of view direct the
story--first encounter rudimentary elements of white civilization, we
get two alien worlds/viewpoints for the price of one.  The conflict of
values, which governs the narrative drive from halfway through the
film, provides the major theme of the story.  It's hard to tell if Ray
is more interested in this plotline or the punctuation of rituals
throughout it.  We see rituals for death, birth, eating, hunting, etc.
They at least give him an excuse to be incredibly daring for 1959--in
what other film of that time does the leading lady bare her
breasts?--and Ray could portray attitudes toward sex more frankly on
screen in this quasi-documentary fashion than he could with his
contemporary social dramas.  Some must have found the portrayal of the
permissive Inuit lifestyle scandalous, surely the main reason Rank
distributors opted to back the project in the first place.  What's the
bet they considered calling it THE INNOCENT SAVAGES first up?  This one
has cult movie written all over it.  Watch for an uncredited and dubbed
Peter O'Toole making his screen debut--he'd reach superstar status
three years later when he was reunited with Quinn in LAWRENCE OF
ARABIA.
