Title
Review for I'm Gonna Git You Sucka (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     [The following review uses frank language to describe the film I'M
GONNA GIT YOU, SUCKA.  If you feel you may be offended, you may wish not to
read the review.]
     Shiiiit!  Hey, brother, you jiv'n me?  I mean I was spectin' this to be
one bad-ass film.  I mean the way some of the brothers were talkin' this
shit was supposed to be like...what was that other thing?  Like AIRPLANE!
Yeah!  Like, man, no way!  I mean these muthah-fuckers who made this thing
don't got what it takes to cut it.  I mean like no-fuckin-how.
     Well, shit.  Like, it wasn't all bad.  Some of it was cool.  I mean the
story had wha-cha-call possibilities.  I mean this dude gets out of the Army
to find his brother gold-chained to death.  That could happen.  Shit,
something like that happened to this dude I know.  But then this story
started messin' around with this big muther-fuckin crime lord called Mr.
Big.  Now you know and I know no muther-fucker is gonna go anywhere with a
name like Mr. Big.  Shit.  They gonna be more brothers laughin' at him than
at fuckin Eddie Murphy.
     So, like this dude has one badass mother.  I mean like when this bitch
gets mad she goes all the way!  Anyway, turns out she used to be like the
main squeeze of this guy who was like Shaft, only his name was Slade.  And
like when Slade hears what's been goin' down he starts actin' like the bald
guy in that MAGNIFICENT SOMETHING movie.  Like, shit, he starts gettin' a
bunch of mean brothers together to go in and wipe out this Mr. Big.  Well,
shit, he gets guys like Isaac Hayes and Jim Brown.  And, like there's a
bunch of funky shit goin down, like makin' fun of other movies.  And that's
cool.  But there just ain't enough of the funny shit and there ain't enough
of the fightin' shit.  No way, brother.  Now you want to see some good shit,
fuck I'M GONNA GIT YOU SUCKA and go see DANGEROUS LIAISONS.  Shit.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     You might be wondering why I'm reviewing this movie. Well, I'm
1/16 black, you know... Would you believe 1/64? Either way, I've always
known every ghetto slang word before the general public and been able
to appreciate black humor. Maybe it's because I grew up in such a
dangerous neighborhood and graduated from a school populated by Lakeas,
Lakeishas, Laquidas, Larissas, Latonyas, La Toschas, Latieshas,
Latricheshas, La Wandas, and a guy named Boogie. I'm also one of the
only white guys I know who actually likes rap music. That probably
originates from years of low-riding cars with 1.21 jigowatt sound
systems blasting the music of various M.C.'s and Ice's, while driving
by my house at ten miles an hour while I was trying to sleep. Different
story.
     Nevertheless, this was a hilarious movie from my standpoint.
Keenan Ivory Wayans may have struck out with 1995's detective parody A
LOW DOWN DIRTY SHAME (which more than lived up to its name), but this
movie is right on target. It's a take-off of the SHAFT and BLACULA-type
movies of the 70's, but keeps one foot on the ground, unlike other
parody movies like HOT SHOTS and NAKED GUN, which retreat into their
own bizarre little worlds.
     I'M GONNA GIT YOU SUCKA has its own alternate world, where gang
members get addicted to wearing too many gold chains and medallions,
but seems more like an actual movie with an actual story to tell
besides making us laugh. There are still a lot of funny digressions
from the plot--the Pimp of the Year pageant, Keenan on "Soul Train" and
the scene where Keenan's date begins taking off clothes and body parts
(one of the funniest movie scenes ever, methinks).
     Keenan plays a wimpy soldier who returns home to find his brother
dead and his family terrorized by crime boss Mr. Big and his henchmen
(Damon Wayans and Kadeem Hardison). Keenan solicits help from some
retired revolutionaries (including Isaac Hayes, Bernie Casey and
ex-football star Jim Brown) to take back the neigborhood.
     I'M GONNA GIT YOU SUCKA is an all-around funny movie that spoofs
blaxploitation films indirectly, by speculating on what would happen
ten years after those movies were over. It works from beginning to end,
with more than a few memorable moments for black and white viewers
alike. My mom even liked this movie.  If that's not an endorsement, I
don't know what is.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Dragan Antulov
It's not easy to categorise films in general, but with
comedies thing seem much simpler. There are three types of
comedies - situation comedies, character comedies, and,
finally, parodies. Parodies are the easiest form and that
can be proved by the way Hollywood made them in the 1980s.
Those made by the Zucker-Abrachams team are classic example
- bunch of hillarious gags, usually ridiculing most of the
commercial hits released in few last years, patched together
with something resembling the plot. I'M GONNA GIT YOU,
SUCKA, made in 1988, is also a parody, but parody with a
difference. First of all, it has some major theme to be
parodied - blaxploitation movies of 1970s. It is also a
author's work - talented black comedian Keenen Ivory Wayans
wrote the screenplay, directed the film and stared in the
main role.
The plot is set in a ghetto ("Every Ghetto U.S.A.", says the
opening title) where young black man just became another
victim of "O.G." - fatal overdose of gold chains. His
brother Jake Spade (Keenen Ivory Wayans) returns from the
Army and finds the remaining family under pressure from
goons who work for local crime lord Mr. Big (John Vernon).
Determined to protect the family, avenge brother and clean
his neighbourhood from gangsters, Jake seeks help from John
Slade (Bernie Casey), his childhood idol who used to fight
the criminals in 1970s. Slade reassembles his old crew -
Kung Fu Jones (Steve James), Hammer (Isaac Hayes) and
Slammer (Jim Brown) and they begin with their crusade.
It is a sad thing that I'M GONNA GIT YOU, SUCKA was made in
1988. Audience at the time probably didn't understand or
appreciate the blaxpoitation in-jokes and other period
references (like the BRADY BUNCH theme in the background),
unlike today's audience, accustomed to the great 1970s
revival. Any way, jokes in this film are of various quality,
often lame; Wayans, however, compensates that with some real
pearls. And most of all, Wayans obviously liked doing this
film, and same can be said about various performers. It is
great fun to see some blaxploitation heroes like Bernie
Casey or Jim Brown playing ten or fifteen years older,
middle-aged versions of themselves. Wayans also uses the
talents of his family - his brother Damon (later noted in
THE LAST BOY SCOUT) shines in a small, but memorable role of
Mr. Big's goon. The soundtrack was also good and utilised
for some good jokes. All in all, the film was perhaps badly
directed and some jokes aren't funny, but as a whole, it
isn't just entertaining for the audience, but it is also a
tribute to blaxploitation phenomenon.
