Title
Review for Evil Dead, The (1982)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Frankie Paiva
Stephen King said The Evil Dead was, "The most ferociously original horror 
movie I have ever seen." The author supported this film, and helped it to 
become the cult classic it is now. Two sequels, Evil Dead II and Army of 
Darkness followed in later years. So what does the original have going for 
it, besides a rave from a horror novelist? It has nothing, nothing at all. 
It's just a by-the-numbers horror picture. The type a Scream movie destroys 
with delicious malice.
A group of teens head out to a remote cabin in the mountains. Their plans for 
endless midnight orgies and marijuana highs get put on hold by their 
lodging's creepy aura. After some investigation, they find the cottage used 
to be a lab for a scary professor. He discovered the Book of the Dead, a 
publication that puts a curse on whoever reads it. The only way to break the 
hex is by dismembering the victim. Our hero, Ash (Bruce Campbell), reads the 
book, unaware of its power. Soon his friends are turning into zombies and 
chasing him through the house. It seems doubtful Ash has what it takes to 
stay alive, and cut up his former pals.
This is a movie that puts recent supposedly violent flicks like The Cell to 
shame. If you cannot handle a large, continuous amount of gore, this is not 
for you. The blood is extremely frequent and bursts out often. Prepare to see 
pencils, knives, clocks, chainsaws, trees, and more all used as weapons of 
destruction. Just because the carnage is excessive doesn't mean it's 
realistic. From first to last frame this is obviously a student film. The 
blood often looks like badly colored water. Clay gets employed near the end 
for beheadings, flesh explosions, and other bodily mishaps. Prepare not to 
eat oatmeal for a long time. Prepare to never look at trees the same way 
again. Despite the bloodshed, there is some nice composition in the first 
half an hour or so. After which the cinematography tries to follow two simple 
questions. Can the camera get closer? and Can we make it seem bloodier? 
Head out into the woods with some of the worst actors and least intelligent 
human beings ever. Overused, supposedly ominous music is your guide through 
the forest of an '80s Blair Witch. This overly gross gorefest is slightly 
scary about once, somewhere between zombie one's face being blown off and 
zombie two's foot being severed. It is occasionally good for a laugh, but 
director Sam Raimi tries too hard. 
The sequels fared much better than this movie, which many consider inferior. 
Yet I really had to ask myself whether I would survive two more Evil Dead 
movies. My unsettled stomach screams no.

Author
John Beachem
Five college students - Ash, Scotty, Cheryl, Linda, and Shelly (Bruce 
Campbell, Hal Delrich, Ellen Sandweiss, Betsy Baker, and Sarah York 
respectively), are out for a weekend trip to a cabin in the woods. They've 
rented it cheap, and are looking forward to a great time. However, things 
aren't looking too good when Ash's car nearly crashes, and the bridge to the 
cabin almost collapses under them. Still, they decide to press on. Things 
seem normal at first, but soon Cheryl is hearing voices coming from the 
woods, and while drawing her hand takes on a life of its own and draws what 
appears to be a book with a face. The other four shake the occurrence off, 
and think Cheryl is making it all up. Then one night at dinner, the cellar 
door opens of its own accord. Ash and Scotty venture below and find the very 
book Cheryl drew as well as a tape recorder. They play the tape recorder, 
which contains a recording by a professor who translated the pages of the 
book (called The Necronomicon). The recording awakens a demonic force in the 
woods, and it soon comes calling on our five brave (though eternally stupid) 
friends.
The real question you have to ask yourself before renting Sam Raimi's ("A 
Simple Plan") "The Evil Dead" is this: how cheesy do you like your horror 
movies? If, like me, you like a thick layer of cheese smothered on top of 
your horror flicks, you should have an absolute blast watching "The Evil 
Dead". This is the sort of fun, campy movie you don't see in Hollywood 
anymore. If, on the other hand, you like your horror films deadly serious 
and without campy humor, run from "The Evil Dead" as quickly as possible. 
This movie will be Satan come to earth for you, so run fast and run far. If 
you fall somewhere in the middle, well, here's a way to figure out if you'll 
enjoy the film or not. In one scene, a character is possessed by a demon and 
attacks two other characters. The possessed character is thrown into the 
fire and begins screaming as her face is charred. One of the two she was 
attacking pulls her out of the fire and she courteously thanks him for 
rescuing her before attacking once more. Sounds way too goofy and cheesy for 
your taste? Well avoid the film, because it's chock full of moments like 
that. Sounds hilarious? Go rent "The Evil Dead" right now and call up a 
couple of friends (the film is funniest when watched with a group of 
friends).
Let's face it, only one actor matters in the "Evil Dead" movies, and that's 
Bruce Campbell. Campbell is, and probably always will be, a sadly 
under-appreciated actor in Hollywood. Now bear in mind, his appearance here 
is one of his first, and his lack of experience shows in a lot of his line 
delivery. However, the little hints at a grand comic talent are already 
showing through in several scenes. The man has a range of facial expressions 
that only Jim Carrey can compete with, and his talents behind the camera are 
equally impressive. He was actually the executive producer for "The Evil 
Dead" and co-producer for its two sequels. It's a good thing Campbell is so 
good, because the rest of the cast... well... isn't. The remaining actors 
range from laughably bad to just plain awful in their talents, and it's no 
wonder that none of them rose to anything resembling fame in Hollywood. 
Ellen Sandweiss lands firmly in the laughably bad category, playing Cheryl 
as a little off kilter even before being possessed for reasons that will 
forever remain a mystery. Hal Delrich is just plain awful as the hot-headed 
Scotty; Betsy Baker has her moments, but generally remains laughable as 
Linda; and Sarah York is absolutely terrible in the film's (thankfully) 
smallest part. So why the high rating for a film with acting this bad? 
Because the acting in a movie like "The Evil Dead" doesn't matter one bit.
So if the acting doesn't matter, what does? There are two things that raise 
"The Evil Dead" above nearly every other horror flick out there, and they're 
both reasons the film has maintained a cult following for nearly twenty 
years. The first reason is because the film is packed with all sorts of gore 
effects. I mean once you hit about the twenty minute mark, you're not going 
to spend more than five minutes without seeing something designed to disgust 
the audience. Even today the amount of blood and gore in "The Evil Dead" is 
impressive. Just imagine how audiences reacted back in '82. The other 
reason, and the much more important one in my book, is Sam Raimi's 
remarkable camera work. Raimi has actually made quite a name for himself 
with his kinetic camera movements. As far as I know he was the first to use 
the technique utilized when the main demonic force moves through the forest. 
He keeps the camera low and moving relentlessly forward, knocking over 
everything in its path. The only sound that accompanies it is a low roar 
that increases in intensity till the force reaches its target. Raimi's use 
of low camera angles is quite effective when used to highlight what were 
once scary scenes. Take a scene where the cellar door blasts open and all 
the characters hover around, looking down into the blackness. Raimi aims the 
camera up at each character's face in turn from below, like something 
watching them from inside the cellar. There is one other thing that has made 
"The Evil Dead" famous (or possibly infamous), and that is the scene in 
which one character is raped by the forest. I give the scene points for 
originality, but did we really need to see that?
I'm sure when this film was released back in 1982 it scared audiences half 
to death. There are a few scenes that remain somewhat eerie even now, like 
Cheryl's hand becoming possessed and drawing a picture of the Necronomicon. 
When viewed these days, "The Evil Dead" is best viewed as a comedy/horror. 
In other words, you'll have a more fun if you don't take it too seriously; 
and you'll have a lot more fun if you don't take it at all seriously. Yes 
the dialogue is horrible (Scotty: "An animal! That's the stupidest thing I 
ever heard."), the characters have no personality (Ash doesn't even develop 
one till the sequel), and if placed alongside modern horror films, this one 
appears to have no budget (It actually was made on a shoestring). Yet none 
of that really matters, and if you're looking for great acting and character 
development you've obviously gotten the wrong movie. As an example of 
classic '80s horror films, "The Evil Dead" stands head and shoulders above 
the rest. I'd recommend the movie to anyone who enjoys cheesy "B" horror 
movies. If you don't like it, you'll not have wasted much time since the 
film only runs 85 minutes. I give it four and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Jerry Saravia
In 1982, Sam Raimi's first tongue-in-cheek horror film, "The Evil Dead", was 
released in theatres, and proved notable in receiving a rave review from 
Stephen King after its premiere at the Cannes Film Festival. The concept 
behind it was that a hidden force was unleashed in the woods, ready to devour 
anything in its path, including a group of young people staying in a remote 
cabin. The film was successful enough as a low-budget sleeper to spawn two 
sequels, each with a bigger budget than the next and all directed by Sam 
Raimi. What we have is a trilogy of horror, growing more tongue-in-cheek and 
goofy with each sequel. Below is a brief look at each film. 
The Evil Dead - I will not say that "The Evil Dead" is one of the best horror 
films ever made - it is not - but it is often repulsive, humorous and full of 
major shocks to the system to make any true horror fan happy. 
Bruce Campbell plays Ash, one of the group of college students who travel on 
an Oldsmobile to some remote cabin in the desolate woods of Michigan. In the 
opening sequence, a whirlwind force travels through lakes, swamps, and trees 
ready to attack the Oldsmobile. Things careen out of control briefly, yet the 
students manage to make it to the cabin, even going through a decrepit 
bridge. But nightfall comes, and one of them makes the mistake of reading 
from an old copy of the Book of the Dead (entitled "Necronomicon," a nod to 
H.P. Lovecraft) and before you know it, evil spirits are unleashed and 
zombies are made. The only way to kill these things is by dismembering and 
decapitating these ugly, evil spirits that possess everyone in the group. 
Naturally, Ash is the one that makes it out alive. 
There is plenty of blood and gore, and there is an inventive use of a pencil 
as a weapon. The film certainly is cheap-looking and barely audible in 
certain scenes, and some of the makeup and special-effects are practically 
garden variety. The strength of "The Evil Dead" is in the straightforward 
directing by Raimi and the astoundingly good cinematography by Tom Philo - 
the latter makes every shot eerie and menacing. There is a sense of 
claustrophobia to the film, a sort of latter-day "Night of the Living Dead" 
where hiding in an isolated cabin can prevent one from dealing with unseen 
forces. Naturally, these forces find their way in the cabin.
"The Evil Dead" also has some superb moments of horror and humor, 
particularly the scene where one girl stares into a window (we only see the 
back of her head) as she is able to read all the cards that her group is 
playing before turning around and screaming...well, you get the idea. I also 
like the vines attacking one girl in the forest and being dragged across 
thousands of twigs, while one of the "shemps" inserts itself in an 
area...well, you know the scene, need I repeat it? Some of the sexual 
connotations I could have lived without but still there is enough going on 
here to make anyone squeamish about going into the woods again. "The Evil 
Dead" is goofy horror to be sure, but fun nonetheless.
Evil Dead 2: Dead by Dawn - Here is an example of not so much a sequel, but a 
remake of the original. With a bigger budget and even better special-effects, 
Raimi continues where the original left off, and brings us even more gore and 
humor. 
At the end of the original, Ash was pursued by that evil force in the woods. 
Now he is back in the cabin enduring more torture by these unseen forces. 
There is a moment where his right hand takes on a life of its own, and Ash 
chops it off with a chainsaw. Needless to say, the hand scurries, hides and 
makes fun of Ash in ways that are so funny that the film's haunting momentum 
pauses and becomes more of a horror-comedy than a pure horror film. We see 
Ash's reflection in a mirror having a life of its own, dancing skeletons by 
the pale moonlight, giggling deer heads, heads being squashed in vises, lots 
of blood spilling into the screen from every direction (though nothing like 
the distasteful "Dead-Alive" by Peter Jackson from 1993), and ghouls and 
zombies yelling things like "I am going to take your soul!" 
Though relentlessly inventive and often inspired, "Evil Dead 2" begins to 
slack off a bit towards the end, especially with the inclusion of an 
archaelogist's daughter searching for her father who happened to live in the 
very cabin that is possessed. She thinks Ash may have killed her father, I 
mean, what would you think if you saw a man draped with blood and holding a 
chainsaw? But Raimi continues to make us feel the claustrophobia of being 
isolated and facing demonic forces beyond our own control. The humor and 
horror pays off, and the final sequence is certainly a doozy. 
Army of Darkness - Ash is back again, now he is stuck in the 13th century 
fighting Deadites and more ghouls and zombies! Huh? Well, you see at the end 
of "Evil Dead 2," Ash was transported back into time before being able to 
finish an incantation       that would have ended the evil spell. He and his 
beloved Oldsmobile landed in some foreign land in the 13th century, and now 
he is subject to the physical torture of some medieval lords. Ash does so 
well battling Deadites to the death that he is considered by the people to be 
their savior against the armies of darkness. Ash's goal, however, is to 
retrieve the Book of the Dead and get back home to his S-mart job where they 
"shop Smart!" There is also a love interest, a medieval damsel-in-distress, 
Sheila (Embeth Davidtz, who later appeared in "Schindler's List"), who 
convinces him to help her people.
"Army of Darkness" is hardly horror, it is an out-and-out campy comedy with 
plenty of thrills per second, and less blood and gore than the previous 
entries. It is practically a new version of Ray Harryhausen's "Jason and the 
Argonauts," albeit less sophisticated in its content if not its form. Ash is 
like Marty McFly in "Back to the Future," saying such anachronistic lines as 
"Groovy!" or "Give me some sugar baby." There are still some moments to 
treasure such as the Evil Ash sequence, the evil Ash Liliputians formed by 
reflective shards of glass, and Ash screwing up the simple line from "The Day 
the Earth Stood Still" ("Klattu Barada Nikto") while trying to choose the 
real Book of the Dead in a scene that echoes Indiana Jones. 
It is a fun-filled 82 minutes, but some of the gags are desperate and 
repetitive, and we start to get the feeling that Ash has had enough of 
battling demons, ghosts, and the vast army of skeletons. Probably Raimi has 
had enough as well, considering the ending has been changed radically from 
its more downbeat finish. Still, if nothing else, "Army of Darkness" led the 
way to more anachronistic, self-aware medieval stories, especially the recent 
TV series "Hercules" and "Xena," both winking at the audience in its complete 
absurdity and anachronisms.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Jamey Hughton
`The Evil Dead' has developed into a cult classic over the years. The
idea was concocted by Sam Raimi and his college buddy, Bruce Campbell,
obviously when their beer keg had run dry. They set out to make a little
horror movie with a microscopic budget, out in a confined setting, with
a mere 5-person cast. I'm sure neither Raimi nor Campbell had planned on
the massive following that `The Evil Dead' has compiled since 1982.
The fact that `The Evil Dead' was produced with such a tiny budget only
seems to add to the fright factor. The movie has a dark, dank and cheesy
appearance that perfectly accentuates the plot of demonic possession.
And please, don't get me wrong, the anemic story line of the film is
flat-out idiotic. The material could have easily developed into another
perpetually retarded horror picture from the early 80's. But - with
Raimi's wonderful style and cunning approach - it somehow develops it
into a frightening, atmospheric and innovative bloodbath. Those looking
for a fun time of bloody cadavers, inventive shocks and corny special
effects couldn't do much better.
There are only five performers in `The Evil Dead' - a quintet of college
students who have slipped away for a quiet weekend at a rickety old
cabin in the woods. Ash (Bruce Campbell), Cheryl (Ellen Sandweiss),
Scotty (Hal Delrich), Linda (Betsy Baker) and Shelly (Sarah York) are
mainly just the bunch of intellectually-impaired bimbos you would expect
from a horror film. After seeing something outside her window, one even
walks out into the middle of the woods to investigate. It could have
been a squirrel, but for whatever reason, the individual wanders into
the dark recesses of the forest calling `hello??' repeatedly. Movies
like `Scream' are so successful because they mock the horror genre with
such fun and accuracy. `The Evil Dead' does not revolve around
characters and dialogue. It's mainly about dismembered bodies, and
Raimi's ability to rattle our cages until we keel over like a petrified
sack of potatoes.
So, the five are living the good life until demons come and disrupt
their big party. Actually, the kids bring it on themselves, using a tape
recorder to play strange incantations which are supposedly recited by a
professor who previously stayed in the cabin. The magic spell awakes a
terrifying life force in the woods, and one by one the characters become
violently possessed by ferocious demons. Ash is left as the reluctant
hero, who barricades up every door and makes a last stand against the
demonic intruders.
Unlike it's two maniacal sequels, `Evil Dead 2' and `Army of Darkness',
this entry relies mainly on pulse-pounding horror. In that field, `The
Evil Dead' delivers in large, gory quantities. You may never want to go
camping again after enduring this relentless bloodbath of claustrophobic
chills. But, even though it's very subtle and hardly recognizable, Raimi
also injects a wry sense of humor to liven things up even more. There
are occasional moments that remind us, despite that `The Evil Dead' is
all in good fun. For instance, soon after poor Shelly has been hacked to
pieces (her severed parts still convulsing on the floor like gelatin),
Ash assures Scotty `we're all going to make it out of here. You, me,
Shelly.... well, not Shelly.'
While it may not be the bloodiest movie ever made, `The Evil Dead' could
easily register as the most disgusting. Scenes in which characters erupt
like pressurized tomatoes are repulsive and nauseating... not to mention
barrels of fun. You may feel obliged to lose your lunch during some
especially revolting bits. The one that caused my stomach to somersault
backwards occurred when a character rises from a buried grave, and rakes
poor Ash's leg with her fingernails (digging literally to the bone). Oh,
there's also the segment in which a girl is strapped down and raped by a
tree. That's in pretty bad taste, alright.
Campbell later evolved into a gung-ho heroic figure as the series
progressed, which was a lot of fun to watch, but here he is perfect. You
may recognizable Campbell from his prolonged stint on television's
`Xena: Warrior Princess' and a scene-stealing cameo in `Escape from LA'.
Sadly, little has come his way aside from the three `Evil Dead' films.
Campbell has an endearing everyman quality, and his delivery is brisk
and colorful, making him one of the more underrated actors of modern
cinema. Campbell's game performance and Raimi's tremendous direction are
the heart and soul behind the film.
It's not for all tastes, that's for sure, but `The Evil Dead' is a
highly enjoyable shocker for all who dare to grab their snorkel and
plunge in. Sam Raimi's delightful, dizzying camera work and imaginative
style help it prevail far over genre expectations. Why not rent this
diamond in the rough for Halloween?  It's one rare instance where a
tight budget actually paid off.
Comments Appreciated!  ">HREF="mailto:movieviews@hotmail.com">

Author
Chuck Dowling
Ultra low budget but extremely inventive horror film about a group of
friends vacationing in a cabin who accidentally awaken an evil force
in the woods via the Necronomicon, the Book of The Dead.  Bruce
Campbell stars as Ash, who eventually becomes the sole survivor and
has to battle both the demons from the woods, and his friends who have
become demons (including his own girlfriend).
The results shown on screen are amazing considering the film's tiny
budget, constant location changes, and a filming schedule that was
sporadic over two years.  Followed by two sequels: Evil Dead II (1987)
and Army of Darkness (1993).
The DVD release of this film from Elite Entertainment contains the
film in it's original aspect ratio of 1.33:1.  The disc contains two
versions of the film's audio: a stereo 2.0 track and a newly
remastered Dolby Digital 5.1.  Included are two separate running
commentary tracks: the first features writer/director Sam Raimi and
producer Rob Tapert and the second track features the film's star,
Bruce Campbell.
Campbell's commentary is informative and extremely witty, as he has a
story to tell for virtually every scene in the film.  Such informative
tidbits include: The original title of the film was going to be Book
of the Dead (and in fact when the film premiered in 1981 that was it's
title) and when they were asked to change the title to The Evil Dead,
everyone thought it was the worst title they had ever heard.  Also,
there's a scene early on in the film where the group sits around and
listens to a tape recorder which they've found that's explaining about
the demonic forces in the woods.  For that scene, it was written for
the characters to be smoking marijuana, so being the wacky kids that
they were at the time, they decided to actually smoke marijuana for
the scene.  Almost all of that footage became unusable because many of
the actor's had never smoked before, and as a result they became
"confused" and were unable to perform the scene.
I wish the entertainment factor was as high for the Sam Raimi/Rob
Tapert audio track.  The two people you'd think would be more
enthusiastic in talking about this film instead barely have much to
say at all.  Don't get me wrong here, when they do speak it's
entertaining to hear, but there are many instances where both are
silent for long periods of time.  Sometimes after one of those long
silences Rob will ask "Have anything to say Sam?"  To me, that's not a
good sign.  Also, it seems like Sam Raimi doesn't remember much about
the film and it's production...  well, compared to Rob and Bruce
anyway.
Also included on the disc is a photo gallery (which includes pictures
from the film's "gala" premiere) and about twenty minutes of raw
footage from the film.  This raw footage really shows you how much a
film can be improved upon using simple audio techniques.
Overall, The Evil Dead is a good low budget horror film, superior to
many films in it's genre.  And the collector's edition DVD release is
well worth your time if you're either a fan of the film or just a fan
of the filmmaking process.  All special edition DVDs should be this
thorough and entertaining.
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email:chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be reprinted
without permission.
