Title
Review for Tranceformer - A Portrait of Lars von Trier (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) Filmmaker Lars Von Trier (Breaking the Waves) bought a
kayak. His friend and collaborator Ernst-Hugo Järegĺrd was surprised and
asked if he was afraid, with the water so cold. No, he replied, he would
be too busy maintaining his balance to have any fear. 
That story, from the new documentary about Von Trier called
Tranceformer, is a fitting metaphor for his career. He is comfortable
when he is working, when he is creating. He can stand on a table and
direct a film crew, but when he is alone, when he is idle, - when he
doesn't have to work to keep his balance - his phobias take over. 
Von Trier was raised without much discipline. His parents often made him
set his own boundaries. He recalls feeling as though discipline was a
form of love he didn't receive. As a result of his upbringing, Von Trier
now has a lot of demons, some of which are touched upon in this
documentary. He talks rather casually about his intense self-loathing
and his myriad encumbering phobias. 
It is no wonder that so many of his films are dark and brooding, and
that they often explore the nature of Evil. Zentropa (A.K.A. Europa) is
shot in dark black and white with only occasional tints of pastel
colors. Set six moths after the end of WWII, it deals with the lingering
violence and anger of fading Naziism. 
In Breaking the Waves, the heroine is naive and neurotically dependent.
The film watches her decay as she copes with God, spiraling guilt, and
the rejection of her community following her husband's paralysis.  
The first films Von Trier ever made (when he was still a child) showed
an understanding of film's use and conventions. They also show an
understanding of when to break those conventions. At film school he
rebelled against the rules of filmmaking as set forth by his teachers -
to the delight of his fans. Breaking the Waves, for example, was shot
entirely using hand-held cameras. 
Von Trier is reputed to be camera-shy; he apparently gives very few
interviews. That reputation is supported by the fact that Tranceformer
is less than an hour long, with as many film clips and interviews with
friends as there are moments of Von Trier on-camera. That doesn't
detract from the documentary, however, because the friends say things
that Von Trier might not confess, and the clips show how Von Trier's
personality is rendered on celluloid. 
Nevertheless, Tranceformer seems incomplete by itself. Von Trier is a
quirky, neurotic character, but he doesn't come across as truly
fascinating unless you know what he has created on film. 
To be fully enjoyed, Tranceformer needs to be accompanied by some
foreknowledge of the man and his work, or by an interest in renting some
of his films. 
