Title
Review for Truth About Cats & Dogs, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS & DOGS (1996) **  Directed by Michael Lehmann. 
Written by Audrey Wells. Photography, Robert Brinkmann. Editing,
Stephen Semel.Production designer, Sharon Seymour. Music, Howard Shore.   
Cast: Uma Thurman (Noelle), Janeane Garofalo (Abby), Ben Chaplin 
(Brian), et al. A 20th Century Fox release. 96 min. Rated PG-13 
The title is catchy. It is actually the name of a call-in radio program 
that's the best part of the film. It is hosted by Dr. Abby Barnes, a 
veterinarian who handles questions (often funny) with aplomb, 
intelligence,  imagination and humor.  Jeanene Garofalo is charming in 
this role. You can see why her listeners like her and why one of them, 
Brian (Ben Chaplin) is so taken with her.
Brian is British, a freelance photographer who makes fine pictures. But 
art does not pay while commercial publicity photos do. Brian's attempts 
to snap a dog, a Great Dane on roller-skates, are quite amusing.  
When he calls in to say "thanks for your advice," and offer to meet Abby 
for a drink, she loses her composure. While professionally cool and 
authoritative, Abby is personally insecure about her looks. A victim of 
modern society's cult of certain stereotypes of female beauty, she 
thinks of herself as something like a dumpy, un-chic, unappealing 
brunette, perhaps a 2 on a scale of 10.
What with the emotion caused by Brian's call (and his English accent), 
she describes herself to him as a beautiful tall blonde. This fits her 
neighbor and new friend Noelle (Uma Thurman) a professional model that 
is being pushed around by a disgusting boyfriend. She towers over Abby, 
in size, not little gray cells.
Hoist by her own petard, Abby gets cold feet and has Noelle impersonate 
her with Brian. Noelle is something of a dim-bulb and, frankly, Brian's 
I.Q. does not impress me - especially since he has long phone calls with 
Abby, calls that reinforce a mutual attraction. This situation is more 
than improbable, as Abby and Noelle don't sound at all the same.
The impossiblities that follow have occasionally entertaining moments, 
if, that is, you suspend disbelief one hundred percent. The film's mood 
is pleasant , but the development is slack, coming to life when Abby is 
at the station's microphone. Some good bits are too thinly spread around 
the movie's 96 minutes.
Sometimes the story reaches a soporific level. There used to be 
sentimental flicks that moved the audience to tears, films called two or 
three-handkerchief movies. "Cats and Dogs" is a two or three espresso 
picture.
The switch of identities has made every reviewer mention "Cyrano de 
Bergerac." The resemblances are superficial. The film's logic holds no 
water:  Cyrano whispered to the handsome but un-smart Christian sweet 
words that Christian passed on to Roxane, in his own voice. 
The substitution of one person for another can be found in many a 
stage-play or film. What set "Cyrano" aside was less its plot than its 
poetry. "Cats and Dogs" is far too prosaic.
The picture is also predicated on a number of false issues. One is that 
Garofalo is an ugly duckling, which she is not, and Thurman a raving 
beauty, which she is not. Another presupposes that Abby never had a 
pass, live or by phone, made at her, which is surprising. Then we have 
the cliches about blondes:  the Dumb Blonde;  "Gentlemen prefer blondes" 
("...but marry brunettes"); etc. The movie might have explored the 
notion of "Gentlemen prefer Blands," the male mistrust of female brains. 
It doesn't.  
What carries the picture somewhat are certain dispersed gags, the animal 
jokes, and especially Garofalo.  I know Garofalo only from her 
efficient, abrasive persona in "The Larry Sanders Show," and from what I 
caught on TV recently: an unfunny, coarse stand-up appearance  based on 
a whole mess of insecurities. The overall impression until now was that 
Garofalo is like a pocket battleship. In the movie, however, her mix of 
sweetness, fears and intelligence gives her a likable, rounded 
personality.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     If you are looking for an entertaining film, and who is not, you
could do a lot worse than dropping in on THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND
DOGS.   The title comes from a radio talk show whose host, a
veterinarian,  is Abby Barnes (Janeane Garofolo).   With charm and wit
she hands out advice to those who call in asking for  advice about
their animals.  Abby is very good at helping those with problems but
her own, as is often the case in Life,  are not as easy for her to
solve.
     For one thing, the adorable and charming Abby thinks she is
neither adorable nor charming, so when Brian (Ben Chaplin) phones in
about his dog who loves to lick his face and Brian likes both the
advice and the sound of the voice dispensing the advice , Abby is at a
loss when Brian asks if he can meet her at a restaurant .and thank her
personally.  "What do you look like?" Brian asks.   "There goes the
ballgame," Abby thinks.   In a panic she describes herself as tall and
blonde, a description that  fits her neighbor, Noelle (Uma Thurman).
In any case, she has no intention of meeting Brian so what is a little
lie?
     Much like a female version of Cyrano, THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND
DOGS, has just what it takes to make the film so much fun to watch.
Brian searches for Abby and finds her. As the tall, willowy blonde
Noelle happens to be visiting her friend, it is natural that Brian
thinks Noelle is Abby; the description fits what Abby had told him.
>From there, Brian's falling in love with the woman he thinks is Abby,
makes for a funfilled film of mistaken identity but with its own
clever version.   It's a delight.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Since Edmond Rostand first committed the play to paper in 1897, 
CYRANO DE BERGERAC has become a reliable romantic formula.  From the 
various "straight" versions to Steve Martin's ROXANNE, and now THE TRUTH 
ABOUT CATS AND DOGS, the concept of a smart-but-plain person wooing 
their true love through a dumb, attractive intermediary has appealed to 
movie makers and audiences alike.  And, with a standout performance by 
Janeane Garofalo, this loose reworking makes for solid, if feather-
light, entertainment.
     It's hard to say enough about how good Garofalo is in this, her 
first major movie part.  In previous outings like REALITY BITES and BYE 
BYE LOVE, where she had supporting roles, she stole scenes; here, she 
walks away with the entire picture.  Possessing the rare star quality 
and natural charisma of performers like Sandra Bullock, Marisa Tomei, 
and Natalie Portman, Garofalo not only "eats up the lens", but also 
displays a fair amount of acting ability.  She's effective in dramatic 
moments, and her comic timing is perfect.  Although she gets second 
billing (after co-star Uma Thurman), this is her film, and it's likely 
to bring a number of offers for future work.
     The story, which starts out as upbeat variation of CYRANO before 
moving in another direction, introduces Garofalo as radio pet doctor 
Abby Barnes.  Her show, "The Truth About Cats and Dogs", has made her a 
household voice, but, as is often true for radio personalities, her face 
is less familiar.  One day, a British-accented photographer named Brian 
(Ben Chaplin) calls up with a problem:  he has an angry dog on roller 
skates ruining his studio.  Abby talks him through the process of 
pacifying the dog, and, in gratitude, Brian invites her out for a drink.  
She accepts, but, afflicted with low self-esteem, lies about her 
appearance.  Although Abby is a 5' 1" brunette, she tells Brian to look 
for someone 5' 10", blond, and "hard to miss" -- an exact description of 
her airhead actress/model neighbor, Noelle (Uma Thurman).
     When Abby explains her deception to Noelle, the statuesque beauty 
agrees to help, but it doesn't take long for things to get out of hand.  
Inevitably, Noelle becomes attracted to Brian, and the two women vie for 
his attention -- Noelle using her body and Abby, her voice. Brian 
doesn't realize that the face of his dreams isn't that of the woman with 
whom he has a seven hour telephone conversation that culminates in phone 
sex.
     Buying into the premise of THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS -- that 
any man could mistake a ditz like Noelle for Abby -- requires a huge 
suspension of disbelief, but, once you get past that stumbling block, 
the film is disarmingly charming, and even offers a few flashes of 
substance.  Nothing in the screenplay is groundbreaking, but there are 
some observations about low self-confidence.  Brian gets tongue-tied 
around women.  Abby is unsure of herself because she thinks she's ugly 
(although, in an ironic twist, Garofalo consistently looks more 
attractive than the "gorgeous" Thurman).  And Noelle has self-esteem 
problems because she believes herself to be stupid.
     The requisite chemistry between Chaplin and Garofalo is present, 
and the story follows an unthreateningly predictable route.  Director 
Michael Lehmann keeps both pacing and tone on track.  There aren't many 
surprises, but the script is written with a degree of wit, and there are 
some bitingly funny one-liners (all of which are delivered by Garofalo).  
As a romantic comedy, THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS offers exactly what 
fans of the genre appreciate -- lighthearted fun.  And, for Janeane 
Garofalo, this should be the launching pad for a promising career.

Author
Robin Redcrest
The URL of this review is:

http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/thetruthaboutcatsanddogs.html
I loved this movie for one reason - Janeane Garafalo.  I haven't
stayed up to watch her on Saturday Night Live, but ever since I
saw her as the blind-date-from-hell in the otherwise silly "Bye
Bye Love", I've been anxious to spend more time with her
on-screen.
Garafalo starts in this adaptation of the ancient tale of
Cyrano, as Dr. Abby Barnes, the host of a radio talk show about
pets.  She's supposedly a plain Jane, who, because of the
intelligence and wit she displays on the radio, wins the heart
(sight unseen) of a cute, sexy listener.  Naturally, when he
wants to meet her, she's too intimidated to show him what she
really looks like, so she talks her blonde, willowy and very
ditzy neighbor (Uma Thurman) into posing as her.
This premise might work, if Garafalo were truly plain, and
Thurman were truly beautiful.  But Garafalo is real, human and
way too adorable to be overlooked, and Thurman is really just
pretty messy.
But even if the contrast were greater,  come on folks!  In the
90s, it just doesn't ring true that physical beauty is
automatically the only thing that brings two people together.  I
just saw "Jane Eyre" and watched William Hurt fall in love with
the truly plain Charlotte Gainsburg over supermodel Elle
MacPherson because, frankly, she was a much more interesting
person.  In this movie, Abby is so bright and funny and
delightful, that a guy would have to be crazy not to want to
spend time with her.  And, Thurman is so ditzy and (allegedly)
adorably disheveled that a guy might be tempted to take a second
look, but after a very short time would have serious trouble
sinking an intelligence depth finder.  Zzzzzzzzz....
Garafalo's appeal defies description, because it's all based on
how she reacts in the moment.  She's like that hilariously funny
best friend who can finish your sentences and make you laugh in
that "you-had-to-be-there" way.  See this movie and be there. 
It'll probably make you take a second look at that
less-than-glamorous person in your life, who's presence you keep
gravitating towards even though he or she is "not your type."
A review by Robin Redcrest of USPAN's 
Circle of Critics

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Do you want to know the truth about cats and dogs? Do 
you? Well, as this movie shows us, they make good companions but 
pale in comparison to the joy and fulfillment romantic relationships 
can bring. Unfortunately, there's a giant roadblock set up in our 
culture that only certain people can get through while the rest 
of us mill around outside, feeling sorry for ourselves. A Checkpoint 
Beautiful kind of thing, and Janeane Garafolo's character Abby relates 
to it well.
        Like a certain oversized teenage movie critic, she is 
intelligent and has a great sense of humor but strikes out with the 
opposite sex because she sees herself as physically unattractive, and 
the men seem to be backing her up on that. Meanwhile, her gorgeous 
neighbor Nora (Uma Thurman... Uma being the only woman's name 
worse than Nora) attracts men like flies. As Abby tells her, "You burp 
and they think it's cute. You barf and they line up to hold your hair 
back." But Nora's down on herself for being too shallow and 
superficial. We all have our prwhen a man calls in to veterinarian 
Abby's talk radio show wanting to know how to get the roller skates 
off his basset hound. (Oh come on, any idiot knows how to handle 
that problem!) He likes her personality and professional demeanor 
and asks to meet her in person. Abby, though, knows her body 
doesn't match her personality and that she probably won't have a 
chance with him once he sees her. So she gives him Nora's body 
description and stands him up.
        Nora happens to be in the studio the next day when the 
dog man comes by and Abby asks her for a big favor. She goes along 
with the masquerade and the three of them head out for a night of fun, 
Abby assuming the role of a goat cheese farmer named Donna. The 
dog man finds out even though this girl is beautiful, she's not quite 
as intellectual or confident about herself in person, but he doesn't 
suspect anything, realizing he's not living in a "Three's Company" 
episode.
        The charade continues, with Abby furthering the 
relationship over the phone (including a decidedly unnecessary 
phone sex/masturbation sequence) and Nora furthering it in person, 
while eventually finding herself attracted to the dog man. Like 
SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE, this comedy/romance is predictable 
all the way through, but we care enough about the characters 
that we root them on and will the romance to blossom.
        THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS isn't quite as 
entertaining as I was expecting it to be, but it handles well a 
theme I could identify with. The thing is, I find Janeane Garafolo 
rather attractive. She's no Uma but I'm sure in real life she'd have 
no problems attracting men. I, on the other hand, couldn't attract 
a man to save my life... and am rather proud of that fact.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     "The Truth About Cats & Dogs" is a popular radio talk show for pet
owners to call in and ask questions of veterinarian Abby Barnes (played
by Janeane Garofalo of "The Larry Sanders Show").  Abby is intelligent
and very funny, but she feels she is short and plain-looking.
(Garofalo herself is actually attractive, but perhaps is plain by
Hollywood actress standards.)  To put it mildly, Abby is extremely
self-conscious about her looks, particularly when compared to her tall,
blond neighbor Noelle Slusarsky (Uma Thurman).  When a listener to her
program, Brian (Ben Chaplin), becomes interested in Barnes and wants to
set up a rendezvous with her, he needs a description, and on a lark
Abby describes Noelle.  So begins a love triangle in which Brian thinks
he loves a single woman with Abby's personality and Noelle's body.  He
believes Noelle is actually Abby and that Abby is the veterinarian's
friend Donna.  If the basic plot sounds familiar, it borrows no small
amount from Rostand's play "Cyrano de Bergerac" or perhaps that play's
reframing in modern terms, ROXANNE.  The result is the sort of light
romantic comedy with the two women trying to pull off the charade and
keep Brian from suspecting.  But eventually the plot gets beyond the
charade into the question of what is it that is the source of the real
attraction?  Is it the physical beauty of Noelle or is it the
personality of Abby?  The film makes some very serious, albeit sugar-
coated, observations about how our society discriminates by degree of
attractiveness.
     And if one wants to see examples of that discrimination in action,
one need only look at the billing of this film.  Top billing goes to
Uma Thurman who is not the main character, has fewer lines than Abby,
and who has less personality on the screen.  The practical fact is that
Thurman is more of a star, particularly after PULP FICTION.  As such
she has more marquee value.  Viewing audiences are perceived as having
precisely the same set of misplaced values about which the film is
complaining.  Had Janeane Garofalo gotten top billing one might feel a
little better about the film.  This is not to say that Thurman does a
bad job, by any means.  This may well be her best role to date.  She is
in some ways a mirror image of Garofalo's character.  Garofalo is
actually attractive but believes she is ugly.  This may have been an
artifact of bad casting or it may be intentional.  Thurman's character
is relatively bright but has convinced herself that she is all looks
and hairdo with nothing of any substance inside of her.  In any case
Thurman, knowing she has top billing, is content to let Garofalo be the
real star.  And Garofalo easily fills the vacuum with sparkle and wit.
     This is a first produced script by Audrey Wells whose previous
work includes being a jazz disk jockey and producing and directing
political commercials.  Some of her dialogue is very funny, though
often one gets the feeling that real people are not this witty
spontaneously and the conversations are too polished to be credible.
Of course the same complaint could be leveled at Woody Allen's screen
writing.  Probably more bothersome is the character of Brian who seems
to be incredibly dense not to realize that the shorter woman has both
the voice and the quick wit of the woman on the radio.  He seems
perfectly willing to believe that the tall blond who is afraid of his
dog and the radio veterinarian who has explained to him how to handle
and calm that dog could be the same woman.  The fact that Uma Thurman's
character has to consult with Janeane Garofalo's character before
treating a turtle does not seem to tip him off that there is anything
strange going on.
     The film boasts a bouncy score by Howard Shore, who is good when
he does his own composing, but the film relies a little too much on
source music.  Telephones seem to play a large part in THE TRUTH ABOUT
CATS & DOGS and it would not surprise me to hear that this film has
contributed greatly to the sale of cordless phones.  There is even an
advertisement for an identifiable long distance phone company played in
the background of one scene, which seems a somewhat crass touch.
Direction of this somewhat spotty is by Michael Lehmann whose own
career has been spotty, having directed HEATHERS, MEET THE APPLEGATES,
HUDSON HAWK, and AIRHEADS.
     THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS & DOGS could have stressed its more serious
theme a little more, but it is an enjoyable comedy and rates a high +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Rebecca Wan
Directed by: Michael Lehmann
Written by: Audrey Wells
Produced by: 20th Century Fox / Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp.
Cast:   Uma Thurman (Noelle Slusarsky), Janeane Garofalo (Abby Barnes),
 Ben Chaplin (Brian).
Run Time: 97 minutes
Rating: **1/2 out of *****
Theatres: Lido, Jurong.
THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS should really be called THE
TRUTH ABOUT  HOW TO DRESS IN A HOLLYWOOD FILM. On the
surface it may seem to be what everyone says it is: a Cyrano de Bergerac
story with a gender twist and a sweetheart ending blah blah blah ... 
Yawn.
This we know, and the ending we can guess without even stepping into this
film. In THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS, Janeane Garofalo is an
intelligent and cultured animal guru who runs--yes, get this--a radio 
show,
where she soothes away her callers' pet problems by recognizing and
diagnosing every symptom they decribe. Garofalo  plays the violin,
reads thick books and is one with every single animal she meets, except 
for
men. Men ignore her because she is short and brunette, and does not wear
concealer.
Unlike her beautiful neighbour Uma Thurman, who lives in a terraced
ground floor apartment, has never received gift books without pictures
(how many times have we heard that one?), who always wears long, swishy,
 spring dresses, sweaters tied around her waist and is blonde, tall, thin 
and
cutely dorky with her oversized, liquid eyes and sharp cheekbones and 
dewy
skin, Janeane is a little rounder, she's petite, she wears dark colors, 
but
most of all, she wears her hair in a Kathy Bates do  from MISERY. In
MISERY Kathy Bates played a psychotic nurse who breaks handsome
James Caan's legs so that she can keep him in her house with her. Kathy
Bates was also overweight, and she was plain and didn't have a boyfriend,
so, clearly, she was insane. In DIABOLIQUE Kathy Bates wore her hair in
a slightly more decent style, but she wore pants all the time and didn't 
comb
her hair, so, clearly, she was a man-basher with lesbian tendencies. 
Unlike
Kathy in both films, Uma Thurman is a blonde goddess for
whom things always work out. As Janeane herself puts it: "when you burp
men think it's cute, when you throw up they want to hold your hair back."
In CATS &  DOGS, Uma dresses in pastel colours all the time and has a 
cute,
layered wispy haircut, but because she is so beautiful she also isn't 
afraid to
pull her hair back for that sixties' "no fringe" look that makes women
look baldfaced unless they have good bone structure.
What this all goes to show is that in the fabled worlds that Hollywood
creates for us to lose ourselves in, women are women and men are men.
Men, of course, can sometimes be women, as Patrick Swayze and Denzel
Washington proved in TO WONG FOO, THANKS FOR EVERYTHING,
JULIE NEWMARR, but when women dress like men it means that men don't
find them attractive. So although Janeane is short and dumpy, she wears
*skirts*, which proves that she is potentially attractive to men, and
that all she needs is better hair and some pore minimizer.
But when Janeane falls in love with a man, she doesn't go out and get a
makeover as you would expect, but instead convinces gorgeous Uma
to pretend to *be* her. Throughout the whole movie, Janeane is very
insecure about her looks, and director Michael Lehmann, who also directed
HEATHERS and AIRHEADS, is always pointing out to us, the audience,
that men ignore her but cannot stop looking at Uma. Men don't hold
doors open for Janeane, but when it comes to Uma, they get into accidents
because their eyes are on her crossing the road instead of
on the cars in front of them. Naturally, Janeane, who has already lost a
lot of weight since her portly days in REALITY BITES,  is somewhat 
perturbed
 about this, and even though she and Brain (Ben Chaplin) hit it off on 
the
phone and connect so well that they can have sex without even meeting
each other, she worries that when Brian, who is sexy, arty and has an 
accent,
finds out he has been shtupping her instead of the Goddess Uma, he will 
be
angry and
she will lose him.
Unaware that she is in the safe zone and will in all likelihood get her
man--she wears skirts, is not as huge as Kathy Bates, and also looks
very nice in russet tones--Janeane gets very tangled in the process
of deceiving poor Brian, who, bless his soul, is a dimwit not to realize
that Janeane, whom he talks to on the phone all the time, has a much
richer and lower voice than Uma's higher-pitched, perky drawl. Things
 get rather messy towards the end, but you'll probably want to find
out how it turns out for yourself. The movie mostly champions Janeane's
cause, although Uma is portrayed as a nice, well-meaning person, and all
through it I wanted to reach out and comfort her, and say,
"Janeane, it's really ok. You're almost there. You were only Wynona's
best friend in REALITY BITES, but you've lost so much weight that
you're now a lead veterinarian. Ricki Lake lost a hundred pounds and
they gave her the number two talk show in America. Oprah is number
one only because 9 million people tune in every day just to see how much 
weight
she's lost or put on that day (I say "lost or put on" because with Oprah
it's such a mystery all the time, and that's why I watch Oprah too). One
day, Janeane, you'll be thin enough to have your own bathing suit scene,
and then you'll be the topactress in Hollywood."
Although its overall premise is a little silly, I enjoyed this movie very 
much
because of Janeane herself, who is funny, sharp and delivers her lines 
with a
wryness that reminds me of old Hollywood wise-cracking heroines like
Bette Davis. And despite the silliness of her being so hip that Brian 
gives
her a book of letters from Sartre to Simone Bouvoir, yet still inable to 
fathom
that Brian loves her for her brain and not for Uma's body, this movie
moves along quickly, has some nice, funny lines that will make you smile,
and is a relief from movies with Tom Cruise wearing rubber masks and 
dangling
from ceilings.
The Flying Inkpot's rating system:
 * Wait for the video.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.


Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS & DOGS is a light hearted and delightful
retelling of the CYRANO DE BERGERAC story.  It is a fun movie with not
a lot of substance, but with plenty of style and wit.  Although not
quite as good Steve Martin's version called ROXANNE, it nevertheless
has a script by Audrey Wells that is superb - full of intelligent
humor.  Although it is certainly no laugh riot, there are many jokes,
small and large, to keep your attention and fix a smile on your face.
Not only does the script possess creative humor, it fashions compelling
characters for whom the audience really cares.  A lightweight show
certainly, but a sweet one.
     Dr. Abby Barnes (Janeane Garofolo) is a radio talk show
veterinarian whose show is called "The Truth About Cats and Dogs."  One
day a photographer called Brian (Ben Chaplin) calls in with a problem
he is having with a wonderful big dog named Hank (Hank the Dog).  Hank
is upset because he has to be on roller skates for the picture.  Brian
falls for Abby's voice, but Abby lacks self-confidence with her looks
so she lies about whom she is.  Actually she is a short but a little
chunky brunette with a lovely and attractive smile.  Nevertheless, she
tells Brain that she is her tall, thin, blonde, and gorgeous neighbor
Noelle Slusarsky (Uma Thurman).
     The next day on the phone, Abby asks Brian, "How'd it go?"  with
Hank.  He says, "he snored, but we stood it."  She inquires, "How'd you
do it?", and he explains, "He slept on my face so I couldn't hear him."
     Noelle doesn't understand Abby's lack of sexual activity, asking,
"You gotta have a boyfriend, don't you?  Otherwise it's just you, a
cat, and 40 candles on your birthday cake."  Abby envies Noelle's
beauty, telling her, "You burp and guys think its adorable.  You puke
and they line up to hold your hair back."  Noelle on the other hand,
does not like her life as a model, explaining, "I don't eat anything so
I can look good on the outside, but on the inside, there's nothing."
     During most of the movie we have almost five foot Abby hanging out
with almost six foot Noelle and creating some hilarious visuals.  The
only major dirty word in the show is a single use of the F-word by
Noelle in a great line that almost had me double over in laughter.
Both of the actresses are good, but this is Garofolo's show.  She is
terrific - strong, witty, vulnerable, and extremely humorous.  Her
funny line at the end of the movie is the best part of the show.
     Thurman does a good job of making Noelle into an airhead without
resorting to caricature.  After Brian gives her a book, Noelle is
shocked saying, "nobody has ever given me a book before that doesn't
have pictures in it."
     Chaplin has a limited role as the sweet and boyishly handsome
boyfriend.  He does this well, but the stars are the two female leads,
and he is there strictly to complement them.  Once Abby puts him to the
test by wanting to know, "If you are trapped in Biosphere 3, whom would
you want to bring: Time's Woman of the Year or Playboy's Bunny of the
Year?"  Okay guys, what would you have answered?
     I do not know exactly what constitutes a "chick flick," but the
large audience on opening night was over three quarters women with more
all female couples than mixed sex couples so perhaps this is a chick
flick.  As a male however, I was just as impressed by the show as was
my wife.
     I like the way, the art of long and intelligent telephone
conversation is a central part of the film.  The film really teaches
you that beauty is more than skin deep.  Actually, I thought there
should have been more of a contrast between Abby's looks and Noelle's.
Abby's clothes are suitably clunky, but Noelle's frocks are too plain
and her make-up too washed out.  In contrast, Abby had great make-up.
I would pick Abby every time as would I suspect will most intelligent
men watching the show.
     THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS & DOGS runs a fast 1:37 thanks to good
editing and pacing by editor Stephen Semel and director Michael
Lehmann.  It is correctly rated PG-13.  There are only a few bad words,
no violence, no nudity, and the sex is limited to the telephone.  I
suspect the film would be fine for most kids over 10.  I recommend the
show to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Craig Franck
Janeane Garofalo plays Abby, the host of a call in talk show about
pets. She gives advice to people about cats and dogs and other
creatures, great and small.
When a caller asks to meet with her, insecurity about her appearence
causes her to lie about her looks and stand up the man. She describes
Noelle (Uma Thurman), who lives down the hall from her, when asked
what she looks like because she never plans on meeting the caller.
The caller, Brian (Ben Chaplin), is persistent; he shows up at the
station. As luck would have it, Noelle is seated at the mike and the
die is cast on the deception: on the phone or radio, it's the real
Abby; in person, it's Noelle standing in for her.
This Cyrano de Bergerac-like scheme just sort of naturally unfolds,
but it can hardly be the basis for a real relationship. Ben isn't
stupid and senses something is up with the two women; this feeds
his interest in Abby. He has most in common with the real Abby,
and Noelle really can't keep up. When Brian gives her a book or
asks what she thinks about a photograph, she can't relate the way
the real Abby can. Abby and Noelle are different kinds of women.
Abby is independent and is fine with her pets. Noelle can't
imagine herself not being in a relationship and must use a check
list from a magazine to experience the epiphany that, yes, indeed,
her current boyfriend is an abusive loser.
The whole thing is unfortunate because Abby and Brian hit it off
so well over the phone. Also, Brian seems like a nice guy and Abby
is an attractive women with a pretty face and a warm smile, but next
to the tall, thin, and exotic Uma Thurman she must feel short and
dumpy looking. That's sad, because Brain doesn't seem like he is
necessarily looking for a Vogue model for a girlfriend.
What's great about this movie is instead of degenerating into a
farcical romp, the characters are developed and you instantly
want to like all three. Brian connects with these two women at
whatever level he can, which is very different depending on
whether he's got Abby on the phone, or "Abby" in person. There
is a great phone scene in which Abby and Brian have a long talk
culminationg in phone sex. There is also a very erotic scene where
he feeds Noelle -- the goody starved model -- some forbidden desert.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This likable romantic comedy stars Janeane Garofalo (BYE BYE
LOVE, REALITY BITES) as a talk-show pet doctor who pretends to be
her blonde-model friend (Uma Thurman) after a charming caller (Ben
Chaplin) asks her out on a date.  (Think "Cyrano" Lite.) Mildly
hilarious before it descends into "touchy-feely" tedium, THE TRUTH
ABOUT CATS AND DOGS is hampered by the casting of two equally
attractive leading ladies.  For the conflict to work as it's
written, the characters need to be a real "Mutt and Jeff" pair.
However, Ms. Garofalo is easily as appealing as (if not more than)
Ms. Thurman.  (If Uma looks less-ravishing than usual, I'd blame the
terrible 'do that she wears!  Woof!) Director Michael Lehmann
(HEATHERS) tries to make Janeane look frumpy, but to no avail.  She
shines even brighter than her co-star and that's a problem for
believability.  (Maybe a better title would be THE TRUTH ABOUT
WOMEN'S SELF ESTEEM?) That said, Janeane, Uma, and Ben Chaplin have
a very good chemistry together.  They make this a trip to the vet
that's arguably worth taking, even for those of us who gag at all
the canine- and feline-related humor.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Christopher Null
     What happens if you meet someone with whom you have almost everything
in common, you find yourself falling for them, but the sparks of romance
just don't seem to fly on a physical level?  Maybe you need an extra body,
and you can just play Cyrano in the background until that fateful moment
when everything is revealed with hilarious results.
     Such is the case in THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS & DOGS, a pleasantly funny
romance that takes another twist on the Cyrano tale, by taking two very
different women (Janeane Garofalo and Uma Thurman) and pitching them at one
guy (English actor Ben Chaplin).
     In this version, Garofalo plays Abby Barnes, a veterinarian who hosts
the titular pet-oriented talk show.  When Brian (Chaplin) calls in about
his new dog's wacky antics, he is immediately smitten by Abby's voice.  And
when Abby describes herself, it isn't is a 5'1" brunette, but as Abby's
model neighbor Noelle (Thurman)--a 5'10" blonde.  A simple wig is out of
the question, so Abby opts to "use" Noelle's body as a surrogate, wooing
Brian on the phone while Noelle exhibits her physical charms.  Meanwhile,
Brian unwittingly falls for both of them.
     The sweetness factor of THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS & DOGS is almost
unbearable--full of oohs and aahs, largely due to literal doses of humor
relating to the parade of animals that punctuates the film.  Audrey Wells'
debut script is also a mushy affair, but it works well enough, even though
it feels a lot longer than it really is (95 minutes).  In fact, everything
here would work a lot better if all the best jokes hadn't been beaten to
death in the rotten trailer for an otherwise pretty good movie.
     That aside, Michael Lehmann's direction (he also directed HEATHERS) is
fine for this story, but the real kudos go to Garofalo, who is one of the
funniest comedic actresses working today and proves it here, and,
surprisingly, to Chaplin, who bored me to tears in last year's period drama
FEAST OF JULY, but turns out to be great in the comic medium.
     I'm really pleased that the theme of romance transcending physical
beauty is being explored again, but the only problem is that Garofalo is
plenty cute in her own right, and in my opinion, can hold her own against
the supermodels any day.  But it's still great to see her get the guy.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com
-Screenwriter-Producer  /  Novelist-Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Christopher Null
     What happens if you meet someone with whom you have almost everything
in common, you find yourself falling for them, but the sparks of romance
just don't seem to fly on a physical level?  Maybe you need an extra body,
and you can just play Cyrano in the background until that fateful moment
when everything is revealed with hilarious results.
     Such is the case in THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS & DOGS, a pleasantly funny
romance that takes another twist on the Cyrano tale, by taking two very
different women (Janeane Garofalo and Uma Thurman) and pitching them at
one guy (English actor Ben Chaplin).
     In this version, Garofalo plays Abby Barnes, a veterinarian who hosts
the titular pet-oriented talk show.  When Brian (Chaplin) calls in about
his new dog's wacky antics, he is immediately smitten by Abby's voice. 
And when Abby describes herself, it isn't is a 5'1" brunette, but as
Abby's model neighbor Noelle (Thurman)--a 5'10" blonde.  A simple wig is
out of the question, so Abby opts to "use" Noelle's body as a surrogate,
wooing Brian on the phone while Noelle exhibits her physical charms. 
Meanwhile, Brian unwittingly falls for both of them.
     The sweetness factor of THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS & DOGS is almost
unbearable--full of oohs and aahs, largely due to literal doses of humor
relating to the parade of animals that punctuates the film.  Audrey Wells'
debut script is also a mushy affair, but it works well enough, even though
it feels a lot longer than it really is (95 minutes).  In fact, everything
here would work a lot better if all the best jokes hadn't been beaten to
death in the rotten trailer for an otherwise pretty good movie.
     That aside, Michael Lehmann's direction (he also directed HEATHERS)
is fine for this story, but the real kudos go to Garofalo, who is one of
the funniest comedic actresses working today and proves it here, and,
surprisingly, to Chaplin, who bored me to tears in last year's period
drama FEAST OF JULY, but turns out to be great in the comic medium.
     I'm really pleased that the theme of romance transcending physical
beauty is being explored again, but the only problem is that Garofalo is
plenty cute in her own right, and in my opinion, can hold her own against
the supermodels any day.  But it's still great to see her get the guy.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter-Producer  /  Novelist-Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list
