Title
Review for Yao a yao yao dao waipo qiao (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The Triads are in Southeast Asia very much what the Cosa Nostra is
in the United States, a secret society that runs organized crime.  Some
historians attribute them to the 17th Century Heaven and Earth Society,
augmented by an outgrowth of the Boxers of the 1898-1900 Boxer
Rebellion.  In the beginning and for much of the intervening time their
avowed goal was to return the Ming Dynasty to power in China.  It is
not likely that they still take that cause seriously, but they still
hold a great deal of power in the countries where they operate in
places as diverse as Vietnam, the United States, and the Netherlands,
though probably not much in their native China, having been to a large
extent cleared up in 1949 and 1950 by an equally ruthless Communist
government.
     However, the title SHANGHAI TRIAD is a play on words.  The film is
really about a triad of three people involved in the underworld of
1930s Shanghai.  At least the English subtitles never explicitly say
they are Triads.  Suffice it to say one of the characters runs a
Shanghai crime syndicate, controlling the trade in opium and
prostitution.  And that could be part of the Triads.
     Shuisheng (played by Wang Xiaoxiao) is a country boy brought to
Shanghai by an uncle who is a flunky for Mr. Tang (Li Boatian), the
biggest crimelord in Shanghai.  Shuisheng's new job is to be a servant
for Tang's mistress Xiao Jinbao (Gong Li) a prostitute and a singer in
Tang's nightclub.  We see the story from Shuisheng's viewpoint from
which it is frustratingly difficult to see who it is killing whom and
why.  It will be more clear by the end of the film, but in the mean
time the story concentrates more on how cruelly treated Shuisheng is by
the beautiful prostitute Xiao Jinbao, who clearly is herself very
angered and frustrated by something and takes it out on Shuisheng.
Some of her anger is caused by her own virtual captivity by Tang.  In
spite of her status as a popular singer, Tang keeps her on a short
leash and uses her like a piece of furniture.  Shuisheng struggles to
understand his new employers and their current crisis.
     By now international audiences have come to expect Zhang Yi-Mou
films to star Gong Li.  The two have been very closely associated since
1988, having made RED SORGHUM, JU DOU, RAISE THE RED LANTERN, THE STORY
OF QUI JU, and TO LIVE.  In fact, their association is to come to an
end after just one more film already made but not yet released entitled
TEMPTRESS MOON.  Gong Li gives her most unusual and perhaps most
complex performance.  But perhaps she plays it with a little less
credibility than in some of her previous films.  Certainly this is the
most fanciful role she has played.  It is hard for a Westerner to judge
nuances in her acting due to the language barrier in this subtitled
film.
     Zhang is not constrained by some of the conventions of popular
Western films, so he is free to experiment a little with the form.  The
plot takes some turns that would be unlikely in a Western film,
particularly toward the end.  He is also able to tone down the violence
or leave it off-screen entirely.  And not just the violence but much of
the crime story takes place where the viewpoint character, Shuisheng,
cannot see it.  Zheng uses Steadicam shots to give us Shuisheng's
subjective viewpoint extensively.  This is his first use of Steadicam
and he reports in an interview that he mistrusts a reliance on the
device.  This is certainly one of Zhang's most opulent films and it
seems very strange to see musical production numbers in one of his
films.  Still, one cannot say overall that it all works.  I rate this
one a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Eric Y. Yap
    After tackling the foibles of modern Chinese bureaucracy and the
experiences of ordinary lives toiling under Communist rule, director
Zhang Yimou returns to the pre-Communist era in his latest release,
"Shanghai Triad".  Set in the 1930's, the movie traces a week in the
life of one of the notorious Shanghai triads or gangs, as seen through
the eyes of a 14 year-old boy, Tang Shuisheng (Wang Xiaoxiao).  The
Shanghai gangs have long been a favorite topic of Hong Kong film makers
as they present a complete package of the important elements one would
expect in a Hong Kong action flick: gangsters, glamorous women, and
revenge.  Zhang's understated version does not seek to compete with his
high-octane counterparts which are replete with bloody violence, sex,
and stunts galore.  The film's focus is not on the gangs themselves,
but the system the represent:  notably, the original Chinese title of
the movie contains neither "Shanghai" nor "Triad" but is instead the
title of a simple children's song.  "Shanghai Triad" returns to
familiar themes sounded by Zhang's earlier works, such as the loss of
innocence, and entrapment in a system from which there is no escape.
    The movie unfolds through the eyes of Shuisheng, a simple country
boy who comes to Shanghai with the simple ambition of earning enough
money to open a tofu store back home.  His Sixth Uncle (Liu Xuejian)
who has arranged his placement with the triad, soon impresses upon him
that there are a hundred country bumpkins who are dying to take his
place.  Shuisheng has great opportunities in front of him, and if he
would only put in his time, he could "become somebody", presumably like
Sixth Uncle himself.  Yet while Sixth Uncle is a know-it-all, and
almost arrogant in front of Shuisheng, he is transformed into a totally
subservient, cowering lackey before the Boss of the gang (Li Baotian). 
Sixth Uncle will do anything and everything for the Boss, from
chauffering the Boss and his women around, to delivering contraband, to
acting as a bodyguard.  Between these two extreme postures of arrogance
and subservience, however, is a man ruing opportunities lost, one who
wonders how he has come to be trapped in a stagnant position with no
chance of ever advancing.
    Shuisheng's assignment with the triad is to serve Xiao Jinbao (Gong
Li), a glamorous singer in a club who doubles as mistress to the Boss. 
Xiao Jinbao initially appears haughty, petulent, and prone to excesses.
She derides Shuisheng's rural origins, and ridicules his ignorance. 
But as the movie progresses, and as the protective layers slowly peel
off, it is revealed that she too comes from the same humble origins,
knows the same rural songs, and finds solace in the company of simple
country folk.  
    Xiao Jinbao exudes the frustrations of country-turned-city-girl who
has come to depend on the material luxuries afforded by her
relationship with the Boss.  While addicted to the wealth and comfort,
she longs to break free from her appointed role as mistress and is
wiling to take surprising risks to reach her dream.  As the film
unfolds, and Xiao Jinbao gets in touch with her former simple country
roots, her warm, generous side, as well as the emptiness and loneliness
of her current existence begin to shine through.  This poses an
important but perhaps unanswerable question, especially in light of
Zhang Yimou's other works set in the pre-Communist era:  would a woman
like Xiao Jinbao have felt any less trapped had she remained in the
tradition-bound countryside, or has she escaped one trap only to walk
straight into the jaws of another?  Towards the end of the film, we get
a haunting glimpse of how Xiao Jinbao's entanglement with the triad
probably began, when an innocent and unsuspecting 9 year-old girl is
initiated into the gang, starting a new life in Xiao Jinbao's footsteps
along a materially rich yet spiritually empty path.
    On its surface, "Shanghai Triad" is about life in the gangs, but
with its downplaying of violence, there are no compelling villians. 
The Boss could pass as another rich, shrewd, successful businessman,
living in an opulent mansion, striking deals over games of mahjong,
knowing how to entertain and how to enjoy the company of women. 
Violence to him is simply a means to an end, a business necessity.  The
triad's most compelling characteristic isn't evil, or its lawlessness,
but rather its function as a System with a rigid code of behavior and a
million pairs of prying eyes and ears to enforce it.  Because this
strict code of behavior and of ethical obligation so pervades the
triad, the worst imaginable behavior is to breach that trust:  to steal
your compatriot's woman, to conspire with someone outside the
fraternity, to attempt to leave the gang.  As in any totalitarian
regime, these infractions never go unnoticed, nor unpunished.
    This snapshot of life within the triad suggests that Shuisheng's
turbulent first seven days are no more significant than any other seven
days.  The Boss suppresses dissent, the turf wars continue, and more
blood is shed, but the System barely skips a beat.  New Bosses will
emerge, even more powerful, even more power-hungry.  And the children,
Shuisheng and the little girl, will end up as another subservient Sixth
Uncle and another frustrated Xiao Jinbao -- and prove equally
expendable.  They cannot escape the fate of their predecessors, and as
in any other System, there will always be someone to take their place
when they fall.  "Shanghai Triad" may use brighter colors, more music
and dance, and the backdrop of urban, bustling Shanghai, but ultimately
it echoes the themes of Zhang Yimou's earlier works: we are trapped in
a society which values the system more than the individual, and we are
trapped also by the forces of history, which keep recurring in an
endless vicious cycle.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SHANGHAI TRIAD is a technical tour de force by the great Chinese
director Zhang Yimou (RED SORGHUM, JU DOU, RAISE THE RED LANTERN, THE
STORY OF QIU JU, and his greatest of all and the number two on my best
of 1994 list, TO LIVE).  Sad to say that, although SHANGHAI TRIAD is
certainly worth seeing, it is one of his lessor films.  Unlike TO LIVE
which came alive in the characterizations, SHANGHAI TRIAD focuses its
tremendous creative energy on images, nostalgia, cinematography, and
music.  In fact, it has so much music that one could almost classify it
as a musical.
     In SHANGHAI TRIAD a fourteen year old boy Shuisheng Tang (Wang
Xiao Xiao) is brought from the country by his uncle Liu Tang (Li
Xuejian) to work in the household of his boss (Li Baotian).  His "boss"
and that is what he is referred to in the movie is one of the biggest
gangsters in Shanghai.  He lives in an enormous house that looks
remarkably like a hotel.  In it he keeps his mistress, the glamorous
but cruel Xiao Jinbao (Gong Li).  The movie is mainly about the
lifestyles of Chinese gangsters, but their warfare forms an important
subplot.
     In a minor role Liu Tang as Uncle Liu gives the best performance
in the movie.  He explains to Shuisheng his duties which include
waiting outside Xiao Jinbao's bedroom door, head bowed but never
falling asleep, while waiting for any request she might have.  In this
world highly reminiscent of the Chicago bootlegger era, the men are in
command.  As Uncle Liu explains the boss's philosophy it is, "Women's
business is nothing but wind.  Men's business, no matter how small, is
important," so do not disturb the boss while he is engaged in business
of any kind.
     Gong Li is stunning in the film and her voice in the many musical
numbers is like honey.  Her character is the only one in the movie who
appears to be able to control the boss.  When they make small talk,
being shorter he looks up to her as if she has him wrapped around her
little finger.  Gong Li is a great actress, but she did not give her
usual energy to this picture.  As a singer and as a beautiful woman,
she is terrific.  Her gowns by Huamiao Tong are a perfect compliment to
her natural beauty as is her heavy but effective 30s style make-up
(Yang Yu and Mi Zide)
     Wang Xiao Xiao is excellent in his fixed expressions in showing
the fright of a "country bumpkin" as Xiao Jinbao calls him.  Everything
in the big city scares him, not the least being the gangsters having a
habit of killing each other.  When Wang tries to act, he shows that he
needs more acting lessons and should stick to expressions for now.
     Li Baotian is effective as an evil boss.  Just when you think you
have him figured out, you don't.  To add to his evil persona his
glasses have dark lenses in the shape of small circles and his head is
shaved bald.
     The marvelous cinematography (Lu Yue) is full of the city filmed
in a hazy dark sepia.  This is contrasted with the shots of the bright
glistening red sequins on Xiao Jinbao's gowns.  When the long limos of
that era sneak off one evening, the images are steel blue shining
against the wetness of the pavement.  The entire picture's filming is
extremely nostalgic.  Many of the moving shots are evocative of a top
notch still photographer.  They are so good I half expected them to be
selling stills from the movie in the lobby after the show.
     The music (Zhang Guangtian) is extraordinary.  I loved all of the
songs, but the theme music is the best part.  It was played again and
again using different instruments and sometimes it was hummed.  It is
still reverberates around in my head.
     Although most of the show is a mood piece, the action in the last
part finally gets believable and the tension is heightened.  Here the
show finally comes into its own and delivers on some of its promise.
Most of the movie however is merely an exercise in style albeit one
well worth watching.
     SHANGHAI TRIAD runs too long at 1:49 and many scenes, especially
those on the island,  should have been deleted or at least abbreviated
by editor Yuan Du.  The movie is in Mandarin with English subtitles
except for all the ending credits which for some reason are totally
untranslated - good thing I have the Web to find the missing credits I
need.  The move is rated R for a half dozen uses of the F-word, some
violence, a little sex, but no nudity.  It is a fairly soft R and the
movie would be fine for a teenager of any level of maturity.  Although
I was disappointed by the movie and expected much more, I did like it
and do recommend it, and I give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
     During the decade of the 1990s, Zhang Yimou, one of the most 
internationally acclaimed of all the so-called "Fifth Generation" 
Chinese film makers, has made a series of visually striking, narratively 
compelling pictures, including RAISE THE RED LANTERN and TO LIVE.  
SHANGHAI TRIAD, Zhang's latest offering, delves deeply into the workings 
of Shanghai's gangland during the 1930s.  Reminiscent of Prohibition-era 
Chicago -- and therefore depicting the universality of organized crime -
- SHANGHAI TRIAD is a fascinating, though imperfect, look at the lure 
and power of greed to corrupt and destroy.
     The story is told from the point-of-view of 14-year old Shuisheng 
(Wang Xiaoxiao), a country "innocent" brought by his uncle (Li Xuejian) 
to Shanghai to work for Boss Tang (Li Baotian).  Zhang uses Shuisheng to 
represent the audience; everything that takes place is seen through the 
young boy's eyes.  In fact, there are several effective first person 
camera shots where we see events unfold as if from Shuisheng's 
perspective.  Like those of us watching the film, Shuisheng has no 
knowledge about what it means to live in Tang's circle, and his 
education is ours.
     Shuisheng's first job for the Boss is to serve his mistress, the 
petulant, controlling Bijou (Gong Li).  Like Shuisheng, Bijou was born 
and bred in the country, but, unlike her new servant, she has allowed 
the bright lights, easy money, and fast life of Shanghai to corrupt her 
innocence.  A singer in the Boss' nightclub and lover to both him and 
one of his top men, she is trapped in a situation that is out of 
control.  There are times when she recognizes the futility of her 
existence and lashes out in mingled pain and despair.  
     SHANGHAI TRIAD takes place over an eight-day period that chronicles 
Shuisheng's arrival to work for the Boss, his conflicted emotions for 
Bijou, a bloody attempt to kill Tang, and the subsequent flight to an 
island safe house.  There is plenty of action, but, like Zhang's 
previous films, the primary focus is on relationships and internal 
conflicts.  The interaction between Shuisheng, Bijou, and Tang forms the 
central dynamic, and those three characters represent this movie's true 
"Shanghai triad."
     Unfortunately, due in part to the script and in part to a flat 
performance by young actor Wang Xiaoxiao, Shuisheng comes across as 
bland.  Even though he's in nearly every scene, we're rarely sure what 
he's thinking or how he feels about those who control his life.  There 
are hints of sexual curiosity, growing faithfulness, and building 
horror, but Wang does a poor job conveying these elements.  His eyes and 
too-often blank expression create an unfortunate dramatic vacuum.
     Conversely, the always-luminescent Gong Li is at the height of her 
ability in SHANGHAI TRIAD, almost making up for what's lacking in her 
young co-star.  Her Bijou is a marvel of subtlety and complexity.  Not 
only is Gong an amazing actress, but she has an undeniable screen 
presence as well.  Bijou may be her most sultry role to date, as she 
sashays her way across the screen, purring the words to the song 
"Pretending", her character's anthem.  While the relationship between 
Bijou and Shuisheng is left disappointingly underdeveloped, the actress' 
performance makes it easier to overlook this defect.
     With its underworld violence and straightforward narrative, 
SHANGHAI TRIAD may be Zhang's most accessible film to date.  It is not, 
however, his best work, having neither the epic scope of TO LIVE nor the 
quiet emotional power of RAISE THE RED LANTERN.  Yet there is still much 
to like about SHANGHAI TRIAD, not the least of which is the production's 
gorgeous look (credit the director and his cinematographer, Li Xiao).  
SHANGHAI TRIAD overflows with memorable imagery and atmosphere.  And, as 
this film verifies, a weak entry by Zhang is often far more engrossing 
than a strong entry by many other directors.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Menno Praas
Looking for action? Wrong movie. Ever wondered how a fourteen year old
boy would feel living amongst Shanghai gang members? This is the movie
for you.  How does this innocent boy from the Chinese countryside turn
up in a violent gang? He happens to be a relative of the godfather of
one of the most important gangs in Shanghai in the 1930's.  In this
capacity he is trusted to be the servant of beautiful nightclub singer
Bijou (played by Gong Li). She is the gang leader's concubine, living
in every conceivable luxury.  The boy gets very close to the gang's
daily life.  He is aware of violence around him, but seems unable to
grasp the reality of it. What he experiences threathens his peace of
mind but exceeds his comprehension.
In this movie director Zhang Yimou prefers to suggest the use of force,
rather than showing it.  He also deliberately leaves out most action,
an important ingredient of Western style Coppola and Scorsese mafia
movies.  During the making of the movie Zhang Yimou was in the process
of separating from his partner Gong Li.  Despite this, Zhang Yimou
offers Gong Li lots of time to expose her beauty and qualities to the
public. In my opinion Gong Li fills too many gaps in the scenario by
singing a choice of Chinese lovesongs in the nightclub.
Bijou behaves like a spoiled woman. She tries her luck when she is
having an affair with the gang's second in command.  The gang survives
a fierce attack from a rivalling gang. The leader decides to go in
tactic hiding.  The gang escapes for a couple of days to an island off
the coast. Bijou and the boy join them.  Bored with the quiet island
Bijou has several conversations with a widow, living a primitive, but
happy life on the island. In these conversations Bijou re-accepts her
own low family background.  Suddenly, the movie shifts into action. By
accident the boy witnesses the preparations of a new attack on the
gang. Now the plot thickens. The final battle takes place outside the
view of the camera. We just witness bodies piling up. Meanwhile Bijou
is ready to abandon her superficial and luxurious lifestyle and
acknowledges her true nature. To me, Gong Li doesn't quite convince in
her acting on this point.  Finally, as the boy's world completely turns
upside down, the story reaches its conclusion.

Author
Pedro Sena
SHANGHAI TRIAD, may not be the best film that Zhang Yimou has ever done, but
one thing is for sure.  He has matured his shooting style into a more
westernized concept.
Like most eastern films, the cinematography is usually still, that is, not
moving very much, and the actors do most of their movement within the
confines of the camera's angles, until the next shot sequence. SHANGHAI
TRIAD, shows that Zhang Yimou is becoming quite westernized in his style,
and is learning to make much smoother films in the process. Before, the
style was a bit on the mesmerizing side, sort of like watching their Chinese
master singers, who take twenty minutes to reach the center of the stage and
one can not even shake our eyes from them.  This attitude, has changed much
since RAISE THE RED LANTERN, several years back, when the camera rarely
moves, much like the characters inside the story never really do.
This film, if anything, is a statement, that places like Shanghai, are much
more westernized than the rest of the country.  And the story, is similar to
one that we might find in New York, or Chicago in the thirties. Basically,
Shanghai, is run by a trio of Mafia lords.  And while they appear to be
friends on the outside and in front of others, they all seem to be doing
something behind each other's back, to hurt each other as much as possible.
And caught in the middle are those smaller people that apparently do not
obey the rules of their individual boss.
Amidst all this is a singer, who has become the mistress of one of these
lords.  She is given a young man to be her servant, and while he is young
and learning, he is, unlike many others, a bit more curious, and
inquisitive.  He is the new member of a family that has long taken care of
this particular lord.  And, as expected, the mistress is having an affair
with someone whose connections to the inside of this particular boss seem to
be rather dubious.
As it happens, on a fateful day, the young man's father is killed in an
assault, and the clan is forced to flee to an island, to protect itself and
gather enough strength and direction to figure out what to do.  In the
process we find that the mistress is losing it, and that there are outsiders
that are trying to do away with this particular lord.
And in a bitter end, the lord wins the war, after many battles are lost.
And he has to dispose of many people along the way to protect both himself
and those around him.
Story wise, this is, as is usual in most of Yimou's films, a very sad film,
in that there is very little that the smaller, less powerful people can do
under the hands of the bosses who take the law into their own hands.... and
there is no government strong  enough to work with it, or to undo the feudal
system that runs much of the country.
The singer eventually meets her death, just like her lover.  Their
indiscretions revealed as a sign that these people were much better aware of
what was going on that was originally apparent.  The film even suggests that
the affair with the mistress was set up to catch one of these men unawares,
and catch him in his role as a traitor
to this family.
The film ends on a sad note, and although there is hope for one little girl,
and one eager boy, the system has won yet again.  The victims are the people
of the country that do not mean anything.  The beauty of the film, is the
subtlety with which Zhang Yimou sets up his film. We do not really know what
is going to happen until the
end, although we can suspect that something is up.  And the acting is sneaky
enough that it adds to the difficulty at figuring it all out. And perhaps,
this may be one of the reasons why Zhang does this.  By keeping the film
insidious, that is, in the hands of a system that was deplored by the
government, and done away with ( one hopes ), Zhang can do much work and
place the Chinese mainland on the cultural film market.  One wonders how
long he can survive doing it, since he is always under attack and pressure
by over eager government authorities who are constantly worried that his
work is subversive.  Well, were he allowed to leave China, chances are that
he would make a film and decry the injustices of the government, in stopping
the film community for petty ego ideals.
TO LIVE, still Zhang's most important film, although not his best, is the
perfect example of a film that the government does not wish to see or show
at all.  But as is the case, when something is made to be subversive,
everyone wants to see it.  Peking may not like it, but everyone in Shanghai
has seen it, though it is illegal to show
it and sell it.  China's government, like the bosses in this film will
eventually get theirs one gets the feeling.  When their cause wonders into
the needless realm where people are getting abused and used, it will fail
sooner or later.  Had the bosses, not been so corrupt, and fighting so damn
much amidst themselves, communism
might not have succeeded so well as it did. Everyone feared the gangs, and
the feudal lords. The new revolution provided a respite from that
viciousness.  But what the new people didn't know, as TO LIVE shows, is that
the bosses were about to get all centralized under one iron fist.
And films like SHANGHAI TRIAD, are a sign that the hold these powers have is
really tenuous, and will soon crack.
There are some wonderful touches in this film. The color filtering of the
camera for effects, is magnificently well thought out, and adds a certain
lyrical style to the film that Zhang has not displayed  before much.  And as
mentioned before, adding the moving camera to this mixt, makes the film even
more interesting.  Like the film noir style, which this resembles in color,
the camera moving in oddly lit spaces, creates a feeling of tension and
wonder..... and surprises always lurk in the corners.
Much can be attributed to the story in the film, which is, essentially told
from the boy's point of view.  He is the story.  And he sees it all, and
tells us what he sees.  Thus the camera, thematically, moves, just like we
see the boy move... a special touch, that adds so much style to this very
nice, and special film.  Replace the bosses with
the rulers in Peking and you still got the same story.......
Excellent film. Beautifully filmed, by a director that you can tell, knows
how to handle a camera.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     When better films will be made than most of the current crop, when
we look back to see who were the really great directors, the name of
Zhang Yimou will be high on the list.  Lacking the equipment in China
that many countries have, he has nevertheless turned out some fabulous
films.  At age 45, he has already to his credit RED SORGHUM, JU DOU,
RAISE THE RED LANTERN, THE STORY OF QUI JU, TO LIVE and now, SHANGHAI
TRIAD.
     In most of his films his starring actress was Gong Li, beautiful
and a mere thirty years old in 1995.  Films she made with other
directors include FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE, among others.
     While the story takes place in the 1930s in Shanghai, with various
war lords running the opium and prostitution rings, the similarity to
present day China has angered the current Chinese government and there
is a question of whether it will be allowed to be released there.  The
Chinese government has recently forbade him to attend the New York Film
Festival's opening night presentation of the film.
     Mr. Tang (Li Boatian) is the equivalent of a Mafia godfather.  By
aiding Chiang Kai-Shek and helped kill many of the Communists who were
anti Chiank Kai-Shek, he awarded the warlord status.  In addition, he
has been permitted the "services" of the beautiful Xiao Jinbao (Gong
Li), a singer and prostitute.
     Mr. Tang trusts no one whose family name is not "Tang."  A
relative allows her fourteen-year-old son to be employed by Mr. Tang.
It is through the eyes of this boy, Tang Shuisheng (Wang Xiao Xiao)
that we, the audience, learn of what is happening.
     As the story unfolds we are surprised at its many twists and turns
which lead to a tragic ending of the film.  For days the film haunted
me; it is that kind of film.
