Title
Review for Fierce Creatures (1997)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
John R. Mellby
John Cleese, Jamie Lee Curtis, Kevin Klein, Michael Palin
Directed by Robert Young, Produced by Michael Shamberg, Steve Abbot
http://www.fierce-creatures.com/
As I watched this film it struck me that there aren't many funny movies
being made any more. Oh, we have comedies (some of them even good) such
as Steve Martin's films, and we have silly films (a painful lot of silly
films), but not very many movies which are just trying to be funny.
I can't remember a funny film I saw since "A Fish called Wanda",
which brings us back here.
Some nice friends gave us tickets to a preview of FC. This unites the
cast, producer, and some writers of "A Fish called Wanda". This movie
isn't a sequel but a totally new, and *very* funny picture. The
stars, along with a fierce supporting cast (love the lemurs), along with
some great actors, in running a zoo.
The film centers upon a pair of twits. No, this isn't a misprint
referring to Jamie Lee Curtis, although her twits (oops, er ummm, you
know what I mean) do have a few prominent scenes. We have a ruthless
New Zealand Twit (Kevin Klein) running a business empire where
everything makes 20% profit or it get destroyed, and his son, a
hapless twit (also Kevin Klein) who pretty much stumbles through life.
The son, Jamie Lee Curtis, and John Cleese all try to run an English
zoo.
First Cleese trys to make the zoo popular through violence. "All the
creatures must be fierce", hence the title. This fails with many
comic problems. Next, Kevin Klein trys a marketeering approach
where Celebrities sponsor the animals. (I couldn't see who Saddam
Hussain sponsored, so if anyone figures it out, please tell me.)
Along the way, mishaps lead them to think that John Cleese is sleeping
with 3-4 women (and animals) at a time, which attracts Jamie Lee,
and disgusts (and impresses) Klein. The naked tarantula scene was almost
painful to watch.
The take old ideas (people trapped in a hotel room trying to escape
the notice of the real occupants, and do them astoundingly well.
You think they have escaped, and at the last minute they don't
get out. They they almost escape again, and ... well, you get the
picture.
Overall Cleese is as funny as ever. Michael Palin is oddly wedged in,
as if they wrote the movie and discovered they hadn't a role for him,
so they patched him into random scenes. Still he is funny. The
supporting actors (too many to name) are good (even if they
occasionally the bundle so many into a scene that it just gets too
busy).
IMHO this is the funniest movie I've seen in several years.
P.S. You wouldn't think that licking blood of an injured woman's leg
would be funny - but it is!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Neither sequel nor equal to A FISH CALLED WANDA, this zoo-keeping
British comedy reunites the original cast-- and a portion of the
original production crew-- with looser, if not downright lazier results.
The timing isn't as sharp, the pace isn't as brisk, and the four
characters aren't nearly as tight together as an ensemble.  Both Michael
Palin and Jamie Lee Curtis are wasted, but, hey, that leaves the door
wide open for John Cleese and Kevin Kline to steal the show.  And they
do.  Kline actually plays two roles, including his character's father.
His younger self is a slightly sillier variation on Otto, his Oscar-
winning WANDA role.  Cleese treads equally familiar ground with an
update of his "Fawlty Towers" television character.  His script (co-
written with Iain Johnstone) rehashes several better-known Basil bits,
which, for the newcomer, should have them in stitches.  The seasoned
hotel guest, however, may react with less than total hilarity.  Sorry,
sorry, sorry.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Michael Redman
The characters from "A Fish Called Wanda" are back for another go at it.
They've changed their names and jobs, but with John Cleese, Kevin Kline,
Jamie Lee Curtis and Michael Palin returning, the comparison is
inevitable, although it is not actually a sequel.
Rupert Murdock clone Rod McCain (Kline) adds a British Zoo to his empire
and sets about turning it into a money-maker by requiring that it only
feature dangerous animals. With the Rambo mode in mind, he decides that
the public is in love with violence and orders the zoo to do away with
the cuter furry guys.
Rollo Lee (Cleese) is the zookeeper in charge of carrying out the orders
which result in an execution order for the less desirable critters. This
brings about the film's most humorous scenes as the animal handlers try
to convince him that their charges are indeed man-killers. With fake
blood and scrapes, they capture an escaped deadly anteater, "Watch out
for his tongue!"  The harmless mammals are disguised as bloodthirsty:
the cuddly meercat is portrayed as the piranha of the desert that can
strip a corpse in three minutes.
McCain sends his son Vince (Kline again) and newly hired Willa Weston
(Curtis) to England to make sure that his orders are carried out and the
operation shows a 20% profit. Weston is on the high speed career track
and wants to impress her new boss until she is charmed by the furry
ones. Vince is only interested in getting Weston and her well-displayed
ample cleavage into the sack.
Once there, McCain The Younger sets about turning the zoo into marketing
hell. Commercial sponsor banners are everywhere and the tortoise
compound becomes "Bruce Springstein Presents" The keepers' uniforms are
plastered with corporate patches like those of stock car drivers.
Like "Wanda", part of the success of this movie depends on juxtaposing
British and American sensibilities. And like its predecessor, there are
some hilarious scenes. The difference between the two films is that this
one doesn't work quite so well. The slapstick is occasionally clumsy and
mis-timed. There is little that goes over the top.
British humor sensibilities are different than what the people on this
continent are used to. Some of it is so dry that we might miss it unless
paying close attention. Other aspects are so goofy that they have to be
top notch in order not to just look moronic.
When the film was originally shown to test audiences last year, the
viewers hated the ending so much that a new director was called in to a
re-shoot.
The film does do well with a number of scenes. The sex farces (Cleese is
often mistaken as a sexual acrobat as he talks to animals in his bedroom
and is thought to be orgying with hot babes and is discovered innocently
half-dressed in a hotel room with two women) are comical, although they
could have been more outrageous. The vision of the keepers dressed in
outrageous animal costumes running around like chickens with their heads
off is hilarious.
The movie is entertaining, but it misses a bit too often. Gentlemen I
knew "A Fish Called Wanda", and this, sirs, is no "Wanda".
[This appeared in The "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
2/13/97. Michael Redman can be contacted at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Walter Frith
The team who brought us 'A Fish Called Wanda' in 1988 re-team for 'Fierce
Creatures.'  There is an old saying in life which is "You can't go home
again."  That was never more true than with the production of 'Fierce
Creatures.' John Cleese, Jamie Lee Curtis, Kevin Kline and Michael Palin
return in a film that has nothing to do with 'A Fish Called Wanda' but
perhaps it should have.  A sequel would have been a far more interesting
concept than this plotline.  A multi-billionaire (Kevin Kline) who is truly
a hard edged businessman/rascal employs his son (also played by Kevin
Kline)to travel from Atlanta to merry old England to investigate the
corporate restructuring of a zoo run by a bumbling but well meaning chap
(John Cleese).  Along for the ride is Jamie Lee Curtis to assist in the
investigation and rounding out the cast is Michael Palin as a zoo employee
who is key to the film's bizarre climax.  Putting it plainly, 'Fierce
Creatures' is a disaster not so much because of what it's about but because
it tries to capture the same level of humour as 'A Fish Called Wanda' did.
The personalities of the characters in this movie are similar in nature to
'Wanda' and some of the scenes are downright copycats of that film.  The
jokes and the physical gags are surprisingly flat and the movie is abruptly
immature at the wrong moments and the word that comes to mind to sum it all
up is 'phony'.  Even more preposterous is the fact that it took two men to
direct this farcical mess (Robert Young and Fred Schepisi)and John Cleese is
aided in the screenplay by Iain Johnstone.  Producer Michael Shamberg should
have recognized that this film wouldn't work and even if you've never seen
'A Fish Called Wanda' you still will recognize the flaws that make this
production superficial and self-serving.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: John Cleese, Jamie Lee Curtis, Kevin Kline, Michael Palin, 
      Maria Aitken, Robert Lindsay, Ronnie Corbett, Carey Lowell, 
      Derek Griffiths, Cynthia Cleese 
Directors: Robert M. Young and Fred Schepisi 
Producers: John Cleese and Michael Shamberg 
Screenplay: John Cleese & Iain Johnstone 
Cinematography: Adrian Biddle and Ian Baker 
Music: Jerry Goldsmith 
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures 
     Anyone who has missed Basil Fawlty since the end of the BBC TV 
series FAWLTY TOWERS need look no further than FIERCE CREATURES.  
Although age had mellowed him a little and he's going by a different 
name, there's no doubt that John Cleese's latest screen personae is 
derived from England's most inept and inhospitable hotel manager.  The 
same manic energy, the same impatience, the same capacity for getting 
into unbelievably comic situations, and even the same mustache are very 
much in evidence.  All that's missing is a porter from Barcelona named 
Manuel. 
     After the unexpected success of 1988's A FISH CALLED WANDA, John 
Cleese began planning a movie that would reunite the entire cast.  After 
flirting with the concept of a direct sequel, he decided instead to 
invent new characters for the actors to play.  Now, eight years later, 
Cleese's idea has finally reached screens, and, while it's not quite as 
bold, funny, or endearing as WANDA, it's still good for numerous hearty 
laughs, which is more than can be said for most comedies these days. 
     FIERCE CREATURES has had something of a troubled production 
history.  A version of the film was ready a year ago, but, after test 
audiences hated the original ending, Cleese decided that certain scenes 
should be re-filmed.  However, Michael Palin was unavailable for nearly 
eight months.  By the time all the actors were ready to regroup, 
director Robert Young was working on another project.  So Fred Schepisi 
(along with his cinematographer, Ian Baker) was brought in for the re-
shoots.  Happily, the transition is seamless.  It's impossible to 
determine what was part of the original version and what was added in 
the second phase. 
     Cleese's script (co-written with Iain Johnstone) reads like a 
series of skits loosely connected by a flimsy storyline.  The chief 
pleasure here is that several of the individual sketches are gut-
bustingly funny.  One of Cleese's fortes has always been humor based on 
mistaken assumptions, and FIERCE CREATURES features quite a lot of these 
(for example, the "girls" that everyone thinks Cleese is hiding in his 
room are actually animals, not women).  There's also enough crude (but 
still effective) sexual innuendo that an "R" rating wouldn't have been 
out of the question (although the MPAA granted a "PG-13").  Only the 
flatulence bits don't really work. 
     The rather convoluted storyline starts in Atlanta, where Willa 
Weston (Jamie Lee Curtis) arrives for work in her new post with Octopus 
Inc. to find out that multi-billionaire Rod McCain (Kevin Kline) has 
changed her job description.  Now, along with his bumbling son, Vince 
(Kline again), she's supposed to go to England to take over management 
of the Marwood Zoo, which has to boost its profits by 20% or face 
closure.  Meanwhile, the current zoo manager, Rollo Lee (John Cleese), 
has decided that the best way to increase revenue is to promote violence 
("Sylvester Stallone did not get where he is today by playing in Jane 
Austen", he says).  As a result, only fierce creatures are to be 
retained in captivity.  Much to the consternation of the various animal 
keepers (Michael Palin, Cynthia Cleese, Ronnie Corbett, ex-Bond girl 
Carey Lowell), Lee decides that all the tame, cuddly animals must be 
eliminated -- one way or the other. 
     Expectedly, the best thing about FIERCE CREATURES is Cleese.  We 
see him so infrequently these days that any extended appearance is 
welcome indeed.  The comic's mannerisms and reactions can turn an 
ordinary scene into something funny.  Kevin Kline gets to play two 
roles, and, while he is given a few opportunities to recall Otto from 
WANDA, his performance isn't as fresh or unique.  Curtis, despite being 
at her sexy best, doesn't make Willa as real as Wanda.  Michael Palin, 
who stuttered his way through the first movie, can't stop talking this 
time around.  WANDA supporting characters Maria Aitken, Tom Georgeson, 
and Cynthia Cleese (John's daughter) are joined by a few new faces.  
But, while this ensemble cast exhibits chemistry, it's not at the same 
high level that it was during the original grouping. 
     Even when FIERCE CREATURES doesn't have you doubled over with 
laughter, it's still amusing.  There are plenty of moments that, while 
not worth laughing aloud at, are capable of bringing a smile to the 
face.  This isn't a great movie -- the comedy is uneven and the 
connecting storyline is weak -- but it's still a lot of fun, and I 
welcome any film that keeps me entertained for nearly the entire running 
length.  So, while it will never replace any of the top comedies on 
Cleese's resume, FIERCE CREATURES works well as a compliment to either 
FAWLTY TOWERS, A FISH CALLED WANDA, or, preferably, both. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
If there's one thing I hate, it's movies where adults acting juvenile is meant
to be humorous. You know, those films where we see adults making vulgar
remarks, farting, belching, and pulling silly faces. I was so sure that's what
I was in for about two minutes into FIERCE CREATURES that I jumped to the
conclusion it would be one of the worst films of the year. Luckily there's a
thing called improvement.
The cast of 1988's A FISH CALLED WANDA reunites nearly a decade later for yet
another wild comedy caper, this time surrounding the possible shutdown of a
zoo in Great Britain that was recently acquired by multi-billion dollar
industry, Octopus Inc. Kevin Kline, who won an Oscar for his performance in
the aforementioned film, plays a duel role as Octopus Inc. president Rod
McCain and his chauvinistic son, Vince. When the Marwood Zoo is taken under
the wings of the company, Vince finds himself traveling to England along with
Willa Weston (Jamie Lee Curtis), the seductive independent-woman type whose
business knowledge is hoped to improve the dwindling profit brought in by the
zoo. Right off the bat we're introduced to unfunny jokes such as "Are your
breasts real?". Why this is considered funny, I'll never know, and why Curtis'
character seems to react to every sexual-harassing comment with silent
flattery is another mystery.
When they actually arrive in England, things start to pick up pace, and if you
haven't given up on the film by then, you're actually in for quite a few
treats. Here we are introduced to Rollo Lee (John Cleese), a seemingly snooty
and self-absorbed zoo director whose plan for improving zoo profits involves
discarding all the furry, loveable animals and keeping only "fierce creatures"
on display. Once they got involved with the events taking place in the zoo,
signs of redemption begin making themselves known, and after the twenty or so
minutes of absolute awfulness, something wonderful happened. I found myself
laughing. Amazingly, it was something I found myself doing often from then on
out.
The idea to turn the zoo into a vicious-animal museum is soon forgotten as
Vince barges in and takes over. Putting Rollo in his place, he turns the zoo
into an advertising haven, where banners and posters for various companies
hang from every available structure, the zoo keeps uniforms start resembling
those worn by NASCAR racers, and illegitimate celebrity endorsements for
varying creatures are boasted. A lot of ideas sparkle with potential but
aren't fully realized as our attention turns more toward a possible Rollo-
Willa romance and a conniving Vince out to embezzle millions. Still, there is
a surprising amount of well-done physical comedy to keep us laughing without
insulting us with immature slapstick. It's just that those moments of
immaturity keep creeping up.
What brings FIERCE CREATURES down so much is several self-induced humor
wounds. Just as you begin forgetting how terrible things started out, they
throw in an off-balance joke that is so moronic, you worry everything good
will be lost. It becomes a comedic roller coaster, reaching fairly high,
gliding, and then plummeting very sharply to the trenches once again. Cleese
is who makes this worthwhile, and even with the always-strong Kline on board,
it's obvious that without Cleese, this film would have nothing. Cleese's
mixture of flubbering nervousness, yet self-righteous arrogance provides the
biggest laughs, which is in dire need alongside the consistently annoying
Curtis. (Personal note: why Curtis was ever considered sexy is one of the
great mysteries I've come to encounter in the world of cinema, ranking right
up there with John Leguizamo being considered a comic "talent")
FIERCE CREATURES is actually a highly enjoyable film bogged down with a high
tally of misfires. What could have been one of the funnest comedies of the
year has too many reminders of why it isn't. All this film needed to do to win
me over was grow up a little, but that was something it refused to do. Why
watching a group of adults acting more vulgar and base than a group of junior
high students is considred entertainment to some is beyond me. Sadly, FIERCE
CREATURES tests this theory a bit too much.
FIERCE CREATURES is one worth checking out on video, and if you utilize the
stale moments to jump up for another can of soda, this just might be the
perfect movie after all.

Author
David Wilcock
A comedy starring John Cleese, Michael Palin, Kevin Kline and
Jamie Lee Curtis
First, let me say (or rather John Cleese say) that this is not a sequel
to the hit comedy A FISH CALLED WANDA. It is in fact an 'equal.'
However, if he means that it has an equal amount of good jokes, then he
is sadly mistaken. This film is nowhere near as funny as WANDA.
The 'plot' centres around a zoo in London. It has been taken over by an
american company (the boss is played by Kevin Kline.) However, the
company don't want fluffy animals, because these don't pull in the
punters. Instead, he wants fierce creatures. He (the boss) also sends
Jamie Lee Curtis and his son (Kevin Kline again) to monitor the
progress of the zoo. What follows is a series of jokes centered around
John Cleese (who plays the owner of the zoo) and the situations that
arise when he is near animals. By the way, the plot about the fierce
creatures disappears after 20 minutes.
Because this film had the same cast, with them playing virtually the
same roles as in WANDA, I couldn't help comparing it with WANDA. And,
compared to WANDA its nowhere near as funny, but even on its on, its
not the comic epic I was expecting.
So, overall then, although there are a few laughs to be had, the film
is dissappointing, and I can really only recommended it if you're a big
fan of Cleese. Otherwise, wait for it on video.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Mr. Sylvester Stallone didn't get where he is today by playing
Jane Austen," new zoo director Rollo Lee advises his staff.  Rollo
works for Australian media baron Rod McCain, who happens to own the zoo
and demands the same twenty percent annual return from it that he gets
from his other investments.
     Rollo knows what the public wants -- violence.  His solution?
Downsizing.  Get rid of all those cuddly animals that aren't providing
the proper return on investment.  Cut back to a group of fierce
creatures and market their ferociousness.  This nonplusses the zoo's
animal keepers.
     FIERCE CREATURES can loosely be called a sequel to 1988's very
popular A FISH CALLED WANDA.  The same cast returns, but they play
different characters.  Rollo is played with a dead pan style by John
Cleese, and Rod is done with broad humor by Kevin Kline.  Kline also
plays Rod's incompetent but ambitious son Vince.  The head mouth among
the animal keepers is Michael Palin as Adrian "Bugsy" Malone.  At one
point, Vince claims that Bugsy would continue to talk even if it killed
him.  Palin, whom I normally like, gives a performance so gratingly bad
that I was ready to kill him.
     The straight man role and the best performance is given by Jamie
Lee Curtis as Willa Weston.  As the show opens, Willa reports to
Octopus Inc., Rod's company, to assume a position managing a group of
radio stations.  Oops, Rod just sold the stations, but not to worry
because he will find something for her.  With her skimpy outfits and
great body, Willa immediately becomes the target of Vince's amorous
intentions.  When she goes to take over the zoo from Rollo, Vince tags
along.
     The setup for the story has much promise, but the delivery is
horribly flawed.  The script by John Cleese and Iain Johnstone feels
like it went through a long series of rewrites, but not enough.  The
resulting hodgepodge of vignettes has little coherence and remarkably
few laughs.  Directed at first by Robert Young and later by Fred
Schepisi, the film lacks the requisite energy to give punch to the
jokes.  If the film were chopped into pieces, the segments might work
on their own, but taken together they tire more than amuse.
     Typical of the jokes has others believing that Rollo is having sex
with multiple women when he is merely hiding animals in his room.
Better is the effect that Willa has on him -- his tongue gets confused
and sexual words come out by mistake.  Most of the jokes are so lame
that I found that I became more interested in checking my watch than
waiting for the next comedy skit.  Let's hope they do not attempt
another remake unless they have a script worth filming.
     FIERCE CREATURES runs 1:33.  It is rated PG-13 for language and
numerous sexual innuendo.  The film would be fine for kids ten and up.
The best part of this show for me was that it ended so I give it thumbs
down and a generous * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Universal)
Starring:  John Cleese, Jamie Lee Curtis, Kevin Kline, Michael Palin.
Screenplay:  John Cleese and Iain Johnstone.
Producers:  Michael Shamberg and John Cleese.
Directors:  Robert Young and Fred Schepisi.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (strong language, adult themes)
Running Time:  95 mintues.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In case you were unclear on this point, FIERCE CREATURES is _not_
technically a sequel to A FISH CALLED WANDA...though for the life of me I
can't figure out why that was the case.  It isn't as though John Cleese
had a radically different idea in mind for reuniting the four principal
cast members.  Cleese again plays a flustered authority figure; Kevin
Kline again plays a libidinous boor; Jamie Lee Curtis again plays a tough
bombshell who uses Kline and seduces Cleese; Michael Palin again plays an
animal lover with a distinctive speech pattern.  A great deal of effort
went into reminding you why you might have enjoyed A FISH CALLED WANDA,
and then FIERCE CREATURES only delivers halfway.  Though buoyed by a
couple of wildly farcical set pieces, FIERCE CREATURES often feels like a
film in search of an identity.
     FIERCE CREATURES opens in Atlanta, where Octopus Inc., run by
multi-billionaire communications tycoon Rod McCain (Kline), has just 
acquired a company which owns a small British zoo.  Determined to make the
zoo just as profitable as his other subsidiaries, McCain assigns former
police chief Rollo Lee (Cleese) the job of whipping the place into shape.
Rollo's plan is to weed out the tamest of the animals, leaving only the
most vicious beasts to attract customers, a plan which outrages staff
members like zookeeper Bugsy (Palin).  The zoo does begin to make more
money, but a couple of opportunistic Octopus employees hope for even
bigger things.  Marketing whiz Willa Weston (Curtis) hopes to create a zoo
franchise which will make her career, while McCain's ne'er-do-well son
Vince (also played by Kline) hopes to line his pockets with the zoo's
profits while turning it into a giant billboard.
     I don't blame the makers of FIERCE CREATURES for making its main
characters so similar to those in WANDA, because they were simply
following a time-honored tradition for recurring comic teams.  From Abbott
and Costello through Spade and Farley, it has been understood that it is
important for roles to be defined.  Id is id and ego is ego and never the
twain should meet; what would the audience make of it if Curly suddenly
began to browbeat Moe?  The problem with FIERCE CREATURES isn't that its
characters are familiar, it is that they are just familiar enough to be
disappointing.  Cleese does the put-upon bit, but he's not put-upon
_enough_; Kline does the dense bit, but he's not dense _enough_.  The
foursome found a dynamic in A FISH CALLED WANDA which worked to
perfection, and there are at least a few references in FIERCE CREATURES
intended to capitalize on that goodwill.  The script simply leaves you
waiting on several occasions, waiting for it to take an extra comedic step
which doesn't come.
     WANDA also featured the delightful sub-text of the clash between
British and American cultures, and FIERCE CREATURES chooses corporate
avarice and gross commercialism as its satirical targets.  Yet there too
the script by Cleese and Iain Johnstone is disappointingly half-hearted
with its jabs.  The ruthless tycoon played by Kline is clearly modeled
after Ruppert Murdoch, yet he escapes with no more interesting a character
trait than occasional flatulence; the outrageous possibilities of a zoo
with a ton of corporate sponsors yield some amusing results (particularly
the zoo uniforms covered in more labels than a stock car), but there is no
major payoff.  It is surprising primarily because Cleese did a funnier and
more concise job of skewering advertising in the Schwepps spot which
accompanied the American video release of WANDA, a spot recalled by an
advertisement Cleese wears on the back of his suit coat in CREATURES.
     FIERCE CREATURES does have its moments, most of them coming in the
last half hour as the zoo employees (including a soft-hearted Cleese) try
to save the zoo from closure.  There are a pair of winning scenes in the
classic farce tradition of slamming doors and near misses, one in a hotel
room and the other involving the younger McCain's attempt to impersonate
his father, yet that latter scene also reminds you of what is missing in
much of the humor in FIERCE CREATURES.  A FISH CALLED WANDA was infamous
as the film which had the audacity to make fun of dogs being killed in
unusual ways, to use stuttering as a comic device.  Until the finale of
FIERCE CREATURES, which includes a startling bit of black humor, the film
feels terribly tame.  The animals in this film aren't subjected to cruel
fates; they are photographed in all their quirky cuteness for "awww"
moments and used for sometimes amusing slapstick comedy.  Too many things
about FIERCE CREATURES feel just slightly askew, like the conflicted
results of film-makers trying both to remind you of something and to make
something completely different.  Part of that may be the result of two
directors (Robert Young and Fred Schepisi), but ultimately much of the
responsibility comes back to Cleese.  At times, his work sparks memories
not just of WANDA's outrageousness, but of classic Monty Python as well;
at other times, he seems to have softened with age.  He is just one of
several creatures in FIERCE CREATURES which isn't quite fierce enough.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
"Fierce Creatures," which reunites John Cleese, Jamie Lee Curtis, Kevin 
Kline and Michael Palin from "A Fish Called Wanda," is a pleasant, funny 
little film. It's not anywhere near as good as "Wanda," which is a shame, 
but even a half-baked offering from this cast is much more entertaining 
than what usually passes for comedy.
Kline plays Rod McCain, a blustering Rupert Murdoch-like billionaire 
mogul who buys and sells just for the power rush. Management of one of 
his recent acquisitions, a British zoo, is delegated to Rollo Lee 
(Cleese), whose duty is to wring a 20% profit from the place, or else. 
Lee, operating on the theory that violence is the only thing that sells, 
declares that the zoo must be purged of all but the dangerous animals, 
hence the "fierce creatures" of the title. His efforts are complicated by 
the arrival of two Americans; newly hired marketing expert Willa Weston 
(Curtis) and McCain's loutish son Vince (Kline again,) who aspires to 
transform the zoo into a corporate and celebrity sponsored theme park. 
Palin plays one of the outraged zoo employees, a obsessive walking 
encyclopedia who never shuts his mouth.
The multi-layered story line is promising, and delivers some juicy 
moments. The zoo keepers try to save their furry friends by convincing 
Lee that their animals are dangerous, leading to some very creative lying.
 One staff member gestures towards a group of meek animals and exclaims 
"the meercat is known as the piranha of the desert. It can strip a corpse 
clean in three minutes!" Moments later, another zoo keeper staggers by, 
wearing a fake bloody eye patch and crying "It's the sea lion, sir!" 
Despite the many juicy moments in "Fierce Creatures," the film has an 
uneven and occassionally forced feel. This isn't surprising, as the 
production endured a reworked script, two directors, and several reshot 
scenes. In "A Fish Called Wanda," the story and the character development 
flowed smoothly. Things are more herky-jerky in this film.
Michael Palin is essentially wasted as the talky zoo-keeper. His 
character is wafer-thin  he exists only to annoy. Palin often did this 
sort of thing in Monty Python skits, but those sketches were just a few 
minutes long. Why a performer of his caliber chose to play a one-note bit 
part is mystifying.  
Jamie Lee Curtis fares better. Her character, an extremely bright 
corporate climber, has an abrupt change in personality mid way into the 
movie, going from ruthless to sweet in seconds. It's an awkward change, 
but Curtis handles it well. Despite the frantic goings-on, she radiates 
an air of confidence and serenity. The combination of intelligence, drop 
dead good looks and that wicked twinkle in her eye make Curtis a 
compelling screen presence.  
In his dual roles as father and son, Kevin Kline is clearly having a 
whale of a good time. As the tyrant Rod McCain, Kline is suitably pompous 
and self-absorbed, punctuating his statements with belches and flatulence.
 The character is appropriately overbearing, but lacks flair. However, 
Kline's turn as Vince, McCain's whacked-out son, is much more rewarding. 
Kline struts, preens, and lurches as Vince pursues his idiotic schemes. 
While his performance fails to hit the manic peak he reached in "Wanda," 
his entertaining work here shows he hasn't lost his wonderful comic edge. 
The center of "Fierce Creatures" is, of course, the magnificent John 
Cleese. As Rollo Lee, he plays a variation of his classic Basil Fawlty 
character. Lee wants to be wicked, he tries to be wicked, but underneath 
it all he's a softy. Cleese sputters better than anybody, and he provides 
some of the film's biggest laughs. 
"Fierce Creatures" isn't a sequel to "A Fish Called Wanda," although, 
late in the film, there is a very funny one-word nod to the earlier movie.
 Because of the huge critical and financial success of "Wanda," it's easy 
to go into the theater with unreasonably high expectations. However, if 
you enter the theater with an open mind and just relax, you're in for 
some real fun. "Fierce Creatures" may lack bite, but it's still a bloody 
good time.

Author
Christopher Null
     One of the moviegoing experiences I'll never forget is seeing A
FISH CALLED WANDA at Mann's Chinese Theater in Los Angeles in 1988.  It
instantly became one of my all-time favorites, and I greeted the arrival
of FIERCE CREATURES, a follow-up from the same four principals almost 10
years later, with heavy anticipation.
     While the experience of seeing FIERCE CREATURES at the Highland 10
in Austin, Texas will be a considerably less memorable experience, the
film is certainly full of entertainment and is worthy of an audience.
     The plot concerns London's Marwood Zoo, which is purchased by
cutthroat media mogul Rod McCain (an unidentifiable Kevin Kline).  In
Rod's employ is Willa (not Wanda; Jamie Lee Curtis), who is charged with
making the zoo a profitable chain of theme parks.  She turns to Rod's
unloved son Vince (also Kline) for help, and hires ex-cop Rollo Lee
(John Cleese) with making some big changes.  Rollo seizes upon the
public's love of violence for his direction, and enacts a plan to stock
the zoo with only "fierce creatures" -- no more boring sloths, lemurs,
or turtles.
     The story gets murkier from here, involving rebellious zookeepers
(including Michael Palin), a plan to sell the zoo, and lots of sex
jokes, but basically the movie floats, thanks to liberal doses of humor
from the principals.
     On the other hand, the film does get a bit heavy into the fart
jokes, making this whole experience seem more like "Benny Hill" than
"Monty Python," but hey, now that Benny's gone, what are we supposed to
do for crude British humor?  Cleese and Kline are the acting standouts
-- no big surprise.  Rather, it's Curtis who proves to be, well, boring,
wearing the same expression throughout the film as if she's constipated
(hence the potty humor, I suppose).
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
