Title
Review for Civil Action, A (1998)
Number of Reviews
30

Author
John Carroll
Big courtroom thrillers have always captivated America. O.J. Simpson, Tom
Capano, The Menendez Brothers. All these names are synonymous to Americans and
courtrooms. And, of course, courtroom dramas are not a new topic to Hollywood.
Whether it be John Grisham's thrilling novels or television's famous dramas,
the courtroom has always provided big bucks. So when I rented A Civil Action, I
was expecting the film to be like The Rainmaker, a brilliant law film that kept
viewers on the edge of their seat. However, what I saw in A Civil Action was
far different from what I expected, a major surprise, but fortunately, a
pleasant one.
John Travolta always seems to come up big when you least expect it. No one
expected him to light up the screen in Grease, nor in Saturday Night Fever.
But, whenever he gets knocked down, he always seems to come back fighting. A
Civil Action is not John's best performance, but a strong one that could rival
any performance in 1998. Travolta proves that a normal and believable
performance can vault a film into Oscar nominations. His performance is not
flashy, nor memorable, just solid. If he delivered the only solid performance,
this film would still be average. Luckily, he has a strong supporting cast.
William H. Macy is probably one of the most underrated actors in Hollywood. He
continues to deliver great performances one after the other, but he is still
regarded as a secondary actor. In A Civil Action, he delivers yet another great
performance as Travolta's paranoid and greedy accountant. He is not a lovable
character, but a character who stands out in your mind whenever you think of
the film. He is not one of the big time lawyers, just a measly accountant. But,
he delivers one of the best supporting roles of 1998, but there is actually
someone better in A Civil Action.
Robert Duvall is also an underrated actor. He gets many leading roles, but is
never heard when you hear of big box office draws like Tom Hanks, Brad Pitt and
Jim Carrey. Duvall has a supporting role in this as a lawyer of the
co-defendant. Duvall is magical in this role. He is the wise teacher, who not
only battles it out in the courtroom, but also manages to teach every major
player a lesson, in his own twisted way.
In many non-comedic films, directors are always trying to find a way to
implement a touch of comedy, to keep the audience on their toes. Unfortunately,
they usually just key in on one character whose main objective is to be funny
(Jar-Jar Binks, anyone?). However, this usually backfires because the character
is never fully developed. This is not the case in A Civil Action. They have
comedy coming from all sides. Whether it be Duvall's inane questions or Macy's
sharp anger, the laughs come in a steady pace. Granted, it's not roll in the
aisle funny, but it provides a nice addition to the film.
The plot is terrific- somewhat. The setup is nice with the film actually
starting with a victory in the courtroom. Then the case that will make or break
Jan (Travolta)'s career rears its ugly head. They find out the goldmine
involved with the case and wind up taking it. However, budgets soon flounder
and Jan finds himself in deep debt. I will not spoil the rest, although I must
speak of the one downside to the film. The courtroom debates are great, but the
actual problem they are fighting for is never fully explored. It left me
somewhat confused, although the rest of the film is terrific.
All in all, John Travolta is back yet again in this great film. His supporting
cast, consisting of Macy and Duvall, turn in tremendous performances, which
ease the load on Travolta. The film is smart, witty and thought provoking. Not
only does it gauge in-court battles, but also the various tolls it can take on
the major players. A Civil Action provides everything a drama lover craves.
The Movie Page- http://jump.to/moviepage
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Matt Prigge
Writer: Steve Zallian (based on the book by Jonathan Harr)
Starring: John Travolta, Robert Duvall, William H. Macy, Tony Shalhoub, 
Zeljko Ivanek, John Lithgow, Kathleen Quinlan, James Gandolfini, David 
Thornton, Bruce Norris, Dan Hedaya, Peter Jacobsen, Sydney Pollack, 
Stephen Fry, Edward Herrman
Oh god how many John Grisham lawyer films we have been munundated with! 
In a perfect world, "A Civil Action" would be a breath of fresh air. 
It's cynical about lawyers in a way that Grisham isn't. It's romantic in 
the exact opposite way a Grisham book/film isn't. And, the capper, it 
has no distinct ending, and the law in Hollywood films is that above all 
else, you must have an ending. Even if it's based on a true story, a 
true story which hasn't yet ended, you must supply an ending, a false 
one, but an ending nevertheless. Hell, "A Civil Action" is even more sly 
and more witty than any of the Grisham works put together (and that 
includes "The Firm," the only novel of his that will ever be regarded as 
a classic). Yet it's also oddly and slightly unsatisfying. Weird. This 
is, in fact, a Steve Zallian film, not just the work of a hack, and 
Zallian is the director of the much-admired "Search for Bobby Fischer" 
(didn't see it) and writer of none other than "Schindler's List." In 
short, I like this guy, and am a sucker for the way he tells his 
stories. After all, apart from the obvious it's-a-Holocaust-film and 
it's-a-Spielberg-film, isn't "Schindler's List" just a damn brilliant 
film, not so much a Holocaust film as it is a wonderful character study.
"A Civil Action" is the same way: it's narrative is split between being 
a lawyer film and being a character study. And it's here that the film 
seems to go a bit wrong. The main complaint of this film is that while, 
yes, it's an engrossing lawyerly tale, it has no real ending, and that's 
not necessarily the problem with the film. It's that it's just kind of 
unsatisfying. If this were a great film, it would feel complete, and 
still end basically the same way. But this film just seems to end, and I 
don't want to be stupid and suggest an alternate ending should be tacked 
on: imagine, if you will, being one of those the film is about, looking 
forward to this film, and then discovered the truth has been through a 
surrealistic and unpleasant Hollywood filter, just so the many won't 
bitch about what is, essentially, genuine.
But the fact that it just ends is not, in all actuality, what is wrong 
with it. It's rather that Zallian has chosen, in the last half hour, to 
adandon the traditional lawyer story, and chose the other part of his 
story, the one about the lawyer, one Jan Schlictman (John Travolta), 
who's shown in the opening and throughout most of the movie as a 
heartless but brilliant lawyer, brilliant because he's manipulative and 
he always wins. It wishes to make it all about Jan in the end, but the 
truth is, his change, although nicely done, is not full. We see him 
suffering from a personal crisis, and Travolta does do a pretty good job 
in depicting his change of heart, but in the end, we don't fully believe 
it. And I think that the problem is when he has made his decision, the 
film choses an odd angle to go at, a noble one, but one that gives the 
film's conclusion that of incompleteness. In the opening of the film, we 
see him doing his old schtick, manipulating courts, winning cases 
effortlessly, and then discussing on a heard radio interview how great 
he is at his job and how much he cares for his cases. In short, he's 
full of bullshit and we know it.
In the film, he takes a case that is hardly desired: a town where 
several of the children have died mysteriously of lukemia and the source 
of the illness seems to be from a local factory that may or may not have 
been dumping waste into the river. Point one, it's not of the usual 
criteria (Jan points out, wickedly, that dead or wounded children aren't 
nearly as sympathetic as those struck down in the midst of their 
success). Point two, it has been through several lawyers. After turning 
them down, Jan changes his mind (a muddled scene - he stops his car on a 
bridge, looks out...is he feeling a sense of overachievement?), and he 
and his team of lawyers (Tony Shalhoub, Zeljko Ivanek, and accountant 
William H. Macy) head out to the town to do battle with the town's 
company. They spend millions of dollars examining the land, test the 
water, what have you (this is where Stephen Fry, a possible Oscar 
nominee for his brilliant performance in "Wilde," pops up thanklessly), 
and in the meantime question the parents of the dead children, and then, 
unsuccessfully, the workers at the plant. They also find themselves 
clashing with a brilliant lawyer for the company, the eccentric Jerome 
Facher, played by Robert Duvall (more on him later on). As we progress, 
we get so involved in the way the story is being told, which is 
engulfing everything around it, including the individual and brief 
stories of some of the townspeople (one of the best is a bit with James 
Gandolfini as an employee of the plant living across the street from 
Kathleen Quinland, who lost her child, who begins to have a personal 
crisis).
Things begin to go downhill for the lawyers in the second half, as they 
are up against impossible odds: the judge (John Lithgow) is not only a 
strickler, but a pal of Facher; the employees of the plant are either 
afraid or to loyal to testify; no concrete evidence is being found, 
depsite the money spent to find it; and they are quickly running out of 
money. As Macy mortgages everything he can, including their homes and 
their office, he slowly loses his sanity (his meatiest role since, oh, 
"Fargo"), and we the audience begin to feel a real loss of hope for our 
protagonist. In fact, the last half hour is such a change from the rest 
of the film and so unresolved that it has been widely panned as not 
being up to par (Owen Gleiberman, especially, criticized the film for 
not being overly-dramatic...I suppose like a Grisham novel). This 
wouldn't be so if the change in Jan had not been handled the way it is: 
instead of having a change of heart and automatically being perceived as 
good, he's seen as being still full of bullshit. Because he doesn't take 
stock in the cares of his partners, and causes them all to lose their 
money and noteriaty in the lawyer field because he wants to help the 
people of the town, he is instead seen as being of good nature but not 
sure how to bring that out. The final half tries to redeem this, as must 
have been the point of making this in Zallian's mind, but what follows 
is a series of scenes where we merely see him making personal stands for 
his beliefs, and though he has changed considerably from the opening 
moments when he's seen speeding back and forth from the town that wishes 
to employ him (and thusly receiving two speeding tickets), we still feel 
that the big change in his life is that he's not rich and esteemed 
anymore (the film's final title card is witty but in all actuality 
shallow).
The fault is not that there is no closure to the court case (it's still 
going on, you know), but that its personal story feels like it needs 
either another chapter or another angle in the final one it has. We need 
to feel like the character has really made a big change in his life, and 
that the story is how a story of strife like the one of the town could 
inspire such a whopping change in his personal life. It only feels like 
half of that. Maybe even less. And it's not Travolta, who does a great 
job here (though never to be a truly memorable performance of his), but 
rather Zallian, whose final chapter needs a rewrite. Up to then, though, 
it's an engrossing drama, one of the best of the year in fact, and one 
of the best lawyer films, period. The reason is because it recognizes 
that a court trial is not about those being defended or prosecuted, but 
rather it's about the lawyers, the knights who battle eachother. We 
learn that the company is almost positively to blame for the deaths in 
the town, but the reason it can't be blamed is because it has the best 
prosecution you can find.
And Duvall's Facher is such a brilliant character and he does such a 
magnificent job at portraying that man that it's almost easy to overlook 
how subtley great he is. Facher is seen as an elderly man, a goofy 
eccentric, carrying a broken brown bag with stickers on it, eating 
lunches out of paper bags, and making a point to take time out of his 
day to listen to the radio, and scold anyone who interupts him. But look 
deeper and you see a master at work: his evil and manipulative nature 
are hidden under the eccentricities that others don upon him, and it's 
difficult as hell to clearly generalize him in any way. That's why I 
liked this film: it's hard to put a pointer on. You can never see 
exactly where this film will land, and even when the credits roll, you 
still aren't sure what to make of it. Call it The Zallian Effect. Same 
thing happened with "Schindler's List" (not that I'm comparing Oskar 
Schindler to Jan Schlictman). Each film is so greatly crafted that you 
can't help but get involved in its broad storytelling, interesting 
characters, and, most peculiarly, the wit that comes along with it. If 
only it felt totally complete (like, say, "Schindler's List," though at 
this point it may be unfair to make comparisons between the two), it 
might have been one of the best films of the year, and along with that, 
a full breath of fresh air.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jeremiah "Spassvogel" Rickert
Starring: John Travolta, Robert Duvall, Kathleen Quinlan, William H. Macy,
Tony Shaloub, John Lithgow.
     Successful and arrogant lawyer Jan Schlichtmann (John Travolta) seems
poised to refuse to pursue the case of eight families, whose children died
apparently as the result of pollution, only to discover that the culprits'
companies are owned by a multi-million dollar conglomerate.  Seeing dollar
signs before his eyes, he puts himself and his law firm wholeheartedly
into the task.  He is so convinced he will
win that he eventually bankrupts his firm, and his partners seeking a
gigantic settlement.  His motivations and ego are put to the test by a
grizzled, but cunning lawyer played by five-time oscar-nominated actor
Robert Duvall (Godfather, Deep Impact, The Apostle), and by the parents of
the dead children, one of whom, played by Kathleen Quinlan (Apolla 13,
Breakdown) only wants an apology.  
     Our first scene with Jan shows him representing the case of a man who
will have to live his life in a wheelchair.  One by one he helps the
crippled man do all of the simple things that
most people take for granted; drink some water, wipe his mouth, all in
plain sight of the jury.  This act convinces the defense team to settle
for 25 million.  When the judge in the latter case, played by John Lithgow
(3rd Rock from the Sun,
Buckaroo Banzai) grants the defense motion to keep the victims' parents
from testifying, Schlichtmann's biggest weapon is taken away from him,
he's forced to rely on facts, and thus begins his desperation to win this
case.
     The film would have you believe that Schlichtmann starts out as an
ambulance chasing over-paid court-room pirate, and by the end, he is a
humbled by his defeat and now understands the moral side of his job.
However, I was not convinced that
he goes through such a change.  Perhaps it is just Travolta's natural
aura, but I found myself unable to subscribe to his humility.  In a way,
he is becoming a sort of Kevin Costner-esque actor.  No matter what part
he is playing, you can't
seem to ignore the fact that its Kevin Costner.  Sometimes this is all
right (Untouchables) and sometimes this is inane (Robin Hood: Prince of
Thieves).  Travolta as a drugged out hit man (Pulp Fiction) worked for me,
Travolta as (take your pick) a super-cop (Face Off) and a Lawyer (A Civil
Action) just doesn't allow him to quash the image that is naturally
associated with the name John Travolta.  Besides, who can't look at that
big face and small blue eyes and not think Chewbacca?
     Robert Duvall plays Jerome Facher, the wizend lawyer who defends one
of the MNC's.  He is also a professor of law and there are snippets of him
teaching his class all of the courtroom "don'ts" just as Jan is committing
them. Duvall seems to fall into what amounts to a "Matlock" sort of
crotchety-old-wisdom routine.  His talents seemed a bit wasted.  Having
recently seen the Apostle, I kept waiting for him to show some of that
intensity, but alas, it never came.
     There is a top-notch supporting cast that doesn't have much to do
other than to be a Greek chorus of warnings to Jan and his ego-crusade.
William H. Macy (Fargo, Air Force One) and Tony Shaloub (Wings, The Siege)
are Jan's partners and they incessantly remind him of the realities of
what he is doing, but he thinks he is indestructable, and in that obvious
hubris, he finds his downfall. The talented actors are as wasted here as
Robert Duvall was.
     Casting choices aside, the script doesn't do much to convince the
viewer that Jan has gone through some change either.  Adapted for the
screen by director Steven Zaillian from the book by Johnathan Harr, it is
quite ambiguous whether Jan's motivation is justice or the replenshing of
his depleted bank accounts.  Is he fighting for those grieving parents, or
his he fighting for his survival as a lawyer? that question is never
clearly answered.  
     The advertising associated with this film misleads you into thinking
he goes through this change of heart, where dollar signs don't matter as
much as redeemed lives, but when you see the clips from the trailer in
context, that message simply isn't there. 
     Zaillian who also directed last year's Amistad, again crafts a film
that wants to be about a larger issue, one that is settled finally in a
courtroom, but doesn't take place exclusively as other films in the genre
have.  In this post-OJ trail culture, people aren't necessarily thrilled
by courtroom antics anymore, especially ones that in the wake of the hours
and hours of procedure, paperwork, cross-examination, and redirects of
that trial, make the Hollywood version seem, well, glamorized, more like a
gladiator fight than the esteemed pinnacle of culture that our system is.
      This film avoids the courtroom for the most part, focusing on the
whirlwind surrounding the trial.  For that I believe that Zaillian
deserves some kudos. The film is a little on the long side, in pace if not
minutes, padded with far too many gratuitous shots of either running water
or glasses of water, or people sipping water. I wanted to shout "all right
we get the picture!" but managed to restrain myself.
     The film has an epilogue of the now virtually penniless Jan
Schlichtmann soliciting some mystery group to take up the case of the
poisoned water and what seemed like five minutes of text on the screen
telling us what all happened in the end, something I won't spoil here.
Twice, however, just when you think the film is over, it keeps going and
going, finally clocking in a just under 2hrs...but what long hours they
seemed, and even a Hollywood ending would have been better than reading
paragraphs of exposition.
     Overall, I found the flim to underlit and overlong, with fairly
weakly drawn characters and an overabundance of water metaphors.  Of the
$4 economy time that I paid for this film, it was worth $1.


Author
Mac VerStandig
"I'm going to do something really outrageous. I am going to tell the 
truth." So proclaims John Travolta in his last film, Primary Colors. 
Kind of ironic that he went from that role, to playing a lawyer in his 
new film, A Civil Action, don't you think? Oh, but worry not Travolta 
fans because he gives what is his second Oscar caliber performance of 
the year in this remarkable film. And his acting, no matter how great, 
is little more than one of the many achievements in this exceptional 
film that is based on a true story.
Jan Schlichtmann (John Travolta) is the type of personal injury lawyer 
that makes you disgusted with the American legal system. He is as much 
an ambulance chaser as the next lawyer, and doesn't seem to have, well, 
morals. His theories are real simple: a dead child is worth very little, 
a dead woman or minority is worth very little, but a dead middle aged 
man is what he thrives off. And thrives he does, he wears a custom made 
suit, drives a Porsche, and seems to be at the peak of his legal career. 
And then he stumbles onto the lawsuit that could make him millions and 
earn him immortality. A company that makes billions of dollars every 
year, and seems to have all the money in the world, has been polluting 
the water supply in Woburn, Mass. This had lead to the pre-mature deaths 
of numerous children, and their families are looking for an apology.
To Schlichtmann an apology is a very simple thing: money. He sees a gold 
mine and seizes the opportunity, despite his long-standing belief that 
children don't equal money. Working with him in his firm are Kevin 
Conway (Tony Shalhoub) and James Gordon (William H. Macy). The 
opposition consists of 2 very different lawyers. On one side there is 
William Cheeseman (Bruce Norris) who seems to be the inexperienced, over 
excited, and incompetent one in the mix. Then there is the wise, 
educated, relaxed and overall brilliant Jerome Facher (Robert Duvall) 
who is as much a Red Sox fan as anyone else in Boston. It will be these 
2 men vs. Schlichtmann and company in what will be the case of their 
careers.
The brilliance to this plot is that it is real. (WARNING: PLOT GIVEAWAY) 
And, as in real life, the story doesn't have a happy ending. It is a 
tragic courtroom film, which is something that is very rare for 
Hollywood. It is also one of the few courtroom films that does not 
involve a female love interest, another rarity. And, because of that, 
this movie really does shine.
The acting is nothing less than brilliant. John Travolta gives the 
second great performance of his career (Primary Colors, where he also 
had the task of portraying a real person) and has finally given reason 
for people to stop asking about his capability. And Robert Duvall gives 
what is just another spectacular job from an actor who is among the 
greatest. But the real treat is William H. Macy who seems to be giving 
role after role of great acting. He gives this movie a whole different 
angle through a unique blend of comedy and drama that only he is capable 
of. You will also find a very good job by John Lithgow as Judge Skinner, 
and a wonderfully charming cameo by Kathy Bates at the end of this 2 
hour film.
When all is said and done, you walk out of a spectacular film that stuns 
you as much as it entertains. Through great acting, a spectacularly true 
story, and an overall willingness to dare, A Civil Action is a great 
achievement. May it be marked as one of the few films of 1998 that was 
truly great.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring John Travolta, Robert Duvall, William H. Macy and Kathleen Quinlan.
Directed By Steven Zaillian
Running Time: 1 hour 50 minutes.
A new courtroom thriller starring John Travolta that _isn't_ written by John
Grisham? There's a miracle everyday in Hollywood. This interesting vehicle
adapted from the true story novelised by Jonathan Harr is an straight
forward telling of the lawfirm Schlichtmann (Travolta) Crowley and Conway
(Zeljko Ivanek and Tony Shalhoub) and their involvement in a case against
contaminated water. However, this case proves to be hugely expensive for
them, and they are drawn into a battle of money and wits against defendant
lawyer Jerome Facher (Duvall.)
Adapted by Schindlers List writer Zaillian, A Civil Action is a better
courtroom drama than most because much of the movie is set outside the
courtroom. In a nice sequence, the film introduces us immediately to
Travolta's character and train of though, although the other members of the
law firms seem to be compromised in the character developed area. Although
Travolta's character is delved into greatly, Conway, Crowley and accountant
James Gordon (Macy) are rather faceless, although played with sterling
effort by the cast. William H. Macy is particularly good as the edgy
accountant who grows more crazy as the firm goes deeper into debt. Shalhoub,
after an excellent performance in The Siege is good here, but plays a minor
role in the big scheme of things. Ivanek, sadly, doesn't get much of a
chance to make an impression on the audience. Robert Duvall is good as the
world weary Facher, but it's far too simple a role for him and lacks any
real depth. He's fun, but he's not very deep. Quinlan appears in and out of
the movie as the leader of the group of parents who are fighting the
pollutants of the water (their children died of leukaemia,) and her
performance is merely average. John Lithgow and Dan Hedaya, however, are
both fun in incredibly minor roles.
Travolta himself has shown he can save nearly any movie, even crap like
Phenomenon (but not Michael.) He obviously enjoys working with Duvall again
(and vice versa) and it's their scenes together that are the highlights of
the movie. Travolta is more than able enough to carry the movie, and his is
the only character that's fleshed out with any depth. But the movie never
comes to an great conclusion about him, and the end of the movie may leave
you annoyed by the fact that the film can't seem to wrap up a potentially
interesting character. Perhaps placing the words 'Based on a true story' at
the start of the movie was the filmmakers way of wimping out: they must have
thought the audiences would of loved these characters because their are real
people. But it doesn't work, and having faceless characters makes the film
flat and sometimes boring.
Apart from the characters, however, the film in other respects is fine. The
direction is impressive and pacy enough, although their are some truly odd
camera angles chucked in for no apparent reason. Both the drama and the
minor action scenes are handled well enough. There's some suitably 'JFK'
type music running throughout, written by Danny Elfman, who I still feel is
more comfortable when writing music for darker films. The pacing is fine,
although it occasionally drags, and the ending is to abrupt.
Although flawed, A Civil Action does contain enough suspense and tension to
keep audiences pleased. Although it doesn't try anything new, A Civil Action
is solid entertainment, and is probably worth watching if you want a quick
fix of courtroom drama. It's just a shame that a potentially interesting
movie is nothing more than average.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        How much are twelve human lives worth?  That's the primary
question director Steven Zaillian ("Searching for Bobby Fischer")
explores in his new courtroom drama, "A Civil Action," and boy, is
it a doozy.  Based on a true story, "A Civil Action" brings us
into a complex legal quagmire, explains the facts in an interesting
(if melodramatic) fashion, then leaves us to ponder the outcome as the
credits roll.  Little is truly resolved at the conclusion of the
tale... but for once, that's exactly as it should be.
        Something lurks in the drinking water of Woburn,
Massachusettes-- an unidentified substance which is robbing the
town's children of their lives.  Suspecting these deaths are
being caused by the toxic substances a local lumber company is
unleashing into a nearby river (which also doubles as the town's
water supply), a group of concerned parents hire personal injury
lawyer Jan Schlichtmann (John Travolta) to investigate.  A self-
professed "ambulance chaser," Schlichtmann is initially reluctant to
take the case, citing the low settlement the group could expect to
receive from such a financially-strapped company.  This reluctance
vanishes, however, after he discovers the company's ties to corporate
giant Beatrice Foods.  Schlichtmann has, of course, missed the
point entirely: the parents aren't seeking financial compensation for
the deaths of their children... merely a formal apology.  Alas,
apologies are not acceptable currency for Schlichtmann, and he pursues
the case purely as a means for financial gain.
        Assisting Schlichtmann are two colleagues from his law firm,
plus James Gordon (William H. Macy), the firm's accountant, who is
(justifiably, it turns out) concerned with the amount of time and
money the Woburn case is costing the company.  (Macy stole the show
for me, as he has in nearly every movie I've seen him in.)  Robert
Duvall is also fascinating as Jerry Facher, the eccentric Beatrice
Foods attourney who becomes Schlichtmann's arch-nemesis in the case.
His odd, nervous habits (bouncing a tennis ball during telephone
conversations, obsessing over an ink pen he finds during a meeting)
stand out all the more when compared with his shrewd, legal mind.  The
man is a brilliant lawyer, and Schlichtmann's firm knows it.
        The big strength of "A Civil Action," however, is Travolta's
cold, predatory performance as Jan Schlichtmann.  Conveying a hard,
self-serving streak which harkens back to his role in "Pulp Fiction,"
Travolta depicts Schlichtmann as a Scrooge-like landshark, interested
only in the money he can make from the misfortune of others.  The
film's opening scene, for example, is a chilling reading by
Schlichtmann of the relative worth of different types of people, as
seen by the court (most valuable on the list: rich, white males in
their 40s.  Least valuable?  "A dead child.")  Much of the story's
power ebbs in the second half, however, when Schlichtmann undergoes a
Grinch-like transformation from "stingy money grubber" to "moralistic
saint."  The change is a bit too sudden to be totally convincing, but
Travolta does what he can with the material.  His efforts are to be
commended, for he comes very close to pulling it off, despite the
lackluster writing in the film's final half-hour.
        "A Civil Action" is a better than average court movie,
probably because it concentrates on the legalities involved in such a
case.  It's made all the more fascinating by its basis in reality, and
fine acting.  Only Travolta's forced, Hollywood-induced spiritual
transformation makes it difficult to truly believe what you're seeing.
A pity.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Steve Rhodes
In A CIVIL ACTION, Jan Schlichtmann, a personal injury lawyer, more
aptly known as an ambulance chaser, has been named one of Boston's 10
most eligible bachelors.  With his movie star good looks and his
expensive clothing, he blasts down the small road in his sleek, black
Porsche on the way to turn down some would-be clients.  Their case,
involving a cluster of leukemia deaths among 8 children, appears to be a
financial loser.  (He has already lectured the audience in voice-over
about the "calculus" of human worth.  Children, having no current
incoming producing ability, fall at the bottom of the charts.)
Jan wants to waste as little of his valuable time as possible on this
case. After getting his second speeding ticket of the day, he notices a
stream near where his car had been pulled over by the officer.
Following it, he gets his fancy shoes muddy, but he discovers the mother
lode.  There are two big companies (Beatrice Foods and W.R. Grace) who
have facilities near the stream.  As visions of checks with large
numbers of zeros flash through his head, a smug smile comes across his
face, and he decides then and there to take the case.  Without any
testing to see if the companies' proximity to the water has any
relationship whatsoever to the children's illness, he knows only that
the companies have the deep pockets from which he figures he can extract
large sums of money for himself and his clients.
(Writer and director Steven Zaillian's adaptation of Jonathan Harr's
book can be infuriating if you think too hard about some of the
scientific conclusions being drawn.  As recent articles in the "Wall
Street Journal" and "Forbes" have pointed out, the case is far from the
simplistic one described.  Clusters will occur in any set of random
numbers, and whether these two companies had anything to do with it was
never proven.  The articles point out that the chemical (TCE) mentioned
in the movie is not a human carcinogen, and the town in question has had
ground water contamination for 350 years.  At any rate, the entertaining
movie has significant problems even if you accept the book and
screenplay as the full and complete truth.)
The problems start with John Travolta's flat performance as Jan.
Travolta never warms up to the role, coming across as emotionally
uninvolved.  Whereas he threw himself into his recent part in PRIMARY
COLORS, playing another character with a flexible set of morals, this
time he approaches the role with clinical detachment.  Generating
neither sympathy nor scorn, he gives a passionless performance than
leaves the movie with a hollow core.
Writer and director Zaillian, who was so masterfully in control in
SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER, sets a languid pace in A CIVIL ACTION.
Fascinating incidents frequently dissolve into tedium as the energy gets
drained away.
Notwithstanding all of these troubles, the supporting cast is terrific,
and, as a writer, Zaillian comes up with some great, subtle humor that
provides one laugh after another as the lawyers put down each other and
themselves.  (The script is much less successful in conjuring up the
pain and suffering of the children.  Absent a few scenes, their misery
is discussed with all of the compassion of a medical textbook.)
The movie is worth seeing for Robert Duvall's performance alone, which
deserves to be remembered at Oscar time.  As Jerome Facher, the cagey
old lawyer for Beatrice, Duvall is mesmerizing as he runs circles around
the younger and more aggressive lawyers.  Acting like a man who always
has 5 aces up his sleeve, Jerome disarms his prey by talking about
everything but the law.  In a particularly delicious scene, he sits
listening to Jan hanging himself through the sin of pride.  After asking
if he could have the nifty hotel pen, Jerome smiles at his adversary and
leaves, ignoring entirely Jan's pompous attempt at negotiations.  The
character of Jerome is so rich that a television series could easily be
built around it.  When Jerome is on the screen, all of the movie's
failings are quickly forgotten.
The other amazing piece of work comes from William H. Macy as James
Gordon, the accountant for Jan's small law firm, who tries valiantly but
unsuccessfully to reign in the firm's soaring expenses for the case.  As
Jan bankrupts himself and his partners, James slowly and surely begins
to lose it emotionally.  Macy's sympathetic portrayal of James will have
you laughing so hard that you almost cry as James tries everything from
lottery tickets to a plethora of credit cards to come up with the cash
necessary to keep the case afloat.
The battle, in which there were few winners, is all too neatly wrapped
up in a Hollywood style ending.  The legal conclusions are printed in
stark white letters just before the ending credits.  Don't read them too
carefully, however, or you will realize how little was really decided.
A CIVIL ACTION runs 1:58.  It is rated PG-13 for mature themes and
several uses of the F-word and would be fine for kids around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
A Civil Action (1998)
John Travolta, Robert Duvall, Tony Shalhoub, William H. Macy, Zeljko 
Ivanek, James Gandolfini, Bruce Norris, John Lithgow, Kathleen Quinlan, 
David Thornton, Stephen Fry, Dan Hedaya, Sydney Pollack. Produced by 
Scott Rudin, Rachel Pfeffer and Robert Redford. Music by Danny Elfman. 
Screenplay by Steven Zaillian, based on the book by Jonathan Harr. 
Directed by Steven Zaillian. 112 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
"I can appreciate the theatrical value of several dead kids," muses 
personal injury lawyer Jan Schlictmann (John Travolta) early in the legal 
thriller, "A Civil Action." To its credit, the film, based on Jonathan 
Harr's nonfiction bestseller, carefully avoids exploiting the death of 
those children. In fact, the production successfully navigates around 
most of the rampant emotional manipulation and storytelling clichés that 
fuel so many courtroom dramas. Unfortunately, in their determination to 
recount a complicated series of events accurately and without emotional 
button-pushing, the filmmakers undercut the inherent drama of their own 
story. "A Civil Action" is admirable and quite interesting, but not 
nearly as compelling as it should be.
Set in the '80s in Woburn, Massachusetts, the case revolves around eight 
families who lost children to leukemia. Believing that chemical dumping 
by two local factories tainted the town's water supply and led to the 
deaths, Anne Anderson (Kathleen Quinlan), mother of one of the children, 
approaches Schlichtmann on behalf of the parents. She is adamant that the 
families are not interested in wealth - - they simply want an apology 
from the responsible parties. 
With well-rehearsed compassionate tones, Schlichtmann explains that, 
while he feels her pain, his firm is small enough that they cannot afford 
to lose a case. As a courtesy, he makes a cursory investigation of the 
site, only to discover that the factories in question are owned by two 
giant corporations, W.R. Grace & Co. and Beatrice Foods. With dollar 
signs in his eyes, Schlichtmann does an about-face and convinces his 
partners to devote their full resources to the case, leading him to face 
off against William Cheeseman (Bruce Norris), W.R. Grace's self-important,
 boobish head lawyer, and Beatrice attorney Jerome Facher (Robert Duvall),
 a much craftier, formidable foe.
Writer/director Steven Zaillian does a nice job of compressing a very 
complex true story into a manageable package. A series of well-staged 
deposition scenes lay out the particulars of the case, while voice-overs 
and sharp editing effectively detail the legal tactics. Early on, we 
learn that in the world of personal injury law, settling out of court 
means everything. Only 1.5% of the cases ever reach a verdict, and, out 
of those, the result is two to one against the plaintiff. 
For the most part, "A Civil Action" minimizes the human factor of the 
tragedy, focusing instead on the high-stakes pissing war between the 
lawyers. Schlichtmann becomes obsessed on extracting as much money from 
the corporations as possible, turning down huge proposed settlements 
because the figures were offered too easily. His primary motive may be 
greed exacerbated by wounded pride, or he might be honestly trying to 
serve the families, recognizing that a soulless corporation understands 
only money, and a severe financial penalty is the closest thing to an 
apology his clients will ever receive.
What's actually going on in Schlichtmann's head is anybody's guess, 
because the film provides scant insight into the man. As always, John 
Travolta is a commanding presence, but he doesn't seem to have a handle 
on the character. One thing is clear - - Schlichtmann's skills do not 
match his zeal. The further he gets into the case, the more clumsy he 
becomes. One of the film's most striking passages shows Facher telling a 
law class about tactical mistakes often made in the courtroom, while the 
camera cuts to images of Schlichtmann making those very errors. 
As Facher, the amazing Robert Duvall is ornery and assured, although his 
overabundant display of colorful eccentricities borders on showboating. 
He sticks out even more in comparison to the rest of the central players, 
a numbing group of one-note characters. Only a few supporting cast 
members manage to flesh out their roles. James Gandolfini is excellent as 
a Grace employee giving his deposition under the watchful eyes of the 
corporate attorneys, using subtle changes in expression to efficiently 
convey the sense of a man of conscience who has selected this moment to 
rebel against a lifetime of silent intimidation. 
And while Kathleen Quinlan's character serves only as a symbol of 
parental grief, David Thornton does wonders with his few onscreen moments,
 displaying restraint and quiet dignity as he relates his desperate 
failed attempts to revive his son, who stopped breathing during the drive 
to the hospital. There is no bathos in the scene; just unadorned, 
heartbreaking human grief.
A little more humanity would have done wonders for this film. The 
lawyers' posturing, planning and maneuvering is fascinating, but with the 
human factor pushed so far into the background, the production turns into 
a clinical, ultimately anticlimactic exercise. Fair to a fault, "A Civil 
Action" is too civil to leave a lasting impression.

Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "A CIVIL ACTION" (Touchstone/Paramount Pictures
Adapted from Jonathan Harr's 1995 non-fiction best-seller, this
is a deadly serious legal thriller - it's also a deadly bore. John
Travolta sleepwalks through the role of Jan Schlictmann, an
egotistical, high-stakes, personal-injury attorney who suddenly
becomes virtuous and loses his custom-made shirt when he sues two
corporations for dumping toxic waste which may have polluted the water
supply and, in turn, caused cancer-related deaths in eight families in
a small town outside of Boston. When we first meet Schlictmann, he's
driving a sleek black Porche and reveling in minor celebrity. Guesting
on a radio talk show, he's confronted by a client (Kathleen Quinlan)
whose letters he has ignored. She's the distraught mother of a young
boy who died of leukemia and represents seven other children in one
neighborhood who met a similar fate. But when Schlictmann discovers
that two major companies (W.R. Grace and Beatrice Foods) may be the
culprits, he gleefully proclaims, "This is a gold mine!" Greedily, he
accept the case which, eventually, drives his firm into
bankruptcy. Written and directed by Steven Zaillian, who wrote
"Schindler's List," it's issue-oriented, earnest and decent, filled
with righteous indignation about social injustice. Unfortunately, it's
not very entertaining - except for Robert Duvall's superbly nuanced
performance as a crafty corporate counsel, Sydney Pollock's turn as a
snobbish executive, and an uncredited cameo by Kathy Bates. Why does
it miss the mark? Because we have no emotional investment in
Travolta's morally ambiguous character. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "A Civil Action" is a bleak, stilted 6, proving that no good
deed goes unpunished.

Author
Kevin Patterson
A CIVIL ACTION turned out to be about as good as I had expected, but not in
the way I had expected. Based on the previews, what I thought we were going
to get was a nice character film about a lawyer who finds himself
personally affected by a case for the first time with a considerable amount
of courtroom melodrama. Instead, the character development turns out to be
kind of thin, but the legal procedure is actually portrayed fairly
realistically and without a tidy happy ending.
John Travolta is the star of the film (which is based on a true story) as
Jan Schlictmann, a personal injury lawyer While he's not a totally
heartless sleazeball, certainly knows the ins and outs of his profession
and isn't about to take on a case solely because it's a good cause. There
has to be a clear, concrete argument to make that won't cost millions of
dollars, and they have to be able to sue someone whose pockets are deep and
who will offer a juicy settlement. As we learn from Jan's narration, a
personal injury trial rarely comes to an actual verdict: 98.5% of them end
in an out-of-court settlement. All a settlement really means, of course, is
that the lawsuit is a sufficient inconvenience that the defendant will
throw out some money to make it go away, not that they actually admit any
wrongdoing.
The trouble is, Jan's latest clients, a group of parents from Woburn,
Massachussetts whose children all died due to ill health, want exactly
that: an apology. They believe that their children's sickness was a result
of improper waste disposal procedures by some local companies which
polluted the water supply. At first, Jan is reluctant to take their case,
but eventually he agrees and undertakes a costly investigation into the
companies' disposal procedures. The problem is that their wishes really
have no place in the American legal system, at least not without a much
more powerful financial force behind them than Jan's firm. To get an
admission of wrongdoing, that means that Jan must prove that the companies
were at fault in court, but as he says, this is not the way personal injury
trials function: they function by ending early in a settlement.
Writer/director Steven Zaillian wisely avoids getting too heavy-handed with
all this: rather than belaboring the obvious cold-heartedness of Jan's
opponents, he sends them up with a light, satirical touch. Robert Duvall
turns in a good performance as the eccentric and arrogant Jerome Facher,
the lawyer who defends one of the corporations. He's certainly cynical and
manipulative, yet not really "evil" per se. He's just a world-weary lawyer
who knows that a trial is really just about putting on a good show:
"justice" has long since ceased to have any real meaning for him. His best
scene occurs about halfway through, when Zaillian intercuts his lectures to
a law school class with shots of him acting out the strategies he describes
in the actual trial. For example, he explains that frequent objections
serve to break up the other side's rhythm, as he tells his students, "If
you ever catch yourself nodding off in court, the first word out of your
mouth when you wake up should be 'objection.'" Then we see Facher himself
asleep during the trial, waking suddenly and exclaiming, "Objection!"
The trial, to put it mildly, does not go well. The judge (John Lithgow)
nixes some of Jan's defense strategy, and it goes on long enough that he
and his partners are more or less run out of business by the legal costs.
They even go so far as to sell their own houses and many of their other
possessions in order to keep going, but finally they reach a point where
they simply cannot continue any longer. Zaillian clearly wants this to be a
sort of transformational journey for Jan, but unfortunately he and his
partners are not developed very well. His sudden conversion from cynical
ambulance-chaser to bona fide crusader for justice happens too quickly. It
seems to result from little more than a walk down the river, where he sees
that the pollution the parents described probably is taking place, and some
serious thought about what it must have been like to lose a child. But
didn't he ever give *any* of his other cases this kind of consideration
before? What's different about this one that causes him to change his
attitude?
A CIVIL ACTION finds only limited success as a character drama, but it
makes up for it with its realistic, intelligent plotting and its avoidance
of excessive melodrama or an easy ending. It probably isn't one of the best
films you'll see, but it's never boring, and you may actually learn a few
things about the mechanics of a civil lawsuit in the process.
Film Reviews Page:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
When I was in law school, we once argued the moral effect of the
economic calculus that A Civil Action presents us with.  Plaintiff's
attorney Jan Schlichtmann (John Travolta) explains to us via voiceover
that a client with a disability is "worth more" than a client who is
dead.  This is because a person with a disability can be expected to
rack up costly bills for health care and personal assistance, where a
dead client can't incur any more bills from the grave.  A civil action
(as defense lawyer Robert Duvall explains, later in the movie) is
about money -- compensating the injured party -- so it makes sense to
give parties who survive their injuries more money than those who
don't, then, doesn't it?
However, this leaves you with a moral problem.  The professor put it
this way: if I run you over with my car, but I don't kill you, isn't
it in my financial self-interest to back over you and make sure that
you're dead?  I'm going to get sued whether you live or die -- at
least this way, I can cut my losses.
A Civil Action doesn't quite reach that wicked little googly, but it's
a commendable attempt to inject concepts of decency and morality into
the questionable realm of tort law.  A Civil Action just happens to be
about a lawsuit filed by eight families in Woburn, Massachusetts, who
allege that the dumping of chemical solvents into the local aquifer
caused their children to develop leukemia and die.  While this is a
tragedy for the plaintiffs, for the audience, it's almost incidental.
The movie could have been about almost any case, up to and including
that poor woman who spilled coffee on herself and sued McDonalds.
What we care about, and what the movie ultimately cares about, is the
duel between Travolta and Duvall, and that duel is much more about
pride and money than it is about the families and their dead children.
Travolta is Jan Schlichtmann, a silk-suit attorney with a kamikaze
boutique practice in Boston.  His style is go-for-broke.  He focuses
all his time and talents on one case at a time, hoping to score a
multi-million dollar settlement.  We don't see Schlichtmann taking the
routine slip-and-fall cases against the mom-and-pop liquor store,
instead, his target is high-dollar deep-pocket corporations.  He's not
a shark -- a shark will eat anything in its path.  He's a fisherman
looking to hook a deep-sea monster.  And when the orphan case of the
Woburn families appears on his desk, he's quick to dismiss it -- until
he finds that corporate giants Beatrice Foods and Grace have plants
nearby.  When Travolta sees the Beatrice logo on the side of a plant
truck, he gazes at it as if it were an undiscovered country of riches,
or as if he were Captain Ahab looking at the white whale for the first
time.
Duvall gets the plum role of Jerome Facher, counsel for Beatrice Foods
and senior partner at a big rich Boston law firm.  Facher is a real
person, supposedly a brilliant trial technician, obviously smart
enough to get to teach at Harvard, but he's the sort to put his light
under a bushel.  Since we don't get to see his talents much (the
three-month trial takes up less than three minutes on the screen),
Duvall shows us Facher's quirks, and it's a broad repertoire.  When
confronted early on with an annoying phone call from his co-defendant,
Duvall leans back in his chair, throws a tennis ball against the wall
like he's Steve McQueen from The Great Escape, and pretends not to
understand a word his cohort is saying.  It's a hell of an acting job,
and Duvall should take the Oscar here he should have won for The
Apostle.
Both actors are fortunate enough to get roles that match their
strengths.  Duvall is stable where Travolta is flashy, quiet where
Travolta is intense, disciplined when Travolta is raving.  Duvall wins
the acting duel, but it's Travolta's movie, and he's the one that has
the responsibility of carrying it.  Travolta takes A Civil Action as
far as it can possibly go and then some.
The story of A Civil Action isn't the technical twists and turns of
the trial.  Some of the technical stuff is wrong (but you'd only know
that if you spent three years in law school).  The story is about
Travolta, and how a smart, calculating trial lawyer gets destroyed by
greed and obsession... and maybe something else.  As the trial
continues, the costs escalate, and Schlichtmann and his partners must
risk everything they have on their abilities to reach a verdict.
How this happens is the meat of the movie.  Why it happens isn't
clear.  Schlichtmann is an enigmatic character, and Travolta keeps his
acting cards close to his chest.  Is he really concerned about
justice, or dreaming about a billion-dollar payday?  Is he fighting
for the families or his own sense of price?  It's a fascinating
discussion (I vote greed) and makes A Civil Action well worth the
price of admission.
If I have a complaint about this movie, it's that we don't see enough
of the lesser characters that populate Jonathan Harr's great book that
the movie was based on, or the great character actors who play them.
Kathleen Quinlan plays the leader of the families, an elementary
school librarian who lost her son and a good part of her soul to
leukemia.  She's chillingly effective -- the scene where she talks
about the "back left corner" will floor you even if you're waiting for
it) but she's not given enough time.  Likewise, Tony Shalhoub is all
but wasted as Travolta's partner -- if Shalhoub had been given half
the screen time that he received in The Siege, A Civil Action would be
the better for it.  John Lithgow just blends into the background as a
judge.  Only William H. Macy is given any time at all as the harried
accountant struggling mightily to pay bills and serve as the voice of
reason.
Audiences play lots of roles in different movies.  Here, we are the
jury in the case of Jan Schlichtmann, attorney at law.  We get to
examine his motives, try his character, and sit in judgment on his
decisions.  A Civil Action is the best jury duty you'll ever sit
through, and (unless you live in New York) you probably won't have to
pay for parking.  (And big-screen lawyers are much cooler than
real-life ones are, trust me.)
MovieNation:  Movie Reviews in Black and White
http://members.xoom.com/movienation
movienation@xoommail.com
"No children have ever meddled with the Republican Party
and lived to tell about it."  -- Sideshow Bob

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
This film melds the respective talents of the man behind the words of
SCHINDLER'S LIST (7/10) and the man who once proudly uttered the phrase
"They call it Le BigMac" in a film, Steve Zaillian and John Travolta.
Captured from a book written by Jonathan Harr, this film is based on a true
story, stars plenty of big names and tosses in a couple of cameos, just for
the fun of it.
PLOT:
Typical shark-like lawyer with no conscience takes on a case featuring the
suspiciously similar deaths of eight children in a small town. The parents
believe that a local plant had contaminated the water supply, ultimately
killing their kids. The lawyer fights two multinationals in court, but runs
out of money nearing the end of the trial. Luckily for him, he's able to
replace it with a newly developed sense of morals.
CRITIQUE:
Interesting yet unexciting court-battle drama features Travolta in prime
form as John Travolta, Duvall in one of his better supporting roles, and an
unsatisfying ending which leaves you dispassionately shrugging your
shoulders at best. This movie is a highbrow affair for people who 1) enjoy
lawyer movies 2) don't require any action in their films and 3) don't mind a
"realistic" ending and appreciate good actors. I personally found it to be
quite humdrum, and even a little boring at times. Kinda had me wishing for a
fistfight or something, one which, unfortunately for me, never materialized.
The plot is well developed, as is the execution of the film, but the missing
link seemed to be the emotional attachment to the film or any of its
characters. This seemed to be non-existent for me. Travolta's cold
performance may have been the reason. Or maybe the lack of tension or real
suspense. Not sure. All's I know is that the film had a superb idiosyncratic
performance by Bobby Duvall, some interesting law factoids, and enough stars
to agreeably allow me to weather its two-hour runtime, all without wowing me
over.
All in all, a mediocre fabrication of law-cinema, offering some points of
interest, no real action, and a weak ending, which applauds the hard work
and genuine nature of some lawyers out there, while belaboring a few of the
justice system's systemic imperfections. No need to see it on the big
screen. Catch it on video, if interested.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
John Travolta received only $140,000 for his Oscar-nominated role in Quentin
Tarantino's PULP FICTION (7.5/10), and a whopping $15,000,000 for 1997's
FACE-OFF (8/10). He needn't make another movie for the rest of his life
because he has secured a percentage of the profits from the Saturday Night
Fever and Grease soundtracks (which have sold in excess of 19 million
copies).
Travolta was born the youngest of six children to tire salesman and former
semiprofessional football player Salvatore Travolta, and high school drama
teacher Helen Travolta. At the age of 16, Travolta dropped out of school
(with his parents' permission, mind you) to pursue acting full-time.
Travolta's white "disco outfit" from 1977's SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER (7.5/10)
recently fetched a record-setting $145,500 at a Christie's auction.
Travolta's present wife, actress Kelly Preston, was once engaged to
Hollywood bad-boy Charlie Sheen, and lived with George Clooney at another
point in her life.
Since 1964, Robert Duvall has been married three times, most recently to
dance instructor Sharon Brophy. Their tumultuous divorce, which was set into
motion by Duvall's allegations that Brophy had carried on an adulterous
affair with a pool installer, dragged on for nearly three years.
William H. Macy got his infamous role in the Coens' brothers FARGO (7/10) as
such: From the moment he read the script, Macy knew he was the man best
suited for the role of luckless car salesman Jerry "Hey! I'm cooperating
here!" Lundegaard. Though asked to read for the part twice, Macy was
eventually left hanging by those darn Coen brothers, who promised to get bac
k to him. Shortly thereafter, the actor learned that the brothers were
continuing to audition his prize part and promptly flew from L.A. to New
York, where he cornered the still-deliberating duo and frankly informed
them, "I'm very, very worried that you are going to screw up this movie by
giving this role to somebody else. It's my role, and I'll shoot your dogs if
you don't give it to me." The Coens conceded, and Macy's brilliant
performance was rewarded with a Best Supporting Actor Oscar nomination in
that very same year.
Actor James Galdolfini's sister Johanna is a prominent official with the New
Jersey Family Court system.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Steven Zaillian.
Cast: John Travolta, Robert Duvall, Stephen Fry, William H. Macy, James 
Gandolfini, Kathleen Quinlan, Tony Shalhoub, Dan Hedaya, John Lithgow, 
Mary Mara, Kathy Bates.
1998 - 115 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for profanity).
Reviewed January 10, 1999.
Since director Steven Zaillian previously wrote the powerful screenplay 
for 1993's Steven Spielberg drama "Schindler's List" and directed 1993's 
intelligent "Searching for Bobby Fischer," his new film, "A Civil 
Action," should most likely be looked upon as an unfortunate misstep in 
an otherwise prosperous career. What doesn't make sense is how such 
high-profile and superb actors as John Travolta, Robert Duvall, William 
H. Macy, and Kathleen Quinlan got involved in this project, which is 
both dull and completely ineffective. The film, which involves a small 
community of children who mysteriously died of leukemia, certainly 
contains the type of story to be emotionally-charged, but somehow all 
signs of feeling have been completely removed from the proceedings, 
leaving us with nothing more than a poorly-done courtroom drama.
Based on a book by Jonathan Hart, which was consequently based on a true 
account, "A Civil Action" is set in 1982 in the town of Woburn, Mass., 
where personal injury lawyer Jan Schlictmann (John Travolta) decides to 
take on the case of eight families who simply want an apology for their 
children's death from leukemia due to unknown causes. Jan originally 
decides to drop the case, but when he stumbles across to corporate 
giants, Grace and Beatrice Foods, who have plants located near the 
families' homes, he sees all of the pieces suddenly fall into place: the 
two companies have been leaking harmful chemicals into the nearby lake 
which, thus, goes into the city's drinking water. Suddenly, after 
hearing about the families' heartbreak and personal stories, he begins 
to care for them and becomes determined to get to the bottom of the 
mystery, even though he is warned by his staff accountant (William H. 
Macy) that no money is coming in to them, only going out. Also figuring 
into the story is Jerome Facher (Robert Duvall), Beatrice Foods' 
corporate counsel, who finds himself in heated waters when Jan will not 
accept his $20-million offer to settle the case.
Coming from such a talented writer, director, and cast, not to mention 
one of the most interesting film composers, Danny Elfman, "A Civil 
Action" is an astoundingly empty-headed drama, one that includes an 
intriguing story and somehow transforms it into an admittedly tiresome 
and occasionally even boring experience. Perhaps one of its major 
problems was that in its attempts to be a relatively uncommercial motion 
picture, Zaillian has misplaced its refreshing unconventional attitude 
with an absence of magnetism and even meaning.
Watching the film, I couldn't help but notice its similarities with 
1997's far, far superior film "The Sweet Hereafter," which dealt with a 
lawyer, played brilliantly by Ian Holm, investigating a school bus 
accident that killed a number of children. In his attempts to find 
someone who may have been responsible for the accident, Holm interviews 
the grieving parents, as well as the sole surviving passenger, a teenage 
girl, which starts to remind him of his own teenage daughter, a young 
drug-addict who has run away from home. Not only was the plotting 
similar to "A Civil Action," but it also had the same exact running time 
of 115 minutes. Considering this, it is amazing how fulfilling and 
truthful "A Sweet Hereafter" was, not only concentrating on the school 
bus accident, but delving deeply into Ian Holm's character and his own 
personal demons, as well as the teenage girl. In "A Civil Action," 
however, I have no idea where the running time went, since the film is 
virtually two hours of nothingness. We do not get to know the parents 
very well, nor any of the main characters. Through its whole duration, I 
did not learn one thing__not one thing__about Travolta's lawyer 
character, Jan Schlictmann, who doesn't appear to have any sort of life 
or purpose outside of his job. Every scene is tediously related directly 
to the premise, and therefore, there was no one for me to care about or 
root for. You've got to work pretty hard, actually, to not get an 
audience to become involved in the parents' plight, since their children 
are dead, but that is exactly what "A Civil Action" does.
To be honest, I would be fairly hard-pressed to state an aspect of the 
film that I actually liked. Aside from one flashback to when a man's 
young son died on the way to the doctor, I remained unmoved and passive 
about what was going on in the scenes, and more than once found my mind 
wandering. I could say the performances were good, but who's fooling 
who? Since every character is one-dimensionally written, no one's acting 
abilities are challenged in any way. Travolta plays a lawyer well 
enough, but that's about all he does. Duvall virtually sleepwalks 
through his role, apparently only appearing to give one-liners at every 
chance he gets. And what in the world is Kathy Bates doing in the 
picture's final scene, as a judge? She appears unbilled, since it is 
just a cameo, but why did she even agree to do it in the first place? 
Finally, when the conclusion arrived and the end credits began to role, 
the film left me with another question: what was the point? Abruptly 
ending without any susceptible momentum, where none came before that to 
begin with, "A Civil Action" seemed to me, at least, to be an example of 
how not to make a courtroom drama, and it certainly did not do justice 
to the very serious subject matter the film deals with. 
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Dustin Putman's
Film Haven >

Author
Mark O'Hara
A Film Review by Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
I like John Travolta.  There's the connection I feel from my teenage 
years when he was Vinnie Barbarino, my friends and me cracking up in the 
high school cafeteria with the line, "Up your nose with a rubber hose."  
I grew up in New Jersey, and Travolta has Jersey connections (listen to 
his deceptive hard r's sometime, similar to Danny DeVito's).  The man is 
just cool, hair swept back, face ready to look threatening or comedic.
The trouble is, he gets way too much screen time in 'A Civil Action.'  
Travolta's Jan Schlichtmann is a personal injury lawyer with two 
partners - Kevin Conway (Tony Shalhoub) and Bill Crowley (Zelijko 
Ivanek) - and an accountant, James Gordon (William H. Macy).  Among 
these players, only Macy is doled out a decent number of lines by the 
script.  Gordon has the job of locating finances for the case in which 
the firm is involved, and Macy does a fine job of complaining to the 
lead partner, Schlichtmann, about impending bankruptcy.  In a scene in 
which Gordon confronts Schlichtmann during a thunderstorm, their law 
office dark and bare because of all the repossessions, we see Macy show 
a darn good stint of anger.  His style is not physically threatening, 
but for a suit-wearing numbers-cruncher, he appears memorably agitated.  
Shalhoub and Ivanek, two strong actors, go along for the ride.  What's 
weak here is that the film becomes as much about the lessons learned by 
one lawyer as about a legal case brought by parents of children who died 
of leukemia.
The town is Woburn (Woo-burn), Massachusetts, and the parents of the 
deceased children are not sure whom they should hold responsible.  The 
most visible parent is Anne Anderson, played by Kathleen Quinlan.  She 
embarrasses Schlichtmann as he talks on his legal radio show, the result 
being his visit to the town in order to drop the case politely.  But on 
his drive back to the city he is stopped for a second speeding ticket;  
before he climbs back in his Porsche, Schlichtmann notices signs of 
pollution in the river.  He investigates, catching his expensive shoes 
in the muck, but also spotting the tell-tale foam along the bank.   
After he eyes operations run by W. R. Grace and Beatrice, he decides 
this could be a money-maker.  His firm commences to depose witnesses and 
hires a drilling firm to probe the aquifer for pollutants.  
I've said already that I'm a Travolta fan, but the best actor in the 
thing is Robert Duvall.  This guy is such a pro that he exudes character 
in the idiosyncrasies of his dress.  While Jan Schlichtmann dons 
impeccable suits and silk ties done up in thin knots, Duvall's opposing 
lawyer Jerome Facher leaves his collar button unfastened, the neck 
pieces of his tie slightly visible.  Facher, the legal eagle whose firm 
speaks for Beatrice Foods, is fastidious in his personal habits, and 
even more careful in his legal machinations.  He may look like an old 
fogey who worships the Red Sox and revels at receiving free pens, but he 
is sly like Inspector Columbo, saving his canniness for when it counts.  
In a sequence of masterful intercutting, we watch Facher lecturing to 
his Harvard law students about maneuvers to avoid in court;  while he 
warns against them, we witness Jan Schlichtmann committing the self-same 
mistakes!   It's a relief that Duvall does not engage in his folksy 
chuckle in this role;  I was beginning to believe he was overusing it.  
Robert Duvall is one of the very best living actors, and there's never 
any talk of his recovering from a career slump.
The story develops into an expose of the legal system, and that's fine, 
except that it feels like we should see more of the victims, the 
children who contracted cancers or at least their families.  The 
glimpses we catch of Mrs. Anderson are brief.  She sits in the back of 
the courtroom on the left-hand side.  In a rare scene that brings us 
close to any of the children, Anne Anderson explains that if she and her 
son were ever separated in stores, their plan was to meet in the back on 
the left side.  And he would meet his mother in the back, left-hand side 
of Heaven.  I suppose the film is to be admired for not taking advantage 
of the tears that could be jerked;  at least the tone is not 
sentimental.  Still, we could stand more of the folks who ostensibly 
hired the firm of Schlichtmann, Conway and Crowley.  Perhaps Kathleen 
Quinlan more opportunity to interact with the lawyers, the Judge Skinner 
(John Lithgow), somebody.  Her role is merely functional, except toward 
the end when she expresses profound disappointment that she never got 
what she wanted, a meaningful apology.
The sets are appropriately decorated, especially the law offices and 
meeting rooms, their shelves lined in calfskin volumes, their heavy 
doors stained dark.  Some nice business turns up concerning the house 
that holds Schlichtmann's office.  It's almost a running joke when 
workmen remove more furnishings, and later Gordon gets up from the floor 
where he desk used to be, and launches his tirade at Schlichtmann, who 
has the habit of refusing offers of millions without consulting his 
cohorts.  There are also some nice shots to establish the gravity 
surrounding courtrooms. Tall corridors lined in marble, the camera 
panning around the statue of a man wielding a sickle.  (But maybe I 
remember these scenes because I saw them ten times over the last months, 
the slick trailer incorporating far too much of the story - but what 
trailer nowadays does not?)
Jonathan Harr's non-fiction best seller 'A Civil Action' sold 1.5 
million copies.  So the film has a solid base from which to spring.  The 
film born of the book is realistic in its jaundiced view of the justice 
system, as well as in its tracing of a lawyer's financial fall.  I 
should add that the picture does not end where it might, but continues 
to follow Schlichtmann's free fall.  It's a decision that adds another 
dimension to the story, suggesting that his moral character has 
improved, even after facing the aftermath of a disastrous case.
Unfortunately, 'A Civil Action' increases the number of stories in which 
underdogs battle vast corporations.  For the most part we see only 
lawyers representing Grace and Beatrice.  But the film contains enough 
glittering pinpoints of originality, and above-average acting, to 
recommend it.  If only it were not so much about John Travolta.


Author
Luke Buckmaster
A CIVIL ACTION
Cast: John Travolta, Robert Duvall, Tony Shalhoub, William H. Macy,
Zeljko Ivanek, James Gandolfini, Bruce Norris, John Lithgow, Kathleen
Quinlan, Stephen Fry, Dan Hedaya
Director: Steven Zaillian
Screenplay: Steven Zaillian based on the book by Jonathan Harr
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 and a half stars
I'm not sure what message Steven Zaillian is trying to give us in his
new film, A Civil Action.  Zaillian adapted Schindlers List and
Searching For Bobby Fischer for the screen, and once again he has shown
considerable talent in his take on the true story of lawyer Jan
Schlichtmann, a man who gives up everything in his search for justice,
only to realize that justice cannot be measured in dollars.  The film
should have been character based, but unfortunately it is based almost
entirely on Schlichtmann's complicated legal case and how he and his
business partners go broke trying to prove the truth.  But as Robert
Duvall tells John Travolta, truth is not something that is found in a
courtroom.  Perhaps this cynical view on the American legal system is
what Zaillian is getting at, but I'm still not sure.  He also has
something to say about compensation, justice and moral order, though
none of these issues are voiced with adequate emotional depth.
Schlichtmann's case centers on a tragedy that deprived eight families -
living in the small American town of Woburn - of their children.  They
say this is due to Woburn's water supply, which has allegedly been
poisoned by riverside factories. Schlichtmann is at first reluctant to
take up the case, but sees dollar signs after discovering that major
corporations are involved.  With the help of his dedicated small team of
employees - including financial advisor James Gordon (William H. Macy,
in yet another excellent small role) - Schlichtmann attempts to bring
the big guys to their knees.  He faces veteran attorney Jerome Facher
(Robert Duvall), an expert with considerably more experience under his
belt, and ends up delving far too deep in the case, landing his company
in serious financial trouble.
A Civil Action is yet another vehicle that showcases John Travolta's
dominant presence, although he is not eccentric here.  Travolta has
channeled and refined himself and his performance is tamer than what you
might expect.  He is a pleasing actor and this is a pleasing part,
although the script rarely gives him the chance of grasping emotion.
Robert Duvall is expected to give the film its energy, but again the
script doesn't properly utilize his capabilities. With such a talented
cast, it's a pity that A Civil Action doesn't benefit from any of them
except perhaps Macy, who provides the only character I could clearly
relate to.  As his financial world tumbles down around him, Gordon
confronts Schlichtmann in an excellent scene that expresses the
arrogance of Travolta's lawyer perfectly - he can fight crusades, but
what gives him the right to bring his friends down with him?
Like so many others, A Civil Action is pretentious because it tells an
important story without building a solid dramatic core on which to stage
it.  Though it is often involving, often engaging and occasionally
moving, this is ultimately a heartless piece that is too focused on
facts and too little on character. If you don't mind a courtroom caper
that is so stripped of emotion that it often feels like a documentary, A
Civil Action's coherent screenplay and steady performances will keep you
ignorant of its faults.  There is material for a potentially excellent
film here, but one can't help but feel that Steven Zaillian has taken
the easy way out on too many occasions.  Instead of examining tragedy
and what it means to those involved, he examines courtroom procedures.
Instead of looking into the hearts and minds of characters that are
fighting for truth, he merely studies the truth itself.  One might say
that A Civil Action could have been a lot worse - that's true, but my
main complaint is that it could have been a lot better.


Author
Bob Bloom
A Civil Action (1998) 3 1/2 stars out of 4
 Jan Schlichtmann is a personal injury lawyer - an ambulance chaser. He's
the kind of lawyer you think about when you hear those anti-attorney jokes.
  And his quest for the truth is the plot of the engrossing courtroom
drama, A Civil Action.
  Some lawyers have compared a trial to high drama, to theater. That may be
when sitting in a courtroom and following a case.
  But watching one on the screen is a different matter. If you bog the
audience down in too much legalese, it becomes bored. If you spend too much
time delving into the personal lives of the protagonists, or toss in a
corny love story, than the drama in the courtroom becomes secondary.
  A few films have hit the right combination: Anatomy of a Murder, Inherit
the Wind, Philadelphia and, now, A Civil Action.
 The movie, set in the 1980s, is based on a true case in Schlichtmann,
representing eight families from Woburn, Mass., takes on two corporate
giants, W.R. Grace & Co. and Beatrice Foods. The families claim that the
companies contaminated their town's drinking water with chemicals and this
ultimately led to the leukemia deaths of their children.
 John Travolta gives a splendid performance as Schlichtmann. At first he is
insincere, arrogant and self-centered. He cares nothing about the Woburn
families and tries to dump the case.
 But when he realizes who he can sue and dreams of the money he can
collect, he changes his mind.
  Schlichtmann later has a metamorphosis, caring little about the money,
only wanting to seek the truth. As one of his clients tells him, the case
isn't about money. All the families want is an apology, for someone to
accept the responsibility for the wrongdoing that claimed innocent lives.
  At this stage, Travolta conveys the single-minded determination and
stubbornness that costs Schlichtmann his friends, his house and,
ultimately, his career.
  Travolta's lawyer walks that narrow rope between obsession and tenacity.
  Backing Travolta is a fine supporting cast, most notably Robert Duvall,
as Jerome Facher, the soft-spoken, but steel-minded attorney representing
Beatrice Foods.
  The only problem with Duvall's character lies in the way he is written,
not in Duvall's performance. Writer-director Steve Zaillian (who wrote the
Oscar-winning Schlinder's List and wrote and directed the little-seen, but
exceptional Searching for Bobby Fischer) gives Facher too many quirks. He
carries around an old, battered briefcase. He takes pens from other
lawyers' offices. He's obsessed with the Boston Red Sox, and on and on.
Zaillian, who adapted Jonathan Harr's best-selling book, probably could
have made Facher just as interesting without so many eccentricities.
  William H. Macy, Tony Shalhoub (who was so solid in The Siege) and Zeljko
Ivanek (best known as prosecutor Danvers on TV's Homicide: Life on the
Streets) portray Schlichtmann's partners who, at first believe in his
crusade, later recognize the toll it is taking on their professional and
personal lives and force their partner to confront his obsession.
 Zaillian's writing and direction is crisp without being flamboyant. With
the help of his editor, Wayne Wahrman, he has created some enthralling
sequences.
Zaillian cross cuts between Facher, who teaches law at Harvard, explaining
to his class how cases are won and lost, to the courtroom where
Schlichtmann makes some of the very legal errors that Facher is describing.
 Always object, Facher tells his students, because it throws off the rhythm
of the opposition. "If you fall asleep in court, the first thing you say
when you awake is ..." and the scene cuts to Facher dozing in the
courtroom, quickly awakening and shouting "Objection."
  A Civil Action, at a little under two hours, is an engrossing movie, made
moreso by being based on fact. But it is more than the story of legal
manueverings or even the search for the truth.
 It's the story of one man discovering his true values and setting right
his moral compass.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Stephen Zaillian has written some of the most intelligent
screenplays to be made into films in the last several years.  He wrote
SCHINDLER'S LIST and SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER.  The latter he also
directed.  His second directing project A CIVIL ACTION.  He is again
directing his own script, a very nuts-and-bolts look at a civil action
against two major corporations as seen through the eyes of the lawyer
who brought the action and risked his law firm and his career on the
case.  The film is based on the book A CIVIL ACTION by Jonathan Harr.
     The film's first moments are among its most chilling as the voice
of Jan Schlichtmann (played by John Travolta) gives us "the calculus of
personal injury," a litany of cold rules for figuring the settlement a
personal action suit.  A victim who is alive and suffering pays off
better than one who is dead.  A male victim will pay better than a
woman will and a child will pay least of all.  As he explains the rules
we see how he plays for a jury's sympathy in order to squeeze more
money from a defendant.
     Schlichtmann's law firm is considering a case from Woburn,
Massachusetts, where eight children have died of leukemia.  It sounds
like just the sort of idealistic case everyone would assume lawyers
should take, but several law firms have already turned down the case.
Schlichtmann is also inclined to refuse the case until he discovers
that there are two major corporations involved.  (Apparently no names
have been changed, by the way.  Certainly all the major characters have
the same names as the principal in the original court case. The viewer
will probably recognize the names of the corporations.)  Schlichtmann
attacks the case in the only way that he knows how, launching a multi-
million dollar investigation in the hopes that a sufficiently large
settlement will pay off the investigation costs.  This is not the story
the viewer expects.  A lot of it is about the financial gamble of
environmental litigation.  The huge commissions charged by the legal
trade are seen not so much as greed but as the pay off of a very big
investment.  In its own way this is one of the most positive films ever
made about the legal profession.
     As with SCHINDLER'S LIST we never actually see when Schlichtmann's
motivation changes from being purely financial to idealism, but
eventually his outrage is obvious.  However, his crusade will bring him
in direct conflict with eccentric legal genius Jerome Facher (not
unexpectedly well-acted by Robert Duvall). In the film Facher plays law
the way Bobby Fischer plays chess, repeatedly trying to get under his
opponent's skin.
     John Travolta is sufficient for this role, but never manages to do
anything beyond the obvious.  He just wears a suit well and looks
reasonably sophisticated.  But Robert Duvall really is a brilliant
actor, and here he has to take an eccentric and make him seem
formidable.  That he does quite nicely.  William H. Macy's role as
accountant for Schlichtmann's law firm seems a little overplayed, but
there is nice support by Tony Shalhoub and especially James Gandolfini
who plays with real sincerity.  It would be nice to see Dan Hedaya in a
sympathetic role for once, but this is not it.  He seems condemned to
always play characters seething with inner rage.  But Duvall steals the
show.
     Conrad Hall's camerawork is a little showy.  He intentionally
under-lights any courtroom scene.  Half of an actor's face will be lit
as if carved out of the darkness.  The score by Danny Elfman shows more
control than he usually has, but the end-credit song by Talking Heads
seems jarringly out of place.  In all this may well be the most
sympathetic and at the same time frightening film about the legal
profession since THE PAPER CHASE.  I give it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale
and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     For one good description of the actual case see
http://www2.shore.net/~dkennedy/woburn_trial.html.  This site is
authored by Dan Kennedy, who was a reporter at the Woburn trial.
Included at the site is the questionnaire that plays a part in the
movie.  For more information you can also see http://www.geology.ohio-
state.edu/courtroom/.  And for greater detail see the book on which the
film was based.

Author
Scott Renshaw
A CIVIL ACTION 
(Touchstone)
Starring:  John Travolta, Robert Duvall, William H. Macy, Tony Shalhoub,
Zeljko Ivanek, Bruce Norris, John Lithgow, Kathleen Quinlan.
Screenplay:  Steven Zaillian, based on the book by Jonathan Harr.
Producers:  Scott Rudin, Robert Redford and Rachel Pfeffer.
Director:  Steven Zaillian.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  118 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     For those unfamiliar with the American legal system -- and count it
among your blessings if you are one of them -- it is not generally the
stuff of which great drama is made.  It is a thing of motions, pleadings,
depositions and causes of action, of hundreds of hours spent reading
thousands of incoming documents, or redacting thousands of outgoing
documents.  It is a war of attrition played out in conference rooms, only
rarely involving tense attorney-witness confrontations or even-more-tense
waits for a verdict.  Cinematic law is a satisfying fiction; real law is,
for the most part, a laborious game of chicken before an out-of-court
settlement.
     A CIVIL ACTION's dubious merit involves the extent to which it
effectively captures real law.  It's based on a real case, recounted in
Jonathan Harr's non-fiction best-seller about Jan Schlichtmann (John
Travolta), a Boston personal injury lawyer with a gift for turning the "s"
in "suffering" into a dollar sign.  He sees no such dollar signs in a case
brought in by his partner Kevin Conway (Tony Shalhoub), a case involving a
statistically significant cluster of children dying of leukemia in the
town of Woburn...that is, until he discovers that the toxic chemicals in
the area just may be spilling out of the deep pockets of R.W. Grace Corp.
and Beatrice Foods.  Schlichtmann smells a killing, and the Woburn case
comes to consume everything he has and everything he is.
     There was every reason to believe that, if anyone could lend a spark
to slogging through the legal mire, it would be Steven Zaillian.  This
was, after all, the director who made chess both kinetic and poetic in
SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER.  Indeed, there are several scenes in which
Zaillian nails the harsh truths of tort law:  Schlichtmann coldly ticking
off the relative cash values of women vs. men or black vs. white in
wrongful death cases; a hilarious courtroom moment in which a corporate
defense attorney realizes he's lost the jury's sympathy before he's even
begun; an effective montage showing the mounting costs of research and
expert witnesses.  A CIVIL ACTION pulls few punches when it comes to
underlining a process that's always about money, and only accidentally
about justice.
     Unfortunately, it pulls all its punches when it comes to giving the
story an emotional hook.  Schlichtmann's conversion from shark to softy is
supposed to anchor the film, except that it's far too subtle.  In fact,
Travolta often plays Schlichtmann as though his concern is always still
about the money, his frustration less about letting his clients down than
about letting the big one slip away -- which, frankly, is a more
interesting choice.  Those clients, meanwhile, remain stoic, heroic
abstractions, the working class American equivalent of the struggling
non-white characters who serve as background color in stories of a wealthy
white character's awakening to social conscience (like SEVEN YEARS IN
TIBET).  As the film slowly becomes the story of how the Woburn case
drains all the cash out of Schlichtmann and his firm, it slowly drains
what little narrative and visual energy it had.
     Certainly much of that energy was supposed to be provided by Robert
Duvall as Jerry Facher, Beatrice's eccentric veteran attorney.  I suppose
the idea is that he's wily because he passes himself off as such a goof,
but the character's tics -- taping up an ancient briefcase covered in
Snagglepuss decals; absently bouncing a ball during a phone conversation;
obsessing over the Red Sox -- are more often distracting than they are
entertaining.  At least Duvall's fussy colorfulness, along with William H.
Macy's less-mannered breakdown as Schlichtmann's nervous accountant, give
you something to watch.  Too often A CIVIL ACTION feels like the sort of
lecture in legal maneuvering we see Facher give to students at Harvard
Law.  It runs out of gas when it runs out of things to tell us, since it
lacks characters to engage us.  Real law makes the appeal of John
Grisham-esque courtroom melodrama make a lot more sense.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: January 8, 1999
Starring: John Travolta, Robert Duvall, Tony Shalhoub, William H. Macy,
Kathleen Quinlan, Bruce Norris, John Lithgow
Directed by: Steve Zaillian
Distributed by: Buena Vista Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (some strong language) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/civilact.htm
Courtroom drama is an overrated genre. Flashy images often come to mind
at the mention of such a setting -- Tom Cruise grilling Jack Nicholson
on the stand in A FEW GOOD MEN -- which are often followed by powerful,
moving images -- Gregory Peck's majestic voice in TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD.
But after a true count, the courts have given reason for a number of
shoddy products that lack substance and are filled with gimmick. THE
RAINMAKER, for example, featured the hotshot, know-it-all character
played by Danny De Vito: it was fresh, but unoriginal. Perhaps this
history, then, is the reason that Steve Zaillian's latest film, A CIVIL
ACTION, is a rewarding experience. 
There's nothing gimmicky about Zaillian's sophomore effort (his debut
film was 1993's SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER). Everything is a cold
reality, from the cutting-block calculus of personal injury law (John
Travolta explains in a series of voice-overs the relative worth of
different clients and concludes that a child is worth the least of all)
to the admitted lack of justice in the court system. Gone is the Perry
Mason-style grandeur, and with it the delivery of great orations.
Instead, a large percentage of the movie's running time does *not* take
place in a courtroom but in the real world of depositions and field
work. 
Travolta is our star, playing real-life lawyer Jan Schlichtmann.
(Indeed, all of Zaillian's script is based on a true story, as told in
Jonathan Harr's book.) Jan is well-dressed and successful, named in a
magazine as one of Boston's ten most eligible bachelors. Perhaps
unfortunately for Jan, he happens upon the Woburn drinking water case,
brought to his attention by Woburn resident Anne Anderson (Kathleen
Quinlan). As it happens there's a large number of leukemia deaths in
Woburn, which Anderson and other town parents believe is related to the
drinking water. Jan traces the water back to its source, where he finds
-- mostly by serendipity -- a tannery which has been illicitly draining
waterproofing chemicals into the town's water supply. Now all Jan has to
do is prove it in court. 
Seemingly against his own advice, Jan becomes emotionally entrenched in
his own case. He carries on his crusade longer than his partners advise,
to the delight of his auspicious adversary, Jerome Facher (Robert
Duvall). It's here that the actors shine: Travolta and Duvall, in the
leading roles, carry on a solid competition; Travolta in particular is
much recovered from previously bland outings like PRIMARY COLORS and MAD
CITY. The supports are also sturdy as well -- William Macy as Jan's
financial advisor is the best. Kathleen Quinlan's performance is a bit
of a disappointment, but aside from that it's hard to find fault with
this picture. Some might find it a bit slow or a bit long, but overall A
CIVIL ACTION is a well-written, well-directed product that has hit its
mark.

Author
Michael Redman
A very rare number of people, at very rare times, are living their everyday
lives when they meet God on the road to Damascus. They're going to work.
They're shopping for groceries. They're paying bills. Suddenly there's a
blinding light and their reality changes completely.
They experience something that triggers a transformation in the way they view
the world. Old perceptions are out the window and a new way of being takes
over. Their previous life vanishes as a new passion overwhelms all.
Boston ambulance chaser Jan Schlichtmann (John Travolta) has his revelation on
the road to Woburn. Stopped for his second speeding ticket on the same bridge
on the same day, Jan glances out on the Aberjona River and soon everything is different.
The attorney is a high profile personal injury lawyer. Named one of the ten
most eligible bachelors in the city, he dresses sharp and aims for the
jugular. With his eye on the financial prize, he has reduced his clients to
dollar signs.
He wheels a crippled man down the courtroom hall and his voice-over explains
the worth of a human being in the civil legal system. A living man is worth
more than a dead one. A man, more than a woman. White, more than black. A dead
child is worth the least of all.
A partner presents the firm with a possible case. Eight children have died of
leukemia in the small industrial town of Woburn. The families suspect the
water is contaminated and they want someone to apologize.
Jan meets with the parents and explains legal reality to them. For him to take
the case, there must be someone to sue...someone with a hefty bank account.
With no big bucks in sight, he's not going to do anything about it.
Looking down the river on the way back, Jan decides to take a walk. He finds
two factories on the shore that may be responsible for polluting the water
supply. Then he notices something on the side of a truck that changes his mind
about the case. A sign says that one of the businesses is "a division of
Beatrice." He's found his deep pockets.
The tiny firm takes on Beatrice Foods and W.R. Grace & Co., two of the
country's largest corporations, in a classic David versus Goliath battle. In
this war, the weapons aren't stones but dollars. As Jan explains, in a big
civil case the plan is to spend more than you need in order to make it bigger,
"The first side that comes to their senses loses."
As the case wears on, the lawyers for the families are running out of
ammunition. They borrow money, mortgage their houses, buy lottery tickets and
finally sell the furniture. In one scene, they're sitting on the floor in
empty offices with no desks trying to figure out how they can dig themselves
out of their financial hole.
They are in it for the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. If they win this
one, they win big. Jan, however, has a different obsession. He's lost sight of
the money and wants the companies brought to justice. Even after the trial
becomes a black hole for his legal firm, dragging down everyone, he refuses a
$25 million settlement offer because he wants the companies to admit responsibility.
Based on a true story that took place in the eighties, the film is an
indictment of the civil legal system. The account makes it clear that cases
aren't about truth, but rather theatrics, manipulations of the court and
negotiations between the sides. Although indeed they may have been, it's never
shown that Beatrice and W.R. Grace were responsible for the deaths. Despite
that, they were willing to lie in court, falsify evidence and spend huge
amounts of money for damage control. As Joni Mitchell sings, justice is often
"just ice."
Director and screenwriter Steven Zaillian ("Searching For Bobby Fischer" and
screenwriter of "Schindler's List") has done an admirable job assembling a
first-rate cast. There's not a weak link among the actors.
John Lithgow is Judge Walter Skinner, the somewhat self-righteous magistrate
who seems to be part of a good ole boys network with the opposing attorneys.
Dan Hedaya plays a smarmy owner of a tannery that has spilled toxic waste.
Kathleen Quinlan and David Thornton are touching as parents of children who
have died. William H. Macy's accountant James Gordon is a man under siege as
he tries to salvage the firm.
Robert Duvall, as Jerome Fancher, lawyer for Beatrice, is the standout of the
movie. Fancher is an eccentric who listens to baseball games on a cheap
transistor radio and carries a beat-up briefcase adorned with cartoon
stick-ons. His disarming bumpkin charm hides a shrewd legal mind. He is easy
to like although he works for the wrong side. Duvall nails the role and steals
the film.
Travolta is appropriately larger than life playing the flamboyant attorney,
but his character has a problem. Although we are supposed to believe that he
has abandoned his greed for a search for justice, we never see the change
happen. His actions are different, but he never warms up.
The cinematography and lighting create a moody feel in even the most mundane
scenes. Interviews with the parents are mostly talking heads, but are
riveting. During the explanation of a boy's death on the way to the hospital,
a shot of blinking taillights on a car stopped by the side of the road in the
rain is positively chilling.
The theme of water as a dangerous product works well. Water glasses take on
the same sinister image as our feathered friends did in "Birds". Especially in
this town where toxic waste threatening the water supply has been a concern
for decades, you won't be able to fill a glass from the faucet without having
second thoughts.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and is going out now
to buy some bottled water. Email your liquid thoughts to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 1/14/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Dennis Schwartz

A CIVIL ACTION (director/writer: Steven Zaillian; screenwriter: based on
the book by Jonathan Harr; cinematographer: Conrad L. Hall; editor:
Wayne Wahrman; cast: John Travolta (Jan Schlichtmann), Robert Duvall
(Jerome Facher), Tony Shalhoub (Kevin Conway), William H. Macy (James
Gordon), Zeljko Ivanek (Bill Crowley), Bruce Norris (William Cheeseman),
Kathleen Quinlan (Anne Anderson), Peter Jacobson (Neil Jacobs), Mary
Mara (Kathy Boyer), James Gandolfini (Al Love), Stephen Fry (Pinder ),
Dan Hedaya (John Riley), Sydney Pollack (Al Eustis), John Lithgow (Judge
Walter J. Skinner), 1998)
"A Civil Action" is about a real court case in the early 1980s involving
toxic waste dumping in a small town north of Boston, that is based on
Jonathan Harr's best-selling non-fiction book about the personal-injury
lawyer Jan Schlichtmann (Travolta), whose small law firm brought a
willful neglience lawsuit against two giant corporations, consumer goods
conglomerate Beatrice and chemical giant W.R. Grace. It's an absorbing
story but it was presented in such a mangled way, so a lot of the drama
was sucked out of it and it instead became an obvious sob story about an
injustice done.
Jan is first shown as a hotshot lawyer full of hubris after winning an
ambulance-chaser case. He drives his Porsche to Woburn, Massachusetts,
to check out a potential law suit representing some families whose
children either died because of Leukemia or became seriously ill because
of the toxins Trichloroethylene (TCE) in their drinking water, he turns
the case down when his clients who are only after an apology, can't tell
him who to sue that has the big bucks to pay. But that all changes when
he gets a speeding ticket on his way back to Boston and observes from a
bridge the site where the dumping from a tannery owned by Beatricefoods
takes place and where W.R. Grace has a chemical plant.
This Steven Zaillian directed film has traces of the same intelligence
he has shown in his previous work as director of Searching For Bobby
Fischer and as a screenwriter for Schindler's List, but loses its
fire-power with scenes of endless court hagglings and what seems like an
interminable amount of time spent in giving prep classes on how the
court system works.
The big corporations throw their big law firms against his small one,
with Grace represented by the arrogant Cheeseman (Norris) and Beatrice
by the wily and eccentric Jerome Facher (Duvall), who hams it up with
his oddball tics and distracting mannerisms -- during a phone
conversation with a fellow lawyer, he willfully bounces a ball against
the wall. This sets-up a battle of David versus Goliath. The film stays
on track with the claim that in today's court system, the odds are
rigged against the little guy and that it takes big money to file a law
suit against such giants. This is proven when Travolta's law firm is
sucked into the case deeper than what they expected, paying huge
expenses to do research to prove contamination, as they all go broke and
have to mortgage their homes to keep the case going.
The supporting players all have limited roles compared to the two
gunslingers, Travolta and Duvall, but perform admirably. William H. Macy
is on the Travolta team and makes it plain he's along only for the
money, with him being the one in the firm who handles financial matters.
But, he cracks from the strain of going belly-up. The others in the
firm, Tony Shalhoub and Zeljko Ivanek, follow their leader Travolta
until they see he actually believes in his clients and they thereby
desert him. Dan Hedaya is the tannery owner who lies on the stand and
can't be shaken from his lie until the case is appealed by the EPA. John
Lithgow is the judge who sides with his big business friends. James
Gandolfini is the only witness who works at the site of W.R. Grace who
is willing to take a chance and tell what he knows. Sydney Pollack is
the snobbish head of W.R. Grace who won't talk business with Travolta
when he invites him to the Harvard club, but only when he's back at his
office and he can put his feet up on the table. Anne Anderson is the
gentle Woburn local who is alarmed that her son died of Leukemia and
initiated the lawsuit to protect others in the community, as her
persistence finally won out.
For all its telling faults in its storytelling ability, the film had an
aura of reality about it that the John Grisham movies never have. The
entertainment value for the film comes from the simulated gun duel
between the inexperienced Travolta taking on the skilled Duvall, who
always seems to be one move ahead of him. That Travolta undergoes a
change of character during the law suit and really believes what he's
doing is right, is shown in the subtle changes of expression he has, no
longer pretending to feel the pain of his clients but tunes into the
pain he has. His ego gets a thorough examination and the superficial
things he was once interested in fail to move him anymore. While Duvall
is shown as the masterful Machiavellian tactician with absolutely no
heart, whose m.o. is to shred his opponents as well as those who are
under him. When one of his staff interupts his quiet office lunch of
listening to the Red Sox game to do him a favor and give him an
important document on the upcoming lawsuit, he spitefully rails into him
for not going out to lunch.
What the film failed to do, is to bring a sense of urgency to their
presentation. Though they were sympathetic to the families' plight and
caught the essence of what Travolta was up against, which makes it
better than most Hollywood films, it just couldn't drive the fastball
thrown down the middle of the plate over the 'Green Monster' in Fenway
Park for a home run. The story became less than compelling and more of
an exercise about who was the better actor/lawyer Duvall or Travolta.
The great social impact of the lawsuit never caught on during the film,
when that should have been the driving force of the film, as it was when
grippingly told in the book.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edwin Jahiel
A CIVIL ACTION ***1/2. Directed, written, executive-produced by Steven
Zaillian. From the book by Jonathan Harr. Photography, Conrad L. Hall.
Editing,Wayne Wahrman. Production design, David Gropman.Music, Danny
Elfman.Produced by Scott Rudin, Robert Redford and Rachel Pfeffer. Cast:
John Travolta (Jan Schlichtmann), Robert Duvall (Jerome Facher), Tony
Shalhoub (Kevin Conway), William H. Macy (James Gordon), Zeljko Ivanek
(Bill Crowley), Bruce Norris (William Cheeseman), Kathleen Quinlan (Anne
Anderson), Peter Jacobson (Neil Jacobs), Mary Mara (Kathy Boyer), James
Gandolfini (Al Love), Stephen Fry (Pinder ), Dan Hedaya (John Riley),
Sydney Pollack (Al Eustis), et al. A Touchstone release.113 minutes. PG-13.
In these days of lawyer-jokes, the legal profession could use some
redemption. It comes in "A Civil Action," which is excellent, intelligent,
touching,complex, impeccably scripted, directed, produced and beautifully
served by all its performers.
It's a true story, one that gave birth to a prize-winning book. In the
1970s, in Woburn, Mass., many children died of leukemia. It was a mystery
for most people, but not for their parents who identified the culprit:
water polluted --better yet, poisoned--by two industrial giants, the Grace
Co, and Beatrice Foods.
The Boston firm of Jean Schlichtmann (Travolta), a personal-injury lawyer
(aka an ambulance chaser) is doing very well. When the children's families
ask him to take their case, Travolta politely declines. On the way to
Woburn in his speeding Porsche, he gets a ticket. On the way back,whether
by cinematic device or real coincidence-- I cannot tell , but it matters
little--comes a second ticket, next to the very location of the toxic
dumping.
Is Schlichtmann having an epiphany? Does it dawn on him that a win over the
mega-corporations could fill his firm's coffers? Is it a combination of
both? Hard to tell. But he takes the case and, in the long run, becomes
haunted by it, to the point that he and his associates have to keep
borrowing from banks, mortgaging their possessions, homes, insurance
policies, and going broke.
The fluid, meticulous but unforced script and direction are by Steven
Zaillian, who rightly jumped to fame with his scenario for Schindler's
List. His credits also include the writing (from other true-story books)
the hospital-based Awakenings, and The Search for Bobby Fisher (Zaillian's
first directorial job) about  a child who was a chess prodigy.
All those titles, plus the scenario for the fictional Jack the Bear, are of
works that move and highlight Zaillian's unquestionable compassion. He
moves you without resorting to kitsch, phony dramatics, manipulation of
emotions. A Civil Action avoids flamboyance, yet shines by its empathy for
human misery. It is also a great thriller-plus-courtroom drama, superior
because of its (mostly) low-key approach, its refusal to yield to flashy
dramatics, its exceptionally good characterizations, whether full-blown or
just sketched in.
At the root of the film we have a David and Goliath story of common
working-class people against corporate King Kongs, and of a small law firm
versus the infinite funds of Grace and Beatrice. The latter's platoons of
lawyers are headed by a powerhouse memorably --if a little too colorfully--
played by Robert Duvall, a prince of foxes.
Every moment counts in the suspenseful depiction of who will outsmart whom,
which strings will be pulled. Each deposition is a self-contained,
mesmerizing drama. We are made painfully conscious that this David is not
the Biblical one; that lawsuits seldom win outright; that the whole
procedure is a preamble to settlements; that  of fifty appeals, only five
win in the courts.
Of course, the film gets its momentum and its thrills from the use of the
tricks of the movie trade, but these are in pastels rather than screaming
colors. From photography to editing, from framing to continuity, from
dialogue or confrontations to the first-rate score by Danny Elfman, the
picture remains discreet and unexplosive.
To put the movie in a historical context, we are, in a sense, in
postmodern, post-post-post-Frank Capra populist territory of the little
people and the Masters of the Land, all framed by the fact-of-life that
Justice and the Law are far from synonymous.
Details are chosen with extraordinary care, from repressed tearfulness, to
the gradual impoverishment of the smaller law-firm, to the Harvard Club
encounter of Travolta and Grace's CEO. He is wonderfully, quirkily played
by director Sydney Pollack.
As for Travolta --or should I say Lazarus? -- I'll just say that he
continues his extraordinary comeback like a speeding bullet.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Touchstone Pictures
 Director:  Steven Zaillian
 Writer:  Steven Zaillian, book by Jonathan Harr
 Cast: John Travolta, Robert Duvall, William H. Macy, John
Lithgow, Kathleen Quinlan, Dan Hedaya, James Gandolfini,
Edward Hermann, Zeljko Ivanek, Tony Shalhoub, et al
   Americans trust lawyers as much as they rely on politicians
and used-car salesmen.  We don't like 'em.  How do we
know? Because a lawyer himself tells us so. In a movie which
dramatizes an actual case, Attorney Jan Schlichtmann tells
his radio talk show listeners that lawyers have been abhorred
not only in the U.S. but in other areas of the world throughout
history.  (He might have pointed out Shakespeare's own view,
which the Bard enunciated in Henry VI, Part IV, "The first
thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers"). It's a peculiar thing,
though.  If we dislike these professionals so much, why do
we hire them so often, and why do we buy John Grisham's
novels so regularly that anything he writes is guaranteed a
number one position on the Best Seller lists?  Most
paradoxical of all, we cheer these fellows on mightily when
they take on the giant corporations, as when a hero lawyer
fights the entire tobacco industry and the insurance business
in two of Grisham's books.
   The answer is that we are selective in our affections.  We
like low-key, small-town Davids who take on big-city Goliaths. 
We dislike big-city counselors who bill $400 an hour to
protect companies that commit atrocities.  We also dislike
small-town advocates who chase ambulances, who, we
assume, have no feeling for their clients' suffering but who
are interested only in winning huge sums that they share 40-
60 with their hapless clients.
   All of this information is to explain the appeal of a book
which has now become a high-profile movie, "A Civil Action." 
Written by a non-lawyer, Jonathan Harr, and published by
Random House in December 1995, it swiftly became a best-
seller and then a paperback, remaining on the most-read lists
for quite a long time.  Its appeal lay in its David-Goliath
resonance, with the redemption of a personal injury lawyer,
Jan Schlichtmann who hocked and lost everything--his home,
his credit cards, his reputation, but not his integrity--in fighting
two giant companies guilty of polluting Woburn,
Massachusetts waters for well over a decade.  As a result of
the corporate evils, eight children had died of leukemia, while
the two companies, Grace and Beatrice Foods, denied that
they were in any way responsible.  The case became an
orphan for a while, i.e. no law firm was willing to go to the
expense of handling it, because the odds of winning seemed
remote.  Even Jan Schlichtmann (John Travolta) had
informed the mother of the dead child (Kathleen Quinlan) that
he could not afford to take on the litigation.  His mind was
changed when he took a closer look at the chemically
polluted waters that would find their way into the homes of
the people of the small Massachusetts town.
   What the movie version has in its favor is that
Schlichtmann is not portrayed as a one-dimensional hero, an
Atticus Finch fighting for all that is just and good.  He is a
flawed person, the sort that would be appreciated by the
ancient Greek playwrights, a guy who is motivated less by the
tragic circumstances of his clients than by a titanic ego and
the quest for the ultimate contingency fee.  He had been for
years considered one of Boston's ten most eligible bachelors,
an extravagant and superficial man who passed out his
business card in a flash whenever he went by the scene of
an accident.  But when he saw the dirty waters and imagined
the overwhelming sorrow that these families felt at the loss of
the young ones, something snapped.  He hires a team of
geologists and engineers and pays their fee in the hundreds
of thousands of dollars to collect evidence of the deadly
nature of the soil around the waters. Specifically he is
determined to prove that the chemicals used by a tannery
had spilled over onto the soil and were not properly cleaned
up.  They were dumped carelessly into the ground and found
their way into the drinking water of the residents.
   Director Steven Zaillian, who adopted Mr. Harr's book to
the screen, has fun taking down the big shots a notch or two. 
He is particularly scornful of the vice president of Grace and
Company, who had invited Schlichtmann to New York to
discuss a settlement and who humiliated the lawyer by
patronizing the latter's education at Cornell University (he had
himself gone to Harvard) and by instructing him that business
is never transacted at the Harvard Club.  Zaillian shows less
contempt for the ordinary working-class people who refuse to
testify that they had witnessed the company's dumping of
toxic waste into the area around the water since, after all,
their jobs depended on their remaining silent.
   Unfortunately Zaillian does not exploit the major advantage
of movies.  Film is a visual medium, unlike books, and by
conducting most of the action in the courtroom, in hearing
chambers, and law offices, he is essentially giving us a filmed
play.  "A Civil Action" would do as well on the stage as the
page, where dialogue is the most essential element, but is
lost on the big screen which demands action and greater
punch.  Further, Zaillian does not take advantage of the skills
of his actors with the one exception of Robert Duvall, who
performs in the role of one of the two corporate lawyers,
Jerome Facher.  Facher is an eccentric chap, one who has
earned his idiosyncrasies by being one of the city's top
attorneys.  He insists on a totally work-free lunch hour, where
he listens to Boston Red Sox games on his little portable
radio and scowls at the messenger lad who brings him
envelopes during his quiet time.  When he discusses cases
by phone with big clients, he is not averse to throwing a ball
against the wall and catching it, and when he sees a pen that
he admires, he asks whether he can take it with him. 
Duvall's winning performance is not matched by Travolta,
who dramatizes his part in a solid by stolid manner, and
what's more his partners--played by William H. Macy and
Tony Shalhoub--are caricatures.  Kathleen Quinlan is
insufferable as a woman who has lost her child, who wants
only an apology from the corporations and not the money,
and who turns her back on the now bankrupt Schlichtmann
because he has not succeeded in getting that repentance.
   Because "A Civil Action" is based on a real case, it does
not have the feel-good ending that you might expect from a
more melodramatic movie or from a comedy like "The
Waterboy" (in which the good-guys' football team wins the
game in the final second).  That is all to the good.  But the
movie simply does not have the spark to kindle much
excitement, given the capacities of the film medium.  To see
how a similar situation is handled in a more stirring manner,
take in last year's "The Sweet Hereafter," which abounds in
tingling imagery and features a monumental performance by
Ian Holm as the troubled lawyer.

Author
Matt Williams
Not your typical legal drama, A Civil Action eschews  grandiose
cinematic gestures in favor of a slightly more grounded (and definitely
more cynical) interpretation of the legal process.   It provides an
always interesting, and sometimes fascinating, glimpse inside the
workings of our courts.
Jan Schlichtmann (John Travolta) is your typical personal-injury lawyer.
He begins the film by coldly describing the monetary value of various
types of clients.  Matter-of-factly, he explains the rules you must
follow to win lawsuits.  One of those rules is to never, ever, start
truly caring about your clients.  That is the rule Jan breaks one day,
and A Civil Action is a movie about the consequences.
In the small town of Woburn, Massachusetts, several children have died
from leukemia, all within a few short years.  The parents blame the
town's drinking water, which has been found to contain traces of the
toxic chemical TCE.  Who is the cause of this pollution?  All traces
point to two local companies...owned by much larger ones with very deep
pockets:  W.R. Grace & Co. and Beatrice Foods.
Though at first hesitant, Jan's small firm takes the case out of hopes
of a quick, rich settlement.  However, when Jan becomes emotionally
involved, he dares to do something he never should:  take the case to
trial.  There, he bets his entire firm in his quest to find the truth
and to get justice...but is it a gamble he can win?
The best parts of A Civil Action are the nuggets of lawyerly truths
spouted by both Jan, and Jerome Facher (Robert Duvall), an eccentric
elder defense attorney who knows all the rules of the game.  Depending
on your viewpoint, these details may seem either cynical or realistic...
but they certainly are thought-provoking.
At first, the film looks like it might boil down into your typical
Grisham-esque legal potboiler.  However, the film is a bit more complex
than that.  Based on an actual case, A Civil Action tries to be more
realistic with its depiction of the legal system.  But, that leads to
the question:  does the film sacrifice entertainment for the sake of
accuracy?
When looking at the film from the fact that there are no grand cinematic
gestures (such as secret witnesses or courtroom brawls), you might
conclude that the answer is "yes".  But, A Civil Action finds its
entertainment in the details of how the legal process actually works,
and in the coterie of fine performances that fill the film.
Regarding those performances, the standouts are the always good Duvall,
and William H. Macy (as the accountant at Jan's firm who tries in vain
to keep the rising costs from becoming overwhelming).  Duvall gets the
plum role, though.  He's a defense lawyer, so you might think at first
that he's one of the bad guys...but the film never sinks to that level
of simplicity.  Instead, he is a fully fleshed out character, and
perhaps the only one in the film who knows where everything is heading.
A Civil Action has its faults.  At times the film's pacing begins to
drag, and the film's one caricature (a buffoonish defense lawyer) sticks
out like a sore thumb amid the more realistic proceedings.  But those
only minimally detract from the film.  The insightfulness of A Civil
Action combined with the strong performances therein make this one worth
your time.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Ryan Davis
 What happens when a greedy, cut throat personal injury lawyer gets a heart
of gold? This is the simple basis to one of the year's best pictures.
Although nicely written and directed by Steven Zaillian, the Academy Award
winning writer of Schindler's List, `A Civil Action' doesn't rely on its
artistic style or atmosphere, but mainly on the acting power of its
incredible ensemble.
 `A Civil Action' is a true story, based on the best selling novel of the
same name, by Jonathan Harr. The film introduces us to Jan Schlichtmann(John
Travolta), a rich and powerful, personal injury attorney. He has found a
case in which two powerful corporations may have dumped toxins that
accidentally poisoned the water in a small town. The water may have caused
eight children to develop leukemia, and their families want to know the
truth.
 Jan, after much deliberation, decides to take the case against the
companies. So he and his law partners (which include the brilliant William
H. Macy, among others), begin what is to become their most expensive and
trying case. But the corporations are not going down easy, they have their
own cut throat lawyers. Jerome Facher(Robert Duvall) is one of them and he
knows every trick in the book. As they get further along in the case, they
get further and further into debt. They even begin to doubt if they will win
the case at all.
 The film runs brilliantly for an hour and a half but as it nears the end,
due to time constraints I am guessing, they begin to cover too much too
fast. The end happens far too quickly, and leaves you feeling unsatisfied.
If they had added fifteen minutes to the film, this could have been
corrected.
 That being said, the movie is more performance powered than story driven.
Travolta is simply marvelous as Jan. Upstaged only by Duvall's perfectly
executed, heartless corporate lawyer.
 All in all the film is great, terrific performances and for the most part,
great writing and directing. One of the top ten movies of 1998.
My Movie Review Archives:
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Ryan+Davis

Author
Walter Frith
Litigation and communication.  The key to being a good lawyer and having
a successful legal career.  Those unsuccessful at it usually become
politicians.  What do you call a thousand lawyers chained to the bottom
of the ocean?  Generally, a good start.  An old joke but usually it
works just as well as "Take my wife, please!"  Tom Cruise's character in
'A Few Good Men' said cases aren't won by the law, they're won by the
lawyers and a court case is a sales pitch and in 1990's 'Reversal of
Fortune', an observation is made that cases are usually won in the field
and not in the court room.
It isn't often that a court room movie comes along where the ending
isn't predictable.  Left off of the American Film Institute's list last
year of 400 films nominated as the best in the first century of film was
Sidney Lumet's 1982 masterpiece 'The Verdict'.  That film used silence
to permeate the film with astounding brilliance.  Director Steven
Zaillian tries the same thing here and it is generally successful but at
times muted.
'A Civil Action' stars John Travolta as a Massachusetts lawyer who,
along with three partners, (William H. Macy, Tony Shalhoub and Zeljko
Ivanek) takes on a civil case in the form of a class action suit led by
a mother (Kathleen Quinlan) who wants answers to why some of the
children in the small town where she lives, have died of leukemia. 
Twelve strange and unexplained deaths that all seem connected to the
town's drinking water and where a tannery operates - dumping thousands
of gallons of run off chemicals into the water.  Quinlan says she
doesn't want money, just an explanation of why the children died and for
someone to apologize.  The company hires a huge law firm whose lead
counsel (Robert Duvall) is an attorney who's practiced law for 45 years
and Duvall's character is one of the most interesting in the film.  Not
a great performance but one of sheer wisdom both in and out of character
as Duvall gets many chances to upstage the people on screen that he's
working with but he falls just short of doing so.
John Travolta's performance is somewhat contained.  He doesn't find a
lot of avenues to truly make his performance memorable but he does a
good job at making us believe he's a lawyer and our hearts go out to him
and and his partners when they make career decisions that bankrupt them,
and nearly destroy their lives.  Perhaps the most disappointing thing
about the film is the use of John Lithgow as the judge.  Like so many
other court room films, the judge is the least interesting character. 
The two performances that won me over the most in this flick were those
of William H. Macy and James Gandolfini who plays a conscience stricken
employee of the plant who wants to help the plaintiffs because he has
many children of his own.  One of the most memorable scenes in the film
has no dialogue.  It is a dinner scene where Gandolfini watches as his
wife pours each member of the family a glass of water and he looks
skeptical about its effects.  Macy is wrenching as the rebellious lawyer
wanting a quick fix and knowing when to cut his losses.  Too bad no one
listens to him.
Director Steven Zaillian ('Searching for Bobby Fischer') and the Oscar
winning writer of 'Schindler's List', structures his film with his own
screenplay based on the book by Jonathan Harr, in a credible and even
manner while letting the story tower over any other aspect of the film
and since it's based on a true story, Zaillian compliments the material
even more by letting it think for the audience rather than the other way
around and in a film like this it's more than a compliment to the
public, it's a welcomed public service announcement in the form of a not
so obvious morality play!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Greg King
Stars: John Travolta, Robert Duvall, William H Macy, Tony Shalhoub,
Zeljko Ivanek, Kathleen Quinlan, Bruce Norris, John Lithgow, Stephen
Fry, James Gandolfini, Dan Hedaya, David Thornton, Sydney Pollack,
Daniel Von Bargen, Peter Jacobson, Mary Mara, Ned Eisenberg, Kathy
Bates (uncredited)
Running time: 115 minutes.
        "Justice is a game," says Bob Dylan in his hit song Hurricane.
That sentiment is borne out in this new legal drama from Oscar winning
writer Steven Zaillian (Schindler's List, etc).  Zaillian steps behind
the camera for the first time since 1993's Searching For Bobby Fischer
to direct this fact based drama that criticises the much vaunted
American legal system, where justice comes at a huge price, and the
only winners are the lawyers.
        A Civil Action is based on a true story about a complex
environmental court case in the 1980's that eventually took eight
years to resolve.  The water supply of the town of Woburn,
Massachusetts, has been polluted and poisoned, resulting in a
disproportionately high rate of deaths from leukemia.  However, the
grieving families have found little help in their attempts to seek
legal redress and damages from the factory and tannery they believe
are responsible.
        The case is known in legal terms as "an orphan."  With no high
profile defendant to try and little likelihood of gaining a huge
compensation pay-out, no law firm has bothered to take on the case.
The plaintiffs have been shunted from one reluctant law firm to
another, until they finally end up with the small firm run by Jan
Schlichtmann (John Travolta).  A personal injury lawyer has earned a
lucrative living from exploiting the pain and suffering and misery of
accident victims, Schlichtmann is initially reluctant to tackle the
case.  Then he discovers a link to two of the nation's largest
corporations, and the battle lines are drawn.
        The case becomes something of a David and Goliath-like
struggle as Schlichtmann's small firm takes on a battery of high
priced, slick lawyers well versed in delaying tactics and every dirty
legal trick in the statute books.  However, Schlichtmann's pride and
determination to reveal the truth and gain what he believes is an
adequate settlement takes his firm to bankruptcy and destroys
everything that he had worked for.
        A Civil Action is not your typical John Grisham-like legal
thriller.  There are no courtroom pyrotechnics here, no explosive
revelations, or dramatic confrontations; not even an idealistic young
lawyer tackling a difficult case on principle.  Rather this is a study
of how the epic case affected the lives of all who were involved.  A
Civil Action is a provocative, cynical and engrossing examination of
the flawed legal system in America.  Its outcome will leave audiences
dismayed at the patent injustices inherent in a system that can be so
easily manipulated by the powerful and the wealthy.  Zaillian's
intelligent and sympathetic direction is perfectly suited to the
material, and he avoids becoming too bogged down in legal detail.
        Zaillian has assembled a top notch ensemble cast, who deliver
solid performances that bring the flawed characters to life.  Travolta
is impressive as the tenacious, driven Schlichtmann, who is willing to
risk everything.  He delivers his best performance since Get Shorty.
The very busy William H Macy (Boogie Nights, etc) is excellent as
Schlichtmann's beleaguered accountant, whose desperate attempts to
stave off bankruptcy bring a measure of humour to the film.
        But stealing the acting honours is veteran Robert Duvall, who
delivers a marvellous performance as Facher, one of the opposing
attorneys.  Duvall beautifully plays him as a Columbo-like character,
whose down trodden demeanour, distracted manner and idiosyncrasies
hide a steel trap mind and a thorough working knowledge of the
intricacies of the law.
        Kathleen Quinlan, Tony Shalhoub, James Gandolfini, Dan Hedaya,
Stephen Fry, John Lithgow, and an uncredited Kathy Bates round out the
impressive cast.  Robert Redford, well known for his environmental
concerns, is one of the producers.

Author
Joe Viglione
    This is a once in a lifetime role for John
Travolta, and at the onset, he looks brilliant
in it; but Robert Duvall not only outclasses
Travolta's character, he shows John what
Burt Reynolds meant about there being
nothing like an old Stradivarius...Burt is
right.  Both Travolta and Duvall have to
deal with annoying characters.  Both
lawyers are absolute jerks.  Where Duvall
plays it cool, calculated, like a professional
shark, Travolta is edgy in his role as the
flamboyant, greedy ambulance chaser.
    He overdoes it.  You don't feel sympathy
for Jan Schlictman, a sympathy that is there
in the book by Jonathan Harr.  Sure, he is
a prisoner of his own obsession, but you 
really have to wonder why his partners let
him behave like a runaway train?   And why
Travolta folds up into this "victim" when he
should be more "head held high" arrogant,
and cocky.  That's what I got out of the book,
but maybe John never read it.
    With all the investment, with the good will
of the victims of the tragedy, none of the 
lawyers stepped in and did the right thing.
But the actors playing them are splendid,
and the supporting cast keeps this film
afloat.  The relish with which some of the
unknowns attack their roles overshadows
Travolta.  
    Perhaps because of that, the film is magnificent.  You don't have to
live in Woburn to appreciate the sweeping beauty of the Boston skyline,
the river Charles, the microcosm of New York City. And  that is what
this film really does...it exposes Boston as a gorgeous city whose
lawyers, talk show hosts,  sports teams, and music scene,  well, just
come in second place to New York.  It's all there when The Attorney
tries to settle with Grace in New York.  Rather than put on the poker
face, Travolta gets the $2400.00
a night hotel room while the tycoon gets him
to put his feet up on some rickety antique.
    Out of his league.  And Travolta, despite
being hailed as the "comeback kid", and yes,
he certainly deserves credit for that, well,
he goes from brilliant to ok...passing grade.
Will he get an Academy Award?  Maybe out
of the sympathy of those voting for his hard
work and persistence...but he just doesn't
deliver the knock-out blow...Robert Duvall
does.  This is light years away from Robert's
performance in The Apostle...in fact, that
reminds me of Travolta here...almost, but
no cigar.  
    For the meat of the film, I must say,
the cinematography, the direction, the
editing, Danny Elfman's music, everything
falls into place.  This picture is something
very, very special.   How do you take an
old story that we in Woburn/Stoneham
have read and known about, and make
it an amazing work that stands on its own?
Somehow, they pull it off.  This film can
be watched again, and again, and again,
and it is the little things...the angle of the
camera, sweeping across rooms and
scenery...and for any resident of Woburn,
it is scary.  My friend said to me "how many
more sites like this in Massachusetts...?"
Good question...my reply: "Yeah, but I
live there..."  And he almost moved in!
    Perhaps we should get a place more
conducive to humankind...like, maybe
a condo in Palm Beach?  A Civil Action
is just the piece of filmmaking to tell any
sane person to get out of Woburn...     
   Who should have played the lead role?
Raymond Burr?  No, he had too much
authority...Richard Gere?  YES...Richard
Gere does the law thing with a sparkle,
he would have been a great antagonist
to Duvall's pragmatic bull.  Ah, but only
in a perfect world.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Steven Zaillian
Cast: John Travolta, Robert Duvall, Tony Shalhoub, William H. Macy,
Zeljko Ivanek, James Gandolfini
Screenplay: Steven Zaillian
Producers: Rachel Pfeffer, Robert Redford, Scott Rudin
Runtime: 112 min.
US Distribution: Touchstone/Buena Vista
Rated PG-13: strong language
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
A film that is "Based on a true story" is problematic from the get-go: 
real life just isn't as interesting as the movies.  Most of the things
that happen in movies are not things that will ever happen in real
life.  Movies are great because they show us things we haven't seen
before, things we may not have ever considered.  A film that's "based on
a true story" is likely to disappoint simply because the components of
the story are probably too realistic to be cinematic.  
A Civil Action is based on a true story.  It's based on the true story
of Jan Schlichtmann (John Travolta), a personal injury lawyer in a firm
with two partners (Tony Shalhoub and Zeljko Ivanek).  Jan is a cynical
man; much of the early scenes are filled with a witty narration in which
he explains the everyday procedures of winning cases and getting the
most possible money from a settlement.  (The first scene, in which a
group of lawyers beg for a two-million dollar settlement after Jan shows
the jury a child in a wheelchair is devilishly funny.)
Jan, however, decides to take a different kind of case:  over a few
years, several kids had died from leukemia in a small town called
Woburn; now, one of the mothers (Kathleen Quinlan) is trying to get a
lawyer to take their case against a local company who may be
accidentally draining toxins into the city's drinking water.  Jan
discovers that the local company is owned by a much larger company, and
so his motives for taking the case begin as a career move.  Later,
though, his morals change, and he sticks with the case, even though it
takes years to discover that the millions of dollars that his firm sinks
into the case are all wasted.
A Civil Action is one of the most frustrating films I've seen in
months:  here is a movie that begins as a funny, entertaining, cynical
look into the way lawyers operate, and concludes as a muddled, partially
sentimental morality tale with no climax and no real ending to speak
of.  It's made perfectly clear in the beginning that the film is based
on a true story, but I think that in the interest of cinema the last
thirty minutes should have been changed completely.  It almost makes me
mad to see a film with so much potential fizzle into a sloppy
resolution.
After all, I usually find John Travolta deeply unlikable, but A Civil
Action shows a side of him that I wouldn't mind seeing more often.  It
also has a fantastic supporting cast, a lot of sharp humor, and a
direct, insightful narration on the practices of one particular personal
injury lawyer.  Director Steven Zaillian also does a good job with
pacing and overall tone, except in the last thirty minutes, which are so
bad that the film as a whole can be considered no better than mediocre. 
It pains me to see this.
Take, for instance, the first scene, which I mentioned above.  This is
a very dry, very funny scene.  It speaks worlds of meaning with just a
little dialogue and a lot of good acting.  The movie has a similar tone
through much of its running time, and the way Zaillian unfolds the
details of the case is skillfully done:  I was always interested to see
what was going to happen, and who would be to blame for the disaster in
Woburn.  There are also some great supporting performances, the best
coming from William H. Macy (as Jan's high-strung accountant), Robert
Duvall (as a quirky defense lawyer), and Kathleen Quinlan (an actress
who needs her own movie).
I was so ready to love this movie, but it takes such an unexpected,
disastrous turn in the last thirty minutes.  It's nearly impossible to
explain in detail without giving away the ending, but I can say that it
requires us to dislike a bunch of people who seemed likable for most of
the movie.  It also has the most aggravating anticlimax of the decade,
whimpering to a close without awarding its audience the least bit of
satisfaction.  I attribute all of these failings to the fact that A
Civil Action has been based on a true story:  Hollywood endings aren't
always good, but at least they wrap stuff up.  This is a story that
didn't have an ending, and someone should have put it on, even if it
meant changing the facts a little.  As I said, cinema is more
interesting than real life; if you're going to make real life into
cinema, it needs to be made cinematic.

Author
Michael Dequina
_A_Civil_Action_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
Every December there emerges a film touted as a major award contender
only to come up short.  Last year, it was Steven Spielberg's overrated
_Amistad_; this year, it's Steven Zaillian's _A_Civil_Action_, which,
like the former film, is a technically proficient but ultimately soulless
courtroom drama.
_A_Civil_Action_, based on Jonathan Harr's fact-based book, marks the
directorial debut of Academy Award-winning screenwriter Zaillian (who
also wrote and executive produced), and he displays an effectively
economical storytelling style.  This is best exemplified in a sequence
where Boston personal injury lawyer Jan Schlichtmann (John Travolta)
meets up with Albert Eustis (Sydney Pollack), a pompous executive with
the corporation of W.R. Grace & Co., and recounts the encounter to his
legal partners.  Instead of showing the encounter and then Jan's account
of it, they unfold simultaneously through intercutting, with certain
behaviors and statements underscored by Jan's after-the-fact commentary. 
Another example has Jerome Facher (Robert Duvall, a Golden Globe nominee
for his work here), attorney to the large Beatrice Foods corporation,
lecturing a class on trial procedure, and each of the  bullet points he
makes are followed by concrete illustration in the courtroom.
The technical proficiency extends to Travolta, who hits the right
dramatic notes as Jan, a hotshot attorney who sees dollar signs in
representing a group of Woburn, Massachusetts parents in a complaint
against Grace and Beatrice.  These eight families claim that the two
corporations contaminated the town's drinking water, which led to their
children's deaths from leukemia.  But somewhere along the way, Jan
becomes emotionally involved, making his own dollar signs disappear as
the impossible case drains his firm's funds but not the energy of his
crusade.  The problem is that I never got a true sense of that change. 
The turning point is supposed to be a scene where Jan is driven to tears
while thinking about one of the father's stories, but I did not sense any
change following that scene; Jan still seemed like the slickster that he
was, and his fierce determination to see the case through still seemed
motivated by money and not sentiment.
That can be blamed less on Travolta and more on Zaillian, whose film,
like the portrayal of Jan, is slick and collected but lacking an
emotional hook.  Zaillian seems more interested in getting factual
details right than building any real dramatic tension or momentum, and
the film never quite reaches takeoff speed, despite the solid work of the
acting ensemble (especially William H. Macy as the accountant of Jan's
firm).  The film's conclusion would be anticlimactic with or without any
dramatic urgency leading up to it, but without, it's not only flat, it's
a big fizzle.
Perhaps if Zaillian had been less civil and took more action with his
material, _A_Civil_Action_ could have lived up to the award-craving hype.
 But, as it stands, this TV movie with a big screen cast looks to be an
also-ran when the Oscar nominations are announced in February.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com___________________________________________________________________
You don't need to buy Internet access to use free Internet e-mail.
Get completely free e-mail from Juno at http://www.juno.com/getjuno.html
or call Juno at (800) 654-JUNO [654-5866]
