Title
Review for Sleepers (1996)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Michael Dequina
Sleepers (R) ***
        Based on a true story or not, Barry Levinson's adaptation of Lorenzo
Carcaterra's best-selling novel is a perfectly competent Hollywood revenge
fantasy.  The problem is, the film is not quite as great as it thinks it is.
        This story of "friendship that runs deeper than blood" opens in
Hell's Kitchen in the late 1960s, where we meet a group of four young boys,
Michael (Brad Renfro), Tommy (Jonathan Tucker), John (Geoffrey Wigdor), and
the author himself, Lorenzo, a.k.a. Shakes (Joseph Perrino).  These
troublemaking but well-meaning kids get more than they bargained for when a
prank goes awry and they land in a hellish boys' reform school, where they
are treated to violent physical and sexual abuse by four of the guards, led
by one nasty fellow by the name of Sean Nokes (Kevin Bacon).
        After the kids finish their sentence, the film flashes forward to
1981, where the film's problems begin. The four guys have now just about
gone their separate ways and lost touch with each other--is this what you
call a "friendship that runs deeper than blood"?  John (former ER recurrent
Ron Eldard) and Tommy (Billy Crudup) are now bigtime hoodlums, and, in a
fortuitous coincidence, they run into and fatally shoot Nokes in a
restaurant.  Enter Michael (Brad Pitt), who is now a New York assistant DA,
who agrees to prosecute the case against John and Tommy--and, unbeknownst to
this two childhood friends, plans to intentionally throw the case to let the
two off and have their revenge.  Helping in the elaborate revenge scheme is,
yes, Shakes (Jason Patric), now a clerk for the New York Times, who also
engineers the downfall of their other three tormentors at the school.
        I suppose it goes without saying that all works out in the end--but,
of course, not without an easily overcome glitch or two.  And those seeking
a glossy revenge tale in which the baddies get their just desserts won't be
disappointed with Sleepers; well-acted and smoothly directed, it gets the
job done... but only on those terms.  Watching the film I could not help but
feel other grandiose intentions at work, ambitions that weren't quite met.
The impressive cast (which also includes Robert DeNiro as the kids' priest
and a hilarious Dustin Hoffman as John and Tommy's alcoholic, drug-addicted
defense attorney), John Williams's shockingly understated and somber score,
and Patric's flat, pretentious voiceover narration ("Hell's Kitchen is a
place of innocence ruled by corruption") suggests a big Oscar-worthy tale.
But it isn't, at least not in this critic's opinion.  The "true" story
relies too heavily on contrived coincidences and, worst of all, shortchanges
major characters.  Despite their role in killing Nokes, John and Tommy are
virtually invisible in the second half; never do we get a glimpse of insight
as to what they are feeling during the trial, seeing their friend "trying"
to put them away.  It is quite obvious why director-scripter Levinson
focused on matinee idols Pitt and Patric, but their side of the story is
perhaps the least interesting.  Also, DeNiro's character is called on to
make a major ethical and religious choice, and we never really get a sense
as to why and how he arrives at his ultimate decision; it just happens.
        As mentioned before, the cast, to varying degrees, does a good job.
Top honors go to DeNiro, Hoffman, Perrino, and Minnie Driver as the four's
pal.  Bacon exudes appropriate menace in the one-note role of Nokes.  Patric
and Pitt are adequate, but they, Patric especially, suffer from accent
inconsistencies.  Perrino has a very thick New York accent, and Patric
barely makes an effort to use one; while time has passed, I doubt that a boy
with that thick of an accent could shake it off so completely no matter
where he lived or whatever speech coach he may have had.  The only star
whose accent is in line with his or her younger counterpart is Driver, whose
very convincing accent comes as somewhat of a surprise, considering her
natural British lilt.  Eldard and Crudup don't make enough of an impression
because they are called on to do so little.  Crudup has been hailed along
with the likes of That Thing You Do!'s Johnathon Schaech as a Hollywood "it"
boy, a superstar of tomorrow; based on his limited work here, it is hard to
see how that buzz originated.
        It may appear as if I didn't enjoy Sleepers, but I did; I got caught
up in the story and the characters.  But this good film had the potential to
be a great film, a true Oscar contender that, alas, didn't quite make it to
the screen.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu
mrbrown@thepentagon.com  /  mj23@the18thhole.com
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com  /  mrbrown23@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Boyhood, bad luck, abuse, and, most of all, revenge sound like
pedestrian subjects for a movie, but in the hands of accomplished
writer and director Barry Levinson (DINER, THE NATURAL, TIN MEN, BUGSY,
GOOD MORNING VIETNAM, RAIN MAN, and BUGSY) they are anything but.
     Spanning two decades and with a star studded cast all at the top
of their form, Levinson's SLEEPERS is a phenomenal film experience.
For reasons that partially escape me, this film had the same effect on
me as THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION.  Both were filled with marvelous
performances and both had people in dire circumstances coping in ways
that earned the empathy of their audience.
     The Cliff's Notes version of the film would be "revenge," but if
that makes you think of some cheap Charles Bronson action flick, then
think again.  The revenge here comes much later and in much more subtle
and surprising ways.  Although certain portions are shocking, this is
not one of those exploitive shows nor even one of the sensational, even
if excellent shows like PULP FICTION.
     For the record, let me say that I approached the film as fiction.
It is reported to be based on fact, but whether it is or not is in some
dispute.  This is a great film regardless of its veracity.  In fact,
the single best part of the film is the highly literate script by
Levinson based on Lorenzo Carcaterra's novel.  There is just enough
humor in it to break the tension, but the script is filled with moving
prose.
     The film, set in Hells Kitchen in New York, starts in the summer
of 1966.  Told with heavy narration by Lorenzo, a. k. a. Shakes (Jason
Patric and Joseph Perrino as the younger Shakes), he begins with "This
is a true story about friendship that runs deeper than blood."  As he
introduces the friends of his boyhood, he tells us that "Michael (Brad
Renfro as the younger and Brad Pitt as the older Michael) was the most
sexually experienced of us, which means he had kissed a girl on more
than two occasions."
     Although they are counseled against it by their tough priest,
Father Bobby (Robert De Niro), the four friends: Shakes, Michael, Tommy
(Jonathan Tucker as the younger and Billy Crudup as the older) and John
(Geoffrey Wigdor as the younger and Ron Eldard as the older) go to work
for a Mafia boss named King Benny (Vittorio Gassman).  They are good
kids who go to mass and serve as acolytes, but like all boys,
especially ones in rough neighborhoods like Hell's Kitchen, they have
their wild sides.
     As Shakes relates, "the sun tapped out at 98 degrees on the day
our lives were forever changed".  On that day they start to commit the
pettiest of petty crimes, but their plan goes awry in arguably the most
powerful sequence in the picture and one of the best this year.  After
that it is off to a hellacious year in reform school where the sadistic
guards include Sean Nokes (Kevin Bacon) and Ferguson (Terry Kinney).
     When Father Bobby comes to visit them in the reformatory, Shakes
tells us, "I couldn't look at him.  He might look right through the
fear and the shame, right through to the truth."
     Also in the film is their friend Carol (Monica Polito as the
younger and Minnie Driver as the older) and Dustin Hoffman as an
alcoholic lawyer named Danny Snyder.  I am going to resist the urge to
tell you any more of the plot.  You need to see the movie.  Few films
have so many actors displaying their talent so effectively.  I left the
theater nothing short of amazed at what I had just seen.  Exquisitely
crafted cinema.
     In case you are wondering about the title, Shakes explains that,
"sleepers was the street name for anybody who spent time in a juvenile
facility."  He also tells us that after seven years your record is
purged so that you were never there and whatever happened, didn't.
     SLEEPERS runs 2:32, but feels like half that long since your eyes
stay glued to the screen.  SLEEPERS is rated R for strong language,
brief nudity, violence, and believable but not carefully done scenes of
the rape of boys.  Teenagers, if they go, should be older and mature.
I give this film my strongest recommendation and rate it a full ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Stephen Hopkins
Director:   Barry Levinson
Starring:   Kevin Bacon, Robert DeNiro, Dustin Hoffman, Jason Patric, Brad
            Pitt, Brad Renfro, Joe Perrino, Geoffrey Wigdor, Johnathan
            Tucker
UK release: January 3, 1997
Based on the controversial bestseller by Lorenzo Carcaterra (who co-produced
the film), Sleepers tells the story of four boys growing up in "Hell's
Kitchen"--west Manhatten in New York City.
After a prank goes horribly wrong the boys are sent to reform school in
upstate New York, where they become the victims of horrifying verbal,
physical and sexual abuse at the hands of the guards who run the place.
Years later one has become a journalist and another a lawyer, having risen
to the position of New York assistant district attorney. In a chance
encounter the other two, by now killers for the mob, run into one of their
former tormentors and shoot him dead.
The events that follow bring the four friends together in a final attempt to
lay to rest the demons of the past. Their plan is as simple as it is
audacious: to avenge their past suffering and punish those who caused it. A
plan that culminates in a courtroom showdown, and quite literally calls for
all involved to get away with murder.
The film falls into three parts, charting the boys' adolescence in Hell's
Kitchen and the stunt that lands them in reform school, through to the
shooting of the guard and the trial. The first two parts focus entirely on
the young actors, led by Brad Renfro (The Client, The Cure) and newcomer Joe
Perrino. All four deliver strong performances and successfully portray a
depth of character that seems missing in the film's later stages.
Its main disadvantage is that it doesn't have the time to go into the depth
of detail that made the book such a gripping read (I read my way through
from start to finish within 24 hours). It is also manipulative and slightly
over-produced, relying too much on background music to rouse the emotions.
As the guards' ringleader Kevin Bacon is too theatrical, shouting and
yelling his way through the role when a quieter, more mundane approach would
have been far more terrifyingly effective. There is no attempt to scratch
the surface and explore more deeply the lives of the guards, or delve into
their actions in any but a superficial way.
The abuse scenes would have the power to shock anyone who had not already
read the book upon which it is based. That said, they are scattered
throughout the movie, some recalled later on as flash-backs. They are also
depicted in such a low-key way that it is all too easy to miss the full
impact of what the boys are supposed to be going through. One scene in
particular occurs when one of the boys is about to be released, and the
guards decide to have their evil way with all four of them for the last
time. The viewer sees them being frog-marched down a long, dark, narrow
passage. The camera moving backwards, you see their faces and the guards
behind them, talking. That they are about to be viciously gang-raped is
never hinted at. The scene cuts to first-person perspective, camera moving
forwards towards a patch of light at the end of the tunnel. Special effects
kick in; the light rushes to fill the screen and hey presto! years have
passed and the boys have now grown up. The way the abuse scenes are handled
spares the viewer from the dirty detail of what the boys endured, but in
doing so glosses over how severely the system affected them, so that it is
far harder to empathise with their subsequent actions as adults.
The film pays too little attention to how deeply the boys have been scarred
by the abuse at reform school. No indication that it brutalised and
destroyed two of them so much that they grew up into cold-blooded killers.
No mention that the year at reform school ripped into the gentlest of hearts
and emptied it of all feeling, leaving instead a boy devoid of his
sweet-eyed charm, his face a resting place for all the torment and abuse he
had endured, who could kill a man and not give it a moment's thought. When
watching Sleepers, it was always bits I recalled from the book that helped
to set numerous scenes in context. While it is in some ways harder for a
film to convey how a character is thinking and feeling, Levinson could have
done better here.
One of the most powerful scenes is where the four of them are sitting down
at a table talking, and one of them says all he wants is to not be afraid of
the dark again, or hear a door in the night and wonder who's coming in,
what's going to happen to him. In a film that is by turns mind-numbingly
disturbing and coated in sacchrine, this is one of the few really poigniant
moments that make it to the big screen.
Overall, Sleepers is well worth seeing, in spite of its flaws. I really
wanted it to be a good film and a success, having been so deeply affected
when the paperback came out in the shops. There is little wrong with what is
in it; the one or two flies in the ointment are what was omitted. If you
read the book before hand, you won't go far wrong.
- -- 
Stephen Hopkins  PGP keys are on Web server at
http://www.stadiou.demon.co.uk: 0x5085B1B9 (1024 bit), 0xBDF2F489 (2048 bit)

Author
August Lamczyk
This is a very difficult film to watch. I am not a paid critic but have
always loved the movies so feel able to throw in my two cents on the film. I
believe it is a good thing that Sleepers would come out in an election year. 
>From the very begining there are several references to poverty and
justice, to mean streets, and living among the torment, and the
possibility that one can survive and even enjoy ones environment thanks to
friendship and the salvation of God.
As you watch this film you begin to see it more then a story of four boys
growing up in Hell's Kitchen. We all make choices in life and most of the
time they are mistakes. But Sleepers takes those mistakes and enhances them
to be almost unbearably costly. The four boys make such a mistake and are
carted off to a children's home. The gaurds often molest, rape and torture
the boys. These scenes are difficult to endure. But I believe they are
necessary to take the viewer into the minds of the boys and the guards. 
Later the movie transcends the viewers to 1981 and a freek occurance that
puts two of the victims as excecutioners of the chief evil guard (played
well by Kevin Bacon). A trial is set with the prosecuting attorney (Brad
Pitt) purposely throwing the trial. Pitt was also one of the boys as well as
a newspaper reporter who also assits him at throwing the trial and exposing
the guards.
It is a stretch that things go soo smoothly, and this is my only fault with 
the film. At the heart is the need for justice. I disagree that it is
revenge. Revenge is beaten into the viewer's head that this is what is
needed for the victims. It is vigilanty justice implementing the justice
system. So it is a severely flawed film in a moral sense? The answer does
not come easy, and I believe this is the film's strength. It is a question
that each viewer must answer. No amount of of ideology can prepare one for
this film. It is a personal answer, and only we know it.
P.S. - I appreciate the chance to express my views rather quickly here. I
also wish to hear feedback on this review.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Here's another long sit-- an elaborate revenge fantasy based, for
all we know, on events that best-selling author Lorenzo Carcaterra
pulled out of his butt.  (The story is supposedly true.) Written for the
screen and directed by Barry Levinson (DISCLOSURE, TOYS), SLEEPERS is a
textbook example of bad-choice filmmaking.  Jason Patric's impoverished
narration sets the tone of something's-not- right and the rest of the
movie is just as wrong.  My favorite flub is the entire third act, which
is too cramped to be comprehensible.  I mean, there's a good twenty
minutes in there where *nothing* makes sense.  Who are these adult
characters?  And why should we care about them?  The plot keeps surging
forward, with momentum in its sails and believability in its wake.
(Most disappointing are all those could've-been-better bits, such as
Brad Pitt feeding Dustin Hoffman his lines in court.  We need to savor
such scenes.) Yeah, this movie is easy on the eyes.  Yeah, enough
happens on- screen to pass the time.  Just don't expect to enjoy what
you're watching.
Mike Legeros 
Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@pagesz.net (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>"Orange whip?  Orange whip?  Three orange whips." [and do gesture]

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jason Patric, Brad Pitt, Ron Eldard, Billy Crudup, Robert DeNiro, 
      Joseph Perrino, Brad Renfro, Geoffrey Wigdor, Jonathan Tucker, 
      Kevin Bacon, Minnie Driver, Dustin Hoffman, Bruno Kirby, 
      Vittorio Gassman
Director: Barry Levinson
Producers: Barry Levinson and Steve Golin
Screenplay: Barry Levinson based on the novel by Lorenzo Carcaterra
Cinematography: Michael Ballhaus
Music: John Williams
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Robert DeNiro.  Dustin Hoffman.  Brad Pitt.  Jason Patric.  Kevin 
Bacon.  Minnie Driver.  With a talented cast like this, it's virtually 
impossible to envision a bad movie, and, in that regard, SLEEPERS 
doesn't surprise or disappoint.  This is easily Barry Levinson's best 
effort of the decade, and it helps to erase the bad taste left by his 
early-'90s mega-flops TOYS and JIMMY HOLLYWOOD.  Despite protests from 
the Catholic Church (which whines about any movie that portrays priests 
as anything less-than-pure), SLEEPERS, which represents two and one-half 
hours of gripping entertainment, is well worth the price of admission.
     The movie is about revenge and redemption, and how, in America's 
darkest social corridors and backalleys, the two can be inextricably 
linked.  It's also a condemnation of a criminal justice system that 
allows innocence to be callously destroyed.  Yet, even though SLEEPERS 
is basically a vigilante motion picture, it exists on a much higher 
plane than something like DEATH WISH, which offers a least common 
denominator, visceral satisfaction.  There's little thrill in watching 
the vengeance extracted by the protagonists of this film because 
SLEEPERS approaches its subject with a conscience.  The movie's moral 
compass is Robert DeNiro's Father Bobby, a Catholic priest who 
recognizes that friendship and loyalty can require sacrifices of the 
soul, but who doesn't tread lightly across the line separating what's 
legally correct from what's ethically mandated.
     In fact, Father Bobby's dilemma is arguably the most compelling 
aspect of SLEEPERS' second half.  The film's sluggish final hour is its 
weakest portion, but there's still enough there to maintain audience 
interest.  We've spent a long time with these characters, and we're not 
about to abandon them because Levinson doesn't move things as smoothly 
to the climax as we might prefer.
     SLEEPERS, which may or may not be based on a true story (the author 
of the novel, Lorenzo  Carcaterra, isn't doing interviews these days), 
spans fifteen years.  Much of the action transpires in New York's Hell's 
Kitchen, which stretches from 34th to 56th Street west of 8th Avenue to 
the Hudson River.  During the film's era, the neighborhood was ruled by 
two vastly different powers:  the mob (represented by  gangster King 
Benny, played by Vittorio Gassman) and the Catholic Church (represented 
by Father Bobby).  Every child learned to respect both, and live by a 
simple creed:  never commit a crime against someone else in the 
neighborhood.  Such offenses were not permitted; the people of Hell's 
Kitchen looked after one another.
     The film opens in 1966 by introducing us to four inseparable 
friends:  Lorenzo (Joseph Perrino), Michael (Brad Renfro), John 
(Geoffrey Wigdor), and Tommy (Jonathan Tucker).  Like most boys, they're 
curious about sex, enjoy playing stickball, and have an appetite for 
pranks.  One such practical joke, gone horribly wrong, changes their 
lives.  When their theft of a hot dog vendor's cart nearly causes a 
man's death, Lorenzo and his friends are found guilty of reckless 
endangerment and sent to the Wilkinson Reform School.  There, under the 
watchful eye of a sadistic guard named Sean Nokes (Kevin Bacon), they 
are subjected to mental, physical, and sexual abuse.
     Although their sentences are only for a year, those twelve months 
fundamentally alter their personalities.  When we next meet them, in 
1981, their lives have moved on, but the submerged hatred lingers.  
Lorenzo (now played by Jason Patric) is an aspiring reporter working for 
the New York Daily News.  Michael (Brad Pitt) is an attorney in the 
D.A.'s office.  John (Ron Eldard) and Tommy (Billy Crudup) are hardened 
criminals.  All four are forced to confront their shared past when John 
and Tommy encounter Nokes in a restaurant.  Their actions provide the 
catalyst for a plan that Michael devises to bring the entire Wilkinson 
experience into the open.  So, with the help of Lorenzo; John's lover, 
Carol (Minnie Driver); and a burned-out lawyer (Dustin Hoffman), Michael 
strives to attain redemption and revenge for them all.  
     SLEEPERS' provocative script is marred only by an unnecessarily 
verbose voiceover narrative and the protracted final third.  One of the 
most fascinating aspects of the movie is watching how the law can be 
manipulated to deliver justice in a manner that was never intended.  
And, while Michael's scheme may be a little too convoluted to be 
plausible, it's nevertheless entertaining to watch the pieces fall into 
place.  
     Then there's Father Bobby's dilemma, which, in some ways, echoes 
the one agonized over by the protagonist of Antonia Bird's PRIEST.  At 
what point do the demands of basic humanity take precedence over the 
oaths and responsibilities of the Cloth?  Much of this struggle is not 
played out in words, but in Bobby's face, and, with an actor of lesser 
ability than DeNiro, the emotional resonance of the internal war could 
have been lost.
     DeNiro isn't the only one to turn in a powerful performance.  
SLEEPERS is as well-acted as it is deftly-crafted.  There are those who 
may be disconcerted by the intensity of the reform school scenes 
(nothing overly graphic is shown, but much is implied).  Levinson takes 
us through every phase of the boys' torture so that, when the time 
comes, we can understand and sympathize with their need to emulate the 
hero of their favorite book, THE COUNT OF MONTE CRISTO, and exact 
decisive retribution.  
     As SLEEPERS opens in theaters, members of the media are trying to 
determine how much of this film is grounded in reality.  Ultimately, 
however, it doesn't make much difference whether the events of SLEEPERS 
happened or not.  The themes and messages are no less valid either way, 
and, even if it isn't a true story, events like these could have 
transpired.  Fact or fiction, this is a memorable motion picture.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Bill Chambers
(For more purple prose check out FILM FREAK CENTRAL
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Set/7504 I now include a section
where YOU the surfer can recommend movies to ME and other
netheads. Have a freakin' good time.)
Kevin Bacon, Robert DeNiro, Dustin Hoffman, Jason Patric, Brad Pitt
written & directed by Barry Levinson
With a weak script at its core, SLEEPERS is akin to the world's
greatest chefs making toast. Based on the supposedly non-fictional
book by Lorenzo Carcaterras (it's difficult to believe, for starters,
that Carcaterras and his friends look like Patric and Pitt), the film
offers very little in the way of tension or drama, and even resorts to
such tired devices as (flat, obvious) narration to make sense of the
complicated--but by no means involving-- plot. This is despite a
wealth of talent before and behind the camera.
Hell's Kitchen is the setting for the story, in which a group of four
mischief-prone boys accidentally injure a bystander when one of their
pranks goes awry. Said boys are then sent to a reformatory, where they
pay for their mistake in the form of Bacon's perverted guard, who
sexually tortures them repeatedly during their stay. Fourteen years
later, two of his victims discover Bacon at a bar and gun him
down. It's up to Patric and Pitt, who have grown up to become a
reporter and a lawyer, respectively, to help their childhood amigos
win the court case that follows.
The best thing one can say about SLEEPERS is that it features some
nice performances by DeNiro as Father Bob, the neighbourhood priest,
and Dustin Hoffman as a washed-up alcoholic lawyer, as well as a few
well-crafted individual scenes.  Levinson (RAIN MAN, DISCLOSURE) pays
no attention to detail in terms of the eighties sequences, in which
everyone wears stylish 1996 clothing. But that's a moot point compared
to the script's central problem: we don't care about any of these
people, or whether they triumph in the end, because their
personalities are interchangeable and ultimately unappealing. The
pacing is terrible; if Levinson insisted on making a film this long
(two-and-a-half hours) he should have spent the time developing the
characters instead of showing us redundant flashbacks and silly scenes
which further complicate the plot.
Molestation and pedophilia are very serious issues that have been
fashioned here into a story as perfunctory and pointless as a TV
movie-of-the-week. While "Sleepers" in the film are defined as people
who have been waiting to get revenge, the title more aptly describes
director and crew during the making of the film. It's bad enough that
these wonderful chefs made toast. They burned it.

Author
Michael Redman
It's about time! After sitting through weeks of decidedly mediocre
films, we've finally got a winner.
Based on the best-selling (and reportedly true) novel and directed by
Barry Levinson ("Diner", "Good Morning Vietnam", "Rain Man", "The
Natural"), this disturbing film is certainly the best thing currently on
the screen. It may be the best movie of the year so far.
Following the life of four men, the story begins in the tough Hell's
Kitchen neighborhood of New York where the boys are treading a fine line
between the influences of their priest Father Bobby (Robert DeNiro) and
King Benny, the local mob chieftain. They're experiencing the typical
city kid life until the hot summer day in 1966 when their lives change
forever.
A petty theft that goes wrong and almost kills a man results in the boys
being sent to the Wilkinson Reform School. While at the detention
center, the boys are abused in every possible way by the guards, lead by
a particularly sinister Kevin Bacon.
The rest of the movie takes place years later in 1981 when two of the
boys, grown to become amoral killers, run into Bacon in a bar, pull out
their guns and murder him where he sits. Their other two friends, a
reporter and an attorney in the district attorneys office, scheme to
set the killers free and expose the evils of the reform school.
The central theme of the film is revenge and how much of a soul is
traded away to achieve it. Is it legitimate to lie, cheat and steal in
order to punish a greater wrong? Father Bobbys decision is especially
agonizing: the man versus the church.
The film is so powerful in its images and concepts that some scenes are
tremendously uncomfortable to watch. The abuses, while not graphic, are
some of the most intensely effective moments in cinema.
Rarely do we see a film with so many elements going for it. The actors,
DeNiro, Dustin Hoffman, Brad Pitt and the rest, are all wonderful. The
story is riveting; the cinematography, excellent and the direction,
engrossing.  It took days to get the pictures out of my mind. And thats
a good thing.
[This appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
10/24/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Michael Redman
It's about time! After sitting through weeks of decidedly mediocre
films, we've finally got a winner.
Based on the best-selling (and reportedly true) novel and directed by
Barry Levinson ("Diner", "Good Morning Vietnam", "Rain Man", "The
Natural"), this disturbing film is certainly the best thing currently on
the screen. It may be the best movie of the year so far.
Following the life of four men, the story begins in the tough Hell's
Kitchen neighborhood of New York where the boys are treading a fine line
between the influences of their priest Father Bobby (Robert DeNiro) and
King Benny, the local mob chieftain. They're experiencing the typical
city kid life until the hot summer day in 1966 when their lives change
forever.
A petty theft that goes wrong and almost kills a man results in the boys
being sent to the Wilkinson Reform School. While at the detention
center, the boys are abused in every possible way by the guards, lead by
a particularly sinister Kevin Bacon.
The rest of the movie takes place years later in 1981 when two of the
boys, grown to become amoral killers, run into Bacon in a bar, pull out
their guns and murder him where he sits. Their other two friends, a
reporter and an attorney in the district attorney's office, scheme to
set the killers free and expose the evils of the reform school.
The central theme of the film is revenge and how much of a soul is
traded away to achieve it. Is it legitimate to lie, cheat and steal in
order to punish a greater wrong? Father Bobby's decision is especially
agonizing: the man versus the church.
The film is so powerful in its images and concepts that some scenes are
tremendously uncomfortable to watch. The abuses, while not graphic, are
some of the most intensely effective moments in cinema.
Rarely do we see a film with so many elements going for it. The actors,
DeNiro, Dustin Hoffman, Brad Pitt and the rest, are all wonderful. The
story is riveting; the cinematography, excellent and the direction,
engrossing.  It took days to get the pictures out of my mind. And that's
a good thing.
[This review appeared in The Bloomington Voice, Bloomington, Indiana,
10/24/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Bradley Null
     How on earth did Kevin Bacon get top billing in a cast that
includes Robert DeNiro, Dustin Hoffman, Brad Pitt, and Jason Patric --
just for starters?  That's just one of the disturbing aspects of
SLEEPERS (and I don't mean that in a bad way), Barry Levinson's new
drama/thriller that finally redeems him for the idiocy of DISCLOSURE and
TOYS.
     Based on the extremely controversial novel, SLEEPERS tells what is
purported to be a true story of revenge in Hell's Kitchen in New York
City.  Four early-teenaged friends (played as adults by Patric, Pitt,
Ron Eldard, and Billy Crudup -- who I have to mention just because I
like to say "Crudup") are sent to a juvenile center when a prank goes
wrong and almost kills a bystander.  The brutality that occurs in the
center does not need to be expounded upon, but suffice it's very
horrible, and that guard Sean Nokes (Bacon) is the baddest of the bad
guys.
     Flash forward 13 years to 1981, when a very non-reformed John and
Tommy (Eldard and Crudup) run into Nokes in a neighborhood bar, and, on
the spot, shoot him 6 times in front of 4 witnesses.  When it goes to
trial, a now-assistant D.A. Michael (Pitt) takes the case and decides
it's time for payback to everyone from the bad-old days at the center.
     Working with attorney Danny Snyder (Hoffman), their old
neighborhood priest (DeNiro), old pal Carol (Minnie Driver), and
newsman-in-training "Shakes" (Patric), Michael constructs an intricate
plan to get the guys off the hook and bring down the juvenile center in
the process -- by losing the case he is prosecuting.
     If you've seen GOODFELLAS, you know what you're in for -- an
overly-narrated epic saga about growing up in New York and the
consequences of events that start when you're just a kid.  And just like
Scorcese, Levinson lays on the narration like butter on pancakes (all
via Patric), and this gets old, *fast.*
     But the point is that SLEEPERS is a very powerful story, and you
never really notice that it's 2 1/2 hours long.  The performances are
universally good (although Eldard and Crudup basically have no lines),
and seeing Dustin Hoffman as a long-haired alcoholic/failed attorney is
quite a treat.  DeNiro is excellent in showing his inner turmoil over
whether or not to lie on the witness stand, and the kids (who I don't
feel like naming right now) all pull off their parts just fine.
     SLEEPERS has its share of technical goofs, like a whole lot of
black-and-white flashbacks, slow-motion, fast-motion, surreal-motion,
and other camera tricks that really detract from the story and don't
belong here.  Also in question is a really rotten score and a
questionable choice of background "period" songs -- and you can blame
veteran composer John Williams, if you can believe that.
     Oh well, at least it's a very solid story that leaves you
wondering... did it really happen?  As for the moral of this little
tale?  This is all I can figure:  Two wrongs don't make a right, but
maybe 150 wrongs do.  They might be right about that.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
