Title
Review for Dawn of the Dead (1978)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Martin A Horton
Written and Directed by George A. Romero
Produced by Richard P. Rubenstein
This is without doubt the greatest horror movie ever made,
and we should accept this without any further ado or arguments.
  You can forget Halloween, Friday the 13th, Nightmare On Elm Street
or Scream, this is the one that got them all started.
A follow up to Romero's 1969 classic 'Night Of The Living Dead' see's
four main protagonists alone, scared and couped up in a large shopping
mall after fleeing the city, with the walking dead everywhere.
Up to the point where the group get to the mall is pretty much run of
the mill, social satire, city folks panicking and not wanting to hear
what they are being told, TV station controllers sending people out to
their deaths just to boost ratings and in the country, Rednecks using
the situation for target practice and a huge party.
When they reach themall the style of the film changes, if not the
points being made by Romero, and it is here where the film comes into
it's own, as we see the group transform from isolated outsiders
looking in on a situation to becoming drawn into the world of
consumerism that is staring them in the face.
At this point the film could have gone dead, but enter Tom Savini and
his gang of hells angels, with only one intent, taking the consumerist
goods for themselves.  What do they want them for? Where can they use
them?  It doesn't matter, they just want them, they just need them to
remind them of a world that once was.
Overall Romero leaves you with the question 'Who actually is worse,
the zombies who only attack the humans, or the humans who attack each
other for seemingly no reason at all?
O.K the performances from everyone (With the exception of genere fave
Foree) are somewhat lacking, but what the hell, this isn't an actors
movie, it's Romero's, and what a bloody good job he makes of it as
well.

Author
David Wilcock
After NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, the second of the zombie films by Romero is
basically a remake, but in colour, and with A LOT of blood and guts. Like
watching zombies heads explode, people getting ripped apart, and a
screwdriver going through someones brain? You've found your film. But is
not just blood and guts. There is also lots of messages about what the
world is like today.
The film, by the way, isn't that bad. Although i wouldn't recommend this if
you're squemish, there is only one gory zombie death (involving a
screwdriver) All the others basically get their brain separated from their
body by shotgun blasts. This is the main problem with the film. It is
INCREDIBLY repitive. You just know how the zombies are going to die, and
thats with a shotgun blast. 
The zombies themselves do are really quite scary. The extras do convincing
extras, and they even though some funny things, like going up the down
escalator. (The film is set in a shopping mall, where the survivors are
hiding in) Also, we get to like the heroes of the piece quite well, and
their personalitys show well.
There are, of course, some corny lines in it ('When their no more room in
hell, the dead will walk on earth') and the ending seems a bit tacked on,
like they didn't when to end the movie. (The movie is 2hrs 20mins roughly,
which is far too long)
Sadly, then, this movie is not as frightening or as good as NIGHT OF THE
LIVING DEAD, but then again isn't as bad as some Stephen King adaptations
or other tacky horror movies. But after all the things I heard people
saying about it (It's really scary, etc) I was midly disappointed. But if
this film is at a horror season at your cinema, or showing on TV, go along
and see it. Although mindless, you will probably enjoy it.

Author
Eric Walker
George Romero's NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD in 1968 was a true horror
classic, filmed in crisp black-and-white and shot on a low budget.
The film's lack of major distribution resulted in it being sent to
Saturday matinees, where legend has it young children saw the movie
and fled the theaters crying.  The primitive, rough feel of the movie
gave it an edge of realism that works even today, instilling a
chilling, creeping feeling of stark terror unlike any other horror
film made since then.  In 1990 Romero re-made NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD
in color and with a much bigger budget, but he wasn't able to
re-capture the intensity and the "realism" that only seems to spring
from the camera and mind of young, maverick directors who enjoy taking
risks and having fun with the camera.
In 1978 Romero made the first sequel to his horror masterpiece: DAWN
OF THE DEAD.  This film has become a classic in its own right, and
deservedly so.  It's a worthy followup and successor to NIGHT OF THE
LIVING DEAD, but it succeeds because it ventures down a slightly
different, more satirical path.  While we are terrified when we watch
NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, the horror of DAWN OF THE DEAD stems from
the way the second movie turns a mirror on us and asks us who is more
frightening: the zombies, or the humans?
The first half hour of DAWN OF THE DEAD actually follows in the
footsteps of NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, ingeniously conjuring up the
same oppressive, relentless atmosphere of terror with its very first
scene.  A TV station is desperately trying to stay on the air, but it
seems more an act of futility than anything else: two "experts" are
shouting at each other over the moral aspect of killing all of the
zombies, while the station manager insists that the station will
continue broadcasting locations of "rescue stations" that people can
go to for shelter from the zombie plague -- even though half of the
locations listed by the station have been abandoned.  The government
has declared that people can no longer live in their homes, and we see
one extended sequence of policemen (or stormtroopers?) bursting into
an apartment complex, rounding up the residents, and herding them
outside.  The inhabitants have been keeping a cache of zombies in the
basement, because they still believe in respecting the dead.
This first half hour of the film continues director/producer Romero's
theme begun in NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, by showing us how people
react when presented with the end of civilization as they know it.  In
one way, it could even be a reflection of H.G. Clouzot's THE WAGES OF
FEAR, which put four "tough" men into a life-and-death situation and
showed how their actions in that situation would surprise everyone,
including themselves.  So it is with DAWN OF THE DEAD: with murderous
zombies overwhelming civilization, and the survival of humanity itself
in doubt, the characters in the film let their true selves come forth.
It's not a pretty sight, as one SWAT patrolman goes berserk and guns
down innocent people; while the film's ostensible "hero," a
square-jawed guy named Peter, realizes he has better chances of
survival by taking off on his own.  (It's one of Romero's more
deliberate ironies that the lead roles in both his first film and this
one are black; what better way to thumb his nose at Hollywood
stereotypes?)
But after about half an hour of scares and chills, the film takes a
sudden detour and explores new territory.  Instead of going for the
inexorable terror of the first film, the story veers into satire...but
the satire works.  In fact, it works well enough that many fans of
DAWN OF THE DEAD consider the first half hour of the movie to be its
weakest part.
Our four heroes are fleeing in a helicopter, looking for fuel and
food, when they come across a huge, abandoned shopping mall.  The mall
is completely intact (amazingly enough), and our heroes realize it's a
perfect place to stay.  It has everything: food, clothes, guns and
ammunition for killing zombies; and so they figure out how to block
the entrances and get rid of all the zombies inside, putting
themselves in a situation that many people have dreamed of.  What
would you do if you had the run of the entire mall, able to take
anything you wanted with no one else there?
The characters actually have to explain to the audience what a
shopping mall is -- this film was made during the days when huge
mega-malls were unusual and scarce, not residing on every street
corner and downtown district in the country.  This may have made the
satire even more subtle back then; since malls and "consumer culture"
have pervaded our society to the point where we now decorate our homes
to resemble malls, it's easier for us to point out the black humor and
realize that Romero is stabbing at us when the characters ask why the
zombies are here, roaming aimlessly throughout the stores.  Peter, the
hero, notes that they seem to be coming there because of instinct:
"this place used to be an important part of their lives."  In fact, if
this film were made today, it might have actually suffered from "been
there done that" syndrome.  Cultural in-jokes that point out our
dependence on (and subsurvience to) malls are a dime a dozen
today...which only shows how much influence the "mall" has had on our
culture.  DAWN OF THE DEAD was fortunate enough to be in the right
place at the right time, and over the time its message has become more
meaningful.
As for the film itself: unlike the original 1968 classic, this movie
is filmed in widescreen (1.85:1) with bright, crisp color.  The
mutilations, decaptitations, exploding heads, gunshots, and
(especially) devouring of human flesh are shown in abundance, in
explicit detail; however, this actually lessens the terror because it
leaves less to the imagination.  The flesh-eating scene of NIGHT OF
THE LIVING DEAD is an unforgettable moment in screen horror because
the black-and-white cinematography actually made it more "dreamlike"
and fired the imaginations of the audience (in fact, the zombies
looked like they were eating fried chicken), but the splatterful
special effects of Savini make up for it by adding a comic-book appeal
(which also helps the satire).  When zombies die, the blood splashes
all over the place; one particularly gruesome exploding head near the
end of the film is especially memorable.  The "director's cut" of the
film (which has about fifteen minutes of additional footage) also
includes more scenes of zombies eating humans alive, ripping out and
devouring the entrails of their still-living victims.  (Yum!)
Still, the movie asks us, are the zombies actually evil?  After all,
they're doing nothing more than roaming the countryside and looking
for food.  As our hero Peter says early in the film, "It wasn't one of
those things that nearly blew me away" -- referring to another
character who nearly shoots him.  Humanity may be physically able to
withstand the onslaught of the living dead, Romero says, but because
we can't even trust each other and be able to live together, it will
be humanity's own selfishness and inability to get along that will be
our undoing.  The point here is emphasized in one of the final TV
broadcasts of the film, as an "expert" asks whether humanity is worth
saving.
Even the final battle of the movie, as an army of looters invades the
mall and smashes things left and right, makes this point.  The
"heroes" shouldn't have stayed in the mall where they were vulnerable;
but they were seduced by the appeal of its "convenience" and they felt
they had to defend it from intruders.  The zombies don't care about
any of this -- they just want their food.  In fact, the zombies are so
ineffectual that the people who die during the final battle wouldn't
have died if they were only fighting the zombies.  They're fighting
each other.
Of course, the "message" of DAWN OF THE DEAD only works if it's a good
movie -- and that's what it is.  It starts out as an effective horror
film, and the horror stays with us throughout, even as the zombies are
locked outside the mall and the heroes don't have anything to do
except get drunk and try on clothes.  Splatter fans have loved the
splatter, and the movie gives us all the gore we expect in a "living
dead" movie, plus some.  The film is more than just a re-make of NIGHT
OF THE LIVING DEAD: it expands upon the original and continues the
"saga" of one of the most memorable horror series of modern times.
