Title
Review for Proof (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     Hugo Weaving is a blind man who doesn't seem to trust anyone.  He
takes photos of what is around him as proof that what is there exists.
He doesn't trust his housekeeper Genevieve Picot, who likes him very
much.  Weaving finds Russell Crowe, who he trusts, to describe his
photos to him.
     PROOF is done by House and Moorhouse Films and is distributed by
Fine Line Features (which is a division of New Line Cinema).  Although
the film's description sounds strange, and initially to me not
interesting, I found PROOF to be a very good film, although I don't
think that it will appeal to everybody.  However, if it comes to your
area, I suggest trying it.  Later this month, PROOF is going to be
released on video.  I feel it is worth seeing.  On a scale of zero to
five, I give PROOF a four.  PROOF is rated R for female nudity, adult
situations, and explicit language.
     The actors all did a good job.  Hugo Weaving was very convincing as
a blind person.  Genevieve Picot was very good as the housekeeper.
Russell Crowe was excellent as the young adult who is befriended by
Weaving.  I don't think that there were any actors in the film that I
felt were miscast.  The film had an interesting idea, which worked well;
however, I wouldn't have wanted to have been the one to describe the
film to the producer!   When I heard what the film was about, I wasn't
quite sure of what to expect.  Thankfully the film was more than I
expected that it could be.
     The script for the film was well written.  There were some places
in the film when the actors came out with some moronic lines, but not
many.  The story moves along rather well.  It did get a little boring in
some places, but those points are few and the interesting parts make up
for the slower ones.

Author
Frank Maloney
     PROOF is a film written and directed by Jocelyn Moorhouse.  It
stars Hugo Weaving, Genevieve Picot, Russell Crowe.  Australian.  Rated
R for brief nudity, mature themes.
     PROOF is the first feature film by the 31-year-old Australian
writer-director Jocelyn Moorhouse.  It is perfect.  She has given us
something very special -- a completely original film directed with
precision and insight.
     The story asks the question "Why would a blind person take
photographs?"  The answer is rife with dramatic possibilities and
compelling implications about human nature, about truth, about trust.
     Partial plot summary follows.  Possible spoilers, but owing to the
limited circulation of this excellent film in the U.S., I feel justified
to discuss the plot in a limited way:
     The blind person is Martin, played by Hugo Weaving, who cannot
trust anything or anyone.  His photos are his way of providing proof
that the world he perceives is the same as the one of the sighted.  In
the absence of vision, he seeks absolute truth, but trusts no one to
describe his photos to him until he meets Andy, played by Russell Crowe,
who has the time and ability to describe Martin's photos in 10 words or
less.  Andy's arrival threatens Martin's housekeeper, Celia, played by
Genevieve Picot, who is locked in a closed-loop relationship with Martin
that is cruel, sadistic, cynical, and mutual.
     Andy is the catalyst that breaks everyone out of the loop.  Martin
must learn to trust someone who he knows has lied to him once; he must
accept the fact that "everyone lies."  Andy has to pull himself out of
his wandering, aimless, purposeless life.  Celia must walk away from the
life she's lived for the last three-and-a-half years; she and Martin
must change their lives from models of mutual, destructive dependence to
a new, more painful independence.  These are the small epiphanies of
real people moving through their lives.
     Moorhouse's film is small and concentrated on people who are
interesting without being impossible.  She concentrates on her story and
on her actors, who excellent.  She does this without bravado or
pretension and with no false steps.
     PROOF is, nevertheless, a visual success, neatly composed, shot in
natural light, sharply edited, with much of the story coming through
visually.  The story is also funny, surprising, even shocking in a quiet
way.  Moorhouse uses her sound editor to mix natural sounds and a sound
track by the Australian group Waving, Not Drowning to enhance a
non-visual realm of the senses.
     I recommend PROOF to you in the strongest possible terms.  Look for
it, ask for it.  It may be the best film you see this year.
