Title
Review for Two Rode Together (1961)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christian Pyle
Two Rode Together (1961)
Directed by John Ford  
Written by Frank S. Nugent 
(based on the novel "Comanche Captives" by Will Cook)
Starring James Stewart, Richard Widmark, Shirley Jones, and Linda Cristal
Marshal Guthrie McCabe (James Stewart) has a sweet deal in the sleepy border
town of Tascosa.  He has a protection racket that nets him 10% of every
business in town, and he's the kept man of the local madam (Annelle Hayes). 
However, his life of ease is interrupted when his old friend Cavalry Lt. Jim
Gary (Richard Widmark) recruits McCabe to handle a crisis.  Comanche Chief
Quanah Parker (Henry Brandon) has a collection of white captives who were taken
as children over the past fifteen years.  Because McCabe has dealt successfully
with Parker before, the Army wants him to arrange the release of the captives. 
A large community of settlers have gathered at Fort Grant to await news of
their loved ones, including Marty Purcell (Shirley Jones), who's sweet on Lt.
Gary.
One could easily dismiss "Two Rode Together" as "The Searchers II" because both
films concern the rescue of captives raised by Comanches.  However, while "The
Searchers" focused on the psychology of its protagonist (John Wayne's character
Ethan Edwards), "Two Rode Together" is more interested in exploring societal
issues.  Director John Ford's westerns often have the thesis that the
wilderness breeds savagery and civilization breeds corruption.  (In this movie,
the two extremes are marked by the vicious Comanche Stone Calf, played by Woody
Strode, and rich businessman Harry J. Wringle, played by Willis Bouchey, who
wants to buy any captive boy to take home to his wife.)  The decent folks are
the pioneers and the cavalry who exist between the two poles, but there is
always the understanding that these few good souls will inevitably be swallowed
by the march of "civilization."  Thus, Ford always pursues his tales about the
forging of America with a profound ambivalence.
In "Two Rode Together," even Ford's usual repositories of goodness are
undercut.  The pioneers include the angry and violent Clegg family, who at one
point form a lynch mob to hang the only white child McCabe and Gary managed to
free.  (It's no accident that the Clegg patriarch is a bible-thumping reverend;
Ford generally satirizes the supposedly benevolent institutions of the
on-rushing society).  Many of the cavalry officers behave in a racist and
unchivalrous manner towards Elena (Linda Cristal), one of the captives freed
from the Comanches.  Lt. Gary and Marty stand as the sole embodiments of
unassailable virtue amid a world of compromise, greed, violence, and madness.
The role of the selfish Guthrie McCabe is an unusual choice for Jimmy Stewart,
who is best known as the selfless hero of Frank Capra classics.  However,
Stewart is up to the challenge and brings a devilish delight to his
performance.  As the movie develops, McCabe proves to be a complex character,
who in one moment can horrify Marty by describing what her captive brother
would look like as a full-grown Comanche warrior and in another defend Elena
against the leers of the cavalry soldiers and their wives.  Richard Widmark is
the perfect counter-point:  resolute, honest, brave, kind, loyal, everything an
officer and a gentleman should be.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html
