Title
Review for Sunday (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 9/12/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:33
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Nudity, profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: David Suchet, Lisa Harrow, Jared Harris, Larry Pine, Yeon Joo Kim
Director: Jonathan Nossiter
Producers: Jonathan Nossiter, Alix Madigan, and Jed Alpert
Screenplay: James Lasdun and Jonathan Nossiter
Cinematography: Michael Barrow and John Foster
U.S. Distributor: Cinepix Film Properties
     At first glance, there's nothing extraordinary about Jonathan 
Nossiter's debut feature, SUNDAY.  But, several hours after I had seen 
the movie, I was still thinking about it, and that's the mark of a film 
with simple, quiet power.  When it premiered at Sundance earlier this 
year, SUNDAY received some of the best press of any picture (it won both 
the Waldo Screenwriting Award and the Grand Jury Prize); now, some eight 
months later, the fledgling distributor Cinepix Film Properties has 
assured that at least a small nationwide audience will get a chance to 
see what so many critics found praiseworthy.
     It's possible to classify SUNDAY  as a "love story", but that would 
probably be a misnomer.  While it's true that the main characters -- 
Oliver, a downsized worker (played by David Suchet), and Madeleine, an 
aging actress for whom roles are scarce (Lisa Harrow) -- go through the 
motions of lovers, their relationship isn't about love.  It's about 
quenching loneliness and finding companionship in a cold, cruel world 
that has, in its own way, sought to crush both of them.  Sex is nothing 
more than a form of primal release, a way to connect with another human 
being.  These two have no future, but they cling desperately for a few 
hours to the illusion of what they have achieved.
     Once, Madeleine was a well-known and respected British actress, 
but, as the years passed and the marks of age began to etch themselves 
upon her features, her services became less and less desired.  In a 
moment of self-deprecating revelation, she claims that the only roles 
she has a shot at these days are those of zombie mutants in low-budget 
horror films, adding, "I guess I'm too old to play a human."  (It's 
worth noting that Nossiter has bucked this trend of using young, 
attractive actors by casting two out-of-shape, middle-aged performers -- 
a choice that's crucial to the film's success.)  Her home life is a 
mess.  She is separated from her husband, Ben (Larry Pine), but he keeps 
showing up at her house on the pretext of spending time with their 
daughter.
     Oliver, meanwhile, is just as despondent as Madeleine.  Like her, 
he's trying to uncover the meaning of life, but it's proving elusive.  
Since losing his job, he has sunk lower and lower on the financial and 
social scale.  Now, he's living in a shelter by night and wandering the 
streets of Queens by day.  Then, on one fateful Sunday, he meets 
Madeleine after she mistakes him for a prominent London director by the 
name of Matthew Delacorta.  Oliver decides to play along with her, and, 
although their initial exchange doesn't touch upon anything that could 
reveal his deception, Madeleine eventually realizes the truth.  Instead 
of challenging Oliver, however, she begins to play an elaborate game of 
"pretend" with him.  
     For the most part, SUNDAY is a poignant, powerfully-realized 
character study of two lonely people.  Their quiet conversations mark 
the film's highlights, and Nossiter pays particular attention to little 
details (for example, when Madeleine and Oliver first enter her home, 
she unobtrusively uses her foot to sweep some newspapers out of sight).  
In addition, he fashions a gray, grim atmosphere (a cold, wintry New 
York City) that adds weight to the despair experienced by the 
characters.  Suchet, who is best known for his role as the title 
character in PBS's POIROT, gained 40 pounds for this part, and plays 
Oliver with great emotional strength.  There are times when we can feel 
(not just see) his despair.  Lisa Harrow, the lead in Gillian 
Armstrong's THE LAST DAYS OF CHEZ NOUS, is every bit Suchet's match.
     As wonderfully effective as the quiet scenes are in SUNDAY, 
Nossiter takes his share of missteps.  The first involves the inclusion 
of small army of secondary characters -- Madeleine's husband and the 
group of men who share the shelter with Oliver.  Although their purpose 
-- to strengthen the sense of isolation -- is clear, scenes with these 
individuals are distracting, taking time away from the interaction 
between the two leads and interrupting the film's flow.  Secondly, there 
are instances when Nossiter's artsy style (point-of-view camera angles, 
close-up shots of dead fish, crabs, and lobsters, etc.) approaches 
pretentiousness.  However, the worst these flaws can do is occasionally 
mute SUNDAY's power.  The best moments of the film shine through, 
leaving behind unforgettable images and feelings that will not evaporate 
when the house lights go up.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SUNDAY (director: Jonathan Nossiter; cast: David Suchet (Oliver/Matthew
Delacorta), Lisa Harrow (Madeleine Vesey), Jared Harris (Ray), Larry
Pine (Ben Vesey), 1997)
One blistery cold winter morning in Queens, New York, a middle-aged man,
Oliver (David), dressed in a rumpled brown suit, who was cut by IBM as
they downsized, leaves a homeless shelter to spend the day walking
around that part of town, knowing that he has to return before
7 p.m. or he gets locked out of the shelter. Suddenly, a woman, probably
in her early fifties, Madeleine (Lisa), with a British accent, shouts
out at him, as he is staring at her, "Aren't you Matthew Delacorta, the
director? I tried out for a part in your film in London." Oliver goes
along with the mistaken identity and goes with this has-been actress,
who can't get respectable parts in films anymore because of her age, to
a Greek diner. They spend the day together, becoming lovers out of a
sheer desire to overcome their loneliness and the dissatisfaction and
fear that life has brought them. This is a one- day fling, where after
the deception becomes unravelled by Madeleine and her anger subsides,
these two lonely souls, at least, find one day of gentleness with each
other, before their life goes on, to who knows what.
This could have been a great picture, it had everything in place to be
great, a great idea for a story, two of the finest acting performances
you can ever want, and a very compassionate story line that is without
any need for contrivances, and could touch the heart of any mature
audience.
So what went wrong and what went right with the film ?
What is right about this film, is that the story of the lovers, if we
can really call them that, is meaningful, therefore it stays with you,
its power goes beyond the time you spend watching it unfold on screen. I
thought about them for days afterwards, wondering how easy it is to lose
track of things and find out that all your desires and dreams fell
through and that you are left in a hopeless state, unable to relate to
anyone what is wrong with you. And getting older in a society that is
youth oriented, finding yourself tossed aside as unwanted scrap heap, is
a very difficult psychological thing for one to reconcile, and
obviously, some do it better than others. Oliver had no outside support,
which might be the reason he hit the bottom financially, winding up in a
spot he will have a great deal of trouble adjusting to, as he tries to
find himself, hoping for a way out... And Madeleine is also stuck,
separated from a husband (Larry Pine) she does not love, who is always
snooping around, trying to win her back with his obsessively manic
behavior, leaving a bad taste in her mouth. Her self-esteem is at a very
low level, as she can't find a way to support her need to be truly
wanted, to find love and happiness, and to be an actress with viable
parts. The problem of getting older and not being appealing anymore
gnaws at her, as she blames everything around her for her troubles,
hating being stuck in a God forsaken place like Queens, living in this
culturally desolate vacuum, where she can't escape from, not satisfied
that she lives with her sweet adopted Korean daughter in a private house
and seems to be materially provided for. This part of the film is very
emotionally moving and well presented.
What starts to go wrong with the film, is that the direction of the film
tries to do too many things, and even though, those things it attempts
might work on their own terms, they don't fit into the theme of this
film, ruining its rhythm. For instance, it offers us a vibrant look at a
homeless shelter, those who are in it, their routines, their
psychological make-up, and it even brings one of the homeless men to
life, Ray (Jared), giving his character a certain appeal that an entire
film could be based on, but to make the homelessness subplot so much a
part to this film, does not do justice to the more essential story line.
Its pace of story is different than David's odyssey, and therefore fills
the screen with too many useless images that do not enhance this
beautifully shot short film with the impact it needs. Instead, what
could have been done, was to keep the main focus on Oliver and
Madeleine's relationship, this would have added more insight into the
reasons for their demise, and give us more of a hint of how they will
act as the picture concludes. It would have served the film better if it
didn't become so arty and give us so many unimportant shots of lobsters
and Queens. This is a very human and emotional story, a story that is
very well conceived, and almost completely overshadowed by the
director's bad instincts that almost surplant so much of the good
unstincts he incorporated in the film. But, surprisingly enough, even if
the film had an air of phoniness about it, the two character's exquisite
performance stuck with me long after seeing the film. I thought their
relationship was genuine, that the film offers contrasting perceptions
of what is real and what is illusionary, as it bolsters the sense of
misfortune that ultimately prevails for both of them. Ah ! If only...
what a film this could have been.
 Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SUNDAY, by new screenwriters James Lasdun and Jonathan Nossiter
and new director Jonathan Nossiter, is just the sort of film that gives
art house movies a bad name.  Its plot labyrinth hints at an some
undisclosed intellectual reward if you can figure out its message.
But, when you finally understand the plot, most viewers will probably
feel cheated since the journey is not worth the reward.  The writers
have surprisingly little to say, and what is said is quite dated and
unrealistic.
     The story is set against a cold and bleak landscape in the New
York City borough of Queens.  Dirty snow dots the terrain like spots on
an old pair of trousers.  Homeless people are the main inhabitants of
this movie's village.
     As the picture opens, a group of men in a homeless shelter scratch
out a meager existence.  The camera flits from person to person as we
catch snippets of meaningless dialog.  Instead of hearing intelligent
writing, we get to see the inside of a filthy toilet bowl and listen as
our protagonist urinates into it.
     David Suchet, best know as television's most recent and best
Hercule Poirot, plays a homeless man named Oliver.  Although many may
find it disquieting to hear Suchet speak with an American accent, his
accent is quite good, perhaps too good, being so nondescript that he
seems to have been born to two television newscasters.  His performance
in the film can also be argued to be of too high a quality.  With him
associated with the picture, it is harder to write it off, and it makes
one try to find something worthwhile in the story, which is a futile
search.
     One day Oliver meets an actress named Madeleine Vesey, played as
an uninteresting enigma by Lisa Harrow.  Madeleine says that she knows
Oliver and that he is the famous director Matthew Delacorta, whom she
once met in London.  Oliver goes along and soon they are swapping
stories that are mixtures of truth and fantasy.  The twist is that some
of the fantasies will happen later in the movie.  This all sounds more
engrossing than it is, thanks to the writers' inability to fashion a
coherent narrative and create any compelling characters.  To make up
for it, they include random scenes of homeless people wandering the
city streets and even singing opera in the subway.
     Eventually, in one of the least erotic sex scenes in some time,
Oliver and Madeleine join bodies but little else.  Later she reflects,
"I don't really know you except in a Biblical sense."
     Finally -- drum roll -- the film comes to its putative point.
Oliver confesses that he was until recently an IBM company man.  He was
a middle-class man with a wife, and he worked in accounting at IBM for
twenty years before being laid off.  The story would have us believe
that this forced him into a fast spiral downward so that he lost
everything.  He is now penniless, alone, and living in a men's shelter.
Given IBM's generous pension and severance pay, one has to assume a
lot, proof of the disconnect between the screenwriter's world and the
real world.  "You can really fall a long way in this country," is how
Madeleine puts it.  "No work, no hope for work, like every day's
Sunday," explains Oliver.  Apparently he has never seen the classified
section bursting with ads looking for people.  With his middle-class
background and his talents, he should have no trouble finding
employment.
     The message of this sad and depressing little film is that jobs in
America can be quite hard to find -- even for middle-class
professionals.  And if you lose yours, you could be broke and homeless
in no time at all.
     SUNDAY runs 1:33.  It is not rated but would be an R for
profanity, sex, nudity, and mature themes.  The film would be
acceptable for older teenagers.  I do not recommend the picture, and I
give it * 1/2 only for a fine performance by David Suchet in an
otherwise dismal film.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 17, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Fernando Vallejo
 Starring David Suchet, Lisa Harrow, Jared Harris, Larry Pine, Joe Grifasi,
Arnold Barkus and  Jimmy Broadway. Directed by Jonathan Nossiter. Running
Time: 93 minutes. Rated R
 _______________________________________________________________
  A man briskly meanders alongside a Queens railroad station. His appearence
leaves something to be desired: bald, overweight and despite his various
items of clothing to protect from the chilly winter cold, he elicits gestures
that indicate heat loss in some part of his ample body. Without warning, a
woman, in her early fifties- late fourties approaches him. " Are you Matthew
De La Corta " she rabidly asks with a punctuated British accent. " We met at
a party in London " she adds. The woman, Madeleine, assumes the man she's
formulating the question to is the famous English director she deeply
admires. 
  " Yes " replies the man after a heavy pause. " I'm Matthew ". But as we've
witnessed, a prolific film director residing in a homeless shelter, in a
seedy part of the Big Apple is an impossible circumstance. Oliver, his actual
name, plays along with the woman's erroneous presumption, and embarks on a
journey, an odyssey of love, despreation, jealousy, pain and the other pathos
of life, subsequently commencing the gripping "Sunday", winner of the 1997
Sundance film festival, and rightfully so. For here we have one of the most
ardently passionate, visually absorbing and dramatically intriguing films of
the deacde. Director Jonathan Nossiter's creation will likely conclude the
year as 1997's best film.
 As the story intensely marched on, I found myself glued to my seat.
Experiencing "Sunday" produces the same enigmatic jolt similar to reading a
novel by Dostoyevsky, albeit the structure is different, one gets the
pleasurable satisfaction of seeing characters emotionally stripped down right
before our eyes, symbolizing class, structure and frame of mind but also
revealing their most intimate secrets and feelings. I was exhilarated,
permeated into the lives of these two people, a man whose labor injustices (
he was unexpectedly fired form IBM ) have led him to unfold a side of his
nature that has been greatly swayed by the poor environment he inhabits; a
calm, callous gentleman who has discovered a new way of life, previously
unfathomable to him -- and learned how to cope with it. His migration from an
economically stable man to a quietly desolate, home-less living has left him
no alternative but to live life day-by-day, abiding an unwanted existence one
fears of enduring. 
 Madeleine, an amiable, yet dissatisfied aspiring actress who's been
consistently undermined by his buffoonish and oppresive, whose own life
hasn't been exatly the most ideal of them all. From her eyes, we see this
excursion into the desired and the unknown as an escape from reguliarity, a
testament to liberation, a ballad to unadulterated detachment.
 As written by James Lasdun and Jonathan Nossiter, "Sunday" has the ability
to be multi-layered without clogging our senses, whimsical yet not
sentimentalizing and mystifying but not alienating us from the protagonists.
Nossiter's crisp, cool and compelling direction is the sort of work that won
"Shine's" Scott Hicks his first Oscar Nomination. And if that happening
doesn't occur to Nossiter ( and the film ), I will dismiss the March event.
Here is a film shot in an equally meager budget as "Chasing Amy" and "In The
Company of Men", surpassing them both in the optical and scriptwriting
departments. 
    The two leads are nothing short of superb. Suchet, last seen in the
big-budget techno-thriller  "Executive Decision", conveys the sense of loss
from an everyday man with extreme restraint. He doesn't indulge in sorrow,
but he prudently indicates us to symphatize with him as we contemplate his
dead-end and how he functions around it. And it appears Oliver is prone to
live his life as a journeyman, one day at a time, omitting the anguish that
naturally arises. Madeleine, played magnificently by Lisa Harrow, fleshes out
hewr character in an extremely convincing fashion. Madeleine is in better
shape than Oliver, but surprisingly much more desperate and eager about her
fate, representing that, at one juncture, money becomes irrelevant as to who
you are. Harrow allows us to penetrate into her torture wonderfully.
 But "Sunday's" perceptiveness extends to much more than that. We are
immersed into the lives of Oliver's homeless fellows, how the Big Apple
perceives them and we are there to understand what they live through. In one
wonderful scene, we observe a scrawny fella ( who also convives eith Oliver
in the shleter ), with a deep penetrating glare he stares at the legs of a
woman he cannot see. Nossiter focuses the camera solely on her thighs, giving
birth to what this man's sense of lust, the absence of her face acknowledges
how vagrant folks have been fogotten by standard *society*.
 As the credits of "Sunday" rolled, I remained calm in my seat, recollecting
 the situations and glares of the characters, admiring the power, the
impeccable narrative and remembering the visually arresting ( New York's
texture has rarely been captured so well ) sites Nossiter surrenders.
"Sunday" is a true illustration of authentic movie magic.

Author
Scott Renshaw
SUNDAY
(CFP)
Starring:  David Suchet, Lisa Harrow, Larry Pine, Jared Harris.
Screenplay:  Jonathan Nossiter and James Lasdun, from a story by Lasdun.
Producers:  Alix Madigan, Agios Katsikakis, Andrew Fierberg.
Director:  Jonathan Nossiter.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, nudity)
Running Time:  90 minutes.
     If Jonathan Nossiter wanted to make a documentary about the plight of
New York's homeless, he should have just gone ahead and done it.  At least
he wouldn't have constricted one of the most compelling relationships of
the year by subjugating it to a forced sense of social consciousness.
Nossiter's feature debut, the Best Dramatic Film winner at the 1997
Sundance Film Festival, ponders the nature of identity and the buried
desires of lost souls through the story of a chance meeting one Sunday in
Queens.  While walking down the street, actress Madeleine Vesey (Lisa
Harrow) hails a rumpled-looking man (David Suchet) she spies from a
distance.  She addresses him as respected film director Matthew Delacorta,
but we know that "Matthew" woke up that morning in a homeless shelter, and
that the men there know him as Oliver.  Is Oliver really Matthew
Delacorta?  Is Madeleine really who she seems to be?  Did she really
attack her estranged husband (Larry Pine) with a pair of pruning shears?
     Though SUNDAY asks plenty of questions without providing many
answers, ambiguity isn't its problem.  The real hitch is Nossiter's
inability to recognize the strength of his central relationship.  Both
Suchet and Harrow give intense, emotionally rich performances as people
taking a momentary escape from their bleak lives by clothing themselves in
attractive fictions.  Their relationship is complex and affecting, yet
Nossiter seems to believe that he needs a broader canvas than the
connection between two lonely people.  That belief gives rise to frequent
detours to peer into the way other homeless men are spending their Sunday,
as well as unsatisfying encounters with Madeleine's husband?/ex-husband?
and self-conscious cinematic trickery like unfocused point-of-view shots
when Matthew/Oliver removes his glasses.  As a love story, SUNDAY is often
beautiful and haunting.  As a film about a Serious Issue, it looks like a
film-maker's attempt to create something to sermonize about in an
acceptance speech.
KICKED IN THE HEAD
(October)
Starring:  Kevin Corrigan, Linda Fiorentino, Michael Rapaport, James
Woods, Burt Young, Lili Taylor.
Screenplay:  Matthew Harrison and Kevin Corrigan.
Producer:  Barbara DeFina.
Director:  Matthew Harrison.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, drug use)
Running Time:  89 minutes.
     First, let's clarify all the things KICKED IN THE HEAD is _not_.
It's not a whimsical, surreal urban odyssey like AFTER HOURS, despite the
perplexing executive producer participation of Martin Scorsese.  It's not
a good-natured slacker comedy, despite the presence of a hyper-reflective,
ambition-deficient protagonist.  It's not a gritty-yet-pop-culture-savvy
crime dramedy in the Tarantino mold, despite the plethora of shootouts and
one inane discussion about the PLANET OF THE APES movies.  And it's not
worth a moment of your time.
     Here's what KICKED IN THE HEAD _is_:  a gruellingly unfunny 89
minutes spent following an annoying, unsympathetic young man named
Redmond (Kevin Corrigan) on a "spiritual quest" through the Lower East
Side, which apparently consists of 1) using plenty of beer and cocaine, 2)
writing plenty of bad poetry and 3) spending plenty of time with people
who are even more annoying and unsympathetic than himself.  This is
independent film-making at its most pointless and self-indulgent,
mistaking profanity for profundity and incoherence for avant-garde.  When
a cast this talented (Linda Fiorentino, James Woods, Lili Taylor) stumbles
through a script this disastrous, you can only assume that the title of
KICKED IN THE HEAD refers to what happened to every one of them before
signing on.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
SUNDAY (director: Jonathan Nossiter; cast: David Suchet (Oliver/Matthew
Delacorta), Lisa Harrow (Madeleine Vesey), Jared Harris (Ray), Larry
Pine (Ben Vesey), 1997)
One blistery cold winter morning in Queens, New York, a middle-aged man,
Oliver (David), dressed in a rumpled brown suit, who was cut by IBM as
they downsized, leaves a homeless shelter to spend the day walking
around that part of town, knowing that he has to return before
7 p.m. or he gets locked out of the shelter. Suddenly, a woman, probably
in her early fifties, Madeleine (Lisa), with a British accent, shouts
out at him, as he is staring at her, "Aren't you Matthew Delacorta, the
director? I tried out for a part in your film in London." Oliver goes
along with the mistaken identity and goes with this has-been actress,
who can't get respectable parts in films anymore because of her age, to
a Greek diner. They spend the day together, becoming lovers out of a
sheer desire to overcome their loneliness and the dissatisfaction and
fear that life has brought them. This is a one-day fling, where after
the deception becomes unravelled by Madeleine and her anger subsides,
they, at least, find one day of gentleness with each other, before their
life goes on, to who knows what.
This could have been a great picture, it had everything in place to be
great, such as a great idea for a story, two of the finest acting
performances you can ever want, and a very movingly compassionate story
line that is without any need for contrivances, that could touch the
heart of a mature audience.
So what went wrong and what went right with the film ?
What is right about this film, is that the story of the lovers, if we
can really call them that, is meaningful, therefore it stays with you,
its power goes beyond the time you spend watching it unfold on screen. I
thought about them for days afterwards, wondering how easy it is to lose
track of things and find out that all your desires and dreams fell
through and that you are left in a hopeless state, unable to relate to
anyone what is wrong with you. And getting older in a society that is
youth oriented, finding yourself tossed aside as unwanted scrap heap, is
a very difficult psychological thing for one to reconcile; and
obviously, some do it better than others. Oliver had no outside support,
which might be the reason he hit the bottom financially, winding up in a
spot he will have a great deal of trouble adjusting to, as he tries to
find himself, hoping for a way out... And Madeleine, is also stuck,
separated from a husband (Larry Pine) she does not love, who is always
snooping around, trying to win her back with his obsessively manic
behavior, leaving a bad taste in her mouth. Her self-esteem is at a very
low level when we see her: As she can't find a way to support her need
to be truly wanted, to find love and happiness, and to ply her trade as
an actress with viable parts. The problem of getting older and not being
appealing anymore gnaws at her, as she blames everything around her for
her troubles, hating being stuck in a God forsaken place like Queens,
living in this culturally desolate vacuum, where she can't escape from,
not satisfied that she lives with her sweet adopted Korean daughter in a
private house and seems to be materially provided for. This part of the
film is very emotionally moving and well-presented.
What starts to go wrong with the film, is that the direction of the film
tries to do too many things, and even though, those things it attempts
might work on their own terms, they don't fit into the theme of this
film, thereby ruining its rhythm. For instance, it offers us a vibrant
look at a homeless shelter, those who are in it, their routines, their
psychological make-up, and it even brings one of the homeless men to
life, Ray (Jared), giving his character a certain appeal that an entire
film could be based on, but to make the homelessness subplot so much a
part to this film, does not do justice to the more essential story line.
Its pace of story is different than David's odyssey, and therefore fills
the screen with too many useless images that do not enhance this
beautifully shot short film with the impact it needs.
The main focus of the film should have been on Oliver and Madeleine's
relationship, at all times, this would have added more insight into the
reasons for their demise, and give us more of a hint of how they will
act as the picture concludes. It would have served the film better if it
didn't become so arty and give us so many unimportant shots of lobsters
and Queens. This is a very human and emotional story, a story that is
very well conceived, and almost completely overshadowed by the
director's bad instincts that almost surplant so much of the good
unstincts he incorporated in the film. But, surprisingly enough, even if
the film had an air of phoniness about it, the two character's exquisite
performance cannot be denied. Their relationship was genuine despite the
circumstances of their differing situations.
Ultimately, what the film offers, is contrasting perceptions of what is
real and what is illusionary, as it bolsters the sense of what ills
misfortune can bring to one's perception of oneself. But, ah ! If
only... what a film this could have been.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
