Title
Review for Dish, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Max Messier
Another "quirky" Australian comedy is poised to be consumed by the
ignorant American masses.  The Dish (one of the most popular films in
Australia!!) has been hailed as "an inspired human comedy" complete with
quirky characters, a heartwarming story, nostalgic images of past
glories, and enough sheep jokes to make my grandmother chuckle.  The
only thing they forgot to include is a reason to care about this fluff
of a film.
Based on a true story, The Dish chronicles a giant satellite dish
located in a sheep paddock in Parkes, Australia that assisted in
transmitting communications and television signal broadcasts between
Apollo 11 and NASA in the summer of 1969.  The dish is the largest in
the Southern Hemisphere and was the only dish in 1969 powerful enough to
capture the live camera broadcasts from the historic landing on the moon
on July 20, 1969.  Running the dish are four quirky characters: Cliff
Burton (Sam Neill), the dish's supervisor who smokes too much and pines
over his dead wife; Mitch (Kevin Harrington), the nerdy dish technician
in love with the local town girl; Glen (Tom Long), the
"chip-on-his-shoulder" dish operator who spends most of the film
whining; and Al Burnett (Patrick Warburton), the stuffy NASA agent who
wears thick glasses and carries the nurturing tone of Barbara Walters. 
These four knuckleheads, during Apollo's flight, overcome such obstacles
as political ass-kissing, power outages, puppy love, gale force winds,
and ridiculous moment-of-purpose speeches in order to not look like a
bunch of Australian outback hicks working in the middle of a sheep
paddock.
All these things end up being about as entertaining as watching the
grass grow in the sheep paddock.
I'm the first to admit I must have missed the boat on this one. 
Elements of better films -- October Sky, Apollo 13, The Right Stuff --
kept popping into my head as I watched the mind-numbing montages that
consumed way too much celluloid.  Archived footage of NASA engineers
working diligently is intermixed with serene, dopey smiles from the crew
fiddling with the controls of thedish, rockets taking off, archive
footage of crowds circa 1969, and astronauts landing on the moon.  I
felt like I was watching some cheap made-for-TV movie on a old console
set.
The sentimental bookends of Sam Neill wearing bad makeup as an older man
reminiscing about that summer of '69 further compounds the film's
homogenous sap.  There's nothing bad here, it's just innocuous, watery,
and lifeless.
Director: Rob Sitch
Producer: Santo Cilauro, Tom Gleisner, Jane Kennedy, Rob Sitch
Writer: Santo Cilauro, Tom Gleisner, Jane Kennedy, Rob Sitch
Starring: Sam Neill, Patrick Warburton, Kevin Harrington, Tom Long,
Genevieve Mooy, Billie Brown
http://thedishmovie.warnerbros.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Laura Clifford
While the U.S. moon landing was a worldwide event, most people are probably
unaware of Australia's role.  In a sheep field in Parkes sits the largest
radio telescope station in the Southern Hemisphere, a prime location to 
track communications with Apollo 11 and relay television pictures back to
Earth.  Three Australians and one American NASA technician will beat amazing
odds to fulfill their task in "The Dish."
Although names have been changed by screenwriters Rob Sitch (director, "The
Castle") and Tom Gleisner (also producer), "The Dish" is based on actual 
events of 1969.  Recent widower Cliff Buxton (Sam Neill), a professorial,
cardigan wearing, pipe-smoking type, leads the crew at Parkes' radio telescope.
Glenn (Tom Long) is a literal, nerdy mathmetician attempting to work up the
courage to ask local lass Janine out.  Mitch (Kevin Harrington) is Glenn's
tormentor and the most perturbed by the presence of American Al Burnett
(Patrick Warburton, TV's "Seinfeld").  Burnett's been sent in to coordinate
the effort and checks and rechecks everyone's work to ensure a smooth
operation.  There's also a new member of the team, Rudi (Tayler Kane), Janine's
rather simple brother who's been hired as a security guard.
Meanwhile Parkes' mayor, Bob McIntyre (Roy Billing) and his wife May
(Genevieve Mooy) are busy preparing for the arrival of such exotic visitors 
as the American Ambassador (John McMartin) and the Prime Minister (Billie 
Brown) while the exuberant teenage Army volunteer next door attempts to
court their disdainful daughter Marie.
Things don't go smoothly.  The local High School band plays the theme to
"Hawaii Five-O" in place of the U.S. national anthem at the Mayor's 
reception.  Then Parkes loses power and prideful Mitch must face up to the 
fact that his neglect to clear fuel pump lines has cost the telescope its 
backup generator.  Cliff lies to NASA to buy time while the team frantically 
recalculates the equations needed to relocate Apollo 11 - even Al breaks
character and lies to NASA.  After this challenge is overcome, the team find
that due to a problem in California, their station will be the primary
television broadcast dish for the moon landing itself, while winds gust to
levels more than twice what the dish has been engineered to sustain.
The ensemble cast breath humor and life into this story.  Neill's Buxton
makes us empathize with the bittersweet nature of his success in the shadow
of his wife's death.  His serenity has a calming effect on the other, more
tightly strung crew members.  Wharburton shows range with his serious
workaholic who allows the Australians to bring out a sense of fun ('I think
we ate a whole sheep,' he tells Glenn and Mitch after returning from Sunday
dinner at the mayor's).  Tayler Kane provides most of the laughs as the
self-important but imbecilic Rudi announces his presence in various 'sectors'
of the station and believes he's talking to Neil Armstrong over his walkie
talkie.  Roy Billing is a delight as the mayor who retains his hominess while
bidding for political recognition.  McMartin plays the Ambassador as a 
stereotypical good-natured American.
Sitch keeps every element of his film perfectly calibrated.  Cinematographer
Wood is able to capture a shot to relay the laughs, romance or majesty required
by the action.  Editor Jill Bilcock artfully arranges those images,
particularly in a fabulous montage which shows the mechanical workings of
the dish played out against the late 60's instrumental "Classical Gas."
"The Dish" finds a place where gentle charm and humor live side by side with
the awe and grandeur of man's accomplishment.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
The manned landing on the moon on July 20, 1969, was the first, truly
worldwide media event ever. 600 million people watched in awe when they saw
and heard Neil Armstrong say, "That's one small step for man and one giant
leap for mankind." What few of those viewers knew is that a remote
Australian radio telescope team was responsible for those historic images
and their story is told in "The Dish."
Director Rob Stitch, whose earlier comedy, the wonderful and goofy "The
Castle," takes a different trail with this true-life story of the
Australia's contribution in making possible for millions to actually see
one of man's greatest accomplishments. The action takes place in the small
town of Parkes, New South Wales, Australia where sheep are the main
industry and the skyline is filled with the giant radio telescope called,
simply, the Dish. The advent of America's mission to land a man on the moon
brought the power of the Dish to the attention of NASA and an official
request for help was made to the Aussies.
Cliff Buxton (Sam Neill) is the director of the Dish project, but the
worldwide visibility of the moon mission prompts NASA to send their own man
to take over the show. Al Burnett (Patrick Warburton) is a high-powered
NASA tech sent on site to assume command of  the Australian operation and
is resented by the local technicians as a know-it-all interloper. As the
Apollo 11 launch date approaches, tension run high at the dish site.
Personal conflicts seem destined to overwhelm the important space mission.
Then, real disaster strikes!
An unexpected power outage in the town also hits the Dish station. One
problem mounts on the next when the backup generator fails to kick in. It
is discovered that Burton's main opponent, Mitch, forgot to prime the fuel
pump, causing all the computers to lose their programs and, most
importantly, the coordinates of the Apollo 11 spacecraft. The crisis unites
the team, Aussie and Yank alike, and they work hard together to make things
right - after blatantly lying to NASA about their problem. When the time
does comes for the first link with the astronauts, the plucky team of
astronomers overcome monumental challenges to fulfill their own mission to
the world.
As the landing approaches, NASA decides that the Parkes dish will be in the
best position to receive the first televised images from the moon. But,
things get even more complicated when high winds suddenly whip the area and
threaten to stop the Dish and its crew from accomplishing their own special
task for posterity. It's science's chance to be daring and the telescope
team is ready to risk it all to give the people of the earth their first
glimpse of the first moon landing.
Helmer Stitch works with many of the same folk that made "The Castle" such
a charmer. Where the earlier film used comedy to tell a quasi-serious
serious story of a man saving his home from ruthless developers, "The Dish"
takes a real, historical event and tells the story in a straightforward
fashion. What keeps the film from being just a docudrama is the keen wit
and humor that underlies the serious subject. Besides the Dish folk and the
government mucky-mucks that descend upon the station are the oddball
characters that live in the town of Parkes.
The large ensemble cast breaths life into the characters of the town and
dish station, making Parkes the kind of place you'd like to visit some
time. The crew  members of the Dish, led by Neill, are real people with
real hopes and dreams. They are proud of their abilities and talents and
come across as a true team. Roy Billing, as Parkes' mayor Bob McIntyre, is
politically ambitious and sees the big event as his chance at the big
times. He, his wife May (Genevieve Moy) and military academy-attending son
Billy (Carl Snell) lead the sometimes quirky townsfolk in their celebration
of the town's involvement in the great event. Tayler Kane, as the Dish's
goofy security guard Rudi Kellerman, get the most outright guffaws with his
not-quite-with-it perf.
The on-site locations and solid cinematography by Graeme Wood give the film
a majestic look of man's technical capabilities. Amazing detail is given to
the production design, by Carrie Kennedy, capturing the 60's period feel
and look - especially of the now-archaic computer equipment that was
state-of-the-art at the time. We're so used to super fast computers and the
internet, it's nice to get a realistic glimpse of where all our modern
technology came from.
The goofy comedy that is liberally sprinkled throughout the film is
represented in a single scene where the local band is requested to play the
American national anthem for the visiting US ambassador (John McMartin). I
won't spoil the gag, but the tune they play definitely ain't The
Star-Spangled Banner.
The Aussie humor may not hit home ever time for American viewers of "The
Dish," but the sincerity and warmth given to the telling of such a
momentous event will appeal to everyone everywhere. I can't wait to see
what Rob Stitch and company will come up with next. I give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Three senior members of the Australian Department of Radio Physics, 
Cliff Buxton (Sam Neill), Ross 'Mitch' Mitchell (Kevin Harrington) and 
Glenn Latham (Tom Long), and their NASA associate, Al Burnett (Patrick 
Warburton), have a problem on their hands.  Their 210-foot, 1,000-ton 
dish -- a hunk of metal set in the middle of nowhere in an Australian 
sheep paddock near the town of Parkes, Australia -- has lost Apollo 11.  
It's 1969, and it's their responsibility to transmit the television 
signals of the moon walk to the rest of the world.  It's an awesome 
responsibility for these 4 blokes, but in this heartwarming film, these 
guys are up for their mission.  The first of their problems is caused by 
a brief power outage, but in a cute and imaginative illustration of the 
fundamental difference between mathematics and engineering, these slide 
rule jockeys figure a way out of their predicament and locate the "lost" 
spacecraft.
This ground level view of space exploration is actually based on a true 
story.  Rob Sitch, the director and co-writer of the marvelously offbeat 
Australian comedy THE CASTLE, brings together his writing team from THE 
CASTLE (Santo Cilauro, Tom Gleisner and Jane Kennedy), and the surprise 
is that they are as good with THE DISH's light comedy as they were with 
THE CASTLE's over-the-top brand of humor.  Although there are plenty of 
laughs in THE DISH, it is the amazing but simple story of dedication 
that remains in your memory after you leave the theater.
Making extensive use of archival footage and audio clips, the movie does 
a masterful job of transporting us back in time.  Graeme Wood's warm 
cinematography has the saturated colors of a 1960s TV set.  The musical 
choices are an evocative choice of memorable old pop tunes and moving 
dramatic pieces.  In short, this is a movie that really knows how to set 
the mood.
The writers provide rich stories and back stories for a large number of 
characters.  We get to know everyone from the townsfolk to the Prime 
Minister.  The best defined is Cliff Buxton, the pipe smoking "dish 
master," who looks and acts like a revered college professor.  Cliff's 
wife died a year ago, and he still bears the scars of her death.
The residents of Parkes are a hoot.  They wonder what the astronauts do 
when they need to do "number 2."  Can't hold it for 4 days, they figure.  
"I reckon, they oughta try one of these," one guy says, pointing to a 
local "delicacy."  "Block 'em up for a week."  
Most of the time, the dish is a hotbed of inactivity as the scientists 
inside wait for the earth to rotate.  (The dish shares prime tracking 
responsibility with a dish in California, which follows the capsule when 
it is on California's side of the globe.)  But when disaster strikes, 
the magic of science comes through as these engineers work through the 
night with blackboard and chalk as their prime tools.  The wonderment of 
scientific endeavor hasn't been so well displayed since OCTOBER SKY.
When most people think of space command and control, they think of NASA, 
in which thousands of scientists toiled away for years.  What is 
remarkable about this story is that without these four unsung heroes, 
July 20, 1969 would have lost most of its impact.  Without live 
pictures, the moonwalk would not have been nearly so dramatic or 
memorable.  
But this is a sweetly humorous, not a somberly serious, movie.  The 
dish's clueless guard, Rudi Kellerman (Tayler Kane), maintains the 
world's loosest security, but he tries to do his best.  "Halt!  Who goes 
there?" he demands sternly one dark night when he detects a breach of 
the compound area.  "Baaaa," the intruder replies.  
THE DISH runs a fast 1:40. The film is incorrectly rated PG-13 for brief 
strong language.  I listened hard and don't remember any profanities.  
The film would clearly be acceptable for all ages, but younger children 
will likely get fidgety.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Ross Anthony
Back in '69, the USA made good on its promise to put a man on the moon. 
This modest, yet charming, Australian comedy asks, "What's the primary 
purpose of that?" Then answers its own question, "Perhaps a live TV 
signal so that the entire world, all of mankind, could watch." 
Since these signals can't bend around the Earth, the US needs a high 
performance communications dish on the other side of the planet. When 
the moon (and therefore Apollo XI) pass over the land down under, all 
eyes will be on a signal pulled out of the sky by a loveably real team 
of four gentlemen in a field of sheep. The patient dish director, with a 
pipe, is the heart of the team. His emotional and sharp-whitted 
right-hand man has a problem with the no-nonsense black-tied NASA 
American. The young engineer crunches numbers while wobbling weak in the 
knees over the local girl who brings the crew lunch. 
Such involvement in the lunar landing is a scientist's dream. As the 
responsibility heats up the tension, bonds cement across our four leads. 
Meanwhile, the tiny town of Parkes, Australia prepares to be either 
exulted or embarrassed as obstacles mount, "He knows everything about 
Apollo 11 - does he know where it is?" 
The local band of teens tunes up to play America's national anthem for 
the visiting US ambassador, but forgoes their own set up for the Jimi 
Hendrix (teeth to guitar) version. Any disappointment over that 
missed-op fades when the band's brass instead fires up the theme to 
"Hawaii Five-O." 
This sharp-tongued small film is well directed, acted, cast, written, 
conceived and scored. The mayor and his family play perfect on the 
screen. Watching Armstrong take "One giant leap for mankind" on the 
telly in their living room crowded with neighbors will likely choke you 
up as it did I. 
Quote from engineer Neil "Fox" Mason at the Dish's Control Desk in 
Parkes, Australia back in '69: 
"Delivering the pictures to the world was my proudest moment. Apollo XI 
was a once in a lifetime experience and it was great listening to the 
original audio broadcast that is used in the movie. It brought back lots 
of memories. ... I think it's one of mankind's greatest achievements in 
the 20th century." 
The Dish. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG. 
*  Starring Sam Neill, Kevin Harrington, Tom Long, Patrick Warburton, 
Genevieve Mody, Tayler Kane, Billie Brown, Roy Billing. 
*  Directed by Rob Sitch. 
*  Written and Produced by Santo Cilauro, Tom Gleiser, Jane Kennedy and 
Rob Sitch at Warner Bros/Working Dog/Distant Horizon. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     It's not that there are no good movies.  It's just that the chains 
can't be bothered to show them.  Take The Dish, a delightful Australian 
comedy that picked up nine nominations from the Film Critics Circle down 
under, and has been an audience favorite at festivals.  UA opened it 
here last Friday at the De Vargas, with no critics' screening or advance 
notice.  By the time you read this it will most likely be gone.  UA, you 
see, only brought it in for a week to keep a few seats warm until they 
hit us next week with the $100 million video game adaptation Tomb 
Raider, which they plan to spread across three screens, two at the North 
and one at De Vargas.
This is not to knock Tomb Raider, which for all we know may be the 
best thing since the Cooking Channel.  But wouldn't two screens do?  And 
leave us one for The Dish, as a sop to that small but deserving audience 
who would rather see a hilarious and moving little character-based 
comedy than watch Angelina Jolie riding a motorcycle and kicking ass.
But back to The Dish.  The tiny town of Parkes, New South Wales is, 
in 1969, the proud home of the Southern Hemisphere's largest radio 
telescope - a 1,000 ton dish that towers over a sheep paddock.  When 
NASA launches Apollo 11 toward the moon, it needs a backup facility to 
relay the signals from Neil Armstrong's historic "giant leap for 
mankind" when its Goldstone, California dish is on the wrong side of the 
planet.  
Parkes is agog.  The Prime Minister (Bille Brown) is coming.  The 
American Ambassador (John McMartin) is coming.  The Mayor (Roy Billing) 
and his wife Maisie (Genevieve Mooy) are beside themselves with the 
honor, even if their sullen rebel of a teenage daughter Marie (Lenka 
Kripac) is not.  And out at the facility, the small team of scientists 
led by director Cliff Buxton (Sam Neill) and NASA overseer Al Burnett 
(Seinfeld's Patrick Warburton) is nervously preparing for its moment of 
history. 
Director and co-writer Rob Sitch (The Castle) weaves the charm of a 
comedy of quirky small-town characters with the excitement of one of 
history's most world-uniting events, with 60 million people glued to 
their black-and-white televisions ("And do the people in India get to 
watch it?" sniffs Marie.)  Neill anchors the movie with his tweedy, 
almost unflappable father-figure of a project director, and the rest of 
the cast is wonderful too.  The movie is filled with little human 
things, some of them very real and understated, some of them played for 
character zaniness, but Sitch never crosses the line to comic 
condescension.  Much of it is funny, some of it is thrilling, some of it 
brings a tear to the eye.  It does have a few downside moments, such as 
having to listen to Oliver's "Good Morning, Starshine" warbling on the 
sound track, but it's a small price to pay.
If UA doesn't have the sense to hold The Dish over, keep an eye on 
The Screen over at CSF, where they'll be trying to get hold of it in the 
next few weeks. 
The Screen, by the way, is going this week with a festival of Toto 
movies.  No, not the little dog from Kansas, but the phenomenally 
popular Italian screen clown who at the height of his popularity in the 
'50s and '60s was regarded as one of cinema's greatest comics, on a par 
with Chaplin and Keaton.  Toto was born in 1898 to impoverished 
gentility (he was a Neapolitan baron) but became a true aristocrat with 
his ascension to movie stardom after a successful career in Italian 
music hall, where he honed his comic persona, which  was Chaplinesque, 
but also utterly and distinctively his own. 
He was the titular character in a whole series of Toto comedies, a 
number of which will be at The Screen's festival and all of which are 
well worth seeing.  But don't miss Big Deal on Madonna Street, in which 
Toto joins a cast headed by Vittorio Gassman and Marcello Mastroianni to 
pull off a jewel heist in Rome.  This classic 1958 comedy, directed by 
Mario Monicelli, has been unsuccessfully copied a couple of times in 
American cinema, most recently by Woody Allen as Small Time Crooks.  The 
Screen will be showing it at 7:15 on Saturday and Monday evenings, with 
a 3:00 matinee on Sunday afternoon. 
