Title
Review for She's Out of Control (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
LARRY MCGILLICUDDY
The 1999 teen comedy She's All That was about a girl with no social 
life suddenly transformed into a potential prom queen. A full decade 
earlier, She's Out of Control was released. It was about a girl who, 
in the midst of puberty, is transformed into a beauty. The way both 
films approach this idea differs considerably, and is just one of 
many factors separating the success of both.
Tony Danza stars as a single father who goes away for vacation and 
when he comes back, his daughter has blossomed into womanhood, thanks 
to the help of his Henry Higgins inspired girlfriend played by 
Catherine Hicks. Danza is not pleased to see this, and spends the 
rest of the movie in screwball situations trying to prevent his 
daughter from having a social life of her own.
In She's All That, it wasn't entirely about her looks. The main idea 
was that she finally started to come out of her shell. Her father 
encourages her to have a social life. The fact that she looks more 
attractive doesn't even come into play with him. There is something 
really disturbing about the Danza's characters attitude about his 
daughter. It seems to be a innate fear of sexuality on behalf of the 
filmmakers. Or maybe they just thought it would be funny. In the case 
of the latter, it's even worse.
I'm insulted that these filmmakers would think Tony Danza in a 
neckbrace is funny. That very thought is as repulsive to me as 
anything in The Doom Generation. There is not one scene in this film 
that even approaches humor. It's not as if there are missed 
opportunities, the film can't even set up situations where a laugh 
would be possible. Danza's behavior makes him into a complete jerk, 
so the audience could barely care about his efforts. And the daughter 
is only seen from Danza's perspective, so there is no way we can warm 
up to her.
Basically what we are left with is Catherine Hicks almost approaching 
charm. That would account for the half star. Other than that, it's 
just watching an old guy ogling his younger daughter and trying to 
prevent any boys from getting near her. Todd Solondz should've 
directed this. His approach would've been much more interesting. As 
it is, She's Out of Control is the worst film of 1989, hands down.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm
