Title
Review for Six Ways to Sunday (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael Dequina
_Six_Ways_to_Sunday_ (R) no stars (out of ****)
What is it with independent films with days of the week in their title?
Last fall brought the awful _Thursday_, a pointless, plotless, blood-soaked
exercise in nihilism.  I thought it couldn't possibly get any worse than
that detestable film, here comes _Six_Ways_to_Sunday_, which would more
aptly be called _97_Minutes_to_Nowhere_.
_Six_Ways_ exemplifies, all too painfully, the traditional criticisms of
independent film: pretentiousness, self-indulgent artiness, graphic
violence, a would-be "hip" sense of humor, a touch of "taboo" subject
matter.  The flat-out awfulness shouldn't be a surprise once one discovers
what director/co-scripter (with Marc Gerald) Adam Bernstein's only other
credit is: arguably the worst big screen _Saturday_Night_Live_ of all time,
_It's_Pat_.  _Six_Ways_ follows Ohio teen Harry Odum (Norman Reedus), whose
progress up the mafia ranks and budding romance with a mafia maid (Elina
Lowensohn) causes some strain with his beloved, overprotective--to say the
very least--mother (Deborah Harry).
As with any film, _Six_Ways_'s effectiveness--or, rather, lack
thereof--lies in the execution, and while the basic story (loosely based on
Charles Perry's novel _Portrait_of_a_Young_Man_Drowning_) may not sound so
bad, it's everything else that makes the film as unwatchable as it is.  The
dialogue is often laughable in the wrong way; the direction a study in how
_not_ to make a film (all  flashy cuts and "surreal" visual narrative
devices; jarringly abrupt shifts in tone); and the acting is even worse.
Reedus is a former model for Prada, and his sub-amateurish performance
shows it; Harry and Lowensohn duke it out for worst performance when their
characters square off over Harry's affections.  The only person, in front
of or behind the camera, who makes any kind of positive impression is
Adrien Brody, who plays Harry's wannabe gangsta best friend.  That it is
also one of the lesser performances I've seen Brody give says a lot about
just how insufferable this worst-of-'99 shoo-in is.  (opens March 5)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Stratosphere Entertainment
 Director:  Adam Bernstein
 Writer:  Adam Bernstein, Marc Gerald, from the novel by
Charles Perry "Portrait of a Young Man Drowning"
 Cast: Norman Reedus, Deborah Harry, Elina Lowensohn,
Isaac Hayes, Adrien Brody
   The term "Jewish gangster" rolls off the tongue like an
oxymoron--notwithstanding Louis Lepke, Meyer Lansky, and
Bugsy Siegel.  Insider trading schemes, OK. But hit-men?  In
his second turn at directing, Adam Bernstein sets us straight
about crooked men who happen to be Jewish, members of
an organized crime family who run a small town.  The movie
is based on a 1962 novel by jazz musician Charles Perry
about Depression era gangsters in Brooklyn, but writers
Adam Bernstein and Marc Gerald update the action to the
present and set the story in the stagnant town of
Youngstown, Ohio. 
   And what a story it is!  While the noirish novel is
consistently downbeat, Bernstein and Gerald have injected
considerable humor, making "Six Ways" cinematic and
contributing mightily to our enjoyment of the tale.  This film is
offbeat in the best sense of the word; full of surprises,
containing mythic references particularly to the legend of
Oedipus, and presenting a complex treatment of its principal
character whose loyalty is sought by two women and by an
amusing, albeit murderous, gang of criminals. 
   The focus of the story is a teenager, Harry Odum (Norman
Reedus), an eighteen-year-old whose mother, Kate (Deborah
Harry), is unable to support either herself or the boy.  Harry,
whose work background consists exclusively of odd jobs such
as hamburger-flipper, turns to crime for lack of other options. 
He learns the hard way that crime does not pay and seeks
redemption through love.
   Here is a plot that could have been structured like scores,
nay hundreds of coming-of-age dramas and comedies, but
writer-director Bernstein knows how to build up more offbeat
scenarios.  He catches us off guard with a number of
surprises, and assembles his scenes in an expressionistic
manner common the plays that came out of France and
Germany during the early part of this century--through a
progression of sharply edited episodes.  Bernstein reaches
beyond the surface of his characters, two in particular, to
show how their attitudes and actions are preventing them
form achieving happiness and how they transform themselves
to get in touch with their generous and kind spirit beneath.
   What is most startling about the picture is the Oedipal
relation between the 18-year-old Harry Odum (Norman
Reedus) and his manipulative and love-starved mother, Kate
(Deborah Harry).  Kate, whose husband had long ago
abandoned her, now shares dilapidated quarters in
Youngstown, Ohio with Harry, seeking a wide range of control
over his life.  Like The Creator, she even takes on the power
of letting there by light, or not, and tends to switch off the
electricity when she suspects Harry, still a virgin, is reading a
book about human sexuality.  What is even more astonishing
is that he gives him his baths, looking the other way when he
briefly soaps his privates, and then gently massages his body
with a towel to dry him off.  We need not wonder for long why
he appears to be asexual--to tell a woman who has fallen for
him that he feels nothing when in the presence of either
women or men.
   Seeking a sense of belonging, he becomes the only Gentile
in the local Jewish mafia by severely beating a peep-show
manager who is not paying off his loan.  Together with young
Arnie Finklestein (Adrien Brody), he is given assignments by
gangster Abie Pinkwise (Peter Appel) and big boss Louis
Varga (Jerry Adler)--who introduce him to gefilte fish,
convincing him that only Gentiles avoid spending money
lavishly, and that only Christian men would wear powder-blue
suits when stepping out.  Most of the tough characters he
connects with have soft spots, with Abie in particularly
holding his uncle Max (Vincent Pastore) in the highest regard. 
When Harry develops a soft spot in his heart for Louis
Varga's crippled maid, Iris (Elina Lowensohn), the lines are
drawn with Iris and Harry's mother competing for the poor
teenager's exclusive affection.
   The movie, which gets its name from police officer Bill
Bennett's (Isaac Hayes) admission that Harry smashed his
nose six ways to Sunday, is packed with wit, charm,
sentiment, and slapstick, and highlights the contrast between
the lavish neo-Raphaelite mansion run by the mob leader and
the battered wooden working-class home of the teenager and
his mother.  It spotlights as well the struggle Harry faces
when he has to choose between the seductive charms of his
mother, formerly a lounge singer who has an unnatural
interest in her boy, and the more bashful but insistent
attention of young Iris.  Norman Reedus comes across like a
young Kenneth Branagh whose mixed feelings about
everyone else in the movie are a source of continual
amusement.  Much is made of a mysterious and dapper
character named Madden (Holter Graham) who is a frequent
visitor to Harry's little world and who provides the catalyst for
a good deal of his actions.  
  The cleverly photographed and sharply edited scenarios of
this inventive story and its crackerjack ensemble
performances succeed in accenting its offbeat qualities: we
don't wonder that director Bernstein labels the genre "darkly
comedic/Oedipal, Jewish gangster/thriller.
