Title
Review for Jailhouse Rock (1957)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Jailhouse Rock" is Elvis Presley's best film.
He plays an ex-convict struggling to becoming a star
as a pop singer.  His business partner and would-be
girlfriend is Judy Tyler.  Presley's character 
achieves fame and fortune as a recording artist
and movie star, but has he surrendered his humanity
and values in a greedy and decadent lifestyle?
Elvis Presley had much in common with Frank Sinatra and
Bing Crosby.  They all were fabulously successful American
singers whose fame and charisma also extended to successful
film careers.  But while Sinatra and Crosby would eventually
win Academy Awards, Presley was not as fortunate.  Some of
his early films were passable, but as Hollywood moguls tried
to mine his popularity, the movies came quicker and the
scripts grew worse and worse.  By the time his studio contracts
had been fulfilled, his career had nearly been destroyed.
It is no wonder that most Presley films are terrible.
Because there was a soundtrack album to sell, the film had
to be laden with songs.  This meant that Presley had to portray
a singer, and the plot would have to be stripped.  He had to 
have someone to sing to, which meant one or more pretty girls.
Add fancy cars and a tropical locale, and what else would be
needed to bring the teenagers to the drive-in?
"Jailhouse Rock" was Presley's third film, made at the peak
of his career, and before the formula had taken over.
Yes, he plays a singer, but the Lieber-Stoller songs are
top-notch.  He also has a surly attitude, and the party
atmosphere of later films is missing.  Best of all, the script
is terrific, only occasional stumbling to underscore his
platonic romance with Judy Tyler or to moralize over his 
loss of values.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dragan Antulov
The author of this review must admit that he was never
particularly big fan of Elvis Presley. The undisputed
musical talent of King and his equally undisputed importance
in the history of modern culture have very little to do with
that. I tend to judge Presley mostly on his movie
appearances, which is most unfair, since his record in that
field, unlike music, wasn't very inspiring, to say the
least. Even JAILHOUSE ROCK, directed in 1957 by Richard
Thorpe and often cited as Presley's best film, could hardly
improve such unflattering impression,
The plot begins when Vince Everett (played by Elvis
Presley), young manual labourer who suffers from temper
tantrums. One of occasions led to the bar brawl that
resulted with his prison sentence for manslaughter. In
prison Everett is put in the same cell with Hank Houghton
(played by Mickey Shoughnessy), former country singer that
couldn't fail noticing the musical talent in his young
cellmate. Hoping for a lucrative partnership, Hank teaches
Everett few tricks that would make him a pop star after
release. Once free, Everett, however, has quite different
ideas and pursues his own career, which practically goes
nowhere until he meets recording industry employee Peggy Van
Alden (played by Judy Tyler). Guided both by the
appreciation of Everett's talent and her feelings towards
the young man, Peggy decides to become his partner and later
witnesses his meteoric rise to fame and fortune. However,
their relationship remains strictly platonic and later
deteriorates when Everett gets seduced by the irresponsible
and decadent lifestyle of a pop star.
The only reason to watch JAILHOUSE ROCK lies in the musical
numbers featuring Presley. However, in order to see them, a
viewer should endure truly horrible script by Guy Trosper
and mediocre direction by Richard Thorpe. Film lacks
coherent plot and looks like a various unfinished films
hastily patched into one. The acting is good, though.
Character actor Mickey Shaughnessy is more than passable in
rather complex role of Everett's mentor and young Judy
Tyler, tragically deceased after the shooting of the film,
is quite charming as Everett's romantic interest. Elvis
Presley here plays surly, arrogant character, closer to his
original image of 1950s youth rebel than his later, more
mainstream incarnations. Quality of his acting is merely
passable but quite adequate for the job, although Presley
looks like someone who could do much better with proper
script. Unfortunately, such better chances never
materialised in his lifetime and watching of this film might
be quite depressive experience for those aware of King's
unfulfilled potentials.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
