Title
Review for Groundhog Day (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     On May 5, 1961, TWILIGHT ZONE ran an episode called "Shadow Play,"
written by Charles Beaumont and directed by John Brahm.  Dennis Weaver
played Adam Grant, a man sentenced to death.  It is the day Grant is to be
executed for murder.  He claims to have a sort of deja vu and can even tell
people verifiable facts he seems to have no way of knowing.  He claims that
he is living the same day over and over.  Eventually he is executed only to
wake up in his cell with the same day starting over.  This idea gets re-used
and explored in detail in GROUNDHOG DAY.
     Phil (played by Bill Murray) is a television weatherman with a funny
on-screen persona.  Of the television he is bitter and cynical and does just
about whatever he can to make himself difficult to deal with.  February 2,
Groundhog Day, finds Phil in Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania, filming the famous
Groundhog Day festivities.  Phil is less than thrilled and is making life
miserable for his producer Rita (played by Andie McDowell) and cameraman
Larry (played by Chris Elliot).  Next morning he wakes up and it is still
Groundhog Day.  Phil is living the same day over and over and making the
same mistakes.  The day becomes like a video game that he plays over and
over, practicing to get past all the hazards of the day.  He uses one
strategy after another trying to find how to get the most out of the day and
how best to benefit from having gone through the day use his experiences of
having already been through the day.
     The script (by Danny Rubin and director Harold Ramis) starts taking on
a higher meaning of just what the purpose of life.  Phil can play his day
for thrills, he can play it to gain self-enrichment, he can play it to get
sex, he can be an altruist, or he can romance Rita.  The latter is
questionable since, first, Rita is a bit sappy herself, but also it is a bit
of a challenge since after Phil has been so nasty way back on February 1, it
seems unlikely that one day would be enough for re-educating Rita.  The
film's conclusion about what the best of all possible Groundhog Days is is a
bit of a  cheat, since it depends very heavily on previous knowledge--life
is not really like a video game--and it is somewhat reminiscent of IT'S A
WONDERFUL LIFE.
     Ramis has an intriguing premise taken just about as far as it could be
taken.  It is pleasant but not particularly deep.  I rate it a high +1 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
MILLER, JIMMY A.
     Basic premise:  Murray is a weatherman who is a less-than-wonderful
human being.  He, Macdowell and Elliot travel to Punxatawney, PA, for
the annual Groundhog Day celebration.  They are unable to leave because
of a blizzard, and Murray awakes the next morning only to discover that
it's *not* the next morning, but Groundhog Day all over again, with the
people around him going through almost the exact same motions they went
through before, seemingly unaware of what has happened to him.
     As Phil continues to relive Groundhog Day, he learns to use his
foreknowledge to his own advantage, allowing him to seduce women, rob
banks, and generally have a good time, without having to worry about the
consequences of his actions.  Gradually this palls on Phil, and he
begins working on Andie Macdowell's Rita.  Rita is most of the things
Phil is not: gentle, kind, and still with playful outlook on life.  Phil
begins a painstaking effort to seduce her, but fails.  
     At this point Phil begins to despair and attempt to kill himself,
only to awaken after each attempt at 6:00 AM, February 2, to the strains
of "I Got You Babe."  Here the film slows down for a moment to really
let us begin to feel Phil's plight, and Murray does an amazing job as a
man who begins to wonder the point of it all, and then seeks to use his
bizarre opportunity to become a better person.
     This is a wonderful charmer of a movie.  It is not Bill Murray
comedy in the tradition of STRIPES or GHOSTBUSTERS, despite its
decidedly off-kilter premise.  Murray's Phil is a variation on the
typical character we have come to associate with him, the wisecracker
who seems to know just a bit more than everyone else, but this time he's
a wisecracker gone sour, though not so over the top evil as we saw him
in SCROOGED.  At first his irritability seems a bit forced, but this
passes soon enough, and Murray delivers wonderfully.
     MacDowell does fine as Rita, making a believable character out of
her even though we only get to see parts of the whole person.  She
creates the gentle soul both we and Murray somehow come to realize holds
the key to his escape.
     I did think Chris Elliot was somewhat wasted as the cameraman.  He
just didn't have much to do, and I think almost anyone could have played
the part.  But this is a minor quibble.  All the supporting cast was
fun, the nerdy insurance salesman in particular.
     But this movie belongs to Murray, who is able to really utilize his
comic skills and keep things from becoming sappy.  The relationship
between he and Macdowell is credible, and Murray's slow transformation
from self-centered jerk is well done.  
     The direction and pacing are excellent.  Given the premise, there
is a tremendous danger of over-repetition, but this is avoided.  We
see only enough to reset the scene, and it is exploited for its comic
and dramatic purposes brilliantly.  Minor characters move in and out of
the action in a believable fashion, helping maintain the sense that
we're in a small town, enhancing the familiarity Phil must feel as he
moves about a place where he eventually knows *to the minute* when
things are going to happen.
     GROUNDHOG DAY is a romantic comedy with, I think, something to say
about people as well.  It is intelligent, charming, and well worth the
full price.  Go see it, again and again and again.

Author
Dragan Antulov
At first glance, GROUNDHOG DAY looks like a film that
epitomises the worst in today's Hollywood - the lack of
originality and total reliance on "high concept". The plot
is "borrowed" from a short SF story by Richard A. Lupoff,
then turned into TWILIGHT ZONE episodes, short film by
Jonathan Heap and, finally, passable but forgettable TV
thriller by Jack Sholder. But this 1993 comedy, directed by
 noted SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE comedian Harold Ramis is
actually something very rare in today's Hollywood - a film
that is in the same time very funny and very humane,
thought-provoking yet entertaining. Because of that the
authors of GROUNDHOG DAY should be forgiven for their use of
not so original idea.
The film begins in Pittsburgh television station, where
weatherman Phil Conners (played by Bill Murray) receives yet
another routine and boring assignment - he must go to small
town of Punxsutawney and cover Groundhog Day, the
traditional event where a local mascot, groundhog named
Phil, indicates the length of remaining winter day. Conners,
self- centred misanthropic, is so disgusted with the task
that he decides to make life miserable for his producer Rita
(played by Andie MacDowell) and cameraman Larry (Chris
Elliott). To make things even worse for him, the unexpected
blizzard grounds the crew in the small town. When he wakes
up the next day, he suddenly realises that the people are
saying the same lines, using the same gestures and that the
same events are happening all over again. He is stuck in the
time loop and he is forced to relive Groundhog Day again and
again for, its seems, all eternity. Stuck in something
resembling personal hell, Phil must find a way to adapt to
the new situation.
Supernatural comedy as a sub-genre more often than not
produced weak, mediocre and formulaic movies in modern
Hollywood. Humour in such comedies was lame, storylines
cliched and predictable, and it usually degenerated into
self-serving special effects bonanza. But, it wasn't the
case with the GROUNDHOG DAY, mostly because the movie had
employed the talents already experienced in such areas. The
director and co-screenwriter Harold Ramis had already proved
himself by writing a screenplay for GHOSTBUSTERS, a similar,
although more spectacular product of that genre. For this
film, he was joined by Danny Rubin and the result was very
intelligent and tight script. The best thing two of them did
was to get rid of any scientific, para-scientific or magical
explanations for the personal time warp - which would
probably look corny and unconvincing. Instead they
concentrated on the practical matters and explored the ways
an average man like Phil would cope with the situation. And
it was done superbly. Movie that covers the same situations
and dialogues over and over again was in great danger of
being repetitive. But the script prevented this - after
being introduced to the main storyline in first, "normal",
segment, we see how even the smallest of details could
branch a whole new and interesting chain of events.
What makes this film especially funny is the great talent of
Bill Murray, one of the best comedians in modern Hollywood.
The entire movie rested on his shoulders. While all other
actors had rather simple roles to repeat, his character was
the only one being the aware the utter repetitiveness of his
existence and thus the only one who was changing through the
entire movie. It was really fine to see the different ways
he reacted to the situation - anger, disbelief, despair and
final acceptance - all that through the subtle gestures or
one-liners. What makes his character even more humane and
likeable, despite his more than obvious flaws, is a fact
that the he is faced with perpetual dilemmas and that he
takes different courses of actions, many of them the same
ones some of us would take in his place. And, finally, we
see him change and change for the better, which, of course
would reward both him and the audience with a happy ending.
The other actors and their performances were, as someone
should expect, shadowed by Bill Murray's role and reduced to
bit parts. Andie MacDowell as his attractive producer Rita
was, of course, good in her role, but the chemistry between
Murray and her wasn't particularly engaging, making their
romantic subplot somewhat too formulaic. And the editing in
this very well directed film should have been better -
Phil's mood change from manic to suicidal seems a little bit
too sudden. But, despite those minor flaws, GROUNDHOG DAY
deserved its reputation of a surprisingly good film,
reputation that gives it a serious potential to be regarded
as 1990s classic by future filmophiles.
Review written on September 19th 1999

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Bill Murray, Andie MacDowell, Chris Elliot
Director:  Harold Ramis
Producers:  Trevor Albert and Harold Ramis
Screenplay:  Danny Rubin and Harold Ramis
Music:  George Fenton
Released by Columbia Pictures
     Pittsburgh weatherman Phil Connors (Bill Murray) is having one of
the most unpleasant days of his life on February 2 in Punxsutawney, 
Pennsylvania where he's covering the Groundhog Day celebration.  It's
one of those days when Murphy's Law seems to be in full effect.  But
Phil soon discovers that things are worse than they first seemed,
because for him, and him alone, time has stopped.  Now, he's trapped in
a bizarre time loop where he's destined to re-live Groundhog Day over
and over again, with no apparent hope of reprieve or release, and no
way of telling anyone else since he's the only one that realizes what's
happening.
     It's deja vu gone mad.  This is one of the most fresh and original
comedies to grace the screen in a long time.  After starting with an
interesting premise, the film executes the story in a manner worthy of
the idea.  From beginning to end, GROUNDHOG DAY is enjoyable.  Written
with an intelligent viewer in mind, the picture will likely charm even
the most cynical movie-goer.
     With as much repetition as there is in GROUNDHOG DAY, it would be
easy for the film to get bogged down.  Solid directing, combined with 
judicious editing, eliminate the problem.  The only time we see a scene 
repeated is when there's something new (and often amusing) added to it,
and even then we are re-shown little more than what's necessary for the
effect.  The story always moves forward, often in unexpected
directions.
     The comedy is of the highest caliber.  Absent are the inane sight
gags and puns of films like HEXED and LOADED WEAPON 1.  Instead,
GROUNDHOG DAY finds its humor in situations and characters.  It makes
use of Bill Murray's prodigious talent as a comic and allows him to
play off of the more serious Andie MacDowell.  While the chemistry
between them isn't smouldering, they work well together.  Their
characters' romance is credible because it's low-key.
     GROUNDHOG DAY isn't a science fiction or fantasy film, so it's not 
interested in answering the technical questions of how the time loop
came about, or what might happen if Murray's character Phil stayed up
all night.  Instead, it presents the situation to the audience, then
does as much as it can with it.  Suspension of disbelief is necessary,
but not difficult to achieve.  This may not be the perfect way to set
up a movie but, at least in this case, it works.
     With all of the formula-driven comedies available today, many of
which are unfunny or only occasionally amusing, it's a joy to find
something as unique as GROUNDHOG DAY.  This movie has all the qualities
necessary to a good comedy: likable characters, charismatic
performers, a strong premise that is capably executed, and a lot of
laughs.  This might be one to see over and over and over....
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
David Wilcock
Running Time: 103 minutes (1 hour 43 minutes)
Starring Bill Murray, Andie MacDowell and Chris Elliot
Directed By Harold Ramis
In this good natured, pleasent and easy going comedy, Bill Murray
(Ghostbusters, 1984) plays grumpy weatherman Phil Conners,
who, every year, is sent to Punxsutawney, P.A, to report on
Groundhog Day. The Groundhog Day ceremony involves a
groundhog being lifted out of a box, and if he dosen't see a
shadow, it will be an early spring. Phil really hates the ceremony,
and not even his producer Rita (MacDowell) can change his mind.
However, fate has a cruel trick for Phil, and he starts re-living
Groundhog day over, and over, and over, until he gradually likes it,
and Rita falls in love with him.
Groundhog Day is a well written, totatly unoffensive and funny
comedy. The screenwriters, director Ramis and Danny Rubin,
have written a funny, warm, but never overly senitmental comedy.
Although the idea of a day repeating over and over may sound
tedious, there are enough good jokes to hold the audiences
attention throughout the whole film. Ramis's direction also helps,
and although he dosen't try any flash director tricks, the film is
directed well enough, and the jokes are set up well. And the
editing is also good, especially when it shows one part of the day
over, and over again, such as when Phil tries to have the perfect
night with Rita. 
The performances are also excellent. Bill Murray is great fun, and
his transistion from cynical to happy is smooth, and delivers his
lines in his usual smary style. Andie MacDowell is good as Rita,
although sometimes she is just a little bit too sweet in some parts of
the film. There is chemistry between the two leads, thankfully,
otherwise the whole film would probably fall part. Chris Elliot, as
the cameraman Larry, is also funny, although you have to like his
goofy style, otherwise you are really going to hate him throughout
this film, and it will lower your enjoyment of the film overall. The
supporting cast aren't bad either, with Stephen Tobolowsky
hillarous as Phils old school mate Ned Ryanson, and even director
Ramis popping up as a neurologist. In fact, there is not one dud
performance in this film, and even the Groundhog gets a funny
scene involving a car chase.
Overall, there is really nothing wrong with Groundhog Day at all.
It almost seems perfect. However, the film can get a bit soppy
sometimes, and some people may get irritated by the day repeating
over, and over, and over, and over. Also, there's not much of an
music score, and the music there is is pretty bad. But these
criticisms hardly affect the audiences enjoyment at all. Overall,
then, Groundhog Day is a funny, smart, and also has some room
in there for some heart. An excellent comedy.
OVERALL RATING= **** out of ***** (4 out of 5)

Author
Lon Ponschock
     The premise of GROUNDHOG DAY is well-known by now: Bill Murray
finds himself living over the same day many times and the film recounts
how he takes what he knows from the previous day (the *same* day) and
applies it anew.
     As the film unfolds, we are drawn into this world of the same day
beginning with the same tune on the radio and the same remarks from the
radio personnel, the same photo shoot of the Groundhog Day celebration,
and the same snowstorm etc.  We follow Murray along as he learns more
and more about his surroundings and of the events of that particular
day.  I will not provide any spoilers for the various comic routines to
which  this premise gives rise for those who wish to see the film.
     I will only ask a question:  What would you do if you could live
the same day over and over and learn from each experience?
     GROUNDHOG DAY is a romance.  Bill Murray's object of affection is
his female producer played by Andie McDowell.  I'm not giving anything
away by saying that it has a 'happy' ending.  I didn't run into anyone
with any grumbles about the film when I saw it or in reviews or anywhere
else about this fact.
     Before I get to that, let me say that I always try to look for what
a particular work is saying about the culture ... how it gets made and
why.  What need does it fulfill?  And I came up with this:
     GROUNDHOG DAY is a fantasy fulfillment (for men in this case) of
the need to *control* and *manipulate*.  The day is played over until
the *manipulation* achieves its desired goal, then the day is over and
life goes on.
     What has come out from the professional press and the Usenet
reviewers has been nearly uniform: The director Harold Ramis is
applauded for his ability to shoot the same day again and again without
allowing the repetition to become boring.  He provides enough detail on
each ensuing day to hold the audience's interest.
   But how would *you* like to be Andie McDowell in this scenario?  All
of her buttons get pushed until she responds in *exactly* the right way
and our story ends.
     I want to beg off of being some kind of Women's Rights apostle
here.  But try the shoe on for size and see how you would feel if you
were put through the same drill.  If you *knew* that you were being
manipulated, how would you react?  Well, I suppose there could be a
sequel called GROUNDHOG DAY II: THE WRATH OF ANDIE, but somehow I just
don't see that happening.
     GROUNDHOG DAY is cleverly crafted and nicely edited and contains
many good performances.  If you are a fan of the Sunday night comedy
shows on the Fox television network, you will see quite few familiar
faces including Ken Hudson Campbell of "Herman's Head," Chris Elliot and
Brian Doyle Murray from "Get A Life," and an actress whose name I can't
remember from the short-lived "Woops!"
     As usual, if I am caught or killed, the Secretary will disavow any
knowledge of my actions.  :-)
      Your comments directed to rec.arts.movies or mail are welcome.
