Title
Review for If Lucy Fell (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Michael Redman
Sarah Jessica Parker and Eric Schaeffer renew a suicide pact to jump off the
Brooklyn Bridge together if they are not involved in fulfilling relationships
by the time she turns 30. There's a heavy deadline because her birthday is in
a month so they are both out there looking for the loves of their lives and
hot to find them in four weeks.
If you can accept the premise, and that's a difficult task, there are a few
decent scenes and a couple of great lines. Besides swallowing the outrageous
concept ("We believe in reincarnation, so if we're not happy and in love in a
few days, we'll kill ourselves."), you have to immerse yourself in the
Generation X world (although at 30, the characters must be elder
statespersons) where serious conversations are about spit and "Whatever" is a
complete sentence.
There's not much interesting about the two main characters. They both seem
superficial and the actors don't go very far towards livening them up. The two
objects of their affections -- an inarticulate artist and the beautiful woman
next door (Elle Macpherson) -- are infinitely more faceted.
The theme of the film, people stuck in the same ole same ole get on with
their lives when they set a deadline, holds some universal appeal. Parker
moves on a career plan, dumps her sorta boyfriend and starts dating. Schaeffer
has an art show of his paintings and finally approaches the woman he has
admired for year.
Unfortunately the film is filled with cliches (two long-time friends go
looking for love, guess who they end up with) and long periods of time where
nothing happens. Some nice music though.
[This appeared in the 3/14/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Christopher Null
     1996 is shaping up to be a great year for comedy.  IF LUCY FELL is
the fifth romantic comedy I've reviewed this year, and it is the fourth to
get my **** rating (no other genres have reached this high in 1996,
according to my archives).
     So, am I getting soft for romances?  Maybe so, but the quality of
American comedy writing really seems to be on the rise.  IF LUCY FELL was
written, directed, and stars one of our most promising up-and-comers, Eric
Schaeffer, whose docu-comedic first (independent) film, MY LIFE'S IN
TURNAROUND, was a sleeper hit in 1994.
     IF LUCY FELL brings Schaeffer into the world of big budget Hollywood,
where he has adapted quite well, bringing another fresh and extremely
funny comedy to the screen.  The picture focuses on two long-time friends
and roommates, Joe (Schaeffer) and Lucy (Sarah Jessica Parker), who vow to
commit suicide on Lucy's 30th birthday if they haven't found true
happiness (or some semblance thereof) by then.  Turns out that's a month
away.
     Even worse is the fact that Joe and Lucy seem to be completely
dysfunctional.  Joe is a wired and slightly deranged artist, obsessed with
the neighbor in the window across the alley (Elle Macpherson, and I'd be
obsessed too).  Lucy is a therapist who probably needs the help a little
more herself.
     Schaeffer's writing provides nonstop laughs for a solid 50 minutes
before the film settles onto the steadier track of how IF LUCY FELL
inevitably ends, but those are a fun 50 minutes, enhanced by some great
supporting characters and subplots.  Schaeffer himself is the hands-down
show stealer, with his character so well-written as to be readily
identifiable to every guy who's ever had an intense longing for a woman
combined with the total inability to speak to her (hey, that's me!).
     Of course, IF LUCY FELL, while a great date movie, isn't going to be
loved by everyone.  Some parts (the beginning) are a lot better than
others (the end).  The conclusion is far too tidy and convenient.  A
couple of characters are annoying (both happen to be Lucy's
dalliances--Dick (a monotone Bill Sage) and Bwick (a goofball Ben
Stiller)).  And sometimes the plot isn't entirely credible (you'll know
what I mean when you see it).  But these problems are far outweighed by
the down-to-earth, "I can relate" comedy that Schaeffer has judiciously
woven into the film.
     (P.S. Be sure to watch for cameos by "The Late Show's" Mujibur and
Sirajul!)
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter  /  Novelist  /  Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sarah Jessica Parker, Eric Schaeffer, Ben Stiller, Elle Macpherson
Director: Eric Schaeffer
Producers: Brad Krevoy, Steve Stabler, and Brad Jenkel
Screenplay: Eric Schaeffer based on a story by Eric Schaeffer & 
      Tony Spiridakis
Cinematography: Ron Fortunato
Music: Charlton Pettus and Amanda Kravat
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     The sophomore jinx strikes again!  In the last twelve months, this 
mysterious cinematic malady has afflicted a number of up-and-coming film 
makers, including Robert Rodriguez (DESPERADO), Kevin Smith (MALLRATS), 
and now Eric Schaeffer.  Schaeffer is one-half of the duo responsible 
for 1994's quirky, often-hilarious MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND.  Little of 
the zest and originality of that film is evident in IF LUCY FELL, which 
makes one wonder how much of TURNAROUND's inspiration came from 
Schaeffer, and how much came from his former partner, Donal Lardner 
Ward.
     Lucy (Sarah Jessica Parker) and Joe (Schaeffer) share a New York 
apartment.  Best friends since college, these two have developed a more 
intimate (albeit platonic) relationship than most lovers.  They also 
have a "death pact":  if they aren't involved in serious romances by the 
time Lucy turns 30, they will join hands and jump off the Brooklyn 
Bridge together.  Lucy's birthday is one month away, and both of them 
are alone, so they have some serious dating ahead of them.
     The object of Joe's obsession is Jane (Elle Macpherson), his 
beautiful next-door neighbor.  Joe has been watching her through his 
apartment window for years, but he's never been able to work up the 
courage to talk to her.  Now, through a series of carefully-orchestrated 
moves, he has placed himself in a situation where a conversation can't 
be avoided.  Meanwhile, Lucy has become intrigued by an offbeat painter 
named Bwick (Ben Stiller), who can best be described as a sweet-but-
eccentric idiot.
     IF LUCY FELL tries desperately to recapture the feel of WHEN HARRY 
MET SALLY, but, even during its better moments, it falls short.  Harry 
and Sally seemed like real people -- they connected with each other and 
the audience.  The same certainly can't be said about Lucy and Joe.  
These two are cardboard cut-outs, and the only thing we feel for them is 
apathy.
     For the most part, IF LUCY FELL is a disappointingly superficial 
romantic comedy.  There's no chemistry between any of the characters.  
The acting is mediocre, with Schaeffer and Parker exhibiting no screen 
presence.  The best performance (gasp!) is given by supermodel-turned-
actress Elle Macpherson, which says something about the work of her co-
stars.
     On those rare occasions when it has a chance to examine a 
potentially-interesting issue (such as the relationship between 
voyeurism, exhibitionism, and fantasy), IF LUCY FELL lets the 
opportunity pass.  The result is that this film, which wants to be 
smart, funny, and hip, succeeds instead in being mostly irritating.  And 
the far-too-predictable ending is both contrived and manipulative.
     After MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND, one could reasonably expect 
something more than this -- a Generation X picture that takes angst to 
absurd levels -- from Eric Schaeffer.  Unfortunately, what we are 
saddled with is a whiney, talky, stagnant movie that's more pretentious 
than romantic, and more dull than funny.  IF LUCY FELL trips early on, 
and keeps stumbling for most of its ninety-two minute running length.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     A couple years ago, writer/director/actor/ex-cabby Eric Schaeffer,
along with his co-everything pal Donal Lardner Ward, made the very
funny, ultra-low budget MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND.  (Actually, one of the
better of films of 1994, as I recall.) The two went on to television--
on "Too Something," on Fox-- and now Schaeffer's back on film, with Ward
nowhere to be found.  Too bad.  This super- sleight New York romantic
comedy could use a helping hand.
     The premise has longtime roomies Schaeffer and Sarah Jessica Parker
(playing a therapist, no less!) vowing to take a dive off the Brooklyn
Bridge if they don't find love by age thirty.  Which is in one month.
Off they go to find romance, which, of course, is right in front them.
Yawn.  There isn't much substance to IF LUCY FELL; the loosely played
laughs come and go, and the emotion behind the romance just isn't there.
If there's a reason to watch this film-- on tape, of course, after
renting MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND-- it's to enjoy Schaeffer's endearingly
goofy performance.  He's a natural, even if his movie isn't. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Chuck Dowling
If Lucy Fell (1996) 1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Sarah Jessica Parker, Eric
Schaeffer, Ben Stiller, Elle Macpherson, James Rebhorn.  Written and
Directed by: Eric Schaeffer.  Running Time: 94 minutes.
I want to know who in their right mind though that this film would appeal to
anyone on the planet.  Two whiny, pathetic losers (Parker and Schaeffer) make
a death pact to jump off a bridge if neither of them find true love by age
30.  JUMP!  PLEASE!
Star-writer-director Schaeffer should not have been allowed to even come
close to a movie set, let alone be allowed to make this totally predictable,
unfunny, waste of an hour and a half of anyone's life.  The characters in
this film are so ridiculously fake and pathetic that you, along with me,
will be praying that they die in the end.  JUMP!  Schaeffer's character is
such a complete dork, and Elle Macpherson actually finds him attractive,
especially after he keeps making himself look like a complete dork.  His
first words to her are "I have herpes."  Ah, I can hear her heart melting.  I
can't even write the "romantic" things that he says to her as they are about
to make love (just the fact that he's about to make love to her is utterly
ridiculous), all I can say is that even if Brad Pitt was saying those things
to a woman he'd have his privates kicked up into his stomach.  Only Stiller
manages to get a laugh or two.  He's just as much of a freak and a loser as
the rest of the characters, but at least he's a slightly amusing freak.
Well you see Parker and Schaeffer are roommates.  Get it?  Boy-girl?
Roommates?  Gee, I wonder if they realize with 5 minutes left in the film
that they actually love EACH OTHER and end up together in the end?  I really,
really wonder.  I desperately wanted them to jump.  Needless to say, it was
not a happy ending to me.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.
