Title
Review for Osmosis Jones (2001)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
OSMOSIS JONES (2001)
Rated PG; running time 95 minutes
Genre: Live action and animated
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.osmosisjones.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0181739
Written by: Marc Hyman
Directed by: Piet Kroon, Tom Sito (animation);
              Peter and Bobby Farrelly (live action)
Cast: Chris Rock, David Hyde Pierce, Laurence Fishburne, Brandy,
       William Shatner, Ron Howard, Joel Silver (voice)
       Bill Murray, Elena Franklin, Molly Shannon, Chris Elliott
       (live-action)
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsosmosis.html
The hardest part about 3BC having been more or less down for two weeks,
is coming back to review new movies that I really didn't want to watch.
AMERICAN PIE 2?  Ewww.  THE OTHERS?  Not my speed.  SPY KIDS, The
Director's Cut?  Fat chance.  And as queasy as I am, the thought of
watching the grossout humor of OSMOSIS JONES just wasn't twisting my
throttle.  But a Chick's gotta review *something*, I reckon; and there
is the matter of one Laurence Fishburne, with a little David Hyde
Pierce, being part of the action.  In the end, Fishburne and Pierce they
almost cancelled out the Farrelly Brothers' influence.  Well, almost.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
Frank Pepperidge is, in a word, filthy - inside and out.  A
misunderstood widower, only his daughter Shane (Elena Franklin) seems to
be trying to help Frank find a clue again; Shane constantly fights a
losing battle to get Frank to eat healthy, exercise, and generally live
right, but not even a stint in the Army can help Fr...oops, wrong movie.
Uh...Frank's equally nasty bud Bob (Chris Elliott) is as codependent as
they come; and after Frank...loosed himself on Shane's teacher Mrs. Boyd
(Molly Shannon), Frank's gettin' no love from that side of the aisle,
either.
But Frank has a whole crew waiting in the wings to help him.  Actually,
they're waiting inside Frank's body: fighting off colds, allergies,
Twinkies, and the occasional monkey-handled egg, are a team of
hard-working antibodies and white-blood cells, the most strident of
which is Officer Osmosis Jones (voice of Chris Rock).  Due to a bad
history old Ozzie has with his Police Chief (Joel Silver), Oz is
initially banished to patrolling the boring mouth sector of The City Of
Frank; but when Cold Tablet Drixoral (David Hyde Pierce) is dispatched
to fight off what the Chief, Mayor Phlegmming (William Shatner), and
Brand...I mean, the Mayor's assistant, Leah (Brandy) think is merely a
cold virus, Ozzie is assigned to help Drix relieve Frank's symptoms.
What begins as a routine cleanup of the sewer that is Frank, though,
soon turns into Something Else, when Ozzie discovers that a SuperVirus
named Thrax (Laurence Fishburne) is out to terminate Frank.
[Man, does that look weird typed-out.]
The Upshot:
I can describe OSMOSIS JONES in three words: "punny", "nasty", and "PG".
That last bit - that is, the film's PG rating - holds the key to its
lack of success, I think; and, keeping my disdain for the Farrellys'
previous effort, ME, MYSELF & IRENE in mind, my acknowledgement of that
rating's shortcomings is also the source of some discomfort for me.
You see, I opine that with that rein-in-the-madcap PG rating acting as
an albatross hanging around its neck, OSMOSIS JONES didn't, *couldn't*,
go far enough in making itself funnier to adult viewers.  In our
abbreviated audience (the empty seats, no doubt, were due to the throngs
who rushed to see Pie Deux), you could hear a pin drop as pun after pun
fell on deaf ears: the adults who thought the humor was merely "cute",
and the kidlets who'd forgotten everything they knew about the "science"
of OSMOSIS JONES well before summer break began.
That's too bad, too; I really wanted OJ [sorry] to succeed.  Certainly,
the cast should have been up for it; with its collection of comics,
humorists, and damn fine actors, one would think OJ's success was
written in the stars.  To be sure, Fishburne tore it up as Thrax, the
baddest mutha of a germ this side of ebola - though I couldn't help but
think about the inherent problems with trying to make a seemingly
AIDS-like virus, *funny*; that Sir Laurence succeeded, and playfully so,
is a testament to just how great an actor he is, even with this type of
material.  Pierce, an equally great comic actor in his own right (if
you've never seen this modern-day Buster Keaton as "Niles" from
FRASIERR, you don't know what you've been missing), made a wonderful
Drix, though I was reminded of his similar voice acting in A BUG'S LIFE;
the comparison is favorable, but still, too similar.
Bill Murray reinvented his CADDYSHACK character, though besides the icky
subject matter itself, Murray's character was the other primary reason I
hesitated on going to see OSMOSIS JONES in the first place; I had hoped
Murray would've gotten past all of that by now.  Watching Murray Go
There Again was distressing, much the same as if, for instance, Steve
Martin suddenly picked up his Wild And Crazy Guy schtick again...ewww.
Still, a slovenly Frank was necessary for OJ to work - and my
reservations aside, I can think of no better actor to have played this
slob than Murray.  As for the balance of the cast, I had to be reminded
that William "KHAAAAN!" Shatner voiced The Mayor Of Frank, so my Issues
weren't really with him, nor was it with Ron "Opie" Howard's brief punny
bit as Tom Colonic, the Mayor's chief rival, or singer Brandy as The
Mayor's headstrong assistant, Leah.  Even Chris Rock, who normally gets
on my nerves in too large a dose, was quite tame as OSMOSIS JONES.
Aye, there's the rub.  Rock was tame; *too* tame, methinks.  He tried
hard, but even with the likes of Fishburne and Pierce helping to class
up the joint, he couldn't seem to elevate OSMOSIS JONES beyond the its
punny nature, saddled with the limitations of its diluted grossout
humor.  Look for a few chuckles here and there, a couple of good lines
(Fishburne has the best one late in the movie), and a cute riff on
Fishburne's THE MATRIX - but don't expect too much here.  Like I said,
too bad.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Surely, there must be a compromise between the all-out illness of an
R-rated "Irene" and the cute but PG-weakened punnyness of an OSMOSIS
JONES, some middle ground where adults can get their laugh groove on
without having our intelligence insulted, isn't there?  I'm still
looking for that middle ground - though you'll notice I'm not holding my
breath.
OSMOSIS JONES (rating: flashing yellowlight):
     Diagnosis: too much Farrelly, not enough funny.

Author
Karina Montgomery
It appears I neglected to send out this review!  My apologies!  Viewers of
my website have seen it, but I apologize for my slip.  I wrote this 8/7/01!
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Osmosis Jones
Wait a minute - a Farrelly Brothers movie that is rated PG?  Starring Bill
Murray?  Is such a thing possible?  Possible, yes, and, believe it or not,
not so bad for the kiddies and adults.  My companion (with very low
expectations) and myself (not so low) were surrounded by kids in the
screening we saw, and trepidatious parents as well - they were willing to
go only because it was free.  It was no routine antibody comedy!  We
laughed a lot and strained to catch all the jokes.  In fact, afterwards,
the more we talked about it, the more we really liked it.
Chris Rock, as the titular white blood cell, was as annoying as he always
is, which was the only damper on the film for me.  If you love Chris Rock,
by all means, rush out and see this film without reading another word.  If
you don't, you should still enjoy it a lot, as we did.  Bill Murray is a
genius at being a lovable slob, and few other people could have been Frank
- so oblivious to his self-induced plight, reveling in his disgustingness
but never winking or nodding at the audience about it, and yet somehow
remaining sympathetic.  Fabulous.
Anatomical jokes (well-researched and not just humerus for humorous' sake)
abound, as well as a general message that you should eat right and help
your body take care of itself.  Bill Murray's Frank is a master of killing
himself through food and general bad behavior, and it is depicted as gross
and awful, and deadly.  He picks up a little simian retro-virus in his job
at the zoo and the internal, animated portion of the movie becomes a great
cop/buddy adventure comedy starring Chris Rock and, later, a pill voiced
with droll heroics by David Hyde Pierce (Niles).
I only gave this film a matinee price because it stumbles a bit in the
beginning of the third act, possibly due to too much attention briefly
being paid to the live-action framing story.  Bill Murray is Frank, whose
body is host to the visual gag-fest that is the animated section of the
film, and he has a daughter, a loser brother, abysmal personal habits, and
some problems with his daughter's teacher.  It's kind of complex for a
framing mechanism, and it is only made interesting by the real story, what
is going on inside his system.  Inside Frank is a nonstop and very creative
barrage of visual and verbal gags, some of which the sound quality
obscured, which just made me want to see it again.  The detail-oriented
writing that went into the endo-plotline more than make up for any mild
deficiencies in the exo-plot.
Jones' story is a pretty straightforward, almost formulaic
cop-who-can't-catch-a-break-but-is-the-only-one-who-knows-about-what's-going-dow
n story, but somehow, in this plasmic milieu, it's fresh again.  It's very
creative, yet very 5th grade science film (thematically) and that is really
what makes it work.  That, and William Shatner as the mayor of Frank.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com

Author
Norm Schrager
Have you ever wondered what goes on in the back of your nose when you
sneeze?  The Farrelly Brothers have.  And in their traditional gross-out
fashion, they'd like to show you.
There you have Osmosis Jones, a combination of clunky live action and
cool, creative animation that tries too hard to please both adults and
kiddies while journeying inside one disgusting body.
That body belongs to Frank the zookeeper (Bill Murray), a greasy,
out-of-shape, wart of a single Dad.  He doesn't exercise, his hygiene
sucks, and he eats food that's fallen to the ground.  Once we're
introduced to his unpleasant exterior, we quickly meet his vile
interior.
In a few ingenious animated sequences, Frank's insides literally burst
to life as the "City of Frank," complete with its own infrastructure,
police department, and greedy, corrupt mayor (nicely overdone by none
other than the voice of William Shatner).  Frank's white blood cells,
led by super-slick upstart cop Osmosis (voiced by Chris Rock), fight a
constant, border patrol-style battle against invading germs and
diseases.
The central story is a gentle spoof of buddy cop movies:  Jones teams up
with a high-powered cold capsule named Drix (voiced by the steady,
deadpan David Hyde Pierce) in an attempt to shut down a renegade virus
(played with a mean funkiness by Laurence Fishburne).  This nasty
illness is looking to make history by offing Frank in just 48 hours, and
this unlikely duo must stop him.  Even if their "fantastic voyage" takes
them into a seedy nightclub in one of Frank's zits.
The animation, directed by former story artists Piet Kroon (The Iron
Giant) and Tom Sito (Antz), is wonderfully colorful and energetic,
looking like a spiffed-up Merrie Melodies cartoon.  In fact, some of the
more harmless germs look like those little aliens in another
half-animated Warner movie, Space Jam.
The biology puns, both visual and vocal, are there as is expected, with
plenty of requisite references to a litany of bodily functions including
peeing and puking (the rule seems to be: the more liquid and mucus, the
better).
But with all the endless opportunity to jam-pack both the frame and the
script, Osmosis Jones is surprisingly tame.  The Farrellys, and
first-time screenwriter Marc Hyman, almost appear to be holding back,
not wanting to give the smaller viewers (this is PG-rated) sensory
overload.  The filmmakers would rather devote their time to juicing up
the urban, radio-friendly soundtrack, which becomes so blatant it's
annoying.  So in peeling back some of the laughs, Osmosis Jones becomes
just a handful of chuckles by the film's end.
It does manage to hold interest until then, even if the live-action
sequences with Bill Murray and daughter Elena Franklin feel quickly
cobbled together and look dreadfully grainy and flat (I think all the
money was spent on the animated bits).  Molly Shannon, as the daughter's
teacher, is a riot, happily stealing both scenes in which she appears.
And, as in any movie aimed toward kids, and doubly so if directed by
guys named Farrelly, you'll find just about every yucky body release
imaginable.  But, what's this?  No fart jokes?  Oh, they save those for
the end.  No pun intended.
Director: Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly
Producer: Dennis Edwards, Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly, Zak Penn,
Bradley Thomas
Writer: Marc Hyman
Starring: Chris Rock, Laurence Fishburne, David Hyde Pierce, Brandy
Norwood, William Shatner, Molly Shannon, Chris Elliott, Bill Murray,
Joel Silver, Elena Franklin
http://osmosisjones.warnerbros.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Whether you're a religious soul or not, there are definitely signs of the
Apocalypse around you.  I'm talking about harbingers like earthquakes, fires
and volcanic eruptions, not to mention a hayseed becoming the leader of the
free world (Dubya really put the "goober" in gubernatorial back in Texas).
Toss in a PG-rated movie directed by the Farrelly brothers, and even I'm
ready to start in with the Hail Marys.
The sicker folks out there will be happy to learn that Osmosis Jones is a
"hard" PG and the Farrellys' penchant for gags involving bodily secretions
is left largely intact.  The film was toned down from a PG-13 to be a bit
more family-friendly, although the deleted scenes would be perfect for the
DVD.  Whether Jones is any good is hardly relevant; the real question has
become "How suitable is this film for my sweet, precious children that I
drop off at daycare while I go to work to make the $600 minivan payments?"
Well, here's your answer:  I don't know.  I don't have kids.  But I do know
jokes about puke, exploding zits and blow-drying your hair with a fart make
me giggle like a third grader.  Feel free to base your decision on my
intelligence level.
Jones is a modern blend of the Oscar-winning Fantastic Voyage plus animation
to portray the goings-on inside the body of a regular Joe.  Our Joe is Frank
Detorri (Bill Murray, Charlie's Angels), an employee of the New England
Memorial Zoo in Providence, Rhode Island (like the Farrellys would set a
film anywhere else).  Frank is a slob, not only in appearance but in his
eating habits, as well.  In the opening scene, we see him prepare a
hard-boiled egg, top it with mayonnaise and about a tablespoon of salt, only
to have it yanked away by a caged monkey.  The two wrestle, and although the
egg lands in the chimp's mouth and then on the bottom of his feces-ridden
cage, Frank downs it like it ain't no thang.
But wouldn't you know it, the egg is carrying a virus, and the majority of
the film shows Frank's animated innards trying to wipe the intruder out
before it's too late (the cartoon parts were helmed by a pair of animated
storyboard artists - Shrek's Tom Sito and The Iron Giant's Piet Kroon).  Not
exactly an original idea, but Jones stays interesting by making Frank's guts
into The City of Frank, a bustling place complete with a Mayor (voiced by
William Shatner, Miss Congeniality), traffic, a police force (of white blood
cells) and everything else you'd expect to find in a densely populated
metropolis.
Chris Rock (Down to Earth) voices the titular Osmosis Jones, a cop assigned
to partner with a cherry-flavored, time-release, Buzz Lightyear-esque cold
pill named Drix (David Hyde Pierce, Frasier) to fight the diabolical Thrax
(Laurence Fishburne, The Matrix), who wants to take Frank down in 48 hours.
And when I say, "take Frank down," I mean kill, not send to bed with the
sniffles.  Thrax is like the King Midas of germs, quickly infecting
everything he touches with his red, glowing finger.
What follows is the basic buddy/cop-flick routine, with the unconventional
Jones trying to convince the straight-laced Drix to think outside the box.
There's a big battle (including another frigging spoof of the slo-mo
fighting in The Matrix, but it's funny here because of Fishburne's
involvement), music (Kid Rock and the late Joe C. contribute) and a lot of
very funny signs that probably require a second and third viewing to fully
appreciate (like "Mouth Open; Epiglottis Closed" when Frank yawns).
Instead of having its animated and live-action characters share the screen
at the same time (like the awful Space Jam and Cool World), Jones is broken
into two distinct pieces.  The majority of the film takes place in the City
of Frank, but the funniest (and grossest) portions involve Frank interacting
with his worried daughter (Elena Franklin), his equally disgusting best
friend (Chris Elliott, Scary Movie 2) and a schoolteacher (Molly Shannon,
Dr. Seuss' How the Grinch Stole Christmas).  Some people seemed to think the
live-action stuff was thrown in as an afterthought, but I thought it worked
a lot better than the animation (at least laugh-wise) and wished there was
more Murray.  As is, Jones is entertaining, but would have been a lot better
if it wasn't geared toward families - it doesn't go far enough for adults,
but probably steps over the line a few times for a kiddie pic.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "OSMOSIS JONES" (Warner Bros.)
    If the Farrelly brothers taught Anatomy & Physiology in school, no
one would cut ever class. This hip, live action/animation story begins as a
monkey snatches a hard-boiled egg from Frank, a zookeeper (Bill Murray), who
grabs it back, drops it, then gobbles up the contaminated morsel, explaining,
"If it hits and ground and you pick it up within 10 seconds, you can eat it." 
    Like "Fantastic Voyage" (1966), the pseudo-science animation then
takes over when his body's immune system contacts traffic control as an ingested
virus hits the digestive system: "Be on the alert for illegal organisms!"  Eager
to right "a stomach evacuation mistake" he once made, a cocky, clever,
courageous white blood cell (Chris Rock) declares, "This is a crime scene!" and
teams up with a conscientious "Phi Beta Capsule" 12-hour cold remedy called
Drixenol (David Hyde Pierce) to chase down and destroy the deadly "Red Death"
virus (Laurence Fishburne) that's determined to take Frank down in 48 hours,
beating Ebola and E. coli to a medical record. Watch out for mucus mudslides,
chaos in Cerebellum Hall and the detritus from Booger Dam (runny nose), along
with comic turns from Molly Shannon and Chris Elliot, plus the voices of William
Shatner and Brandy Norwood.  Peter and Bobby Farrelly, along with writer Mark
Hyman and animation directors Piet Kroon and Tom Sito, have turned their
penchant for gross-out comedy, encompassing flatulence, festering sores and
"popping a pimple without a permit," into a funny, Farrelly-funny family film.
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Osmosis Jones" is a wildly imaginative,
original, explosive 7. And perhaps, as they're laughing, kids will learn where
to find their uvula, along with nuggets about nutrition and hygiene. 

Author
Bob Bloom
OSMOSIS JONES (2001). 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Bill Murray, Chris Elliott,
Elena Franklin and Molly Shannon, plus the vocal talents of Chris Rock, David
Hyde Pierce, Laurence Fishburne, Brandy Norwood and William Shatner. Written by
Marc Hyman. Directed by Peter Farrelly and Bobby Farrelly. Animation directed by
Piet Kroon and Tom Sito. Rated PG. Approx. 100 minutes. 
 The idea for Osmosis Jones is most imaginative: a live action-animation feature
about a slovenly man and the battle his body rages against an invading virus. 
 It's a shame the execution of this concept falls very short of its premise. The
movie is lacking and most unsatisfying. 
 Osmosis Jones is crude, gross, disgusting, and was directed by the Farrelly
brothers - the twisted siblings behind There's Something About Mary, Me, Myself
and Irene and a couple of other movies in which the humor is mostly targeted
below the belt. 
 Not that there's anything wrong with scatology. I bet even cavemen appreciated
bathroom humor - such as it was. 
 It's merely that with Osmosis Jones, the Farrellys humor is too juvenile, too
predictable. You can almost foresee the puns just by viewing the part of the
inner anatomy a sequence is drawn. 
 Osmosis Jones looks like one of those old health class movies gone psycho. The
trouble is, the animation may please the very young, but the jokes may be over
their heads, while the teen-age audience may find it too tame for their tastes.
 Adults? Well, let's just say most will find it unappetizing. 
 Osmosis Jones plays like a 100-minute infomercial for the eat healthy foods
lobby. 
 The live action sequences revolve around Frank (Bill Murray), who seems to be
the grungiest human being in the universe. He continually looks as if he needs a
shave and a shower. Frank, much to the consternation of his daughter, is a
fast-food addict, eating anything - and everything - that can kill you. 
 He works at a zoo where the animals look cleaner - and presumably smell better
- than he does. 
 Frank's body is invaded by Thrax, a lethal virus, after Frank eats a
hard-boiled egg that had fallen to the ground. It's not gross enough that Frank
picks the egg up from the dirt and plops it into his mouth. Nope, the Farrellys
pile it on by first having Frank wrestle a chimp for the egg, wresting it from
the primate's mouth. 
 Like I said, the gross meter tips the scales on this one. 
 After ingesting the egg, the movie begins its animated sequences. Here, Osmosis
Jones (voiced by Chris Rock), a renegade white blood cell is teamed with Drix
(voiced by Frasier's David Hyde Pierce), a 12-hour, painkiller cold capsule to
battle Thrax (smoothly voiced by Laurence Fishburne). 
 Basically, what we have is a cliched cop-buddy movie, rife with all the clichés
of that genre. 
 And this is why Osmosis Jones doesn't click. It merely falls back on tired,
familiar conventions instead of creating new and exciting situations. 
 The jokes and puns are lame: Osmosis searches out a snitch, a former flu virus.
After pumping him for information, Drix tells Osmosis, "Funny, he doesn't look
fluish." And the jokes don't rise above that level. 
 The live action scenes are no better. Frank is such a slob, so unappealing that
it is difficult to fathom how he ever married or even sired a child. He's almost
a bigger cartoon than the animated characters. 
 Osmosis Jones is a movie that may be too violent for young children as Thrax
burns and dissolves blood cells right and left. 
 The animation is rather two-dimensional and flat. It lacks scope and depth. 
 It is an unappealing movie that will leave you scratching your head, and maybe
leaning toward a shower after you walk out of the theater. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Other reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Laura Clifford
Frank Detorri's (Bill Murray) a single dad who lives on beer and junk food 
with no apparent understanding of sanitation or hygiene, much to the dismay of
his preteen daughter Shane (Elena Franklin).  When he uses the '10 second
rule' to retrieve a hard boiled egg from a chimp's cage at the zoo and downs
it, he introduces a lethal bacteria into his system.  Inside his skin, the 
City of Frank is in turmoil thanks to the vote-pandering of Mayor Phlegmming
(voice of William Shatner), so it's up to one Frank PD white blood cell (voice
of Chris Rock) to save the day in Peter and Bobby Farrelly's  "Osmosis Jones."
The City of Frank is a brightly animated (animation directed by Piet Kroon and
Tom Sito) cellular municipality where Osmosis Jones is a typical rogue cop
looking for another chance.  He's inadvertently teamed up with Drix (voice
of David Hyde Pierce, TV's "Frasier"), a cold capsule with 12 hours worth of
painkillers to dispense.  This quarrelling duo are about to go on a "Fantastic
Voyage" in order to hunt down Thrax (voice of Laurence Fishburne), the virus
intent on shutting down Frank.
While the animation is certainly colorful to look at, Osmosis Jones' story
is a hackneyed one.  The story cries out for puny puns, but we only get 
occasional sprinklings of wit or bodily humor (Drix graduated phi beta capsule,
he departs on a bus headed for bladder).  Neither the hero or villain is
particularly interesting (Thrax looks like an animated "Predator"), although
Hyde Pierce is a delightful sidekick.  Adults can desperately keep their eyes
peeled for small amusements the animators dot along the landscape.
Meanwhile, back in live action land, Bill Murray is reduced to nothing more
than a walking gross-out joke.  There's no particular enjoyment to be found
watching him vomit on Molly Shannon (she plays Shane's teacher, Mrs. Boyd)
or hoisting his ingrown toenail onto a restaurant table.  One must wonder
how the climatic flatlining of a child's father will play to the family
audience as well.  Rest assured, the whole enchilada is wrapped up with a
fart joke.  
While far less offensive than the Farrelly's last effort "Me, Myself and
Irene," that film at least spiked some comic highs with Jim Carrey's 
hijinx.  "Osmosis Jones" will probably be OK for the kids, but the Farrellys
playing for the family audience is like watching Marilyn Manson croon a
Phil Collins tune.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
In OSMOSIS JONES, the Farrelly brothers, co-directors Bobby and Peter, turn
their outlandish and frequently disgusting brand of adult humor (ME, MYSELF &
IRENE) to the world of kids' movies.  The result is a film that is just as
repulsive and awful as its vile trailers.  Mostly a cartoon set inside the human
body, the movie cuts back periodically to a live-action outer world dominated by
Bill Murray, who has never sunk so low.  Expect to be ready to run for the exits
whenever humans show up on the screen.  Walking out could be one of your
smartest moves of the year.
Frank Pepperidge (Bill Murray), who works at an animal park, is one of the
crudest and most revolting people that you're ever likely to meet.  He throws up
on the teacher (Molly Shannon) of his sweet daughter (Elena Franklin) and later
pops his volcano-sized zit onto the teacher's mouth while trying to make amends
for the vomit.  In another scene, he puts his filthy foot which has a
puss-filled and bloody ingrown toenail on the table at a restaurant and claims
to deserve handicap privileges.  And when his equally nauseating coworker (Chris
Elliott) points out that Frank has a monster sized piece of snot hanging out of
his nose, Frank just sucks it back in.  In short, Frank is the type of character
that you hope to forget as quickly as possible but fear that you won't be able
to.
The animated part of the picture has a certain amount of imagination but just
isn't funny.  Comedian Chris Rock (POOTIE TANG) is the voice of the cartoon
character named Osmosis Jones, a white cell who takes on the big germs.  Cartoon
figures say things like they are going down to the kidneys to see the stones,
you know, as in The Rolling Stones.  But the boredom of the animated portion is
much preferable to the fear that the movie will cut back to Murray.  If you go,
one piece of advice: BYOBB.  Bring your own barf bag.
OSMOSIS JONES runs a very long 1:25.  It is rated PG for "bodily humor."  Since
the movie was originally rated PG-13, one wonders how it escaped the PG-13
rating.  Besides its illustrated bathroom humor, the movie has some sequences
that could disturb kids under 7, including the realistic death of a parent and a
frightening cartoon villain.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave it just 1/2 of a star, saying that it was one of
the very worst movies of the year.  He found it disgusting and boring.  Only
some tolerable music kept him from giving it zero stars.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 10, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Robin Clifford
Frank (Bill Murray) is not what you'd call a health nut. His idea of haute
cuisine is to smear a boiled egg with mayonnaise and load it with salt.
When, after dropping said egg on the ground at the zoo where he works and,
against his daughter Shane's (Elena Franklin) advice, he eats it, he
doesn't realize the trouble he is in? He ingests a deadly virus and it's up
to the denizens within Frank's body, led by a cocky white blood cell, to
save him from himself in "Osmosis Jones."
Peter and Bobby Ferrule enter a brave new world when they take us into the
less-than-healthy body known to its inhabitants as the City of Frank.
Osmosis Jones (Chris Rock), an anti-body with an attitude, is a member of
the Frank PD and is always getting into trouble with his boss, the Chief,
for his renegade moves. When the deadly virus named Thorax (Laurence
Fishburne) invades Frank's body, only Osmosis sees that their host is in
great peril. That is, until he is joined by Drib (David Hide Pierce), a
twelve-hour time-release cold pill with germ-fighting power. It's up to
this unlikely duo to search out the evil Thorax and eliminate him.
Watching "Osmosis Jones," I kept having a feeling of familiarity with the
concept. What came to mind most strongly, at first, was the 1966 sci-fi
flick "Fantastic Voyage." That F/X extravaganza took us inside the human
body for the first time to show us what makes it tick. But, it didn't
attempt to bring anthropomorphic life to the inner workings of the body.
Then, it struck me - Woody Allen had just such a vignette in his ambitious
1972 comedy "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex (but Were
Afraid to Ask)" where the inhabitants of a man's body work together to help
him get laid. It was an amusing short that used actors (such as Burt
Reynolds and Tony Randall) to give human faces to the various internal
parts of the body.
The Farrelly brothers take the idea a quantum leap from short vignette to a
feature length animation that is part cop show, part action flick and
populated with police, crooks, corrupt government officials, laborers,
white collar workers, villains and a sexy babe. They combine the
live-action story about Frank, a widower that, when his wife died, lost
nearly everything - his job, his life and, very nearly, his mind. He gave
up caring about himself, eats junk food and doesn't exercise, much to the
chagrin and concern of his daughter, Shane. When he invokes the "ten second
rule" (if you drop something on the ground for less than ten second, it's
edible) at the zoo he now works at, he unknowingly introduce the Red Death,
Thrax, into his body. The killer virus, which has a string of victims under
his belt, vows to finish the City of Frank off in less than 48 hours.
Thrax sets up shop with his henchmen in the festering in-grown toenail on
Frank's foot and mercilessly plots to set a fever ablaze within their host
and add Frank to his growing list of casualties. No one in the city, save
Osmosis Jones, recognize the peril the city is in. With only the help of
Drix and a sexy little red blood cell, Leah (Brandy Norwood), to depend on,
Osmosis begins his own fantastic voyage as he hunts down the deadly virus
to put a stop to his mayhem.
Utilizing the talents of Hollywood's top animators and CGI artists, the
Farrellys have created a unique city within the man. Combining a
hard-boiled detective story with animation fantasy is no easy task and the
Farrellys are partially successful with their effort. It helps that Bill
Murray is willing to get down, dirty and disgusting as the bedraggled Frank
who wants to do the right thing for his daughter but is mired so deeply in
his grief, he doesn't care what damage he inflicts on himself. The makers
flash back and forth between Frank's self-abuse and the citizens of the
city trying to cope with his bad habits.
The vocal talents that give life to the inhabitants of Frank are focused on
Rock, the always-amusing Hyde Pierce, TV's "Moesha" star Brandy and, as the
incumbent, corrupt mayor of the City of Frank, William Shatner. None,
however, with the exception of Drix, do much in the way of creating
memorable animated characters. The same goes for the limited live-action
cast. Murray, as always, is one funny guy and gives "disgusting" new
meaning. Wasted are Molly Shannon as Shane's teacher, Mrs. Boyd, and Chris
Elliot as Frank's sidekick and coworker, Bob. Young Elena Franklin is fine
as Frank's loving, caring daughter.
Animation is first rate, with a variety of settings in the human body. The
lymph nodes are the headquarters for the ever-vigilant Frank PD where
Osmosis is routinely told by his boss, the Chief, to "get out of my
office!" in typical cop show fashion. The stomach is the terminus for all
incoming nourishment while the cardiovascular system reps the highways that
the citizens of Frank use to get around. It is all very clever and
entertaining to watch, but like other aspects of the film, is not
particularly memorable.
The gross-out equation that permeates much of the film is obviously geared
to entertain the youngsters that "Osmosis Jones" is out to attract, and
there is plenty to gross them (and you) out. The Farrellys, with Marc
Hyman's original script, do inject some clever humor and visual cues that
are made to entertain the adults who will, inevitably, attend the film with
the kids. It's an ambitious animation effort, but lacks that certain charm
to make it remarkable work. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
This film takes place in two different worlds. One is the real world with human
beings, starring Bill Murray as the really un-hygienic guy, and the other is the
animated world inside Murray's body, consisting of cells and germs (that talk!)
trying to run his system from within. Osmosis Jones is one of the cells inside
his body.
CRITIQUE:
A very original story told in a very unique manner that doesn't necessarily hold
together as tightly as an overall picture, with limited laughs, tension or
attachment to its characters, and very few memorable moments on which to chew
afterwards. I've been impressed with quite a number of animated movies over the
past couple of years, but this one just didn't do all that much for me. It's a
movie that seemed lost in its journey to find the perfect target audience, by
including bits and pieces for every cultural, age and ratings demographic, but
just not coming together as an effective, cohesive whole in the end. Sure, a
couple of laughs sprout up here and there, the disgusting stuff is really gross
and Bill Murray should be commended for allowing himself to look so bad in this
film, but does it entertain throughout? Not really. It's got its moments and
it's definitely sparked by an original streak, with a very clever look at the
inside of one's body by way of an "underworld" living within, but when all is
said and done, I just sat there and didn't really feel much either way. And even
now, when I look back, there isn't really much about the movie that bowled me
over.
It's actually ideally suited for the video market. The kids will dig on the
gross stuff like snot running out of a man's nose and a zit popping onto a
woman's lips, the teens will likely appreciate the hip-hop soundtrack and most
adults might get a kick out of Chris Rock's voice portraying a white blood cell.
Just don't expect much "oomph" from this film, because that's one aspect which
seems to have been left on the cutting room floor when the picture went from a
PG-13 rating to a PG. In the end, the bad guy is kinda bad, the laughs are kinda
funny and the ending is kinda predictable, all of which equal a so-so film, not
required to be seen on the big screen. In fact, the last sequence in the film
features some really awful CGI work (the eyelash stuff!) that felt like it still
needed about a week's work and for the love of God and all that is holy in this
world, can someone please tell everyone in Hollywood that we are no longer
amused by MATRIX parodies...I mean, c'mon man!! But overall, the film does
contain a handful of clever scenes featuring characters and places set inside
our bodies, which did entertain me somewhat, so I guess I'm about half-half on
this movie. Not a killer flick but definitely not a snoozer either.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Atlantis (5/10) - Emperor's New Groove (8/10) - The Iron Giant (5/10) - Kingpin
(9/10) - Rocky & Bullwinkle (4/10) - Shrek (8/10) - Small Soldiers (7/10) -
There's Something About Mary (7/10)
