Title
Review for Shanghai Noon (2000)
Number of Reviews
27

Author
Christian Pyle
It seemed like a good idea:  import the superstars of Hong Kong's successful
action films and put them in American action movies.  So far, though, the
Hollywood efforts of Jackie Chan, Chow Yun-Fat, Jet Li, and director John Woo
have failed to measure up to their work in Hong Kong.  Chan, the most popular
member of the group with American audiences, is the most difficult to fit to an
American genre.  Why?  Because Hollywood doesn't make "Jackie Chan movies." 
The closest equivalent America has had to Chan's unique style were the silent
comedies of Buster Keaton.  In the films of both Chan and Keaton, the emphasis
is on "gags" (stunts) that are simultaneously thrilling, hilarious, and
graceful while the lead character is reduced to a simple persona that the star
plays in every movie and the plot is a loosely woven justification for the
gags.  Ironically, therefore, Chan may have found a better fit with the
Hollywood of the 1920's than with Hollywood today.  When sound came in, they
stopped making "Buster Keaton movies" and could not find a niche for the
stone-faced star.   There was even a disastrous attempt to pair Keaton with
Jimmy Durante in a series of sound comedies.  Some seventy years later, Chan
has found himself with the same sort of awkward mismatch as Hollywood has
inserted him into two "buddy movies":  1998's "Rush Hour" and the new "Shanghai
Noon."
As in "Rush Hour," Chan's character has come to America from the East to save a
kidnapped woman.  This time around it's 1881, and imperial guardsman Chon Wang
(Jackie Chan) is part of a contingent from China's Forbidden City to deliver a
ransom of 100,000 pieces of gold to a mission in Carson City, Nevada, and
retrieve Princess Pei Pei (Lucy Liu).  The princess thought she was escaping
China and an loathsome arranged marriage when she was betrayed and found
herself kidnapped instead by Lo Fong (Roger Yuan), a former member of the
Imperial Guard who was exiled for treason.  Chon gets separated from his
comrades when Roy O'Bannon (Owen Wilson) and his gang rob their train. 
O'Bannon is also cut adrift when he's double-crossed by a new member of the
gang (Walt Goggins).  After some initial fighting and a detour or two, Chon and
Roy team-up to find the princess.  Along the way, they have to fend off Lo
Fong, Marshal Van Cleef (Xander Berkeley) and his posse, and the other imperial
guards (Cui Ya Hi, Rong Guang Yu, and Eric Chen).
References to classic westerns abound.  Chon Wang sounds like John Wayne when
pronounced with Chan's accent ("That's an awful cowboy name," responds Roy). 
Berkeley is made up to look like his character's namesake, Lee Van Cleef, who
starred alongside Clint Eastwood in "The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly."  There's
a well-executed homage at the end to "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid," as
well.  To its credit, "Shanghai Noon" avoids cliches, for the most part.  (I
assumed there'd be a runaway stagecoach in there somewhere, but there wasn't.) 
At one point, Roy even rejects a cliche.  Roy and Chon are in jail, and Chon
suggests, "I'll pretend to be sick."  Roy replies, "Does that still work in
China?  Because, I gotta tell you, in America it's been done to death."
The way they do break out of the cell is one of the funniest moments in the
movie.  There's another sidesplitting scene when the guys get drunk in a
cathouse.  Other than those two scenes, there were more laughs in the outtakes
at the end than in the movie itself.  Like "Rush Hour," the script for
"Shanghai Noon" is thin and uneven.  There are lots of gaps that left me
scratching my head.  For example, at one point Chon has climbed to the top of a
snow-capped mountain with more of the same stretching before him.  Cut to Chon
by a stream near a forest.  What happened to the mountains?  Another
befuddlement:  for some reason, Van Cleef and Lo Fong think that Roy has the
ransom gold, but the gold was never stolen.  The other guardsmen have it
throughout the movie.  Only the most minimal gestures are made towards
character development.  One central character, a Native American woman Chon
mistakenly marries (Brandon Merrill), is so underdeveloped that the closing
credits refer to her simply as "Indian wife."  Normally we expect a lack of
plot and character development in a "Jackie Chan movie"; plots and characters
exist only to link the stunts and fight scenes together.  However, when Chan
goes out of his own genre and into an American buddy pic, the requirements of
the latter genre and the sparseness of the fast-paced action sequences of
Chan's Cantonese features makes the plot much more important.  The feeble
scripts of "Rush Hour" and "Shanghai Noon" would likely be rejected by any
popular American action hero, but producers probably think, "Hey, Jackie's
movies don't have plots anyway."
Despite it all, Chan is still Chan.  There are some wonderfully inventive fight
scenes where Chan gets to strut his stuff, and he has a lot of fun with
western-themed props like tomahawks and six-guns.  The best moment:  he
fashions a weapon out of a horseshoe and a rope.  However, if this were a real
"Jackie Chan movie," there would be a lot more of these moments, and the movie
would be a lot more fun.  I hope the next time Chan goes west, he travels by
way of Hong Kong.
Bottom line:  It's "Rush Hour 2: The Early Years."  
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Ross Anthonyy
East meets wild west in Jackie Chan's Hollywood latest. Chan, who's as cute
as a toddler in a bathtub, teams up with Owen Wilson, a Seinfeld rambler
with a quick tongue and golden smile. The pairing works like a charm. In
fact, the film nearly blew the top off the theater, save for a few quirks
and the standard fight scene ending.
Lucy Liu (Princess Pei Pei) is kidnapped and held for ransom in Carson City,
Nevada. Chan and three other imperial guards are sent from China to rescue
her. However, Owen Wilson's gang of bandits rob their train, derailing the
original plan. It's a good ol' fashion cowboys, Indians, and Chinamen
picture.
But, after the midpoint, the production becomes more of a sequence of
wonderfully original and funny scenes than a coherent piece. It's too bad,
because had the filmmakers been able to keep both those barrels focused, the
shot would have been a double bull's eye. Still, in a season not graced by
many good films, that one-barrel packs a powerful bullet. I had a great
time!
I'd first seen Owen Wilson in a little film called "Bottle Rocket" a couple
years back. He was as outstanding then as he is now. I'm confident "Shanghai
Noon" will give him the recognition he deserves, "I don't know karate, but I
know Ka..razy and I will use it." Of course, Jackie continues to be
lovable - how could you not like this guy? The cinematography and music are
solid. Even the script is wonderful - save for the climax. Not that it was
bad, it's just that a marvelous cast of characters had been created and
built up well; the climax failed to utilize this huge potential. Aside, from
Wilson's uncommonly rich standoff with the sheriff, the rest of the climax
plays out as you'd expect (in contrast to the freshness of the rest of the
film). And then to top it off the resolution goes way silly.
Best to have ended the film on a freeze frame -- depicted in the picture
above. Despite falling short of what it could have been, "Shanghai Noon"
still kicks butt. I recommend it heartily.
Shanghai Noon. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Liu, Brandon Merril, Roger Yuan,
Xander Berkeley, Walton Goggins.
Directed by Tom Dey. Written by Alfred Gough & Miles Millar.
Produced by Roger Birnbaum, Gary Barber and Jonathan Glickman at
Spyglass/Touchstone.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Ron Strong
TOUCHSTONE PICTURES AND SPYGLASS ENTERTAINMENT PRESENTS A BIRNBAUM /
BARBER PRODUCTION IN ASSOCIATION WITH A JACKIE CHAN FILMS LIMITED
PRODUCTION JACKIE CHAN  OWEN WILSON  "SHANGHAI NOON"  LUCY LIU  MUSIC
BY RANDY EDELMAN CO PRODUCERS NED DOWD  JULES DALY EXECUTIVE PRODUCER
JACKIE CHAN  WILLIE CHAN  AND SOLON SO PRODUCED BY ROGER BIRNBAUM
GARY BARBER  AND JONATHAN GLICKMAN WRITTEN BY ALFRED GOUGH & MILES
MILLAR DIRECTED BY TOM DEY
Rated PG-13 for mild language, adult situations, drug use, martial art
action and violence.  107 minutes.  Super 35mm / Panavision (2.35:1)
Jackie stars as Chon Wang, a lesser Imperial Guard in the Forbidden
City of China. The royal Princess Pei Pei (Lucy Liu) is set to be
married to the obnoxious son of a nobleman from another prefecture.
Unwilling to follow her Father's wishes, Princess Pei Pei with the
assistance of her English tutor, decides to escape to America. But
this is all a ploy devised by exiled guard Lo Fong, which will lead to
the Princess' kidnapping and ransom.
Unable to take any legal action, the ransom demands are met and three
of the Forbidden City's bravest Guards (played by Cui Ya Hi, Rong
Guang Yu, and Eric Chen) are ordered to transport the ransom payment
to Lo Fong in Carson City, Nevada. Chon Wang pleads with the imperial
court and is given permission to join the team, as he is looked upon
as a buffoon.
On a train in the U.S. Jackie meets up with bandit Roy O'Bannon (Owen
Wilson). He is much less of a bandit than he is a glory hog, looking
simple for the notoriety and fame that being a bandit will bring him.
With his gang in tow, Roy attempts to rob the train, when one of his
gang murders the Chinese interpreter of the Royal Court, who also
happens to be Chon Wang's uncle.
Chon Wang gives chase, foiling the attempted robbery, but also leaving
himself stranded in the desert. As the disgraced Guard wanders through
the desert, he again comes upon Roy, who has been left for dead by his
former gang. Buried up to his neck in the desert, Roy pleads with Chon
to dig him out. Chon demands to know where Carson City is. Roy directs
him, and Chon leaves. But not before sticking two chopsticks into
Roy's mouth and telling him to dig himself.
Chon soon finds himself confronted by angry Crow warriors, a friendly
Sioux tribe, gunslingers, a horse that thinks and behaves like a dog
and an Indian bride (Brandon Merrill), before once again running into
Roy.
"Shanghai Noon" is just good fun. The chemistry between the cast is
remarkable. The performances are all acceptable within the whimsical
levels of the film. Jackie's performance is as good as anything he's
done before. He's not called on to do much acting here, as the
character is not written with any depth. But Jackie's natural charisma
shines through, and his comic timing is so perfect, both physically
and (surprise) verbally that once again he commands the screen
whenever he is on.
Owen Wilson, last seen in the embarrassing remake of "The Haunting",
gives a good natured performance as Roy O'Bannon. His innocence is
refreshing and fun. A bad guy that's not really bad. His scenes with
Jackie are some of the best bits of comic dueling since Martin and
Lewis. Lucy Liu as Princess Pei Pei is given little to do in the
script, but for a change does not play a nymphet or some other
deviant. The character is a noble woman of status and wealth, but
finds a greater cause as a result of her own imprisonment.
The rest of the performances are all broadly drawn comic performances.
Nothing here is realistic, mind you. "Shanghai Noon" is first and
foremost a light, jovial film. And the performances match that style
with ease.
The Cinematography by Dan Mindel is gorgeous. Using Calgary, Alberta
as the prime location. Mr. Mindel is able to create a lush, romantic
western feel to the film. Nothing here really looks like Nevada, but
the locations are so beautifully shot and staged, the film can be
looked upon as a loving tribute to earlier films of the genre. And as
such, the script by Alfred Gough and Miles Millar plays fast and loose
with history, but with reverence to past films. Homage to such films
as "High Noon" (obviously), "Red River" and most notably "Butch
Cassidy & the Sundance Kid" all bring a sense of nostalgia to the
film. It is a comforting experience. At a time when the Western is
considered either old hat or irrelevant, here is a film that embraces
those old attitudes and (dare I say) clichés and manages to make them
palatable and refreshing. Here is a film that is not contemptuous of
the genre. This is the purest "horse opera" since the days of George
O'Brian or John Wayne.
Director Tom Dey has crafted a loving tribute to Hollywood's past. In
this, his first film Mr. Dey shows both a love of character and of
craftsmanship that is refreshing to see. Nothing here really stands
out, or takes one's attention away from the story or action. And that
is as it should be, when Jackie Chan is your star.
And what of the action and stunts. Well, while not up to a level of
"Drunken Master 2" or any of Jackie's Hong Kong films, "Shanghai Noon"
is miles ahead of anything Jackie has done in an American film before.
His timing, choreography, and creativity are still as sharp as ever.
Jackie even gets to recreate a few scenes from his earlier films
(obvious to those of us that have seen those films, but refreshingly
fun for those unfamiliar). Finally Jackie can honestly say, that he
has made an U.S., his way and incorporating his style.
To sum up, "Shanghai Noon" is a fun summer confection. Not too heavy
and not too light. A fun and entertaining film that the whole family
can enjoy (parents be advised there are scenes of smoking, drunkenness
and peyote use). An enjoyable and charming film that can and will be
enjoyed again and again.
Owned & Copyright Š 2000 R.L. Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed
without the expressed written permission of the author.

Author
Chad Polenz@aol.com
It's a western, an action movie and a comedy all rolled up into one. But it's 
also a Jackie Chan movie so that
automatically makes it a lot more likable to begin with. 
The story is simple, Chan stars as a Chinese imperial guard who must travel 
to Carson City, Nevada in the
late 1800s to rescue a princess who thought she was going there to start a 
new life but actually walked right
into a kidnapper's trap. 
Owen Wilson costars as Roy O'Bannon, a train robber who I think is Han Solo 
in a former life. When the
two find themselves as a team a lot of hilarity and action ensues. Wilson is 
really charming as the supposed
bad boy and so is Chan as the ignorant immigrant. 
The story is really all over the map but it's forgivable because the two men 
are so fun to watch and the
action sequences are so exciting. This is how action movies are supposed to 
work. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
Bill Chambers
SHANGHAI NOON **1/2 (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (bill@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Liu, Xander Berkeley
screenplay by Alfred Gough & Miles Millar
directed by Tom Dey
The level of humour never rises above that of its title in Shanghai
Noon, a play-on-words that "Mad Magazine" staffers surely brainstormed
at some point, and I wouldn't have it any other way. The picture is so
juvenile it makes the 1985 western spoof Rustler's Rhapsody look
pretentious by comparison, which is a major selling point in my book,
for comedies these days tend to be cynical, scatological affairs--in
short, Porky's redux, everything but good-natured.
If its innocuousness ultimately earns Shanghai Noon the dreaded label of
"family entertainment", so be it. (Here is what I scribbled on a piece
of paper after seeing the film: "Jackie Chan's doing his thang and it
comes off as downright innovative in light of crap like Road Trip.")
The year is 1881, and Jackie Chan plays Chong Wang, one of the Imperial
Guards ordered to deliver the ransom for kidnapped Princess Pei Pei and
retrieve her from the Chinese mining camps of Carson City, Nevada. En
route in America, his uncle is killed in a train robbery that leaves
Jackie stranded and in the company of laconic cowpoke Roy O'Bannon (Owen
Wilson), the "good" thief who had no part in the homicide. I'm getting
ahead of myself: before they join forces, Jackie defeats armed Crow
warriors with his bare hands and marries into an Indian tribe.
There's fortune in Roy's eyes as Wang (whose full name sounds like John
Wayne, "a terrible cowboy name!" exclaims Roy) tells him of the 100 000
in gold coins waiting to be exchanged for the princess, and so he
volunteers to set our Jackie on course and instruct him in the way of
the West. (I won't belabour that Shanghai Noon glibly trumpets
assimilation over tradition--the movie sides with Roy as he encourages
Wang to abandon his Eastern code of ethics--but let it be duly noted.)
Soon, they have not so much hatched a plot as stumbled upon one to free
Pei Pei, leading to a whopper of a Mexican standoff in a church. (Shades
of John Woo.)
Speaking of Woo, he had the right idea when he commented in a recent
interview for "Premiere", "Some actors are good in slow motion, some
not. Some you want to see them fast, like Jackie Chan: Pow! Pow! Pow!
That's his real character. He's just like a tiger. There's no reason to
use slow motion." About the only directorial misstep first-timer Tom Dey
makes in the requisite fight scenes (the first reason to see any Jackie
Chan flick) is the occasional half-speed flourish--untrained fighters
require camera tricks to appear graceful (would Ralph Macchio have
gotten by in The Karate Kid without them?), but not Jackie Chan, Jet Li,
Bruce Lee, Sonny Chiba, etc.
As with Jackie's other English-language pictures (and the American
versions of his Hong Kong exports), the big, prop-dependent brawls could
and should be longer, though this time around their brevity might be on
account of Jackie's age and not studio ignorance. (Miramax, from what I
understand, is under the impression that we prefer car chases and big
stunts to martial arts combat--that's why they recut Operation Condor to
emphasize grandiose action over the kung fu, nearly invalidating the
presence of Jackie in the process.)
Otherwise, Dey has crafted a tasty matinee snack; if Shanghai Noon
doesn't have any lasting impact, it won't cause indigestion, either. The
amusingly anachronistic and nonconfrontational screenplay--the film owes
great debts to Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid and Blazing
Saddles--occasionally goes slack (as to be expected from the writers of
the meandering Lethal Weapon 4), but Dey and his cannily cast performers
always find their footing. Owen Wilson, possessed of a warm, soothing
drawl, is the most charmingly goofball he's been since debuting in
Bottle Rocket. Nimble Jackie seems much more at ease with him than he
was with abrasive Chris Tucker in the excremental Rush Hour. And Lucy
Liu, as the prototypical Jackie Chan heroine/damsel in distress, is
adequately regal and sexy. Okay, fine, really sexy.

Author
Homer Yen
Non-alcoholic beer.  Sugar-free cookies.  Fat-free ice
cream.  These look good, but they just don't quite
satisfy.  Now you can add "Shanghai Noon" to this
list.  Set in the year 1881, this adventure-comedy
about cowboys, Indians, and a Chinese Imperial Guard
looks great.  The impressive cinematography shows the
pomp of Imperial Guards (who sport very festive
looking garb) practicing martial arts in unison, the
majesty of the vast Western expanse, and the beauty of
snow-capped mountains.  However, once you move beyond
the first 30 minutes and start looking for a story,
you'll find that the plot becomes less coherent than
President Clinton's explanation about his relationship
with Monica Lewinsky.
The story begins in the fabled Forbidden City where
hundreds of Imperial Guards are drilling in the main
courtyard.  Among them is Chon Wang (Chan), a loyal
protector bound by honor and oath.  Included among
those that he has sworn to protect is the demure
Princess Pei Pei (Lucy Liu).  Faced with the
unpleasant prospect of taking part in an arranged
marriage, she decides to escape to America.  Chon
tries to stop her, but when the Princess coldly stares
at him and demands that he desists, his reverence for
her makes him completely powerless.  His moment of
weakness, however, proves to be disastrous.  Once the
Princess reaches America, she is kidnapped.  To right
his mistake, he volunteers to go to America to rescue
her.  
Chon certainly possesses the fighting skills necessary
to fend off rowdy cowboys, dimwitted bandits, and even
a hostile group of Indians.  These encounters allow
Chan to display his trademark comical fighting style. 
When he's not delivering a punch or a roundhouse kick,
he's jumping through trees or scurrying through
windows.  And when he's up against a superior number
of foes, he quickly improvises and uses unconventional
objects as weapons.  The most unique sequence involves
a battle with a gun-wielding posse in which our hero
skillfully uses a horseshoe and a piece of rope to
dispatch his opponents.  Chan is not a vicious fighter
who is intent on maiming his opponent.  Rather, he
just seems content on knocking them down.  Thus,
despite some bone-crunching sound effects, the fight
scenes are completely bloodless.  
Eventually, Chon team's up with the smug yet amiable
outlaw, Roy O'Bannon (Owen Wilson).  Chon hopes that
Roy's familiarity with the territory may be of an
asset.  Meanwhile, Roy feels that locating the
Princess might yield some lucrative benefits.  Teaming
these two together, however, slows the movie down
considerably.  While Chan and Wilson seem comfortable
in their roles, they didn't really have any chemistry.
 Chan could have done this as a solo project. 
Wilson's inclusion seemed to only accomplish adding
another bad guy to the mix, an ornery and
reward-hungry gunslinger (Xander Berkeley).
"Shanghai Noon" is fun to watch when it focuses on
Chon's mission to save the Princess.  But as the story
progresses, there are a number of other subplots that
are introduced but are never fully resolved.  This
becomes quite distracting.  For example, Wen is
supposed to avenge the death of someone, a plot that
seems totally forgotten.  Princess Pei Pei learns
something about the common person, but this notion is
never furthered.  These are all noble ideas, but they
dissipate like noble gases.  Even stranger, there is
no clear reason for having a villain.  The audience is
left completely in the dark as to his motivation and
grand scheme.
Regardless of how silly the film is, it is always a
treat to watch the buoyant Jackie Chan.  Part fighting
machine and part clown, he can simultaneously make you
awe in wonder with his deft martial arts moves and
make you laugh like a little kid because deep inside,
Chan is a doting child who has never quite grown up. 
There is no other performer like him, so any of his
films are usually worth the price of matinee.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) I love Jackie Chan movies. Even if the plot is
confusing or the characters are flat, I love them anyway because Chan's
amazing stunts and graceful moves are a joy to watch. Unfortunately,
SHANGHAI NOON has no amazing stunts, and although there are some fight
sequences, they are more edited and less performed than I've come to
expect from Chan. The movie isn't completely unlikeable, but it's not
for Chan connoisseurs.
The movie opens in China on one of the oldest and most-used plot devices
in the world: the Princess has been kidnapped. Naturally, Jackie Chan
(playing Chon Wang) is sent to the Western U.S. territories to find her
and bring her back.
The movie introduces us to Roy (Owen Wilson) and his band of comically
inept outlaws. Roy and his gang are robbing the passengers of a train --
the same train that Chon and the rest of the royal entourage is on. One
of Roy's men shoots one of the "Chinamen," Chon's uncle, which gives the
movie an excuse for a fight scene.
It had been about 15 minutes without any Jackie Chan stunts -- not even
any little easy ones. So when someone disconnected the last car on the
train, with Jackie on one side and the bad guys on the other, I knew I
was about to witness the first stunt. I was on the edge of my seat,
ready to be amazed and thrilled. Jackie backed up into the car to get a
running start, dashed toward the end of the car, and ...
And the editor cut to a blurry medium shot of a figure that MIGHT HAVE
been Chan, jumping between two train cars that MIGHT HAVE been moving at
different speeds. If Chan really did do the stunt, then the director and
the editor are idiots for obscuring it. But I'm sure that's not the
case.
The fight continues up the train as Chon takes on Roy's gang, one by
one. Finally, Chon finds himself on a stack of timbers piled on a
flatbed car. Gun in hand, Roy follows him onto the logs, and the two
stare each other down. One of Roy's henchmen appears, standing next to a
release lever at the end of the car. He growls "I know how to get him
offa there."
Again I saw the stunt coming. I was on the edge of my seat, ready to be
amazed and thrilled. Jackie stands on the logs with a look of shock on
his face. The henchman pulls the lever to release the logs, and...
And the editor cuts to a helicopter shot of two figures that MIGHT have
been real people (if they weren't computer-generated), harmlessly
flailing their limbs over a pile of rolling and tumbling logs.   Clang!
Ooof!
SHANGHAI NOON's fight scenes have the choreography and pace of Chan's
other movies. But still, I think they rely more heavily on editing and
less on performance than in previous Chan movies. The most obvious
example is when Chon makes a weapon from a rope and a horseshoe. It
LOOKS like the weapon was too hard to use because there's never a clear
shot of the thing working. But add a few sound effects and turn up the
volume (Whoosh-whoosh-whoosh! Clang! Ooof!), and you can get away with
visually sloppy fight scenes.
The movie does have some things going for it. Wilson is appealing as the
bandit who can't shoot straight and who doesn't have the heart to be
ruthless. Some of the movie's funniest lines, ad-libbed by Wilson, come
from the softspoken, yet sarcastic Roy.
Also, the camaraderie between Roy and Chon (after their first encounter,
they forgive and forget) was funny and warm. It's the same friendship
that Chris Tucker and Chan showed in RUSH HOUR, which makes me think
Chan is really as nice a guy as he seems.
Plus, it's just hard not to like Jackie Chan, especially when he's doing
fight scenes that have been choreographed just for him. At one point he
fends off two drunken cowboys wielding only moose antlers.
"I may be from Greenland but I don't drink" 
-- Julia Ormond, Smilla's Sense of Snow

Author
Bob Bloom

 Shanghai Noon (2000) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Jackie Chan, Owen
Wilson, Lucy Liu, Brandon Merrill, Roger Yuan and Xander Berkeley.
Written by Alfred Gough and Miles Millar. Directed by Tom Dey.
 Following in the footsteps of comedians from Buster Keaton to the Marx
Bros. to Abbott and Costello to Martin and Lewis to Bob Hope to John
Candy, Jackie Chan has followed Horace Greeley's advice and gone west.
 "Shanghai Noon" is a comedic Western, a funny culture clash in which an
Imperial guard (Chan)  comes to the Old West of 1881 to rescue a
kidnapped princess ("Ally McBeal's" Lucy Liu).
 Along the way, Chan's Chon Wang meets a fast-talking con artist, but
inept outlaw, Roy O'Bannon (Owen Wilson). The two ostensibly team up to
rescue the princess, though Roy has his mind set on somehow grabbing the
$100,000 in gold sent to America to ransom her highness
 "Shanghai Noon," like most of Chan's movies, is a rough blend of action
and comedy. The action sequences are first-rate as Wang battles Indians,
cowboys and a former, disgraced guardsman who masterminded the
kidnapping plot.
 The comedy is definitely low brow, but offers some funny moments. Roy,
for example, continually mispronounces Chon Wang as John Wayne as
berates his partner. `That's not a cowboy name,' he tells him more than
once.
 There are some funny subtitles as Wang tries to make himself understood
to a tribe of Indians who have befriended him.
 Chan, as usual, is always exciting to watch as he leaps, rolls and uses
props with the deftness of a ballet master.
 The real find is Wilson.  Best known for his role as a would-be
criminal in the independent "Bottle Rocket," he also has co-starred in
"Armageddon" and "The Haunting." In "Shanghai Noon" he is glib,
charming, a blowhard and a bit of a coward. His character is reminiscent
of the type Bob Hope would play, though he is physically more active and
much better looking than Hope.
 Wilson holds his own with Chan, and the two make a charming duet.
 "Shanghai Noon" features a fine score by Randy Edelman as well as
scenic cinematography by Dan Mindel.
 Alfred Gough and Miles Millar's script, though, is a bit
anti-climactic. Director Tom Dey, making his feature film debut, could
have trimmed a bit from the one-hour-and-50-minute running time. The
movie's pace needed to be a bit quicker. At a couple of junctures there
is dead space between some of the action sequences. Judicious editing
could have speeded up the movie.
 "Shanghai Noon" is a fun outing, filled with stunts and gags that will
please Chan fans. It's not art, but it is entertainment.
  Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Reviews by Bloom, an associate member of the Online Film Critics
Society, is can be found on the Internet Movie Database Web site:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SHANGHAI NOON (director: Tom Dey; screenwriter: Alfred Gough/Miles
Millar; cinematographer: Dan Mindel; editor: Richard Chew; cast: Jackie
Chan (Chon Wang), Owen Wilson (Roy O'Bannon), Lucy Liu (Princess Pei
Pei), Brandon Merrill (Indian Wife), Roger Yuan (Lo Fong), Xander
Berkeley (Van Cleef), Rong Guang Yu (Imperial Guards), Cui Ya Hi
(Imperial Guards), Eric Chi Cheng Chen (Imperial Guards), Walton Goggins
(Wallace), Jason Connery (Andrews), Russell Badger (Sioux chief), 2000)
This is a winning madcap comedy, enhanced by the mercurial pairing of
Jackie Chan with
Owen Wilson, featuring a fluid script and some irrespressible comedy
routines. Though the plot of the film revisits familiar territory, of
the rescue of the princess tale, and the idea of a buddy movie, where
characters who are opposites must mesh together. But, what overcomes
that familiarity, is the energy and chemistry the two co-stars have and
their ability to look good on-the-screen together. Jackie Chan is Chon
Wang -- if you say it fast it sounds like John Wayne -- a screw up in
the Imperial Guard in the Forbidden City of China in 1881, while Owen
Wilson is Roy O' Bannon, a non-stop talking, screw up bandit, who robs
trains in the Wild West.
Princess Pei Pei (Lucy Liu) refuses to marry the 12-year-old emperor,
whom she says reminds her of a toad. When her American tutor (Connery)
offers to smuggle her out of China to Carson City, Nevada, she accepts,
but it is a hoax, as she ends up being kidnapped by a renegade Imperial
Guardsman whom the American acted for, Lo Fong (Roger Yuan). He holds
her for a king's ransom in gold and makes her into a slave with the
other Chinese he keeps around so that the Americans can have cheap labor
to build the railroad.
The Emperor sends three of his best Imperial Guards to exchange her for
the gold, but Chon Wang, having a secret crush on the princess, talks
his way into going along to carry their bags. Out West, their train gets
robbed by the O'Bannon gang and Chon gets separated from the other
Imperial Guards. While in the woods, trying to figure how to get to
Carson City, he saves a Sioux Indian boy from the Crow through his
ability in the martial arts, and the chief rewards him with a squaw
(Brandon Merrill) and the Indian name of "Man-Who-Fights-In-Dress."
Still resolved to find the princess, he meets Roy O' Bannon again, and
the two somehow end up in jail together, and make a shaky pact to be
partners -- with Chon only interested in rescuing the princess, while
Roy is pretending to be interested in her, but really is interested only
in the gold. After they escape from jail, a ruthless and corrupt
sheriff, Van Cleef (Xander Berkeley), who rides with a posse after the
wanted desperadoes, tracks them down, and a series of comically inspired
shootouts, a spoofing of the traditional Western and of Lee Van Cleef's
spaghetti Westerns, and a chance for Jackie Chan's martial arts thing to
develop full blast, which all take place with much zest and a surprising
amount of wit (not sophisticated but the lowbrow kind).
Shanghai invests more time in comedy than in martial arts, using the
odd-couple relationship between Chon and Roy to its maximum comic
advantage. What results are well-executed pratfalls, lots of sight gags,
ingenuous fight scenes, some stupid ethnic jokes and the flaunting of
Indian stereotypes, but whereas those old Westerns had the bias be for
real, here's its in jest and, all the while, the film keeps the comedy
rolling on. Though not all the comedy works, the scenes of Owen in the
whorehouse were stale and offered the lowest kind of vulgarian  humor.
But there is something inexplicable about the stars that make this film
effective and able to overcome its triteness. It was better than what I
expected from a Jackie Chan Hollywood film, and credit must be given to
first-time director Tom Dey for making the film so appealing and so
people friendly. It should prove well in the box office, probably
reaching past its targeted teenage audience, and after all, this is a
business film...whose purpose is the bottom line.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
John Beachem
It's 1881, and the royal Princess Pei Pei (Lucy Liu) has fled her home
in China's Forbidden City to visit the west. Unfortunately she has
been kidnapped, and the ransom has been set at one hundred thousand
pieces of gold. Three royal guards have been sent to America to
deliver the gold.  Accompanying them is Chon Wang (Jackie Chan), a
guard who is not particularly popular among his people for reasons
never explained to us.  As Wang's group heads toward Carson City to
deliver the gold, their train is robbed by the surfer like Roy
O'Bannon (Owen Wilson) and his gang of rather brain dead thugs. Wang
is seperated from the other guards. He forms an unlikely alliance with
O'Bannon in an attempt to rescue the princess on his own. Accompanying
the two very different men are Wang's new wife, Falling Leaf (Brandon
Merrill), who turns out to be an expert marksman, and a horse who can
follow commands better than any dog. Against them are a group of
renegade lawmen led by the evil, blood-thirsty Marshall Van Cleef
(Xander Berkeley) and a former Chinese warrior (Roger Yuan), who now
runs a labor camp.
As everyone knows, Jackie Chan movies are not held to the same
standard as most other films. Chan's films are present for no other
reason than to entertain with slapstick humor and amazing acts of
physical dexterity.  I'm happy to say that on both counts, "Shanghai
Noon" delivers. Does that mean this is a great film? No, of course
not. A Jackie Chan movie can never be classified as great. "Shanghai
Noon" Is really nothing more than goofy, mindless fluff that audience
members will forget days after viewing.  Does that mean there's
nothing deep and meaningful about this movie? Frankly, yes. The
subject of the treatment of Chinese workers in the old west is touched
upon briefly; but you'll be pleased to hear that the remainder of the
film is devoted entirely to Jackie Chan and Owen Wilson acting like
goofballs, and the two get some great goofball scenes together. Two of
the funniest ones are where they have to escape from a jail cell, and
another where they play a rather bizarre drinking game in a whore
house.
Jackie Chan has been called the Buster Keaton of the '90s. At first I
didn't believe this to be an accurate statement, since many of his
older films ("Rumble in the Bronx" in particular) are a little more
serious.  However, after the release of "Rush Hour" two years ago,
Chan has shown himself to be quite the comedian. While physical comedy
is obviously his forte, Chan is also a master of hysterical facial
expressions. Watch his face in a scene where tomahawks are being
hurled at him. On the other hand, Owen Wilson ("The Haunting") is
great at dialogue driven comedy. He is given some of the movie's best
lines like, "Stop it! We're men, we're not pinatas." Yet despite some
great comical moments, I had a hard time seeing Wilson as anything
more than a surfer stuck in the old west. Chan and Wilson obviously
make up the majority of the film, with the other characters amounting
to little more than props. Lucy Liu ("Play it to the Bone") gives a
strangely subdued performance and hardly appears in the
picture. Xander Berkely ("Gattaca") is strangely amusing, rather than
scary, considering the type of character he is supposed to be playing.
Okay everyone, you're obviously going to see "Shanghai Noon" to watch
Jackie Chan do some amazing acrobatics using all sorts of
scenery. Thankfully there is quite a bit more action here than was
present in "Rush Hour". He also gets some interesting props to work
with: like a horseshoe tied to a rope; a pair of antlers sans moose;
and in a rather amazing scene, a few pine trees.  It's also a lot of
fun watching Chan's old fashion warrior try and use a six shooter for
the first time. The movie's main faults come from some interesting
minor characters being given no screen time. Brandon Merrill's
character is especially interesting, but she appears in the film for
no more than two minutes at a time. Another problem is a gratingly bad
soundtrack, which doesn't fit the movie in any way. The movie ends
with Chan's trademark outtakes which were some of the funniest I've
seen from one of his movies.  Also, watch for an appearance by
"Revenge of the Nerds" star Curtis Armstrong. "Shanghai Noon" runs a
bit too long at 110 minutes, when Chan's movies should always stick to
a 90 minute running time. I'd recommend the film to anyone who enjoyed
"Rush Hour" and give it three and a half out of five stars.
Any past movies you want me to review? Send to:
johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at either: http://www.dependentfilms.net or
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
MPAA: Rated PG-13 for action violence, some drug humor, language and sensuality
Runtime: USA:110
RATING: 8/10 
Jackie Chan is back! If this sentence means anything to you, if Kung-Fu, Karate and elegant fights make you happy, see this film. If not, you don't have to read the rest of this review. Maybe I am wrong, but I believe that the fans of Jackie Chan and martial arts will get much more out of this than other members of the audience. On front, let me just say that this is a very entertaining film. It is somewhat 'Wild Wild West' tried to be. Jackie Chan has never been better. And it may very be his first film where the story is equally appealing as the action sequences.
In the unknown regions of ancient China, lies a forbidden city, surrounded by majestic mountains, and hidden from the rest of the world. Mystique and treasures are conceived behind its walls and protected by the royal army of brave and invincible warriors. The Emperor's daughter (Lucy Liu) dreams of another life, where freedom is more important than wealth and traditions. Seduced by the western way of life, she follows an American officer to the land of opportunities, where she falls under the power of Lo Fong (Roger Yuan), a former warrior that escaped the forbidden city for the same dreams. Demanding a gigantic ransom for the princess, he imprisons her in his mine, where Chinese workers are tortured under his tyranny. It is now time for four brave worriers to rescue the princess and return her safely home. One of these worriers is Chon Wang (Jackie Chan). On a train to Carson City, Chon runs into Roy O'Bannon (Owen Wilson) -- the inept leader of a gang of a bumbling but dang!
erous train robbers. He is an outlaw with ethics (imagine that). A romantic that  never steals from women and can barely shoot a gun. When Roy hears about the ransom that has to be paid, he becomes friends with Chon, but their relationship turns soon into a true friendship. We follow them on their quest, filled with dangers, surprises and adventures...
Forbidden exotic cities, snowy mountains, golden prairies, saloons, beautiful princesses, brave heroes, evil villains, duels to the death and "happily ever after" -- this film has it all. Like its plot, the movie combines the classic Cowboy-movies with the beautiful Hong Kong-action. The result is a good portion of good old fashioned entertainment presented with a new and refreshing twist. Most of the time 'Shanghai Noon' is very funny because of this rather original premise: the Ancient East meets the Wild West. You won't find a better contrast than that. China is a land of beauty,magic and mystique. Ancient traditions that command total obedience. Here a man must not think for himself. He must follow orders from a great, almost divine force. America is a land of endless fields, green forests, clear rivers. Unchanged since the beginning of time. Yet untouched by man's vanity. It is the sunrise of a new civilization that slowly emerges from the shadows of the gray taverns. Ben!
eath the ruffness, lies the endless and pure freedom. Alfred Gough's and Miles Millar's script consists of endless and mostly amusing whacks on the cultural differences between the civilizations. We follow our brave warrior on his quest, and his many amusing encounters with the Indians, Outlaws and Wild Cowboys. There are moments in the first hour of the film, when you won't stop laughing. But after making his point, first-time-director Tom Dey doesn't quite know what to do and so the second half of the movie is mostly a wait for the ending. Of course in a film like this, a climax can not exist for one simple reason: from the very beginning you know how the film will end. That is why the screenwriter should save some of the hilarious moments till the end. Instead they are all released in the first half of the movie, which although makes you laugh non stop in the beginning, leave you bored and a bit disappointed in the end. In other words, this film extends its curtecy for all !
too long, repeating itself for no obvious reason.
In the end it is the wisely chosen pair that holds this film together. That element is the constant positive force that makes the movie into a great experience. Together Chan and Wilson make a great and believable team. Jackie Chan is superb in this role. I couldn't think of anyone who could provoke genuine emotions between the graceful Kung-Fu kicks. There is something about him that alienates him from the other actors in his category. He does not posses the muscles of Arnold Schwartznegger, he doesn't resort to explosions or digital effects to look interesting (like Steven Segal), nor does he move with the gracefulness of Jean Claude van Dam. And yet he generates so much warmth and sweetness that it compensates for all the virtues mentioned above. We'r not just amazed by his physical abilities. He makes us care about his character. Wilson has what it takes to be a failed cowboy. What's very important is that he understands the atmosphere, the style of the film, so that he do!
esn't over act or make his character to serious.
A very decent cinematography and costume design are accompanied by an energetic musical score by Randy Edelman. The editing may need some polishing, since the film drags on for all too long, testing everyone's patience. Though Dey presents a story that gives him many possibilities, he uses few of them and resorts soon to an ordinary action / adventure that (though not original) is solid. It is a less artistic, but lighter and more amusing experience than 'Mission: Impossible 2' . A true, cheerful good hearted delight that provides a light, harmless entertainment for audience members of any age. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
SHANGHAI NOON
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Liu, Brandon Merrill, Roger
Yuan, Xander Berkeley.
Screenplay:  Alfred Gough & Miles Millar.
Producers:  Roger Birnbaum, Gary Barber and Jonathan Glickman.
Director:  Tom Dey.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, profanity, drug use)
Running Time:  110 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Jackie Chan in another buddy action-comedy -- now there's something I
didn't think I ever needed to see again. Sure, the formula proved
extremely successful in 1998's $141 million hit RUSH HOUR. It also meant
Jackie Chan fans had to endure the human audio torture device that is
Chris Tucker, and that studios would persist in their foolish perception
that American audiences might not embrace a film with Chan as its solo
star. SHANGHAI NOON looked like a disaster waiting to happen -- formula
piled upon formula, cheap gag piled upon cheap gag, Jackie Chan in another
buddy action-comedy.
     The next time an international action star comes calling on
Hollywood, and needs a buddy action-comedy partner, I hope they pick Owen
Wilson again. The quirky actor does something few actors have the ability
to do: He can make you forget you're watching a formula film. SHANGHAI
NOON opens in 1881, where independent-minded Chinese princess Pei Pei
(Lucy Liu) wants to escape the Forbidden City and her arranged marriage. 
Unfortunately, she chooses as her escort to America a duplicitous
translator, who turns Pei Pei over as a hostage to disgraced former
Imperial Guard Lo Fong (Roger Yuan). Enter Chon Wang (Chan), a lower-tier
Imperial Guard who accompanies a mission to recover the princess. On a
train crossing Nevada, Chon Wang and company are accosted by a gang of
thieves headed by Roy O'Bannon (Wilson). O'Bannon and Chon begin at odds,
but eventually become riding partners (though O'Bannon's goal is more
likely the solid gold ransom than the princess' safe return).
     As was the case in RUSH HOUR, Chan's ability to hold up his end of
the buddy partnership is never in question. There is something so
instantly and immensely likable about Chan that it's almost unfair that
he's also so physically gifted. His stunt work is again in top form in
SHANGHAI NOON, finding more creative props for Chan to use as weapons
against his foes: saplings, moose horns, horseshoes, a railroad log car,
etc. Director Tom Dey and editor Richard Chew don't do Chan's work optimum
justice -- too many sequences are chopped up when it has proved infinitely
smarter over the years to let the camera sit still and watch Chan at work
-- but they still possess that unique capacity to dazzle. A movie fight
sequence is usually an obligatory piece of action business; a Jackie Chan
fight sequence is the reason you never want to leave your seat during the
action.
     And Owen Wilson is the reason you never want to leave your seat
during the exposition. His O'Bannon is a great, goofy comic creation, a
big talker whose primary reason for being in the outlaw game appears to be
impressing women. Any number of actors probably could have pulled off that
characterization, but it's far more difficult to give it the strangely
off-hand charm Wilson provides. His performance cashes in on the
incongruity of his surfer-casual line readings, but it never depends on
that incongruity. There's just something unexpectedly funny about the way
Wilson handles even the most mundane, predictable moments. I spent half of
RUSH HOUR pleading for Chris Tucker to get off the screen so I could enjoy
Jackie Chan. No such problems in SHANGHAI NOON -- I felt a silly grin
plastered across my face no matter which actor was being showcased.
     If the raw material of SHANGHAI NOON had been stronger, it could have
been a truly inspired comedy. Writers Alfred Gough and Miles Millar pump
some clever lines into the script, but it's still a bit too dependent on
making fun of the names Pei Pei and Chon Wang (or rib-nudgingly naming one
nasty cowboy Van Cleef). Then there are the lumbering plot development
scenes, including references to Chinese railroad labor that seems included
primarily for a sense of anachronistic moral superiority. In fact, the
entire premise feels like a grand distraction from the appeal of the two
stars, whose work individually and as a team blows the material away. I'm
not sure what sort of setting might have served them better, and it almost
feels like quibbling to wonder. Chan and Wilson simply make SHANGHAI NOON
loads of fun. It's the sort of buddy action-comedy that wipes some of the
stigma away from the term.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
SHANGHAI NOON (2000) 
Rated PG-13; running time 109 minutes 
Genre: Action/Comedy 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0184894 
Official site: http://studio.go.com/movies/shanghainoon/index.html  
Written by: Alfred Gough, Miles Millar 
Directed by: Tom Dey 
Cast: Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Liu, Roger Yuan, Xander Berkeley, 
Walt Goggins, Brandon Merrill
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsshanghai.html
Remember back in my ROMEO MUST DIE review where I said that Jet Li 
displayed "the charm and humor of Jackie Chan"?  Well, strap me down and 
slap me silly--because I was just plain wrong.  I like Jet Li, but he's 
no Jackie Chan.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Set in the late 1800s, SHANGHAI NOON is a fun mix of humor, martial 
arts, riffs on and homages to Western flicks ranging from HIGH NOON to 
BLAZING SADDLES to BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID, with a few 
Eastern movie standards ("You killed my uncle!") thrown in for good 
measure.
After Princess Pei Pei (Lucy Liu) is kidnapped away from Forbidden City, 
China and taken to America's western frontier of Carson City, Nevada, 
Imperial Guard Chon Wang (Jackie Chan) is reluctantly allowed to go to 
America along with three other guardsmen, to rescue her.  Fate meets him 
on a train, when Roy O'Bannon (Owen Wilson), a flirtatious train robber 
with a heart o' gold (and a nose for finding gold), crosses paths with 
Chon and eventually teams up with him to help Chon find the princess.  
Standing in their way is the traitorous ex-guardsman Lo Fong (Roger 
Yuan) who is behind Pei Pei's kidnapping, Marshall Nathan VanCleef 
(Xander Berkeley), out to arrest Roy and Chon, and Wallace (Walt 
Goggins), one of Roy's trigger-happy newbie bandits.
The Upshot:
The word best used to describe SHANGHAI NOON is, "fun".  Not just fun-ny 
- though, it was definitely that - "Shanghai" worked well because it 
never took itself too seriously (ya gotta love a Cowboy movie where the 
Indians aren't treated like Noble Savages, and they poke fun at 
themselves), and neither did its two lead actors/characters.  And 
because of its lighthearted approach, I was easily able to ignore plot 
slippages that might otherwise have bugged the daylights out of me had 
"Shanghai" been a more straight-ahead action flick.
The trademark of any Jackie Chan movie comes in his high-energy martial 
arts acrobatics, combined with his usual humorous flair.  And as usual, 
Chan did not disappoint on either end.  Chan is the Dick Clark of 
martial arts movies; the man must be 105 years old by now (I remember 
watching him in CANNONBALL RUN when I was a wee pup myself--and he 
looked about the same age even then), but watching him fly around 
on-screen, doing all his own fighting and stunts, you'd swear that he 
was still a young thing.  It is nothing less than amazing to me, and I 
could watch his movies without the sound on as long as he could keep his 
tremendous kicks (puts Chuck Norris to shame, I tell ya) and punches 
going.  And I defy you to find anything cuter than Jackie Chan getting 
silly after puffing on a peace pipe ("Could be worse; at least he's not 
White"...man, they kept me rollin').
Equally enjoyable, in a different way, was Owen Wilson as Roy O'Bannon.  
I couldn't help but to see shades of a young Robert Redford in Wilson, 
though unlike Redford's Butch Cassidy, Roy was a lot more personable and 
a lot less misogynic.  "Sincere and charming" describes his character 
best; never sarcastic or winking at the audience, you'd be hard-pressed 
to see Roy as a true bad guy, even when he opens mouth, inserts foot. 
But it was the interplay between Roy and Chon (and of course, between 
Chan and Wilson), that most impressed me.  The "Chinese Drinking Game" 
they played had me in stitches, as did their early fight scene together 
(which reminds me: don't believe everything you see in the trailer for 
this flick.  You'll see what I mean). I'd dearly love to see these two 
actors expand on their great chemistry; who knows--maybe they could be 
the next Paul Newman And Robert Redford buddy team.
The beauty of SHANGHAI NOON, though, is that it doesn't just rely on the 
two leads to progress its story.  Lucy Liu's Princess is no shrinking 
violet; as headstrong as she is beautiful, it was quite heartening to 
see that she had some fight in her, and she didn't just sit back and let 
herself get Rescued like a damsel in distress.  And though Roger Yuan 
didn't really distinguish himself in what could've been a plum role as 
bad guy Lo Fong, the same cannot be said of Xander Berkeley; the fun he 
must've had in playing the Marshall in his dueling scenes with Roy, was 
evident during his performance.  It's just too bad that he wasn't given 
more on-screen time.
A couple or three bits didn't work all that well. I never did get what 
Wallace's deal was all about; he seemed to be one bad guy too many.  
Maybe I blinked and missed it--or maybe the meat of their parts were 
left on the editor's cutting floor--but where were the three Imperial 
Guards hanging out over the course of the movie?  And though the tribal 
chief's daughter was apparently a throwback to similar female characters 
in past Westerns, I rolled my eyes at how her story played out in the 
end.  Fortunately, these were minor missteps, and they had a negligible 
effect on my enjoyment of the movie.
Usually, thoughts of movie remakes and part-twos, give me the hives; but 
I didn't get enough of SHANGHAI NOON.  I want more.  If approached 
well--and if Jackie Chan can hold up (and he shows no signs of slowing), 
I could groove on SHANGHAI NOON II: DESTRY RIDES AGAIN.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]
I hesitated on addressing the Black Factor--or more precisely, the 
"Minority Factor"--in this review; after all, Chan & company took such a 
whimsical look at the lives of Chinese and Native Americans in the wild 
wild west of yore ("I don't know why they call me the 'Shanghai Kid'; 
I'm not from Shanghai!") that it seems almost wrong to deal with those 
issues on a more serious basis.  Still, I've not been one to back down 
from examining prejudices - Hollywood's, as well as my own.
The lighthearted approach used in dealing with the issues of race in 
this movie didn't mean that it was glossed-over; it was just treated 
subtlety, and in my opinion, worked all the better for that subtle 
treatment.  Only once did my BS meter go off (Blacks would be welcome in 
a saloon in the 1800s, but not Chinese?), and only once was bigotry 
specifically, directly addressed.  The treatment felt right, though 
issues of Chon's assimilation into western culture (in a "when in Rome" 
fashion) left me vaguely ill-at-ease.
But more disturbing to me, on a personal level, was my own prejudicial 
reaction to this movie--in a roundabout way, most of which had little to 
do with "Shanghai", and more to do with Chan's recent hit movie, RUSH 
HOUR, co-starring Chris Tucker (which I didn't watch for the longest 
time because I, frankly, didn't feel like seeing Tucker play the 
sidekick as court-jester).
The Diva broached this issue in her review of Held Up when she said, 
"Why is okay for me to spend my money watching a stupid Adam Sandler 
movie, but not okay for me to watch 'Booty Call'?"; and it made me stop 
and wonder the same about my own pre-judging of the role of the Black 
Sidekick--like Tucker in "Rush", vs the White Sidekick--like Wilson in 
"Shanghai".  The self-examination left me somewhat disconcerted; I had 
to ask myself if there's really a difference in how the characters are 
written and/or played by their respective actors, and more to the point, 
whether the difference is an actual, tangible thing, or merely my 
perception.
I haven't quite decided yet.  My heart wants to say that a Tucker, or a 
Danny Glover, or a [insert Black Actor as Sidekick name here] is written 
or directed differently than would be a Wilson, or a Gene Wilder, or a 
[insert White Actor as Sidekick name here].  But my head tells me that 
even where there is fault in the writing or direction, there is probably 
also duplicity on the actor's part.  And maybe a bit of some on mine.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Forget MISSION: IMPLAUSIBLE TOO; spend your movie duckets next week on 
SHANGHAI NOON.  It's the funniest movie I've seen all year; Owen Wilson 
is a silly charmer, and Jackie Chan is still one baaad mofo.  And don't 
forget: as with most Jackie Chan movies, do not leave before you see the 
outtakes.
SHANGHAI NOON (rating: greenlight):   
GLADIATOR brought the roar into the summer movie season, but SHANGHAI 
NOON adds the fun.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Even worse than the spy genre, the Western genre is in clear
decline.  The film industry has lost the recipe for making good
riveting Westerns.  Now they can make only repetitive parodies that
mock the conventions of the Western and which do not have the soul
that made Westerns great.  The features that used to come cheap--the
horses and the scenery--now make Westerns prohibitively expensive to
make.  Perhaps the Western will return with digitized horses and
blue screen sunsets, who knows?  I spared myself last year's THE
WILD, WILD WEST, but SHANGHAI NOON looked moderately better.  It
probably was.
     Bringing a Chinese martial artist to the Old West has some of
the same possibilities as bringing a samurai in the only partially
successful mixture of genres of RED SUN (1971).  Sure enough, this
film has all the standard Western cliches we could have listed
BEFORE seeing the film.  We have a moving train robbery (only
slightly less cliched is the fact it is committed by amateurs and
incompetents).  We have a visit to a cathouse.  We have an escape
from an evil sheriff's jail.  We have a visit to an Indian village.
And, of course, there is a saloon brawl.  And there is a showdown on
a town street.  Miles Millar and Alfred Gough seem to have written
the script with a checklist.  Each cliche circumstance is revisited
with an eye toward how it might be a little different if a comic
Chinese martial artist involved.  Even so nothing more creative than
a three-way fistfight is attempted.  There are also wide vistas
filmed to stirring music whetting our appetites for a real Western,
but the film only reminds us that the film industry has lost that
particular ability.
     The film opens in Beijing, in the Forbidden City.  Chon Wang
(played by Jackie Chan) is a hapless member of the Imperial Guard,
charged with scrubbing floors and protecting Princess Pei Pei (Lucy
Alexis Liu).  The princess, wishing to avoid an arranged marriage,
agrees to be taken to Carson City, Nevada.  Along the way she
realizes that her companion is really kidnapping her.  Wang is sent
to Nevada with his uncle to rescue her.  The uncle is killed when
the train is robbed by a band of inept train robbers.  Chon teams
with their leader Roy O'Bannon (Owen Wilson) in an attempt to save
the princess.  What does all this have to do with Shanghai or noon?
Not a thing.  But by giving the film a pointless name the writers
could squeeze one more joke out.  Many of the gags will be familiar
including the "horsing around" of a trained horse.  One weakness of
the script is the dependency on one character, who shall remain
nameless here, who gets the characters out of several nasty patches,
but otherwise seems never to be around.  This is just too easy an
answer for how the main characters are going to escape their
problems.
     In spite of the rather unimaginative plotting and scripting
Owen Wilson and Jackie Chan each turn in engaging performances.
Remarkably, Wilson holds his own against Chan, perhaps even making
himself the more interesting character.  The stress is less on
Chan's martial arts than in his classic films.  These fights still
seem very orchestrated.  I have no doubts that if Chan got into a
real fight he would probably still give a very good account of
himself, but I suspect it would look very different from the
stylized and contrived fights he has in his films.  These are
choreographed to show off his natural grace.
     Daniel Mindel's cinematography is frequently quite good, though
many of his effects are overly familiar.  When bullets shot through
a wall each gave rise to a column of light in BLOOD SIMPLE, it was
an impressive effect.  Now it is over-used and once again here we
see it used.  He does get some nice Nevada landscapes and it is hard
not to make the Forbidden City in Beijing look impressive.  Oh, and
yes, I can confirm what Jackie Chan fans already know.  The viewer
should sit through the credits to see the out-takes from the
filming.
     Overall SHANGHAI NOON this is just a passable entertainment
which gets from me a rating of 5 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Tom Dey. Screenplay by Miles Millar and Alfred Gough. Starring
Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Liu. Running time: 111 minutes. Rated PG
for mild language by the MFCB. Reviewed on June 5th, 2000.
The western genre is one that, in retrospect, seems kind of silly. Modern
revisionism like "Unforgiven" and "Dancing With Wolves" aside, the western
in general is a rather unfortunate black-and-white look at the mid-to-late
nineteenth century, with "the Cowboys" painted as the good guys, and "the
Indians" cast as the villains. The richness of the authentic era is often
supplanted by simpleminded melodrama, a litany of archetypes in spurs and
ten-gallon hats. Which is not to say that these movies aren't necessarily
a lot of fun -- it's tough to beat something like "Stagecoach" for sheer
exhilaration -- but it's hard to dismiss the notion that part of the
reason for the decline of the western was its strict adherence to this
imaginary, often offensive version of the past.
It's ironic, then, that a movie like "Shanghai Noon" -- which seeks to
be both a traditional summer action picture and a pastiche of the western
-- offers a surprisingly genuine view of the Wild West. This isn't the
kind of realism offered by the aforementioned Eastwood and Costner films,
where you could almost feel the heat of the desert and the gallop of 
the horses under your feet. But "Shanghai Noon" makes some surprisingly
astute observations about the whole Cowboy-and-Indian dichotomy which
is rather unexpected in this kind of comedy.
Jackie Chan plays the amusingly-named Chon Wang (which by itself should
give you an idea of the kind of humor of the picture), a Chinese Imperial
Guard who is sent to Nevada to rescue Princess Pei Pei ("Ally McBeal's"
Lucy Liu). The princess has been kidnapped from the Forbidden City by the
traitorous Lo Fong (Roger Yuan) and is being held for ransom in a work
camp populated by other enslaved Chinese. Chon's job is made more
difficult when he is erroneously pegged as the sidekick of train robber
Roy O'Bannon (Owen Wilson), and then in a drunken stupor gets married to a
sly Native American woman (Brandon Merrill). Thrust into an uneasy
partnership and hunted by both Marshall Van Cleef (Xander Berkeley) and
O'Bannon's old gang, Chon and Roy have to team up to travel to Carson City
and rescue Pei Pei.
Much of the amusement of "Shanghai Noon" arises from the nature of Chan's
character: here is a figure who seems alien to both the settlers and the
Native Americans alike. One hilarious sequence really puts it all in
perspective. Chon, having saved a Sioux child from a tribe of Crow
warriors, is invited to join their revelries one night. Chon knows very
little English and no Sioux whatsoever but tries to discuss his mission 
with the Natives all the same. Groans one Sioux, "Now he's saying it
slower. Like that'll help." 
Similarly, there is a sequence involving the other Imperial Guards sent
to America, who have become separated from Chon Wang. Their interpreter is
murdered, but they manage to gain passage with a family of Puritans --
who figure they can't be Indians, so they must be Jews. The script, by
Miles Millar and Alfred Gough, cuts through the cultural barriers; by
showing how ridiculously people act toward Chon and the other Chinese, it
acts as a not-so-subtle reflection of the silliness underlying all those
old Western serials.
Indeed, "Shanghai Noon" as a whole does a very good job of finding just
the right balance between comedy, action, and social commentary. And while
none of these are done exceedingly well -- there aren't a lot of
absolutely uproarious moments, and Chan's stunts are accomplished but
rarely of the amazing variety -- they do come together in a pleasant, 
enjoyable package.
Owen Wilson didn't impress me much as a one-note character in "The
Haunting", but does a much better job here. It helps, no doubt, that he's
been given a pretty interesting character to work with: O'Bannon sort of
straddles the line between wearing white and black hats. He's a train
robber but he's always polite and never steals from ladies. He's torn
between rescuing Pei Pei because it's the right thing to do, and because
he might be able to steal the gold brought to America for her ransom. Even
though he's ostensibly a hero, Wilson maintains a believable roguishness
throughout the proceedings -- all given an almost surreal edge by the fact
that he's a cowboy who sounds like he should be surfing the waves off
Waikiki.
Chan does his usual capable job, although he plays the buffoon a little
too much early on, making his character's later competence seem 
incongruous. Liu makes the most of a small role, playing a princess who
possesses both strength and grace. Somewhat less successful is Merrill as
Chon's Native bride: although she handles the mostly silent part well, the
character itself forms the basis of the movie's most unsuccessful subplot. 
Obviously intended to be a parody of the many inadvertent, neglected and
often ill-fated Native brides in westerns (see "The Searchers", for
example), Merrill's character is used as a deus ex machina a few times too
many, and is an uncomfortable insertion into the story. Nowhere is this
more apparent than at the end of the film: the character's final fate is
contrived and almost nonsensical, as if Millar and Gough had no idea what
else to do with her.
Despite its unconventional marriage of martial arts and cowboy antics,
"Shanghai Noon" is not a movie that will reinvent the western genre. But
that's not what it sets out to do: it's basically an excuse for Jackie
Chan to do what he does best in a new environment, and get in a few digs
at popular cinema along the way. The combination might be unorthodox,
the material somewhat uneven, but somehow, it works pretty well.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/ShanghaiNoon.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
James Sanford
         If you were to make up a list of the hardest working movie
stars, martial arts master Jackie Chan would definitely belong somewhere
in the top ten. Although he's now in his late 40s and has completed at
least 75 films, Chan, who apprenticed with such masters as the Peking
Opera and Bruce Lee, continues to push his body to the limit in pursuit
of new physical challenges.
 Usually he finds a way to put a humorous spin on his stunts as
well. In his American breakthrough picture "Rumble in the Bronx," for
instance, he beat up villains using shopping carts and refrigerators. He
dispatched some bad guys in "First Strike" by brandishing a ladder as
adeptly as if it were a fencing foil. In "Rush Hour," he literally ran
up a garden wall and propelled himself onto a tree branch.
 No one can accuse him of not earning his paycheck.
 Chan collects several bruises and reaps quite a few laughs in
"Shanghai Noon" (the title is a slightly complicated spoof of Gary
Cooper's "High Noon"), playing Chon Wang, a Forbidden City
floor-scrubber who pursues the kidnapped princess Pei Pei (Lucy Liu) all
the way to Nevada in the late 19th century. Along the way, the
determined Wang confronts hostile Crow Indians in a fight that leads to
some amazing tomahawk juggling, is saddled with a ridiculously stubborn
horse and trades quips with Roy (Owen Wilson), an outlaw who's so chatty
and such a bad shot he was thrown out of his own gang.
 Wilson, who plays Roy as a 1980s Valley Guy trapped in the body
of an 1880s gunslinger, meshes very comfortably with Chan, and even when
the jokes are moldy, the duo cheerfully try to put them over anyway.
Often you'll find yourself laughing even though the punchline turned out
to be exactly what you expected.
 Although there's plenty of violence and shooting, "Noon"
somehow manages to stay reasonably sunny and lighthearted without
resorting to the condescending who-cares-it's-just-a-movie attitude that
sunk Mel Gibson's "Maverick" a few years back. Director Tom Dey, who
trained in TV commercials, has an unfortunate habit of keeping his
camera too close to the action, so much so that at times it's hard to
see exactly who's doing what. But by the same token, Dey is smart enough
to trust Chan and Wilson's instincts -- there are several clever scenes
here that were almost certainly either partially or entirely improvised
by the stars.
 "Noon" squeezes a lot of comic mileage out of the sight of the
silk-robed, ponytailed Wang mixing it up with cowboys and desperadoes.
The Indians dub him Man-Who-Fights-In-Dress and the local sheriff brands
him "the Shanghai Kid," which offends Wang slightly because, he
explains, he's not from Shanghai. That's the least of Roy's worries:
"Justice system's all screwed up," he snarls when he learns the bounty
on Wang's head is $1,000 while the reward for Roy is a mere $500.
 Of course, "Noon" wouldn't be a Chan movie if it didn't include
a few eye-popping set pieces and Chan obliges by nimbly running up a
collapsing pile of logs, doing a series of tricky moves on the slender
catwalk of a bell tower, turning a piece of rope and a horseshoe into a
lethal weapon, and managing to balance a sword on a wooden pole during a
big fight. "Noon" also concludes with the traditional series of outtakes
Chan fans expect, and they're well worth sticking around to see. James
Sanford

Author
Scott Hunt
Cast: Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Lui, Roger Yuan, Xander Berkeley,
Writers: Alfred Gough and Miles Millar
Director: Tom Dey
Review by Scott Hunt
Movie Hunt: http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Shanghai Noon is a paint by numbers picture done with finger-paints. There 
are no surprises as to where the paint is going and despite the pretty 
colors, it's far too messy to be considered good. In an attempt to replicate 
the previous success of Rush Hour, the writers have taken the "hero must 
travel to a strange land to save a kidnapped female" premise from the 
previous film and tried to shoehorn it into an Old West setting. In a sloppy 
attempt to disguise rehashed goods, an unsuccessful lampoon is made of 
Westerns. There are some amusing moments created through the sheer charisma 
of Jackie Chan, but overall, it's a feeble effort at displaying the skills 
of one of the premiere physical comedians in world cinema. The audience and 
Chan both deserve far better.
Like Rush Hour, Chan plays a hero who must rescue a kidnapped damsel in 
distress. In this case, he's a member of the Imperial Guard named Chon Wang 
sent to the Western territories of America, circa the late 1800s, to help 
deliver a ransom of 100,000 pieces of gold to a mission in Carson City, 
Nevada, and safely return Princess Pei Pei (Liu) to their homeland following 
her abduction by the traitorous Lo Fong. Following the cinematic tradition 
of buddy pictures, he meets up with Roy (Wilson), a bandit whom he first 
hates, then grudgingly befriends. The thin as onionskin premise just begs to 
be peppered with reams of whimsically staged displays of Chan's ballet-like 
fight scenes. It's a good fifteen minutes before Chan even remotely attempts 
a stunt. And when he does, it singularly unremarkable, involving a 
confrontation with some train-robbing bandits led by Roy. There is a bar 
fight midway through the film where Chan squirts from foe to foe, slippery 
as wet ice and a unique standoff between Chan wielding a horseshoe tied to a 
rope against armed combatants, but other than that, I'm hard pressed to view 
any of the other fights as especially unique to Chan. Anyone who's never 
seen martial arts films might be impressed, but I found myself greatly under 
whelmed.
Wang's partner Roy lends the movie an off-kilter skew with his surfer dude 
via the Old West mentality. Roy is an amiable bandit who is quixotically 
quirky in his approach to life. Although an acquired taste, is soft-spoken 
sarcasm and basic insecurity lends an interesting counterbalance to Wang's 
befuddled chivalry.
A cardboard cutout could have played the princess. As it stands, the fiery, 
charismatic Lucy Lui is criminally underused. How can we care about her fate 
when she is so severely underdeveloped a character? At least she fares 
better than Wang's American Indian bride (Brandon Merrill), who spends the 
entirely of the movie as a silent plot device, speaking only to deliver a 
trite, groan inducing punch-line at the end. Women tend to get short shrift 
in buddy films as window dressing, but these two aren't even given that 
common courtesy. It's a wonder women can even enjoy films of this type with 
their underlying misogynistic tone.
Amid the uninspired scenes are a few amusing nods to the classic western. At 
one point the men are hunted by Marshall Van Cleef (Berkeley), who looks 
more than passingly like Lee Van Cleef in the Good, the Bad and the Ugly. 
Roy has a Sundance Kid look about him that is played upon in a scene where 
the pair plans to bust through a wooden door, guns blazing, as in Butch 
Cassidy and the Sundance Kid. A weaponless Wang fighting tomahawk wielding 
Indians puts an welcome, odd spin on the cowboys vs. Indians theme as the 
fight goes down with nary a six-shooter in sight, using foliage as weapons.
It's obvious this film exist as feel-good, striving merely to entertain, not 
educate or examinate, but that doesn't excuse some of the distracting 
cliches and plot holes. Midway throught the film, Wang is unknowingly 
married to an American Indian woman, who risks her life time and agains to 
save him, yet by film's end, she inexplicable swtiches allegiances, ignoring 
her wedding vows for another man. Wang, a man ruled by tradition, honor and 
principles, does the same. At one point Roy is left for dead, buried up to 
his neck in dirt, a vulture picking at his head. Next scene he's playing 
cards in a casino, no worse the wear. It's a Houdini escape that begs 
explaination. Why do Lo Fong and Van Cleef both think Roy and Wang have the 
gold? Was there a crucial scene cut explaining their fallacious thinking, 
seeing as how the gold never left the custody of the three other imperial 
guardsmen who were transporting the gold with Wang?
Buddy films rely on charisma to carry them through typically threadbare 
plotting. Wilson and Chan display an unusual, yet warm chemistry, but it 
simply isn't enough. They have fun with what they're given, but it's obvious 
both of their considerable talents are suffocated by Filmmaking for the 
Masses 101. It would have been nice to see both men's talent breath under 
more clever, knowing filmmaking.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Touchstone Pictures/Spyglass Entertainment
 Director: Tom Dey
 Writer:  Alfred Gough & Miles Millar
 Cast: Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Liu, Brandon Merrill,
Roger Yuan, Xander Berkeley
 Screened at Loews E-Walk, NYC
   We don't look for political edge in summer films targeted to
a young audience and for the most part people won't
consider "Shanghai Noon" to be political.  But for adults who
think too much, there is indeed such a memorandum.  The
movie, which pits a Chinese villain against a Chinese hero,
marries a Chinese superstar to an American Indian maiden,
mounts an Asian champion against a bevy of American
Marlboro men, and most of all insinuates a hugely successful
friendship between a laid-back Southern-Cal type of outlaw
and a Pekingese, serves to indoctrinate the audience
into the joys of political correctness while simultaneously
sending up the whole liberal notion of P.C.  Though set in the
1880's, "Shanghai Noon" has a surprisingly modern feel,
especially when you hear one character phrase himself with
expressions like "OK" and "cool" and hear Chinese people
who are in America for a brief time speaking almost perfect,
Carson City English.
   "Shanghai Noon" is yet another showcase for the dazzling
physical performances of Hong Kong kung-fu conqueror
Jackie Chan (born Chan Kwong-Sang), considered by some
to be the world's most popular movie actor.  At the age of
forty-six he still does his own stunts and performs high kicks,
rapid pirouettes, and blazing fistplay that make us question
why so many athletes quit the pros before they hit their fifth
decade.  Having performed on the screen since 1971 in the
obscure "Little Tiger from Canton" and then capturing the
cheers of a youthful American public with the likes of
"Supercop," "Rumble in the Bronx" and "Police Story," Chan
has been compared to no less a figure than Buster Keaton. 
As you watch Chan's latest, which is filmed in a part of
Canada that looks a good deal like the American West
a decade or so after the Civil War, you can't help
thinking of the Kansas-born Keaton, who got his start in a
family acrobatic comedy that had the father literally sweep
the floor with the child's outstretched body.  
   Chan likewise sweeps through his scenes, sometimes used
as a mop but ultimately triumphing thanks to nothing more
than the equipment he was born with and the fast-shooting of
his new American friend played by the strikingly handsome
and usually relaxed Owen Wilson as his unlikely pard. 
Though the screenplay is largely an excuse for one action
scene after another, scripters Alfred Gough and Miles Millar
provide their people with splashes of high-spirited wit while
director Tom Dey presides over scenes of slapstick chaos. 
Dey opens his picture in China's Forbidden City in 1881
where during a ceremony of the Imperial Guard (something
like Saddam's Republican Guard, designed to protect the
god-like figures), where the esteemed princess (Lucy Liu)
opposes a projected marriage to a nerd.  After her tutor
sneaks her out by ship to America, she is kidnapped and held
for a ransom in gold.  When Chon Wang (Jackie Chan) is
sent by the emperor to get her back, he gets lost on his way
to Carson City, Nevada, winds up with train robber Roy
O'Bannon (Owen Wilson), and despite their initial differences
in culture and temperament wind up the best of pals and
partners in the plot to pick up the princess.
   Aside from the occasionally sharp script, which includes
lines like "Your name is Chon Wang?  That's a terrible
cowboy name!" "Shanghai Noon" is remarkable principally by
the way the innumerable fights are choreographed without
much help from the MTV department.  The barroom brawls
and open-air confrontations look uncommonly authentic, and
yet, given the solid chemistry between Chan and Wilson, the
audience can look forward to amusing exchanges during the
relatively quiet intervals.  Look to this movie to provide the
much needed breakout for Owen Wilson--who could be
compared to a young Robert Redford and used effectively in
much-delayed sequels to "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance
Kid."
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 110 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Ron Small
Screenplay: Alfred Gough, Miles Mallar
Starring: Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Lui, Brandon Merrill, Xander 
Berkely, Roger Yuan, Rafael Baaz, Ron Guang Yu, Russel Badger
In SHANGHAI NOON Jackie Chan, once again, is given the opportunity to beat 
villains with various bits of scenery while Owen Wilson is given his first 
chance to truly shine in a major film. By now Chan has become something of a 
cultural icon, and unlike many flash in the pan symbols (Mr. T, The Brat 
Pack, The Backstreet Boys…well, one can hope, can't he?) he has endured. His 
Bruce Lee by way of Buster Keaton schtick not only hasn't atrophied, it's 
gaining popularity with each new AMERICAN film he puts out. And yet the guy 
can still pull the proper punches and perform more than the necessary stunts 
with a crazed kamikaze glee that he's retained since his start in 70's Hong 
Kong pics. Less established is Wilson, who by now is a veteran of third 
banana comic relief roles in noisy, empty-headed blockbusters like ARMAGEDDON 
(where he was one of the first to die though, because of Michael Bay's 
severely haphazard direction, I hadn't noticed that he had died until the 
credit crawl when I was able to decipher that the fellow was MIA for half the 
picture hence he must have been killed, unless Bay simply lost track of him) 
and ANACONDA (a film in which he became snake chow within the first thirty 
minutes…not as bad a fate as poor Eric Stoltz who had to spend that film's 
entire duration in a coma…sadly his career has yet to come out of one), but 
began his career co-writing idiosyncratic gems like BOTTLE ROCKET (in which 
he also starred) and RUSHMORE with college buddy Wes Anderson. Here he could 
be playing an ancient ancestor of his BOTTLE ROCKET character, a wannabe bad 
ass with shades of ironical California surfer dude. 
When we're first introduced to Wilson his character is stalling in the midst 
of a train stick up he helped orchestrate, in order to flirt with a hot 
chick; "Is this your first robbery," he coos. With his sun-bleached hair and 
oddball, corn-fed Zen cadence Wilson gives off a self effacing Harrison Ford 
vibe…it's like he's winking at the audience as if to say "not to worry, when 
I'm on screen we're gonna have fun". And we do. Unfortunately the film's 
talented duo is made to twaddle about in a threadbare Saturday Morning 
Cartoon plot with a script that mistakes ingenuous puns for wit.
Placing these wildly disparate performers together in a Western buddy flick 
is surely inspired (certainly more inspired than the pairing of Wilson's much 
less charismatic brother, Luke, with Big Momma himself, Martin Lawrence in 
BLUE STREAK). Yet they never come together to ignite the chemistry of Gibson 
and Glover in LETHAL WEAPON or even Stiller and Norton in KEEPING THE FAITH. 
With the exception of one very amusing bit (a Chinese drinking game that the 
two play while sharing a bubble bath; a scene that belongs in a much funnier 
movie), they seem too enamored of their own considerable talents to ever 
create any palpable comic tension.
Stars as energetic as these can certainly make bad movies more tolerable 
(depending on how much screen time is allotted to their improvisations… 
sometimes this can turn out badly as well…just check out MYSTERY MEN if you 
doubt me), but they can rarely turn them into bonafide good movies. It has 
happened but such an occurrence is as rare as Steak Tar Tar. The original 
BEVERLY HILLS COP was a formula thriller given hints of social satire solely 
because of Eddie Murphy's inspired clowning, but what of THE GOLDEN CHILD or 
BEST DEFENSE, turgid feature length skits that sunk despite Murphy's 
charisma. His presence may have made those films less torturous, but it also 
served to italicize how good those flicks could have been had the material 
been up to par. As a result, most films like these feel bizarrely uneven. 
Example: Chris Tucker's fast paced performance in the very slow paced MONEY 
TALKS.
SHANGHAI NOON surely would have been much worse without Chan and Wilson, both 
of whom seem to be improvising through much of the been there\done that story 
line which, here, is a good thing. Whenever the film focuses on Chan and 
Wilson playing off their surroundings, and sometimes each other, it works. 
But it all comes back to the plot and the boring paces each character is put 
through. For every inspired bit we get three uninspired formula moments 
designed to push the creaky plot forward: the initial dislike between 
characters who will inevitably love each other in a very heterosexual way of 
course, the bonding, the mistrust, and so on.
It's not a bad idea to put Chan in a Western and have whites mistake him for 
an Indian (or on one occasion, a Jew,) but the possibilities of an Asian in 
the Old West are never explored other than at a juvenile pun level (which I 
suppose is fine if you happen to be ten years old). In the film, Chan plays a 
Chinese imperial guard who travels to America with fellow guards (all quickly 
dispatched) in order to rescue Princess Pei-Pei (see what I mean?). He 
stumbles across Roy O' Bannon (Owen Wilson), a good-natured thief in the 
middle of performing a train robbery that goes awry when Roy's buddies turn 
against him. Chan and O' Bannon don't like each other but since fate keeps 
tossing them together, they ultimately choose to partner up and save the 
princess. Many pee-pee jokes ensue.
The majority of Jackie Chan's foreign imports (most of his films) may be 
lacking in the script area, but they do however provide some breathtaking 
action sequences. So far, Chan's American endeavors have not. In RUSH HOUR, 
another dopey buddy movie nearly saved by the pairing of Chris Tucker and 
Jackie Chan, director Brett Ratner hardly used Chan's physical strengths at 
all, and when he did, the action was shot lethargically; Chan was adequate 
but he was essentially asked to perform the same kind of stunts Steven Seagal 
used to do back in the days when he was able to lift his leg. Why hire Chan 
if you're gonna treat like Van Damme or some other action star who can't 
really fight? Dey makes better use of him, though he doesn't seem to know how 
to film him. Dey keeps his camera up close on Chan while the actor performs 
his gonzo stunts, making it more difficult to see exactly what the hell he's 
doing. In Chan's Hong Kong films the directors knew to pull back and let Chan 
do his thing. In America, this terrific performer has yet to be fully taken 
advantage of.
Note: I present to all those loyal readers out there (yes, all three of you) 
an exclusive thought that came to fruition within my cluttered noggin 
approximately seven minutes following the writing of this review: As I 
scanned through my nitpicky write up I realized that maybe I've been a wee 
bit harsh on what is basically a piece of cornball escapism that I probably 
would have cherished in my pre-teen years. It may be unfortunate that since 
then I have become much more jaded and harder to please. Which is to say if 
you are a child (or one at heart, to borrow the cliché…trust me I'm returning 
it right this second) you'll most likely really dig this hodgepodge of corny 
sh…jeez there I go again. But if you happen to be an elitist film snob like 
myself, the kind who prefers THE FRENCH CONNECTION to LETHAL WEAPON 2, well, 
than you know the drill.
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small

Author
Steve Rhodes
A kidnapped princess, 100,000 pieces of gold and Jackie Chan's
exhilarating stunts: if you think that these sound like the perfect
ingredients for a high old-time at your local cinema, you're right.  As
they say in commercials, "But wait, there's more!"
Based on an idea of Jackie's, SHANGHAI NOON, directed by Tom Dey, is set
in the Old West.  Expanding on Jackie's story outline, Miles Millar and
Alfred Gough's hilarious script starts in the Forbidden City before it
heads for the Chinese mining camps in Nevada in 1881.  (This permits the
story to subtly but effectively explore the rampant racism in that
period in our history.)
Last, but not least, Jackie is perfectly matched with Owen Wilson, as a
sidekick who can best be thought of as the anti-Jackie.  Owen's
character is as unsure and lazy as Jackie's character is bold and
energetic.  Hands down, however, Owen gets almost all of the best lines.
Owen plays Roy O'Bannon, a robber who couldn't shoot the broadside of
the proverbial barn and who would rather spend his time with the ladies
anyway.  (When Roy finds his mug on a wanted poster, he goes wild with
delight.  "It'll drive the girls crazy!" he declares, barely able to
control his excitement.)  His ladies are all women in red who occupy a
bordello so chaste that it could appear in a PG-rated picture.
(SHANGHAI NOON is a mild PG-13.)
Jackie plays Chon Wang, an Imperial Guard who is sent to America as part
of a contingent sent to deliver 100,000 pieces of gold as a ransom for a
kidnapped Chinese princess.  Through a series of misadventures, Chon
ends up partnering with Roy.  The two try to make themselves into a
couple of tough Western dudes so they can rescue the princess.  When Roy
finds out how Chon Wang's name is pronounced, he laughs.  "John Wayne --
that's a terrible cowboy name," Roy tells Chon.  "That's not going to
work."
Well, something that certainly does work is the chemistry between these
two charming actors.  Even if their characters are opposites, their
eventual friendship is as genuine as is the rough road to it.  Acting a
bit like Mel Gibson -- the writers collaborated on Mel's LETHAL WEAPON 4
-- Roy doesn't leave all of the physical antics to Chon.  "I don't know
karate, but I know crazy, and I will use it," Roy explains.
As always, Jackie dazzles the audience with his good-spirited stunts
that are choreographed with ballet precision.  With his baby-faced looks
and his broad smile, he would be a hard actor not to love.  And when he
gets hurt, as he often does while doing his own stunts, you can truly
feel his pain.  In every movie he manages to find fresh approaches to
the fighting sequences.  This time he wields everything from moose horns
-- sans moose -- to a horseshoe on a rope.
It is perhaps a little know facet of Jackie's oeuvre, but Jackie is just
as funny when he isn't showing off his athletic dexterity.  SHANGHAI
NOON's funniest sequence -- even more so than the wonderful outtakes --
has Chon and Roy taking a bubble bath in adjoining tubs.  They ham it up
singing a drinking song that it is side-splittingly funny.
As the resilient Princess Pei Pei (you can guess how her name can be
mispronounced), Lucy Liu is underutilized but still manages to give her
character an inner spark.  In a variation on a shotgun marriage, Chon
ends up with a wife through a peace pipe marriage.  Native American
model Brandon Merrill plays Falling Leaves, Chon's new sharpshooter
wife.
The movie's delights don't end with the acting and the script.  Thanks
to Daniel Mindel's lush cinematography and Randy Edelman's old-fashioned
western film music, the movie is a real treat for the eyes and ears.  A
thoroughly enjoyable film, it is (arguably) Jackie's best movie ever.
SHANGHAI NOON runs a fast 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for action violence,
some drug humor, language and sensuality and would be fine for kids
around 8 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, adored the movie, awarding it a full ****.  He
said that he thought it "was really funny, yet in a cool sense."  His
favorite character was Roy.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mark O'Hara
Just in time for students out of school for the summer, Jackie Chan appears 
in another American movie.  The Hong Kong action master is developing a 
trademark: as he did in RUSH HOUR with Chris Tucker, Chan teams up in 
SHANGHAI NOON with comic talent Owen Wilson for a lot of laughs.  The two 
cover the gamut of humor, Chan with his over-the-top physicality, Wilson 
with his quirky, incongruous, New Age-y cowboy.  It's lots of fun.
Although the plot is a creaky mix of clichés, director Tom Dey paces the 
story well, most scenes leading into action sequences that would keep any 
viewer watching.  What Dey and Chan treat us to once again is a series of 
absurd situations, the heroes (Chan as Chon Wang  do you get the 
sound-alike? And Owen Wilson as Roy O'Bannon) slipping into all kinds or 
peril only to survive by their wits or, in O'Bannon's case, by stupid luck.
Starting out in the Forbidden City, the story introduces us to the Chinese 
princess Pei Pei, played by Lucy Lui.  Because she is unhappy in her 
homeland, she gives in easily to the plot proposed by her American tutor  
to leave the country for the States.  Naturally, this private teacher turns 
out to be just another smooth-talking bad guy, as it's a kidnapping plot 
disguised as a defection.  Once the princess is away, the emperor and his 
entourage  receive a ransom note, and proceed to dispatch three members of 
the Imperial guard,  three of the bravest men in the country.  Chon Wang 
tags along because of his fondness and loyalty to the princess, and he 
quickly finds trouble on the train on the dusty plains of the American West. 
  Though the two begin as antagonists, Chon and Roy fall together and even 
become friends.  Their goal is to rescue the beautiful Pei Pei and return 
her to China, and O'Bannon wouldn't mind if mines full of gold came his way 
in the process.  Another rub is that Pei Pei left her homeland under her own 
volition in the first place.
The main conflict that adds interest, beside the ongoing feud between Wang 
and O'Bannon, is the egregious kidnapper, Lo Fong, played by Roger Yuan.  
Head shaved, this young Asian actor easily plays a despicable master of 
martial arts and crime.  Among the adventures that entangle the heroes, a 
Native American woman (Brandon Merrill)  ostensibly Wang's wife  saves the 
day a few different times.  On the whole, not a very original premise, but a 
competent collection of fights and assorted witticisms.
Jackie Chan is unbeatable when it comes to mixing creativity and violence.  
If he were only around when Peter Sellers was fighting his manservant in the 
Pink Panther series!  Chan has been doing this business for so long that his 
effort here is seamless, the self-done stunts pieces of stunning 
choreography.  In one bar fight scene, Chon Wang grabs moose antlers off the 
wall, a perfect weapon with which to fend off a saloon full of belligerent 
cowpokes.  Jackie's English is improving, and he continues to display 
wonderful timing in virtually any scene he's in.
Wilson is the perfect choice for O'Bannon.  In some ways Wilson is a young 
Steve Martin, playing off incongruities with clever but subtle jokes.  His 
character is not quite the nebbish Woody Allen would make him, but there's 
this underlying, rather subtle hilarity that surrounds his performance.  
O'Bannon is good at heart, yes, but he can't avoid the temptation to pick up 
some money however he can.
Lucy Liu plays her part well enough, without having many lines.  The 
modernization of Eastern relationships is one of the more unbelievable 
facets bought to light by the narrative.  Chon Wang goes from obsequious 
bowing to familiar address at a rapid rate.
Working closely with Lo Fong, Marshal Van Cleef fills the role of another 
formidable baddie.  Xander Berkeley plays the role with a nice, sometimes 
almost cartoonish menace, keeping in tone with the exaggeration essential in 
a film of this genre.
The fight scenes in SHANGHAI NOON are very slick, humorous and engaging.  To 
fulfill his hallmark of brilliance within violence, Chan employs the 
antlers, a spinning sheriff's badge, even springy evergreens as weapons.  
His acrobatics are unmatched, his comic sense very natural.  He's certainly 
famous for doing his own stunt work, and the well-known out-takes running 
atop the closing credits make the watching of SHANGHAI NOON even more 
enjoyable.
Perhaps the film is not as fall-down funny as RUSH HOUR; some of the 
ridiculous business in that film cause belly laughs of the kind experienced 
on cool, fast amusement rides.  But neither is NOON as heavy in its 
subplots.  For fans of fights and buddy movies, this flick is a must-see.  
And for viewers unfamiliar with Jackie Chan, this piece would serve as a 
solid introduction.


Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Liu. Directed by Tom Dey. Rated
PG-13.
Now that Jackie Chan is officially in Hollywood, studio honchos seem
afraid of letting him carry a film, something that he has done
countless times in Hong Kong. His first two big American Event Movie
projects have both been buddy movies. The first, Rush Hour, saw him
paired with the fast-talking, very American Chris Tucker. The film
turned out to be one of the biggest hits of 1998, quickly making Chan a
hot commodity. Now, Tinseltown is hoping to repeat Rush Hour's success
with Shanghai Noon, an inconsistent western comedy that brings together
Chan and, oddly, Owen Wilson (a debatable move, since everyone confuses
him with brother Luke anyway). The film is somewhat insensitive and not
always as funny as you'd like, but it's still memorable for a couple of
standout scenes.
After Princess Pei Pei (Lucy Liu, in a token role) is kidnapped from
China's "Forbidden City," Chon Wang (pronounced almost like "John
Wayne," setting up a few cheap jokes), an imperial guard, is sent with
a group of four others to rescue her. Wang is separated from his
companions when a train robbery led by outlaw Roy (Wilson) goes wrong.
Wang finds himself in an Indian village where he unwittingly marries a
young, beautiful Indian girl. This fails to take his mind off his
mission and soon enough he partners with Roy, who agrees to help rescue
the Princess from an evil Chinese hostage-taker who wants a lot of
money from the Chinese government.
The four Chinesemen who came with Wang are carrying a lot of gold and,
of course, that's really what Roy is motivated by. Chon Wang is pure
and only wants to rescue his beloved princess. There's a veritable
subplot concerning whether Chon Wang can find the courage to abandon
his culture, disobey the Emperor's orders and Americanize himself that
left a sour taste in my mouth. I balked when some claimed that there
were racial stereotypes in The Phantom Menace, but if people get mad at
this one, I can at least see why.
One of Jackie Chan's dilemmas has often seemed to be whether to focus
more on the comedy or the eye-popping martial arts stunts -- he is
exceptionally talented at both. His best films are the ones that
balanced the two, neither upstaging the other. One of Shanghai Noon's
problems is that both seem to be diluted -- the action is abundant but
more cautious than Chan's other films and the laughs are, at best, on-
and-off.
The movie redeems itself with two gut-bustingly hilarious scenes, one
involving controlled substances at an Indian campfire and the other a
Chinese drinking game. These are two of the most memorable scenes of
the year; if more of the movie of the movie was like this, we would
have been looking at a comedic masterpiece. And then there is the
obligatory blooper reel just before the end credits roll which, not
surprisingly, turned out funnier than the rest of the film.
With Jackie Chan movies, it always comes back to this: almost anything
can be salvaged with the actor's charm. In the end, it's the actor's
effortless amiability that really saves Shanghai Noon. He's so good at
portraying a fish-out-of-water that he breathes new life into the
overdone isolated-foreigner-introduced-to-modern-society plot. It's a
shame that Hollywood is afraid to let Chan go it alone: he's not only a
great martial artist but he's a hell of an actor too. Owen Wilson,
meanwhile, is just alright.

Author
Lars Lindahl
"Shanghai Noon" (2000) *** (out of four)
Starring Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Liu, Roger
Yuan, Walt Goggina, and Xander Berkely.
When Rush Hour became a surprise box office hit in
1998, Jackie Chan simultaneously became a household
name in America. Much like his character in the film,
Chan was someone different - a welcome change from now
fading stars like Dolph Lundgren, Jean-Claude Van
Damme and Sylvester Stallone. Completing his own
stunts, Chan's dexterity is a marvel to watch, and
with a quiet, gentle manner of speaking, he is also
unstoppably amiable. Rush Hour, for Hollywood and
audiences alike, was too good to be true - everyone
and their dogs knew a follow-up was inevitable. Enter
Shanghai Noon, a bright, enjoyable action comedy that
isn't a sequel to Rush Hour but might as well be
considered one. With Chan, an identical plot, and the
same East-Meets-West-With-Hilarious-Consequences feel
to it, if you didn't like Rush Hour you won't like
Shanghai Noon, and vice-versa. 
Gone is the comedic sidekick Chris Tucker of Rush Hour
(what has happened to Tucker these past couple of
years anyway?), his replacement: the equally
loquacious and hilarious Owen Wilson. An actor who is
finally getting the recognition he deserves, Wilson
had blandly humorous supporting roles in Armageddon,
Anaconda, and The Haunting but his greatest
accomplishment remains his involvement in the fresh
comedies Bottle Rocket and Rushmore as co-writer.
Coming into the movie, I felt that the performance of
Wilson would crucially make or break the film. Since
Chan's fighting scenes were near-guaranteed to be
entertaining (they were), would the rest of the movie,
which Wilson dominates, be as exciting? Happily,
Wilson came through. As a two-timing wannabe outlaw,
his acting was exactly what the role demanded; a
combination of confidence and low self-esteem - a guy
who can talk the talk but comes nowhere close to
walking the walk. Wilson impressively completed the
difficult task of filling huge gaps of plot with witty
subplots and one-liners. His job was to hide the fact
that Chan's English vocabulary is somewhat limited,
and he succeeds with high honors.
But, then again, without Jackie Chan, this movie would
be nothing. He is a true expert at what he does - cool
stunts without the commanding aid of special effects,
and his good old fashioned fighting skills (no matter
how often he does them) never get old. But the actor
Jackie Chan is developing as well. He seems much more
mature and comfortable here then in Rush Hour,
sporting a long pony tail hanging below his
fashionable cowboy hat. 
Shanghai Noon, poking fun at the old time Westerns in
which pardners are inseparable (until it comes to gold
or women, that is), relies on the chemistry between
Wilson and Chan is excellent, although it does take a
little too long for them to finally team up. The story
follows Chon Wang, an 18th century imperial guard who
is sent from China to the Wild Wild West in order to
rescue the kidnapped princess (Lucy Liu) he has a
crush on. On his way, he stumbles into some trouble
and eventually is helped by the suspicious Roy
O'Bannon (Wilson). The real challenge for the two is
whether they will survive each other before they
attempt their rescue mission.
With numerous references to older classics (the movie
is called Shanghai Noon, get it? Shang-High Noonhaha,
also a shot similar to the famous final scene of Butch
Cassidy and the Sundance Kid) and names (Wilson's
birth name was Wyatt Earp, Chon Wang conveniently
sounds just like John Wayne), the smaller jokes work
best. 
A small predictable comedy, occasionally sprinkled
with gigantic laughs and "how-did-they-do-that?"
action scenes, Shanghai Noon does run a bit too long,
but otherwise is great, clean fun. Oh and don't forget
to stay for the infamous bloopers at the end of the
movie, they're very funny. 

Author
Jon Popick
After Wild Wild West, viewers might be understandably apprehensive about
a summer film set in the Old West, the mere sight of a tumbleweed
striking fear into the hearts of moviegoers round the world.  But
Shanghai Noon will change the way you feel about the recently maligned
genre.  Noon not only proves that Jackie Chan's mainstream hit Rush Hour
was no fluke, but also looks likely to establish co-star Owen Wilson as
one of Hollywood's most likeable comedic stars.
Noon's story is so simplistic that it could have been taken from a video
game (in fact, some games are much more complicated).  A Chinese
Imperial Guard named Chon Wang (Chan, Rush Hour) is sent to the great
western frontier of the United States to rescue a beautiful princess
(Lucy Liu, Ally McBeal) from working in a railroad slave camp.  Along
the way, he teams up with a struggling outlaw named Roy O'Bannon
(Wilson, The Haunting), who is being chased by a Machiavellian U.S.
Marshal.
As in any self-respecting buddy film, Chon Wang (pronounced like `John
Wayne') and Roy don't become friends right off the bat.  As Noon opens,
Roy and his gang of inept cowboys are trying to rob the train that is
carrying Chon Wang and his fellow Imperial Guardsmen.  It doesn't go
down as planned, and Roy ends up buried up to his neck in the desert,
while Chon Wang is separated from his group, which is now light
approximately one person.
What transpires from that point is a series of fantastic fighting scenes
that display Chan's physical prowess, plus enough side-splitting
one-liners from Wilson to keep even those that abhor martial arts glued
to the screen.  There are at least six great fight sequences that, quite
frankly, blow away the ones in the highly touted Mission: Impossible 2.
And, like many of Chan's other high-kicking extravaganzas, Noon offers
outtakes of flubbed lines and stunts gone bad (hey, that sounds like one
of Fox's May `sweeps' specials!).
As politically incorrect as any film that I can remember (fun is poked
at the Chinese, Native Americans, Jews and the irreverent White Man),
Noon also boasts a very funny scene where Roy trains Chon Wang to become
a cowboy (to Kid Rock's song of the same name), as well as a very
bizarre sequence involving a whorehouse, bubble bath and a Chinese
drinking game, the latter of which I was hoping would result in some
intoxicated fighting (a la Chan's wickedly cool Drunken Master 2), but
unfortunately that dream was never realized.
Noon is the directorial debut of Tom Dey and was written by Miles Millar
and Alfred Gough of Lethal Weapon 4 fame.  Dey's direction and the
co-written script skillfully blend the important elements of action and
comedy, but Wilson's deadpan drawl makes the whole picture worthwhile.
I couldn't help but wonder how much creative input he had in his own
lines, which seem as well written as either of the finely crafted
screenplays the actor has penned (Bottle Rocket, Rushmore).
PG-13 for action violence, some drug humor and mild adult language

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Jackie Chan was always different from all other martial arts stars 'cuz
he always laced his fights and his films with humor. Lots of it. Between
sight gags and his wonderful facial reactions, no language got in the
way of the fights and his movies made the international jump well. But
we are far past the time in which we could expect a nine point two
minutes long battle every nine point four minutes. As I wrote about Rush
Hour, and a phrase that applies as well to Shanghai Noon, this is not a
"Jackie Chan" flick in the chop sockey sense. So let's take it as a
regular movie starring Jackie Chan and see where that takes us.
There are certain things every good Western flick should have. Horses.
Injuns. A huge church bell clanging. A showdown on an empty street. A
hanging or two. A runaway horse and wagon. A damsel in distress and some
pony-tailed Jewish guys in dresses . . . That'll make sense when you see
the Shanghai Noon, which has everything a Western is supposed to have,
and twice again as many laughs. They're in the script. They're onscreen
in visual gags. They're all over Jackie Chan's face.
Beginning in the Forbidden City in the Western Year numbered 1881, we
first see the Chinese Imperial Guard and witness their utter devotion
and subservience to their Princess, Pei Pei (Lucy Liu). She, by Imperial
decree or custom, is to marry the next Emperor of China, who happens to
be a pudgy twelve years old boy. Her American tutor says he can smuggle
her out of the country and she, thinking it is of her own free will,
agrees. Only Chon Wang (Jackie Chan) sees her sneak out, but she orders
him to let her go. He, obedient servant that he has been trained to be
since birth, obeys. What the Princess doesn't know is that the tutor has
left a ransom note behind. And the Royal Court sends their best men to
retrieve the Princess . . .
.. . . which wouldn't include Jackie but he gets there anyway. On his way
to Carson City, where the ransom is to be paid, Jackie picks up a horse,
a Indian wife (Brandon Merrill) and an incompetent outlaw companion
(Owen Wilson) whose non-stop mouth offers up all the gags that Jackie's
English isn't good enough to provide. He battles both Cowboys and
Indians and ultimate bad guy Lo Fong (Roger Yuan) while picking up a
nickname and getting a bounty levied on his head. Once you get past the
opening sequence, set in the Forbidden City, there's some kind of gag in
every scene. Parents should note that there is some language and dope
humor that isn't exactly family friendly, thus the PG-13 rating on what
otherwise could've passed muster.
As in his last outing, Chan lets his sidekick steal the show. That would
be Wilson, sounding like a 90s California dude and taking apart the
classic showdown with an internal monolog that is flat out funny. Said
showdown also adds a psychotic marshal (Xander Berkeley) who dogs our
heroes as they search out the princess. Lucy Liu doesn't get a lot to
do, though she does show up some karate chops which'll be on better
display in Charlie's Angels later this year.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Shanghai Noon, he would have paid...
For the old school fan, it's thirty minutes between each Chan fight but
the last one is a whopper.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
The classic Western gets a kick in the pants when East meets
West and Jackie Chan tosses the tumbleweed.  He plays a Chinese
Imperial Guard who tags along when the Emperor sends three of his
cohorts to America, circa. 1890, to ransom and rescue Princess Pei Pei
(Lucy Liu) who has been kidnapped from the Forbidden City.  So there
he is - Hong Kong's contemporary Buster Keaton knocking around all the
cowboys & Indians & Asians cliches as he crosses Nevada.  He's named
Chon Wang, pronounced "John Wayne," and there are obvious allusions to
"High Noon." About half-way through the story, the buddy theme kicks
in, as Chan befriends a bumbling wannabe outlaw, played strictly for
laughs by Owen Wilson. Director Tom Dey, whose previous experience is
in TV commercials, blatantly telegraphs what's gonna happen in advance
so there aren't too many surprises - like when Chan and the Native
Americans pass the peace pipe. Writers Alfred Gough & Miles Millar
heap on the racial and ethnic stereotypes but, in general, they let
Jackie Chan do a lot of what he does best: acrobatic fighting. There
are clever touches - like an amusing trick horse, an inebriated bubble
bath in a bordello, and making unlikely use of antlers and
horseshoes. Unlike other grim martial artists, Chan radiates warmth
and humor which makes him irresistibly appealing between the action
sequences. So how does "Shanghai Noon" compare with "Rush Hour"?
"Rush Hour" is set in a contemporary urban environment which may be
easier for much of Chan's audience to relate to than the gunslingers
of the Wild West. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Shanghai
Noon" is a light-hearted, silly, irreverent 7.  And don't leave before
the final "out-take" credits - they're the best of all.

Author
Frankie Paiva
One reason I think Jackie Chan is such a hit with American audiences is 
because his movies are so much fun. Known internationally as a martial arts 
master, he first appeared in the states with Operation Condor, First Strike, 
and Rumble in the Bronx. More recently, his first American film, Rush Hour, 
grossed over $100 million at the box office. This was mostly due to its 
mixture of comedy and nonstop action. Chan's latest, Shanghai Noon, does not 
deviate from the humorous action setup that worked so well before. This is 
basically Rush Hour with spurs and ten gallon hats. While this may seem like 
a disappointing thing at first, it turns out not to be. Shanghai Noon is the 
continuation of a movie I never really wanted to end, and by the time the 
film closed, I was asking for more.
Chon Wang (Jackie Chan) is an Imperial Guard who gets sent to America to 
recover Princess Pei Pei (Ally McBeal's Lucy Liu) whom the Emperor believes 
was kidnapped. She actually went voluntarily, and gets tricked into working 
with a large group of Chinese immigrants on a railroad in present day Nevada. 
Roy O'Bannon (Owen Wilson) is the talkative leader of a group of bandits who 
make the mistake of robbing the train that Wong is on. About five thrilling 
action scenes later, O'Bannon and Wong decide to team up together to rescue 
the Princess, and return her to China.  Many adventures involving a variety 
of villains and a variety of weapons ensue that will test the two friends' 
trust for each other.
Shanghai Noon is probably the funniest movie released so far this year, and 
is easily Chan's best. The fish out of water and radically different buddy 
plotline works magically again. As the chatty and sensitive O'Bannon, Owen 
Wilson shows much more potential than his previous efforts in Armageddon and 
The Haunting. He provides a nice alternative to the annoying Chris Tucker. 
Much of the film's humor derives from racial differences. When a Western 
couple is debating why Wong is wearing a dress (it's actually his Imperial 
uniform) they decide he must be one of those Jews. Similar jokes involving 
the Chinese, Native Americans, and African Americans are also present. 
However, the film is lighthearted, and the jokes aren't nearly as shocking as 
those of, say, Blazing Saddles. In addition to some offensive humor, there 
are a barrelful of clichés we've all seen before. These too get effectively 
covered up by the film's fast paced action and excitement. Jackie Chan 
retains his usual charm, and when you see Wong fighting a number of Crow 
Indians or a saloon of men with his bare hands, you know you are watching 
classic Chan. Pei Pei gets to kick some butt too. Lucy Liu, who will star in 
the kung fu heavy Charlie's Angels, proves she's no damsel in distress. It's 
nice to see a female character tangle with the guys. This movie has the 
perfect balance of comedy and action, but one must wonder how long this 
racial divide blockbuster action picture formula can last. I'm not sure 
exactly whose idea it was to open Noon the same week as Mission: Impossible 
2, but it is a worthy competitor. It is not only a better bang for your buck 
action flick, it achieves humor that is impossible to find in M:I-2. After 
the film ends, watch for the usual outakes, a token, and often best part of a 
Chan film. This movie embodies what summer really should be, lots and lots of 
fun.
