Title
Review for Sabrina (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SABRINA is a surprisingly delightful and fresh romance.  I went to
this show solely because my wife wanted to see it.  I suspected and
feared it would be one of the shows so sweet it could induce a diabetic
attach, but was surprised at what a naturalness SABRINA has.  It is a
show that quickly worked its charms on me for many reasons, but most of
all for the acting by Julia Ormond and strangely enough for her makeup
(Joseph Campayno) - more on both of these later.
     The tale of Sabrina has been done before and many critics have
complained that the 1954 version was such a trivial film that there was
no point in producer and director Sydney Pollack doing a remake.  After
seeing this version, I disagree strongly.  This movie touched me, and
I'm glad I saw it.
     Sabrina (Julia Ormond) is the daughter of the chauffeur (John
Wood) of the billionaire Larrabee family.  Sabrina and her dad live
over the garage, and she spends her time watching the Larrabee parties.
The family estate is picture perfect as are their parties.  As Sabrina
puts it, "It would never rain on the night of a Larrabee party.  They
would never allow it."
     She has an undying crush on David Larrabee (Greg Kinnear), but he
pays no attention to her.  He falls in love with Dr. Elizabeth Tyson
(Lauren Holly).  His brother Linus (Harrison Ford) is a workaholic as
is his mother Maude (Nancy Merchand).  Linus sees a merger opportunity
with the company owned by the Tyson family, Mr. Tyson (Richard Crenna)
and Mrs. Tyson (Angie Dickinson), because of the upcoming marriage.
     A disappointed Sabrina leaves for Paris stating the show's
frequently mentioned notion, "Paris is always a good idea."  I'll
second that.  When she returns, she is changed forever and both
brothers fall for her.  Well, sort of.  It is this love triangle that
makes up the body of the show.
     Although many things are special about this picture, first and
foremost is Julia Ormond's acting.  I have not been a fan of hers
before.  I thought she was acceptable but no better in LEGENDS OF THE
FALL.  In SABRINA she is brilliant.  I found her performance flawless
and would love to see her nominated for an Academy Award for it, but I
am sure the members of the Academy will view the movie as too light
weight for such consideration.  Her character has two stages in the
movie, the immature girl with the crush, and the fully developed
beauty.  She plays both in an understated natural way that is
absolutely captivating.  Just the way she walks and carries herself
says so much about both stages of her character.
     Sabrina is created by a marvelous makeup job.  In her youth she
has a more natural look and has long wavy hair.  When she returns
transformed from Paris, she has short curly hair with stunning makeup.
Her clothes (Ann Roth) are also transformed so that the commoner has
more impressive clothes than any of the pseudo-royalty at the Larrabee
party on the night of her return from Paris.  Maude's gown in contrast
is horribly overdone with a large purple sash, and Mrs. Tyson's is a
plain white frock that could be found at any Goodwill store.  When
Sabrina walks into the party, she is so beautiful that the audience is
almost gasping, "oh my God!"  She is transformed from a lovely youth to
a knock down dead gorgeous woman.  It would have been easy to overdo
this, but Ormond gives a child like innocence to even her adult role.
One of the most compelling performances I have seen this year.
     The other actors are not as good with the exception of Greg
Kinnear who looks a lot like Gary Sinise.  Kinnear is perfect as a
naive rich kid, okay, young man, but he acts like a kid.  There are
many wonderful scenes in the show, but my two favorites are when he
runs into but does recognize Sabrina and his dance with her that
evening.  The first is hilarious and the later incredibly romantic.
Harrison Ford starts off acting like he wishes he had not agreed to
make the film, but as the movie progresses he warms up to his role.
Angie Dickinson pathetically overacts in the few scenes she has.
Richard Crenna, who has been great in many a TV movie, is wasted here
as he so frequently is.  See, for example, his silly role in JADE.
Nancy Merchand gives a mixed performance as the mother, sometimes she
is funny and other times she overdoes it.
     Some of the minor actors are quite good.  John Wood as the
chauffeur is a lovable character.  Dana Ivey as Linus's secretary is
really cute.  When she and Maude have to go through his clothes drawer
Ivey says, "We were up to our elbows in your underwear drawer.  It was
like the Shroud of Turin."  The script by Barbara Benedek, David
Rayfiel, and Samuel Taylor is both romantic and funny.
     The dreamy piano music by John Williams adds to the ambiance of
the picture and makes you ready to fall in love with Sabrina.  The
lighting is particularly impressive.  Watch how it caresses Sabrina's
face making it seem to glow from within.  The cinematography by
Giuseppe Rotunno takes advantage of this lighting to create a beautiful
film to watch as do the expensive and impressive sets by Brian Morris.
     SABRINA runs a brisk 2:04, but it feels like a much shorter movie.
The movie is incorrectly rated PG.  This is a G movie as there is no
bad language, sex, nudity, or violence of any kind.  If your kids are
old enough (8?) to be interested in romance, they would like this film.
I am not fond of the term "date movie", but if the term means anything,
it would certainly apply here.  Although the movie is perhaps not great
art and it does have flaws, I strongly recommend everyone see Ormond's
performance and catch the rest of this show as well.  I give it ***,
and if the Ford's performance had been better, I could easily have
given it more.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Harrison Ford, Julia Ormond, Greg Kinnear, Nancy Marchand, 
      John Wood, Richard Crenna, Angie Dickenson, Lauren Holly
Director: Sydney Pollack
Producers: Scott Rudin and Sydney Pollack
Screenplay: Barbara Benedek & David Rayfiel based on the film written by 
      Billy Wilder and Samuel Taylor and Ernest Lehman, from the play by 
      Samuel Taylor
Cinematography: Giuseppe Rotunno
Music: John Williams
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     These days, Hollywood seems to be almost entirely bankrupt of new 
ideas.  For bursts of inspiration or innovation, the movie-goer 
increasingly has to seek out independent motion pictures.  What we are 
getting more and more from the big studios is a flood of sequels, films 
based on novels, films based on TV series, remakes, or a combination of 
the above.  SABRINA joins this list as the latest classic whose script 
and cast have been updated for the '90s -- although in the case of this 
variation on the CINDERELLA tale, the story admittedly has a certain 
timeless quality.
     In general, I approach romances with a great deal of skepticism, 
principally because it's so easy to mess up this kind of movie.  Love is 
a difficult emotion to effectively capture on film, and, too often, 
screen romances look like two actors going through the motions.  
Happily, with SABRINA, that's not the case.  Despite the unambitious, 
formula-driven plot, wonderful performances by Julia Ormond and, 
especially, Harrison Ford keep this remake afloat.
     I would never claim that SABRINA is one of 1995's best romantic 
movies (although it is an improvement on the overrated THE AMERICAN 
PRESIDENT).  Its plot-by-numbers story doesn't offer much in the way of 
surprises, and it doesn't have the emotional power of a LEAVING LAS 
VEGAS or the euphoric quality of THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN.  But SABRINA is 
fun in its own way, and, though clearly flawed, it nevertheless offers 
two hours' solid diversion (the overlong running time, by the way, is 
one of those flaws).
     The title character, Sabrina Fairchild (Ormond), is the daughter of 
the Larrabee family's chauffeur (John Wood).  Since she was little, 
Sabrina has had a crush on the youngest Larrabee son, David (Greg 
Kinnear), a dashing playboy.  Unfortunately for her, David doesn't 
really know she exists.  So, when Sabrina goes off to Paris to change 
her life (and appearance), she still harbors her passion in secret.  
When, after "finding herself" abroad, she returns home and dazzles David 
with her new glamour and self-possession, she sees a chance for her 
dreams to become real.  But complications arise -- David is engaged to a 
wealthy pediatrician (Lauren Holly), and the marriage will seal a major 
merger between the Larrabee Corporation and Tyson Electronics.  David's 
older brother, Linus (Harrison Ford), the "living heart donor" head of 
the corporation, won't allow his brother's flirtation with Sabrina to 
endanger the deal, so, in the best interests of business, he makes a 
play for her.  Unfortunately, Linus gets in over his head and the cold, 
calculating businessman discovers that he does indeed have a heart.
     In 1954, Audrey Hepburn was Sabrina.  While Julia Ormond is no 
Hepburn, she possesses the kind of luminous screen presence which allows 
us to accept her part in this modern-day fairy tale.  Harrison Ford, 
taking over for Humphrey Bogart, is very good as Linus, carefully mixing 
pathos, cruelty, and compassion into a surprisingly complex personality.  
The weakest of the main performers is Greg Kinnear (in the William 
Holden part), who is more of a personality than an actor -- and, at 
times, this shows.  Of the supporting players, only veteran actor John 
Wood is worthy of special note.  The rest of the cast do adequate, but 
not noteworthy, jobs.
     In 1991's REGARDING HENRY, Harrison Ford's character was 
transformed from a heartless man to a loving husband by a bullet to the 
head.  Here, the personality change is similar, but it happens in a more 
believable fashion, and the motivator -- love -- seems far less 
contrived.  It's not really that difficult to defend SABRINA, despite 
its numerous faults.  Even though it isn't as good as the original 1954 
version, this movie, brought to the screen by director Sydney Pollack 
(OUT OF AFRICA), simply has too much romantic appeal and on-screen 
chemistry to be dismissed as "just another" in the ever-growing pool of 
remakes.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Way back, in 1954, Billy Wilder directed the film of the same
name.  It starred William Holden as the man much-too-wealthy -for
his-own-good and Audrey Hepburn as the daughter of Holden's chauffeur.
In the cast, too, was Humphrey Bogart.  The question in my mind is, if
you have a great cast, turn out a very entertaining romantic comedy,
why attempt to "improve" on the original? Are there no more writers
left in the movie world?  Are the producers afraid to take chances,
preferring to go back some forty years to do a remake of a hit?
Sometimes it seems that only the names have been changed ... to protect
the innocent.
     This time around we have equally fine actors.  There's Harrison
Ford (the billionaire ... in 1954 probably only a millionaire) and the
lovely Julia Ormond as the chauffeur's daughter.  Others starring in
the cast include Nancy Marchand, Greg Kinnear and John Wood.  Special
mention should be made of Kinnear.  Music by John Williams, a most busy
man. Also in the cast are Angie Dickinson, and Richard Crenna.
     The dialogue is witty and the film entertaining but there is too
much of the feeling of "How many times have I seen a similar film
before?"  While it is not easy to sneeze at a billionaire's proposal,
(and I do not for one moment believe that the chauffeur's daughter is
that interested in the money,) nevertheless, it occurred to me that
Ford is getting just a teeny bit mature to get the role of the guy who
gets the girl.  Julia Ormond acquits herself well as the young woman
who eventually falls for Harrison.  And did she not used to climb onto
a tree limb and watch the fabulous parties the Harrison family was
giving?  Maybe it was money after all. Naaah.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This remake of the 1953 Bogart/Hepburn classic starts off 
with humor and charm but crashes and burns toward the end, when 
too many conflicts and motivations are resolved too quickly, leaving a 
multitude of unanswered questions in the air. Harrison Ford plays rich 
businessman Linus, who is constantly terrorized by his bitchy sister 
Lucy... No, not really, but he does have an irresponsible younger 
brother named David (played by talk show host Greg Kinnear), who is 
currently engaged to equally wealthy Elizabeth (DUMB AND 
DUMBER's Lauren Holly), whose father is planning a billion-dollar 
merger with Linus' company, which manufactures security blankets... 
No, not really.
        Meanwhile, lovely Sabrina (Julia Ormond), daughter of the 
family chauffeur, returns from a few months in Paris looking more 
beautiful than ever. David finds himself mysteriously drawn to 
Sabrina, who has been obsessed with him all her life but never got the 
time of day from him (because he doesn't wear a watch). David lets 
everyone in on his newfound attraction right before a painful glass-in-
the-ass injury. Linus takes advantage of David's incapacitation to 
begin wooing Sabrina himself. Is he diverting her attention for 
personal or business reasons? The movie keeps us guessing on that one 
until the end.
        SABRINA, at two hours and ten minutes, is way too long. 
There's no such thing as an epic comedy, so why are they trying to 
pass this off as one? It's too top-heavy, with unnecessary scenes in the 
first hour involving Sabrina's Paris transformation from mousy to 
lovely and David's attraction to her upon her return. Still, I shouldn't 
complain. These scenes may be superfluous but they're the scenes in 
which the movie works best.
        It's toward the end, with all the rapid-fire plot twists and the 
Linus-Is-A-Prick...-Or-Is-He? scenes, that the movie tries to jerk 
around our emotions. Well, I don't know about you, but my emotions 
refuse to be jerked. I was looking for logic instead, and found none. I 
walked out of the theater asking all sorts of questions about why those 
characters waffled more in the last twenty minutes than President 
Clinton and a family-sized box of Eggo's combined.
        Granted, there are a lot of funny lines in the movie, mostly 
found in that first hour. That's the part where you think you know the 
characters and their motivations, before the movie pulls the rug out 
from under you. Harrison Ford, as always, delivers a good 
performance, as does Ormond, although I can't imagine why on earth 
any man would choose her over the devastatingly beautiful Holly. (I'd 
like to deck my halls with boughs of that... I don't know what that 
means, but it sounds chauvinist enough.)
        The big surprise of the movie is Kinnear, who claims to have 
had no prior acting experience (although pretending to tolerate 
Richard Simmons when he comes on your show is Emmy-quality as 
far as I'm concerned). I've had my eye on this guy since his hilarious 
between-clip commentary on E.'s "Talk Soup" show. He left that show, 
sadly--as his replacement is a cross between Jim Carrey and every 
pathetic small-town news anchor to ever live--and got a late-late night 
talk show on NBC which, also sadly, showcases no real talent on his 
part. It's in SABRINA where he truly shines for the first time, showing 
a great talent for both comedic and dramatic acting, even if he is 
unconscious for half the movie. Mark my words, that Kinnear kid has 
a future in Hollywood!
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
and check out the 40+ new reviews since Christmas.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SABRINA (1995) ** Directed by Sydney Pollack. Screenplay by Barbara 
Benedek & David Rayfiel. Based on the film "Sabrina" (1954) directed by 
Billy Wilder, written by Wilder, Samuel Taylor, Ernest Lehman, from the 
play "Sabrina Fair" by Samuel Taylor. Photography, Giuseppe Rotunno. 
Editing, Frederic Steinkamp. Production design, Brian Morris. Costumes, 
Ann Roth. Music, John Williams.  Cast: Julia Ormond (Sabrina Fairchild), 
Harrison Ford (Linus Larrabee), Greg Kinnear (David Larrabee), Nancy 
Marchand (Maud Larrabee), John Wood (Fairchild), Lauren Holly (Elizabeth 
Tyson), Angie Dickinson (Ingrid Tyson), Richard Crenna (Patrick Tyson), 
Dana Ivey (Mack), Elizabeth Franz (Joanna), Fanny Ardant (Irene), 
Patrick Bruel (Louis), Valerie Lemercier (Martine). A Paramount Picture. 
130 min. Rated PG.  
Except for special effects and technical innovations, Hollywood's 
exponentially increasing lack of imagination keeps it hacking away at 
remakes and sequels. The original "Sabrina" by Billy Wilder was almost 
unimprovable. There was no artistic reason to make it again, unless it 
was to make you appreciate the first movie even more.  
Much of the remake follows "Sabrina I" scene-for-scene, especially in 
the early sequences. For the rest, the changes add little, subtract a 
lot. Both films deal with a family of magnates on Long Island. Larrabee 
Industries is run by senior brother Linus (Humphrey Bogart then,  
Harrison Ford now), while junior brother David (William Holden, now Greg  
Kinnear), a company director in name only, keeps busy with wine and 
women (we don't know about song). 
Years ago, the Larrabees imported from England a Rolls Royce along with 
chic chauffeur Fairchild (now a widower) and his daughter Sabrina 
(Audrey Hepburn in 1954, Julia Ormond in 1995). Sabrina has had forever 
a crush on David, who never noticed it  or her.  As a cure, she is sent 
to Paris by her father. She returns transformed into a lovely, 
sophisticated young woman on whom David puts the make. Bad news for 
Mother Larrabee (Nancy Marchand, awfully gowned and photographed like a 
gargoyle) and Linus. 
David is engaged to Elizabeth Tyson, the daughter of powerful 
industrialists. Well beyond class distinctions is the fact that a 
Larrabee-Tyson merger is in the works. It will vanish if David does not 
marry Elizabeth. To eliminate the Sabrina danger, Linus begins to court 
her. She responds and Linus is hoist on his own petard, as anyone could 
have guessed from the start . 
The superficial differences between the Wilder and the Pollack films are 
in the updating of the story by adjusting for inflation (the 1954 
million is now a billion), and means of locomotion (the Concorde, 
private helicopters and jets).  The real differences are in the cast, 
the direction, the Paris sequences and the dialogue.
No one, including Julia Ormond (pronounced OR-mond)  could in a million 
years approach the beauty, charm, elegance, distinction and 
distinctiveness of elfin, doe-eyed, adorable Audrey Hepburn--who, by the 
way,  also speaks excellent French. The Ormond hype of reviewers 
(e.g."We're melting") or of morning TV anchors ("So beautiful as to make 
you faint") has no basis. While throughout the first film, Hepburn 
convinces us with her many expressions and her romantic, schoolgirl 
crush on David, Ormond looks by comparison, older, stolid, rather 
expressionless, and generates about 70 watts of electricity with Ford 
and 40 watts without him.  
Greg Kinnear makes an OK screen debut yet lacks the warmth of William 
Holden, an actor who while never a pretty-boy had a commanding presence, 
without even trying to assert it. You may disapprove of Holden the 
playboy, but he charms you nonetheless, whereas Kinnear is more leering 
than attractive.
Ever likable Harrison Ford is appealing but here there is vagueness 
about his part and murkiness about his courtship. It is said that in the 
original Humphrey Bogart looked uncomfortable and actually said so, but 
Billy Wilder knew what he was doing. Casting Bogart against type was a 
coup. The contrast of a familiar persona shifting from tough guy to a 
romantic  upper-class pretender (in both senses) added a funny element 
that is lacking in the Ford character.  
In "Sabrina II,"  Nancy Marchand replaces Walter Hampden as the nominal 
head of the Larrabees. She has a few quips but I miss eccentric Old Man 
Larrabee who brought much amusing zip in his complicity with Linus.  At 
the same time, the economically stated poignancy in the first film's 
chauffeur Fairchild is now replaced by gimmicks.  
The direction is another problem. Writer-director Billy Wilder, a 
sophisticate from Austria, Germany, France and Hollywood, was among many 
things the collaborator and inheritor of Ernst Lubitsch and arguably the 
premier film-cynic of his time -- along with the gentler Preston 
Sturges. His work reflected European sophistication. At his best, Wilder 
put layers of meaning beneath what seemed to be obvious situations, 
lines or gags. His "Sabrina" was far funnier than the remake. In this 
film, Sydney Pollack, a first-rate craftsman with a first-rate crew, 
there are no subtleties or sub-texts.  
"Sabrina I" was part Eisenhower-era fantasy and part throwback to 1930s 
films that gave the poor of the Depression something to dream about. The 
remake is all of that plus a post-yuppie tale. 
Bogart may have been a one-track-mind businessman, but he had a 
definite, marked sense of humor.  Ford is given little of this and 
though younger is more like a caricature of the entrepreneur with 
obsessive tunnel-vision who only thinks, works, lives business.  Notice 
how, during a big Larrabee garden party, one glimpses Bogart indoors, 
demonstrating a new product to potential buyers. In "Sabrina II," Ford 
is shown doing this twice (and with more screen time), to Arabs and to 
Japanese.
In general, the moneyed class in Number 1 was shown as rather natural 
within its wealth. In Number 2 there is something offensive,  
ostentatious, crass and tacky about the rich and famous. Typically, 
Kinnear says about his mother's birthday :"I bought her a little 
Picasso." Ford "How much did that cost me?" Kinnear: "I don't know." 
Later, Ford takes Ormond on his private plane and is twice rude to the 
bubbling lady-attendant. There's more along those lines too. 
The Paris sections of "Sabrina I" are utterly charming. Sabrina goes to 
cooking school where the teacher-chef is very funny, while Marcel Dalio 
plays an elderly student, a delightful nobleman who sophisticates 
Sabrina.  In "Sabrina II," somehow Sabrina works for Vogue magazine. The 
sequences are way too long, disconnected and cliched. Sabrina almost 
loses her virginity to a young Frenchman (who gives her silly, pithy 
advice, too). There is forced semi-slapstick. The French scenes feel 
like the hundred-franc first-timers' tour of Picturesque Paris as well 
as a visual derivative of the Astaire-Hepburn movie "Funny Face." The 
movie's guiding principle seems to be that more is more. 
The first date of Linus and Sabrina is pretty straightforward in 
"Sabrina I" but needlessly long and complicated in the remake. Linus 
falling for Sabrina is gradual in "Sabrina I," too sudden in "Sabrina 
II." Then Ford tells Marchand something like "Don't worry, I'll ditch 
her" yet minutes later is ooohing over the girl.
There's overkill in several ways. For example, back from Paris, at the 
Long Island train station, Sabrina  arrives outrageously overdressed for 
someone fresh off a plane. Ask any transatlantic traveler. (In the 
identical scene of "Sabrina I" the same error was made, but at least the 
young lady had come by boat).    
The new film lacks the wit, class and pacing of the original. There are 
some improvements, no doubt, but those that come readily to mind are 
mostly the amusing Dana Ivey as Linus's secretary and the way in which 
David finds out that the chic lady he picked up at the railroad station 
is Sabrina. 
For those who worry about May-December couples, they will find the 
remake more acceptable. Ormond looks pretty mature and Ford not at all 
over-the-hill. In real life Ford (age 53) is 23 years older than Ormond 
(age 30).  
In "Sabrina I," Hepburn, then 25, was 11 years younger than William 
Holden and 30 years younger than Humphrey Bogart. In all of her movies, 
she looked convincingly very much younger than her age. And in something 
of a convention in Hepburn films, she was involved with much older 
leading men. The age gap ought to have been blatant, but the handling of 
most of those movies plus Audrey's charm made the difference in years 
more acceptable than expected.
Audrey Hepburn, born  1929 . Films where she was much younger than her 
leading men. 
Roman Holiday 1953, Peck born 1916 ,then 40 / AH then 24 --age 
difference 16 yrs
Sabrina  1954,  Bogart b. 1899, then 55 /  AH  then 25 -- age difference 
30  yrs
War and Peace 1956, Henry Fonda, b. 1905, then 51 / AH then 27-- age 
difference 34 yrs
Funny Face 1957  Fred Astaire, b. 1899,  then 58/ AH by then 28 ---age 
difference 30  yrs
Love in  the Afternoon 1957, Gary Cooper, b. 1901, then 56/ AH by then 
28 --age difference 28 yrs 
The Unforgiven 1960, Burt Lancaster b.1913, then 47 / AH then 31 ---age 
difference 16 yrs  
Charade 1963 , Cary Grant b. 1904, then 59 / AH then 34 --age difference 
25 years
My Fair Lady 1964, Rex Harrison, b. 1908, then  56/ AH then 35 --age 
difference 21 yrs
Paris-When it Sizzles, 1964,  William Holden b. 1918, then 46/ AH then 
35 -- age difference 11 yrs  
Green Mansions, 1959, Tony Perkins b. 1932, then 27/ AH then 30, 3 yrs 
older
Breakfast at Tiffany's, 1961, George Peppard  b. 1928, then 33 / AH then 
32,  1 yr younger
The Children's Hour, 1962, James Garner b. 1928, then 34 /AH then 31,  1 
yr younger
How to Steal a Million, 1966, Peter O'Toole b. 1932, then 34/ AH then 
37,  3 yrs older
Two for the Road, 1967, Albert Finney b. 1936, then 31/ AH then 38, 
====>  7 yrs older 

Bloodline 1979, They All Laughed 1981, Always 1989 : comparisons 
irrelevant. AH's age was respectively 50, 52 and 60. 
