Title
Review for Septičme ciel, Le (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Charles Egert
        The title of Benoit Jaquot's `Le Septičme Ciel' refers to the ultimate
degree of happiness. In this case it is synonymous with having an
orgasm. Think of the song lyrics which go something like `I'm in
heaven'. The film is a comedy. In the tradition of comedies an obstacle
of some sort usually stands in the way obscuring the unerring happiness
of a couple. This may just lead to temporary misunderstanding although
it can even sometimes threaten the stability of the couple. One of the
member's of the couple suffers, or each takes a turn at it. The problem
in this film is that we never really are allowed to believe for a second
that the couple's bourgeois Parisian existence really is threatened, so
the acuteness of the comedy is lessened. 
        For a while in his films Benoit Jacquot has been concentrating via very
original stories on telling us about young women's lives. He is quite
good at creating novel situations for characters but less good at
narrating a significant episode of their lives effectively. In La
Désenchantée, for instance, a very young woman has been seriously
propositioned by a much older man who is in a position to support her
and all the members of her family who are fatherless and soon to be
motherless as well. In the crucial scene where we see the older man
coming towards her dressed only in his robe she hurriedly utters her
acceptance, then faints.
        In his new film Jacquot has gotten a good performance from the two
leading actors as well as three or four supporting roles. The wife is a
public `huissier' (sort of notary) who works in partnership with her
mother, having lost her father at an early age. This turns out to be key
since as the film opens she is going through a period of crisis. At
twenty-nine Mathilde is exactly the same age as her father at his death.
The scenes where her symptoms are enacted take place in a public space,
which unfortunately is filmed less convincingly than it should be. There
is in these artificially filmed scenes no whiff of the real life of
Paris streets. I am recalling what Rohmer at least used to do in some
scenes where we could see traffic circulating on foot or by car in the
background as a vital piece of the story unfolded usually thanks to a
perfectly natural dialog. The spectator was allowed to be there, to feel
as well as hear the hum of traffic. We could look away, allowing
ourselves to be distracted, but the characters had something usually
revealing, even vitally important, to say.
        The couple here is in no way under a threat, it's rather like an
heirloom has been displaced in the meticulous accounting of Mathilde's
professional life. She decides to look for it. The wife's lack of
feelings in bed is not totally debilitating to the life of the couple,
as one graphic bedroom scene makes clear. They have a cute child of
seven and are more than moderately successful by Parisian standards,
another major difference from Rohmer's films. If we think of the
treatment Rohmer made of a party scene in `La nuit de la pleine lune' we
can see some telling differences of camerawork. Rohmer's party was an
occasion for the actors bodies to have a total value like in dance
whereas during the party sequence in Jacquot's film everything is
darkish with an occasional bright flash of clear light. This is perhaps
meant to highlight the heroine's brief first encounter with a hypnotist
who is going to affect her destiny. The camera focuses on his face and
the sideways glances he gives her. The camerawork is one thing, however,
which has made Jacquot an interesting filmmaker for me. In addition
Sandrine Kiberlain does a good job as a woman who is uncomfortable with
her sexuality if not exactly with her sexual identity. After several
visits to the hypnotist's her arms dance and sway and we notice her
whole body moving more sensually.
        But the details in the story are afterthoughts which seem to come
later, to affix themselves onto a plot that is too spare and too
classical. Nico's marital infidelity is treated in such a way that we
don't understand if this is something new which is done out of desperate
vanity or on the contrary an illustration of the two-bit psychological
wisdom exchanged in a cafe in the previous scene. It all boils down to
the dictum that love is not sex, so sex is not the plus ultra, not the
real betrayal of the love within the unit formed by the couple and
including their son. The problem is that we never doubted it for an
instant. So when Mathilde smirks reproachfully at her husband `Sex is
all you think about', while sending him on one wild goose chase after
another, the suspense and the comic relief consequently are in short
supply. Also the causes of Mathilde's problem in bed appear and
disappear, almost without anguish. Vincent Lindon's Nico is also less
convincing. The film ends on a fadeout while Nico begins to learn to
overcome his guilt over what we used to call handicapped sex and which
beforehand constituted the sexual status quo within his couple.
        And then the images don't always inform as much as they should. For
instance there is ring in the story that is used as a type of potlatch,
which symbolizes an obligation to the gift-giver by the receiver of the
gift. We are obviously supposed to guess according to this gage how far
towards sexual infidelity with her hypnotist Mathilde has really gone.
This is finely measured, and an acute discernment on Jacquot's part
becuse it, the ring, is an hierloom if not the hierloom, but I am not
sure I understood an image meant to solve the enigma or could even
formulate my opinion on the question. On the other hand there is a scene
at home where 29-year old Mathilde is in her bath and which wonderfully
illustrates the animal attraction she exercises on her family, both
father and son. Christian Vincent in his film `La Séparation' was,
however, more successful in my opinion in creating an intimate sense of
what it is like to live in a real Parisian apartment, with pastels
colors and occasional half-done projects cluttering up desks and other
places. Here everything is neat and clean, even the kitchen at
dinnertime, the walls are white, the prints and wall hangings
uninformative as far as I could tell. Is this all supposed to show
Mathilde's inner state before the film? If that is so why the warm
steamy intimacy of the bath scene, and why is Nico, her husband, so
irreversibly stuck on her? The only answer is that his doctor's ego is
flattered by the fact that his wife is mentally ill. Her behavior in bed
gives him an excuse to cheat on her with nurses.
        Finally, this film is a comedy so it is meant to have a moral the
audience will find delightful. At the beginning of the film we have the
three-quarter image of Mathilde wandering the street in a daze. Her body
is out of focus and, as the camera focuses better, the resolution begins
rather by the people in the background, passers-by who seem to be moving
one step ahead of her. At the end she catches up with everybody else
and, even though she surpasses her husband, she has enough patient humor
to wait until he is able to appreciate her new sensuality. And once
again the light are dimmed so the audience can appreciate the lesson
too.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  In "Gone With the Wind," which is now enjoying a revival
with a spruced-up sound track, Rhett Butler says to Scarlett
O'Hara, "You need kissing."  Substitute the word the studios
would use in the 90s for what David O. Selznick chose for the
30s and you'll get an idea of what Butler believes would make
Scarlett a happier person.  This speculation carries over to
Benoit Jacquot's "Seventh Heaven," or in the French, "Le
Septieme Ciel."  Jacquot, fascinated by his psychoanalytic
readings on the role of the unconscious, focuses on a 28-
year-old anhedonic woman, unable to experience pleasure in
life, presumably because she has never had an orgasm.  The
picture takes her up to and through her first--and
second--period of sexual bliss and how her sudden change
affects her husband.
   If you did not get to see "Bliss," last year's most underrated
movie, you can take in Jacquot's film, the closest thing to
Lance Young's creation.  "Seventh Heaven" has a similar
theme with parts that seem virtually plagiarized from that
genuinely fascinating work which was filmed in 1995.
"Bliss" focuses on a nonorgasmic wife who joins an army of
women seeking help from a sex therapist, Baltazar (played
wonderfully by Terence Stamp).  When she is swiftly
liberated, her husband becomes suspicious, follows her to the
analyst's studio, and has a violent showdown with the good
doctor.  "Bliss" is sometimes clinical but at its core is full of
action, a swiftly-moving often quite humorous take on the
profession of psychoanalysis and a showcase for Mr. Stamp's
considerable talents.
   Unfortunately, "Seventh Heaven" does not approach its
prototype in any regard.  Shot virtually in real time as is this
director's inclination, it is yet another example of arty French
film.  It's talky and clinical, loaded with the sort of stuff with
which novels and perhaps the stage do a better job. 
Its principal character, Mathilde (Sandrine Kiberlain) has none
of the appeal of the gorgeous Virginie Ledoyen.  Ledoyen's
star-making performance in Jacquot's 1995 film "A Single Girl"
fashioned a bright slice-of-life story about a 19-year-old
woman who faces pressure in her job as a room service
waitress in a fancy hotel.  When a smile crosses Kimberlain's
face--which it does only in the final segments of the
movie--she's captivating.  In other scenes her wall-eyed
asymmety dampens potential audience appeal.
   Kiberlain, the 28-year-old wife of a surgeon eleven years
her senior, is first seen as a blurred image on the camera, an
obvious metaphor for her clouded mind.  She walks the
streets of Paris in much the way that Julianne Moore's Carol
White wanders around her own home in Todd Haynes's
"Safe": eclipsed as though her body has been taken over by
impurities that deaden her chance for joy.  She shoplifts
aimlessly, stuffing the toys into a trash bag at home; faints
when she's caught or else for no apparent reason; and one
day runs into a strange man on the street who calls himself a
hypnotist and invites her to an expensive restaurant for her
first session.  This doctor (Francois Berleand), a serious man
who never smiles, urges her to practice feng shui, a Chinese
system of living harmoniously. Though moving her bed to face
a recommended direction does not help her to attain orgasm,
a second session does.  When her husband Nico (Vincent
Lindon) beholds his own success in giving her pleasure in
bed, he becomes ironically turned off, scared, as though she
were doing this to show him her independence.  His anxiety
drives him into the office of another hypnotist and into a
confrontation with a man he believes to be his wife's
practitioner--the only comical episode in the story.
   To Jacquot's credit he occasionally summons some of the
mystery of Alfred Hitchcock, particularly as we observe the
strange encounter between Mathilde and the doctor on the
street.  We wonder what the man has in mind by escorting
her to a salmon-and-wine luncheon, why he insists on her
paying him in cash, what he will do with the ring she leaves
with him as a security deposit.  Ultimately, little is made of
these incidents which are supposed to be taken as clues to
the doctor's character, nor are we really clear on husband
Nico's paradoxical reaction to his wife's new and giving
personality (unless this successful surgeon is aghast that she
could be so independent-minded).
   The film is decently acted by Vincent Lindon as the
bewildered husband who, like physicians everywhere, cannot
tolerate the existence of alternative therapies.  Jacquot,
hwoever, is too vague throughout.  He states, in an inteview,
that his girls "are born to be alone, and they find their
freedom knowing they are alone."   What freedom?  Mathilde
is an unhappy woman who finds pleasure only when she
finally connects.  When she is "free" of others, she is sickly
and overrun with a compulsion to steal.  People talk as they
might in real life, not really advancing the plot as much as
dropping sound bites about the healthful properties of sex and
union.  Finally, "Seventh Heaven" is as pretentious and
serious as the two hynotherapists employed by the fragile
couple.
