Title
Review for I'm Not Rappaport (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Writers are smacked around so often and with such impunity in
Hollywood that it is perfectly understandable when a writer insists on
directing his or her own material.  It similarly makes sense, I suppose,
for a playwright to want to direct the film adaptation of his own
material, and Herb Gardner has been unusually protective of his plays.  In
1986, he directed his own adaptation of THE GOODBYE PEOPLE; in 1996, he
directed his own adaptation of I'M NOT RAPPAPORT.  Clearly Gardner is
attached to his creations.  In fact, he is far too attached.  Another
director might have identified I'M NOT RAPPAPORT as a meandering play with
one interesting idea, and given it the good tightening up it needed.
Gardner clings to every line and situation, turning out a sluggish and
repetitive meditation on aging.
     Walter Matthau stars as Nat, a senior citizen in New York City who
spends his days creating identities for himself and causing trouble for
those he believes guilty of exploiting people.  He is also troublesome to
Midge Carter (Ossie Davis), the old gentleman he pesters with his tall
tales every day on a Central Park bench.  The two become entangled when
Midge's failing eyesight threatens his job as an apartment building
superintendent, and Nat offers unsolicited assistance by posing as Midge's
attorney.  Nat's daughter Clara (Amy Irving) considers her father's
behavior grounds for having herself declared his guardian, but Nat refuses
to change his ways, even when an attempt to con a drug dealer (Craig T.
Nelson) places both Nat and Midge in danger.
     I'M NOT RAPPAPORT is about a man's attempt to retain his dignity in
spite of advancing years, and there are strong possibilities in the
character of Nat.  A committed Socialist and social agitator, Nat sees his
deceptions in defense of the elderly as a natural extension of his
life-long belief in the rights of the oppressed.  The film's best scene is
Nat's showdown with Danforth (Boyd Gaines), the representative from
Midge's apartment building, as Nat browbeats the insincere yuppie into a
realization that he is attempting to discard a human being who has
out-lived his usefulness.  Walter Matthau and Ossie Davis both give solid
performances, obviously appreciating their own opportunities in rare
leading roles, and there is an affecting sincerity to their comments about
giving respect where it is due.
     That scene between Nat, Midge and Danforth is noteworthy not just
because it is the best one in I'M NOT RAPPAPORT, but also because it says
everything Gardner has to say that is worth saying.  The film basically
consists of a series of conversations between characters, and virtually
every one finds Nat trying to put something over on someone to prove he is
still relevant or to save his skin.  In one such scene, Nat challenges a
young tough (Guillermo Diaz) who has been extorting protection money from
seniors; in another, Nat tries to persuade his daughter that he does not
need her supervision.  The relationships are not compelling enough by
themselves to carry those scenes, and the point that seniors are
under-estimated and mis-treated is made and made and made again.  As I'M
NOT RAPPAPORT wanders through the last of its 133 minutes, you may begin
to feel that you have been sitting in your seat as long as its main
characters have been alive.
     Gardner tries to make up for that repetitive structure by spicing up
the third act with the drug dealer sub-plot, and what a strange encounter
it is.  In an attempt to protect a young woman (Martha Plimpton) who owes
the dealer money, Nat plays the part of a stereotypical mob boss who warns
the "Cowboy" dealer to leave her alone.  What begins as broad comic relief
soon turns nasty as the Cowboy (played with scary effectiveness by Nelson)
proves smarter and more dangerous than Nat expected.  Yet even this scene
is a re-tread of the run-in with the young extortionist, as Nat pushes his
act too far with someone unwilling to play along.  Worse still, it leaves
us with the depressing notion that the elderly should be seen and not
heard.  Gardner didn't need to take us through over two hours of hoops
just so that we could end up right where we started.  Well-intentioned and
well-acted though it might be, I'M NOT RAPPAPORT is the product of a
writer too married to every word, and a director too sparing with the
knife.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Herb Gardner is the Tony award winning author for the play "I'm
Not Rappaport."   Ten years after it appeared on Broadway, Gardner
brings it to the theaters with total control.  He is the producer,
writer, and director of the film version.  This is not necessarily good
in that the major suffering of the film is that it has play stamped all
over it.  Plays are in-person experiences that happen in intimate
settings.  Films take place on a much larger scale.
     Gardner does take his play outdoors, but the cinematography by
Adam Holender (SMOKE) fixes the camera immovably on the talking heads
for insufferably long periods.  This causes the wit and humor of the
play to come across all too often as the pedantic ramblings and sermons
of a couple of old men.  The beauty of the language does come through,
but the net effect of the movie is to make the viewers wish they had
gone to the play instead.
     As the story opens, Ron Rifkin (LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS and
the soon to be released THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE) is speaking to the fur
workers' union.  The year is 1909, and thanks to some help from a woman
in the audience, he calls for a general strike.  After a quick cut to
the present where the restaurant workers are on strike, we meet one of
the two leads in the story, an 80 year old ex-Communist organizer named
Nat (Walter Matthau).  As the Communist Internationale plays in the
background, Nat drones on with tired dogma about the proletariat, but
no one takes him seriously.
     When he goes to a grocery store and starts marking down food he
deems overpriced, people look upon him as a savior more than a kook.
Everybody that is except the owner who wants to throw him out when he
begins to suspect that Nat is not from the Mayor's office of consumer
affairs as he claims.
     Every day Nat meets his acquaintance Midge (Ossie Davis) at a
bench in Central Park.  Midge views him as a pain and his incessant
conversations and stories as little more than verbal harassment.
     Being tired of hearing Nat has returned from the dead or that he
is a deep undercover Cuban secret agent, Midge tells him to stop lying.
"Lies, not lies -- alternatives.  Sometimes the truth doesn't quite
fit," argues Nat.  "I was one person for the first eighty years.  Why
not a hundred for the next five?"
     Most of the show is about old men raging against the dying of
their light.  When Midge stands up, he falls down.  Nat takes this
philosophically as it does with everything in his life, reflecting,
"It's the system.  Two years old, you stand up.  Seventy years later,
you fall down again."
     There are some interesting images in the picture.  The best is
when they both sit on a bench with a bronze statue of a suit talking on
a cell phone.  With one on each side of the immovable man, they smoke
dope and admire an attractive stranger, Laurie (Martha Plimpton).  Each
of them fantasizes her as being a woman from years ago in their past.
Later in the film, they will come to Laurie's aid when she gets in
trouble with a drug dealer named The Cowboy, played against type by
Craig T. Nelson.
     The long scenes of banter in the park undoubtedly worked well in
the play.  In the film, they are too long and preachy.  More lively
editing or camerawork would have helped.
     Midge finds that Nat drives him crazy, complaining, "Lord, I asked
for help, and you send me a weird Commie blind man."  I find that
Matthau's acting frequently annoys me, but in this film I loved his
work and that Davis's.  I empathized with them both.  Two convincing
performances.
     Less effective is the supporting cast.  There is nothing wrong
with their performances, but they provide little more than window
dressing in this two person play.
     Boyd Gaines plays a jogging character named Danforth who does have
a single good line: "Truth is I hate running.  Being immortal takes too
much time."  Now, I know why I gave up jogging twenty years ago.
     Nat puts everybody down.  He warns Danforth, "One more word, and
I'll make a citizen's arrest for crimes against the language."
     If you like to watch for goofs, you can see the boom appear quite
clearly twice in the famous "I'm Not Rappaport" joke sequence between
Nat and Midge.
     "Everybody else got a two wheeler when they turned ten, I got a
paperback copy of Das Kapital," carps Nat's daughter Clara Gelber (Amy
Irving).  Most movie goers get entertainment, but I got a talky play
masquerading as a movie.  If you can get past the stilted filming, the
film has a message worth hearing.
     I'M NOT RAPPAPORT runs too long at 2:15 because the play was not
effectively adapted into a movie.  It is rated PG-13 for dope smoking
among the geriatric set.  There is a little profanity and some
violence, but no sex or nudity.  The film's attitude about drugs makes
me suggest that the film be seen only by kids who are over twelve.  I
found the filming frustrating, but I liked most of what the movie had
to say so I am recommending it and giving it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     Turning a play into a movie is always a hit-or-miss process, and I
still don't know quite what to make of the latest film to take that
journey, I'M NOT RAPPAPORT.
     Based on the critically-acclaimed play of the same name, I'M NOT
RAPPAPORT as the story of two elderly men, Nat, a Jewish/socialist
radical and compulsive liar (Walter Matthau), and Midge, a black, nearly
blind apartment superintendent (Ossie Davis).  The pair has an uneasy
friendship based on the fact that they sit on the same bench in Central
Park, where Nat fills Midge's head with fabrications.  Nat's flair for
creating new personae for himself draws the pair into one minor
adventure after another, involving a young artist-in-training (Martha
Plimpton), a drug dealer (Craig T. Nelson), a mugger (Guillermo Diaz),
and threats from Nat's daughter (Amy Irving) regarding the ever-looming
old folks' home.
     The stuff of Broadway?  For sure.  The stuff of Hollywood?  I don't
think so.  The problems of compressing a heartwarming story about two
old guys who hang around Central Park into a feature film have obviously
taken their toll on I'M NOT RAPPAPORT, and what we've got is a 2-hour,
15-minute opus that features a very rocky start, some unneeded subplots,
and an overly repetitious plotline that is compelling despite its heavy
talkiness.
     Matthau and Davis are truly inspired as the leads (they worked
together before in GRUMPY OLD MEN), and it's great to see Plimpton
again, but whoever was in charge of putting Irving and Nelson in this
movie should be put in the old folks' home themselves.  Herb Gardner's
direction of his own script is as good as you can expect for a piece
like this (he changes camera angles enough to keep it interesting, and
that's about it), but nothing much else is overly inspired.
     The film is semi-entertaining and semi-interesting, but unless
you're really into this kind of tale, "semi" probably isn't going to cut
it.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 12/26/96 (limited)
Running Length: 2:15
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Walter Matthau, Ossie Davis, Amy Irving, Boyd Gaines, 
      Martha Plimpton, Craig T. Nelson, Guillermo Diaz, Elina Lowensohn 
Director: Herb Gardner
Producers: John Penotti and John Starke
Screenplay: Herb Gardner based on his play
Cinematography: Adam Holender
Music: Gerry Mulligan
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     I'M NOT RAPPAPORT, Herb Gardner's 1986 Tony award winning play, 
comes to the screen with the actor Gardner had originally envisioned in 
the lead role.  Although Judd Hirsch won his own Tony for playing Nat in 
the Broadway version, Gardner had always wanted to see Walter Matthau's 
interpretation of the character.  Unfortunately, at the time of the 
play's run, Matthau had been unable to commit to eight shows a week, so 
Hirsch was offered the role.  But, when the opportunity arose to make a 
movie adaptation, Gardner approached Matthau, who agreed 
enthusiastically.  Ossie Davis, one of several actors to play Midge on 
the stage, welcomed the opportunity to reprise his part.
     Davis and Matthau appeared together a few years ago in GRUMPY OLD 
MEN, and, in a sense, their relationship in I'M NOT RAPPAPORT is 
strikingly similar.  Yet, while this film has much of the irascible 
charm and wit of the earlier movie, it is more affecting and churns 
deeper waters.  In GRUMPY OLD MEN, we laugh at the characters because 
they are silly, funny, and likable.  In I'M NOT RAPPAPORT, we laugh with 
them because we understand not only who they are, but who they wish they 
had become.
     The movie revolves around the unlikely friendship of two eighty-
year old men who, despite infirm bodies and failing eyesight, aren't 
ready to give up on life.  Together, they sit around on benches in New 
York's Central Park, argue with each other, discuss life and philosophy, 
reminisce about better days, argue some more, share a joint, and try to 
do their small part in righting the world's wrongs.  And, while most of 
their efforts are ultimately ineffective, it isn't until the very end 
that we, like them, recognize that even apparent failures can be 
successes.
     Several minor characters occasionally cross Nat and Midge's paths.  
Nat's daughter, Clara (Amy Irving), doesn't trust her father on his own 
and wants to put him in an old age home.  Laurie (Martha Plimpton), an 
attractive artist, watches the pair from afar, sketching them.  The 
Cowboy (Craig T. Nelson), a high-testosterone drug dealer, roams the 
park on business.  Danforth (Boyd Gaines), the yuppy spokesman of the 
group that wants to fire Midge from his maintenance job, breaks the bad 
news only to have the situation unexpectedly blow up in his face.  And a 
mugger (Guillermo Diaz) tries to extort protection money from Nat.
     For the most part, the plot is incidental.  What matters in I'M NOT 
RAPPAPORT are the characters and their dialogue.  Over the two-plus hour 
running time, Nat and Midge touch on an amazing variety of subjects:  
unions and bosses ("their tactics haven't changed in one century"), age 
("an old man like me, I could wander through the world like a ghost"), 
memories ("nostalgia kills more of us than heart disease"), and the war 
between idealism and realism ("I got smarter -- I fought in battles I 
thought I could win").  They talk and talk and talk, and they're always 
a delight to listen to, whether we're hearing Nat's tall stories or 
Midge's less fanciful reflections.  
     I'M NOT RAPPAPORT reveals its characters in steps.  Because Nat and 
Midge are played by Matthau and Davis, a  pair of "audience-friendly" 
performers, we're prone to like them, but it isn't until we spend some 
time in their company that our initial impressions are validated.  
Through two short flashbacks (a 1909 labor union rally and images of a 
shy girl who committed suicide), we learn what motivates Nat, and why he 
is so desperate to make a difference.  Because he blames himself for a 
death, he is forever trying to atone.  With a similar economy of scenes, 
we gain a wealth of insight into Midge's personality -- he's an ex-prize 
fighter on the ropes.  Until he meets Nat, that is.
     Matthau and Davis have both invested a great deal of heart and 
energy into this production, and it shows.  While their names on the 
marquee all-but-ensure an element of quality in any film, their work in 
I'M NOT RAPPAPORT represents a mark of distinction for each of them.  
The supporting performers are all solid -- each gets one prominent scene 
to compliment, but not eclipse, the leads.
     I'M NOT RAPPAPORT is the kind of movie that grows on you.  It's 
obviously a play that has been adapted for the cinema, but that doesn't 
take anything away from the delicate magic that Gardner has conjured by 
his use of sly comedy and keen social insight.  While it's true that 
this is essentially a buddy movie, it's a very special one. Nat and 
Midge's friendship reminds us of what bonding really is -- and it 
doesn't have anything to do with dodging bullets or running away from 
exploding buildings.  In the final analysis, this motion picture is far 
more about a rapport than a Rappaport.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
