Title
Review for Red Planet (2000)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The Mars jinx continues. First, Tim Burton fired off an empty shell with
MARS ATTACKS, a film that managed to have a little fun with itself via the
goofy-looking alien creatures, but very little else. Earlier this year, many
of us experienced the stillborn child that was MISSION TO MARS, another film
which also managed to give us one very cool special effect (the sandstorm,
people...not the CGI alien!), but no real meat in its "story" department.
And now six months later comes yet another sci-fi flick hoping to achieve at
least one level of competency above the former films, but alas, once again,
we are all left holding our ding-dongs. I guess it's up to director John
Carpenter to bust out for the last hoorah. Expect GHOST OF MARS in theatres
sometime next year.
PLOT:
This movie takes place in the year 2025. A crew of astronauts is stranded on
the planet Mars with little hope of survival. Their situation is endangered
further by the presence of a guerilla robot out for blood. Will their
orbiting captain be able to help them get off the planet alive? Does anybody
care? Let's find out.
CRITIQUE:
Blah. This movie felt a lot like a big-budget episode of TV's "Star Trek".
Zero tension, a few cheap thrills (including a side shot of Carrie-Anne Moss
exiting the showers, thank you very much), a tiny bit of action and a hardly
noticeable story. They should have just called it STRANDED, since that was
basically all that this movie was about. It just so happened to take place
on the planet Mars, but they may as well have been stranded anywhere else
with cavernous mountains and orange filters, cause this planet seemed to
have no relevance to the actual story. What story, you may ask? Hmmmm, not
sure. Other than the fact that these folks are deserted on this planet and
looking for a way out, the film had very little else to offer. And is it me,
or does the plot sound a lot like what is turning out to be the best sci-fi
flick of the year, the low-budgeted PITCH BLACK? Who knew?!
Fortunately for us, that film actually had a bad guy, a charismatic lead and
some nasty alien muthas. This movie has got a "robot" who is supposed to be
scary, running around making some buzzing noises, plenty of shots of crew
members switching and clicking buttons in the cockpit and some nasty bugs,
who looked almost as CGI as the pathetic "alien" at the end of MISSION TO
MARS. The actors were all decent, but a couple, like Tom Sizemore and
Terence Stamp, seemed to be there simply to cash a paycheck. Kilmer was
good, but I believe he already played that very same character in THE ISLAND
OF DR. MOREAU. But I suppose much of my disappointment with the film
could've been resolved if they had actually spent some time building an
interesting story or developing their characters, but neither aspect
materializes here. The film was actually never boring for me, but neither
was it ever exciting. And I'm not sure if this was just the theatre that I
was in but damn, how about lowering the decibel level on some of those
"crash" and "explosion" sequences? Jeez-Louise, my eardrums were about to
bust out! A renter maybe, but nothing worth seeing in the theatres. This
movie is yet another missed opportunity to build a great story around all of
the mystery and unknown elements surrounding the red planet. This film had
very little to do with Mars, even less to do with entertainment and
contained yet another disposable sci-fi "romance". I certainly wouldn't
qualify it as a horrible flick, watchable to be sure, but one which will
undoubtedly be forgotten by most as they walk out of the theater.

Author
Christopher Null
     One approaches the release of Red Planet with a singular, desperate
thought:  There is no way... it is not possible... it is
inconceivable... that Red Planet could be worse than Mission to Mars.
     Indeed, Red Planet makes for a far better film than Mission to
Mars.  While that's not saying a whole lot (since Mission currently
ranks as the worst movie I've seen all year) Red Planet is at least
competently constructed and mildly engaging, so long as you put aside
the sappy melodramatics.  Of course, this isn't that easy to do.
     A narrated prologue by Carrie-Anne Moss's Commander Kate Bowman
clues us in to some of what's ahead through its drippy introductions of
the setting and the cast.  By 2025 we've apparently destroyed the earth,
so we're getting ready to move to Mars thanks to a terraforming project
that has oxygenated the atmosphere.  Unfortunately, something seems
amiss: the sensors have vanished, and the algae they put up there seems
to have gone away.  To find out what gives, our last best hope -- a
human crew -- is sent to the planet to discover what went wrong.  And,
while 2025 is not an eco-friendly era, it is an equal-opportunity one,
and the buxom Bowman is in charge.
     Along for the ride are a rogues gallery of characters -- notably
Val Kilmer (surprisingly tame here) as the ship's mechanic and Tom
Sizemore (surprisingly lacking dialogue) as the chief scientific officer
onboard.  And then there's AMEE, a robotic CGI dog (very well-done, I
must add) ostensibly with some kind of navigation job... despite its
legacy of military programming that fundamentally makes it a deadly
weapon.  (A better recipe for trouble I can't imagine.)
     The discovery mission is soon underway, but, well, do movie space
missions ever turn out very well?  Before you know it, we're in
MacGyver-esque search-and-rescue mode after a fire hits the ship, and
most of the crew is stranded on the surface with the now-crazed robot
dog.  At this point the film unfortunately degenerates into any number
of recent space cinema entries -- take your pick from Lost in Space,
Mission to Mars, Apollo 13, or Pitch Black (though some of these are
better movies than others).  All the while we are meant to wonder, what
happened to the algae on Mars?  (Now there's something that'll get a
PG-13 audience on the edge of its seat!)
     Once we've made it this far, the movie really starts to bog down. 
Red Planet's plot holes come at you at a dizzying pace, and they can be
rather extreme.  To wit: Why isn't the off-screen murder of one
character simply heard over the other characters' headset radios?  How
does a homemade solar radio work in the dark?  How do you get sparks in
space from smashing metal?  The answers to these questions and more are
not forthcoming.
     On top of this, the weird cosmo-metaphysics espoused by Terence
Stamp's grandpa-like character ("the soul of the ship") don't make the
movie any better.  Instead, it comes across as an attempt to be like
2001: A Space Odyssey, somehow implying a greater force beyond mankind
imploring us to care for the world we have.  It comes as no small irony
that Stamp's is the first character that is gotten rid of.
     But putting the silly-talk aside, in its quest to show off its
obviously-not-really-Martian landscapes, Red Planet unfortunately misses
a big lesson that 2001 proved so very well:  Getting there can be all
the fun.  Next time Hollywood decides to take a trip in space, let's
hope they take it slow.
Director: Antony Hoffman
Producer: Bruce Berman, Mark Canton, Jorge Saralegui
Writer: Jonathan Lemkin, Channing Gibson
Starring: Val Kilmer, Tom Sizemore, Carrie-Anne Moss, Benjamin Bratt,
Simon Baker, Terence Stamp
http://www.redplanetmovie.com/cmp/redplanet.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Michael Dequina
The latter half of _Mission_to Mars_, directed by Brian DePalma and
released by Disney earlier this year, justifiably left viewers with a bad
taste with its high-minded but lame-brained artistic pretensions.  But an
unfortunate side effect was that the decent first half of the film,
capped by a suspenseful domino-effect disaster sequence, was completely
forgotten.  In the case of _Red_Planet_, however, there's nothing of
merit to forget--or, at least, the film's only redeeming quality, its
perfectly solid visual effects, show up onscreen constantly enough to
remind us of the wasted effort turned in by the FX crews.
The year is 2050, and we are told through voiceover by one Commander
Kate Bowman (Carrie-Anne Moss) that the earth has become so polluted that
it will soon no longer be able to sustain life.  All sights have been set
on Mars, where algae has been planted by unmanned probes to generate
oxygen.  But something has gone wrong, and a crew led by Bowman has been
sent to the red planet to figure out what.  After a shuttle landing
mishap strands Gallagher (Val Kilmer), Burchenal (Tom Sizemore),
Pettengill (Simon Baker), Santen (Benjamin Bratt), and Chantilas (Terence
Stamp) on the Mars surface and leaves Bowman aboard the main orbiting
spacecraft, the crew is given even more problems to solve.
Their problems, however, are none compared to the ones faced by director
Antony Hoffman, who is given the arduous task of making Chuck Pfarrer and
Jonathan Lemkin's script into a watchable film.  Simply put, nothing
really happens, and the whole "earth in danger" framework becomes moot as
Gallagher and company simply search for a way to get back aboard the
mothership and go home.  The only real conflict in the script are the
weak attempts the writers make at creating "villains": a crew member who
accidentally causes a problem early-on, then is retroactively made out to
have evil intent later in the film; and, more prominently, AMEE, a
scouting robot who turns from gentle to killer with the flip of a switch.
 Guess which setting she ends up on when the shuttle crashes?
Hoffman, a commercial director making his feature debut, simply throws
his hands in the air and instead focuses on what he knows best: the look.
 As mentioned before, the visual effects are impressive, particularly the
completely CGI AMEE; and the ship sets and desert locations convince. 
But looks can't count for everything, and Hoffman appears to completely
bank on the attractive appearances of stars Moss and Kilmer to make the
romance between their characters work for the audience.  Needless to say,
it takes more than Ultra-Brite smiles to conceal the fact that this
undercooked subplot was sloppily grafted on to give the film more appeal
to females--who are instead likely to be insulted by the love story's
completely arbitrary nature (as will all other demographics).
As ludicrous as _Red_Planet_ is, the copy writers at the WB publicity
department actually one-up the makers of the film by pasting on a loud
disclaimer at the top of the press notes that urges the media to not
reveal the film's ending.  This blurb would lead one to believe there's
some big surprise in store, but perhaps the only shock up the film's
sleeve is how closely it hews to everyone's formulaic expectations.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Scott Renshaw
RED PLANET
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Val Kilmer, Carrie-Anne Moss, Tom Sizemore, Benjamin Bratt,
Simon Baker, Terence Stamp.
Screenplay:  Chuck Pfarrer and Jonathan Lemkin.
Producers:  Mark Canton, Bruce Berman and Jorge Saralegui.
Director:  Antony Hoffman.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, adult themes, brief nudity, profanity)
Running Time:  106 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Some genre films tease you with the prospect that they can be
something more substantial before degenerating into stupidity and cliche. 
RED PLANET at least does viewers the courtesy of not wasting their time
with such futile hopes. In the opening minutes, Mars Mission Commander
Bowman (Carrie-Anne Moss) provides a voice-over neatly summarizing the
premise before launching into capsule characterizations of her crewmates. 
That co-pilot Santen (Benjamin Bratt), he sure is a hot-head, which
undoubtedly will play a significant role in his ultimate fate. And that
scientist Burchenal (Tom Sizemore), he sure has an ego, which undoubtedly
will create some sort of character tension down the road.
     Dim-wittedness in Hollywood action films is only to be expected at
this point in cinema history. Vaguely pretentious dim-wittedness is pretty
inexcusable. RED PLANET sends a six-person crew to Mars in 2057 to find
out what has happened to oxygen-producing algae sent by earth scientists
as part of a colonization plan. You see, earth has become nearly
uninhabitable due to environmental degradation, and our only hope of
survival is creating a survivable atmosphere elsewhere, but something has
gone screwy because oxygen readings have suddenly dropped. The mission
team is ready to investigate when a freak radiation burst damages their
vessel, forcing an emergency evacuation of all personnel but Bowman. The
landing vehicle is damaged on impact, leaving the surviving crew members
-- including dashing chief engineer Gallagher (Val Kilmer) -- to figure
out a way to get back home.
     At certain points in RED PLANET, you can't help but wonder why anyone
wasted time on a back story at all. Though the very survival of the human
race is theoretically at stake, the film seems interested in that point
only to the extent that it can be included in press notes, in absurd
declarations like, "It's a smart movie that posits the question, what if
man fails to do the things necessary to live on earth?" In fact, RED
PLANET resolutely refuses to deal with anything beyond the basic goals of
its characters to find a way back to earth. Why does no one in the
stranded party refer to being thirsty or hungry after going without food
and water for more than a day? How would the people on earth be responding
to the apparent failure of this crucial mission? What exactly was the
reason that no one could detect any oxygen, when it turns out there's a
whole lot of it around? And why flirt with the notion that there's some
intelligence bent on thwarting the terraforming effort, only to make the
real villain of the piece the crew's resident malfunctioning evil robot?
     Silly questions, of course, since RED PLANET is kind enough to alert
you so quickly to its minimalist intentions. The characters spout dialogue
that alternates between inane exposition and pointless 
self-characterization. "I'm a scientist, but I'm really interested in
philosophy," says philosophically-interested scientist Chantilas (Terence
Stamp), though not in so many words. "We're sexually attracted to one
another, so I hope neither one of us dies," say Bowman and Gallagher,
though not in so many words. "I sure wish it didn't take 40 minutes for
you to answer," says Bowman after sending a radio message to earth,
actually in so many words, just to let us know the writers knew at least
one science fact. It's a wonderful irony in RED PLANET that it places so
much weight on the fate of these six characters, only to make them utterly
weightless as actual characters.
     At odd intervals, something happens to slap the film out of its
oxygen-deprived stupor. Most of them involve Moss, whose strong presence
occasionally tricks you into thinking the film is better than it is. One
involves a great shot of the Mars lander taking a tumble for which it
certainly wasn't designed. And, sadly, many others involve the pleasure of
watching one or another of the annoying characters meet an untimely
demise. As directed by rookie feature director Antony Hoffman, this is a
lame special effects-driven action film that can't even be bothered to
provide a handful of visceral thrills. Lacking big-time action excitement,
competent story-telling or any desire to prevent you from walking out
scratching deep trenches into your head, RED PLANET is simply a
planet-sized waste of time. But at least it only wastes a few minutes of
your time before making that obvious.

Author
Robin Clifford
Well, mankind finally did it. It's 2057 and planet Earth is on the brink of
ecological extinction. There is one choice and one choice only for survival
- colonize Mars. The Mars Terraforming Project laid the groundwork to
prepare the red planet for its human inhabitants. Now, a manned space
mission is sent to begin the colony, but disaster soon strikes, stranding
the landing party on the inhospitable planet and leaving mission commander,
Kate Bowman, alone on their failing spaceship. It's a race against time as
Bowman must save her ship and crew in the science fiction actioner, "Red
Planet."
"Red Planet" is by the numbers and derivative, but it is well done by the
numbers and derivative. It tries to do a lot of things with several plot
lines happening concurrently. It's a survival flick a la the 1964 sci-fi
movie "Robinson Crusoe on Mars" as the marooned crew discovers that there
is air on the planet, extending their endangered lives. The introduction of
a sinister robot, called AMEE, portends problems that are reminiscent of
both "Alien" and "Terminator." There is even a passing nod to the classic
"War of the Worlds" thrown into the mix, as well as "2001."
This is a typical Hollywood action/disaster film that moves along at a
brisk, energetic pace under the control of first-time helmer Antony
Hoffman. The director has a good team behind the camera, so there is
quality built in to the sets, costumes (although all the uniforms have the
players names emblazoned in several places in large letters as if the crew
of six suffers from a learning disorder that prohibits their remembering
each other's names) and flashy special F/X.  Veteran lenser Peter
Suschitzky gives the film the benefit of his years of craft experience.
Owen Paterson helps things look otherworldly with art direction that makes
the red planet an inhospitable place indeed. Costuming, by Kym Barrett, has
a suitable pseudo military air about it, though Carrie-Anne Moss's threads
consist mainly of skin tight t-shirts without a bra - not that I'm
complaining, mind you.
The small but well-versed cast breathes some life into their mostly
two-dimensional characters, though there is little in the way of character
development. Carrie-Anne Moss has proven she has the physical ability to be
an action hero, but, to date, has not had the chance to show any acting
chops. If she can get more meaty roles, she may prove herself to be the new
Sigourney Weaver. It's too soon to tell, though, with her current track
record. She plays the stalwart, smart Captain Bowman well enough but
doesn't get beyond the essentials of the character. Val Kilmer and Tom
Sizemore get to do the macho guy thing and get to deliver the funny,
smart-ass lines that provide the film's comic relief.
The rest of the cast is little more than background characters. Terrence
Stamp plays a scientist turned philosopher, but is killed off early on,
getting little to do except to tell the others "you can do it!" Benjamin
Bratt is given even less to do and his demise makes little sense in the
context of the story. Simon Baker plays a quasi-sinister character, but the
motivations and actions of the guy make little sense except to introduce a
"bad guy" to the story. Special mention is needed to praise the robot
character AMEE. While she doesn't speak, she is a major character in the
monster movie part of the tale and consists of some cool F/X.
Some of the details of the Red Planet are not handled quite as well as
others. In one part, there are clouds in the sky - on a planet supposedly
devoid of an atmosphere. This is one glaring inconsistency. In another,
when the stranded, would be colonists locate their emergency habitat, they
find it utterly destroyed. The comment is made that even the worst storm on
Earth could not harm the refuge, but no reason is given why their almost
home was wrecked. You also have to take the sci-fi mumbo jumbo explanations
given with a grain of salt.
Comparison will be made with the other Mars flick that hit the screens
earlier this year, "Mission to Mars." Where the latter film approached the
awful category, "Red Planet" plays more like a space western that tells its
tale of survival in a hostile land. There is no deep philosophy to muddy
the action waters, here. Instead, we have an old-fashion story that uses
up-to-date F/X and computer-generated technology to keep us entertained for
a couple of hours. Even if it ain't rocket science, it did that for me and
I give it a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

RED PLANET (director: Antony Hoffman; screenwriters: Chuck
Pfarrer/Jonathan Lemkin, from a story by Pfarrer; cinematographer: Peter
Suschitzky; editors: Robert K. Lambert/Dallas S. Puett; cast: Val Kilmer
(Gallagher), Carrie-Anne Moss (Bowman), Tom Sizemore (Burchenal),
Benjamin Bratt (Santen), Simon Baker (Pettingil), Terence Stamp
(Chantilas); Runtime: 106; Warner Bros.; 2000)
The third dull Hollywood film about Mars in a little over a year, after
Tim Burton's "Mars Attacks!" and "Mission to Mars." I would think that
three strikes and you're out should apply to any more of these space
bombs cast into theaters by producers with big budgets and small
stories. This one's a nuts-and- bolts sci-fier that looks good but its
dialogue is just terrible, with the capable cast unable to overcome the
poorly plotted story and saying things like Val Kilmer is forced to say
about Mars, "Things happen on Mars that are extreme and otherworldly."
The story is a formula one, where the mission is to save the world and
find missing algae needed to supply the world with oxygen. The
characters are either undeveloped or predictable stock characters. The
film itself is unconvincing, making the Mars-mission astronauts into a
disharmonious team (which is hardly likely of ever happening, especially
when this is known before the orbit, and the fact that it takes six
months to reach their destination), and the unreality of the film is
furthered by making one of them into a real villain, which seem
far-fetched for an astronaut.
South African director Anthony Hoffman directs without imagination, as
the film seems to drag on at a lethargic pace. The "Red Planet" was also
void of humor and the obstacles encountered by the astronauts seemed
arbitrarily thrown into the film to purposefully give the film an excuse
for the special effects to be the star. I think Hollywood should
reevaluate its plans to make these special effect only films about Mars
and see if they can go back to the drawing board and put some life into
these stories about the Earth's last frontier. Those B-movies made in
the 1950s on a shoestring budget were more entertaining to me than this
large-scale leaden sci-fi adventure story.
The film opens on the listless note it will maintain, unfortunately,
throughout, as the serious Commander Bowman (Carrie-Anne Moss) will
relate via her voiceover the purpose of the mission and introduce the
crew, as she takes the viewer on a tour of the sleek aircraft.
In 2050, the Earth is about to become unlivable from pollution. The most
telling sign of this danger, is that all the frogs have died. The only
way the human race can save itself is the
Mars Terraforming Project, an attempt by scientists to create a
habitable atmosphere  based on the obtaining of oxygen- producing
blue-green algae, which calls for colonizing Mars. An unmanned Mars
project that was working has mysteriously malfunctioned, so an emergency
mission commanded by Bowman is sent to get things straightened out.
The introduction of the crew is done in the same tired formula style
seen in countless films, as each member is labelled and doesn't move
from that tag, except for the film's designated hero Gallagher (Val
Kilmer), the ship's mechanical engineer, considered the least important
person on the mission, a 'space janitor,' someone who has designs on
Bowman, especially after seeing her beautiful tits when she comes out of
the shower. Predictably, he becomes the most important member of the
crew, saves the world and gets the only girl aboard the ship who isn't a
mechanical robot.
The other crew members are so boring and one-dimensional, that when they
started getting picked off one by one, for one reason or another, I was
rooting for a more efficient way of getting rid of them, maybe picking
up the pace at two at a time killings. Burchenal (Tom Sizemore) is the
head scientist, he writes code for genetics and doesn't believe in God
and jokes about becoming Mars's new "king" and having Bowman be the
"queen" to propagate the species. His counterpart, wouldn't you know it,
is a believer in God, the resident scientist-philosopher, Chantilas
(Terence Stamp). He is an arrogant preacher of the truth, who's only
purpose in the film, is to rant on about the limitations of science,
seemingly impressed by the sound of his own voice. Thankfully we got rid
of him in the first wave of deaths.
The two most repulsive crew members are the co-pilot, Santen (Benjamin
Bratt), who is a
tormentor of the others and an egomaniac, and the other is the
agricultural specialist, Pettingill (Simon Baker), the villain, who is
both a liar and a coward. This was some crew, lacking in credibility,
wit and likability!
The voyage runs into trouble from a gamma ray storm, disabling some of
its equipment. The Mars lander descends to the surface with Gallagher,
Burchenal, Santen, Pettengil and  Chantilas. We then get into the
special effects part of the film, the only thing the film can brag
about, as there's a well-photographed crash landing scene. The five men
become the first humans on Mars when their landing capsule roughly
bounces upon the desert surface until finally rolling to a stop, as they
are surrounded by airbag-like balloons.
The barren red desert of Mars is breathtakingly beautiful, as the men
trudge through it unable to find the algae that had been growing there.
When they reach the spot that was created to house them safely for a two
year period, they find it in ruins. The source of that destruction is a
mystery, which the film never tries to explain. Did God do it? Maybe, an
alien? It's an interesting theme, but this film was only able to grab
onto its spectacular special effects (showing the Mars earth
mysteriously moving) and by proving that there is life on Mars, and was
not able to follow through on any ideas invested in the far-reaches of
the story.
There is one other passenger on their voyage, an all-utility tracking
robot, AMEE, who is maintained by Gallagher. When AMEE goes mustang and
can't be repaired, she starts attacking the men, aiming to destroy all
of the them by going into a war mode, which gives the story another
contrived plot.
When ideas are quickly jettisoned, the film comes down to being a
formula film, one of a rush against the clock to leave Mars in one
piece, with Bowman, aboard the craft that is damaged by a solar flare,
making emergency repairs and with the crew, now reduced to only the
space janitor, trying to get back to the main craft and return to Earth
with the knowledge to save humanity before it is too late.
I thought the film lacked suspense, and the acting was only bearable,
not giving this film too much of a chance to overcome its overall
dullness. If you are the kind of viewer who goes bananas for technology,
this film might seem better to you than what I thought of it, as that
part of the film was stunning, indeed. But if you are interested in a
lively story, then I'm afraid you wouldn't get that on this mission.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Redman
Movies can do the two big Es very well: educate and entertain. In the best
of all possible worlds, they accomplish both. On the Red Planet, they fail entirely.
In the near future, a manned mission is sent to Mars to observe primitive
plant growth. This film does a remarkable job of demonstrating exactly how
exciting watching algae grow would be.
After some mumbo-jumbo about an ecological disaster on Earth and an
interminable wait to reach the fourth planet, the ship falls apart almost as
fast as the movie does. The ground crew of people you couldn't care less
about is trapped on the surface without food, water or air and stalked by a
deadly rogue cyberdog. The one potentially interesting character
(Carrie-Anne Moss) spends her time alone in the orbiting ship talking to a computer.
Attempting to graft "2001"esque space mysticism with "Terminator" robot
horror, first time director Antony Hoffman can't seem to figure out what's
going on. Neither can we. Didn't he have anyone who could step back from the
shooting and make sure there was a coherent story? Couldn't he have used the
money saved by only having to pay half a dozen actors to hire a scriptwriter?
There are so many mis-steps. Every opportunity to create dynamic tension is
thwarted by plot holes and lackluster direction. Why introduce the theme of
faith vs. science if the crewman who could comment on it disappears early
only to die _offscreen_?
The audience begins the film waiting for something to happen. Two hours
later, they're still waiting. Despite our greatest hopes, there is no life
on the red planet.
(Michael Redman has written this column for a very long time and finds
observing Mars from the ground much more interesting than anything in this
film. Email your experiences with the cosmos to redman@bluemarble.net.)
[This appeared in the 11/16/2000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]
-- 
mailto:redman@bluemarble.net
Film reviews archive: 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Michael+Redman

Author
Susan Granger
 There were two competitive Mars exploration pictures planned
for 2000: the dreadful "Mission to Mars" and "Red Planet." When the
first tanked at the box-office, the second looked more
promising. Wrong! This sci-fi story begins in 2050, when the Earth has
been polluted and six astronauts are sent to repair the Mars
Terraforming Project for colonization. But when Carrie-Anne Moss, as
the mission commander, gets them into orbit, problems occur and a
crash-landing leaves her five crewmen stranded without their high-tech
equipment. "This is what they told us about it high school," one
mutters, "the moment when algebra would save our lives!"  Plus, a
malfunction in AMEE, their exploration robot, turns it into a
stalking, renegade adversary. "AMEE's gone mustang," reports Val
Kilmer, who serves as the ship's janitor. The perfunctory, contrived
script by Chuck Pfarrer and Jonathan Lemkin is filled with
techno-babble about malfunctioning equipment and why the terraforming
blue algae was scoured off the planet's surface. Director Antony
Hoffman flounders, staging stilted, superficial scenes, squandering
the talents of Moss, Kilmer, Terence Stamp, Tom Sizemore, Benjamin
Bratt and Simon Baker. A feeble attempt at humor occurs when the men
urinate and marvel, "You sure get a high arc in low gravity." So much
of this project's dramatic potential is squandered: there are no
Martians, only tiny, ravenous insects who, conveniently, keep their
distance most of the time. Carrie-Anne Moss converses primarily with a
computer named Lucille, and even her nude shower scene is a
bore. Finally, at the end, she's allowed to haul the hero out of
trouble and jump-start his heart. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Red Planet" is a pointless, fumbling 2. Is there a Mars curse?

Author
Steve Kong
I love how Hollywood works.  When a film about a particular subject or 
thing comes out there always seems to be another one about just that same 
thing on the heels of it.  For example look at Speed and Blown Away (mad 
bombers), Antz and A Bug's Life (bugs), Matrix and eXistenZ (alternate 
reality).  These types of films are always released a few months away from 
each other and I don't know why because invariably one is far superior to 
the next  usually by a large margin.  This year the thing that is being 
covered twice in theatres is a trip to Mars.  The first out of the gates 
was Brian DePalma's terrible Mission to Mars.  The second is Red Planet and 
Red Planet is what Mission to Mars should have been.
Humans have finally polluted the Earth to the point where habitation on 
this planet is no longer viable.  What is a species supposed to do?  Go 
find another planet to ruin of course.  And this is how Red Planet 
starts.  The opening of the film sets up the story quickly via a voice-over 
by Command Kate Bowman (Carrie-Anne Moss).  We meet the rest of the crew 
quickly, co-pilot Ted Santen (Benjamin Bratt), scientist Dr. Quinn 
Burchenal (Tom Sizemore), Chip Penttengill (Simon Baker), a religious 
scientist Chantias (Terence Stamp), and the space handyman Gallagher (Val 
Kilmer).
Unlike Mission to Mars where a lot of time is spent watching the crew as 
they go to Mars, Red Planet makes the trip quick and easy.  Much of Red 
Planet actually takes place on the planet Mars.  What is interesting and 
also what drew me into the film was writer Chuck Pfarrer's (Darkman) notion 
of how we were going to make Mars inhabitable.  Humans, seeing the demise 
of Earth, sent probes to Mars with algae.  This algae worked to make an 
atmosphere on Mars and eventually the atmosphere would turn habitable and 
breathable.  But, to the surprise of the humans somehow all the algae just 
disappeared one day.  Gone.  And it is this disappearance of the algae that 
the crew, headed by Bowman, is sent to investigate on Mars.  The movie has 
a good and plausible explanation for the disappearance of the algae and it 
keeps you guessing throughout the film.
Did I like Red Planet?  Yes.  I enjoyed the film thoroughly.  Some might 
say that it's a bit long or a bit slow, but I thought it was a good solid 
piece of sci-fi moviemaking.  Kudos to director Antony Hoffman and writer 
Chuck Pfarrer for putting together a believable and enjoyable film.
The actors all do well.  Carrie-Anne Moss again shows that she's up to par 
as an actress and that her first time out in The Matrix was not a 
fluke.  (It's interesting to note that her character's name is a tip of the 
hat to the movie 2001's main character Bowman.)  Val Kilmer is excellent as 
Gallagher.  Kilmer has that exact smugness and immature that the Gallagher 
character calls for and Kilmer shines in the part.  Of the other actors 
Terence Stamp puts out a good performance and so does Tom Sizemore (who is 
always a good and reliable supporting actor).
The special effects in Red Planet were sufficiently good.  The one that I 
loved the most was AMEE the robot that is supposed to navigate Mars for the 
ground crew.  AMEE is frightening and though the robot is not always 
onscreen the frightening presence of "her" is always there.
Red Planet is a good sci-fi flick.  Catch it in theatres if you have a 
chance or catch it on video.  Skip Mission to Mars, Catch Red Planet.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
RED PLANET (2000)
Rated R; running time 110 minutes
Genre: Science Fiction
Seen at: Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.redplanetmovie.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0199753
Written by: Jonathan Lemkin, Channing Gibson (based upon a story by
Chuck Pfarrer)
Directed by: Anthony Hoffman
Cast: Val Kilmer, Carrie-Anne Moss, Tom Sizemore, Benjamin Bratt,
Simon Baker, Terrence Stamp
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsredplanet.html
The five-second Bammer review: YAWN.
Those needing a wee bit more substance in their reviews, are invited to
read on.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
The year: 2057.  Twelve billion people living on Earth.  Something's
gotta give - and increasingly, it's Earth's natural resources.
For 20 years, Earth scientists sent unmanned probes to Mars, hoping to
stimulate life there, to one day allow some of Earth's citizenry to
colonize Mars.  When the oxygen levels on Mars start dropping, "Houston"
sends a crack team of their top people to Mars to investigate.  The team
includes: tough-as-nails [but Soft inside!] Mission Commander Kate
Bowman (Carrie-Anne Moss); techie Robby Gallagher (Val Kilmer), who the
team teasingly calls their "Space Janitor"; Dr. Quinn Burchenal (Tom
Sizemore), a Geneticist with Science constantly on the brain; Lt. Ted
Santen (Benjamin Bratt), mission co-pilot and resident Stud;
Terraforming Specialist Chip Pettengill (Simon Baker), picked for the
mission as a last-minute replacement; and Dr. Bud Chantillas (Terrence
Stamp), former scientist and current Seeker-Of-Light.
And let's not forget AMEE, the robot WonderDog; prepped for exploration
as well as military mode, AMEE is one terminator that you do *not* wanna
tick off.
The Upshot:
I'm firmly convinced that at this point in human existence, movies about
missions to Mars, are doomed to be bad (contrary to what I wrote in my
review of MISSION TO MARS, which I, admittedly, overrated because of its
Tender Love Story.  Hooboy, did I take a wrong turn there.  But I
digress.)
RED PLANET was, in a word, boring.  And in a few more words, it had plot
holes wide enough to drive a truck through, uninteresting characters
that you were glad to watch die one at a time, a storyline that was
laughingly thin with weak feints toward having Big Philosophical
Discussions, multiple Deus Ex Machinas (one in particular that had the
Geek in me up in arms; anyone with working knowledge of How Modems Work,
will see what I mean), and the dumbest, most unintentionally funny
excuse for an Evil Monster that I've seen in a long time.  Oh, but the
movie *did* have irrelevant-to-the-scene Sting songs constantly playing
in the background, and - proving that it was Modern! And! Hip! - lots of
references to The Web.  Oooh.  I'm impressed.
I give "Planet" credit for almost coming to life near the end [ironic
that the more characters died off, the more interesting the movie got],
and for avoiding the easy "Matrix" way out by not making Carrie-Anne
Moss' character Melt around all the flying testosterone [at least, not
completely].  The movie certainly *looked* Pretty enough, though the
strange etch-a-sketch (without the surrounding plastic) directional
thingies the characters were so fond of using, made me long for Mr.
Spock's Tricorder.  And I gotta admit that that Braless Space Commander
closeup even got *my* attention (must be cold up there, eh Commander?).
But considering that RED PLANET was held back for months to keep it out
of direct competition with MISSION TO MARS, you might think that they'd
spend a little time adding some...oh, I dunno...*entertainment* to it or
something.
And what a waste of Tom Sizemore; hell, of Moss (who at least had a few
sparky moments) and Terrence Stamp, too (Val Kilmer, though, was his
usual wooden self).  Director Anthony Hoffman oughta be pimp-slapped for
having all that powerful acting ability at his fingertips, and leaving
it lost in space like that.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
The good news: there were no Black astronauts in this "futuristic" space
flick to test out Diva's "Brotha Rule Of Science Fiction" (in which the
Black astronaut/scientist/comic-relief is usually the first to die).
The bad news: there were no Black astronauts in this "futuristic" space
flick.
The better news: there were no Black actors wasted in this stunningly
boring space flick.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
It might be that Mars exploration is too far ahead of our time to allow
filmmakers to create a good, realistic, adventurous Mars space flick
just yet.  Or it might be that with all the Modern Technology gizmos
that we humans have, it's NASA that's behind the ball, not keeping up
with *us*; who knows.  One thing's for sure: until Classics like "The
Jetsons" come to fruition, none of these "To Mars...And Beyond!"
pretenders to the throne have a real prayer of impressing an
increasingly techno-aware American Public.  Unless, of course, they have
"Star Wars" somewhere in the title.
RED PLANET (rating: yellowlight):
Crash-landing at a theater near you...

Author
Steve Rhodes
Is there life on Mars?  Even after the inert actors in Antony Hoffman's 
RED PLANET make their journey there, the count of life forms still 
appears to be about zip.  With an arid landscape that is the spitting 
image of Utah, the tedious movie is about as much fun as a long stroll 
through a hot Utah desert without benefit of water.
The near-comatose cast is led by Carrie-Anne Moss (THE MATRIX) as 
Commander Kate Bowman.  In one of the blandest narrations on record, she 
explains the setup to us.  It seems that Earth's resources have been 
depleted by bad ecological choices, so the planet's inhabitants have 
decided to colonize Mars.  In order to prepare our promised land, we 
have blanketed Mars with algae.  This has been working for twenty years, 
but suddenly the algae have started to disappear.  Commander Bowman is 
leading the first manned mission to Mars in order to find out what 
happened to the algae.  Yes, RED PLANET is about lost algae.  If you 
think that AWOL algae doesn't sound like a hot recipe for a picture, 
you'd be right.
Along on the expedition with the commander are Robby Gallagher (Val 
Kilmer), Dr. Quinn Burchenal (Tom Sizemore), Ted Santen (Benjamin 
Bratt), Chip Pettengill (Simon Baker) and Dr. Bud Chantillas (Terence 
Stamp).  In a dead-end subplot, Dr. Chantillas is a scientist turned 
philosopher who spends his time looking for God.  Exactly why he was 
chosen to join them is a mystery not worth solving.  
The good news about the cast is that Val Kilmer avoids his usual 
proclivity for overacting with a vengeance.  The bad news is that he 
phones in his part without one scintilla of emotion.  Actually, the 
whole cast seems affected by the lighter Martian gravity which appears 
to make time slow down and brains go into idle loops.
In order to jazz up this PG-13-rated science fiction tale, writers 
Jonathan Lemkin and Channing Gibson have the commander parade naked and 
wear tight see-through tops.  Moss demonstrates as much sexuality in her 
nude scenes as she does fear when disaster strikes, which is to say, 
none at all.  After standing nude in front of Gallagher and telling him 
to think of her as his sister, she orders him to get busy.  "Why don't 
you go fix something?" she requests.  "Yes, sir, uh, ma'am!" he shoots 
back.
About the only satisfactory moment in RED PLANET comes when the 
commander's computer decides to get sarcastic with her.  "That's not 
good," the commander remarks when something unexpected happens.  "No, it 
isn't," the computer replies wittily.
Usually, one wants to see science fiction movies on the big screen in 
order to appreciate the impressive images.  In RED PLANET, Peter 
Suschitzky's dark and dull cinematography gives you little reason not to 
wait for video.  And if you do wait, you would be better off renting 
MISSION TO MARS, which is a superior movie.  "You want me to shut up and 
let you die quietly?" Burchenal asks Gallagher at one point.  You'll be 
hoping, against hope, that he says "yes," so that this miserable mission 
can draw to a quick close.
RED PLANET runs 1:47.  It is rated PG-13 for sci-fi violence, brief 
nudity and language and would be acceptable for kids around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Antony Hoffman.
Cast: Val Kilmer, Carrie-Anne Moss, Tom Sizemore, Simon Baker, Terence Stamp, 
Benjamin Bratt.
2000 - 110 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for violence, profanity, and partial nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, November 11, 2000.
Since space movies have grown more than a little tiresome over the years, and 
with another film about Mars released this past March, there was more than a 
few reservations at the onset of "Red Planet." After all, what fresh material 
could director Antony Hoffman and screenwriters Chuck Pfarrer and Jonathan 
Lemkin possibly muster out of such a worn-out premise? Quite surprisingly, 
the answer turns out to be a lot, as "Red Planet" is not only infinitely 
superior to last spring's "Mission to Mars," but also one of the most 
involving and well-made space-set thrillers since Ridley Scott's 1979 opus, 
"Alien."
Set in 2050, when the Earth's polluted atmosphere has quickly made the planet 
nearly unlivable, a six-person crew set off on a six-month voyage to Mars to 
reconfirm that colonization may, in fact, be possible for humans. With Lt. 
Cmdr. Kate Bowman (Carrie-Anne Moss) staying behind with the ship after a 
malfunctioning problem, the other five members--"hotshot" second-in-command 
Ted Santen (Benjamin Bratt), veteran Chief Science Officer Bud Chantilas 
(Terence Stamp), medical systems engineer Gallagher (Val Kilmer), Dr. Quinn 
Burchenal (Tom Sizemore), and Dr. Chip Pettengill (Simon Baker)--make their 
way to the red planet to reach a previously-built station equipped with 
enough oxygen, food, and water to last 26 months. 
Oddly enough, the algae that had been heavily spray upon Mars' surface twenty 
years before has mysteriously disappeared. And what they don't expect is that 
the station has been completely destroyed, leaving them with only seven hours 
until the oxygen in their helmets runs out. Making matters worse is AMEE 
(Autonomous Mapping Evaluation and Evasion), a robot that Kate sends to Mars 
to aid in finding the crew, but whose military instincts go haywire on the 
rough landing, leaving it a murderous force hell-bent on destroying the 
entire group.
Sumptuously photographed by Peter Suschitzky, with the desolate landscapes of 
Wadi Rum, Jordan, and Coober Pedy, Australia standing in for Mars, "Red 
Planet" is a suspense-filled, surprisingly thoughtful drama that plausibly 
tells what could happen if the Earth ever did grow too polluted to live on. 
Deliberately paced, yet never stalling for a minute, the film draws you into 
its setup as we meet and grow to understand the dynamics of the six 
characters, and then lets loose into an unpredictable thrill ride once they 
are unleashed upon the largely unexplored terrain of the foreign planet.
Despite including an excessive, unnecessary narration by Kate Bowman that 
bookends the main attraction, the film rarely steps wrong. One of the major 
pleasures is the way that, despite revealing its main plotline, it is always 
difficult to decipher where the film is going, and what the outcome will be. 
Furthermore, instead of turning into a monster-on-the-loose horror movie, 
director Hoffman wisely aims higher, and makes the dangerous AMEE only a 
subplot to a much larger story about a crew that find themselves fighting to 
survive the perilous planet itself, and using their brains and the expertise 
they hold in their profession to do so.
The actors fit snugly in their roles, with the standouts being lead Val 
Kilmer, who is so charismatic as a performer that he deserves more roles; 
Carrie-Anne Moss, who brings a tough poignancy to her character of Kate; and 
Terence Stamp, who, in the picture's most thought-provoking line, says, "I 
realized science couldn't answer the really interesting questions, so I 
turned to philosophy. I've been searching for God ever since." The dignity 
that Stamp brings to his supporting appearance as aging scientist Bud 
Chantilas is quite extraordinary, and even when he goes AWOL in the second 
hour, his lasting impression has long-since been made. Rounding out the cast 
is the bland Benjamin Bratt, rising Australian actor Simon Baker, and Tom 
Sizemore.
Ultimately, "Red Planet" is such a convincing motion picture because the 
talented actors and the mostly tightly-written script make you believe 
everything that is happening to them. With Mars giving off alternately 
reddish and bluish tints, with its rocky, mountainous vistas, and a violent 
ice storm the size of Montana sweeping through the area at one point, the 
visual effects are also startlingly believable. There is no reason why "Red 
Planet" should be such a successfully entertaining thriller, but almost 
everything falls into place and seems to effortlessly work. Maybe there's 
life yet in the gradually wearisome space genre. Movies like "Red Planet" can 
only help.
   - Copyright 2000 by Dustin Putman
     Reviews by Dustin 
Putman - http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman

Author
Homer Yen
You're a mean one, Mr. Grinch.  He's as ugly as a
cactus and as charming as an eel.  Living atop the
windy peak of Mount Crumpit, he peers out onto the
town of Whoville far below.  He's a solitary
curmudgeon whose sole source of enjoyment comes from
making life miserable for others, especially during
the holiday season.  Loathing their Christmas spirit
with their bright lights, non-stop singing, gift
giving, and general sense of gaiety, he devises a plan
to rob Whoville of their most precious holiday.
However, his foul mission is thwarted by the
kindhearted actions of little Cindy Lou Who (adorable
Taylor Momsen).  In a chance encounter with the Grinch
(an unrecognizable Jim Carrey), she believes that he's
not all bad despite what the rest of the town thinks. 
With her wide-eyed innocence, she hopes to bring out
his warm side hidden under all that green fur and
callous demeanor.
"How the Grinch Stole Christmas" is a slightly revved
up version of the Dr. Seuss bedtime classic. 
Richly narrated by Anthony Hopkins, the film follows
the original basic outline.  However, it comes up
short on imagination and has lost a touch of its
sentimental spirit. 
You would expect more in terms of design, considering
the Grinch universe takes place within a snowflake. 
The Whoville denizens look and act like mannequins. 
They possess hog-like snouts and sport a hairstyle
that looks like it was the result of a passing
cyclone.  And for a town that seems to be in a 24/7
preparation mode for Christmas, the whole place looks
oddly somber.  There is a noticeable lack of primary
colors, the palettes seem muted, and the entire set
design seems like something out of Candylandor the
backlot of Universal Studios.  Of course, there are
some terrific special effects.  And its strongest
segment occurs when the Grinch goes on his raid during
Christmas Eve.  He employs a giant vacuum to suck out
the goodies, unleashes moths to eat the hanging
Christmas stockings, and even steals the visions of
sugarplums dancing in their heads.  But up to that
point, there's very little magic in the air.
Another shortfall was that the film didn't do enough
to generate enough sympathy for the Grinch.  Yes, we
learn of the Grinch's past and the root of his hatred
for Christmas and Whoville, but it spends an
inordinate amount of time establishing his meanness. 
This disqualifies the film from being a wholesome
child's tale, and moves it into dark territory that
may leave wee ones confused. Among other things, he
pushes little kids to the ground during a sack race
and eats shards of glass while he plots against the
town of Whoville.  This is a bad hero/role model for
children if they tend to mimic what happens on-screen.
Yet, the film has flashes of creativity, and kudos are
in order for Jim Carrey who worked exceptionally hard
to pull off this almost-impossible role.  Despite
being mummified under that green suit, he still
applies his unique brand of physical comedy while
snarling, growling, and scowling, and does his best to
show us a good time.
The movie does have its funny moments even if its
grander aspirations are unrealized.  
But it needed to be brighter to captivate and more fun
to enthrall.  
Like the Grinch who felt hatred towards those who had
him ostracized,
This film's heart is two sizes too small.

Author
Jon Popick
When 2000 dawned, it looked like we'd have dueling Mars films, kind of
similar to the two films about computer-generated ants we had back in
1998, or the battling volcano pictures from 1997.  Like those other
movies, the Mars films were originally scheduled to hit the theatres
within a month of each other.  Ultimately, Mission to Mars opted for a
March release and Red Planet picked a pre-holiday opening in November.
At the time, it seemed as though Planet changed its date to distance
itself from the similarly themed Mission, but it turns out that wasn't
the case.  Planet sucks, and its studio is hoping the film gets lost in
the dust that will be created by the freight train known as Adam
Sandler's Little Nicky.  It's a sacrificial lamb with knocking knees and
dingleberries stuck to its ass fur.
Planet is set halfway through the 21st century, where our race has
apparently sapped the Earth of its resources, leading to an extensive
period of the development of Mars for human use.  They've grown algae
and built a station that is supposed to support a crew of scientists for
over two years.  Everything seems to be going well, and then the oxygen
levels suddenly bottom out.  With no time to figure out why, humanity
blasts six people off to Mars.  Here's the rundown on the crew:
ˇ Commander Kate Bowman (Carrie-Anne Moss, The Crew) is in charge of the
mission and acts as the Mars-1 pilot.  She's a tough, no-nonsense girl
with a great rack.
ˇ Ted Santen (Benjamin Bratt, The Next Best Thing) is the mission's
co-pilot.  He's well-built, cocky and doesn't mind letting everybody
else know how great he is.
ˇ Dr. Bud Chantillas (Terence Stamp, The Limey) is the Chief Science
Officer.  He's an old codger (the only crew member who has seen frogs in
his lifetime) who has recently shifted his allegiance from science to
God.
ˇ Robby Gallagher (Val Kilmer, Joe the King) is the mechanic.  Despite
his intelligence, is often looked down on by the other crewmembers.
ˇ Dr. Quinn Burchenal (Tom Sizemore, Play It to the Bone) is a civilian
bioengineer sent to solve the mystery of the missing oxygen.  If you're
familiar with Sizemore, you'll know that him playing a doctor is a
little more than a stretch.
ˇ Chip Pettengill (Simon Baker, Ride With the Devil) is another
civilian, but this guy is an expert in terraforming.  Which means he
knows a lot about dirt and rocks.  Yawn.
ˇ AMEE is a robotic elimination machine that looks like one of those
Poo-Chi dogs.  She's a cold-blooded killer when set in `military mode'
but is just as sweet as can be otherwise.
As you would expect in a sci-fi/action film, Mars-1 experiences problems
minutes before the crew is set to leave for the rocky terrain of Mars.
In a spectacularly silly scene, the crew hurtles toward terra firma in a
pod that is covered with airbags that make it look like an oversized
bunch of grapes.  The crew is banged up, their pied-ŕ-terre has been
trashed by some unknown enemy, and AMEE is on the loose and out for
blood.  Oh, yeah, and they're out of oxygen, too.
There are some plot holes wide enough to drive a space shuttle through
in Planet.  The Mars-1 crew is supposed to be making the first manned
mission to the fourth planet from the sun, so who built the place they
were supposed to live in?  How does Gallagher get a solar-powered radio
to work after the sun has gone down?  At one point, the remaining
members of the expedition walk over 100 kilometers in 19 hours 
including a stop to sleep for the night.  The best part may have been
when Gallagher uses parts from the '97 Mars Rover to build a radio.  At
least he knows where to find it.
Planet is the directorial debut of Antony Hoffman and, with any luck,
somebody will confiscate his license to make any more films (he can't
even spell his name right, for Christ's sake).  The hackneyed script was
penned by the Lethal Weapon 4 team of Jonathan Lemkin and Channing
Gibson.  Even the cinematography from David Cronenberg regular Peter
Suschitzky is underwhelming.
1:50  PG-13 for adult language, brief nudity and violence

Author
Scott Renshaw
RED PLANET
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Val Kilmer, Carrie-Anne Moss, Tom Sizemore, Benjamin Bratt,
Simon Baker, Terence Stamp.
Screenplay:  Chuck Pfarrer and Jonathan Lemkin.
Producers:  Mark Canton, Bruce Berman and Jorge Saralegui.
Director:  Antony Hoffman.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, adult themes, brief nudity, profanity)
Running Time:  106 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Some genre films tease you with the prospect that they can be
something more substantial before degenerating into stupidity and cliche. 
RED PLANET at least does viewers the courtesy of not wasting their time
with such futile hopes. In the opening minutes, Mars Mission Commander
Bowman (Carrie-Anne Moss) provides a voice-over neatly summarizing the
premise before launching into capsule characterizations of her crewmates. 
That co-pilot Santen (Benjamin Bratt), he sure is a hot-head, which
undoubtedly will play a significant role in his ultimate fate. And that
scientist Burchenal (Tom Sizemore), he sure has an ego, which undoubtedly
will create some sort of character tension down the road.
     Dim-wittedness in Hollywood action films is only to be expected at
this point in cinema history. Vaguely pretentious dim-wittedness is pretty
inexcusable. RED PLANET sends a six-person crew to Mars in 2057 to find
out what has happened to oxygen-producing algae sent by earth scientists
as part of a colonization plan. You see, earth has become nearly
uninhabitable due to environmental degradation, and our only hope of
survival is creating a survivable atmosphere elsewhere, but something has
gone screwy because oxygen readings have suddenly dropped. The mission
team is ready to investigate when a freak radiation burst damages their
vessel, forcing an emergency evacuation of all personnel but Bowman. The
landing vehicle is damaged on impact, leaving the surviving crew members
-- including dashing chief engineer Gallagher (Val Kilmer) -- to figure
out a way to get back home.
     At certain points in RED PLANET, you can't help but wonder why anyone
wasted time on a back story at all. Though the very survival of the human
race is theoretically at stake, the film seems interested in that point
only to the extent that it can be included in press notes, in absurd
declarations like, "It's a smart movie that posits the question, what if
man fails to do the things necessary to live on earth?" In fact, RED
PLANET resolutely refuses to deal with anything beyond the basic goals of
its characters to find a way back to earth. Why does no one in the
stranded party refer to being thirsty or hungry after going without food
and water for more than a day? How would the people on earth be responding
to the apparent failure of this crucial mission? What exactly was the
reason that no one could detect any oxygen, when it turns out there's a
whole lot of it around? And why flirt with the notion that there's some
intelligence bent on thwarting the terraforming effort, only to make the
real villain of the piece the crew's resident malfunctioning evil robot?
     Silly questions, of course, since RED PLANET is kind enough to alert
you so quickly to its minimalist intentions. The characters spout dialogue
that alternates between inane exposition and pointless 
self-characterization. "I'm a scientist, but I'm really interested in
philosophy," says philosophically-interested scientist Chantilas (Terence
Stamp), though not in so many words. "We're sexually attracted to one
another, so I hope neither one of us dies," say Bowman and Gallagher,
though not in so many words. "I sure wish it didn't take 40 minutes for
you to answer," says Bowman after sending a radio message to earth,
actually in so many words, just to let us know the writers knew at least
one science fact. It's a wonderful irony in RED PLANET that it places so
much weight on the fate of these six characters, only to make them utterly
weightless as actual characters.
     At odd intervals, something happens to slap the film out of its
oxygen-deprived stupor. Most of them involve Moss, whose strong presence
occasionally tricks you into thinking the film is better than it is. One
involves a great shot of the Mars lander taking a tumble for which it
certainly wasn't designed. And, sadly, many others involve the pleasure of
watching one or another of the annoying characters meet an untimely
demise. As directed by rookie feature director Antony Hoffman, this is a
lame special effects-driven action film that can't even be bothered to
provide a handful of visceral thrills. Lacking big-time action excitement,
competent story-telling or any desire to prevent you from walking out
scratching deep trenches into your head, RED PLANET is simply a
planet-sized waste of time. But at least it only wastes a few minutes of
your time before making that obvious.
