Title
Review for Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back (2001)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Robin Clifford
Things take off from here with a stolen orangutan, pilfered jewels, loony
Federal Wildlife Marshal Wilenholly, a national manhunt and crashing a
major studio production. I won't spoil things for the fans and the curious,
so I'll stop here with any further description. What "Jay and Silent Bob
Strike Back" really amounts to is a self-indulgent, buddy fest that brings
together all of the Friends of Kevin and others into a goofball journey
across the USA. It has its fun moments, but is aimed squarely at the fans
of Jay and Silent Bob. It has some laughs along the way, but fewer than I
expected.
The cast of cameo perfs and bit parts abounds with all manner of young,
not-so-old, and the occasional icon player. Matt Damon and Ben Affleck poke
humor at their own celebrity status, particularly Affleck's notorious
hedonism. (Shortly after the screening I saw, Affleck admitted himself for
detox. Fact parallels fiction, I guess.) Joining these "big name" stars are
Smith alumnus Chris Rock, Alanis Morissette, Jason Lee and Joey Lauren
Adams and a myriad of others names that is too long to list. Everyone,
especially Mark Hamill as super bad guy Cock-Knocker (we has a huge right
hand) and foe to Bluntman and Chronic, are having one hell of a good time.
There isn't a bad bone in the body of "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" but
the film is too loaded with inside jokes and mutual admiration and
camaraderie to draw in the audience. I felt, and I should never feel this
way, like an outsider looking in and I am privy to all the inside humor.
The film is a paean to Smith's dynamic duo and has the feel that he is
putting his long-time characters to bed - probably until someone gives him
a bunch of money to resurrect the guys once again. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
Warning: if you are not a fan of "Clerks" or "Chasing Amy," not to mention
"Mallrats," then it is very likely that you will find little enjoyment in Kevin
Smith's newest film. "Jay and Silent Bob Strikes Back" is a delirious joyride
for all View Askew fans, taking us from New Jersey to Hollywood and back with
many belly laughs and a few lulls along the way. It is mandatory that you are
educated in this universe or else, you'll have a joyless time.
To anyone not familiar with View Askew, it is the name of Kevin Smith's
production company in Red Bank, N.J. and the universe in which all his
characters from his first four films reside in. Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent Bob
(Kevin Smith) are the two drug dealers who have appeared in all of Smith's
films. Usually left on the sidelines, they take center stage this time as they
continue selling drugs in front of the Quik Stop convenience store in Leonardo,
N.J. Jay and Silent Bob get wind from their old friend, Brodie (Jason Lee), that
the comic book based on them, Bluntman and Chronic, is getting made into a
Hollywood movie by their other old friend, Banky (also played by Jason Lee).
Huh? Okay, if you saw "Chasing Amy," you'll recall that Banky and Holden (Ben
Affleck, who reprises his role here) were comic book artists who made their
claim to fame with their "Bluntman and Chronic" comic book. In this movie, Banky
sold the rights to Miramax studios to make the movie. Jay and Silent Bob are
infuriated that they
 are not getting a piece of the collective pie so they embark on a journey to
Hollywood that includes some hot babes dressed in slinky outfits, a wild
orangutan, plenty of gay and fart jokes to make GLADD blush (which they
reportedly have), Carrie Fisher as a nun, George Carlin as a hitchhiker, clumsy
federal marshals, Internet bashing, and more in-jokes (many associated with
"Star Wars") than almost any movie I have ever seen. 
"Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" has quite a few good laughs but there are also
far too many lulls. The scenario involving a federal wildlife marshal simply
marks time (including an unfunny cameo by Judd Nelson). Plus, those
slinky-outfitted babes (which includes a vivacious Shannon Hamilton) exude more
groans than smiles, aping the recent remake of "Charlie's Angels." Best bits
involve the Quik stop employees, Randal and Dante from "Clerks" (played by Jeff
Anderson and Brian O'Halloran), who call the police in to arrest the likable
drug dealers. I also liked Ben Affleck as Holden and as himself, not to mention
Matt Damon as himself, as they trade asides on each other's careers and mocking
their joint effort, "Good Will Hunting." There is also Mark Hamill as
Cock-Knocker, which has to be seen to be believed, Wes Craven making another
"Scream" sequel, and Jason Biggs and James Van Der Beek as themselves portraying
Bluntman and Chronic in the movie version. You can also count on several other
cameos by other c
haracters from Smith's View Askew universe. 
The stars of this show are Jay and Silent Bob and they are often hysterical to
watch. Jason Mewes in particular steals the show as Jay with his sexual body
language and obscene comments having to do with one particular area of the
female anatomy. Kevin Smith as Silent Bob merely makes disapproving looks and
gestures and too much of this can go a long way. Still, they make a fitting
pair, as always, and drive the movie forward with more scatalogical jokes than
one can count in this jaded day and age of sexually promiscuous teen movies. 
"Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" is fitfully funny and often clever enough for
those not easily offended by gay and fart jokes (count me in the mix). It is not
half as good as "Clerks" or as hackneyed as "Mallrats" or "Dogma," but it does
fall somewhere in between.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust668@aol.com
or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com 

Author
Frankie Paiva
There's an unwritten screenwriting rule that you should never write about your
own life because people aren't interested. Luckily, Cameron Crowe completely
ignored this idea. Unfortunately, Kevin Smith did not. `Jay and Silent Bob
Strike Back' is the world's biggest in-joke, a culmination to Smith's last four
pictures, `Clerks', `Mallrats', `Chasing Amy', and `Dogma'. It is a satire that
constantly winks at the audience, but leaves it's funniest moments to subtlety
The film doesn't work on an intelligent level unless you've seen the above four
films, and know all about Kevin Smith's battles (bumping heads with `Magnolia'
director Paul Thomas Anderson, ABC airing his TV show only for legal reasons) as
an independent filmmaker. It's a pretty big assumption that we want to get
involved with his ego, but Smith takes us there anyway. It makes for sheer
brilliance hiding under a whole lot of mediocrity. 
The plot, so to speak, follows Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent Bob's (Smith) road
trip from Jersey to Hollywood. They're trying to stop Hollywood from making a
movie for which they are obviously the source material. (If that isn't irony,
what is?) Along the way, they get involved with some very attractive `animal
activists' who aren't who they appear to be, Jay falls in love, and joints are
passed. 
A wide variety of celebrities make cameo appearances in the film, mostly
spoofing themselves. Carrie Fisher, George Carlin, Jason Biggs, Shannon Doherty,
Chris Rock, Matt Damon, and  James Van Der Beek are just a few of the many
surprises. Ben Affleck (looking quite dazed), Shannon Elizabeth, and Will
Ferrell are all effective in small roles. 
One must really wonder what type of audience Smith was trying to reach with this
film. There's no future for this production as a film, since the references are
far too current to last more than a year or two, and the stupid humor wasn't
appealing because the film has a bitter core. The film is largely a cleverly
disguised tirade about the studio system. It hits many things on the mark, but
there isn't the same endearing quality that `Dude, Where's My Car?' or `American
Pie' have. We simply don't care about the characters.
Sadly, the film aims its crosshairs on places other than Hollywood. A large
majority of the humor is homophobic, and would be quite degrading and offensive
to anyone with an open mind, Smith's usual crowd. Whether the jokes are meant to
be taken seriously (as religious groups joke the jokes in `Dogma'), is in
question, but there's just too much negative material to ignore. Then there's
the humor that's just plain stupid, overdone, and unfunny.
But for all the bad jokes, there are some great ones. I laughed uncontrollably
around ten times, mostly at places where the rest of the audience didn't. 
When Silent Bob finally talks in the second half of the movie, the audience at
my screening cheered. It was a Marcel Marceau in `Silent Movie' for the
generation of 2001. 
Smith can do better. Don't see the movie if you don't know all about him, or
don't see many movies. You'll just be presented with some rather vulgar humor,
and there are better movies for that. For those more film-inclined, it's an
exclusive party, but a lame one at that. 
Read more reviews at www.moviepie.com

Author
Karina Montgomery
JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK (2001) / ** 1/2
Directed by Kevin Smith, from his screenplay. Starring Jason Mewes, Smith,
Ben Affleck. Running time: 104 minutes. Rated R for offensive language by
the MFCB. Reviewed on September 6th, 2001.
Synopsis: Potheads Jay (Mewes) and Silent Bob (Smith) learn from their
friend Holden (Affleck) that their likenesses are being used in a new
feature film, based on a comic book created by Holden and his ex-partner,
Banky (Jason Lee). Determined to put a stop to the movie, Jay and Silent
Bob set out for Hollywood. En route, they befriend a monkey, encounter a
quartet of suspicious women -- including the lovely Justice (Shannon
Elizabeth) -- and run afoul of a hapless wildlife offer (Will Ferrell).
Review: "Jay And Silent Bob Strike Back" feels like a late-night wrap
party; it's a loud, fun, silly release. "Jay And Silent Bob" has none of
the keen ethical acuity of "Dogma" or "Chasing Amy", nor "Clerks"'s sly
social awareness; it's just a traditional road comedy, an excuse to put a 
bunch of Smith characters (and actors) back onto the screen one last time
and take a few more potshots at his favourite targets. The result, not
unexpectedly, is somewhat uneven, and exhibits a "Saturday Night
Live"-like ignorance of when a joke has outlived its usefulness. To a
degree, it's also a rather inaccessible movie: if you're unfamiliar with
earlier Smith flicks, the appearance of some actors in multiple roles may
be confusing. Similarly, if you've never heard of, say, the debate over
Greedo shooting first, much of the cinema-oriented humour may not be to  
your taste. That said, there are moments of brilliance, especially for  
Smith aficionados: the "Scooby Doo" and "Planet Of The Apes" pastiches  
are priceless, as is the scene in which the title characters provide wish
fulfillment for any long-suffering Usenetter. And "Jay And Silent Bob  
Strike Back" succeeds as a last hurrah for Smith's seminal creations: it
both celebrates the characters, and leaves us satisfied that their story
has now been told.
Copyright  2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Pity any Internet reviewer who turns thumbs down on this
movie. You're likely to be beaten up. Badly.  At least that's the
message conveyed by the title characters in the most unsubtle
way possible in a movie that's as unsubtle and you can find this
year and yet, paradoxically, one which demands an audience
that's pretty hip about film in general--one which can appreciate
self-deprecatory humor and has a knowledge of the output of
Kevin Smith, of Miramax studios and of contemporary politics in
general.
    "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" can be compared with "Rat
Race," yet another film which opened during the month of August
which is typically set aside for the release of movies for which
studios do not expect a great deal.  Both are hilarious IF you're
the right audience for them. Both require that you're the sort that
can go for foul-mouthed, vulgar pics that do not rely on polished,
commercial, beginning-middle-end plotting, rational development
and political correctness while "Jay and Silent Bob" in particular
will appeal to frequent moviegoers--meaning not those who
trudge to the theaters just twelve times a year but those who 
make pilgrimages fifty to one hundred times or more to the
multiplex and to art houses alike.
   Budgeted considerably higher than "Clerks" and less
anticlerical than "Dogma," Kevin Smith's new movie entertains
the concept of intellectual theft.  Miramax studios (which, under
the name of Dimensions happens to be the same company which
distributes this very picture), is about to launch a new film called
"Bluntman and Chronic," based on a comic book which, in turn, is
based on the characters Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent Bob
(Kevin Smith).  Trouble is that Miramax is going ahead with the
project without the consent of the two individuals and without
letting them in on a share of the kitty.  Further disturbed about
Internet flaming by anonymous geeks who are critical of the
comic book concepts, Jay and Bob set out from their Leonardo,
New Jersey hangout for Hollywood where they intend to enjoin
the making the film. On the road the two buddies run into a series
of adventures, best of which are with four bimbos who look
surprisingly like that babes from "Charlie's Angels" and who
convince the fellas that they could use help in liberating lab
animals.   Their real goal is more nefarious, but the women's
operation is in danger of being blunted because one, Justice
(Shannon Elizabeth), is falling for Jay.
   By the time Jay and Silent Bob reach Hollywood, they are
being chased by the local cops and by an agent of the Wildlife
Commission. The highlight of the movie occurs inside Miramax
studios where the noted distributors of arthouse fare has the guts
to impugn some of its own creations and even knock the "idiots"
who have paid to see "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back."  Chris
Rock shines as a militant and paranoid African-American director
who sees racism in the fact that he has not been assigned a
black gaffer and is convinced that the white guy who brings him
coffee has spit into his cup and has put some "boogers" into the
drink.  
   For all its merit, "Jay/Bob" is not necessarily a step forward for
Kevin Smith. Smith's first work, "Clerks," made in 1994 for just
$27,000,  took us to the same convenience store in which Jason
Mewes is hanging out here.  Mewes acts well there as he does
here--certainly better than do Ben Affleck and Matt -Damon who
show up in "Jay/Bob" and whose skits re "Good Will Hunting"
simply miss the boat.  What's more in "Chasing Amy," Smith
renders a more polished piece--about a comic book artist who
meets a female counterpart with whom he falls in love until he
finds out she's gay.  "Dogma," silly but more ambitious, took on
more apocalyptic and therefore riskier themes and therefore did
not fare so well, but all in all Smith has to date has done no
wrong.
Rated R.  Running time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.co

Author
Jerry Saravia
Warning: if you are not a fan of "Clerks" or "Chasing Amy," not to mention
"Mallrats," then it is very likely that you will find little enjoyment in Kevin
Smith's newest film. "Jay and Silent Bob Strikes Back" is a delirious joyride
for all View Askew fans, taking us from New Jersey to Hollywood and back with
many belly laughs and a few lulls along the way. It is mandatory that you are
educated in this universe or else, you'll have a joyless time.
To anyone not familiar with View Askew, it is the name of Kevin Smith's
production company in Red Bank, N.J. and the universe in which all his
characters from his first four films reside in. Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent Bob
(Kevin Smith) are the two drug dealers who have appeared in all of Smith's
films. Usually left on the sidelines, they take center stage this time as they
continue selling drugs in front of the Quik Stop convenience store in Leonardo,
N.J. Jay and Silent Bob get wind from their old friend, Brodie (Jason Lee), that
the comic book based on them, Bluntman and Chronic, is getting made into a
Hollywood movie by their other old friend, Banky (also played by Jason Lee).
Huh? Okay, if you saw "Chasing Amy," you'll recall that Banky and Holden (Ben
Affleck, who reprises his role here) were comic book artists who made their
claim to fame with their "Bluntman and Chronic" comic book. In this movie, Banky
sold the rights to Miramax studios to make the movie. Jay and Silent Bob are
infuriated that they
 are not getting a piece of the collective pie so they embark on a journey to
Hollywood that includes some hot babes dressed in slinky outfits, a wild
orangutan, plenty of gay and fart jokes to make GLADD blush (which they
reportedly have), Carrie Fisher as a nun, George Carlin as a hitchhiker, clumsy
federal marshals, Internet bashing, and more in-jokes (many associated with
"Star Wars") than almost any movie I have ever seen. 
"Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" has quite a few good laughs but there are also
far too many lulls. The scenario involving a federal wildlife marshal simply
marks time (including an unfunny cameo by Judd Nelson). Plus, those
slinky-outfitted babes (which includes a vivacious Shannon Hamilton) exude more
groans than smiles, aping the recent remake of "Charlie's Angels." Best bits
involve the Quik stop employees, Randal and Dante from "Clerks" (played by Jeff
Anderson and Brian O'Halloran), who call the police in to arrest the likable
drug dealers. I also liked Ben Affleck as Holden and as himself, not to mention
Matt Damon as himself, as they trade asides on each other's careers and mocking
their joint effort, "Good Will Hunting." There is also Mark Hamill as
Cock-Knocker, which has to be seen to be believed, Wes Craven making another
"Scream" sequel, and Jason Biggs and James Van Der Beek as themselves portraying
Bluntman and Chronic in the movie version. You can also count on several other
cameos by other c
haracters from Smith's View Askew universe. 
The stars of this show are Jay and Silent Bob and they are often hysterical to
watch. Jason Mewes in particular steals the show as Jay with his sexual body
language and obscene comments having to do with one particular area of the
female anatomy. Kevin Smith as Silent Bob merely makes disapproving looks and
gestures and too much of this can go a long way. Still, they make a fitting
pair, as always, and drive the movie forward with more scatalogical jokes than
one can count in this jaded day and age of sexually promiscuous teen movies. 
"Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" is fitfully funny and often clever enough for
those not easily offended by gay and fart jokes (count me in the mix). It is not
half as good as "Clerks" or as hackneyed as "Mallrats" or "Dogma," but it does
fall somewhere in between. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Michael Dequina
        More than other filmmaker in recent memory, writer-director Kevin
Smith is unusually receptive and accessible to his rabid (and
consistently growing) fanbase.  The discussion board on his official
website (viewaskew.com) is legendary for the amount of interaction he has
with fans; and public appearances and autograph signings are far from
rare occurrences, with the latter usually extending hours beyond their
allotted time blocks in order to accommodate every last person in line. 
But even Smith has outdone himself in terms of giving back to his public
with the wild comic romp _Jay_and_Silent_Bob_Strike_Back_, which behind
its outrageous surface is an affectionate valentine to those who have
loyally followed him and his work over the years.
        So for this film more than any of his others, it certainly is
beneficial (though just as certainly not necessary) to walk in with some
prior knowledge of Smith's "View Askew-niverse," which officially closes
with _Strike_Back_.  The title characters, foulmouthed drug dealer Jay
(Jason Mewes) and his laconic "hetero lifemate" Silent Bob (Smith), are
the Askew-niverse's most beloved figures, having appeared in all of
Smith's previous films in capacities small (_Clerks_, _Chasing_Amy_) and
larger (_Mallrats_, _Dogma_).  _Strike_Back_ gives the pair their
long-due turn on center stage, and in an added bonus for the fandom,
resurfacing especially for this occasion are other popular characters
from those four films.  Needless to say, only those with some Smith
oeuvre familiarity will fully appreciate the appearances of people such
as _Clerks_' Dante and Randal (respectively played by Brian O'Halloran
and Jeff Anderson), who to the VA-virgin eye would seem to be just bit
players.
        The significance of _Amy_'s Holden McNeil (Ben Affleck) and Banky
Edwards (Jason Lee, who also turns in an appearance as the best thing
about _Mallrats_, Brodie Bruce), however, won't be lost on any newcomers,
for they nudge Jay and Silent Bob--the movie and the characters--into
action.  _Bluntman_and_Chronic_, the superhero comic book Holden and
Banky modeled in the likeness of Jay and Bob, is about to be adapted into
a film without our dynamic duo's permission, and so they set off on a
cross-country trip from New Jersey to Hollywood to stop the production. 
Obviously, the more serious overtones of Smith's last two efforts, _Amy_
and _Dogma_, are nowhere to be found in _Strike_Back_, and don't come in
looking for some innovations in plotting, either; the film is simply a
road/chase comedy that wants nothing more than to make the audience
laugh.
        And are there ever laughs to be had in _Strike_Back_.  Indeed,
Smith's famous (infamous?) predilection for dick and fart jokes is very
much in evidence (though, thankfully, there's nothing here approaching
the scatological nadir of _Dogma_'s Golgothan), yet while he may have
gained a fair amount of notoriety for that lowbrow brand of humor, his
greatest strength has always been the rapier wit of his dialogue,
whenever raunchy or not.  On the receiving end of many of the film's best
verbal barbs is the glitzy world of Tinseltown moviemaking.  No one is
shielded from the hysterical satirical onslaught: not Internet gossip
sites; not Affleck, who gamely pulls double duty as Holden and himself;
not the film's distributor, Miramax; not even
_Jay_and_Silent_Bob_Strike_Back_ and the View Askew canon itself, and as
such the fourth wall is not only broken, but flat out bulldozed.
        Lest the film sound extremely insular with all its in-jokes and
Hollywood insider humor, _Jay_and_Silent_Bob_Strike_Back_ also offers a
number of broader-appeal delights, particularly in the performance
department.  That Mewes and Smith have their act down by now is no
surprise; Mewes invests his usual gusto into every last one of Jay's
four-letter words and vulgar gestures, which are, as always, countered
with expert reaction takes by Smith.  What is surprising, though, is
Shannon Elizabeth's beguiling turn as the sweet Justice, who falls for
Jay as she and her more sour friends Sissy (Eliza Dushku), Chrissy (Ali
Larter), and Missy (Jennifer Schwalbach, Smith's wife) spend time on the
road with him and Bob.  Other colorful characters pop up throughout the
course of the film, the standouts being Will Ferrell's clueless Federal
Wildlife Marshal Willenholly and Chaka (Chris Rock), a militant
African-American film director; and a multitude of stars recognizable to
all audiences turn up in some enjoyable cameos.
        The polished and at times--brace yourselves--slick visuals of
_Strike_Back_, undoubtedly due in large part to cinematographer Jamie
Anderson, will be downright shocking to Smith fans and especially to his
detractors, who will find themselves with one less thing to knock him on.
 I'm sure they will come up with plenty of compensatory ammunition in the
content of the film--or rather lack thereof.  With its shameless (and not
always successful) riffs on other movies, frequent references to his own
previous work, and slant toward broad antics in general, even Smith has
called _Strike_Back_ "a step backward" in his progression as a filmmaker.
 To hell with any perceived requirements for "artistic growth," I say, if
stagnation and regression are done in the name of offering a good time at
the movies--and _Jay_and_Silent_Bob_Strike_Back_ is nothing less than a
rollicking blast.  (This film is not yet rated; opens August 24)
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back (2001)
Kevin Smith, Jason Mewes, Shannen Doherty, Renée Humphrey, Ben Affleck,
James Van Der Beek, Jason Biggs, Matt Damon, Joey Lauren Adams, Shannon
Elizabeth, Eliza Dushku, Carrie Fisher, Tracy Morgan, Scott Mosier, Ali
Larter, Diedrich Bader, Jason Lee, George Carlin, Jeff Anderson, Dwight
Ewell, Will Ferrell, Ever Carradine, Steve Kmetko, Chris Rock, Judd
Nelson, Jules Asner, Brian O'Halloran, Jennifer Schwalbach Smith, Seann
William Scott, Steven Anthony Lawrence, Art Oughton, Mark Hamill, Harley
Quinn Smith, Joe Quesada, Adam Carolla, Marc Blucas, Jon Stewart, Paul
Dini, Wes Craven, Morris Day, Walter Flanagan, Bryan Johnson, Jamie
Kennedy, Gus Van Sant. Written and directed by Kevin Smith. 97 minutes.
Rated R, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" is a raucous road comedy that operates
on three levels. Aficionados of crude humor will howl at the
obscenity-laden dialogue and raunchy sight gags. Film buffs will get
dizzy keeping up with the references, re-creations and parodies of
movies and rips at movie stars. And faithful followers of
writer/director/actor Kevin Smith's View-Askew Universe will be in hog
heaven, as virtually everyone from Smith's first four movies pops up to
say "Hello."
For those of you who haven't seen "Clerks, "Mallrats," "Chasing Amy" and
"Dogma," I'll try to give you a proper set-up (please bear in mind that
I am far from an expert  for more information, visit
www.viewaskew.com). Introduced to audiences in "Clerks," Jay (Jason
Mewes) and Silent Bob (Smith) have appeared in every Smith film, as well
as numerous comic books and a short-lived animated TV series. They even
did a walk-on in "Scream 3." Normally, the boys hang out in front of a
New Jersey convenience store, where Jay sells marijuana and yaps
incessantly, fixating on women and sex. Jay is an insult machine, with
his laid-back "hetero lifemate" Silent Bob the frequent recipient of
jabs attacking his weight and questioning his sexual orientation.
Jay and Silent Bob are also underground legends. In "Chasing Amy" we
learned that Holden McNeil (Ben Affleck, who also appears in "J&SBSB" as
himself) and Banky Edwards (Jason Lee, who also appears here briefly as
"Mallrats" veteran Brodie Bruce) created a highly successful superhero
comic book series, "Bluntman and Chronic," based on Jay and Silent Bob.
When the two artists parted company, Holden gave the characters to
Banky, who struck a lucrative deal with a Hollywood studio, which brings
us to the beginning of "J&SBSB."
Are you still with me? If not, study the previous two paragraphs before
you see the film. Or just settle back and let the movie flow over you.
Spoiler Alert: The following reveals numerous plot points. I suggest you
read them, because knowing the plot will help you keep up with the
jokes.
As "J&SBSB" opens, Jay and Silent Bob find their lives turned upside
down when a restraining order bars them from holding court in front of
their beloved convenience store. To make matters worse, they learn that
strangers are mocking them online. Holden gives the boys (whose world is
so small that they don't know what the Internet is) a crash course in
Cyber Film Geekdom 101, showing them an "Ain't It Cool News" type Web
site and one of its bile-filled message boards. Taking the fanboy
attacks on Bluntman and Chronic personally, they decide to go after
Banky, who never got permission to use their personas in the film. Jay
and Silent Bob will travel to Hollywood and stop production of the
Bluntman and Chronic movie, by any means necessary.
Along the way, they will meet a stranger (George Carlin) who teaches
them hitchhiker sexual etiquette, and the "Scooby Doo" gang, who teach
them about teamwork. Jay will fall in love with the beguiling Justice
(Shannon Elizabeth). Her "Charlie's Angels" style friends Sissy (Eliza
Dushku), Chrissy (Ali Larter), and Missy (Jennifer Schwalbach, Smith's
wife), key figures in the militant animal rights group CLIT, will mock
the boys, even as they agree to participate in a raid on a product
testing lab. About a million clit jokes will be made as Federal Wildlife
Marshal Willenholly (Will Ferrell) pursues Jay, Silent Bob and their new
monkey friend across America.
In Hollywood, they will break onto a movie studio lot and watch Ben
Affleck and Matt Damon rehearse for "Good Will Hunting 2: Hunting
Season." Affleck and Damon will squabble with each other, taking shots
at each others movies; six ("Bounce, "The Talented Mr. Ripley," "All the
Pretty Horses," "The Legend of Bagger Vance," "Forces of Nature" and
"Reindeer Games") in less than 20 seconds! Mark Hamill will turn up for
a light saber battle and a paranoid director (Chris Rock) will rant
about racism. Finally, Jay and Silent Bob will face the big screen
versions of Bluntman and Chronic, played by James Van Der Beek and Jason
Biggs, prompting some juicy "Dawson's Creek" and "American Pie" jokes.
You will either find the whole affair hopelessly juvenile and indulgent
or you will laugh and laugh (how much depends on your knowledge of
movies in general and the Smith oeuvre in particular). If you belong to
GLAAD, you will hold a press conference and announce that the barrage of
gay jokes proves that the film is homophobic, completely missing the
point of Smith's ongoing exploration of the sexual insecurity that
prompts adolescent males (of all ages) to make such jokes. If you are
me, you will decide that, despite some dull spots and a few parodies
that are just too easy, "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" is wicked fun
and another feather in the cap of Kevin Smith.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
    CAPSULE: The running gag pair of characters from all of Kevin
    Smith's films gets their own movie.  The gags are sporadically
    funny.  It is more than occasionally funny for teens who are
    fond of scatological humor and anti-gay jokes.  The plot is
    weak and  the leads are not a particularly funny comic team.
    The little inside jokes and digs at other entertainment and
    particularly at Kevin Smith films are the best features of the
    film.  Sadly for me they were just not funny enough to make the
    film worth watching.  This feels like the high school skit that
    that the principal would not let the kids do on talent night.
    (And it turns out he had very good reasons.)  Rating: 4
    (0 to 10), low 0 (-4 to +4)
A film needs a plot.  It needs characters for empathy value.  It
needs a story and an emotional center.  If a film is just a chain
of jokes it can only be so good and any entertainment value will
succeed or fail based on how funny the jokes are.  Kevin Smith has
now made two satisfying films, CLERKS and CHASING AMY.  With DOGMA
he tried to make a philosophical religious comedy and mixed with a
madcap romp.  Peter Cook and Dudley Moore did that very
successfully with their BEDAZZLED.  But getting the combination to
work is very hard to do right and Kevin Smith's fecal monsters in
DOGMA were not the way to do it.  His remaining two films,
MALLRATS and his new JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK are aimed
squarely at a teenage audience.  JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK is
a compendium of gay jokes, penis jokes, flatulence jokes, film
pastiches, and in-jokes.  How funny the jokes are will be a
subjective call.  For me, the vast majority of the jokes were just
not very funny.  There was not enough cleverness or variety.  It
is funny at most once or twice to accuse someone of being gay.
Penis jokes work only so many times.
Showing up as minor characters in every Kevin Smith film Jay and
Silent Bob were a clever pair of human running gags.  They were
sort of the modern equivalents of Naunton Wayne and Basil Radford,
the comic duo who showed up satirizing the English middle class in
several good British post-war films including DEAD OF NIGHT, THE
LADY VANISHES, and PASSPORT TO PIMLICO.  Jay and Silent Bob were
originally supposedly typical Generation X stoners.  As the series
wore on they had larger and larger parts.  In JAY AND SILENT BOB
STRIKE BACK they are the leads.
Jay and Silent Bob (played by Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith) are
chased away from the front of the convenience store where they
were dealing drugs in CLERKS.  This leaves them at loose ends.
They are not sure what would be worthwhile to do with their lives
when they hear that a comic book with characters visually modeled
on them will be adapted into a movie.  They decide to devote their
lives to wrecking the movie or getting some of that big movie
industry cash.  So it is off to Hollywood to shake down the movie
company and having adventures along the way.  The film is mostly
about their adventures on the road and when they get to Hollywood
The problem with this comedy team is that neither really pulls his
weight to make the film funny.  Silent Bob, being silent, can only
contribute to the comedy by reacting with that very expressive
face of his.  This makes his piece of the comedy even less than a
straight man like a Dean Martin or Bud Abbott would have.  Jay has
to be the comic.  He could carry the load for both if he were
extremely inventive.  The problem is that he is not sufficiently
funny.  He is too bland to be the comic half and his lines just do
not show any comic flair.  So Jay and Silent Bob are a long way
from being a successful comic team.  Their starring roles and the
low humor make this a comedy for those young at mind and for
people who can laugh at gags they have seen before--sometimes just
minutes before.
Like DOGMA before it, but definitely not like CHASING AMY, this
film feels more like an amateurish skit than a real movie.
Certainly neither the plot nor the characters are at all
involving.  They are excuses for gags, many of which still fall
flat.  It is DOGMA without any of the humorous theological
content.  The film does not offer much to an adult audience.  I
rate it 4 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Laura Clifford
Writer/director Kevin Smith ("Clerks") goes back to where he started, giving
an entire feature over to the Greek chorus who've appeared in all his films,
Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent Bob (Kevin Smith).  When Jay and Silent Bob hear
that the 'Bluntman and Chronic' comic book characters based on them have been 
sold to Miramax for a feature film, they find Holden McNeil (Ben Affleck, 
"Chasing Amy") to get their cut.  Holden's sold off his share to Banky Edwards 
(Jason Lee, "Chasing Amy") but does introduce the boys to the Internet.  Jay 
becomes incensed when he sees all the rude comments on the web about his alter 
ego and the dynamic duo decide to take on Hollywood in "Jay and Silent Bob 
Strike Back."
Kevin Smith gathers just about everyone who's ever been in one of his films
(although Alanis Morrisette appears to have been cut) to have fun dissing
Miramax, Paul Thomas Anderson, the success of Ben Affleck and Matt Damon
and the stupidity of his own characters.  You'll find parodies of "E.T.,"
"Armageddon," "The Fugitive," and "Planet of the Apes" in this free-wheeling,
good-natured, foul-mouthed grab bag.
Jay and Silent Bob meet up with a hitchhiker (George Carlin) who informs them
that the 'unwritten book of the road' requires thumbers to orally service
their drivers - just before they're picked up by a nun (Carrie Fisher - "Star
Wars homage #2 after the "Star Wars-like" logo Smith's emblazoned across
his film).  Then Jay becomes smitten with Justice (Shannon Elizabeth, 
"American Pie"), a jewel thief travelling with Sissy (Eliza Dushku, "Bring It 
On"), Missy (Jennifer Schwalbach Smith, wife of Kevin Smith) and Chrissy 
(Ali Larter, "Legally Blonde").  Sissy makes Justice set up Jay and Silent Bob,
telling them they're out to set free lab animals.  
Jay and Silent Bob end up escaping with an Orangutan while the girls make off 
with a cache of diamonds, but now they've got idiot Federal Wildlife Marshall 
Wilenholly (Will Ferrell, "Superstar") on their trail.  Eventually the lads 
make their way onto the Miramax lot, where they crash the filming of "Good Will
Hunting 2:  Hunting Season" before encountering James Van Der Beek ("Varsity 
Blues") and Jason Biggs ("American Pie") in the Bluntman and Chronic outfits 
they appropriate.  They dazedly reply to a set call by director Chaka (Chris 
Rock, "Dogma") and Silent Bob finds himself in a light saber dual with 
Cock-Knocker played by none other than Mark 'Luke Skywalker' Hamill.
Smith's film is clearly an exercise for his extended filmmaking family to have
fun and they mostly let us in on it.  This lightweight comedy is wispy, though,
vanishing from memory within 24 hours of having seen it.  Smith does have a
talent for dialogue, making even excessive foul remarks still seem amusing,
but his visual style (or lack thereof) still needs attention (early scenes
in Holden's office look really subpar).
Most amusing is the trashing of Affleck by himself, Damon and Smith.  Affleck
is accused of having dead hookers in his trailer and his face adorns a giant
movie billboard titled 'Moonraper.'  Damon's introduced doing a 'lion face,
lemon face' acting exercise with an admirable 'straight' face.  A movie fan
site, presumably based on Ain't-It-Cool-News, is redubbed the 'Poop Shoot'
here.
While there are numerous references to things being 'gay' and Jay's sexual
identity being questioned, GLAAD's recent attack on Smith seems like misplaced
overkill.
Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith are front and center stage this time and prove
they can hold it.  The reliable Will Ferrell is amusingly clueless and just
about the entire cast of "American Pie" acquit themselves well.  A background
scene showing Jay and Silent Bob's first infant meeting features Kevin Smith's
baby daughter as his alter ego.  Gus Van Sant gives a fun cameo while Wes 
Craven gives an awkward one.  Chris Rock isn't funny at all as the shrill 
director.  Morris Day gives a send off right out of "Purple Rain."
"Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" is fun while you're watching it, but with
the talent on hand, you can't help but feel it should have been a whole lot
better.

Author
Bob Bloom
JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK (2001) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Jason Mewes,
Kevin Smith, Ben Affleck, Shannon Elizabeth, Will Ferrell, Jason Lee, Chris
Rock, Ali Larter, Brian Christopher O'Halloran, Seann William Scott, George
Lucas, Carrie Fisher and Mark Hamill. Written and directed by Kevin Smith. Rated
R. 
Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back can rightfully be subtitled "Kevin Smith's
Greatest Hits" for the film is comprised of numerous references and characters
from Smith's earlier works including, Clerks, Mall Rats. Chasing Amy and Dogma.
So, be advised: Bone up on that cinematic quartet in order to achieve the
maximum enjoyment from Smith's latest outing. 
Kevin Smith must be a very likable person because several good sports took a ton
of kidding in this feature, most notably Miramax, the studio whose subsidiary,
Dimension Films, is Jay and Silent Bob's distributor. Others deserving accolades
include Ben Affleck, Matt Damon, directors Gus Van Zant and Wes Craven and the
mighty George Lucas. 
This is a laugh-filled, foul-mouthed road film with Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent
Bob (Smith) hitching to Hollywood to sabotage Miramax's production of Bluntman
and Chronic, comic book characters based on the two Jersey slackers. 
Jay's convoluted reasoning is that if the film is shut down, people on the
Internet will stop insulting him and Bob, even though it is not him and Bob the
people are dissing, but rather their comic book counterparts. 
No matter, the duo begin their long trek hitching rides across the country. But
first they get some tips from a veteran hitchhiker, played by George Carlin, who
tells them to follow "the book" - the rules of the road. 
Of course Jay's interpretation immediately gets the duo in trouble with a
friendly nun (Carrie Fisher) who offers them a ride. 
Jay and Silent Bob contains enough laughs that the movie's weaker aspects -
which include a lame subplot about a girl gang of diamond thieves as well as a
buffoonish federal park ranger played by Will Ferrell - can be easily tolerated.
Really, how can you not laugh at a film in which our heroes are picked up by the
Mystery Van, and Jay has a pot-induced hallucination concerning Velma and
Daphne. 
The movie's highlight, though, is near the finale. In Hollywood, Jay and Silent
Bob sneak onto the Miramax lot where they crash the set and are mistaken for
extras of the latest Affleck-Damon picture, Good Will Hunting 2: Hunting Season.
Here we are privy to a hilarious conversation between Affleck and Damon in which
the two put down each other's careers and film choices. 
And the laughs continue to grow. Next up is Jason (American Pie) Biggs and James
(Dawson's Creek) Van der Beek, the actors chosen to portray Bluntman and
Chronic. The pair mistake Jay and Silent Bob for their stunt doubles. 
Finally, comes a Star Wars homage featuring one of the stars of that legendary
feature. This bit will leave you howling. 
Smith's obvious affection for pop culture icons is evident in the way he shoots
these scenes and handles his performers. He allows them to play it all
tongue-in-cheek. Their fun comes through the screen to the audience. 
It is too bad that this is Jay and Silent Bob's swan song. The characters have
grown since their supporting role debuts in Clerks. But Smith realizes that
times have changed, and he doesn't want his creations to overstay their welcome.
So Smith has provided them with just the right kind of exit, saving the best for
last. 
Goodbye Jay and Silent Bob. At least you're going out with a blast. 
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He can
be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Other reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette. 
Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Max Messier
It's time to say "goodbye," according to Kevin Smith, to his token
recurring characters -- the C3PO and R2-D2 of the local Quick Stop --
Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent Bob (Kevin Smith).  Since their inception
as two stoner losers hanging out in front of the local Quick Stop
"smokin' blunts and kickin' asses" in Clerks, Jay and Silent Bob have
received ever expanding roles in Smith's later features -- Mallrats,
Chasing Amy, and Dogma.  But when these two guys showed up in a cameo in
Scream 3, that was the moment when they "jumped the shark" (AKA lost
their unique appeal and devolved into would-be Happy Meal figurines).  I
wouldn't be surprised if two 10-foot tall character replicants greeted
all guests at Miramax's HQ.
If you looking for a plot in Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, don't
bother.  Smith uses the safe convention of repetition by including
certain key locations of his first three films and all of their main
characters -- minus Dogma.  By doing this, Smith creates a familiar
universe for Jay and Silent Bob to venture through and trick the
audience into remembering their old favorites and ignore the throwaway
script.
The story goes something like this.  Due to the success of a comic book
series called Bluntman and Chronic, which used Jay and Silent Bob for
character inspiration, the boys are living life well on royalty checks
and hanging out at the same local Quick Stop from Clerks.  Upon hearing
that Bluntman and Chronic has been sold to Miramax and the boys have
received no compensation, they head to Hollywood to stop the
production.  Along the way, four hot chicks pick them up -- girls
straight off the covers of Maxim and Stuff, actually jewel thieves in
need of two patsies for their next job.  Jay and Silent Bob are framed
for the robbery of an orangutan and are then hunted by Federal Wildlife
Marshal Wilenholly (Will Ferrell) as they travel the back roads to
Hollywood to clear their names.
At first Strike Back is pleasant enough thanks to all the nostalgia. 
But the happiness wears off quickly as it becomes all too apparent that
Smith has fallen for the same grab bag of pop culture that teen comedy
producers eat with a spoon.  Scooby Doo, Charlie's Angels, and numerous
references to the Star Wars films - including a blatant cameo by Mark
Hamill and, well, the title -- all make lame appearances.  Endless
tongue-in-cheek references to Miramax's totalitarian control of
"independent" cinema come off as empty and contrived, as if Miramax
suits thought they could mock themselves while raking in the cash.  (It
didn't work for Josie and the Pussycats either, fellas.)
Tons of people (literally, at least 4,000 pounds worth of celebrities)
show up in this film -- including John Stewart, Matt Damon, James Van
Der Beek, Joey Lauren Adams, Judd Nelson, Gus Van Sant, Shannen Doherty,
Wes Craven, Jason Biggs, Ali Larter, George Carlin, and Chris Rock to
name but a few.  Ironically, they are playing themselves in a film that
unilaterally mocks them.  The self-loathing impresses, and if that was
Smith's intention for the film, then it's admirable.
Alas, any such sentiment is drowned in a sea of dick jokes, fart jokes,
and references to the 1980s.
Director: Kevin Smith
Producer: Scott Mosier, Laura Greenlee
Writer: Kevin Smith
Starring: Jason Mewes, Kevin Smith, Jason Lee, Ben Affleck, Shannon
Elizabeth, George Carlin, Jason Biggs, Will Ferrell, Ali Larter, Chris
Rock, Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
It'd help if you watched Kevin Smith's first four films before you see Jay
and Silent Bob Strike Back, just to familiarize yourself with some of the
characters.  But if you don't, you'll still be rolling on the floor.  Heck,
even if you've never seen any of them, Back offers more laughs per minute
than anything you'll see this year.  Here's a refreshing idea - the film
blows through most of the gags we've already seen a dozen times in the
trailer within about 15 minutes, leaving nothing but fresh laughs for the
remainder of this comedic gem.
Although Back contains very little of the rapid-fire dialogue many expect
from Smith (Dogma), it's still the most relentlessly funny movie since South
Park: BLU.  Smith takes self-deprecation to a new, sub-Woody Allen level
(but unlike Woody, Kevin never, ever saves the good lines for himself) as he
rips on himself, his films, his stars and their films, his studio and their
films, other directors and their films, and even his own audience (but not
nearly as inanely as they did in America's Sweethearts).
The film begins with a '70s flashback that shows something every comic book
fan craves - the origin of the main characters, Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent
Bob (Smith).  Then Back re-introduces several of the characters from Smith's
previous films in a way that will leave your head spinning and your sides
splitting - you know, folks like Dante Hicks, Randal Graves, Brodie Bruce
and Holden McNeil (Brian O'Halloran even gets to say his big line over and
over again).
The story here is completely inconsequential, as Smith is going all out to
get you to bust your gut as he closes the book on his View Askew-niverse.
Jay and Silent Bob learn that a film is being made that features characters
based on their own lives (Holden, it seems, has sold the rights to the
"Bluntman and Chronic" comic to former partner Banky Edwards).  Pissed that
they're being cut out of the action (and even more pissed that people are
writing mean shit about them on an Ain't-It-Cool News spoof site called The
Poop Shoot), the boys decide to hitchhike to Hollywood to put a stop to the
film's production, but instead end up in a conspiracy involving four
vinyl-clad hotties, an orangutan, Daredevil, Steve Kmetko, Morris Day, and
their old friends Fanboy Walt and Steve Dave (to divulge more would be
criminal).
This ain't rocket science - Smith fans will think Back is the greatest thing
ever, and the uptight pricks who hate his stuff will hate this, too.  Smith
parodies everything from Winnie the Pooh to The Fugitive (he even works one
in for a movie that just came out, and one that won't be out until next
summer) and does it with a bevy of WB stars (Eliza Dushku, James Van Der
Beek, Marc Blucas), Chris Rock doing his best Spike Lee impression, and a
load of appearances from characters a lot of people may have completely
forgotten about, like Clark (Scott William Winters) from Good Will Hunting.
Where else can you see two Academy Award winners (Ben Affleck and Matt
Damon) ripping on the movie that won them an Oscar?  Where else can you see
Jason Lee play two different parts in the same film?  Where else can you see
Luke and Leia in the same movie?  Where else can you see a director cast his
wife, ex-girlfriend and infant son?  It can all be found right here - just
be sure to stick around for the closing credits for Smith's "apology" for
riling up the gay community, and for yet another surprise cameo when the
credits are finished.
1:39 - R for nonstop crude and sexual humor, pervasive strong language, and
drug content

Author
Steve Rhodes
JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK, Kevin Smith's swan song to his two most famous
characters, is the best received comedy that I've seen since THERE'S SOMETHING
ABOUT MARY, which is a tea party in comparison to the foul-mouthed humor in JAY
AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK.  The audience didn't just laugh; they went wild with
boisterous laughter and heavy applause throughout.  In short, if you like really
raunchy humor, you may find it, as I did, to be the funniest movie of the year. 
(On the other hand, if you are one of those who walked out in disgust with
Smith's DOGMA, then JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK is not the movie for you.)
In one of the fastest paced movies of the year, the story has Jay and Silent Bob
(Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith), a pair of card carrying drug dealers, traveling
from their New Jersey convenience store home to Hollywood so that they can stop
a movie.  It seems their comic book alter egos, Bluntman and Chronic, are being
used in a movie without Jay and Silent Bob's consent.  Jason Biggs and James Van
Der Beek are slated to star in it.  JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK has more and
better used cameos than just about any movie that I've ever seen.  Among others,
they include Carrie Fisher as a bible-toting nun, Mark Hamill as a comic book
version of his famous alter ego and Gus Van Sant as a director too busy counting
his money to yell, "Action!"  Best of all are Ben Affleck and Matt Damon who
mock themselves and their movies.  
The film stops several times to make fun of itself and of the audience who was
"stupid" enough to buy tickets to this movie.  (Actually, purchasing tickets to
this film is extremely smart given that it delivers more laughter per dollar
than anything in recent memory.)  The film even skewers people who write about
movies on the Internet.  Guilty.
Although it's filled with inside jokes, you'll still be laughing even if you
only get some of them.  It's easy to understand enough so that they are still
funny.  
Jay is a motor mouth who hasn't met a subject that he couldn't vulgarize.  His
favorite topic is oral sex, but, being an equal opportunity profaner, he's
willing to make crude jokes about absolutely anything.  But it is his buddy, the
aptly named Silent Bob, who is responsible for most of the movie's success.  His
reaction shots, with his wildly exaggerated eye movements, are comedic gems.
The story's main subplot concerns four animal rights activists, Justice (Shannon
Elizabeth) and her three sexy buddies, Sissy (Eliza Dushku), Missy (Jennifer
Schwalbach Smith) and Chrissy (Ali Larter).  These Charlie's Angels types give a
ride to our heroes on their trek to LaLaLand to stop the picture.  Jay tries to
put the moves on Justice, but he doesn't stay in command of the situation for
long.  One of the funnier sight gags has the women using a pink, clam-shaped,
birth control case that contains high tech gadgetry.
Granted, it's not the movie for everyone, but, if you like Kevin Smith's brand
of humor, you'll find that this is his best.  And, as I said earlier, it's the
funniest movie of the year thus far.  No, wait.  Forget, `thus far.'  It's bound
to be the funniest movie of the year.  In a time when almost every movie feels
obligated to come in at PG-13 so that they can rake in the maximum cash, it's
great to see a filmmaker with the guts to target only a mature audience. 
JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK runs a lightening fast 1:35.  It is rated R and
contains pervasive crude humor and language and sexual situations. It would be
acceptable for high school seniors and older.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Wednesday, August 22, 2001. 
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Eugene Novikov
"Come on, Silent Bob! We're going to Hollywood."
Starring Jason Mewes, Kevin Smith, Will Ferrell,
Shannon Elizabeth, Seann William Scott, Chris Rock,
Jason Lee, Ben Affleck. Directed by Kevin Smith. Rated
R.
Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back is a dumb movie
disguised in a smarmy interior. Kevin Smith, coming
off the wonderful, challenging Dogma, fills it with
sub-Road Trip gross-out jokes and expects us to buy it
because he's just oh-so-ironic. But when a movie is so
self-aware it becomes about nothing but itself, we can
hardly be expected to pay for admission.
Jay and Silent Bob, two New Jersey stoners who hang
out at the doorstep of convenience store selling pot,
have appeared in almost all of Smith's movies but, if
I'm not mistaken, have not starred in one until now.
They find out that there is a movie based on the comic
book that is based on them being made in Hollywood.
This presents two problems: a) they haven't received a
penny in royalties and b) nerds on the internet
("What's the internet?") are talking trash about them.
What is there to do except go to Hollywood and stop
this movie from being made?
On the way -- they're hitchhiking, because who knew
you needed tickets to take a bus? -- they run into a
group of hotties who pretend to be with an
animal-rights group, but are really jewel thiefs who
parade around in Charlie's Angels-style outfits. Of
course, they set Jay and Silent Bob up to look like
the thieves, so that there is a massive manhunt going
on during the second half of the film. Will Ferrell,
who again proves himself incapable of doing anything
but sketch comedy, shows up as the wildlife marshal
inspector who thinks the two have stolen a monkey.
The movie will probably please only Smith's die-hard,
undiscerning fans; everyone else will be critical of
this mind-bogglingly stupid effort following some the
sophisticated cinema that he churned out in years
past. Any appeal the movie has will come from the "in"
jokes, most of which I think I understood, but the
movie is "in" to the point of absurdity. There needs
to be something holding it together other than its own
smugness.
Once Jay and Silent Bob get to Hollywood, the movie
abruptly switches gears from gross-out comedy to
ridiculously broad Hollywood satire. Countless "hot"
movie stars and personalities make an appearance, from
Smith veterans Matt Damon and Ben Affleck to Wes
Craven, but Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back resorts to
such low-brow gags as another Scream sequel with a
monkey as the killer. Get it? They're so desperate for
another movie, they ran out of ideas and used a
monkey! A monkey!
As often happens with writers who are working below
what they are actually capable of, most of the really
good lines are throwaways, while the big, painstaking
gags mostly fall flat. One of the funniest lines in
the movie flies by: when asked to comment on the
clitoris (don't ask), Jay responds: "the female
clitoris?"
Kevin Smith is a talented writer (though I agree that
his films would be better off if he'd let a real
director take the helm), and Jay and Silent Bob Strike
Back holds true to his promise to make a more
facetious film. Unfortunately, it's also shapeless,
pointless and largely unfunny. Smith's "verbal
trampoline," as Ben Affleck once called his
distinctive dialogue, takes a back seat to his dubious
instincts as a populist filmmaker. This was supposed
to be the movie that didn't offend anyone, but it's
offensive because it's terrible. 
