Title
Review for Adult Version of Jekyll & Hyde, The (1972)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Matherly
The Adult Version of Jekyll and Hide (1971)
Rating: 3.0 stars out of 5.0 stars
See this review the way it was meant to be seen:
http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/bmadultjekyll.html
"Judging by the marks and placement, I'd say a medical man."  
  ---A coroner gives a detective his snap judgment as to who he thinks
could have strangled a bookseller, in The Adult Version of Jekyll and
Hide. 
After slimy doctor Chris Leeder (Jack Buddliner) is interrupted during
an affair with his receptionist (Rene Bond) to go on a shopping trip
with his unaware fiancee (Jennifer Brooks), he comes across an old
notebook in a rare bookshop.  The notebook belonged to the infamous Dr.
Jekyll and contains the formula that caused him to become the vicious
madman Mr. Hide.  Leeder decides it is something he must have.  He
returns to the shop after hours to retrieve the book but the old
bookseller refuses to sell it, so Leeder kills him to obtain it.  
Leeder returns home and decides to mix up a batch of the formula
himself, despite the warning that Jekyll leaves about the formula
bringing out the true nature of whomever drinks it.  Instead of becoming
a vicious madman though, Leeder becomes a sexy blond with big breasts
that likes to make out with other women and castrate drunken sailors
that are too rough with her in back alleyways of bars.  When the cops
become suspicious of Leeder's involvement with the bookseller's death,
he decides to lay low as Ms. Hide.  Unfortunately, Leeder's fiancee has
been chatting with the police and Ms. Hide doesn't care for that, so she
decides she must silence her before Leeder is caught. 
The Adult Version of Jekyll and Hide is an ultra campy soft-core
(bordering on hard-core) sex romp that was produced by the same man who
produced Herschell Gordon Lewis' Blood trilogy, David F. Friedman. 
Although Lewis was well known for being the Godfather of Gore, he and
Friedman also had a long career in making sex films.  When Lewis and
Friedman parted company after Color Me Blood Red, Lewis continued making
gore films while Friedman went back to exploitative sex films.  There
are some scenes of torture in Jekyll and Hide though, that almost seem
as if the filmmakers were trying to go for a melding of the two types of
films.  
It's amazing what movies could get away with in the seventies versus
what they get away with nowadays.  Although the original release of this
film had an X rating (for near explicit sex and a little violence) and
actually showed in theaters, in the new millennium this film would never
have been rated (as NC-17 is even too tame for this film and X no longer
exists) and it would have ended up going straight to video or never
being released at all.  The film contains sex and violence in a
combination that was rather unheard of then and is downright unspeakable
today. 
The acting in the film is what you would expect from a film made in the
late sixties/early seventies, but all of the women in it are
attractive.  Rene Bond, who plays Leeder's receptionist, was a major
player in early seventies adult films and has a following that is easily
understandable.  She is incredibly gorgeous (and nicely built) and
actually is a decent performer as well.  Considering that most films
like this contain women who are usually not known for their acting
ability, it is refreshing to find one that knows how to read a line and
actually give a performance.  Jane Tsentas does a decent turn as Ms.
Hide, displaying sex appeal and menace in equal amounts (and has the two
scene stealing moments I mentioned earlier).  Jennifer Brooks plays
Leeder's sweet-natured fiancee well and although she doesn't bear as
much flesh as the other two women, she isn't hard on the eyes either. 
Image Entertainment and Something Weird's DVD presents the film in the
full frame format and the transfer is immaculate.  The source print was
taken from an original negative and contains a few minor scratches, but
overall it looks incredible.  There are sequences that look as if they
were shot recently instead of almost thirty years ago.  The audio is
decent, but there is at least one reel that sounds as if the entire
soundtrack, dialogue and all, came off of a vinyl record album as there
are pops and hisses throughout it.  
The disc also contains a commentary track, featuring producer David L.
Friedman and Something Weird owner Mike Vraney, which is very
informative and generally free of dead areas.  Friedman recalls a great
amount of details about the making of the film (including the fact that
it was financed by a bunch of airline pilots!) and at times even talks
over Vraney's prompts. His recollection of the days when he made
exploitation films is interesting, especially when discussing how the
films would be cut differently in different states.  He's at his most
interesting though when he's discussing how people who are offended by
his films can remedy the situation without preventing the people who
DON'T get offended by them from being able to see them.  He also
discusses why the film is mistitled as Jekyll and HIDE instead of HYDE
as the Stevenson novel originally had it spelled. 
Vraney obviously has a great love for the films he releases on DVD and
this love shows, not only in the quality and subject of the films he
releases, but also in the extras that are packed onto the discs. 
Besides the commentary track, the disc also contains a theatrical
trailer and a still gallery of exploitation films (with such great
titles as Ramrodder and Thar She Blows).  With this film and others like
it, and the release of H.G. Lewis's films, Image and Something Weird
solidify their presence as one of the best purveyors of classic cult
cinema in the US. 
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
AOL Instant Messenger: Widescreen25
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
