Title
Review for Boomerang (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
120 min., R, Comedy, 1992
Director: Reginald Hudlin
Cast: Eddie Murphy, Robin Givens, Halle Berry, David Alan Grier,
      Grace Jones, Chris Rock, Tisha Campbell, Eartha Kitt,
      Martin Lawrence, Geoffrey Holder
     Eddie Murphy has a reputation at his work place for being able to
bed any woman.  In comes Robin Givens who is Murphy's new boss.
Naturally, Murphy wants to get Givens into bed (well who wouldn't) and
Givens plays hard to get which makes Murphy want her even more.  When
Murphy starts to realize that he may be interested in a serious
relationship with Givens, he finds all she is looking for is sex.
     BOOMERANG is a very funny movie, even better than HARLEM NIGHTS and
ANOTHER 48 HRS.  I highly recommend that you go see this film before it
leaves the theaters.  On a scale of zero to five, I give BOOMERANG a
five.  BOOMERANG is rated R for brief female nudity, explicit language,
adult situations, and adult humor.
     Eddie Murphy is not as foul mouthed as usual, and has a more
interesting character than in past films.  This film will probably be
loved by any fan of Eddie.  Robin Givens gives a good performance, but
her character seemed to lack depth.  Halle Berry and David Allan Grier,
of FOX's "In Living Color," both give great performances.  Grier, I
think, gives his best performance yet.  I found Eartha Kitt's character
to be obnoxious and annoying, but the film would not have been as good
without her.
     BOOMERANG is not a film to be picked apart and analyzed.   Instead
it is a film to sit down, relax and laugh at.  If you go to pick it
apart, I think that you will hate this film.  If you want to go to enjoy
Eddie's funny antics, then this is definitely a film for you.  This film
is nearing the end of its theatrical run, so I suggest that if you are
going to go see it that you don't wait too long.  There is nothing
really to be said about the locations, because most of them were inside
buildings.  The script was great and gave all the actors a chance to
come out and make you laugh.  The soundtrack was also great!
     There isn't really too much more I can say about this film.   It is
of no great moral backing, and probably won't be nominated for an Oscar
(comedies seldom are).  Nothing will be lost by watching this film on a
VCR if you would prefer to wait and skip the high theater prices.
