Title
Review for Talented Mr. Ripley, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
37

Author
Lars Lindahl
Directed by Anthony Minghella
Written by Anthony Minghella
Starring Matt Damon, Jude Law, Gwyneth Paltrow, Cate Blanchett, Jack Davenport,
Philip Seymour Hoffman, Philip Baker Hall, and James Renhorn.
The last movie I reviewed was Milos Forman's "Man on the Moon." Jim Carrey
fabulously portrayed the mysterious comedian Andy Kaufman as a character who
was a master at becoming anything but himself. Due to the ambuguity of
Kaufman's persona, people were forced to make up for themselves who he actually
was. "The Talented Mr. Ripley's" Tom Ripley is a character with the same
chameleon-like ability of transforming himself into whatever he pleases.
However, he does not let those he encounters decide who he is, instead he
judges for himself what people should believe and know. Although Kaufman and
Ripley are quite similar, the movies they star in are far from that. While "Man
on the Moon" relies on the comedic talents of Carrey to entertain the audience,
"The Talented Mr. Ripley" is a grim analysis of civilization in the 1950's
which contains elements of trust and deception. When these two adjectives go
together in the description of a film, it is expected that tragic chaos will
erupt from the combination and strong feelings will develop for the victims and
doers. The result of Anthony Minghella's masterpiece is certainly that as
eruptions frequently occur during the fabulously suspenseful plot. The film
throws its audience around with unique plot twists during every scene creating
a thrilling unpredictable atmosphere. 
The story  follows the adventures of Tom Ripley (played chillingly well by Matt
Damon) who finds himself on a journey to Italy where he is being paid to try to
convince a young man, Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law in a breakthrough performance)
to return to America. Once he arrives, Ripley finds he is greatly attracted to
Greenleaf's style of life. He becomes so obsessed with Greenleaf that
eventually his desires take over his morality. "The Talented Mr. Ripley" is a
presentation of several classes from the snobby, selfish rich American to lower
class Italians. Its wide range of analysis rather than just on Ripley makes it
more interesting and disturbing in how social structure creates people.
However, Ripley's obsession is the central point and for good reason. This
villain is very unique because the majority of the public watching the movie
can relate to him more than any other character. We all know that what he is
doing is sick and wrong but for some reason we understand why he is doing it.
Bonding with Ripley is what makes the film so frightening. 
Both the script and the directing are responsible for non stop tension. The
dialogue written by Minghella is so fresh and engaging that the film's 160
minute running time seems to fly right by. When one segment of the film begins
to drag on too long, the film quickly shifts to a newer, fresher scene. Some
very memorable lines and some clever sexual references make this one of the
best scripts written this year, if not this decade. The directing also is
flawless. Minghella was most likely influenced by Alfred Hitchcock, from his
"Psycho"-like format for the opening credits to his very effective ability of
spinning the camera to a point of near dizziness like that of "Vertigo."
Minghella shows that without special effects a film can still be frightening. 
Anthony Minghella utilizes the skills of each actor (most of them Academy Award
winners) perfectly. Damon is superb as Ripley. Hidden behind some thick
glasses, he looks harmless but once he is overtaken by desire his face
completely transforms to a harsh coldness. Jude Law, who has given some decent
supporting performances in films such as "eXitenZ" and "Gattaca", takes a
surprisingly perfect turn as Dickie Greenleaf. As a snobby, rich kid who hates
America, its hard to like him but it's even harder to hate him and to see him
suffer from Ripley's wrath. His performance was accurate in creating mixed
emotions for his character. Gwyneth Paltrow was also great as Greenleaf's
suspicious girlfriend, Marge. Marge starts off a bit slow and underdeveloped
but as the film continues Paltrow is given the chance to bloom and she does.
Other supporting actors also contribute their talents such as Philip Seymour
Hoffman as one of Greenleaf's friends. Hoffman is beginning to dominate
Hollywood as he appears in three movies currently out in theaters and thanks to
his talents gives three great performances. 
The script, the direction, the acting; all are top notch in this thriller that
plays with your mind by playing with the characters' minds. From the very first
scene to the very last, "The Talented Mr. Ripley" is perfection.

Author
Ross Anthony
As the title appears on screen, the word "Talented" arrives only after
shuffling tentatively through a series of other fitting words: passionate,
confused, misunderstood, lost, etc. Telling insight into Ripley's character.
A powerfully strong first act, Ripley (Damon) is commissioned by a rich
American shipbuilder to persuade Dickie (his aloof son) to return home from
Italy. Ripley a master of impersonation, forgery, lying, and the piano
becomes so fatally seduced by the lavish lifestyle with this obsession
extending to Dickie (Jude Law) that his original mission is abandoned at
sea. But when Dickie doesn't share Ripley's jubilance over this new found
relationship -- well, the film takes an ugly murderous twist from which it
never recovers.
Having arrived early to the screening, I took a peaceful stroll in a nearby
park where I came across an unusually shaped tree. Leaning nearly 45 degrees
into the path, it seemed to cut back 90 degrees in the opposite direction.
But further inspection revealed that the tree had been cut to avoid blocking
the path. What I had thought to be the trunk was actually just a very thick
branch, elbowing from its grossly severed trunk. I had no idea this was some
freakish foreshadowing for a movie I was soon to screen. "Ripley" builds at
an interestingly artful angle, takes a lethal twist, then just keeps going;
no peak, no climax, no resolution.
That said, the acting, dialogue, direction and cinematography are fantastic.
I've not seen Damon stronger. And Jude Law is absolutely stunning, he fills
the Dickie character with magnificent fervor. Paltrow is nothing less than
convincing as a fine cast of actors front exacting direction (spectacular
really) and warm wonderful cinematography faulted only slightly with its use
of a soft focus filter that I found distracting. The film's seldom-surfacing
sinister sense of humor is also delightful.
But like Ripley and his mission, this gorgeous film sabotages the bizarre
journey it originally offered -- only to become a serial account of
psychosis, betrayal and murder.
The Talented Mr. Ripley. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Matt Damon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jude Law, Cate Blanchett, Philip
Seymour Hoffman, Jack Davenport, James Rebhorn.
Directed by Anthony Minghella.
Screenplay by Anthony Minghella based on a novel by Patricia Highsmith.
Produced by William Horbert and Tom Sternberg at Paramount/Miramax.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Nick Lyons
  Anthony Minghella's last film (The English Patient) was highly overrated, but
when I heard he had a new project with an intriguing premise, I took notice.
Thankfully, it's neither boring nor overrated, but rather a chilling mystery
that captures your attention.
  The film begins with a nerdy young man named Tom Ripley (Matt Damon) who is
noticed by Mr. Greenleaf. He sees that he attended Princeton the same year as
his son Dickie (Jude Law) and actually knew him, so he persuades Tom to go to
Europe and bring back his son for $1000. Tom accepts and leaves immediately.
When he finds Dickie and his beautiful young girlfriend Marge (Gwyenth
Paltrow), he makes it seem like he knew him and they give in. They become good
friends, or so it seems, until Dickie becomes a little suspicious of his acts.
For example he does uncanny voice impersonations, dresses up in Dickie's
clothes, and he basically wants to become closer to him, even be him. Along the
way Tom also gets to know Freddie (Phillip Seymour Hoffman) and the rich girl
Meredith. The film soon takes a turn for the better, as Tom becomes pushed out
of Dickie's life by Freddie, and ultimately ends up murdering Dickie.
  This stylish thriller is similar to Hitchcock, in fact they share similar
qualities. Ripley's obsession with Dickie reminds me of Jimmy Stewart and KIm
Novac's relationship in Vertigo. Both lead characters were greedy and didn't
realize how much harm they were doing until the end. Unfortunately Ripley has
some problems. The story is rushed too quickly at the beginning and is somewhat
absurd at times. Within the first 5 minutes, he agrees to see Dickie, and that
is that. I just found it a little strange that the beginning wasn't expanded on
more. Also, when I meant that the script was somewhat absurd, I was referring
to Ripley's mind. How could anyone be so smart to get away with a complicated
crime like this? Even I had trouble keeping up, and it's highly unlike anyone
could think up of a scheme like this. It's highly unlogical, that a person can
be one step ahead everytime a conflict arises. Aside from that, the film has
many enjoyable qualities.
  I know some people like to see action films and root for the hero, but I for
one think villains are a tad bit more interesting. Take Star Wars for example,
I find the dark side (Darth Vader and such) to be more interesting and far more
exciting to watch on screen. With Ripley, director Anthony Minghella takes the
approach of making the villain (Tom Ripley) the main focus in the film. After
Dickie was killed, the audience seemed to be more involved with the film,
because Ripley was a fascinating character. Sure he is unpleasant, but which
villain isn't? The fact that becoming someone, is a imaginative idea, and
Minghella exploits it well. Never has nastiness been so pure in a movie, and
for that I applaud. 
  Another wonderful aspect is the acting. Jude Law, Matt Damon and Gwyenth
Paltrow all deserve Oscar nods as far as I'm concerned. Each character had it's
own exquisite features, but Matt Damon was by far the most clever and
appealing. Jude Law played a good rich kid, and afterall, he was Ripley's idol.
If it hadn't been for his good acting ability, we would have never believed
that anyone would want to become him, especially if he was a rich snob, with no
talents what so ever, which leads me to the next character, Freddie. Now I
know, I may be a little harsh, but I honestly despise Phillip Seymour Hoffman.
People are saying how far he has come, but what has he really done? Patch
Adams, Flawless? That's nothing to be proud of. I'm disgusted by him, and
frankly could care less about him. Luckily he isn't in it much. Gwyenth Platrow
however is as good as ever. I actually thought she did better here than she did
in Shakespeare In Love. She was that good.
  Director Anthony Minghella also did an equally notable job. I'm glad he
redeemed himself after English Patient, because I was beginning to think that's
all he was going to be known for. There's also some fabulous camera shots that
are worth taking notice, if you're a hard-core film buff. Good stuff.
  In the end, I get the sense Tom Ripley dug himself a deeper hole. What once
was a simple journey, became a night of living hell for him. No matter how much
he tried to cover up Dickie's death, it just made him feel worse, and he knew
he had no other choice. The Talented Mr. Ripley is a very intelligent thriller,
that isn't simple minded. A must see.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Matt Damon, Jude Law, Gwyneth Paltrow, Cate Blanchett.
Directed by Anthony Minghella. Rated R.
He's a talented one himself, this Anthony Minghella. Three years ago,
he scored big-time with his WWII weepie The English Patient. The film
all but swept the Oscars and was a resounding critical and box-office
success. Now Minghella comes out with another Oscar shoo-in that also
happens to be one of the year's best films. The Talented Mr. Ripley is
Minghella's proof that The English Patient was no accident.
A janitor at a philarmonic, Tom Ripley leads a rather boring life until
he is sent ti Italy to persuade Dickie Greenleaf, the snobby son of a
wealthy American businessman to come home. When he arrives, he finds
himself falling in love with Dickie's lifestyle. Instead of actively
pestering him to go home, Tom lives it up in Italy and Dickie's father
pays for it. Before long Tom falls in love with Dickie himself.
Halfway through the movie there is a confrontation wherein Tom murders
Dickie and takes on his identity. From there, he plays an elaborate
game of cat and mouse with the police and with Dickie's girlfriend
Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow), trying to make the police think that he is
Dickey and make Marge think that Dickie's dumped her. The twist is that
Tom is not some great conspirator; rather he is a modern reincarnation
of Machiavelli, a man who thinks on his feet and kills when he must
kill to achieve his goal. He is a great improviser.
You may have heard about the enigmatic Oscar nominee Cate Blanchett
having a role in this movie. Her part is small, but it's there. She
plays an American whom Tom tries to carry on an affair with while
juggling his many other problems. Her character serves to demonstrate
Tom's ability to inadvertently get way in over his head and then get
himself out of trouble with his quick thinking ability.
The Talented Mr. Ripley runs almost two and a half hours and yet the
pace and tone of the movie is pitch-perfect. By making the villain the
focus of the film, Minghella (or perhaps novelist Patricia Highsmith,
whose work this movie is based on) builds suspense quietly but
undeniably. It's far from being a traditional thriller: the director
doesn't use the soundtrack as an easy way out. The suspenseful scenes
are mostly dialogue based, with only a few incidents of real violence
but the result is as tense as anything.
Matt Damon gives what is surely his best performance to date as the
title character. He perfectly conveys Tom Ripley's central trait: he
doesn't seem to realize that he is a psychopath. At first he kills in
his own best interest; by the end of the movie he kills because he has
become addicted to lies, but he never seems to recognize that what he
is doing is wrong. He sees that police are chasing after him but he
never feels any guilt or remorse for his actions nor does he see any
reason why he should.
I've liked Jude Law since I first saw him in the intelligent sci-fi
thriller Gattaca and now, after a major role in eXistenZ, he one-ups
himself. His Dickie is one of the films biggest joys (please, no pun
intended) -- a spoiled brat who is also a decent guy and a compelling
character. I liked Gwyneth Paltrow almost as much: she is one of the
hardest-working actresses in show business and it always amazes me how
she can turn in such deeply felt performances in movie after movie
after movie.
One doesn't realize it at first, but The Talented Mr. Ripley is an
extremely bold endeavor: a supposedly mainstream thriller that deals
with concepts like homosexuality, betrayal and pathological lying in a
deliberately paced, long production. I felt grateful that this movie
was made. I didn't want it to end.

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
DIRECTED BY:      Anthony Minghella
STARRING:         Matt Damon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jude Law, Cate Blanchett,
Philip Seymour Hoffman, Jack Davenport
WRITTEN BY:       Anthony Minghella
RATED:            R for violence, language, and brief nudity
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:       James 3:16, Job 5:2, Proverbs 14:30
It is a sin to waste one's talent.  And it is a sad pity to sit by and
watch someone else do it.  THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY tells a sad tale of a
capable but unhappy and deeply troubled young man who desires a life other
than the one he has been given.
Matt Damon (DOGMA) plays the sociopathic pianist/bathroom attendant Tom
Ripley who is quick to confess that his primary talent is in mimicry.
Mistaken for a Princeton graduate, he is hired by a frustrated father to
fly to Italy and convince his wayward son (and fellow Princetonian)  to
return to the United States.
Recognizing a good deal when one falls in his lap, Tom readily agrees.
Even before setting foot on Italian soil, he is already introducing
himself as Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law, EXISTENZ), the young playboy he was
sent to retrieve.  One taste of Dickie's lifestyle is enough to convince
Tom that this life is infinitely better than the one he left behind.
Little did he realize at the time the trap he was setting for himself.
After ingratiating himself to Dickie and his girlfriend Marge (Gwyneth
Paltrow, A PERFECT MURDER), Tom becomes inseparable from them.  Figuring
it is better to be "a fake somebody than a real nobody," he successfully
reinvents himself to fit in with the "manor born" crowd.  When Dickie
eventually tires of his continual company, it is no surprise to find that
Tom is not so agreeable to leave.
Upon Dickie's demise, Tom decides to adopt his identity and stay in
Italy.  This will present a bit of a problem as many already know him as
Tom Ripley and many know what Dickie Greenleaf really looks like.  Thus
begins a series of duplicitous hoops through which Tom must jump just to
keep his lies believable and his crimes undiscovered.
THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY is more a character study than a genuine
thriller.  Mr. Damon does a fine (even if somewhat unnerving) job in
portraying a man with severe psychological problems.  Quick-witted and
even tempered, Tom's surface demeanor belies the turmoil and conflicts
raging within his heart.
Jude Law is well cast as a privileged rich child who completely and
totally disrespects the very source of his privilege.  Spoiled beyond
words, his character, Dickie, uses people as others might use old
newspaper. And yet his charismatic personality attracts people to him as
effortlessly as a light captures a moth's attention (oftentimes with the
same disastrous results).
  Both Gwyneth Paltrow and Cate Blanchett (PUSHING TIN) lend their
considerable talents to the film but play relatively insubstantial
characters, serving as pawns in the misguided Ripley's mental chess game.
Writer/director Anthony Minghella (THE ENGLISH PATIENT) working from
Patricia Highsmith's 1955 novel, has set the film in the late fifties, a
dynamic time in Italy's history.  While focusing on the novel's concept of
changing one's life by stealing the more desirable life of another, he has
made a number of textual modifications to the original tale.
An added plot device which, for me, neither enhanced nor contributed to
the appreciation of the source material was the introduction of homosexual
elements.  Subtly introduced a quarter of the way into the film, the
homosexuality of certain central characters eventually  becomes a
dominant, driving force in the film's story.  It was not needed and served
to weaken the overall impact of this psychological study.
Ripley is a tragic figure.  He is made tragic by his inability to
recognize his own self worth.  Whenever we envy the life of another, we
fail to be thankful for all we already have.  Envy leads to discontent
which opens the mind's door for all kinds of devilish thought and action.
"For where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil
work." James 3:16 [KJV]
When we live with the awareness that God is our sufficiency and that we
are uniquely created in Him, we are able to appreciate the lives of others
without being desirous of the lives they lead.  God would have you be
thankful for your own life.  After all... He is.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Pictures/ Miramax Films
 Director: Anthony Minghella
 Writer: Patricia Highsmith (novel), Anthony Minghella
 Cast: Matt Damon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jude Law, Cate
Blanchett, Jack Davenport, Caterina Deregibus, Philip
Seymour Hoffman, James Rebhorn, Stefania Rocca, Philip
Baker Hall
   Aside from self-defense, do you think you could kill another
human being?  Not your style?  Perhaps.  But some people
disagree with you.  One of the dissenters is Patricia
Highsmith, whose 1955 novel "The Talented Mr. Ripley" has
been made by Anthony Minghella ("The English Patient") into
what is easily the best crime thriller of the year.  Minghella
proves that he is as adept at fashioning edge-of-your seat,
Hitchcockian dramas of transgression as he is at building a
sweeping love story.  "The Talented Mr. Ripley" is the second
screen adaptation of the Highsmith novel, the first being
Rene Clement's "Purple Noon" which starred Alain Delon as
the title character who envies his playboy friend and decides
to kill the young man and assume his identity.  Both were
lavishly filmed in some of Italy's more scenic and
characteristic spots.  Minghella wisely avoids the temptation
to do the appealing psychological study in the noir style,
allowing cinematographer John Seale to capture the brightly-
colored vistas of Ischia, Palermo, Rome, Anzio and Venice,
thus affording the Italian Tourist Board with spectacular, free
promotion.
   The Paramount Pictures/Miramax Films co-production also
features some of the handsomest performers in the business,
including the Jude Law, who bears not a slight resemblance
to a Greek god; a role that nicely explores the resources of
the talented Matt Damon; and a strikingly appealing Gwyneth
Paltrow who looks lovelier here than she has ever appeared
before.  Cate Blanchett, who turns in a satisfactory
performance as a ditzy rich gal comes across as just plain
silly in a role that does not capitalize on her own meticulous
capabilities.
   "The Talented Mr. Ripley" was the first in writer Patricia
Highsmith's series about an struggling American who
becomes entirely captivated by the good life in Europe and
simply could not see himself returning to the states as a hotel
bathroom attendant and sometimes pianist at social
gatherings.  And who could blame him?  How are you going
to keep this Yank down in New York after he's tasted la dolce
vita?  
   Convincing shipping magnate Herbert Greenleaf, the father
(James Rebhorn) of a wastrel, Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law)
that he had attended the same class as Dickie at Princeton
University, Tom Ripley (Matt Damon) is given a thousand
dollars by the older Greenleaf to go to Italy and convince the
young man to return home.  Tom discovers Dickie soaking up
the sun with his girl friend, Marge Sherwood (Gwyneth
Paltrow), persuades the rich young man as well that they
were classmates at Princeton, and, pretending that he shares
a passion for jazz and a talent for impersonation, is taken in
by Dickie as a guest.  While Tom hangs out with Dickie,
eating his food and allowing his host to buy him some
custom-made threads, shares with him the rich life--attending
jazz clubs and gawking at the beauty of a land which, on his
own, he would never have been able to see.  We can easily
see how the alluring Dickie draws people toward him like a
magnet, as he jumps on the stage to share a song in Italian,
plays his saxophone, and plans a ski trip with his snobbish
American friend, Freddie (Philip Seymour Hoffman).  
   His ability to fit in with the good life gives Tom Ripley a
vision: he could have it all if he could erase Dickie from the
scene, assume his identity, and spend time forging checks
and passing himself off as the influential son of a magnate. 
Each time a situation arises that could give him away, we in
the audience hold our breath to see how in the heck this
audacious liar and murderer can avoid getting caught.  Tom's
skill at winging it makes him actually likable to us
notwithstanding his dastardly deed, and given the natural
resentment, perhaps envy, we may have for the guy he kills
(who is a womanizer as well as a wastrel), we may actually
root for him to fool everybody--Dickie's girl friend, the
American woman, Meredith Logue (Cate Blanchett) who
seems to turn up everywhere, Dickie's American friend,
Freddie Miles, and yet another man Tom befriends, Peter
Smith-Kingsley (Jack Davenport).
   Minghella adds a gay theme absent from the Highsmith
novel, a motif which contributes to the tension and which
gives us the feeling that perhaps Tom was motivated to kill
Dickie not only to take over his wealth but because Dickie
spurned a homosexual advance.  The Patricia Highsmith style
can be spotted by anyone lucky enough to see the first-class
Hitchcock picture, the 1951 "Strangers on a Train," featuring
a psychopathic Robert Walker's relationship with a tennis star
played by Farley Granger.
   To see why a typically banal Hollywood ending was
avoided we need only check into the writings of novelist
Highsmith who once said, "Neither life nor nature cares if
justice is ever done or not."  While director Minghella does
make one concession to the modern American audience by
providing an emotional reason for the murder, Highsmith was
herself without interest in psychological explanations for
anything.  Book reviewer Susannah Clapp has said, "Rather
than engaging the reader with the solution to a crime or the
thrill of a chase, Highsmith invites us to observe life as a
cunningly devised trap from which there is, as events
accumulate, no escape."  Minghella remains true to the
source by registering all actions in the movie, whether violent
or not, in a matter-of-fact way, allowing us in the audience to
treat events as witnesses to a clever game of a man focusing
his energies on avoiding a series of traps.  The talented Mr.
Minghella will have every congregation of movie viewers
sitting in continuous apprehension.
Rated R.  Running Time: 139 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Talented_Mr._Ripley_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
The big surprise of the year-end awards season has been the strong showing
by this adaptation of Patricia Highsmith's novel, written and directed by
Anthony Minghella.  The raft of accolades is somewhat understandable; this
'50s-set thriller is certainly one of the most laid-back suspense films I
have seen in recent years, and its pleasures are accordingly unconventional.
The chief strength is how the film slowly seduces rather than relentlessly
prods the audience, lulling it into its spell--much like how the title
character, Tom Ripley (Matt Damon), eases his way into the good graces of
Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law, in a star-making turn), whom Tom is paid (by
Dickie's tycoon father, played by James Rebhorn) to drag from his new home
of Italy back to the United States.
As Tom gets to know Dickie, his friendly girlfriend Marge Sherwood (Gwyneth
Paltrow), and their carefree, jazzy lifestyle, he falls in love with his
newfound best friend.  When Dickie's attention to him starts to wane, and it
becomes clear that his affection cannot be reciprocated, Tom uses his talent
for impersonation and forgery to have Dickie's life as his own.  Needless to
say, myriad complications are in store, not least of which is an
ever-elongating line of dead bodies.  But this is no traditional,
exploitative thriller, and the understated--but no less violent--way in
which Minghella depicts the murders succeeds in genuinely unsettling the
audience rather than giving them a cheap shock.
There is a bit of a problem in the center of _The_Talented_Mr._Ripley_, and
that is Mr. Ripley himself, adequately played by Damon.  Minghella has taken
great pains to make him a rather sympathetic character (unlike in René
Clement's 1960 French adaptation of the novel,
_Purple_Noon_(Plein_Soleil)_); Tom here is a gawky, insecure young man whose
underlying motivation for killing is his frustration with having to hide his
"true self."  The problem is that one never gets a sense of who this person
is since he's seen in an act of impersonation (to one degree or another)
right one from frame one.  With no clear idea of who the real Tom Ripley is,
it's hard to completely feel for him--a task which is already difficult
considering all his victims are, indeed, innocent.  Nonetheless, Minghella's
film is, overall, an effectively disturbing work.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Anthony Minghella's follow-up to his Oscar-winning adaptation of The
English Patient is a stylish Hitchcockian thriller that is as beautiful
as it is creepy.  Based on Patricia Highsmith's novel of the same name,
The Talented Mr. Ripley stars a hunky teen heartthrob (Matt Damon) as a
homosexual sociopath with murderous tendencies.  Hardly sounds like
Christmas fare (which is probably why the gay angle is missing from the
film's trailer), but Ripley will indeed be released on December 25th to
a largely unsuspecting public.
Damon (Dogma) stars as Tom Ripley, a struggling New York City piano
tuner that, thanks to some lucky timing and a borrowed blazer, ends up
being offered a short-term, high-paying job.  Ripley will receive $1,000
to go to Europe and persuade the son of a shipping magnate to return
home in time for the Thanksgiving holiday.  So he brushes up on his
Italian and heads for the sun-drenched Mediterranean.
His target  called Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law, eXistenZ)  is a spoiled
wild-child whose primary talent seems to be spending his allowance.
(Why his pop doesn't just cut Dickie off remains a mystery.)  Dickie
frequents jazz clubs, cheats on his novelist fiancée Marge (Gwyneth
Paltrow, Shakespeare in Love) and has no intention of returning to the
U.S. or to his father's business.  Although the pasty-white Ripley has
trouble fitting in amongst the well-to-do bronze gods at first, he
eventually wins their approval by doing a dead-on impression of Dickie's
father.  But Ripley only has one dress shirt and a ratty corduroy
jacket, so Dickie lets him borrow some of his threads and plants in his
underprivileged underling the idea to take over Dickie's identity.  As
Ripley says, `I'd rather be a fake somebody than a real nobody,' and he
shows that he would go to any lengths to realize this dream.
The story may sound familiar to you because it was already made into a
film in 1960 (Miramax re-released it in the U.S. a few years back).
This original version, Plein Soleil  (Purple Noon), starred Alain Delon
in the title role and seemed both to gloss over the whole gay twist and
give the film a considerably more upbeat ending.  But this is 1999 and
films have changed a lot in those intervening four decades.  Among other
upgrades from the 60s adaptation are two extra murders and a brand-new
character (Cate Blanchett, An Ideal Husband).  There are a number of
other differences, but revealing them would give away too much of the
plot.
Damon is spectacular as the spine-chilling chameleon Ripley.  I always
thought his acting chops were a bit overrated, but with this role he
establishes himself as one of the better young actors in Hollywood.  Law
is entirely believable as a snooty rich-boy, but Paltrow is just
annoying.  She's probably a snooty rich-girl in real life and didn't
know how to approach the idea of playing herself.  Most enjoyable
perhaps is Philip Seymour Hoffman (Flawless), who plays a friend of
Dickie's in a manner that will remind you of a young Thurston Howell
III.  His blood is so blue it looks like he's choking.
Complementing Damon's performance is a top-notch production team
(including four Oscar winners from The English Patient) that captures a
strikingly beautiful 50s Italy.  The film is aglow with bright, sunny
color, the water is always blue (even in the bathtub), and you can
almost smell the combination of olive oil and body odor in the street
scenes.  Minghella's direction is simply gorgeous, using spellbinding
camera work that would make Hitchcock proud.  Ironically, Hitchcock used
Highsmith's first novel, Strangers on a Train, to make one of his finest
films.
Ripley's ending may not please everyone (in fact, it caused a lot of
groans during my screening), but it's faithful to Highsmith's book,
which spawned four sequels over a thirty-eight-year period.  The third,
`Ripley's Game,' was made into a 1977 Wim Wenders film called American
Friend that starred - get this - Dennis Hopper in the title role.
Consider that alternative if you gripe about this film.
2:18 - R for violence, adult language and brief nudity

Author
Jamey Hughton
`The Talented Mr. Ripley' is an offbeat addition to the Holiday movie
schedule - perhaps the most unlikely contender of the Christmas season.
In his follow-up to `The English Patient', director Anthony Minghella
appears to be channeling Alfred Hitchcock, as everything is executed
with a certain style and sophistication that seems reminiscent of the
late director's best work. If he were still alive today, it wouldn't
surprise me if Mr. Hitchcock would blush at the sight of Minghella's
latest offering; `The Talented Mr. Ripley' is a finely oiled suspense
machine crammed with a thorough sense of fascination.
The film is based on a novel by Patricia Highsmith, which was previously
adapted to the silver screen in 1960 under the name of `Purple Moon', a
film which won critical acclaim for it's intricate and unsettling study
of an unstable but highly intelligent sociopath named Tom Ripley. In
Minghella's version, Matt Damon inherits the icy title role with plenty
of chilling results. Although I haven't read Highsmith's novel, many
sources are indicating that the new version of Tom Ripley is portrayed
with far more innocence than the previous one....shaping the modern
Ripley into an unwilling murderer who only kills as a last resort. This
approach opens a wide canvas for mystery and intrigue, and Damon's
frightening metamorphosis into the main character is a masterful balance
of sinister charm and brilliant intuition.
Ripley, a curious dreamer and master chameleon, is persuaded by the
wealthy Herbert Greenleaf (James Rebhorn) to travel to Italy and
retrieve his son Dickie (Jude Law) so he can return home and see the
family. Once he arrives at his destination, Tom is swept away by
Dickie's lifestyle: his dashing fiancee Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow), his
friends, his social stature... It is safe to say Tom is more than
slightly intrigued by the notion of living Dickie's life for him. And
that brings us to this little snippet of dialogue, spoken by Tom in a
moment of quiet revelation: `I always thought it would be better to be a
fake somebody than a real nobody.'
`The Talented Mr. Ripley' is a rich and unsettling tapestry of murder
and suspense that is neither predictable nor formulaic - a rarity for
the thriller genre, which makes for a delectable Christmas treat.
Minghella's film is, in terms of artistic beauty and emotional craft,
one the finest films of the year. Taking a page from Hitchcock classics
like `Psycho' and `North by Northwest', it offers a fascinating and
jarring character study that extends generously to each of the three
leads - with Damon carrying the most demanding load and delivering
superbly. Jude Law (`eXistenZ' and `Gattaca') also delivers an
Award-caliber performance as the spoiled playboy Dickie Greenleaf, and
Paltrow, while not emitting the vigorous radiance of her performance in
`Shakespeare in Love', proves to a competent piece of the twisted
puzzle. In support, both Philip Seymour Hoffman (as Dickie's smug and
contemptuous playboy buddy) and Cate Blanchett (as Tom's awkward love
interest) are solid, but the former is able to ignite more screen
charisma. Philip Baker Hall has a brief but effective appearance as an
American detective hired to connect the dots of a few gruesome murders.
The question of Tom's sexual preferences occasionally hangs over the
proceedings like a dour cloud of smog. There is much indication of
sexual friction between Tom and Dickie (and afterward another male
character), and although they are sometimes excessive and unnecessary,
these details only help to further establish the nature of Tom's
character. I may argue that the film is also slightly overlong, but
Minghella finishes on a particularly haunting note. `The Talented Mr.
Ripley' is full of gorgeous locales, effective imagery and subtle but
nerve-jangling suspense. It's the definition of a smart man's thriller,
and if Hitch were around to see it, I'm sure he would be envious.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Matt Damon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jude Law, Cate Blanchett, Philip Seymour
Hoffman, Jack Davenport, James Rebhorn, Sergio Rubini, Philip Baker
Hall, Celia Weston, Rosario Fiorello, Stefania Rocca, Ivano
Marescotti, Anna Longhi, Alessandro Fabrizi, Lisa Eichhorn. Written by
Anthony Minghella, based on the novel by Patricia Highsmith. Directed
by Anthony Minghella. 139 minutes.  Rated R, 4 stars (out of five
stars)
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests
to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com
with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Combining beautiful people in glorious, exotic locales with a lurid
tale of duplicity and murder, "The Talented Mr. Ripley" is the big
screen equivalent of the thick paperback thrillers so popular with
vacationers. Like most of those novels, the film is also a bit
overstuffed, but that's easy to forgive. With this well-acted,
wonderfully textured work, director Anthony Minghella ("The English
Patient") has crafted a wicked psychological study that would do
Hitchcock proud.
Based on the 1955 novel by Patricia Highsmith, the film centers on
Thomas Ripley (Matt Damon), an ambitious, facile young man who envies
the lush lifestyle of Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law), an American
expatriate lolling around Italy with his girlfriend, Marge (Gwyneth
Paltrow), so much that he decides to take over his identity by any
means necessary.
Tom Ripley's fractured journey begins in New York City, when
industrialist Herbert Greenleaf (James Rebhorn) mistakes the
impoverished young piano player for a classmate of his wayward son. He
offers to fund Tom on a trip to convince Dickie to return home.
Ripley soon finds himself in a wonderland of beaches, villas, trendy
clubs and an air of privilege. In short order, he ingratiates himself
with the handsome, charismatic Dickie, furthering the bonding process
by revealing his "mission" to the urbane layabout. Now operating as a
"double agent," Tom writes encouraging letters to the senior
Greenleaf, while spending the father's money knocking about the
country with his son.
All is well until the relationship begins to fray. Dickie tends to aim
his full attention toward the latest arrival to his social circle,
giving scant time to those who have been around longer. Ripley soon
finds that he is no longer the flavor of the day. Rather than an
intriguing newcomer, he is now perceived as a hanger-on. As if this
isn't bad enough, Dickie reacts negatively to Tom's quasi-erotic
advances. While on an out-of-town holiday with Dickie, the calculating
young Ripley strikes out. His plan is to lay low in various Italian
cities, using forged letters and his skills as a mimic to co-opt
Dickie's identity. The scheme is clearly a house of cards, but then
again, Tom Ripley is a very resourceful man.
In Patricia Highsmith's novel (the first of a series of books on the
character), Ripley is a flat-out sociopath. A large part of the
story's twisted pleasure comes from seeing life through the eyes of
this coldly efficient shark. Minghella changes the tone by giving Tom
a bit of a conscience. He also plays up Ripley's sexuality. While it
was established in the book that Tom was at least bisexual, if not
entirely gay, his sexual orientation was almost irrelevant. People
were just a means to an end and their gender meant little to this
self-absorbed acquisition machine. While I understand why Minghella
felt the need to make the changes, I still prefer Ripley in his
undiluted asexual mode.
But thanks to the immense skills of Matt Damon, the altered Ripley
still works. To emphasize the class differences between Tom and
Dickie, Minghella wanted Damon to initially appear pale and
scrawny. Accordingly, Damon dropped 30+ pounds and stayed in the
shadows. His efforts were successful. When Tom first meets Dickie and
Marge, turning up on the beach in an ill-fitting Speedo, he looks
underfed, out of place and remarkably exposed. Anyone who dismissed
Matt Damon as just another Hollywood pretty boy will learn better here
- Damon is the genuine article; an accomplished actor who will do
whatever it takes to make his character credible. He is extraordinary,
deftly playing his wholesome good looks against an ever-darkening
persona in one of the year's best performances.
Jude Law is his match as the magnetic Dickie Greenleaf. He totally
captures the spirit of the character; a tempestuous, supremely
confident dilettante who perceives himself as the real thing. It's
easy to understand why Marge and Tom would be drawn to this smoldering
young firebrand. While Gwyneth Paltrow has far less to do, she acquits
herself nicely as Marge, who is far more assertive here than in the
book.
Anthony Minghella does a masterful job with his exceptional cast and
stunning Italian locations, creating an alluring sense of bohemian
abandon. After watching the film, I was ready to hop the next plane to
Italy and hang out with these people, even if it meant maneuvering
around the dangerous Mr. Ripley. Minghella uses the radiant settings
to maximum effect - the darkest moment of the story takes place in
bright sunlight, which makes its impact even stronger.
While the mechanics of the film's last act play better in the book
than onscreen, "The Talented Mr. Ripley" still packs a considerable
punch. At two hours and 20 minutes, the film is a bit longer than it
needs to be, but Anthony Minghella's sprawling creation remains one of
the most captivating, and chilling, character studies to come along in
quite a while. So skillful and seductive is the portrayal of Tom
Ripley that you find yourself hoping he'll get away with his
crimes. Now that's truly disturbing.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
The Talented Mr Ripley: single white male
These Pacific Heights type stories are usually told from the victims' point
of view, which serves to make the 'villain' more threatening, as he could
pop into any scene. In The Talented Mr. Ripley, director Anthony Minghella
(working from Patricia Highsmith's novel, the first in a series of
Ripley-novels) takes the alternate route, tells the story from the
'villain's' point of view. Meaning he's in just about every scene, so what
'pops up' to surprise us from time to time is his sociopathic nature. And he
is sick, the kind of sick that feeds your ego simply to steal your identity.
But that's his talent--the human chameleon. And, as all chameleons (and
secret agents, a similar breed) must, he has no past, no history; there's no
real 'explanation' for his actions, and barely any hints. Meaning of course
he's the ideal blank slate upon which to impress an identity, any identity.
All he needs is a mark.
Highsmith supplies one via a little Henry James/Ambassadors shuffle: Ripley
(Matt Damon) bluffs his way into an assignment to travel to Italy and
retrieve a rich man's son, Dickie Greenleaf, (Jude Law) living in some
particularly Edenic niche of Italy with Marge, (Gwyneth Paltrow) his
girlfriend. So yes, it's a guy, a girl, and a garden spot. All we need now
is the snake: enter Ripley, ingratiating himself into their confidences,
living with them, studying them. Initially it's all about adoration, but
that quickly escalates into jealousy, and from jealousy it's an easy step up
to the conclusion that they--or, Dickie--isn't really deserving of this
decadent, expatriate lifestyle. Or, at least isn't as deserving, which, to
Ripley--already operating under the Raskolnikov moral code (if I can do it,
I should)--serves as all the moral compulsion/permission he needs. When the
circumstances permit, and as the trailer tells us, he becomes Dickie,
assumes Dickie's identity, which is where The Talented Mr. Ripley really
gets fun.
We did love Jack Tripper's antics after all--always pretending to be one,
two, or more people at once. Ripley's doing essentially the same thing, only
now, when the coincidences start piling up against him, he simply kills his
way out. Anything but get caught. And he does have some Flashman (George
MacDonald Fraser's 'Ripley') type luck, but not too much. Meaning it's all
credible, more or less, even as the body count rises. Interestingly, too,
Minghella, instead of having his 'hero' (Ripley) be flat out bad, draws him
as strangely driven, each time torturing himself for what he 'has' to do,
etc. Which is a nice touch, allows us a little sympathy for an otherwise
unsympathetic character, enough that we even want him to get out of each
scrape alive, by his wits alone (per Bond). It's impressive, or,
impressively written, and never quite gets stale or overly predictable. The
last twenty minutes even tease us with a Clay Pigeons ending, by introducing
a private investigator (Philip Baker Hall, still Seinfeld's library cop) and
a run of particularly bad luck for Ripley. For him, though, there's always
an answer, a proven solution to anything: just start killing. And the thing
is, we kind of want him to. His most attractive quality, after all, is his
sociopathic nature, so the more it surfaces, the better. With Silence of the
Lambs, what we really wanted was more Hannibal. In The Talented Mr. Ripley,
we get it.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
John Beachem
 Directed by: Anthony Minghella
 Written by: Patricia Highsmith (novel), Anthony Minghella
"No matter what you've done, no matter how terrible, no one ever thinks that
they're a bad person." These words are uttered by Mr. Tom Ripley, played
perfectly by Matt Damon. The line perfectly sums up the kind of character
Ripley is. Looking back over several of Damon's previous films, one realizes
that while he has always done admirably, he has also been overshadowed by even
greater co-stars. In "Good Will Hunting", Robin Williams stole the glory, and
in "Rounders", audiences were so mesmerized by Edward Norton, that Damon was
overlooked. Here, Damon is able to display his considerable acting talents
without fear of being upstaged
Tom Ripley openly admits that he has three talents: forging signatures, lying,
and impersonating people. When Herbert Greenleaf (James Rebhorn) hires Tom to
go to Italy and bring his wayward son, Dickie (Jude Law), home, Tom puts these
talents to use. Tom soon becomes best buddies with Dickie and his fiancee Marge
(Gwyneth Paltrow). Tom soon becomes so obsessed with the lifestyle he now
lives, that after an "accident" on a boating trip claims Dickie's life, he
decides the best course of action would be to assume Dickie's identity. This
soon has him sinking deeper and deeper into the pits of depravity as he
attempts to keep his lie alive.
"The Talented Mister Ripley" is perhaps the type of film Hitchcock would have
made, were he a director in the '90s rather than the '50s and '60s. Beautifully
shot in Italy, a rather eerie sense lingers behind each scene, even before
Ripley changes. The main difference between this film and a Hitchcock piece is
the so-called subtext. This is most likely due more to the changing times than
to any directing or writing style. If this had been made by Hitchcock, the most
subtext that would have been present would perhaps have been Gwyneth Paltrow's
line: "It's a good thing we're not getting married soon, or else we'd have to
take Tom with us on the honeymoon". In this tale, made for '90s audiences, Tom
is blatantly homosexual, as are several other characters. Whether this should
be viewed as a fault or not is entirely at the discretion of the viewer.
The acting here is truly something to behold. As I've already said, Damon is
amazing, but the entire supporting cast is excellent as well. Jude Law in
particular delivers a particularly amazing performance. Gwyneth Paltrow nicely
underplays the role of the only person who doesn't believe Tom, and Phillip
Seymore Hoffman is perfect as a friend of Dickie's who begins to suspect
everything is not as it seems. Cate Blanchett is unfortunately underused in the
role of a woman who believes Tom is Dickie. Also look for an entertaining
appearance by Phillip Baker Hall as a hard boiled detective.
One of the film's largest flaws is the running time. At 139 minutes things
really do tend to drag, particularly at the beginning where perhaps a bit too
much time is spent setting the plot into motion and introducing the characters.
However, this is the film equivalent of a good "page turner" of a novel. It
does a great job of holding your interest, making you wonder how Tom is going
to get out of each situation created by his lie. An enjoyable film overall,
though far from flawless, I give "The Talented Mr. Ripley" four stars and a
recommendation to try and catch a matinee.
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
- "..It's better to be a fake somebody", than a real nobody.."
- Tom Ripley, THE TALENTED MR.RIPLEY
After the passionate and sensually seductive "The English Patient", everyone
were waiting in anticipation for director Anthony Minghella's next film. And
here it is. A sophisticated and brilliantly creepy film experience that will
mesmerize and shock you to the last frame. This is as far as psychological
thrillers go. Hichock's "Psycho", Kubrick's "The Shining", Demme's "The
Silence of the Lambs" and Fincher's "The Game" can be compared to this
spine-chilling masterpiece. Minghella offers you the guilty seasonal
pleasure of pure evil in its most luxuriant form.
 The film is based on Patricia Highsmith's 1955 cult novel with the same
title. Set in the mid-50s, the story begins in an exquisite garden party,
where Tom Ripley (Matt Damon ) is playing the piano for the cream of
aristocracy. When finished, he is stopped by a wealthy businessman that
mistakes him for being a friend to his son, Dickie (Jude Law). Tom is then
offered $1000 for going to Italy and bring his irresponsible son back from
his dream world to his father and the real life. Tom, pretending to know
Dickie, agrees. It is here we start suspecting that Tom is more than a good
looking pianist. He is starting to prepare for his trip, collecting all
information about Dickie, including his taste for music. In Italy, Tom is
instantly liked by Dickie and Dickie's cultured fiancé, Marge (Gwynlyth
Paltrow ), pretending to love jazz and having the same interests, while
soaking into luxury. Here, the audience and Dickie is about to discover that
there is a lot hiding under Tom's mask of innocence. He is a man of many
talents, including lies, forgery and such accurate impersonations of
different people, their voices and behavior, that hair will rice on your
heads. His solitary life makes him vulnerable and he is reaching for
attention and love. This is how it begins -- as a story of possession. Tom
wants Dickie. He wants to be the center of Dickie's world and, because he is
a new refreshment in Dickies privileged life, he is. At this time Minghella,
his cast, crew and audience are taking a wonderful vacation. You can almost
feel the fresh ocean breeze and gentle sun. You can relax in the lush
vineyards with Dickie, Marge and Tom, while enjoying the intoxicating blend
of jazz, suntan lotion and gin-and-tonic-on-the-rocks. This is heaven on
earth. Seductive, fresh. You never want to leave. But Dickie bores easily,
and when his old-time pal named Freddie (Philip Seymour Hoffman ) shows up,
Tom is brutally pushed into the background, with all feelings slowly
cropping up. Now he wants Dickie in another way. If he can't his love, he
will have Dickie's life, with all its pleasures..
Minghella is exploring the human nature, mind and soul. Like American Beauty
and Eyes Wide Shut, this is a film about two worlds, two plans of existence.
In one you are who you are and in another you are who you are supposed to
be. One is a world of masks and illusions, another is a reality that we all
hide. Tom Ripley is caught between these two worlds. He is charming,
beautiful and can make anybody like, love and respect him. But behind the
mask of innocence and charm, lurks another truth, that is more frightening
than anyone imagines. In truth he is searching, as everyone else, for
fulfillment, happiness, peace. In other words for a perfect life. His
methods, however, are close to paranoia. It is a frightening story about
class envy. Tom is so unsatisfied with his own life and himself, that he is
willing to sacrifice his soul, his identity, his life to become someone
else. He ends up in a solitary existence (portrayed in a powerful scene
where he alone unpacks his Christmas presents that he has bought for
himself). In numbness and emptiness. His life becomes an eternal fear and
charade, as he covers up his true identity with mask after mask, until he
looses it completely. In several scenes it seems that Tom is a homosexual,
in others he is definitely not. This is never explained and that is the
point. He becomes nothing more than a combination of masks, under which is
nothing, emptiness. Somewhere you can sense an echo of critique of the
modern society, where money, status and image is everything, including
fulfillment. In his bizarre and twisted search for happiness, Tom has
misunderstood money for bliss. There are moments, when he dreams of giving
someone the key to his dark soul, but he realizes that it is too late and
that there are too many demons in his past for him to start a new. His past
can not be washed away. Hurt, angry and confused, he couldn't understand
where he did go wrong.
Matt Damon (Saving Private Ryan and Dogma) plays this spine-chilling
chameleon with uncanny -- and quite spooky -- ease. It is frightening to see
him  float into different persons, copying their voices and personalities.
This talented young actor is a joy to behold and should get a nomination at
this years Academy Awards. In fact, I wouldn't be surprised to see Tom
Ripley become a recurring antihero -- like a Hannibal Lecter (returning next
year in "Hannibal"). Equally magnificent is the surprisingly fascinating
performance of Jude Law ("Gattaca", eXistenZ) as the sharp, fresh young
Casanova, reminding about Sonny from the "Godfather". Gwynlyth Paltrow
("Sliding Doors" and Shakespeare in Love) is impressive as always as the
smart, good-hearted Marge and Cate Blanchet (Elizabeth) is fabulous as the
elegant, sophisticated beauty that falls under Tom's spells, naively
believing his lies. Another interesting performance is provided by Hoffman
("Boogie Nights" and Magnolia). Speaking in a lockjaw tone, he is amusing as
the local "provider" of earthly pleasures. The supporting cast is equally
convincing.
This film is so beautifully shaped, that there are not enough words to
describe its perfection. The elegant cinematography, rich art direction,
precise editing and heavenly music (Gabriel Yared) combine in a colorful
blend that will electrify you from the first to the last frame. And yet, it
is not the visual aspect that makes this a powerful and memorable
experience. It is the intellect and sophistication of the plot and the
magnificence of the acting that create a frightening, thought provoking
epic, that even Hichock would not direct any better.
- "What ever you do..How ever terrible, how ever hurtful..No body thinks
that they are a bad person.."
- Tom Ripley, THE TALENTED MR.RIPLEY

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY (1999) *** Written and directed by Anthony 
Minghella; based on the novel by Patricia Highsmith. Photography, 
John Seale. Editing, Walter Murch. Production design, Roy Produced by 
William Horberg and Tom Sternberg. Cast: Matt Damon (Tom Ripley), 
Gwyneth Paltrow (Marge Sherwood), Jude Law (Dickie Greenleaf), Cate 
Blanchett (Meredith Logue),  Philip Seymour Hoffman (Freddie Miles), 
Jack Davenport (Peter Smith-Kingsley), James Rebhorn (Herbert 
Greenleaf),  Sergio Rubini (Inspector Roverini), et al. A Miramax 
Films/Paramount Pictures.release. 135 minutes. R (sex, language, 
violence)
Add another title to the continuing, large number of French film 
remade as  Hollywood productions. The original was the 1960 thriller 
"Plein Soleil," (called "Purple Noon" in Anglo countries) by Rene 
Clement (The Battle of the Rails,  Forbidden Games, Gervaise,  Is 
Paris Burning? etc.)
In the early 1950s wealthy American Mr. Greenleaf, whose son Philip 
(Maurice Ronet, 32) was whooping it up in Italy, hires young Tom 
Ripley (Alain Delon, 24) to go to Italy and bring back the playboy. 
The film was the beginning of very good-looking Delon's stardom, 
reinforced by the Italian "Rocco and his Brothers," "The Eclipse" and 
"The Leopard." Swiftly he reached superstar/heartthrob status, and 
very rich. Ironically for the man who played a killer and mpostor in 
"Plein Soleil," years later he was more than suspected of connections 
with the French Mafia --and worse.
Patricia Highsmith (1921-1995), an American expatriate to Europe 
where she was much appreciated, wrote five Ripley novels. "The 
Talented Mr. Ripley" is the second of the series and the first to be 
filmed. Later came Wim Wenders's "The American Friend."
The talented Mr. Minghella is British of Italian extraction, wrote 
and directed the imaginative "Truly Madly Deeply,". which is 
wonderful; directed "Mr. Wonderful" which is not but still good; 
scripted and directed the triumphant "The English Patient."
The original movie's is excellent, though its leads are Frenchified. 
In the remake, the main lines are the same. Tom Ripley, a pianist who 
lives in poverty in New York as a men's room attendant, is mistaken 
by shipbuilder magnate Herbert Greenleaf for a Princeton schoolmate 
of his profligate son. His recompense for returning the errant Dickie 
to the USA is $1,000. In the late 1950's, the movie's period, this 
now paltry sum wenta very long way abroad toward La Dolce Vita  fun, 
games, fast Alfa-Romeos, fast everything and everybody.
Tom, who has no special looks, suntan, or overt sophistication, worms 
his way into Dickie's household through talented, confidence-man 
tricks. Dickie lives high on the hog, is reasonably dissolute, crazy 
about jazz, plays the saxophone, seems happy with his would-be writer 
girl Marge.
He does mock Tom for being rather rusticated, but he becomes 
friendly, treats Tom like a pet, buys him suits and stuff, takes him 
around, notably to a jazz club (excellent music) where Tom scores 
through his musicianship. He does not score with women. There is 
already a soupcon of gayness or bisexuality. It will get amplified 
but still treated with kid gloves.
Tom, having tasted the "good" life,  cannily plans and plots away. 
But his ultimate aim is not immediately apparent --probaly not even 
to himself, as he is something of a secret psycho. Still, friendship 
is good, but, in complex ways  it leads to a major dispute at sea, 
during which Tom kills Dickie. Next thing you know is that Tom 
impersonates Dickie.
I will say little about the plot, twists, complications and the other 
parties involved in it. The developments are interesting, the 
zig-zags good, the suspense quite effective. But not as effective as 
it might have been.
There are several reasons for this. In no order of priority: too many 
improbabilities, narrow squeaks; coincidences. Too much tight timing. 
Too many tricks by Tom, yet they work without any major glitches 
when, in real life there would have been several. Tom paints himself 
into corner after corner, yet he always manages to get out of them in 
"accelerando" tempo.
Much of the story is elliptical. Apparently, the film would have come 
to over four hours had it not been severely edited. I presume that 
the cutting down process came at the price of some abruptness and 
muddling.
There are several, discreet influences of Hitchcok, including the 
decision to make this a character-driven movie. Including also 
passing details, such as Bernard Herrmann-like sounds. I wish 
Minghella had looked more closely  at what King Alfred had wrought. 
He would have learned that Hitch kept everything clear and clean, so 
that the viewer would not be distracted and waste time wondering or 
puzzling -- at the expense of suspense. Minghella director should 
have studied Hitchcock's "Strangers on a Train," which has several 
points in common with "Ripley" -- and was also based on a Patricia 
Highsmith novel, her first to be filmed.
The moral of "Ripley" is that, yes, you can fool all the people all 
the time. I will not get into the conclusion of the movie, but anyone 
who knows that other Ripley books followed can guess that Tom is a 
survivor.
In spite of my objections I find the movie taut (if not tight), 
gripping, colorful, even beautiful--in its many Italian settings. The 
supporting characters are interesting and effective. Small parts ( a 
young working-class woman, a deaf landlady); mid-parts (an Italian 
detective and an American detective; a likable choir master); major 
parts ( New York heiress Meredith and t  obnoxious American-abroad 
Freddie).  Gwyneth Paltrow as Marge is mostly decorative --and even 
then, seldom photographed through flattering lenses. Weaknesses 
notwithstanding, this is a three-star film

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TALENTED MR. RIPLEY, THE(director/writer: Anthony Minghella;
Screenwriter: based on the novel by Patricia Highsmith; cinematographer:
John Seale; cast: Matt Damon (Tom Ripley), Gwyneth Paltrow (Marge
Sherwood), Jude Law (Dickie Greenleaf), Cate Blanchett (Meredith Logue),
Philip Seymour Hoffman (Freddie Miles), Jack Davenport (Peter
Smith-Kingsley), James Rebhorn (Herbert Greenleaf ), Sergio Rubini
(Inspector Roverini), Philip Baker Hall (Alvin MacCarron), Celia Weston
(Aunt Joan), Rosario Fiorello (Fausto ), Stefania Rocca (Silvana), Ivano
Marescotti (Colonnello Verrecchia ), Anna Longhi (Signora Buffi),
Alessandro Fabrizi (Sergeant Baggio), Lisa Eichhorn (Emily Greenleaf),
1999)
"The Talented Mr. Ripley" offers another screen adaptation of the
Patricia Highsmith novel, the first being Rene Clement's "Purple Noon
(59)," a more straight- forward Hitchcock type of film that the French
actor Alain Delon couldn't do much with. Then there was Wim Wenders
better version, "The American Friend (77)," where Dennis Hopper got into
the sinister con man's character and showed how his criminal guilt was
related to Germany's postwar guilt. This time, in a grander and more
elaborate version, Tom Ripley (Damon) is a closet homosexual and someone
capable of killing anyone who interferes with his plans to assume
someone else's identity, which makes the crime thriller take on a
slightly different meaning from the way Highsmith intended it to be
perceived (she also wrote the novel for the great Hitchcock film,
"Strangers on a Train"). For her, life had no escapes or false
sentimentalities attached to it, it's just a trap that everyone is in
and can't get out of, exceptthey can try to make things better for
themselves through their cunning ways.
Anthony Minghella (The English Patient) will make the theme of the film
into an identity crises problem that Ripley has and allow the film to
become a character study about a sociopath who can complacently say
about himself, "I always thought it would be better to be a fake
somebody than a real nobody." He has removed most of the complicated
psychological layers of the character and made Ripley into a seemingly
nicer sort of person, the murder he commits is not premeditated as in
the novel but comes about when he is provoked beyond what his fragile
nature can take.
Ripley is first seen playing the piano in a borrowed Princeton insignia
blazer he got from the piano player he replaced at a rooftop reception,
and the ambitious NYC men's room attendant with the Ivy League looks is
spotted there by Herbert Greenleaf (Rebhorn), the shipping magnate, as
he approaches Ripley with the thought that he is a college classmate of
his son's and comes from the same upper-class strata, and he therefore
makes a snap decision to have Ripley go find his wandering playboy son
in Italy and urge him to come home. For his troubles, he will be paid a
thousand dollars and expenses.
Minghella paints a picturesque view of how these rich Americans in the
late 1950s live as ugly Americans in Europe, as the photography is
brilliant, with its array of luminous colors, from Mediterranean places
such as San Remo, Palermo, Roma, and Venice. The beautiful
scenery,villas, luxurious hotels, and splendid boat rides are just right
for getting the audience all excited about taking a look at how the
smart-set travel and spend their leisure time. This fits in nicely with
the touristy look of the film. But the story, as engrossing as it is,
can so easily be forgotten when the film ends.
This is a big budget Miramax film, not an arthouse personal film. Its
magnificent look took away any kind of noir intent the novel might have
had if the film was done in the pure form it was written in.
The film becomes primarily a character study about Ripley and not a film
that is too concerned about filling all the holes it has in its plot,
which are enough to sink a ship. Ripley is unsatisfied with his lot in
life and takes this once in a lifetime chance to be with the elite. He
manages to engage the manipulative and good-looking Dickie (Jude) in the
Italian seaside town he is idling away his time in, who seems to act
more queer than Ripley but apparently isn't, as he is sexually active
with his girlfriend Marge (Gwyneth), someone Ripley tries to befriend.
She just seems to be along for the ride- her part is a rather
inconsequential one, though it is in the same vein as the tiresome parts
she usually stars in, but here we are, at least, spared from seeing
tears come down her reddened cheeks. We just see her justifiable
petulant anger, as she gives Ripley that knowing bitchy look of
disapproval, indicating I know what you did to my Dickie.
Ripley's main intent, will be to concentrate on absorbing himself in
Dickie's personality and to try to ingratiate himself with the
womanizing and capricious wastrel- a part that Jude does a good job of
conveying, as he captures the character's nasty mood swings as well as
his goofy flippant side. One of the ways Ripley endears himself to
Dickie, is sharing in his love for jazz with him, even though, he is
only interested in the music because he knows that Dickie is. This
friendship, built on his telling Dickie the reason that his father sent
him here, will work out well as long as Dickie finds him amusing, but
the relationship soon becomes frayed, as Dickie becomes irritated with
some of his homoerotic gestures and grows tired of his lingering
presence around him.
When asked by Dickie what his one talent is, Ripley names three- forger,
liar, and impersonator. As the creepy young man will use his acquired
talents to ingratiate himself to his superiors; he is seen here as being
less a scam artist than he is of being someone trying desperately to fit
in where he doesn't belong. When he senses he can't be a hanger-on with
Dickie or Dickie's crowd anymore, he seizes the moment to kill Dickie
and take his identity, as he discovers he has a talent for murder also.
Having already maneuvered his way into Dickie's crowd, but with no great
lasting friendships in sight, his two greatest successes being with the
textile heiress Meredith Logue (Cate) and the wealthy Peter
Smith-Kingsley (Davenport). He met Meredith aboard the ship to Italy,
and told her that he is Dickie Greenleaf and managed to get her to think
they are kindred spirits and to have her fall pathetically in love with
him. She will turn up at odd moments in his travels and be portrayed as
the spoiled rich girl who doesn't know what to do with herself. The
trick in this relationship, is for Ripley to think quickly on his feet
so that she will not know that he is an impostor. His other positive
relationship will be a homosexual one, as Peter will know him as Ripley
and be used by him to cover his murderous tracks.
The strongest performance in the film comes from Freddie Miles (Philip
Seymour Hoffman), as an edgy, playboy friend of Dickie's, who smells out
Ripley but just fails to realize how deadly he can be. The scenes with
Freddie pushed the envelope wide-open and made the average intelligence
that Ripley possessed diminish in his chilling presence. Hoffman's
screen presence sparked keen interest in the story and made it seem more
powerful when he was onscreen. When he wasn't onscreen, the story wasn't
quite as fascinating, which made me wonder if he would have been even
more suited to play Ripley than the bland Damon was.
As the story gets violently out-of-hand, the pleasure in the film
becomes mostly in watching the obvious lies Ripley tells when confronted
by someone who knows that he is not being straight with them and yet he
is shown to still manage to think fast on his feet and come up with a
fitting story to put them off his trail. And, even if, there seems to be
little sympathy for the idle-rich during Ripley's spree, there also
becomes less and less sympathy for the psychopathic Ripley, who the
filmmaker was insidiously trying to get the viewer to identify with.
The only question remaining becomes not why Ripley is doing this but
whether or not he will get caught. Thereby, the film loses touch with
the character who falls too far from the graces of any rationality for
social acceptance, who is seen drowning in his own lies and trapped in
his own guilt-ridden nature. In the novel, Ripley is more of a
long-range scheming sociopath than he is in the film. The new
spontaneous twists in the film changes the mood of the story, and makes
it more creepy but not more endearing. I think the reason for that, is
because the Matt Damon part loses the character's rich rebellious flavor
and makes him become less an antihero than viewed as a serial murderer.
To fully identify with Ripley would require the viewer losing himself
totally in the character and seeing the world only through Ripley's
narcissistic eyes, and that is the way Minghella probably wanted one to
see the film and understand how Ripley operated. The problem with that,
is it simplified all the dark notions of Ripley's character and
lightened the burden of the story too much, trying to make it conform
with the '90s style of film. As a result, this seductive film comes to a
conclusion that failed to live up to the gamesmanship offered throughout
most of the story. The film became less meaningful the longer it went
on, and it ran for 139- minutes.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at
http://moviereviews.org/the_talented_mr__ripley.htm---
The most impressive part of The Talented Mr. Ripley isn't Matt Damon's
excellent performance or the picturesque Italian scenery, but rather
the abnormally disturbing chills that commence running down your spine
at the 10-minute juncture of the two-hour-plus film.
Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law) is a playboy in the truest of senses. He
lives in Italy off of the allowance his father provides, dates a
beautiful girl named Marge Sherwood (Academy Award Winner Gwyneth
Paltrow) and cheats on her constantly. But Dickie's father, Herbert
(James Rebhorn), isn't blind to his son's laziness and decides to do
something about it when he meets Tom Ripley (Matt Damon). The meeting
is really just a big misunderstanding, since Tom is wearing a borrowed
Princeton jacket that leads Herbert to assume he was Dickie's
classmate. Before long, Tom is given $1000 (a lot of money in the
1950's setting) to find Dickie in Italy and bring him back to his
father.  Although the film's trailer has no qualms about giving away
almost every twist and turn of the movie, I won't. I will only reveal
that Ripley is indeed talented and "would rather be a fake somebody
than a real nobody."  Dickie Greenleaf is a somebody.
One of the unnecessary characters in the film is Meredith Logue (Cate
Blanchett). Meredith is a playgirl who shuns her family's name and
money but clearly couldn't survive without the socialite status that
both provide.  She wanders in and out of the plot according to when it
is convenient to have her around and could be edited out altogether in
favor of a shorter and more concise film. The only drawback to
splicing Meredith away is that Cate Blanchett gives a remarkable
performance that over-shadows the more prominent Gwyenth Paltrow. This
is most ironic since Paltrow stole Blanchett's much deserved Best
Actress Oscar for Elizabeth when she won for her mediocre-at-best
performance in Shakespeare in Love.
The other standout is Matt Damon who confirms his status as one of the
finer up-and-coming actors with Good Will Hunting, Rounders, Saving
Private Ryan and now this under his belt. He makes Ripley an eerie and
frightening character while, at the same time, maintaining a sort of
dorky persona and managing to not overdue some rather subtle
homosexual themes. His character's success at becoming someone he
isn't is half due to his talent and half due to his luck. Damon smirks
just the right way when he catches a serendipitous break and uses
these fortunes to make the character all the more eerie and the film
all the more disturbing.
The Talented Mr. Ripley beautifully captures the essence of Italy. The
film's remarkable cinematography should go head-to-head with Anna and
the King on Oscar night. Scenes in Venice's St. Marx Square, Rome's
Piazza di Spagna (Spanish Steps) and other Italian landmarks are
magnificently shot and even compete with the actors onscreen for
attention.
The movie has many similarities to F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great
Gatsby.  Not the least of which is the concept of someone who obtains
money through illegitimate means by trying to be someone they're
not. This holds true of both Tom Ripley and Dickie here. The lavish
socialite lifestyles portrayed are similar and so is the deep, dark
secrets that just about everyone has.  Just don't confuse yourself,
The Talented Mr. Ripley may be good, but if you expect something on
par with The Great Gatsby, you will be sorely disappointed.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY" (Paramount Pictures)
"I always thought it would be better to be a fake somebody than
a real nobody," says Matt Damon as the chameleon-like Tom Ripley in
Anthony Minghella's creepy, star-studded thriller adapted from
Patricia Highsmith's novel. Tom Ripley's a leech, an amoral outsider,
obsessed with the hedonistic la dolce vida of Dickie Greenleaf, a
charming rogue, brilliantly played by Jude Law, whom he's sent to
bring home from Italy: "You're the brother I never had. I'm the
brother you never had."  Frustrated, Ripley not only covets Dickie's
privileged lifestyle, he wants to be Dickie, so much that his brutal
killer instincts take over. Ripley's so diabolically clever, so adept
at imitation and fabrication that he fools everyone except Dickie's
girl-friend - that's Gwyneth Paltrow, a bland Grace Kelly clone, which
is quite appropriate since the story's set in the '50s, when social
distinction and class status meant everything to this detached group
of people. Also involved in this spellbinding, sexually ambiguous,
melodramatic intrigue are Philip Seymour Hoffman, as Dickie's snotty,
suspicious friend, and Cate Blanchett, as a rebellious socialite who
believes Tom's ruse. (I'm curious: what if Blanchett had exchanged
roles with Paltrow?)  After The English Patient, Anthony Minghella
does not disappoint with this visual portrait of a pathological
liar. John Seale's cinematography is stunning - from the shimmering
waters of the Mediterranean to the twisting, cobbled alleys of Italy,
particularly the eerie final shot in which a mirrored Ripley is
reflected in a subtle myriad of distorted identities. Gabriel Yared's
music, primarily period jazz, truly complements the story. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The Talented Mr. Ripley is a complex,
provocative, potent 10. It's frightening yet fascinating.

Author
Shay Casey
Identity is a tricky thing. Many of us would like to think we have a single
identity, that it causes us to always act a certain way. But what Anthony
Minghella's latest film "The Talented Mr. Ripley," which was based on a
Patricia Highsmith novel, seems to explore is how "identity" can be whatever
one wants it to be at any particular moment. Its title character, Tom
Ripley, is a man of many voices, and a man with the kind of face everyone
recognizes, but can't really place. In short, he is a man whose identity may
be left open to dispute, and also a mentally unstable person who has few
qualms about killing those in his way. But what's disturbing about "The
Talented Mr. Ripley" isn't the murder. It's the fact that when seeing it
from Tom Ripley's perspective, it all makes a whole lot of sense.
The film opens with Ripley (Matt Damon) playing piano for several wealthy
members of the New York social scene. Fooled by his Princeton blazer,
Herbert Greenleaf (James Rebhorn), takes a liking to the charming young man,
who he believes went to school with his son Dickie. Being a lower-class boy,
Tom doesn't know what he's talking about, but decides to play along. Soon,
Greenleaf asks Tom to go to Europe, find Dickie, and convince him to come
home. When Tom finds Dickie (Jude Law), he is lounging around Italy with his
jet-setter girlfriend Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow). Dickie doesn't know Tom, but
thinks he might be an old college buddy he's forgotten. When Tom reveals his
father's plan, Dickie takes a special liking to the "talented" young man.
Soon, however, Dickie becomes bored with Tom's earnestness and wants to get
rid of him. Unfortunately, Tom doesn't want to give up the life he's come to
love. Thus begins a story in which Tom slowly but surely takes over Dickie's
identity, doing whatever necessary, including the occasional murder, to
maintain the illusion.
First and foremost, "The Talented Mr. Ripley" is a great-looking film. The
Italian locations, including Rome, Venice, and Naples, are filmed by
Minghella in sweeping, panoramic shots exhibiting the beauty of the
Mediterranean. The scenery is quite breathtaking. Minghella also engages in
some delightful Hitchcockian technique, beginning with throwback opening
credits that split the screen into shards as Ripley's face is first
revealed. More startling visuals can be had in Minghella's creative camera
positioning, including some very interesting use of mirrors, and in the way
he and his editor move between scenes, with unconventional wipes and fades
being the norm. All of this goes toward indicating the film's central idea
of Tom Ripley having a confused identity. There are several shots of a
mirror placed in front of Tom or Dickie, replacing the other's image.
Likewise, Tom is forced to look at himself in the mirror on several
occasions-an old trick often used when a character questions his identity or
motives, but effective nonetheless.
Minghella's film also boasts an impressive cast, all of which turn in solid
performances. Damon manages to put aside his so-called "boyish" charm and
turn it into something far more sinister. He smiles constantly, but not with
that cute, fleeting half-smile used by so many of today's teen heartthrobs.
Instead, Damon breaks out a huge, toothy grin so picture-perfect that when
he flashes it for the sixth or seventh time, it starts looking awfully
scary. During their screen time together, co-star Jude Law matches Damon
easily. His Dickie is a user, one who picks up friends everywhere he goes
until he gets bored with them, after which they are promptly forgotten. He
represents the most disgusting aspects of the "idle rich," taking material
wealth and a ring of friends for granted. Despite all this, it's not hard to
see how a man like Ripley could become enamored of a man like Dickie. He
lives a life of ease, one in which pleasure seems to find him, rather than
the other way around. Likewise, it's not hard to understand when Tom takes a
rather violent objection to his eventual "dumping." Gwyneth Paltrow is
solid, if unspectacular, in a role that starts off large, but turns up only
intermittently in the film's second half. Cate Blanchett shows up in a part
created exclusively for the film as an idle rich American girl who meets Tom
at the airport, believing him to be Dickie, and Philip Seymour Hoffman plays
Dickie's obnoxious friend Freddie, who turns out to be quite a bit smarter
than he looks. Both of the supporting actors deliver outstanding
performances, with Hoffman offering up some particularly good scene-chewing.
As played by this actor, Freddie is a character you can't take your eyes off
of, and every one of Hoffman's facial ticks and gestures indicates all we
need to know about his motives.
Fine performances, beautiful scenery, and artful direction notwithstanding,
there are problems with "The Talented Mr. Ripley" that I find difficult to
let pass without mention. First off, many of Minghella's "improvements" over
the novel (knowledge of which is gained purely from hearsay; I've never read
it) don't seem to help much at all. First of all, Minghella makes quite sure
that we all know Tom feels really, really bad about all the horrible things
he's done. This may help towards creating a more well-rounded character, but
often it's hard to look at Tom and not think, "If he hates it so much, why
doesn't he just stop?" I'm willing to hazard a guess that the film would
have been far more disturbing with a killer who completely rationalizes all
his crimes and feels little remorse afterward. Actively trying to garner
sympathy for Tom Ripley doesn't quite work. The addition of Blanchett's
character also makes the question of Tom's sexuality a bit muddled, thought
I really don't have a problem with that. The real problem with the character
is that she, like many of Minghella's changes, helps draw out the film's
ending unnecessarily. The movie is just too long. As a general rule, I don't
like saying this, because I have no problem with long movies in principle
(after all, "Magnolia" was over 3 hours long, and I loved that one). But
"Ripley" gets bogged down when Minghella has created more plot threads than
he knows what to do with. To put it simply, the first act of the film is
enthralling, a superb buildup to the first climax on a boat (you'll know it
when you see it), the second act interesting, if only for its machinations
on how Tom is going to get out of the mess he's created, while the final
half hour just leads us around in circles. I don't know why Tom has to get
into trouble by unlikely coincidence so many times (Blanchett's character
seems to exist solely for this purpose), only to have another similarly
unlikely coincidence get him out. Eventually, I started to wonder if all the
setup of Tom being such an accomplished con-man (with his clever wordplay
and voice impersonations) went all for naught when these coincidences, and
not his own cleverness, started getting him out of jams. Is Mr. Ripley
talented, or merely lucky?
Minghella is obviously trying to pay homage to Hitchcock here, and it's a
shame that he misses only one thing that Hitch knew: economy. A little
judicious snipping here and there would have made "The Talented Mr. Ripley"
a tighter film with clearer focus. Still, the issues raised by Minghella's
work must not be denied. The identity issue is at the forefront, and it is a
pertinent one. Yes, Tom Ripley runs around pretending to be another person
for a great deal of this film, and we must all agree that in our minds, this
is an unforgivable act. But there is a side of me thinking that Tom's
actions are a whole lot more understandable than they might seem at first
glance. After all, who among us does not change identity frequently, often
several times a day? We go to the office and carry ourselves one way. We go
home and carry ourselves another way. Are these not separate identities
residing in the same person? The only difference is that Tom Ripley has
another name to go along with his separate identity, which is a far more
interesting idea to base a movie on.
For more reviews, go to
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Land/4252/movies.html

Author
Steve Kong
Why did everyone love The Talented Mr. Ripley?  I can't understand.  Simply 
put up front, I hated The Talented Mr. Ripley.  I thought it was a bore and 
it was nothing special.
Mr. Ripley is Tom Ripley (Matt Damon).  Ripley is a loser who would rather 
be a fake somebody than a real nobody.  Ripley is also a good impersonator 
and is a gifted liar.  As the film opens Ripley meets the parents of Dickie 
Greenleaf (Jude Law).  Dickie's father asks Ripley if he would like to go 
to Italy to get his son Dickie to return to the states.  It seems that 
Dickie has been living off his father's money in Italy with his girlfriend 
Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow) and has no plans on returning.  Well, Ripley finds 
someone he really wants to be, Dickie.  Dickie is outgoing, personably, and 
extroverted.  Everything Ripley wants.  And a plus is that Dickie's 
girlfriend is not bad either.
I can see how The Talented Mr. Ripley can be an interesting film on someone 
taking someone else identity.  But, writer/director Anthony Minghella does 
it in such a way that I was looking at my watch multiple times during the 
film, I even got up once to look at the DVD jacket to see what the running 
time of the film was (a whopping 2 hours and 20 minutes if you're 
curious).  The sinker for the film isn't bad acting, the three main actors, 
including Damon, are great.  The sinker for the film is the pace.  When the 
murderous dark side of Ripley is shown, it is already past half the 
film.  The first half of the film is sheer boredom.  The second half of the 
film is sheer silliness.  The Talented Mr. Ripley is not what everyone 
says, it's not what the big critics say it is.  This is not a great film, 
it is rather a meandering snore fest with an ending that left me somewhat 
upset that I sat through the whole film.
As I mentioned before, the actors all do wonderful jobs with their 
parts.  Damon shows that he really can act and takes the lead role and 
injects some flair into it.  Damon does well with the Mr. Ripley role as a 
man who is truly confused with what he is and what he has done.  Jude Law 
whom I last saw in the terrible eXistenZ does better in this film (of 
course anything is better then that gore-fest eXistenZ).  Actually, Law 
does quite well in the film portraying the spoiled boy who can only show 
his affection to one person at a time.  And Paltrow does very well as the 
girlfriend who finds out more than she should have and which no one 
believes.  The actors in The Talented Mr. Ripley are great, too bad they 
didn't have a better film to carry their talents to the audience.
Maybe I was being a bit brutal with The Talent Mr. Ripley by saying that I 
hated it.  I dislike the film a lot, but I can't give it a Skip, Skip, Skip 
rating.  The acting talents in the film are too much and if on the off 
chance there is nothing of interest at the rental place, try out The 
Talented Mr. Ripley if you're a patient person and would like to see some 
good acting.  Else, try as hard as you can to find something else to watch, 
there are lots of movies out there that better entertain you for 2 hours 
and 20 minutes than this silly film.

Author
Walter Frith
Director Anthony Minghella was challenged to come up an encore to his
runaway 1996 hit 'The English Patient'.  That film won nine Oscars, some of
the most in history, and although Minghella will be hard pressed in the
minds of many to top that effort, 'The Talented Mr. Ripley' has a curious
air of looking like Minghella isn't even attempting to top it and that's a
good thing.  The same can be said for Quentin Tarantino when he made 1997's
'Jackie Brown', knowing it would never be as good as 'Pulp Fiction',
Tarantino didn't try to top it and good directors know their limitations and
when their opportunities to exceed present themselves.  The only time a
director tries to top a previous effort is usually when a previous film is
made for commercial reasons and studio interference is instrumental in
overkill for its sequel, usually in the case of a splashy, big budgeted
action film or a half baked comedy and these films usually have a different
director than the original film.
Matt Damon.  A talented actor and writer.  How many of you remember that he
DID win as Oscar for 1997's 'Good Will Hunting' as the film's co-author
along with Ben Affleck and Damon gave a dynamite, hard edged Oscar nominated
performance in it and the same year, played a young and determined lawyer
battling the odds in Francis Coppola's 'The Rainmaker'.  Damon couldn't have
looked more different in those two films and now plays the heavy in a film
that asks us to be happy with who we are and to truly not covet anything
that belongs to somebody else.
Set in the 1950's and based on the novel by Patricia Highsmith, 'The
'Talented Mr. Ripley' has an aristocratic look of Hitchcockian elegance and
doomed fate for many of its characters and treats the subject of murder as a
chilling and memorable nightmare for the audience and the people up on the
screen.  Tom Ripley (Matt Damon).  We see early that he isn't happy with who
he is because he borrows a Princeton University jacket one afternoon for a
reception in New York City where he plays the piano and is approached by a
rich husband and wife who ask if he ever knew their son Dickie Greenleaf
(Jude Law) at Princeton.  They offer to pay Tom's expenses to Europe with
the hope that he can go to Italy and convince their son to return to
America.  Tom's trip to the continent of culture is made difficult by his
encounter with Dickie.  When he does find him, he turns out to be a wholly
rude and obnoxious lout.  A man who thinks he is too good for his own
country and slices through his fortune with great comfort without any
appreciation of how he got it (from his rich parents) and treats only his
girlfriend Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow) with the slightest amount of courtesy.
Key to the plot are two other characters who are in the mix of things to add
tension and authenticity to the film's plot.  They are a wealthy woman
traveling in Europe (Cate Blanchett), who befriends Tom, and Dickie's
equally obnoxious peer Freddie Miles (Philip Seymour Hoffman).
Matt Damon's performance as Tom Ripley is rather low key but this is a
clever choice and decision on the part of both Damon and Minghella for
allowing it to be that way since the film's second half has a different and
totally appropriate look and we, the audience, are treated to a film with a
slow beginning that picks up later rather than one that starts off great and
then loses steam.
Mingehella uses a very even handed approach to the material and illustrates
his characters as a cross between high art and the bankrupt culture of
criminal violence and never lets one element rise above the other.  His
lavish and exquisitely filmed scenes around the European scene are marvelous
to watch and director of photography John Seale, who won the Oscar for 'The
English Patient', uses lighting as mood swings that look almost as good as
the personalities of the film's human contributors.  It's almost as if the
camera is a character in itself.  An unusual and impressive feat that looks
original and the film has lethal shots of beauty (and sometimes horror) at
almost every turn.
The film will have problems however, when it comes to Oscar nominations.
Jude Law's character disappears too quickly and Matt Damon has been upstaged
this year by too many other good performances.  Minghella also will suffer
comparisons to 'The Englsih Patient'.  It will be a sub-conscious thing with
Academy voters who would sing a different tune if this film had not been in
the shadow of another so revered.  What does all of this add up to?  For me,
one of the ten best films of 1999 since it pays tribute to great films of
the past, has a shocking and unexpected criminal twist for layers of
superlative suspense and teaches us all to be happy with who we are,
something so many of us have forgotten, often because of our overlearned and
under appreciated existences which in many cases are a lot better than we
give them credit for.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Homer Yen
If you've seen or heard some of the nominations from
various film critic societies around the country, then
you probably know that this movie has been mentioned
for a couple of reasons.  Many applaud the gorgeous
cinematography and the strong performances of the
cast.  Even within my esteemed group of online film
critics (The Online Film Critics Society), there is
general agreement that `Mr. Ripley' should be
remembered when Oscar nominations are announced.  Yet,
while the buzz surrounding this film is generally
good, I'm actually puzzled as to why this film is
getting so much praise.  My feelings for this film are
decidedly mixed, although it's one of the best-looking
average movies I've seen this year.
Mr. Ripley of the title is Thomas Ripley (Damon), a
person who seems to be skilled in many areas although
he works as a bathroom attendant.  For example, he can
speak in other people's voices with alarming accuracy.
 And, he's a pretty good pianist.  After a particular
recital, a man approaches him.  The man sees that
Ripley is wearing a Princeton-emblazoned jacket.  He
asks if he graduated from Princeton and if he knows
his son, Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law), since they are
the same age.  Of course he is just a lowly attendant
and the jacket is borrowed, but to hide his true
identity, he says yes.   The man, who is a shipping
magnate, hires Ripley to travel to Italy where Dickie
currently lives.  His task is to convince him to come
home.
Dickie is quite a character.  He has tons of charisma,
which is in part to his good looks, his elite taste,
and his wealth as the son of a shipping magnate. 
Dickie's world is tremendously lavish.  He has a
terrific, hilltop bungalow.  He spends his afternoons
on his sailboat.  And he frequents the best clubs in
town.  Ripley arrives and manages to successfully
blend into Dickie's life and meet some of Dickie's
friends.  These include fiancée Marge (Gwyneth
Paltrow) and, a well-connected partygoer (Phillip
Seymour Hoffman).  Up this point, which is about 45
minutes into the movie, I am really enjoying how
Dickie's and Ripley's friendship are evolving.  But
all of a sudden, Dickie and Ripley don't see
eye-to-eye anymore.  Dickie becomes bored with Ripley.
 And Ripley doesn't want to give up this newly
acquired lifestyle.  At about this point, the film
moves away from being a glossy drama, and becomes
decidedly dark and inexplicably bloody.  It was as if
the film started out in one direction, and then made a
sharp right turn.  
Any praise for this film should be directed at Damon's
nice performance and the terrific cinematography.  The
film takes place in wonderful locations throughout
Italy.  The camera skillfully catches the romance and
beauty of beach towns, the awesome architecture of
Rome, and the quaintness of other small villages.  It
was certainly enough to make me want to visit Italy
sometime in the future.  Every scene is handsomely
shot while the sets are opulent, and certainly would
make many of us envy the Dickie Greenleaf lifestyle. 
But despite all that it strives to be, the beauty of
the film was only skin deep.  
As I left the theatre, I was reminded of a recent film
called `A Perfect Murder.'  Ironically, it also
starred Gwyneth Paltrow as a distressed woman who
suspects that foul play is in the air.  That
production was undeniably glossy, and the performances
were solid.  But, it felt oddly empty.  `Mr. Ripley'
is slightly glossier and has slightly better
all-around performances.  Yet, it still felt oddly
unsatisfying.  I think that the problem is that once
the film abruptly changes direction, the audience's
expectations have been ruined.  And that's too bad,
because the outset of the film oozed with potential.

Author
Indra Moeljadi
Everybody has one talent. Ronaldo's talent is scoring goals. Monica
Lewinsky's talent is smoking cigars. Jay Leno's is making jokes about Monica
Lewinsky's talent. Mine talent is unclear yet, it's somewhere between making
things to break up suddenly or writing these reviews. Tom Ripley's talent is
impersonating people.
Tom Ripley (Matt Damon) was just a regular guy. A toilet-cleaner, who loves
to play piano. But a Princeton badge on your borrowed jacket can do many
things. For Tom, it opened a way to go to Italy to find Dickie Greenleaf
(Jude Law) and to make him go back to New York, back to his parents.
So there he goes to Italy. In Italy, he's not the Tom Ripley he used to be.
He's just someone else. Most of the time he's Dickie Greenleaf. Then things
happen. Tom's talent seems to obsess him, and he goes great ways to fulfill
his obsession. All that to be a fake somebody than to be a real nobody.
What's wrong with this guy? Girls will love him, because Matt Damon is
playing that role, and he can play piano. I still wish I could play the
piano.
The movie is very slow. And the whole theme is basically the same as Single
White Female. But in SWF it's set in an apartment, while this movie is set
all over Italy in the late 50s. I got bored watching this movie. It was too
slow, too long, too obvious (you could know what would happen next), too
Matt Damon, and not enough chicks (just Gwyneth Paltrow and Cate Blanchett).
To tell you the truth, I'm still wondering why this movie could be nominated
for an Oscar. It would never get my vote.
Well, I don't know. I'm not a real movie critic. I'm just writing what I
think. And I know most of the people would disagree with what I'm saying
here, but maybe that is my talent.
Indra Moeljadi
just like every other person, would love to be a fake somebody

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY
(Paramount/Miramax)
Starring:  Matt Damon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jude Law, Cate Blanchett, Philip
Seymour Hoffman, Jack Davenport, James Rebhorn.
Screenplay:  Anthony Minghella, based on the novel by Patricia Highsmith.
Producers:  William Horberg and Tom Sternberg.
Director:  Anthony Minghella.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, brief nudity, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  135 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     For the life of me, I don't know why any film-maker would take on the
thankless task of literary adaptation. If he takes too many liberties
(see: Roland Joffe's THE SCARLET LETTER), he risks derision. If he is too
scrupulously faithful (see: ANGELA'S ASHES), he risks creating a narrative
without its own identity as a film. You don't want to infuriate fans of
the source material (Paul Verhoeven's STARSHIP TROOPERS), and you don't
want to sacrifice a unique artistic perspective just to get every detail
right (THE GREEN MILE). Guaranteed name recognition comes with a price. 
It is, simultaneously, a can't-miss and a can't-win proposition.
     If Anthony Minghella feels that pressure, he sure doesn't show it. He
squeezed and compacted THE ENGLISH PATIENT's complex narrative, and came
up with a beautiful old-fashioned romantic drama. Now, in taking on
Patricia Highsmith's THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY, he has completely re-made
the story's titular morally-ambiguous protagonist. The result may give
purists fits, but it's a strangely invigorating piece of psychological
suspense. Matt Damon plays Tom Ripley, a young New Yorker living just
close enough to lives of privilege to understand he doesn't live one
himself. A unique opportunity arises when shipbuilding magnate Herbert
Greenleaf (James Rebhorn) offers to send Tom to Italy, believing Tom to be
a college classmate of his son Dickie (Jude Law). Greenleaf wants the
free-living Dickie to return home, and hopes his "friend" Tom can persuade
him. Tom, however, finds Dickie's life of expatriate revelry  far too
fascinating to be concerned with much besides ingratiating himself into it
-- by any means necessary.
     Those familiar with Highsmith's novel will remember Ripley as a con
artist (he uses his address and IRS letterhead to collect "underpaid
taxes" from naive self-employed artists) who coolly considers murdering
Dickie. Minghella is more interested in the Tom who initially sees his
trip to Europe as a fresh start, and whose actions snowball into something
he can no longer control.  Minghella's RIPLEY turns Tom into something far
more than an admittedly fascinating portrait of amorality. He's a man
obsessed with fitting in who ultimately has no chance of fitting in -- a
twisted knot of self-loathing, self-justification, fear, exhilaration and
calculation. Those who would knock Matt Damon's unconventionally creepy
performance as too bright-eyed aren't looking at Tom Ripley the way I
think Minghella wants us to look at him: as a fellow unable to stop
himself from performing his entire life in search of acceptance for
something he's not.
     Minghella combines this twisty characterization with direction that
occasionally leans too heavily on visual metaphor. When Dickie discovers
Tom playing dress-up with his clothes, Tom hides behind a mirror, his head
appearing above a reflection of Dickie; when Dickie's fiancee Marge
(Gwyneth Paltrow) confronts Tom with suspicions of his duplicity, he
stands before her (literally) exposed. The cues can feel a bit 
heavy-handed, but Minghella can also stage scenes where tension appears in
unexpected ways -- a shouted confession unheard, a lingering moment caught
in the space between two lies. It's one thing to direct actors well, which
Minghella certainly does here (Philip Seymour Hoffman is particularly fine
as an icily condescending ugly American). It's rarer to find someone who
can find all the right notes in character interaction, from the turn of a
phrase to the placement of an uncomfortable silence.
     Many viewers are likely to be put off by THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY's
less-than-tidy conclusion, which serves as a bookend to the film's
arresting opening shot. Of course, that's just one of the many ways that
Anthony Minghella risks losing his audience. He interrupts a relationship
drama with a bloody confrontation; he changes some characters from the
novel radically, and introduces new ones. His interpretation of THE
TALENTED MR. RIPLEY is undeniably a departure from Highsmith, but it's a
departure that works the way any thoughtful re-interpretation can work. 
The talented Mr. Minghella has fashioned a seductive, sad portrait of a
man helplessly watching the loss of his own soul. It may be fitting that
Tom Ripley, master chameleon, has taken on yet another new shape for this
version of his story.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     For me one of Alfred Hitchcock's best films is DIAL M FOR MURDER.
It is a stage play barely adapted for film, but it is a very good stage
play.  We have in it a murderer who is a formidable force.  His talent
is not that he strong or fast.  He does not come popping out at
anybody.  He does not outrun anyone.  His skill is that he thinks very
well on his feet.  You can actually just see him thinking out
possibilities and almost unerringly find the right one.  Once he makes
a decision he stays with it.  He never seems troubled by uncertainty.
THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY is about a very similar sort of criminal
genius.  Quite a bit younger, but no less mentally agile is Tom Ripley
(played by Matt Damon).
     It is 1958.  Tom Ripley is, to use his words, "a real nobody," a
bathroom attendant and sometime piano player.  But he is good a mimicry
and at forging signatures.  He decides that it is better to be a fake
somebody than a real nobody.  When he comes in contact with the
Greenleaf family, wealthy from shipping, he passes himself off as a
friend from Princeton of Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law), currently in
Italy.  He is treated like one of the family for a while, and Dickie's
father Herbert Greenleaf (James Rebhorn) has a proposition for Tom.  He
will pay Tom $1000 to go to Italy and convince Dickie to give up his
playboy ways and return home.  Tom goes, meeting Meredith Logue (Cate
Blanchett) along the way.  In Italy Tom arranges a meeting and
befriends Dickie and his fiance Marge Sherwood (Gwyneth Paltrow).  All
the while he is putting together plans to kill Dickie and, where
necessary for his plan, take his place.  Director Anthony Minghella's
screenplay begins with this setup and brings the characters together
and then lets them simmer together in the warm Italian sun for nearly
an hour, choosing the leisurely pace of a good Agatha Christie film.
The tempo is slow and thrills are cerebral, but we do get to meet and
understand the characters and it pays off in the second half of the
film.  We see that in more than one sense that Ripley is expert in
playing people.  His one failure is to fool the unctuous Freddie Miles
(Philip Seymour Hoffman), an old friend of Dickie.  Freddie takes an
immediate dislike to Tom, complicating the plan.  Eventually there is a
murder and Ripley has to be both himself and Dickie Greenleaf for a
while.  He is walking a tightrope and must remember with each person
what version of reality he is trying to project.  And as the film
progresses his step must become ever more careful.
     The roles must have seemed like a little bit of dj vu for the two
male leads.  Damon played the genius of lower class origins in GOOD
WILL HUNTING.  Jude Law played the aristocrat whose very identity is
borrowed by someone else in GATTACA.  In any case Law seems very much
at home in his roll as the young jazz-loving jet setter.  Damon seems
sufficiently controlled.  Paltrow is regal.  Special mention should be
made of one of the bit parts.
     One of the ever more familiar faces showing up in films is Philip
Baker Hall who in here has a small but important roll as an American
lawyer.  Hall, in his late 60s, is able to project an absolute
authenticity of authority and at the same time a magnetism of a person
in a position of power.  Anyone who has seen the film HARD EIGHT was
mesmerized by his performance from the very first scene.  He has been
in films since the early 1970s, but probably because of his performance
in HARD EIGHT he is showing up in a lot of major films.
     The plot of THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY does not take a whole lot of
thought before contrivances become apparent.  But under the influence
of the warm Italian sun, the audience is lulled into going along with
it and even being thrilled as Ripley gets himself into and out of minor
scrapes in his amoral attempts to steal a life.  I give the film a 6 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
John Sylva
The Talented Mr. Ripley (1999) by John Sylva    Rating: A
In forty years or so, as people do now with such movies as "Bringing Up Baby"
or "Gone With the Wind", people will look back on one film that starred a chunk
of the A-list of actors that made their mark in the movie industry during the
early years of the 21st century.  The cast of this movie will consist of the
next Audrey Hepburn-s, the next Clark Gable-s, and so on.  That film is "The
Talented Mr. Ripley," a haunting, stunning thriller that follows the same form
legendary director Alfred Hitchcock uses in films such as the 1960 spellbinding
classic, "Psycho".
His last film being 1996's war/love story "The English Patient", Anthony
Minghella writes and directs this masterful, chilling character study with one
of the most appealing, talented casts of any film this year.  Adapted from the
Patricia Highsmith novel of the same name, the screenplay for "The Talented Mr.
Ripley" is written to perfection, starting with a long, thorough exposition
that leads to a phenomenal climax, followed by probably the most clever,
thoughtful ending of the year.  From first frame to last, "The Talented Mr.
Ripley" gives you your money's worth with humor, suspense, and not one, not
two, but four Academy Award worthy performances that will certainly enhance
each actor's career.
On the surface, "Ripley" may appear to be just another entry into the ongoing
dice âem up flick genre, but the film goes much deeper than anything has in
that area, making a film comparable to the brilliance of "Psycho."  Thomas
Ripley is a Norman Bates for the new millennium, a tragic, unsettling character
whom you want to associate with and feel for, but in the end you can't help
hoping he fails in his conquest of murder and lies.
The film, set in the 1950's follows a young sociopath named Thomas Ripley (Matt
Damon) who is persuaded by a man who is impressed with Tom's piano skills,
Herbert Greenleaf (James Rebhorn) to go to Italy and retrieve his wealthy,
first-class flirt of a son, Dickie (Jude Law).  Ripley accepts the offer, and
sets off to Italy.  Upon his arrival at a crowded airport, he runs into
Meredith Louge (Cate Blanchett), a wealthy business woman who works in the
textile industry, whom he will introduce himself to as Dickie Greenleaf.  From
here, it's apparent Ripley would like to live the life of Dickie instead of his
own, and upon his first meeting with Dickie, that thought becomes an obsession,
which becomes a murder.  
"Ripley" has Tom posing as an old classmate of Dickie's from Princeton, and as
a result, Dickie and girlfriend Marge Sherwood (Gwyneth Paltrow) automatically
befriend him and Dickie invites Tom stay at his home.  Tom falls in love with
the lifestyle that Dickie and Marge live daily, and also with Dickie as a
person.  Where things get even more complicated is when Tom decides to assume
Dickie's life, creating himself a fake I.D., and introducing himself to
everyone except Marge as Dickie Greenleaf.  As the plot unfolds, Meredith will
start to date Dickie, and once things really get going, a fair number of lives
have been taken.  It will be Ripley's ultimate task to maintain his fake
identity, but the goings get harder for him once Meredith, who knows him as
Dickie, and Marge, who knows him as Tom, start interacting.
"The Talented Mr. Ripley" is similar to last fall's oddball comedy "Being John
Malkovich" in a variety of ways, although in "Malkovich," being someone else is
as easy as crawling into their brain through a portal, but in "Ripley," you
must continue killing and lying to maintain your new identity.  These are two
of many recent films that focus on a character wanting to be someone else. 
What is it about changing one's identity that perplexes so many filmmakers to
the point where they write feature films about the subject matter?  "Ripley" is
the only one that can be classified as film noir, and is the most effective of
all in that this is undoubtedly, the best thriller of the year.
Matt Damon first broke into Hollywood two years ago with "Good Will Hunting,"
and ever since has had the boy next door, goody-goody reputation following him.
 His performance here in "Ripley" is one that will erase his old reputation,
and bring on a more sophisticated feel to him.  His performance two years ago
in "Hunting" was a shock, but Damon is as it his best yet in "Ripley,"
delivering his lines with an eerie, powerful sense.  Damon would seem to be the
last person who could realistically play a villain in a film, but here he
proves he can be the good guy just as well as he can the bad.
Jude Law, a lesser known actor who has appeared in fiction flicks as "Gattaca"
and "eXistenZ," also turns in a fine performance as his charismatic character. 
Dickie is a mostly realistic, yet somewhat over the top character who will be
your best friend one moment, and the next be your worst enemy.  
Gwyneth Paltrow is even more Oscar worthy here than she was in last year's
Academy Award Best Picture "Shakespeare in Love," showing off her gleaming
dramatic chops in the film's final forty five minutes.  Paltrow's character is
too light during the film's first half to get any award recognition for her
performance as the confused, devastated Marge, but now Paltrow shows comedy
isn't the only genre she can master.
As far as supporting roles go, "Ripley" has an array of fine actors who are
underused as their interesting characters.  Among them being Cate Blanchett,
who was robbed last year of an Oscar from one of this film's co-stars, Gwyneth
Paltrow, in the dazzling film "Elizabeth." A second Oscar nomination in a row
is most probably out of the question for Blanchett, as although she shines as
her important character, she is only fed ten to twelve minutes screen time from
Minghella's screenplay.  Blanchett's role should have and could have been
enhanced, as Meredith Louge is not just another part of Ripley's life, she is
the link between the real world and the world that Ripley has created for
himself.  On the other hand, Phillip Seymour Hoffman comes of rather restrained
as his wise cracking, obnoxious character of Freddy Miles, a close friend of
Dickie's who steals the attention that Tom gets from Dickie around halfway
through the film.  Other supporting actors who deserve more screen time include
Jack Davenport as a close friend of Marge's, and Jack Rebhorn, as the concerned
Herbert Greenleaf.
"The Talented Mr. Ripley" is an unpredictable, unforgettable motion picture,
that will certainly hold its own at the Oscars in March.  Every element of the
film is haunting, from the lively musical score to the beautiful Italian
locations, "Ripley" will follow you in your mind for days after your viewing
it.  Anthony Minghella's wonderful masterpiece is clever in the way that it
absorbs you, making you believe the friendship between Tom and Dickie, and then
throws numerous plot twists at you, wrapping you around its story even more. 
And that's where the film truly succeeds, in a way that it will challenge your
thoughts about being another person, as the violent images that occur from
Ripley's longing to become Dickie are reason enough to just be happy with
yourself.
The Bottom Line: Brilliant screenplay and direction make "Ripley" a thrilling,
haunting drama.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Buena Vista International on February 25, 2000; 
certificate 15; 140 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Anthony Minghella; produced by William Horberg, Tom Sterngerg.
Written by Anthony Minghella; based on the novel by Patricia Highsmith.
Photographed by John Seale; edited by Walter Murch.
CAST.....
Matt Damon..... Tom Ripley
Jude Law..... Dickie Greenleaf
Gwyneth Paltrow..... Marge Sherwood
Cate Blanchett..... Meredith Logue
Philip Seymour Hoffman..... Freddie Miles
Jack Davenport..... Peter Smith-Kingsley
James Rebhorn..... Herbert Greenleaf
Sergio Rubini..... Inspector Roverini
Philip Baker Hall..... Alvin MacCarron
For years Hollywood made films with black and white characters -- only 
recently has it realised that people are not so simple, and come in shades of 
grey. Heroes are more flawed these days than they were fifty years ago, and 
villains no longer sit twiddling their moustaches, giggling maniacally or 
stroking kittens. Anthony Minghella is one of the few filmmakers whose work 
goes even further. He doesn't just throw his characters a few ambiguous 
traits. He makes us respond to them in challenging ways.
Consider his Oscar-winner "The English Patient", which required us to 
sympathise with the passion and pain of a man who could be cold, selfish and 
cowardly. And now "The Talented Mr. Ripley", adapted from the first novel in 
a series by Patricia Highsmith, whose hero is a deceptive psychopath we fear 
but feel compassion for.
His name is Tom Ripley (Matt Damon), a bathroom attendant who is mistakenly 
believed to be a graduate of Princeton University by rich shipbuilder Herbert 
Greenleaf (James Rebhorn). Tom is only happy to play along; later, to another 
character, he will admit his greatest talents to be "telling lies, forging 
signatures, impersonating practically anybody."
Greenleaf thinks Tom was a classmate of his son Dickie (Jude Law), and 
persuades him to take an all-expenses-paid trip to Italy for the purpose of 
bringing the chap back to America. Dickie is living in Mongibello with his 
girlfriend Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow), spending his easy-going days lounging on 
the beach in pursuit of such epicurean delights as eating, drinking, 
screwing, sailing and saxophone-playing.
Tom ingratiates himself without difficulty, and has a great time living with 
Dickie and Marge, accompanying them on all their adventures. He's a yes-man, 
always smiling, wanting to be shown things; he makes Dickie feel important. 
But the rich brat gets fed up with this, and decides to toss Tom aside. "We 
should spend some time apart," he says. "You can be a leech! You bore me!"
Tom's response is to murder the man (who he had fallen in love with), assume 
his identity and use it to arrange a life for himself in Rome. He changes his 
appearance just enough to match Dickie's passport photo, checks into hotels 
under his name, buys things with his traveller's checks. It's better to be a 
fake somebody, he reckons, than a real nobody.
I expected "The Talented Mr. Ripley" to be one of those movies where we get 
some sort of dark glee out of the protagonist's villainous actions. And it 
could have worked well on that level, but Minghella's sincerity makes it 
something more compelling -- a torrent of conflicting emotions, like I 
suggested in my opening paragraphs. We share the love and anger Tom feels 
toward Dickie, because he is a selfish child who treats other people as 
playthings, but does become wonderfully warm when paying attention to 
someone. We agree with Dickie's eventual judgement that Tom is creepy and 
phoney, and yet it seems so unfair, because we sense Tom had never had any 
good fortune before meeting Dickie and Marge.
The biggest contradiction throughout the film is the one between our 
revulsion and seduction. Dickie's life is a grotesquely lazy one, and Tom 
living it as an impostor is downright evil, but then again, we can sort of 
see the attraction. Minghella has updated the setting of the novel by almost 
a decade, so the story now takes place in the late '50s, and coincides with 
Italy's 'dolce vita' period. Cinematographer John Seale captures its dreamy, 
boozy atmosphere with images of rich, luxurious colour, and it is, as Tom 
puts it, "one big love affair".
Even the earliest moments of this, though, have an underlying tension to 
them. Before meeting Dickie and Marge, Tom has introduced himself as Dickie 
to a cute young woman named Meredith (Cate Blanchett), so from the outset we 
know he's plotting something. Meredith forms a fascination with Tom that acts 
as an ironic counterpoint to his own obsession with Dickie, but her character 
is really in the movie to complicate the plot. A lot of its second half, you 
see, revolves around Tom keeping up both of his identities, and much tension 
is generated by this one idea, with Tom having to carry on creating lies to 
keep his head above water with different sets of people. The longer he goes 
without getting discovered, the more tense things get, because it's more 
improbable he can stay in control of such a labyrinthine web of deceit.
At the centre of this breathtaking thriller are some great performances. Law 
and Philip Seymour Hoffman are perfect as young, arrogant members of the idle 
rich, giddily staggering around with excited eyes, ecstatic at both the 
beauty of their surroundings and the knowledge they could buy them. Paltrow 
is uncomplicated, clear and honest as the one normal character in the 
picture, who eventually realises what Tom's up to, but can't get anyone to 
believe her. And then there is Damon, who struts with force and confidence 
when pretending to be Dickie, but plays Tom as someone constantly faking a 
nervous and plain front. That's pathetic, because it shows he's got no 
confidence in his own personality, and chilling, because he doesn't mind 
killing for somebody else's.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic 

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Talented Mr. Ripley (1999) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Matt Damon,
Gwyenth Paltrow, Jude Law, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Cate Blanchett, Jack
Davenport and James Rebhorn. Written and directed by Anthony Minghella.
 Tom Ripley's credo is simple: It's better to be a fake somebody than a
real nobody.
 That drive to shed his own personality and put on the persona of another
is the crux of "The Talented Mr. Ripley."
 The movie, based on the cult novel by Patricia Highsmith, is an
intelligent thriller about a nobody who goes to fatal lengths to become a
somebody.
 By mistake, piano player-tuner Tom Ripley (Matt Damon) is mistaken by
shipping magnate Herbert Greenleaf (James Rebhorn) as a fellow Harvard
graduate of his son, Dickie. Little does Greenleaf know that Tom works as a
men's room attendant.
 It seems Dickie (Jude Law) does not want to enter the family's shipping
business, so he is living and playing in Italy, ignorning his father's
entreaties to return home.
 Tom is offered $1,000 plus expenses to go to Italy and persuade Dickie to
return home.
 Instead, Tom falls in love with Dickie's lifestyle, determining that this
is the way he wants to live.
 But every fairy tale must come to an end, thus it is with Tom and Dickie.
 Dickie, who is spoiled, self-centered and a bit cruel, begins tiring of
Tom and sends him packing.
 Tom and Dickie fight and during the scuffle Dickie is killed.
 Thus, Tom flees to Rome where is able to begin a new life as Dickie Greenleaf.
 The joy of Oscar-winner Anthony Minghella's movie is watching the webs Tom
continually spins, the lies he constantly gets caught in and the way he
always extricates himself from the most perilous situations without
exposing himself.
 Minghella's Ripley differs from Highsmith's in one crucial sense:
Minghella's Ripley is not as amoral or cold-blooded as the novel's.
 For example, Dickie's death is a spur of the moment crime of passion and
rage rather than a calculated act.
 In a sense this allows you to feel some sympathy for Ripley, while at the
same time you can abhor his actions and immorality.
 In Damon's hands, Ripley is a gawky outsider, his nose always pressed
against the window, watching the rich play, envying them their position.
 Ripley has a few talents, including mimicry and forgery, both which abet
him in his quest for the riches he so badly desires.
 Damon plays Ripley as a sycophant, a parasitic hanger-on with an air of
naivete. He lacks the worldiness and sophistication of those around him.
Yet he is always willing and eager to please.
 Oscar-winner Gwyneth Paltrow makes a sweet Marge Sherwood, Dickie's
fiance. She is warmer, more compassionate than Dickie, opening her arms to
the young stranger who latches on them.
 Yet after Dickie's disappearance she hardens and becomes determined to
uncover the truth.
 Minghella has turned the book into a sort of class struggle with Ripley
taking whatever extremes necessary to raise himself and remain in a sphere
that otherwise would be out of his reach.
 Jazz also plays a role in the movie. Tom, a classical pianist, studies and
memorizes various jazz works in order to get close to Dickie. And the way
Minghella has Damon deliver some of Tom's explanations about events make
them sound like jazz riffs as he covers his tracks.
 "The Talented Mr. Ripley" is a very pretty movie, the scenery, sets and
costumes covering the underlying darkness of Tom's obsession.
 It is a long movie, nearly two hours and 20 minutes, but the time passes
quickly as Tom flies from one seemingly impossible dilemma to another
without so much as taking a deep breath.
 Offering able support are Philip Seymour Hoffman as Freddie Miles,
Dickie's fey friend, Cate Blanchett as Meredith, the young woman who loves
Tom/Dickie without realizing his deception and Jack Davenport as Peter
Smith-Kingsley, who befriends Tom without realizing his true intentions.
 "The Talented Mr. Ripley" is sure-fire entertainment, a solid piece of
filmmaking. To his credit, Minghella takes his time telling the story,
allowing us to get to know the characters before igniting the main
storyline.
 You will walk out of "The Talented Mr. Ripley" unsure of your feelings
about young Tom. You can be outraged by his lack of morality and shocked by
his behavior, but deep down - in that dark place only you can see - you may
find a spark of admiration.
 And that is the genius of Minghella's movie.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Steve Rhodes
"I always thought it would be better to be a fake somebody than a real
nobody," Tom Ripley (Matt Damon) says in his most revealing line of the
Hitchcockean tale, THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY, by writer/director Anthony
Minghella (THE ENGLISH PATIENT).  Tom, an almost accidental killer, is
the hero of the story.
It all starts when Tom, pretending to be a Princeton grad, meets Herbert
Greenleaf (James Rebhorn).  Herbert likes Tom and thinks he's just the
man to go to Italy to bring back Herbert's wayward son, Dickie (Jude
Law).  Accepting Herbert's $1,000, the innocent, well-scrubbed Tom is
off on his big assignment to Europe.  The film, which could as easily
have been ironically titled AN INNOCENT ABROAD, follows Tom as he
quickly moves up in the world.
With his milk white skin and nerdy glasses, Tom stands out on the beach
among the bronzed bodies of the idle rich in Italy.  Law (GATTACA), who
looks like a Greek god, is perfectly cast as a guy who fully intends to
live the rest of his life on his father's money.
Set in 1958, the movie's lush color palate makes it look like it was
filmed back then.  John Seale's inviting cinematography gives the
picture a travelogue gloss.   But with creepy music reminiscent of an
old thriller and with the sinister events of the story, you may have
second thoughts about your initial inclination to leave the theater to
book your seat on the next flight out.
Using his newfound knowledge and love of jazz, Tom becomes bosom buddies
with Dickie, a saxophone player.  Soon Tom, Dickie and Dickie's fiancée,
Marge Sherwood (Gwyneth Paltrow), become inseparable.  Not only does
Damon play out of character as a sociopath, Paltrow too renounces her
usually tougher roles for the part of a vulnerable woman who becomes
trapped in the center of a whirlwind that she doesn't understand.  All
of the acting is superb, but it is Damon's Oscar quality work that
stands out the most.
Dickie says that everyone has one talent (Marge's is making the best
martinis) and asks Tom what his is.  With deceptive honesty, he replies,
"forging signatures, telling lies and impersonating other people."
Truer words were never spoken.
Dickie grows to love Tom, but Tom is fickle.  As Marge explains, his
attention is like the sun.  When it's on you, you feel warm and happy,
and, when it isn't, you're cold.
Most of the surprising story, based on a Patricia Highsmith's novel, has
Tom realizing just how good his impersonation skills are.  In a
wonderfully nuanced performance, Damon reveals much while seeming to
reveal little about Tom.  Some of the twists in the plot are obvious but
many aren't.  The surprises are delicately presented with subtlety being
the story's trademark.  Tom doesn't plan most of his nefarious
activities, and the movie has that same easy naturalness as if the story
just unfolds organically rather than being tightly scripted.
The talented cast includes Cate Blanchett and Philip Seymour Hoffman as
two other Americans in Italy who find themselves caught up in Tom's
complicated web.  Philip Baker Hall plays a tough, no nonsense private
investigator.  "I don't care for BS," he says coldly.  "I don't care to
speak it.  I don't care to hear it."
"You never meet anybody who thinks they're a bad person," Tom says
perceptively.  Certainly Tom doesn't see anything wrong with his
actions.  He has no regrets.  And the subversive show has us rooting for
him all along the way.  THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY may be an odd and
disquieting choice for a holiday release, but it is nevertheless a
fascinating one.
THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY runs 2:15.  It is rated R for violence, language
and brief male full-frontal nudity and would be fine for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Duncan Stevens
Anthony Minghella's Talented Mr. Ripley recalls his last directorial
effort, The English Patient, in one respect: both screenplays are adapted
from novels, and both take significant liberties in their adaptation. And
just as Minghella made an effective film out of English Patient that was
almost entirely unrelated to Michael Ondaatje's book, Ripley is an
fascinating film that owes very little to Patricia Highsmith's novel.
Matt Damon plays the Tom Ripley of the title, a working-class lad with a
flair for mimicry and forgery who goes on an errand to Italy: the father
of a Princeton-educated wastrel named Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law)
commissions Tom to track down Dickie and bring him back to New York, one
way or another. Plans change when Tom encounters Dickie and his girlfriend
Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow): the wealth and bonhomie of Dickie's social circle
affects Tom more than he had expected--and rather than Tom influencing
Dickie to leave behind his opulent lifestyle, the story chronicles the way
that lifestyle seduces Tom. One of the main themes here is the casual
cruelty of the privileged, as Dickie initially welcomes Tom into his
social sphere and later rebuffs him, calling him a "leech" and taking away
his newfound status. The film then shifts into thriller mode as Tom
assumes Dickie's name and persona, and carries on a tense balancing act in
simultaneously maintaining his "Tom" identity for those who know him that
way, and becoming "Dickie" for others.
The Ripley of Highsmith's novel was a calculating, amoral sociopath--the
fun lay in seeing what he could pull off--but Minghella's Ripley is
arguably more interesting. Damon gives Ripley's character, initially at
least, wide-eyed wonder at the luxurious expatriate life, and an innocent
though insecure spirit--there's a sense that he genuinely longs to be
accepted by Dickie, and ultimately acts out of frustration and jealousy.
He assumes the double identity in desperation, in order to extricate
himself from another problem, rather than for the pleasure of exploiting
Dickie's wealth and status, and tries to eliminate one of his personae so
that he can get out of his unwanted double life. (There is no sense, for
Highsmith's Ripley, that the trickery is anything but amusing and
profitable.) The irony, of course, is every lie seems to necessitate three
more, and that neither persona will obligingly fade away. The effect is
very Hitchcock--the suspense is considerable, and the trajectory of the
story sets up, as in the best Hitchcock (e.g., Vertigo), a strange play of
sympathies: the audience recognizes that the protagonist is deeply flawed,
yet hopes that he'll evade detection in the end. Law's portrayal of Dickie
as a self-assured womanizer who expects the world to revolve around him
encourages us to initially identify with Tom, and to continue to
sympathize with him even as he builds his network of deceit. (On the other
hand, Paltrow is oddly ineffective as Marge, largely because her character
is so entirely hung up on Dickie, for whom the audience has no sympathy;
it's hard to understand what she sees in him, and the audience waits in
vain for her to take on a personality of her own.)
As with English Patient, the film looks gorgeous--many of Italy's most
attractive settings, both interior and exterior, are on display--and as
with English Patient, Minghella uses the location to great effect. Tanned
and expensively dressed, Dickie seems to inhabit the sun-splashed beaches
of Italy, and Tom, scrawny and pale, could hardly seem more out of place
initially. Over the course of the film, Tom assumes the necessary
trappings--clothes and music tastes in particular--so that he can take
over Dickie's life convincingly, and yet the audience still identifies him
as the insecure working-class boy that appeared at the beginning. The
transformation from tourist into expatriate accordingly never seems quite
complete, of course, but Damon brings all his acting skills to bear on
having Tom gradually learn to fit into his high-toned surroundings, and
the result is impressive. Just as the desert divided two of the main
characters in English Patient, with Ralph Fiennes's character adapting to
it and Kristin Scott Thomas's character resisting, the Italian Riviera
both brings together and separates Tom and Dickie. But the overall feel of
this film has none of the lush romance of English Patient-- indeed, where
the earlier film was all about sweeping vistas and unlimited space,
Minghella achieves an increasingly claustrophobic feel in the second half
of Ripley, again in a rather Hitchcockian way: smaller interiors, shorter
cuts and snappier conversations.
The power of Talented Mr. Ripley lies in Damon's portrayal of Tom, though.
Minghella plays up the homoerotic aspects of the relationship between Tom
and Dickie, not so much to drive the plot as to drive home a point about
Tom: his whole life is built on hiding things, on playing a part, which
certainly describes the life of a closeted homosexual in the '50s.
Ironically, his double life begins when he lets this particular mask slip
a bit; his troubles ensue because he seems to assume that he no longer
needs to play that particular role. A grimmer irony is that Tom can never
stop playing a part, much as he wants to--and Damon makes it very clear
that he does want to, that whatever thrill he once got from assuming the
identity of others has dissipated. The ultimate result feels more like
tragedy than Hitchcockian thriller (few Hitchcock characters are drawn in
such a way that we regret their demise), tragedy in the Shakespearean
sense: Tom's insecurity and longing for acceptance set off a chain of
events that he is powerless to halt. Damon's performance is subtly
expressive--it seems that he's fated never to be allowed to unburden
himself completely, and it's that clamped-down aspect that draws the
audience's sympathy.
Equal parts character study and thriller, Minghella's Talented Mr. Ripley
is easily the equal of English Patient in depth, yet entirely different in
mood. Catch it before it leaves the theaters.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Like a filet mignon served rare, "The Talented Mr. Ripley" is an
exquisite sensory experience that's cold at the center.
        Anthony Minghella's film (he made "The English Patient") is the
second adaptation of Patricia Highsmith's novel; the first, a 1960 French
feature starring '50's heartthrob Alain Delon, was called "Plein Soleil"
("Purple Noon").  As time and circumstance would have it, the films share
some impressive strengths: they're intensely rich and colorful, feature an
impressive cast (this one stars Matt Damon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Cate
Blanchett, and Jude Law), and provide dazzling entertainment for a solid
couple of hours.
        However, "The Talented Mr. Ripley" often seems like a completely
different motion picture from "Purple Noon," since Minghella has developed
themes and characterizations not pursued in René Clément's original.
        Damon plays the talented Tom Ripley, a sometime pianist, oft-time
bathroom attendant, and full-time sociopath.  Early in the film, shipping
magnate Herbert Greenleaf (James Rebhorn, soon to be seen as the
prosecuting attorney in "Snow Falling on Cedars") mistakes Tom for a friend
of his errant son Dickie, currently living the playboy life on the Italian
Riviera.  Greenleaf, quite taken with Tom, makes him an offer he can't
refuse: bring Dickie back to New York for the princely sum of $1,000.
        In the Mediterranean resort of Mongibello, Tom quickly insinuates
himself into the lives of Dickie and his classically bland fiancée Marge
(Paltrow).  He wears Dickie's clothes, drinks Dickie's champagne, spends
Dickie's money.  But when Dickie grows tired of Tom, the talented Mr.
Ripley will stop at nothing to protect what--and whom--he has worked to
become.
        Damon and Law are as sun-drenched and handsome as the surrounding
topography, yet Paltrow is oddly graceless.  She really only impresses the
once, the lump-in-the-throat "I don't believe a single word you've said"
scene that's in the prevalent trailers.  Blanchett is much more interesting
as Meredith Logue, a slightly naďve socialite who keeps turning up in the
last places Tom wants to see her.
        Whereas I cannot fault "The Talented Mr. Ripley" in terms of its
technical accomplishments or star power, that cold center left me feeling a
little detached.  These are beautiful people for sure, but their
cold-heartedness left me more with a craving for hamburger than for prime
steak.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Christopher Null
     Few enough people know that THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY is based on
Patricia Highsmith's 1955 novel of the same name.  Fewer still know they
already made one movie about Mr. Ripley, a little French number called
PURPLE NOON (1960).
     If you happen to be one of a handful who has seen NOON, don't feel
like THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY is retreading old ground.  It's actually
different.  In fact, it's very different.  So much so that with the
exception of a few brief scenes and the overall theme, these two films
could be based on different source material.  What's really astonishing
is that both are excellent films.
     Tom Ripley (Damon) is introduced innocuously enough.  He's a New
York piano player/maintenance worker/bathroom attendant who, after
borrowing a Princeton-crested jacket, suddenly finds himself propelled
to Italy in search of Dickie Greenleaf (Law) at the best of Dickie's
father (Rebhorn).  Tom arrives soon enough, finding Dickie living the
slacker dream, sailing, drinking, and carousing -- when he's not
spending time with steady girl Marge (Paltrow).
     Ripley's plan to emulate Dickie is apparent from the start, but it
isn't until free spirit Dickie inevitably pushes the clingy Tom away
that Ripley figures he'll take over Dickie's life altogether.  Then the
fun really starts.
     Matt Damon plays a sociopath with uncanny -- and quite spooky --
ease.  In fact, I wouldn't be surprised to see Tom Ripley become a
recurring antihero -- like a Hannibal Lecter should be.  Highsmith wrote
five books about Mr. Ripley, so there's plenty of source material to
work from.  Sequels or no, Damon is so dead-on scary that Hollywood
likely shudders to be alone with him.
     Gwyneth Paltrow, on the other hand, is fairly useless in her role.
For starters, she vacillates between her standby British accent and her
plain-old Gwyneth voice, neither of which really fit her character.
Worse is that she has little to do in the film but often go hysterical,
which doesn't help the movie.  Before you Paltrow fans hit the "Send
Hate Mail" button, try not to forget Gwynny's performance in dogs like A
PERFECT MURDER, GREAT EXPECTATIONS, and HUSH.  It's just too bad she had
to muck up a perfectly good movie like this one.
     Jude Law and the rest of the supporting cast, particularly Hoffman
as a boorish American friend who shows up midway through the movie, are
good or great.  The music, dominated by period (1950's) jazz songs, is
also well-suited for the disturbing thematics of the movie.  And let's
not forget director Anthony Minghella (THE ENGLISH PATIENT), who
captures the beauty of Italy while coaxing some great performances from
his actors.
     On the sour side, MR. RIPLEY's homosexual themes are awkward at
best, and a few plot points (mainly Ripley setting up his alibi) seem to
have been lost to editing, despite a 2:30 run time.  As a thriller, this
may seem long, but the mood is perfect and the film rarely drags.
Altogether, it's a grand psychodrama.  Perfect, you know, for the
holidays.
Director: Anthony Minghella
Producer: William Horberg, Tom Sternberg
Writer: Anthony Minghella
Starring: Matt Damon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jude Law, Cate Blanchett, Jack
Davenport, Caterina Deregibus, Philip Baker Hall, Philip Seymour
Hoffman, James Rebhorn, Stefania Rocca
http://www.talentedmrripley.com/
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jerry Bosch
I frequently twist my son's arm to go with me to an early show. We normally
seat one seat apart. As the show progresses, if the movie is boring me  I
lean hard across the empty seat and whisper in his ear, more or less after
the priest's sick mother in THE EXORCIST: `Son, why you do this to me? Why
you brought me here?'
Have you ever received a trivial present that is beautifully wrapped? Italy
is a spectacular place to photograph.
a well directed movie does not have to be good.
At The Talented Mr. Ripley I watched a shipping tycoon engage a poor young
man to go to Italy to persuade his son to return to New York. Then I watched
the young man stage the circumstances of his meeting with the mark and his
girl friend, and then I watched them be rich and lazy and grow friendly. In
the process I watched the poor young man share and get to like the good
life, conspiring with the rich playboy to deceive the father while not fully
acknowledging his deceptions to the son. Fill in a few similarly pedestrian
details and that is not a synopsis but all that happens in this movie for
about an hour. Fascinating? Hardly.  Son, why you do this to me?
The plot of The Talented Mr. Ripley is standard
murder-followed-by-assumed-identity fare with the usual hazards of inquiring
police and navigating between identities to avoid the usual contrived
perils. Of course in order to give novelist Patricia Highsmith a plot for 5
books and director Anthony Minghella a movie, the character stupidly stays
within reach of all who knew one or the other of his identities and they
keep bumping into him at inconvenient times. Yawn.
One of the reasons why the movie fails as intelligent entertainment is that
this kind of deception would be impossible to maintain while functioning in
the environment of the previous identity; and the resort to serial killings
does not overcome the objection. The plot is predicated on a transparent
contrivance which is unimaginative and unoriginal to boot, therefore
reducing the movie to ordinary, forgettable fare. Why you do this to me?
Matt Damon manages to get some measure of your support for his nefarious
plots, which means that he did a competent job of playing his part. A little
more make-up for the close-ups might have helped to conceal his bad facial
skin. Gwyneth Paltrow was lovely as ever. Although her part was paltry
(ouch!) she had two strong scenes which were the acting highlights of the
movie. Cate Blanchett's acting skills were pretty much wasted in a smallish
part, although she did a conscientious job of getting into the mental set of
her character. The part of an irresponsible rich playboy is well played by
Jude Law, except for the fact that when the Paltrow character tells us that
he was also charismatic we just have to take her on faith, which according
to the apostle Paul is the manifestation of things not seen.
Did I wonder sometimes how the writer would get him out of one or another
predicament? Of course; am I not human? Do I not bleed if you cut me? They
did throw me some bones, but not the Monaco cut. Nor the New York strip for
that matter.
A 2 star movie which is well photographed and well directed deserves another
1/2 star (out of 5).

Author
Gary Jones

Written and directed by Anthony Minghella, and based on Patricia
Highsmith's novel, The Talented Mr. Ripley is a psychological thriller
of jealousy and confused identity among the privileged classes. Tom
Ripley (Matt Damon) is paid by a wealthy businessman to persuade his
wayward layabout son Dickie (Jude Law) to return home from Europe. Tom
travels to Italy, meets Dickie and girlfriend Marge (Gwyneth Patrow) and
is soon sharing their bohemian tourist lifestyle, but the friendships
formed are not all they seem and soon come under strain. 
The film is deliberate but compelling, its restrained pace punctuated by
a couple of moments of extreme violence, including one of the most
effective screen murders I've ever seen. The best aspect of the film,
though, is Matt Damon's magnificent performance as the scheming and
manipulative but strangely pathetic Tom Ripley, whose talent, and
compulsion, is to take on the identity of those around him. This is not
an easy role to have taken on and was a very brave choice for an actor
with a career as a pretty-boy movie star ahead of him. Such actors might
be tempted to rebelliously take on a role against type, such as Leo de
Caprio's rumoured but abandoned casting as the killer in American
Psycho. Damon's role here is that of a subtle and sympathetic monster,
something much more difficult and carried off brilliantly.
With The English Patient, Anthony Minghella was likened to David Lean.
Such comparisons with great British film-makers seem not to have
irritated Minghella, because The Talented Mr. Ripley shouts its
Hitchcock influences from the rooftops. Apart from its Hitch-like plot
and themes, the film's original score, by Gabriel Yared, is frankly
little more than a Bernard Herrmann pastiche (although if you're going
to copy anyone, you might as well copy the best). Some trademark
Hitchcock shots are used, as when the viewpoint rotates as we close in
on a tormented character from above, and when the camera travels over
the heads of a formally-attired opera audience to tightly frame the main
character in one of the boxes with the Yared/Herrmann score driving the
allusion home. Even the opening credits have a similar look to the
distinctive credits created for Hitchcock by Saul Bass.
The current fashion is for long films - it seems that nobody thinks a
film less than two hours long will be taken seriously. At 139 minutes,
The Talented Mr. Ripley drags occassionally and could have been more
effective if it was half an hour shorter. Hitchcock famously once said
that the length of a film should be directly related to the endurance of
the human bladder. If his bladder could have taken the strain, he would
have been proud of Ripley. (8/10)
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Anthony Minghella.
Cast: Matt Damon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jude Law, Cate Blanchett, Philip Seymour 
Hoffman, Jack Davenport, James Rebhorn, Philip Baker Hall.
1999 - 135 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, brief nudity, and gore).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, December 28, 1999.
Anthony Minghella's last picture, "The English Patient," was lush and 
visually beautiful, but its attempts at emotional catharsis and intimately 
drawn characters fell flat, due to its ultimate unevenness. Based on the 
first in a series of novels by Patricia Highsmith, in which the protagonist 
(and antagonist) happens to be Thomas Ripley, a sociopath, "The Talented Mr. 
Ripley" dilutes Minghella's past problems to bring us one of the most 
challenging and thought-provoking thrillers in recent memory. A film in which 
we follow a character who just so happens to be mentally unhinged, it also 
holds the ability to genuinely surprise because we grow to, on some level, 
like Tom, and even at times when he does awful things to other people, it 
usually seems perversely just.
The ball gets rolling in New York City in 1958, when a man (James Rebhorn) 
persuades Tom Ripley (Matt Damon), who says he is a Princeton graduate, to 
travel to Europe and persuade his rebellious son, Dickie Greenleaf (Jude 
Law), to return home with him and leave behind his excessively luxurious 
lifestyle. Tom agrees, and is soon in Italy, becoming pals with Dickie, who 
starts hanging out with him and taking him to jazz clubs, even after he 
discovers Tom's true purposes for the trip, and  his girlfriend, Marge 
(Gwyneth Paltrow). Things go well for a while, but Tom gradually becomes more 
and more infatuated with Dickie, to the point where he has the capabilities 
to do anything if he can't have him.
One may read the plot synopsis and think to themselves, "been there, done 
that," but they would be wrong, as I haven't even begun to discuss the many 
further plot developments, all of which come together to create a complex and 
absolutely electrifying motion picture. Unlike most thrillers, which follow a 
rather cliched pattern of rising tension before a "fight to the finish" 
climactic battle, "The Talented Mr. Ripley" soaks you into the story slowly, 
but surely, until you are completely involved in the goings-on. The fact that 
the film's first hour is rather deceptive only aids in the first violent 
outburst being all the more startling, and the death at hand oddly justified. 
Matt Damon, in his first satisfying role since 1997's "Good Will Hunting," is 
perfectly cast as the likable, yet occasionally threatening Tom Ripley. Tom, 
a confused young man who isn't sure where his life is going or who he should 
even be, decides that impersonating others' identities might make more sense, 
as he says, "I always thought it would be better to be a fake somebody than a 
real nobody." Tom is obviously a conflicted person who truthfully believes he 
is a nobody, and we naturally care about his feelings, despite watching him 
commit crime after crime. Damon is a boyishly good-looking actor who, here, 
also believably hints at a darker side behind his winning exterior. This is a 
top-notch character for Damon, and an intelligent career move, as he really 
does need another movie that, like "Good Will Hunting," shows off his refined 
acting skills.
Jude Law is also very good as Dickie Greenleaf, a man that can be kind and 
caring, and the next minute be cold and hateful. "There are those times when 
Dickie makes you feel like you are the only person in the world besides him," 
Marge tells Tom. "He's so good at it. That's why people love him so." Tom is 
drawn to Dickie, even when he isn't being a very nice person, and it is the 
attributes of Law that help to pull this tricky role off. Dickie is so 
constantly alluring and fascinating that one can wholeheartedly understand 
why Tom would be won over so much by him.
The two central female roles are somewhat underwritten, but the actresses 
that Minghella has cast are so extraordinary that they make the characters 
their own. Gwyneth Paltrow, as Marge, is somewhat limited in the confines of 
her role, but is touching and sympathetic, nonetheless. 
Meanwhile, Cate Blanchett, as Meredith Logue, a beautiful American debutante 
who meets Tom at the train station when they first arrive in Italy, and keeps 
bumping into him, adds wonderful flavor to her character. Blanchett may have 
even less screen time than Paltrow, but in many ways, is far more memorable. 
Meredith grows to care for Tom, even though she thinks he is Dickie, based on 
what he told her at the train station, and this confusion causes problems 
later in the picture, especially in a scene of extreme technical beauty and 
calculation, in which she meets Marge and her friend, Peter (Jack Davenport), 
at a restaurant. Each one is waiting for Tom Ripley, but Meredith believes he 
is Dickie, whom Marge has been desperately trying to find since he, more or 
less, disappeared from her life after taking a trip with Tom. This may sound 
more complicated and difficult to understand than it actually is. Not to 
worry; Minghella knows how to toy with the expectations of his audience, and 
succeeds brilliantly in this respect. 
Rounding out the major players are Philip Seymour Hoffman, despicable as 
Dickie's snotty-nosed friend, Freddie; and Jack Davenport, as Marge's friend, 
Peter, who grows a liking to Tom. Davenport, an actor I don't believe I've 
ever seen before, has extraordinary chemistry with Damon in their scenes 
together, and appropriately comes off as a pure romantic as Peter.
Precise and texturally detailed in both its story and the sumptuous 
cinematography of the Italian cities, beaches, and countryside, "The Talented 
Mr. Ripley" is a somewhat old-fashioned suspense film that Alfred Hitchcock 
would have been proud of. Minghella clearly showed how good of a director he 
might be in the right situation with "The English Patient," and with "The 
Talented Mr. Ripley," he has hit his full stride. This a stunner of a 
thriller, both mature in its writing, also by Minghella, and provocative in 
its inclinations and plot twists, which always feel natural, rather than 
manipulative--two refreshing qualities you almost never find in the same film 
nowadays. A winner. 

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Matt Damon; Gwyneth Paltrow; Jude Law; Cate Blanchett & Philip
Seymour Hoffman
In some strange way, The talented Mr. Ripley is what you would consider to
be a chick flick. I'm not sure why, but that's how it ends up. The two guys
who I saw the movie with both disliked it as much, if not more, than I did.
But yet my buddy's wife and her female friend really liked it. I'm not sure
what it was about this movie that we males disliked the most. I would have
to say that a movie starring Matt Damon and Jude Law would never normally
top my must-see list. Add Gwyneth Paltrow to the mix and you have the
makings for a movie that is just too sickly sweet for words. Maybe it was
all the gay references that we didn't appreciate. I really don't want to pay
to see one guy put the moves on another guy. (Two women, yes. But not two
guys.) But I think the real killer for me was the male frontal nudity. Do we
really need to see Jude Law in a bathtub? Let me answer that with a
resounding NO. What is it with the dick shots in movies lately? The night
before watching The Talented Mr. Ripley, I had to endure Oliver Stone's
3-hour tribute to male genitals, Any Given Sunday. I know all the females
out there will say that it's about time we get male nudity, since females
have been going topless in movies for years. But ladies, there is a hell of
a difference between breasts and penises. I propose a new rule for male
nudity in movies. If we have to endure male genitals swinging in the breeze,
I say that it should be mandatory for female genitals to get an equal amount
of screen time. Just a thought. Anyway, back to this movie.
Another problem that I had with this movie was the story. Matt Damon plays
Tom Ripley, a young man, who by a twist of fate, (or is it?) runs into a
shipping magnate (James Rebhorn) who mistakenly thinks that Ripley is a
former classmate of his son's. Ripley does nothing to correct this error.
Instead he accepts an offer from the man to travel to Italy to try to
persuade the man's son, Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law), to return home to the
United States. This is where things get interesting. Tom Ripley immediately
begins to show signs of some serious sociopathic behavior. He arrives in
Italy and immediately ingratiates himself into the lives of his "friend"
Dickie, and Dickie's girlfriend Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow). It is difficult to
go into a great deal of detail without giving too much of the movie away,
but suffice to say that Tom wants Dickie's life, and is willing to do
whatever he has to in order to get it. The pure sociopathic genius with
which Tom Ripley goes about his chores is amazing. My hat goes off for
writing of Ripley's manipulation of everyone else in the movie. At times I
almost feel sorry for his character's occasional problems, until I began to
wonder if everything that is going on is not just some part of his master
plan. My problem with the plot is that I was never sure why Ripley was doing
what he was doing. (I know he was nuts, but I wanted more than that.) I
could never see his goal. Maybe that was supposed to be the point, but I
felt that it hurt the story more than helping it.
I can't find fault with the Ripley character, and if everything surrounding
him was a little more rounded, this might have been a better movie. I just
didn't care about anybody else in the movie. So the manipulation that they
endured at Ripley's hands never elicited much of a reaction. I made a crack
about Damon, Law and Paltrow at the top of the review. It's not that I
dislike any of them, they are just the sort of actors that fall into my
"take them or leave them" pile. Damon is actually quite good as Ripley, but
not good enough to overcome the multitude of weak spots in the plot. Jude
Law continues to land in my "who cares" pile. He was good, but I was so
ambivalent towards his character that I really can't give him high marks.
Then we have Gwyneth. It seems her only job was to play the girl who you
can't help but fall madly in love with. She fills the role nicely and, as
usual, exudes charm. The one actor who I do have very good things to say
about is Philip Seymour Hoffman, who plays Dickie's playboy friend. He is
about the only one who is suspicious of Ripley and you can cut the tension
with a knife when he and Damon appear on the screen together. Unfortunately,
his role, while integral, is fairly small.
This is a movie that I have no doubt I would have really enjoyed under
different circumstances. Other than the above-mentioned problems, I can't
really put my finger on the major flaw that really hurt the film. But it was
there nonetheless. The Talented Mr. Ripley is the sort of film that I hope
gets remade someday. All of the major components are there for a spectacular
movie. With some expert tweaking, it could have been one hell of a film.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A certain Mr.Ripley is hired by a worried American father to go to Italy and
convince his rich, spoiled, playboy son to return to the States. Once Ripley
meets up with the man and his fiance, he finds himself strangely attracted
to the man, his better-half and their lifestyle. It isn't long before Ripley
yearns to take on a bigger part of the rich boy's life, and soon finds
himself doing almost anything to achieve that very goal.
CRITIQUE:
Once more, this film falls into the early-winter Oscar movie trend of
running waaaaaay too long for its own good. This is a good film with fine
performances, solid direction, picturesque views and an interesting premise,
which essentially gets diluted in a script which focuses a little too much
on the "lives of the rich and famous" and not enough on the tightness of the
story, which could easily have afforded us more thrills, tension and
intrigue. I also thought that the homosexual under/overtones of the film
were too obvious and distracting on the whole, without the proper resolution
to justify all of its ambiguous references. Did it really matter what his
sexuality was? Why not focus more on the loneliness of the character?
Anyway, I guess this criticism is more of a personal quip. The director
might've felt as though this ambiguity was integral to the character. I
didn't and found it generally intrusive. On the whole, the film actually
felt like three hours, but it turns out that it was only about two hours and
twenty minutes, so I guess it did lag somewhat. The performances were all
pretty good with Law and Damon kicking the most ass. Damon was particularly
effective as the man with the "talent" to fool all others, and this despite
the fact that I didn't truly perceive his character to be as "talented" as
he was just plain lucky! Either way, Damon was solid in the role.
Overall, this film is intriguing enough to sit through, but difficult to
fully recommend because of its slow pace and lack of real tension. Some
people are comparing this to Hitchcock's films, but I doubt any of his films
lagged this much. I don't mean to harp on this length thing, but as
superficial as it may seem, not many people have the patience to sit still
for long periods of time, simply to gaze at beautiful Italian sceneries
going by from time to time. More meat is what this story needed, and a
stronger emotional pull from its lead character, who did generate some spark
of menace and vulnerability, but ultimately seemed to get lucky most of the
time, or be at the right place at the right time. If anything, I would
recommend you catch this movie on video so that you could be your own judge
and see if this story truly "works" for you. I dug the cinematography, the
actors and the direction on the whole, but found the story to be less
realistic than I would have liked and unreasonably long for my taste. Love
it or hate it, I think we could all agree on one thing: Jude Law is one
great looking man! Oh yeah, this film also has a dubious ending which may
leave many unsatisfied, but despite my own initial disappointment, I liked
it after all.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Matt Damon's first role was a one-liner in 1988's MYSTIC PIZZA. I guess Matt
really got affected by his role in ROUNDERS (7/10), a role for which he
reportedly received $600,000, since he apparently played in the $10,000
buy-in Texas Hold 'Em tournament at the 1998 World Series of Poker
(http://www.wsop.com) in Las Vegas. He lost during the first day of four. He
apparently turned down a role in Ang Lee's film RIDE WITH THE DEVIL in order
to shoot this one with Anthony Minghella.
Jude Law's "breakthrough role" came in 1997's GATTACA. He also starred in
David Cronenberg's eXistenZ (7.5/10). He was born in 1972 in London,
England.
Gwyneth Paltrow apparently turned down the role of Emma Peel in THE AVENGERS
(7/10).
Phillip Seymour Hoffman has been in three films which have been released
over the last three months of 1999: TALENTED MR.RIPLEY, FLAWLESS and
MAGNOLIA.
The second movie that director Anthony Minghella ever directed was 1993's
MR. WONDERFUL starring Matt Dillon and Annabella Sciorra. His next, was the
1996 Oscar-winning film THE ENGLISH PATIENT.
There was an earlier interpretation of this book which was filmed in 1960
called PURPLE NOON (It's a French film called PLEIN SOLEIL). The Minghella
version was originally titled THE STRANGE MR. RIPLEY.
Jack Davenport, who plays the gay character of Peter in this film, got his
first break after he wrote to John Cleese and asked to be a runner in the
movie FIERCE CREATURES. He ended up playing a zookeeper. He is the son of
actor Nigel Davenport and actress Maria Aitken.

Author
Jerry Saravia
How does one comprehend the chameolonic Mr. Tom Ripley's actions, and his
desires to be someone else by any means necessary? Is it an attraction to the
posh lifestyle of his new friend, Dickie , or a need to come to terms with his
own identity? Director Anthony Minghella's adaptation of Patricia Hightsmith's
1955 crime novel is as smooth and clever as the titled character, a thrilling,
masterfully told thriller - an exemplary character study of deception and lies,
and of an identity crisis in turmoil. 
Matt Damon plays the youthful Ripley, whom we see at the beginning of the film
playing the piano at a reception wearing a Princeton University jacket. He
catches the eye of a wealthy New York ship magnate (James Rebhorn), who falsely
assumes that Ripley went to college with his son, Dickie, considering that
Ripley's jacket is emblazoned with a Class of '56 patch. Under false pretenses,
Ripley is asked by Dickie's father to fly out to Italy to bring back his son,
who is living the high life with his girlfriend, Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow). Once
Ripley arrives in Italy and meets Dickie, he is introduced to a glamorous world
of lavish parties, concerts, beaches, and hot jazz clubs. Dickie (Jude Law) is
a difficult man to get to know, but he is immensely likable and full of energy.
His girlfriend Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow) likes everyone, and takes a liking to
Ripley who is the total opposite of Dickie. But slowly Ripley falls in love,
and Dickie is the man he adores and wants to be - Marge and a snobbish friend
of Dickie's (Philip Seymour Hoffman) are merely distractions in Ripley's
fantasy world. 
"The Talented Mr. Ripley" weaves its story and characters smoothly like a
snake, and the slow pace exemplifies its creepy atmosphere - we get the sense
that Ripley's intentions or goals are unclear throughout the film. What does he
want with Dickie, and will he help Dickie's father or does he begin to see
himself as Dickie? And who in fact is Ripley? Sure, he is a talented piano
player and a gifted mimic, but who is the real Ripley? 
Excluding "Good Will Hunting," I have not cared for Matt Damon as an actor,
especially in the cartoonish funk called "Dogma." In the guise of Thomas
Ripley, Damon finally finds a character as complex, mischievous and
duplicitious as anything he's ever managed to play before. One moment he is a
smiling simpleton who seems utterly harmless, the next moment he's a conniving,
amoral, two-faced murderer. The transition is brilliantly executed by Damon and
he makes us hold our breath during every moment he is on screen - we are never
sure how he is going to react. And to Damon's credit, he makes Ripley
sympathetic, and there were moments when I was tense and scared for him, since
his murderous ways could be uncovered. 
Jude Law, who played the cyber hero in David Cronenberg's "eXistenZ," displays
an interesting range for his character - a devious, devilish grin that masks
his own insecurities about getting close to people, and displays a gradual
tempermental attitude toward Ripley. Law looks like he belongs in the past, and
think of how well he could have fit in any of Hitchcock's thrillers, especially
"Rope" or "Strangers on a Train." If Law did not utter a syllable, he would
still be a commanding presence on screen, so let's hope Oscar nominations are
in the running. 
Gwyneth Paltrow turns in a surprisingly credible and intelligent performance,
her best turn since "Hard Eight." Though the role is somewhat thankless and
similar to the awful "A Perfect Murder," she gives the character, Marge, more
weight and nuance than expected. She is amorous, lovable but she also is
suspicious of Ripley, though she does love him as a friend. Paltrow slowly
shows irritation at seeing Ripley everywhere she goes, especially after Dickie
mysteriously disappears. It is a superb performance overall - I'd rather hand
her an Oscar for this mature role than for her Oscar gold in "Shakespeare in
Love." 
Director Anthony Minghella, who previously helmed "The English Patient,"
follows Hitchcock's golden rule of psychological thrillers - to make us care
for the characters enough that we feel for their safety, even for a murderer
like Ripley. And no secret is made about Ripley, we know what he is and what he
is capable of and so Minghella makes us wonder what will happen next. He also
shows us the decor and atmosphere of Italy in all its splendor, and all the
sights will make you wish you were there along with Ripley, Marge and Dickie. 
Tightly structured and suspense built on characters motivations (what a rarity
nowadays), "The Talented Mr. Ripley" is a masterpiece in the best tradition of
Hitchcock. And there is a sense of emotional doom when Ripley discovers that he
is not aware of his own identity, and may continue searching for any kind of
identification. Brimming with vital supporting turns by Cate Blanchett, Philip
Baker Hall and Philip Seymour Hoffman, "Talented Mr. Ripley" is a uniquely
great film - it may leave you with a bitter taste but you won't soon forget it.
Now that takes talent. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or comments at Faust667@aol.com or at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com
