Title
Review for Léon (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/5c077337b81db4968825677c0020225c?OpenDocument
It's ironic that the best films in cinema history are invariably the
original director's cut of the film.  Films such as Aliens, The Abyss,
The Wild Bunch, Blade Runner, and Terminator 2 are all prime examples of
a filmmaker's integrity, later chopped up or mucked with by the studio. 
The advent of the DVD format has provided a more accessible way to get
these original cuts to the public and provide to film freaks like myself
the ability to become further enraptured by the extension of such
classic films.
The DVD release of the original international version of Luc Besson's
1995 masterpiece The Professional, which is known as Léon around the
world, is a prime example of how a good film can become an instant
classic as a director's cut.  For years, I have heard of an
"international" version available only in laserdisc format, which has
eluded me for years.  I even bought a laserdisc player from my uncle Don
for 100 bucks just to watch certain directors' cuts - including Léon. 
But after countless searches in laserdisc stores, I could never find
it.  Until now.
The film follows the story of Léon, played by Jean Reno, a professional
hit man for an Italian Mob crew run by Danny Aiello.  He lives next door
to a ferociously independent 12-year-old girl named Mathilda - played by
then newcomer Natalie Portman, whose father is involved in drugs and
crooked cops.  One day, a crew of the cops - lead by Gary Oldman in an
over-the-top performance - kills her entire family while Mathilda is out
buying groceries.  Taking pity on her, Léon hides her in his apartment
when she returns to save her life.  Mathilda learns of Léon's hit man
profession and decides to follow in Léon's footsteps as a "cleaner." 
She then falls in love with him and manages to reawaken emotions within
Léon he has kept locked away as part of his profession.  At this point,
the differences in the American version and the International version
really kick in.
The International version contains an additional 24 minutes of footage
that pertains directly to the relationship of Léon and Mathilda, footage
that American censors deemed "too explicit."  I assume that American
censors feel that defining character development is too much for
American audiences to handle.  The best part of this extra footage is
that gives better understanding of both Mathilda's and Léon's
motivations pertaining to later actions involving Oldman and his crew of
bad cops.  There's even a previously unseen cameo by the great French
actor Jean-Hugues Anglade - star of Queen Margot, Besson's La Femme
Nikita, and Killing Zoe.  With these additional scenes replaced, Léon
and Matilda's relationship brings you emotionally closer to the film and
draws stronger bonds between the characters that were murky in the
American version.
The most ironic thing about the International version of the film is
that with the inclusion of the missing scenes, the film becomes
primarily a heavy, emotional drama punctuated with big action scenes at
the beginning and the end of the film.  The film betters reflects the
serious drama of French cinema but is laced with pieces reflecting the
brutality of American cinema.
My advice to everyone out there is to throw away your copy of The
Professional, throw down twenty bucks, and pick up this newly restored
cinematic masterpiece.
Director/Writer: Luc Besson
Producer: Luc Besson, Claude Besson
Starring: Jean Reno, Natalie Portman, Gary Oldman, Danny Aiello
Five stars out of five stars (HIGHEST RATING)
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Lon Ponschock
     THE PROFESSIONAL is a carefully crafted story of revenge ... sort
of what THE CROW tried to be but couldn't compared with this.
     Matilda (Natalie Portman) is a twelve-year-old who has lost her
family in a firefight over drugs.  She seeks refuge with Leon (Jean
Reno), a professional killer.
     So here we have the makings of what could be a piece of
sentimental claptrap arrived just in time for the holidays.  But these
are the makings only.  The story here is wonderful, the language and
script well-done and the revelation of detail occurs in a way that I
wanted the film not to end ... not for a long time.
     *That's* when a picture is really good.  They don't come around
that often and that's the reason that you will see writings here on the
occasion of that triumph and not on the occasion of wasted time on
trayf.
     Mention should be made of the fine performances by Gary Oldman and
Danny Aiello as well.  They always deliver superb performances and
their work here is no exception.  Jean Reno as Leon could be GIGOT in
another era: living out of a suitcase, friendless--with nothing but
his work.  Natalie Portman in what might be a first role makes the part
of Matilda her own in a truly captivating way.
     Captivating is a good word for THE PROFESSIONAL.  It will steal
your heart in a way that other child-adult 'buddy pictures' like
AMERICAN HEART could not reach.  And what you are able to touch in this
film is the emotion of the moment:  a rare gift.
     It's probably just coincidence, but you know what Leon
spelled backwards is, right?  I knew you did.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jean Reno, Natalie Portman, Gary Oldman, Danny Aiello.
Screenplay/Director:  Luc Besson.
     I wonder if budget is at all a criterion for whether or not a
movie can be considered an exploitation flick.  Take THE PROFESSIONAL,
for example.  It boasts extremely glossy cinematography, a couple of
recognizable name actors, and a couple of fairly impressive
explosions.  It's also basically about violence and cheap titilation,
and features a central relationship between a middle-aged man and a
twelve-year-old girl with a decidedly ambiguous sexual dimension.  THE
PROFESSIONAL is all over the map, and its pretensions of being about
anything more than its most unpleasant elements simply make it all the
more unpleasant.
     THE PROFESSIONAL of the title is a New York hit man named Leon
(Jean Reno), brutally efficient but also very isolated.  One day he is
forced to let someone into his life when a girl from his apartment
building knocks on his door.  Her name is Matilda (Natalie Portman),
and the rest of her family has just been killed by crooked and very
wired D.E.A. agent Norman Stansfield (Gary Oldman) after Matilda's
father tried to rip him off.  Leon reluctantly takes Matilda in, then
begins to teach her his profession when she says that she wants to
avenge the murder of her young brother.  The two become closer, which
makes them all the more vulnerable when Stansfield learns that they
know too much, and sets out to eliminate them both.
     Writer/director Luc Besson has gone this route before with his
popular French import LA FEMME NIKITA, a slick potboiler about a female
assassin.  There is no question that Besson can make a great *looking*
film; with the assistance of cinematographer Thierry Arbogast, he has
created a film chock full of moody close-ups and evocative lighting.
But beneath the shiny wrapper, there isn't nearly as much going on as
Besson would like us to believe.  The relationship between Leon and
Matilda never clicks because neither one is given a character to
develop.  Leon is mostly a collection of quirky traits, all intended to
show us that for a hired killer, he's really not so bad a guy:  he
drinks lots of milk, takes meticulous care of a potted plant, and
enjoys Gene Kelly movies.  Jean Reno succeeds at giving Leon a haunted
and desperate quality, but he never makes an emotional connection to
Matilda.  Natalie Portman is all wrong for a part that called for a
much grittier quality, but she doesn't have too much to work with,
either.
     Besson would have been better served spending more time trying to
bring his characters to life, and less on feeble attempts at humor
which are often embarrassing.  A silly game between Leon and Matilda
involving celebrity impersonations is completely out of place, as is a
scene where Matilda shocks a hotel manager by announcing that Leon is
her lover; character is thoroughly sacrificed for a cheap gag.  Gary
Oldman's entire part is something of a cheap gag, wild-eyed and way
over the top, but at least he is interesting to watch.  There isn't a
real person to be found anywhere in THE PROFESSIONAL, which isn't
always a problem in an action thriller, except that this one is trying
to pass itself off as something more.
     A more disconcerting problem with THE PROFESSIONAL is that it
plays around with the sexuality of a twelve-year-old in a really
distasteful way.  There were only two real choices for dealing with
that component of Leon and Matilda's relationship:  confront it head
on, or ignore it entirely.  But Besson flirts and teases the audience
with the idea that he's going to show them a forbidden love story,
while choosing simply to focus his camera on Portman's rear end and
dress her in skimpy clothing.  This is to say nothing of the
questionable decision to make it look like quality paternal time when
Leon is teaching a child to load a 9mm pistol, or the blood which is
spilled aplenty.  A great deal of the time, THE PROFESSIONAL is just
plain sleazy, and all the soft filters in the world can't disguise that
fact.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Few examples seem as appropriate for the phrase "style over
substance" as the career of French filmmaker Luc Besson. His
films earned great deal of popularity simply by looking
"cool" and flooding the audience with impressive sounds and
images, while seriously lacking coherent plot and character
development in the same time. Besson managed to solve at
least some of those problems in his 1990 film LE FEMME
NIKITA. However, it seems that Besson thought that at least
some characters of that film weren't sufficiently explored,
namely The Cleaner, played by Jean Reno. Four years later,
the variation of that character became the protagonist of
THE PROFESSIONAL, action film that is now mostly associated
with the career of Natalie Portman.
In this film Jean Reno plays L‚on, man whose job description
might very well be summed up in the phrase "cleaner". He is
one of the deadliest hitmen in New York underworld, able to
complete even the most complicated and difficult tasks with
incredible efficiency and all that without trace. L‚on's
professional success is in sharp contrast with the quiet and
utterly ascetic private life he mostly spends in his small
apartment. His 12-year old neighbour Mathilda (played by
Natalie Portman), on the other hand, has a lot of problems
with drug-dealing father (played by Michael Badaluco) and
the rest of her dysfunctional family. Things get even worse
when the family gets a visit from the group of corrupt DEA
agents, led by psychopathic Norman Stansfield (played by
Gary Oldman). Mathilda is the only survivor of the massacre
and she seeks the refuge behind her neighbour's door. L‚on
takes her in and reluctantly agrees to shelter her until
things cool down. Mathilda is, on the other hand, quite
impressed when she finds about her protector's true
profession so she wants to use his talents in order to
avenge the death of her 4-year old brother. First she wants
to hire him, then she wants him to teach her skills of
"cleaner", while L‚on, utterly inexperienced in personal
relationships, unsuccessfully tries to keep both of them
from trouble. However, presence of the girl begins to affect
L‚on and he becomes to sees the previous emptiness of his
life. Stansfield in the meantime becomes aware that he left
the eyewitness during the massacre so the extremely violent
conflict between him and L‚on becomes inevitable.
Besson again remains faithful to his reputation by filling
THE PROFESSIONAL with many visually impressive scenes and
very atmospheric and memorable music by his long-time
collaborator Eric Serra. Besson's talent is most visible in
action scenes, especially the final showdown, which is
probably one of the best-choreographed gun battles in the
past decade. However, old-fashioned phrase "style over
substance" still hurts this film and whenever Besson decides
to pay much attention to the plot and character development,
the lack of those particular talents becomes quite apparent.
Large amount of implausabilties in the Besson's screenplay
(it is really hard to imagine ultra-efficient yet illiterate
hitman in modern-day New York or said low- profile hitman
choosing to live next door to drug dealers) is the only part
of the problem. Greatest flaw of this film is Besson's
inability to decide how to handle the relationship between
12-year old girl and the hitman three times her age. Various
avenues - ordinary friendship, substitute parenting and even
Lolita-like relationship - are hinted, but never
sufficiently explored, so after the few scenes in the
beginning film meanders until violent finale brings some
sort of conclusion. However, the acting in this film superb,
especially in the case of Reno who seems as the perfect
choice for this role. Although young Natalie Portman shows a
lot of talent in her first feature film role, sometimes that
performance slips into overacting. Gary Oldman, on the other
hand, does his trademark psycho routine very well, while
Danny Aiello provides good contrast with his minimalist
approach to the role of L‚on's mob contact Tony. Taking
everything into consideration, THE PROFESSIONAL seems to be
one of the most overrated films of the past decade, but
Besson's skills of action director are enough to guarantee
entertainment to those who like "artsy" approach to that
particular genre.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Bryan Youngsur Lim
     Just saw THE PROFESSIONAL.  This should've been a really good
movie, as we all know Besson is a certifiable genius.  The movie has a
nice beginning, but that's about all I can say in defense of it.
     There's some really poorly handled Lolita-isms with the little
girl.  Not that I have a problem with the little girl-older man thing,
if it's handled well like in THE LOVER (and I'm not just talking about
the gratuitous nudity), but in this movie you never really understand
what's going on, and you get the impression that Mr.  Besson is really
into seeing young girls in slutty clothes.
     The action sequences are *incredible*.  As perhaps the biggest Woo
fan I know, these sequences come damn close.  Unfortunately, they're
too short, and you only get this tiny window into what could have
been.  It's just not gratifying, as they're entirely too infrequent.
     Milk.  Milk is this strange recurring motif in the movie, a pretty
lame motif, too.  Perhaps it's supposed to inspire this sense of growth
or some crap like that, but I didn't dig it.  Also, there's a plant
which is really over- emphasized.
     And, last but not least, the film is set in Brooklyn.  I don't
care if he's French, Besson should have the good sense not to set a
film here because, with some obvious exceptions, Brooklyn is just too
cliche and a tad too tacky.  I always think of that crappy Seagal flick
and how he's buddies with the pizza kitchen owner who
Knows-How-Things-Work.
     I'm open to discussion on this topic, because I really *wanted* this
movie to be great and to me, it wasn't.  A real waste of two great
actors (Jean Reno and Gary Oldman), too.

Author
James Berardinelli
     The career aspirations of Mathilda (Natalie Portman) aren't those
of the average twelve-year old girl.  Instead of wanting to be a doctor,
fashion model, teacher, lawyer, or nuclear physicist, Mathilda has
decided to follow in the footsteps of her best friend, surrogate
father, and protector, Leon (Jean Reno).  The only problem is that Leon
is a "cleaner"--a professional hit man ("Cool" is her one-word
response when she learns this tidbit of information).
     Mathilda comes from a very dysfunctional family.  Her father is a
drug dealer, his wife (played by Ellen Greene in a wig and performance
that strongly recall images of LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS' Audrey) despises
her, and her half-sister enjoys beating her up.  Mathilda's chief
pleasure is hanging out in her New York City tenement building's
stairwell, smoking cigarettes.
     One day, a crooked cop (played with typical over-the-top
exuberance by Gary Oldman) decides to have Mathilda's whole family
exterminated.  When she arrives home to find them slaughtered, she goes
to Leon, who lives down the hall, for help.  Although he's at first
reluctant to open his door to her, once he does, she worms her way into
both his life and his heart.  And she's not some wide-eyed innocent;
her desire to learn about killing is fueled by the need to exact bloody
revenge for her little brother's murder (she could care less about the
other family members).
     In LA FEMME NIKITA, writer/director Luc Besson proved his
capability of putting as much octane and adrenaline into a thriller as
any American director while keeping his formula uniquely
non-Hollywood.  Much the same is true of THE PROFESSIONAL, which has
sequences to rival those of SPEED for white-knuckle excitement--not to
mention a plot that's equally as preposterous.
     The real strength of THE PROFESSIONAL, however, is the central
relationship between Mathilda and Leon.  Although not well-founded in
reality, these two characters mesh nicely.  Despite an occasional
low-key hint of sexual attraction, this is basically a father/daughter
or mentor/apprentice relationship.  There's nothing unique about a
young girl melting the heart of a hardened loner except the manner in
which Besson approaches the theme.
     Jean Reno, essentially reprising his "cleaner" role from NIKITA
(where he was called Victor), plays his character with a perpetual
deadpan (except when he lampoons John Wayne).  He does more with
mannerisms and body language than with facial expressions, and the
closer he is drawn to Mathilda, the more uncomfortable he appears.
     The less traditional role belongs to an impressive Natalie
Portman, yet another member of the highly-talented, recent group of
youthful actors.  Portman portrays a victim of society's ills, the
perfect example of innocence corrupted.  There are likely some viewers
who will be disturbed by Mathilda's predilection for profanity.
     Because of the non-American flavor brought to this film by Besson,
THE PROFESSIONAL is anything but typical fare.  It is stylish, darkly
humorous, and almost artsy in its approach to the genre.  Nevertheless,
it delivers what viewers want from any thriller:  lots of action.  With
some surprisingly strong character interaction, there's a lot to like
about this movie, at least for those willing to look beyond all the
bloodshed.
     At one point, Leon comments to an attentive Mathilda that "the
closer you get to being a pro, the closer you can get to the client."
Through the intimacy of the link forged by Besson with his audience,
there's no doubt that he's as much the consummate professional as his
implacable title character.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
