Title
Review for French Lieutenant's Woman, The (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the hardest tasks for any filmmaker is a successful
adaptation of a literary classic. There were very few of
them who actually succeeded in that, and rarely do we see
great novels being transformed into great films. The reason
is quite obvious - the medium of movie is quite different
from the film, and thousands of pages of text could hardly
be transformed into two hours or 90 minutes of films. So,
film adaptations could hardly be faithful to the original
novels and fans of such novels are almost always
disappointed. On the other hand, in such cases ignorance
could be bliss. By not reading the original novel in
advance, viewers are spared from such disappointments and
they can judge movie based on its own merit. For the author
of this review, such was the case with John Fowles' novel
THE FRENCH LIEUTENANT'S WOMAN and its 1981 film adaptation
by Karel Reisz.
The plot begins when Victorian gentleman and amateur
scientist Charles Smithson (played by Jeremy Irons) comes
from London to coastal town of Lyme in order to study
fossils. During his stay, he is engaged to Ernestina Freeman
(played by Lynsey Baxter), daughter of wealthy local
industrialist. Before two of them get married, Charles meets
Sarah Woodruff (played by Meryl Streep), ex-governess who
became scorned by the local community after the torrid
affair with French seaman. Some call her "whore", some pity
her, and some, like local physician Doctor Grogan (played by
Leo McKern) doubt her sanity, since she spends every free
moment looking at the sea. Charles is intrigued by her story
and wants to help her, but in the process he falls in love
and endangers his own engagement and future with Ernestina.
Sarah also seems to fall in love with Charles, but some of
her actions indicate clever manipulation. In the same time,
Mike and Anna, modern day actors who play characters of
Charles and Sarah in the movie based on the novel, have
their own torrid love affair at the set.
Faithful adaptation of THE FRENCH LIEUTENANT'S WOMAN,
according to those who had read the novel, was impossible,
so the authors of this movie had to be creative. Director
Karel Reisz was lucky to have script written by famous
British playwright Harold Pinter. Instead of standard plot,
we have two parallel stories - regular and "movie within
movie". The latter is given more time, but the lack of usual
suspension of disbelief (since we know from the start that
we are watching the film, and not the actual story or
characters) doesn't hurt the film. Instead, those two
parallel plots help us to truly appreciate the film and
directorial mastery of Karel Reisz. The editing, very
important in this kind of film, is well done. Although the
modern segment is given less time than Victorian "movie
within movie", Reisz uses small bits and pieces to paint
complex and intriguing picture. Two love stories are very
different and very similar in both times; characters are
complex, and their motivations unclear, and the outcomes for
protagonists are different. Reisz and Pinter also use
parallel stories to comment on differences between modern
and Victorian times in the way society treated women,
marriage, sexual morality and mental illness. And even
"movie within movie" has few well-done ingredients to the
story - character of Charles' young servant Sam (played by
Hilton McRae) and his romance with local girl is good
opportunity to portray class division in Victorian society.
Such complex story and dual characters required first class
actors in major roles. Jeremy Irons in his first major role
fulfilled that requirement, but his portrayal of nice,
mild-mannered Victorian gentleman who gets in trouble
because he can't control his romantic desires doesn't look
impressive. But it didn't happen because Irons was bad in
his role; on the contrary, he is as good as ever, but in the
view of the similar roles he played in many recent movies,
his Charles/Mike doesn't look original. Unlike somewhat
typecast Irons, his more versatile partner Meryl Streep is
truly great, although her Sarah seems much more interesting
character than Anna. The other actors are also great,
especially Leo McKern in memorable episode of local
physician who takes interest in uncharted areas of
psychiatry. Reisz also took great efforts to reconstruct
period details, and always reliable composer Carl Davis
creates melancholic atmosphere with his musical score,
dominated by string instruments. The ending of the film is
somewhat overlong and confusing, though. But that wouldn't
general impression about THE FRENCH LIEUTENANT'S WOMAN as
surprisingly successful combination of standard melodrama
and unconventional filmmaking.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
