Title
Review for King of Kings (1961)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
KING OF KINGS (US, 1961)  Directed by Nicholas Ray. Written by Philip
Yordan. Photography,  Franz Planer, Milton Krasner, Manuel Berenguer.
Editing, Harold F. Kress, Renee Lichtig. Set design & costumes, Georges
Wakhevitch. Music, Miklos Rosza. Producer, Samuel Bronston. Cast: Jeffrey
Hunter,  Siobhan McKenna,  Hurd Hatfield, Ron Randell, Viveca Lindfors,
Rita Gam, Carmen Sevilla, Brigid Bazlen,  Harry Guardino, Rip Torn, Frank
Thring, Guy Rolfe, Maurice Marsac, Gregoire Aslan, Royal Dano, Edric
Connor, George Coulouris, et al.  168 minutes.
KING OF KINGS (1961) In 1927, during the waning days of silents, Cecil B.
DeMille made an impressive life-of-Jesus film called "King of Kings."
Nicholas Ray's longer, 1961 version goes one better. It is surprisingly
moving and sober, and though reverential, it amounts to much more than a
collection of biblical postcards. The narration (by Orson Welles) is
limited and well done.
The movie came after a spate of youth-centered pictures such as Nicholas
Rayšs own classic "Rebel Without a Cause" (1955), and after silly titles
like "I Was a Teen-Age Frankenstein" or "I Was a Teen-Age Werewolf." So the
wags dubbed it  "I Was a Teen-Age Jesus " -- a  good jest had the movie
deserved it.
But it didnšt. The joke was unfair to the film, its makers and Jeff Hunter.
Hunter's face may lack the necessary intelligence for his role, but he is
so well directed that he's convincing enough.
True, his King's English is not perfect. Hunter tells the rebelling Jews :
"Romans are conquerors. If you become conquerors you will be no different
than them." Good pacifism, bad grammar. Someone ought to have caught that
jarring "than" and credited Christ with better English, so to speak. But
then, literacy is not Hollywood's forte.
The picture establishes a clear continuity from Jews to Christians, that
is, it stresses the Christians as Jews. There are several unusual scenes.
Among them, Golgotha's disorderly array of crosses comes through like a
mass of TV antennas  --whether by chance or on purpose I cannot tell.
Curiously, the opening of Francois Truffaut's British-made "Fahrenheit 451"
of 1967, with its own antennas, bears some resemblance to this.
(Interestingly, Ray Bradbury, whose book Truffaut adapted, is the
uncredited writer of the narration of King of Kings)
Jesus on the Cross is not a ghoulish sight. We see no torture. The descent
comes very rapidly and discreetly. Physical violence and pain are neither
underlined no exploited.
The interesting supporting cast includes Siobhan McKenna, Robert Ryan, Hurd
Hatfield, Viveca Lindfors, Rita Gam and Rip Torn.
There are many Spanish supporting actors and extras. The movie was filmed
in Spain, as was the entire quartet of "epics" produced by Samuel Bronston.
These were Bronston's claim to fame:  "El Cid" (1961, also partly shot in
Italy and the UK); :The 55 Days of Peking" (1963); "The Fall of the Roman
Empire" (1964). The 1960s were the heyday of shooting "epics" and action
pictures in Spain, including the works of Sergio Leone --his justly famous
Spaghetti Westerns --which were also Paella Westerns.
Beautiful score by Miklos Rozsa. "King of Kings" absolutely ought to be
shown letterboxed, but is not always.  (Edwin Jahiel)
Written = April 10, 1990  Small additions, changes = December 1998
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Edwin Jahiel
KING OF KINGS (1961)  Directed by Nicholas Ray. Written by Philip 
Yordan. Photography, Franz Planer, Milton Krasner, Manuel Berenguer. 
Editing, Harold F. Kress, Renee Lichtig. Set design & costumes, 
Georges Wakhevitch. Music, Miklos Rosza. Producer, Samuel Bronston. 
Cast: Jeffrey Hunter,  Siobhan McKenna,  Hurd Hatfield, Ron Randell, 
Viveca Lindfors, Rita Gam, Carmen Sevilla, Brigid Bazlen, Harry 
Guardino, Rip Torn, Frank Thring, Guy Rolfe, Maurice Marsac, Gregoire 
Aslan, Royal Dano, Edric Connor, George Coulouris, et al.  168 
minutes.
In 1927, during the waning days of silents, Cecil B. DeMille made an 
impressive life-of-Jesus film called "King of Kings." Nicholas Ray's 
longer 1961 version goes one better. It is surprisingly moving and 
sober, and while reverential, it amounts to much more than a 
collection of biblical postcards. The narration, spoken by Orson 
Welles, is limited  (that is, not invasive) and well done.
The movie came after a spate of youth-centered pictures such as 
Nicholas Ray's own classic "Rebel Without a Cause" (1955), and after 
silly titles like "I Was a Teen-Age Frankenstein" or "I Was a 
Teen-Age Werewolf." So the wags dubbed it "I Was a Teen-Age Jesus " 
-- a  good jest had the movie deserved it.
But it didn't. The joke was unfair to the film, its makers and Jeff 
Hunter. Hunter's face may lack the necessary intelligence for his 
role, but he is so well directed that he's convincing enough.
True, his King's English is not perfect. Hunter tells the rebelling 
Jews : "Romans are conquerors. If you become conquerors you will be 
no different than them." Good pacifism, bad grammar. Someone ought to 
have caught that jarring "than" and credited Christ with better 
English, so to speak. But then, literacy is not Hollywood's forte.
The picture establishes a clear continuity from Jews to Christians, 
that is, it stresses the Christians as Jews. There are several 
unusual scenes. Among them, Golgotha's disorderly array of crosses 
comes through like a mass of TV antennas --whether by chance or on 
purpose I cannot tell. Curiously, the opening of Francois Truffaut's 
British-made "Fahrenheit 451" of 1967, with its own antennas, bears 
some resemblance to this.
(Interestingly, Ray Bradbury, whose book Truffaut adapted, is the 
uncredited writer of the narration of "King of Kings")
Jesus on the Cross is not a ghoulish sight. We see no torture. The 
descent comes very rapidly and discreetly. Physical violence and pain 
are neither underlined no exploited.
The interesting supporting cast includes Siobhan McKenna, Robert 
Ryan, Hurd Hatfield, Viveca Lindfors, Rita Gam and Rip Torn.
There are many Spanish supporting actors and extras. The movie was 
filmed in Spain, as was the entire quartet of "epics" produced by 
Samuel Bronston. These were Bronston's claims to fame:  "El Cid" 
(1961, also partly shot in Italy and the UK);  "The 55 Days of 
Peking" (1963); "The Fall of the Roman Empire" (1964). The 1960s were 
the heyday of shooting "epics" and action pictures in Spain, 
including the works of Sergio Leone --his justly famous Spaghetti 
Westerns --which were also Paella Westerns.
Beautiful score by Miklos Rozsa. "King of Kings" absolutely ought to 
be shown letterboxed, but is not always.  (Edwin Jahiel)
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/
