Title
Review for Murder at 1600 (1997)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Dwight H. Little
Writers: Wayne Beach and David Hodgin
Starring: Wesley Snipes, Diane Lane, Daniel Benzali, Alan Alda, Dennis 
Miller, Ronny Cox, Tate Donovan, Harris Yulin, Norman Fell
"Murder at 1600" deals with the rather "Absolute Power"-esque (a far 
better film, by the way) problem that the president may have had sex 
with another woman who wasn't the first lady and then brutally murdered 
her and shoved her corpse in a bathroom in the White House.  Now, I'm 
sorry, but they have the Secret Service to deal with the corpse, and 
they wouldn't just toss it in a bathroom.  Anyway, the chief suspect is 
one of the cleaner's of the White House, and the investigator is a cool 
and inquisitive detective played by the cool Wesley Snipes, and of 
course buddied by wisecracking ubergod, Dennis Miller, who seems to have 
written a line or two of his own dialogue.
Snipes is aided in his investigation with not much initial help by a 
Secret Service chick played by Diane Lane.  But the investigation is 
limited by a creepy White House staffer played by the Daddy 
Warbucks-looking Daniel Benzali (from "Murder One").  He limits nearly 
everything, hindering Snipes investigation.  Also in on the 
investigation is another staffer (Alan Alda), the president's horny son 
(Tate Donovan), and, of course, the President (Ronny Cox), who seems 
rather ignorant with everything anyway.
Now, this film is not a bad film at all.  The plot twists are 
interesting, though not very shocking since somehow you can feel the 
twists minutes before.  And the film has a totally original albeit 
unbelievably proposterous finale, including sneaking into the White 
House (????).  And, of course, the acting's good.  And the actor chosen 
to play the big villain is a totally original choice.  I like that pick 
of casting a lot.
But the characters are all cardboard and any kind of character 
developments are just there for plot reasons.  For instance, Diane 
Lane's characters was a sharpshooter in the Olympics back in the 80s, so 
you know she's gonna be used to shoot some badguys.  And, as most films 
do, it uses the great comic brilliance of Dennis Miller as just a 
character who will either be wounded or killed (I won't say which).  On 
his show once, he said the reason his personality shines through each of 
his film personas is because their so thinly drawn.  He's so right.  The 
guy's a genius, give him a good part some day, will ya?
Anyway, the film is pretty fun for a cliched-ridden thriller, and has 
some really cool plot twists.  It's not its absurdity that's wrong with 
it, but lack of innovation and originality that wounds it.  It's not a 
bad film, but it's nothing special either.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Nick Schaden
    "Murder at 1600" is a movie that starts with promise but ends in
disappointment. It's a candy that initially tastes sweet but has a horrible
aftertaste.
    It isn't necessary for me to ramble on and on about "Murder at 1600"'s
plot, in its most simple form it's an investigation of a murder inside the
White House. In the opening scenes that introduce the audience to the
characters and story line director Dwight Little takes us for a fascinating
ride. I couldn't help but be swept away by both the plot and the strong main
character of Wesley Snipes. Luckily, the plot doesn't attempt to show some
"hidden past" or tough background detective Harlan Regis (Wesley Snipes)
has. Instead, "Murder at 1600" jumps quickly into the movie's main plot. The
movie smartly doesn't dwell in any subplots, which would only hinder and
slow down this kind of picture.
    After roughly a half hour into "Murder At 1600"'s plot, slowly but
surely things turn for the worse. Of chief importance, the movie's once
strong plot drops like a rock with unrealistic and head scratching
situations. Why is the President's son determined (and starting to succeed)
at having sex in "every room in the White House"? Why would a sane person
commit murder to change foreign policy? How does the White House have a
secret "back door" and passages seemingly everywhere that can lead to any
portion of the building? How could a cop-impersonating-janitor get himself
within ten yards of the President?
    However, it must be stressed that not all is bad in "Murder at 1600".
Dennis Miller makes a great partner/sidekick for Snipes's character. In
addition, the other major actors save the movie, Wesley Snipes, Diane Lane
and Alan Alda have solid performances.
    In conclusion, if you're looking for a great story of corruption in
government, don't pick up this movie or the dud "Absolute Power". Even with
some solid acting, "Murder at 1600"'s horrible plot destroys any hope this
movie had of being above average.

Author
Chad Polenz
Murder At 1600
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1997, R, 104 minutes [1 hour, 44 minutes]
[thriller/mystery]
starring: Wesley Snipes (Detective Harlan Regis), Diane Lane (Nina Chance),
Daniel Benzali (Nick Spikings), Dennis Miller (Detective Stengel), written by
Wayne Beach, David Hodgin, produced by Arnold Kopelson, Arnon Milchan,
directed by Dwight Little.
You may have noticed there's a trend happening among Hollywood thrillers, or
more specifically, thrillers concerning the government. Filmmakers know
audiences want detailed (read: "complicated") stories about conspiracies so
that even if they can't understand them, they won't notice the cop-outs and
cliches. "Murder At 1600" lies somewhere in between the trend setters and
followers as it starts out as a standard detective story but eventually
becomes another over-the-top thriller.
The opening sequence does a fine job in establishing a mysterious atmosphere
as we see bits and pieces of a sex scene taking place somewhere in the White
House. Soon we realize the girl involved in the scene was murdered and so the
"whodunit?" routine kicks in. But what's so different and interesting here is
the fact the murder took place in White House, which means everyone inside,
including the First Family, could be suspected.
Wesley Snipes stars as Harlan Regis, a Washington, D.C. homicide detective
who is called in to investigate the murder. And since this is a political
thriller you know this won't be an easy case for anyone to solve because of
the element of national security. The first act lays a good, basic framework
of the power of the government while at the same time making supporting
characters suspects.
Of course what's a strong male lead without a female counterpart? Diane Lane
co-stars as Nina Chance, an Olympic sharpshooter now a Secret Service agent
who is assigned to work with Regis. At first they bicker, then they get
along, and by the end they find themselves saving each others lives (at least
they don't fall in love!). Let's not forget Dennis Miller as Detective
Stengel - Regis' wisecracking buddy who doesn't get nearly enough screen
time.
The majority of the film goes through the motions you'd expect: a possible
conspiracy crops up, Regis and Chance investigate and soon find themselves in
over their heads, then the process repeats.  Little seems to assume anyone
who's seen films like "Clear And Present Danger" and "Patriot Games" should
be able to figure out what's going on, or at least be entertained by the
process. 
There's also those moments of cliffhangers and sudden revelations, and
interaction with characters who think Regis knows too much. But every time
they think they've got a suspect, a motive, and evidence it turns out what
they have points at someone or something else. The plot is also conducive to
double-crosses which in turn lead to chase scenes and shootouts - which is
what we critics call "movie convenient."
Everything comes together for the characters in the final act, but the rest
of the film breaks down. Regis, Chance, and Stengel must break into the White
House in order to "catch" the killer and save the president in the process.
The fact the line "We've never had a security breach in 180 years" is uttered
pretty much says it all.
I think the idea behind "Murder At 1600" was to combine the commercialism of
"Mission: Impossible" with the intelligence of "JFK" and "The Fugitive." Had
it not tried so hard to do both at the same time it could have been something
original, but the net result is at least watchable.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MURDER AT 1600 fits right in with its ancestors - this year's THE
SHADOW CONSPIRACY and ABSOLUTE POWER.  We have yet another massive
conspiracy plot with the White House at the center of the duplicity.
Like its forefathers, it stretches credibility way past the breaking
point.
     All of this having been said, director Dwight Little's MURDER AT
1600 still turns out to be an entertaining thriller.  Yes, the story is
preposterous and the acting by the supporting cast borders on parody,
but the performances by Wesley Snipes and Diane Lane enliven what would
otherwise be a pedestrian movie.  They appear to believe their material
and manage to transfer their acceptance to the audience.  Whereas I
normally get obsessed with the problems of such a Swiss cheese
thriller, this time I found myself swept up into the two heroes'
predicaments.  They believed, so I believed, and I rooted for them
right down to the last chase scene.
     "Yeah, yeah, I got a coat and tie," says the D. C. Homicide
Detective Harlan Regis (Snipes) as he answers his boss's call.  "1600
what?"  That's right, there has been a murder at 1600 Pennsylvania
Avenue, and for some reason the Secret Service wants a local cop to
investigate.
     In the opening scene, Regis establishes his macho prowess, but
will this new assignment be more than he can handle?  When he arrives
at the White House he finds a woman who has been murdered soon after
having has sex with someone, but clues are hard to find, and the Secret
Service is hiding what it knows under the covers of secrecy.  How many
people were in the White House at the time of the murder? -- 31, but
the official list only has names 30 of them.  Regis cannot get the name
of the other because of reasons of national security.
     When Regis goes to the home of the dead woman, the Secret Service
has already stripped it of all the evidence, which it will not show
him.  Moreover, they managed to arrive at her house only fifteen
minutes after she was killed.  This does not add up.  Except for the
First Family, who were at Camp David, Regis considers everyone else
possible suspects.
     All of this happens quickly at the first of the movie.  From there
the film, filled with dramatic music (Christopher Young) down in the
low registers, moves from surprise to surprise with several obligatory
chase scenes to keep the energy going.  The sound effects include the
requisite number of thunderstorms lest you forget to be frightened.
     Beside the impossibility of the script by Wayne Beach and David
Hodgin, the dialog borders on the trite, especially in one supercilious
speech at the end.  Still, the story line twists one way and then
another and always keeps your attention.  Every time you think you have
the mystery figured out, you don't.
     Although Snipes has star billing, Diane Lane's performance is
equal to his.  She plays tough Secret Service agent Nina Chance.  She
manages to be beautiful without any sexual connotations.  She is a
career agent trapped between her conscience and her dedication to her
position.  Both Snipes and Lane play intelligent people with
interesting other lives.  Regis constructs Civil War battlefield
models, and Chance was a gold metal sharpshooter at the Olympics.
     Daniel Benzali wins the award for the worst performance in the
film.  With a constant scowl and a shaved head, he plays the ever
menacing Nick Spikings, head of White House security.  He grunts most
of his lines.
     Ronny Cox plays President Jack Neil.  President Neil has a hostage
crisis to deal with while the murder investigation goes forward.
Lambasted as being an ineffectual and indecisive president, his make-up
has him looking ready for the undertaker.  Alan Alda plays Alvin
Jordan, the president's National Security Advisor.
     A high energy thriller with two good leads.  What more could you
ask for?  Well to start with, a plot with a tinge of plausibility and a
supporting cast that was not embarrassing.  Nevertheless, Snipes and
Lane manage to carry the movie.
     MURDER AT 1600 runs 1:45.  It is rated R for violence, profanity,
and sexuality.  It is a mild R and would be fine for teenagers.  I
enjoyed the picture, flaws and all, so I recommend it to you and give
it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Wesley Snipes, Diane Lane, Dennis Miller, Daniel Benzali, Alan
Alda, Ronny Cox Director: Dwight Little Screenplay: Wayne Beach & David
Hodgin
A dead body in the bathroom makes a smelly, blood stained mess on the
floor. The mystery gets a little more baffling when the homicide takes
place in the White House. The victim is a blonde, Caucasian female in
her mid twenties who has had the honour of sleeping with Uncle Sam and
the dishonour of also sleeping with his son. Such is the shroud of
secrecy and hidden motives behind this slaying, that blame or suspicion
falls on anyone having come in contact with the woman, including the
janitor. The scene opens with the victim having gratuitous sex on the
president's desk, before moments later being bludgeoned to death in a
toilet cubicle. This is probably not the most sordid deal to have passed
over the polished wood of this most distinguished table, but it does
bring to mind that candid question - how many presidents have used this
table for recreational purposes other than political?
Wesley Snipes has reprised his role as a tough guy, no-nonsense homicide
officer assigned to uncover the layers of truth submerged beneath
thicker layers of lies. Teamed with Diane Lane posing as an Olympic
sharp shooter turned White House Secret Service Agent, together they
strip away the thick coats of mystery to find the President at the
bottom of the cake. This otherwise non-inspirational thriller has its
moment of pure silliness when we witness a game of murder in the dark'
in a maze of secret tunnels beneath the White House. The evil navy seal
is about to break Snipes neck in a death grip. Lane points her gun and
finds her mark between the Seal's eyes and should perhaps win the award
for best sharp shooting in the dark. If finding a target was this easy,
give me a blind fold, put an apple on your head and I promise I won't
miss.
This is the fifth tale involving the American President this year and
takes a rather ordinary fourth place behind the more thrilling AIR FORCE
ONE, the more corrupt ABSOLUTE POWER, and the more light hearted MY
FELLOW AMERICANS. When access to 1600 gets as easy as opening a couple
of metal grates, and roaming a few underground tunnels, I find it
surprising that nobody has tried to blow the Institution away with some
home made explosive. As for the excitement over a dead body in the White
House, well people die every day.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Wesley Snipes, Diane Lane, Alan Alda, Daniel Benzali, Ronny
Cox, Dennis Miller.
Screenplay:  Wayne Beach and David Hodgin.
Producer:  Arnold Kopelson and Arnon Milchan.
Director:  Dwight Little.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, sexual situations)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     When I first saw MURDER AT 1600 on the release schedule, I was hoping
against hope that it was about a crime on board a low-flying aircraft.  No
such luck...MURDER AT 1600 is yet another in the long line of recent films
(SHADOW CONSPIRACY, MY FELLOW AMERICANS, ABSOLUTE POWER) which have turned
the White House into cinema's reigning repository of all things dark,
sinister and/or lascivious.  It's not that some of that building's 
residents haven't done a good job of that on their own, at least according
to the juicier innuendo, but come on already.  One Oliver Stone film a
year is enough without every suspense hack to come down the pike throwing
an army of sinister Secret Service agents and megalomaniacal policy wonks
at some poor sucker every six to eight weeks.
     In MURDER AT 1600, the poor sucker is Harlan Regis (Wesley Snipes) a
Washington D.C. homicide detective assigned to the case when a young
female White House staffer is found stabbed to death in a bathroom.  It's
instantly obvious that the White House security, led by Nick Spikings
(Daniel Benzali), is covering something up, but it's not clear what, or
whether Secret Service liaison Nina Chance (Diane Lane) is around to help
Regis or hinder him.  It would be telling to reveal the plot behind the
murder, but naturally it's more complicated than we or Regis initially
believe, and involves a more far-reaching conspiracy.
     I've said before that I'm not a big believer in conspiracy theories,
but that's not why I think most films about conspiracy theories are so
mediocre at best.  Screenwriters Wayne Beach and David Hodgin aren't
interested in creating characters -- Regis and Chance each have one hobby,
as though that defined a personality -- and it's fairly obvious why.  The
conspiracy _is_ the central character in films like this, with the actors
merely running around to achieve dastardly ends or to thwart them.  A film
isn't "important" just because it shows people in power abusing that
power, but the film-makers behave as though the seriousness of their
subject matter should be enough to satisfy the audience.  Worse still,
they behave as though no one else had ever thought of the idea.
     That leaves actors stranded in parts that are as lively as the
miniature figurines Snipes' Detective Regis sets up in recreations of the
Battle of Bull Run.  Snipes is a likeable enough performer, but he is not
doing himself any favors by adding this film to a string of lumbering
action duds like DROP ZONE and MONEY TRAIN.  When a role makes you smart
enough to save the government but stupid enough to walk up to a suicidal,
gun-wielding lunatic and start chatting about your bureaucratic pet
peeves, it's time to use the script for something useful like smacking
your agent in the head.  Daniel Benzali and Alan Alda have more to do with
the heavy roles, but they're just as stranded; Dennis Miller's snarky
sarcasm as Snipes' partner is more a comment on the quality of the film
than anything going on in the film; TV pundit John McLaughlin looks
delighted at the prospect of earning his SAG card for his 100th cameo
appearance.  MURDER AT 1600 is full of paycheck parts, and the cast
doesn't dignify them with anything more than paycheck performances.
     MURDER AT 1600 might have been at least a moderately diverting
thriller if director Dwight Little (RAPID FIRE, MARKED FOR DEATH) had
included a few...well, thrills.  It's a startlingly suspenseless suspense
thriller Little has cobbled together, with drawn-out chase scenes and
shoot-outs which create a lot more noise than tension.  By the time our
heroes begin their invasion of the White House through the underground
tunnel system -- which gets so much pedestrian traffic in these films that
there ought to be a hot dog cart and a souvenir shop -- the audience
probably won't care very much who is responsible for the film's central
crime.  If you've never seen one of these films before, you might get a
buzz out of seeing the mighty brought low.  Some of us have been on this
particular White House tour too many times to find anything interesting
about one more secret meeting in the Oval Office or one more clandestine
rendezvous in the Lincoln Bedroom.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        There's only one presidential election every four years, but it 
seems like every few months we get another presidential conspiracy 
movie painted as _the_ thriller of the year. In 1997, we've had 
ABSOLUTE POWER, AIR FORCE ONE, SHADOW CONSPIRACY 
and MURDER AT 1600. This one is about as lame duck as old Gerald 
Ford, trying to bring us a complex plot of cover-up and intrigue but 
copping out over and over again with rehashes of action flick 
standbys.
        Here's what happens this time. It's night at the White House. 
A secretary is having sex with some unidentified guy with a cute butt. 
The next day she's dead and hotshot detective Wesley Snipes is called 
in. How do we know he's a hotshot? We've seen the traditional action 
flick opener -- the clever hostage negotiation scene. It's not so clever 
this time, consisting of Snipes disarming a suicidal ex-government 
employee holding a gun to his head in the middle of the street.
        Snipes is off to the White House, where he finds the Secret 
Service head (the shiny bald head of Daniel Benzali) won't cooperate 
with him at all. In fact, if not for the intervention of National Security 
Adviser Alan Alda, Snipes wouldn't have been allowed in the White 
House at all. Alda helps Snipes out further, assigning a sexy Secret 
Service agent (Diane Lane) to act as his liaison... a very dangerous 
liaison. Well, not really, I just wanted to say that.
        Almost immediately, a suspect is found, an eccentric night 
janitor seen flirting with the deceased on one of the security videos. 
Snipes doesn't buy it, and launches into an independent investigation 
of his own, one that reveals planted evidence and romantic 
involvement by the president's son. Snipes' partner, an always-
wisecracking Dennis Miller, calls him up every once in awhile with 
more news and Lane, who at first doesn't believe Snipes, eventually 
and predictably comes around, and risks her ass to break into Social 
Security storage and break out some classified information.
        For the first hour or so, MURDER AT 1600 looks like it 
could be going somewhere interesting. Sure, we have to sit through 
the lame opening sequence and plenty more lame scenes after that, 
but the whole murder in the White House thing makes for an 
interesting premise that is never quite delivered upon. Snipes and 
Lane don't make for a bad action team, but with nothing to work 
with, they're just cogs in the bad movie machine. Dennis Miller 
might as well not even be in the movie; they waste his talents more 
in MURDER AT 1600 than they did in BORDELLO OF BLOOD, and 
that's saying a lot.
        When you get to the last half-hour, the movie has descended 
metaphorically and literally into a wet sewer, busting out the old 
break-into-the-building underground climax. And when they finally 
reveal who killed the woman and why, you'll wish you never sat 
through this movie at all. The "1600" in the movie's title doesn't 
represent an address, it represents the number of satisfied customers 
worldwide.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Walter Frith
Another conspiracy movie?  Maybe.  Plausible story?  Yes.
Entertaining?  Definitely.  For all the complaining people do about
government (and a lot of it is justified), it's refreshing to see a
movie that keeps those who think they are above the law within its
boundaries.  Maybe this only happens in the movies but it is a nice
thought.
A murder has occurred at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue (The White House,
Washington, D.C.) and a homicide detective (Wesley Snipes) is assigned
to investigate the crime and runs into stiff opposition from the head
of White House Secret Service (Daniel Benzali) and is aided in his
search for the truth by a conscience-stricken female Secret Service
agent (Diane Lane).  The President's national security advisor (Alan
Alda) is also part of the intrigue as he resists any attempt to link
the first family with the crime.  Snipes is forced to investigate
certain venues in secret which puts his life in danger and the movie
takes many different turns before arriving at its conclusion which
unfortunately isn't disguised too well and many film buffs will have
the story figured out before the climax arrives.
That is about the only flaw keeping 'Murder at 1600' on the money at
all times and is a taut and suspenseful thriller detailing not only the
murder investigation but it also contains a sub plot which involves the
White House dealing with a crisis of military hostages held overseas in
Asia.  It's also too bad that in every film dealing with suspicions at
the highest levels of government, that those central figures remain as
caricatures to the plotline and we never really get to know them as
part of the film's central focus.  It's true in this case with the
President being portrayed by Ronnie Cox ('Deliverance', 'Beverly Hills
Cop', 'Robocop', 'Total Recall') and was also the case in 1994's 'Clear
and Present Danger' in which that film's President (Donald Moffat) was
secondary to the story and 'Independence Day' which portrayed its
President (Bill Pullman) rather poorly.  Even the recent 'Absolute
Power' failed to show its President (Gene Hackman) as anything more
than a second rate characterization.
Wesley Snipes gives his best performance since 'White Men Can't Jump'
(1992) in this picture which makes his character not only intelligent
but determined to get at the truth.  Its a deep portrayal from Snipes
who has been so good and so focused on the characters he's played.
'Murder at 1600' is a step in the right direction for his career.  It's
also a film in which the entire cast figures prominently and delivers
the goods.

Author
Michael Redman
There's a major crime at the White House and the politicians are busy at
work covering it up. This could be either one of many films from the
past couple of years ("Absolute Power", "My Fellow Americans", etc.) or
the headlines from just about any day since the late sixties.
Jumping on the blame-the-government bandwagon, "Murder" is a thriller
that doesn't make much sense...and doesn't need to. Stars Wesley Snipes
and Diane Lane keep it on target even with a plot that has so many
ill-conceived ideas that if you had a chance to stop and think, the most
intelligent comment would be "Huh?"
A young (and coincidentally, beautiful) female staffer is found murdered
in a White House bathroom just an hour after a late night tryst with
someone a few feet from the presidential seal. Virtually every one of
the 30 people in-house are suspects. Or is it 31? Or more?
DC homicide cop Harlan Regis (Snipes) is brought in to make the
investigation "look good" as the Democrats (and you know that this
president is a Democrat: he never served in the army, is dealing with a
hostage crisis and is seen as a wimp) scurry around practicing damage
control. Unfortunately for the spin doctors, Regis is bent on solving
the crime rather than accepting the spoon-fed solution.
Sharpshooter (and coincidentally beautiful) Secret Service agent Nina
Chance (Lane) is assigned to the detective as the official liaison but
it is unclear if she is helping him or hiding the facts. The interaction
between Snipes and Lane is dynamic and their chemistry is hot without
being overtly sexual.
The secondary actors hold up their end admirably. Alan Alda is the
perfect National Security Advisor who is personable and sleazy at the
same time. Ronny Cox plays the President who, although a pivotal player,
has a minor role. Daniel Benzali is the menacing head of White House
security and doesn't turn in much of an acting job, but looks great.
"Saturday Night Live" veteran Dennis Miller has great timing as Regis'
partner: on screen for just a few minutes to provide comedic relief. 
The plot holes? There are so many of them that this column would be
beyond the length limit just to list them. Most notable is the extended
gun fight while our heroes are sloshing through the water in the tunnels
under the White House. They are attempting to get a message to the
President, but there are about a zillion other and  less dangerous
(although also less cinematic) methods to accomplish their task.
Much like last year's "Independence Day", this is an entertaining fun
movie without much other redeeming value. A hunk, a babe, big guns and a
government conspiracy: the summer films are starting early.
[This appeared in the 4/24/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Wesley Snipes, Diane Lane, Dennis Miller, Daniel Benzali, 
      Alan Alda, Ronny Cox
Director: Dwight Little
Producers: Arnold Kopelson, Arnon Milchan
Screenplay: Wayne Beach & David Hodgin
Cinematography: Steven Bernstein
Music: Christopher Young
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     The "1600" in the title, MURDER AT 1600, refers to a house number 
on Pennsylvania Avenue:  the address of the White House.  That makes 
this the third movie in three months (following SHADOW CONSPIRACY and 
ABSOLUTE POWER) to deal with high-level government cover-ups, murders, 
and conspiracies.  Who said Americans are cynical about the Presidency?  
     MURDER AT 1600 isn't the worst of the trio (that dubious honor goes 
to SHADOW CONSPIRACY), but it is easily the most preposterous.  There's 
hardly a single aspect of this motion picture that seems more than 
superficially credible, and if the United States government is really 
run in the Keystone Cops manner depicted in Wayne Beach and David 
Hodgin's script, then this country is in a great deal more trouble than 
anyone suspects.
     MURDER AT 1600 opens with a sex scene in the Oval Office, during 
which a unknown man is enjoying the favors of a gorgeous blond.  (Could 
that man be the President?  The President's son?  The bald head of the 
Secret Service wearing a wig?)  Shortly thereafter, the woman's bloody 
corpse is discovered in a White House bathroom.  While the Secret 
Service swarms in to get the situation under control, Washington 
homicide detective Harlan Regis (Wesley Snipes) is called in to 
investigate.  We know he's a good cop because a needlessly obvious 
prologue gives us a sample of his on-the-job talents as he uses 
unorthodox methods to save a suicidal man's life.  
     Regis is out of his depth on this murder, however.  The head of the 
Secret Service, Nick Spikings (Daniel Benzali), is downright 
belligerent, and only the intervention of Alvin Jordan (Alan Alda), the 
President's National Security Advisor, prevents him from forcibly 
ejecting Regis from the White House.  Nina Chance (Diane Lane), Regis' 
Secret Service liaison (and former gold medal winning sharpshooter), is 
equally frosty and unhelpful.  And governmental forces begin to close 
ranks as the trail of blood points squarely at President Jack Neil 
(Ronny Cox) and his son, Kyle (Tate Donovan).  Meanwhile, as if Neil 
doesn't have enough to worry about at home, an overseas hostage crisis 
threatens to boil over.
     While there isn't much that director Dwight Little can do about the 
lack of intelligence in the storyline, he attempts (with varying 
success) to make up for this deficiency by generating a degree of 
tension during some of the otherwise-routine action sequences.  And, 
although there's little doubt regarding the film's ultimate resolution, 
there is at least some suspense about exactly how it comes about.
     Hollywood should be able to generate a more compelling picture with 
such a promising premise.  Perhaps MURDER AT 1600's greatest flaw is 
that it's so ordinary.  There's nothing new here:  we have the maverick 
cop risking everything by taking on the system so that a killer can be 
brought to justice.  Along the way, there are the requisite chases, 
fights, and shoot-outs, but nothing in this film, from beginning to end, 
sets itself apart as even slightly memorable.  The subject matter, if 
not the presidency, deserves more respect.
     Wesley Snipes is pleasant as usual, but this role could hardly be 
described as a challenge.  Diane Lane fails to bring much emotion or 
appeal to the thankless role of Snipes' female sidekick.  Despite 
displaying more energy than Lane, Dennis Miller (as Regis' partner) has 
less screen time.  Daniel Benzali plays the stereotypical bully in a 
position of power.  And Alan Alda, last seen traipsing through Woody 
Allen's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU, adds another less-than-sterling entry 
to his underwhelming recent resume.
     It's apparent that MURDER AT 1600 underwent some fairly heavy re-
editing shortly before its release.  Not only are there some jarring 
transitions and conspicuous plot holes, but a number of scenes featured 
heavily during the theatrical previews (including Regis uttering the 
momentous line: "1600 Pennsylvania Avenue -- an address that changes all 
the rules") have been excised from the final print.  Not having seen the 
original cut, I can't say whether these changes have helped MURDER AT 
1600.  Regardless of their impact, however, the result is nothing for 
any of the participants to be overly proud of.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
