Title
Review for Juror, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I always knew somewhere, somehow Alec Baldwin 
and Demi Moore would star in a movie together. Think about 
it -- they're both dark-haired, husky-voiced hunks who can't act 
very well. THE JUROR is the movie that proves when you put two 
people of that calibur next to one another trying to pull off serious 
acting, the result will be mostly laughable.
        Demi plays a single parent (mother of androgynous "3rd 
Rock From the Sun" teen Joseph Gordon-Levitt) who is called up 
for jury duty in a Mafia murder case. The jury selection scene at the 
beginning where Demi admits she never follows the news and has 
no idea what's going on in the world seems almost autobiographical. 
I have a hunch she's used the phrase "Someone needs to vote Reagan 
out of office" at least once in the past year.
        No sooner does the trial begin than a handsome gentleman 
shows up to buy some of Demi's sculptures. (If they're anything like 
her pottery in GHOST, I'm sure they'd sell out instantly... That's 
sarcasm.) It's Alec, of course, and after he charms her and gets into 
her house, he reveals his true intentions. He's got the house bugged 
and he'll hurt the kid if he has to unless he hears those two magic 
words -- not guilty.
        Apparently, Demi is the only juror targeted by Alec for 
extortion. He reveals that he "picked" her to convert the other jurors 
to a not guilty verdit because of her magic gift of debate and 
persuasion... and a pair of knockers that won't quit. The first hour 
of THE JUROR is divided between Demi being inexplicably bitchy 
to her kid and slutty best friend and shots of Baldwin listening in 
on and taking pictures of her. Predictably, it turns into a fatal 
attraction kind of obsession, with Alec going above and beyond 
the Mafia call of duty to keep Demi in her place.
        She actually does get them all to acquit the man on trial, 
but that's just the first half of the movie. Baldwin still has to go even 
more over the top in his portrayal of a man so obsessive he kills four 
people after the trial and keeps stalking Demi after she's sent her son 
off to Guatemala for safe-keeping. In between, there are more than a 
few scenes of the two together, sending the Overacting Meter off the 
chart with their inadvertently hilarious exchanges.
        THE JUROR also sets off the Predictability and Boring 
Expository Information Meters in more than one location. I'm going 
to have to sentence this one to life in the Jail of Mediocrity because 
it's probably the worst court trial movie since the gay porn orgy 
HUNG JURY, starring "Twelve Horny Men."
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Columbia)
Directed by    Brian Gibson
Written by     Ted Tally, based on the book by George Dawes Green
Cast           Demi Moore, Alec Baldwin
MPAA Rating    "R" (presumably for violence, language, and badly
                    acted Italian mobsters)
Running Time   ~120 minutes
Reviewed at    General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh, NC (31JAN96)
      At last!  A movie that explains the O.J. verdict!  Well-endowed
literary revisionist Demi Moore stars in this thrill-less thriller, about
a juror-in-jeopardy who must convince her peers to acquit a mobster, or
else whispering bad guy Alec Baldwin will do something scary to her son. 
(Such as, say, forcing him to watch Mom strip on a late-night television
talk show?) Bad bad bad.  There's a fundamental wrongness to THE JUROR
that almost defies explanation.  Every possible dramatic convention is
ignored; every on-screen action has no meaning other than as an absurd,
immediate gratification.  Even the camp value is minimal.  The first
unwatchable movie of the year and, yet, people were clapping and cheering
to the end.  I can't explain it.  Perhaps, after viewing Demi's various
tight-fitting tops, they had formed the opinion that, for certain figures,
Moore is better. 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I have a theory that some actors can not read.  As proof of this I
present Demi Moore in THE JUROR.  If she had been able to read, surely
she would have read the script and seen that it had bomb written on
every page.  There was probably a Surgeon General's warning on the
cover about taking this job being hazardous to an actor's wealth.
     As further proof of my theory, there was her recent disastrous
choice of doing THE SCARLET LETTER.  When she has good material to work
with as she did in GHOST and A FEW GOOD MEN, her incredible talents
radiate so it must be her inability to read that is causing her to make
such poor decisions about which projects to undertake.
     The plot of THE JUROR is that Annie Laird (Demi Moore) is on a
jury trying a big time Mafia boss, Louie Boffano (Tony Lo Bianco), for
murder.  Boffano gets The Teacher (Alec Baldwin) to threaten juror
Laird to not only vote not guilty in an open and shut case, the police
even have a tape of Boffano talking about the murder, but to convince
the rest of the jury to vote not guilty as well.  The show is filled
with major implausibilities and improbabilities.  In an unbelievable
show, the ending manages to be even worse.  I did not think this
possible.
     Annie Laird is an avant-garde artist who makes boxes people stick
their hands in to get an artistic tactical feel.  Sure.  After the
trial begins, a creepy stranger called The Teacher comes with her to
her remote cabin in the woods to see her art.  This is a set up for her
to be able to use lines like, "would you like to feel another one."
You must check your brains at the lobby or you will never be able to
buy a minute of this preposterous script.  When The Teacher is
threatening to kill her son Oliver (Joseph Gordon-Levitt), she is
consoled by The Teacher's partner in crime, Eddie (James Gandolfini),
"Hey, I got a kid too.  I know what you're going through."
     The cliched hyper-spooky music by James Newton Howard has to be
the most ludicrous of the year.  The cinematography by Jamie Anderson
is of the ugly, dark and dreary school with various shades of dirty
blues and grays.
     I was very sad to see one of my favorite actresses, Lindsay Crouse
getting a terrible part as Prosecutor Tallow.  She has to utter absurd
lines as her advice to Laird on the relative danger of the mob, "They
always threaten, but they don't do squat."  On the other hand, there
are almost no good parts in this film.  Most of the film is an
embarrassment as when they show Oliver, aged 12, playing pornographic
video games for no reason.  It is completely out of character for
Oliver.
     Even given the low quality of the script by Ted Tally based on a
novel by George Dawes Green, the overacting by Moore and Baldwin
transforms from merely awful into a colossal disaster.  Too bad
director Brian Gibson didn't pay more attention to the dailies and just
abandon the project before it was completed and save the backers some
money.
     Is there anything good in this turkey?  Well, there are a few very
minor actors in almost trivial roles that are good.  My favorite is
Jack Gilpin (SOMETHING WILD and BARCELONA) playing a juror who is tired
of deliberating and ready to go home regardless, saying, "These people
are scum, but I don't care anymore."
     THE JUROR runs forever at 1:58.  It is rated R for bad language,
sex, brief nudity, and violence.  It would probably be okay for most
teenagers, but I hope none of them waste their time seeing it.  I hated
the show, and I feel certain you will too.  I am giving it 1/2 of a *
only because I have seen worse.  At least the show is more utterly
ridiculous than painfully unbearable.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Demi Moore, Alec Baldwin, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Anne Heche, 
      Tony Lo Bianco, James Gandolfini, Lindsey Crouse
Director: Brian Gibson
Producers: Irwin Winkler and Rob Cowan
Screenplay: Ted Tally based on the novel by George Dawes Green
Cinematography: Jamie Anderson
Music: James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     THE JUROR starts in a courtroom in the United States and finishes 
with a chase through a ruined temple in Guatemala.  If you can imagine a 
screenplay that cobbles together elements of TRIAL BY JURY, THE PELICAN 
BRIEF, and CONGO, you have a fairly good idea what to expect from this 
movie.  As soon as you think THE JUROR can't get any more silly, it will 
inevitably prove you wrong.  
     This is yet another in a *long* line of inane thrillers to pit 
"ordinary" people against amazingly-intelligent, incredibly-nasty, 
often-psychotic adversaries.  Add THE JUROR to an already overpopulated 
category that includes THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE, UNLAWFUL ENTRY, 
PACIFIC HEIGHTS, SINGLE WHITE FEMALE, THE TIE THAT BINDS, and EYE FOR AN 
EYE.  There are three prerequisites this kind of film:  the basic 
storyline must have little or no basis in reality, the main character(s) 
must be unreasonably virtuous, and the villain must be evil incarnate.  
THE JUROR follows each of these precepts to the letter.
     Get ready for Demi Moore in yet another high-profile, artistically 
barren motion picture.  Unlike DISCLOSURE, however, which was actually 
enjoyable, THE JUROR is a trial to sit through.  The movie would like 
viewers to believe it has something relevant to say about the ease with 
which our legal system can be abused, but, in the end, all the posturing 
about the need for a "reasonable doubt" in criminal cases becomes just 
another lame plot element.  THE JUROR never comes close to making a 
serious statements about crime or justice.  Director Brian Gibson wants 
thrills and shocks, not potentially thought-provoking questions.
     Annie Laird (Moore) is a hard-working single mom who spends all of 
her spare time caring for her pre-teen son, Oliver (Joseph Gordon-
Levitt).  She's so ignorant of current events that she becomes an ideal 
candidate for a juror in the high-profile trial of reputed mob boss 
Louie Buffano (Tony Lo Bianco).  At first, she's excited to be selected, 
but it doesn't take long for the thrill to turn to terror.  The evidence 
against Louie, which includes a tape recorded conversation, is 
overwhelming, but the mob isn't worried.  Their best man, the Teacher 
(Alec Baldwin), is on the job.  He singles out Annie as his target and 
makes her an offer she can't refuse:  vote "not guilty" or both she and 
her son will suffer the consequences.
     If this plot sounds familiar, that's because it's a retread of 
1994's TRIAL BY JURY, another horrible courtroom thriller about jury 
tampering.  To differentiate this movie from the earlier one, THE JUROR 
(based on the best-selling novel by George Dawes Green) has expanded 
beyond the trial, resulting in an increasingly-ridiculous series of plot 
twists that climax in a crumbling temple deep in the heart of a 
Guatemalan jungle.  It's like a bad John Grisham plot -- lots of danger 
and running around, little of which ultimately means anything.
     For the most part, the acting is surprisingly good for this kind of 
formula motion picture.  Demi Moore is the lone exception -- it's rare 
that she's believable for more than part of a scene.  Alec Baldwin, on 
the other hand, gives a nicely controlled performance as the obsessive 
man who wants to control not only Annie's vote on the jury, but 
everything about her life.  Supporting players Joseph Gordon-Levitt, 
Anne Heche, and James Gandolfini all do solid, if unspectacular, jobs.
     However, no number of competent performances can save THE JUROR.  
The painfully obvious storyline is what sinks this movie, and even the 
most accomplished cast couldn't have done much more with the material.  
This motion picture is guilty of wasting the time of anyone who wants 
even a modicum of intelligence in their entertainment.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin
