Title
Review for Citizen Ruth (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Christopher Null
     It's been a while since I've anticipated a film this greatly and
been let down so much by the actual product.  Filmed from Alexander
Payne and Jim Taylor's extremely entertaining script, CITIZEN RUTH had a
lot to live up to.  Of course, in some ways, it does, and in some, it
doesn't.  Geez, you'd think I would be used to disappointment by now!
     CITIZEN RUTH is the story of Ruth Stoops (Laura Dern), a "huffer"
(paint/glue/other hazardous vapor sniffer) who finds herself the
unlikely center of a modern morality play.  Ruth, pregnant for the fifth
time and up on drug charges once again, is given a choice by an
unsympathetic judge:  go to jail for criminally endangering her fetus,
or have an abortion and face a lighter sentence.  Immediately, ires are
raised and banners are crafted from both sides of the abortion issue --
with Ruth Stoops, the lowest of the low, right in the middle.
     What follows is a rather simple tale of pro-choice vs. pro-life,
and there's no clear good guy in all of this.  But instead of focusing
on the issue, the filmmakers choose to focus on the characters -- and
they're all pretty loathsome when you get down to brass tacks.  Worst of
all is Dern, who is so gratingly offensive that by the end of the movie
you really just want her to shut up more than anything else.
     Some of the supporting characters are amusing, but it gets to the
point where you just can't take any more Southern small-town kitsch and
an overwhelming desire to leave this no-win debate overtakes you.  But
something keeps you in your seat -- and it isn't just the gum on the
floor.  I guess it's the humor that the filmmakers have instilled into
this not-too-funny situation and the earnestness with which they try to
tell this story.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Huffer" Ruth Stoops has a big problem.  The judge has sent her to
substance abuse programs many times for sniffing everything from model
glue to brake fluid.  Now she has been caught again, and this time she
is pregnant.  The judge has had it with her.  She has already had four
kids taken from her, although she disputes the exact number taken
because she was an unfit mother, so the judge wants to try her for
felony criminal endangerment of the fetus in her womb.
     CITIZEN RUTH has the audacity to skewer both sides of the most
controversial issue in America today -- abortion.  The judge takes Ruth
aside and hints that, if she gets an abortion, he will not bring her to
trial.  The local anti-abortion group hears this and takes Ruth in.
They figure that the judge's twisted logic of kill the fetus through an
abortion or I will try you for abusing the fetus will turn the case
into a cause celebre, which it does.
     Laura Dern, acting for just union scale wages, gives a brilliant
and unflinching performance in a totally unsympathetic role.  If you've
never seen a spray paint can sniffer in action -- I hadn't -- then you
have no idea how gross it can be.  The script by first-time
screenwriters Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor never tries to gloss over
her actions or give her some big redemptive scene.  Throughout the
show, bathrooms pose a special danger for Ruth since she finds good
sniffing material in bathroom cleaning supplies.  Her serious role is
the fulcrum that supports the rest of the characters, who are drawn so
broadly that they become delicious parodies.
     So, you ask, can they form a compelling story out of this?  The
tug of war over the baby in Ruth's body becomes the basis of a comedy
that works surprisingly well.  First-time director Alexander Payne, one
of the co-writers, has a deft sense of how to balance the serious with
the comedy and balance the goring of both sides of the political
debate.  I was at a special screening of the film at which the film's
editor Kevin Tent spoke.  He said that although he believes the film
does not favor either side, many people with strong views pro or con on
abortion believe that it favors their own camp.
     Like prize fighters in a ring, we have the two sides, each of
which house Ruth at various times in the story.  In one corner is the
pro-life organization called the "Baby Savers."  The Stoney family runs
the local chapter of the organization.  Kurtwood Smith is hilarious as
the supercilious father and hardware store worker Norm Stoney.  He has
his flaws, including a roving eye toward Ruth.  Mary Kay Place does the
part of his middle-class wife Gail.  Gail wants Ruth to know that they
love her but that she must not sit on the chairs in the living room.
It just isn't done.
     The rest of the Stoney family includes a perfect eight year old
named Matthew (Sebastian Anzaldo III) and a completely rebellious
teenager named Cheryl (Alicia Witt).  While the Stoney family wears
their Christian values on their sleeves, Cheryl sneaks out to do drugs
and smuggles boys in her room for sex.  Her parents seem oblivious to
the problems under their own roof as they try to repair the problems of
the rest of the world.
     Outside an abortion clinic, Gail alternates between eating honey
glazed donuts and screaming "baby killer" at the arriving cars.  Other
anti-abortion activists are more articulate.  "It's just a business to
them," one Vietnam vet explains to Ruth.  "Four or five hundred bucks a
pop.  It's just contract killing."
     Just as soon as some in the audience gets riled up over the unfair
portrayal of the pro-life faction, the pro-choice group appears in the
other corner of the ring to get their taking down by the script.
Swoosie Kurtz plays Diane, the leader of the local chapter, who starts
the film as a spy deep in the Baby Savers group.  Diane's unabashed
lesbianism does not shock Ruth, but how little Diane ends up caring for
Ruth does.  Soon Ruth comes to realize that her body represents no more
than a small battleground in a larger war.  M. C. Gainey plays a Hells
Angel type pro-choicer named Harlan who surrounds Diane's house with
his buddies to guard Ruth like a prisoner.
     Both sides call in their big battleships -- their respective
national leaders.  Amazingly, Burt Reynolds is fairly good as Blaine
Gibbons, the Bible-toting national leader of the Baby Savers.  (I have
a rule, most recently validated by the turkey known as STRIPTEASE, to
avoid all Burt Reynolds films as completely hopeless.  Here Reynolds
displays some long hidden talent.)  Tippi Hedren (THE BIRDS) gives a
cameo role as Jessica Weiss, the head of the national pro-choice group.
     When Ruth's rock tape gets busted, she steals the only tape she
can find -- an investment strategy tape by someone named Larry Jarvick.
"...keep the chart handy as we figure the capitalization effect on your
assets," advises Larry.  Like someone listening to ancient Sanskrit,
Ruth becomes increasingly fascinated by its incomprehensible mantra.
     In the best scene in the show, Ruth goes wild inside Diane's house
when the Baby Savers announce on television that they will pay her
$15,000 to have the baby.  Hosanna, her ship has finally come in.  Not
having ten dollars to her name, she feels like she has won the lottery.
Her "friends" in the house cannot fathom her happiness so they explain
to her why she can't have the money.  To this Ruth moans, "Why can't I
ever have what I want?"  And later, "my body belongs to me!"  Soon the
inevitable bidding war will begin.  Nevertheless, the show is resolved
in a fresh and pleasantly surprising ending.
     After the screening, editor Kevin Tent stayed and answered some
questions.  The first was about the film's distribution problems.
CITIZEN RUTH opened last year to almost uniformly glowing reviews.
Even so, Miramax never put it into general release.  One member of the
audience speculated that perhaps the film was considered a hot potato
since it poked fun at so many groups.
     Tent went on to talk about the editing of the picture.  He said
that he was surprised at the casting of Kurtwood Smith as the father
since he usually plays a heartless bad guy.  Smith ended up being so
funny that they had to edit out a lot of his scenes to keep the movie
from going overboard.
     The other tidbit he gave was that originally there was an
additional ending added after the film's current ending.  All during
the show, Ruth kept wanting to watch TV, but was never allowed to.
Some of the scenes were left on the cutting room floor, but a few of
them made it into the final print.  In the additional ending that was
cut, Ruth goes to a video store full of monitors all covering the
controversy surrounding her.  She switches them off and turns to a soap
opera.  As the film ends, she is in bliss.
     Tent says the role of the editor and director is that of
hypnotists.  They must keep the audience in control and never lose them
by letting scenes run on too long.  Well, he and Payne certainly
hypnotized and mesmerized our audience with their delightful and
insightful black comedy.
     CITIZEN RUTH runs 1:44.  It is rated R for drug usage and some
profanity.  It would be fine for older teenagers.  I recommend the film
to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Miramax)
Starring:  Laura Dern, Swoosie Kurtz, Mary Kay Place, Kurtwood Smith,
Kelly Preston.
Screenplay:  Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor.
Producers:  Cary Woods and Cathy Konrad.
Director:  Alexander Payne.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, drug use, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  103 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     CITIZEN RUTH is not coming soon to a theater near you.  If you live
in one of the half-dozen or so cities where Miramax gave the film a trial
run, you missed it months ago; if you don't live in one of those cities,
you never even got the chance to miss it.  No one markets unconventional
or controversial films better than Miramax, but even they couldn't get
more than a handful of people into theaters to see CITIZEN RUTH.  This
time, they were dealing with the Grand Poobah of unconventional,
controversial subjects.  You see, CITIZEN RUTH is about abortion.  No,
wait, it gets worse -- CITIZEN RUTH is a _comedy_ about abortion.  It sets
out to offend nearly everyone, and succeeds.  It's got an unrepentant
loser as its protagonist, and she's the most likeable character in the
film.  In short, CITIZEN RUTH has absolutely everything working against it
except a blisteringly funny script, assured direction and a remarkably
brave lead performance by Laura Dern.
     Dern plays Ruth Stoops, a young woman with no home, no job and a
penchant for sniffing anything that comes in a can or a tube.  Ruth is
already a four-time loser as a mother when she learns after her 17th 
arrest for inhalation of dangerous substances that she is pregnant.  The
judge (David Graf) threatens Ruth with a felony charge for endangerment of
her fetus, but suggests that he might reconsider if she were to get an
abortion.  That suggestion outrages local right-to-life leaders Norm
(Kurtwood Smith) and Gail Stoney (Mary Kay Place), who take Ruth into
their home and try to turn her case into a media event.  Of course the
other side isn't about to sit still for such tactics, eventually snaring
Ruth away from the Stoneys to make their own political statement.  Stuck
in the middle is Ruth herself, who seems to have more control over
procuring her next high than over the fate of her pregnancy.
     If you were inclined to keep a tally, you'd probably find that
Alexander Payne and co-writer Jim Taylor don't split their mockery evenly
down the middle.  They take some savage shots at the Baby Savers' tactics,
including a hilarious scene at a "clinic" where Ruth receives "counseling"
about her "choice."  Norm, meanwhile, is portrayed as an ineffectual
horn-dog who ogles Ruth in a bathroom and uses his job as a hardware
store clerk to proselytize.  That doesn't mean the pro-choice advocates
get off easy.  They are portrayed as just as obsessed with "messages" and
public relations, and just as star-struck by their national leader.  It's
also hard not to chuckle at the terribly earnest paean one lesbian couple
sings to the "moon mother."
     There is only one place where the film-makers' sympathies obviously
lie, and that is with Ruth.  You may have a hard time sharing that
sympathy, however, because Laura Dern isn't interested in making you like
Ruth.  Ruth is a selfish manipulator, always ready to swear that she's
going to turn her life around a moment before she grabs a full bottle of
chianti and an empty bottle of toilet cleanser.  It is a gutsy and
brilliant performance, one on which the success of CITIZEN RUTH as a
social satire depends.  If Ruth Stoops is turned into one of the
sanctified poor, the film collapses under the weight of its sincerity.
Instead, she is made completely oblivious to anything but her own
immediate needs.  She is a walking worst-case scenario, which makes it
easy for both sides to use her as an example.  It also makes it impossible
for either side to control her, making for some of the funniest film
moments of the year.
     Payne's most extraordinary accomplishment may be satirizing both
sides of a serious issue while never understating the seriousness of the
issue itself.  In fact, CITIZEN RUTH is really about how this particular
battle has taken on a life of its own apart from the people affected by
it.  There is a scene at a protest early in the film where a clinic
employee chides protesters' behavior with a reminder that they "know the
drill."  It is a telling moment.  At some point, Ruth Stoops' case becomes
just another drill, another "war story" like the one a protester tells as
he gathers with colleagues as though in a social club.  Near the climax of
the film Ruth tries to escape from both sides, and is shocked to discover
that she can walk away virtually unnoticed; everyone is too busy shouting
to pay attention to a single troubled woman.  It's a shame that a
subversively spectacular film like CITIZEN RUTH managed to walk away just
as unnoticed.  

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 12/13/96 (limited); 12/25/96 (wider)
Running Length: 1:46
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Laura Dern, Swoosie Kurtz, Kurtwood Smith, Mary Kay Place, 
      M.C. Gainey, Kelly Preston, Burt Reynolds, Tippi Hendren
Director: Alexander Payne
Producers: Cathy Konrad and Cary Woods
Screenplay: Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor
Cinematography: James Glennon
Music: Rolfe Kent
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     The average movie about the abortion debate tends to be preachy, 
melodramatic, and unbearably solemn.  So, it comes as something of a 
shock that the latest venture to the front line of the pro-life/pro-
choice battle is actually a *comedy*.  Director/co-writer Alexander 
Payne has taken the slogans, name-calling, and behind-the-scenes 
tactics, and created a vicious satire that skewers (and probably 
offends) those on both sides of the issue.  There's a serious message 
here, as well -- that in a war between ideologies, it's too easy to lose 
sight of the individual.
     As ambitious and unconventional as Payne's approach is, however, it 
doesn't always succeed.  The most serious and the most outrageous 
elements of the film occasionally work against one another.  CITIZEN 
RUTH is moderately more successful than THE LAST SUPPER in attempting an 
evenhanded lampoon, but there are times when the comic elements seem 
forced and overplayed.
     Laura Dern (RAMBLING ROSE) is Ruth Stoops, a glue-sniffing, 
alcoholic drifter who has been arrested 16 times for "hazardous vapor 
inhalation".  She has given birth to four children, all of whom have 
been taken away from her by the government.  (She's a walking definition 
of the term "unfit mother".)  Her family and friends have disowned or 
abandoned her.  Now, after being jailed for getting high on patio 
sealant, she learns that she's pregnant again.  The judge decides to 
allow charges of felony criminal endangerment of the fetus, but tells 
Ruth that if she gets an abortion, he'll reconsider.  Suddenly, Ruth's 
case becomes a lightning rod for local activists.  The struggle for 
Ruth's conscience pits the Baby Savers, run by an evangelical husband-
and-wife team (played by Kurtwood Smith and Mary Kay Place), against a 
pro-choice organization headed by a lesbian feminist (Swoosie Kurtz).  
The situation rapidly develops into a war where the weapons are coercion 
and bribery, and the last thing anyone seems to care about is Ruth. 
     CITIZEN RUTH starts out dark and grim, with the first ten minutes 
devoted to exposing Ruth in various states of degradation.  In short 
order, she goes from being a whore to a beggar to a glue-sniffer.  It's 
an uncomfortable way to begin any film, especially one that wants us to 
laugh.  I'll give Payne credit for being daring, but his approach is not 
an unqualified success.  The switch to comedy is unheralded, and may 
alienate more viewers than it entices.  Personally, while I found the 
transition disconcerting, the results are ultimately worthwhile.  
     Laura Dern gives an excellent performance, allowing herself to be 
photographed in an extremely unattractive fashion, with no makeup, dark 
circles under her eyes, and lank, unwashed hair hanging below her 
shoulders.  She plays Ruth as a selfish, but very human, character who 
only cares about the pro-life and pro-choice movements in relation to 
how she can benefit from them (preferably financially).  In an odd way, 
the strength of Dern's acting could almost be seen as detrimental to the 
film.  If Ruth wasn't this believable, the most over-the-top aspects of 
the satire wouldn't feel as overbearing.  
     Every character except Ruth is a pure caricature -- the 
personification of an exaggerated point-of-view.  The most obvious 
example of this is the national pro-life leader.  Played with delicious 
self-parody by Burt Reynolds, he is the kind of smarmy, hypocritical 
creep who gives televangelists a bad name.  Holy and pious in public, he 
is shown to be vain, greedy, and arrogant in private (he even has a 
personal "boy toy" servant).  Reynolds' liberal counterpart, portrayed 
by Tippi Hendren, is presented as more subdued, possibly because she has 
much less screen time.
     CITIZEN RUTH has its share of bitingly funny moments, and some of 
the comedy is quite inventive.  By structuring the film as a satire, 
Payne is able to make statements about the abortion issue that no 
straight film would likely attempt, and, as is often the case, there's a 
great deal of truth buried in the humor.  In fact, CITIZEN RUTH's 
weakest moments occur not when it's savaging social causes and political 
concerns, but when it attempts to inject conventional drama into its 
exaggerated, outrageous milieu.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Chuck Dowling
Citizen Ruth (1996) ** out of ***** - Cast: Laura Dern, Swoosie Kurtz,
Kurtwood Smith, Mary Kay Place, Burt Reynolds, Kelly Preston, David Graf,
Alicia Witt, Tippi Hedren, Diane Ladd. Written by: Alexander Payne and Jim
Taylor. Directed by: Alexander Payne. Running Time: 105 minutes.
George Carlin once said that you can joke about anything. I believe that.
Although it helps when the joke is funny. "Citizen Ruth" tries to poke fun
at the abortion controversy raging in this country right now, and while the
subject isn't exactly known for its comedic potential, it would have been
possible for this film to be funny. But it's not. Mainly it comes across as
awkward.
Laura Dern plays Ruth Stoops, an indigent woman who has major drug problems
and has become pregnant for the fourth time. After being arrested, she faces
felony charges for indangering the life of her fetus. The judge then comes
to her and tells her to go and "take care" of her problem (which makes
absolutely no sense based on the crime which she was charged). Eventually,
organizations representing both sides of the issue are involved, and are
playing a game of tug-a-war with Ruth's situation. Neither side really cares
about Ruth herself, but are just using her to advance their agenda.
The character of Ruth Stoops needed to be sympathetic at some point for the
audience to care about her, but it never happens. Whenever she's not trying
to get high from paint or glue fumes, she's getting drunk, yelling,
screaming, crying, falling down stairs, beating up young children, or
punching herself in the stomach. It got to the point where the people who
were exploiting her came off more favorably than she actually did.
There are just a couple of good things about the film. One is a scene
involving a very perky pro-choice doctor and nurse. That scene made me
laugh. The other is Burt Reynolds. I like Burt, and I'm glad to see him
working. Other than that though, "Citizen Ruth" isn't very entertaining, and
mostly comes off as an unpleasant viewing experience. [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
In a surprising first feature, director and co-writer Alexander Payne,
stabs straight into the heartland of America with "Citizen Ruth", a
satire using the abortion issue as its focus, but  really striking at
fanaticism in all forms as its target.
Laura Dern plays Ruth Stoops, a hopeless drifter who has a penchant
for "huffing", inhaling the aerosol propellants in things like spray
paint and driveway sealer. When she is arrested for this abuse for the
16th time, AND she's found to be pregnant, she is charged with
endangering a fetus and is to serve a hefty sentence - that is, until
the judge offers clemency if she gets rid of her "problem".
Here begins the satire as the fanatical fringe elements on both sides
of the abortion issue do battle, with the brain damaged, but not
stupid, Ruth at its center.
This is a very impressive feature debut for Alexander Payne that
benefits from a tremendously talented cast, with an Oscar caliber
performance from Laura Dern.
Dern, who looks a wreck through most of the film, puts it on the line
as the totally self absorbed, selfish, and really screwed up substance
abuser, Ruth. Like Harrelson does in "Larry Flynt", Dern gives a
performance that has you believing that a Ruth Stoops can exist in our
world. She is funny, conniving, pathetic, smart and stupid at varying
times and degrees. Her dives into substance abuse are strikingly
handled both through Dern's acting and the notable camera work.
Supporting cast, headed by Swoosie Kurtz, Kutwood Smith, Mary Kay
Place, Kelly Preston, Tippi Hedrin  and Burt Reynolds all lend good
comic turns as the fanatics vying for Ruths fetus, if not her soul.
The script, written by director Payne and Jim Taylor, takes its
satirical shots at a whole spectrum of politics, from the homophobic,
right wing reactionary pro-lifers to the ultra left femi-Nazis
pro-choice faction. It puts the fanatical fringes in their deserved
light, showing just how absurd mindless causes can be.
Placing Ruth at the center of this maelstrom helps take the edge of
the extremists, showing how meaningless their causes really are. If
Ruth, the focus of their beliefs, doesn't care, how can they,
possibly, justify their cause? Ruth walks out of the picture while
both sides do battle, and it doesn't matter - its not he object of the
cause thats important, just the cause.
"Citizen Ruth" is an amusing, thoughtful satire and a very good effort
for a feature debut. Laura Dern shines out in a solid film. She's one
of my favored contenders for a best actress nomination. Its her best,
hardest hitting work to date.
We get another standout female performance from Laura Dern as
Ruth Stoops in "Citizen Ruth."  What a crowded field for Best Actress
consideration this year - I could nominate 10 worthy performances!
Dern gives one of the best even of those, though, as the painfully
clueless, totally irresponsible and selfish Stoops.  The most amazing
thing about her work is that you'll be routing for her by the end
of the film, as she rejects both the pro-lifers' and pro-choicers'
attempts to use her to 'send their messages.'
The directorial and screenwriting debut of Alexander Payne is a witty
look at how fanaticism turns well intentioned people into raving
lunatics who eventually lose sight of their cause in their campaign
to 'win.'
Mary Kay Place and Kurtwood Smith are the falsely sunner pro-lifers
(baby savers in this film's lingo).  Their faction is led by Burt
Reynolds as Blaine Gibbons in an oily performance that recalls
his work in "Striptease."  In an uproariously jaw-dropping display
of ego and bad taste, Gibbons keeps as his flunky a suspicously
effeminate adolescent, Eric, who Gibbons saved from an abortion.  Eric
tests the temperature of Gibbons' massage oil by shaking a few drops
from a baby's bottle onto his wrist before applying it to the back
of Blaine's neck!
Swoozie Kurtz and Kelly Preston are the liberal, moon goddess
worshipping lesbian pro-choicers.  Their leader is Tippi Hedren as
Jessica Weiss, a woman so shallow, she describes Ruth as heroic upon
meeting her.
Dianne Ladd makes a surprise and uncreditted appearance as Ruth's 
Mom (Ladd is Dern's mother).
"Citizen Ruth" is a very original comedy highlighted by beautifully
odd comic accents.  When Ruth is first brought into the home of
the baby savers, she relaxes in a bath and entertains herself by
enjoying alternating eye views of her toe in the bathtub faucet, a
scene that's not only funny, but defines just how much of Ruth's brain
has been destroyed by her chemical inhalations.
Unfortunately, the very well-realized satire comes to its end a bit
weakly.  You know where Payne's headed and it's the right way to go,
but it could have used a sharp punchline to wrap.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Author
James Brundage
Written by Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor
Starring Laura Dern, Swoosie Kurtz, Mary Kay Place, Kurtwood Smith, Kelly
Preston, M.C. Gainey, Alicia Witt, and Burt Reynolds
     Look, I know I'm going to get flamed after this, and anyone with a
militant opinion one way or the other about the issue should know that I
really don't care.  So don't waste your time.  That said, down to the review
of one of the most controversial movies I have seen in a while.
     I just got off of a Laura Dern trip.  First, I completed David Lynch's
Wild at Heart.  Then, I immediately popped in Blue Velvet, another
Lynch/Dern collaboration.  Afterwards, I took a brief respite from the
serious in the form of the dark comedy Curdled.  Then, this morning I
checked my TV guide and saw that Citizen Ruth was on TMC so I decided to go
back on my Laura Dern trip.  So, dutifully taking my clicker, I changed to
channel 18 and was greeted by the little dog hyping a feature presentation
and then got down to watching my third Laura Dern movie in two days, Citizen
Ruth.
     Citizen Ruth, like Blue Velvet, is a dark satire.  One of them takes on
a relatively safe subject, small towns, in a relatively unsafe way.  Citizen
Ruth takes on the least safe subject that it can find, abortion, and does it
in the most unsafe way possible.
     Before you start steaming at your computer as your own personal
opinions on the subject come to the surface, let me say this to placate you:
Citizen Ruth does not take a side.  Or, rather, it is equally fair to both.
The fairness that Citizen Ruth displays, however, is in taking each side out
back and beating it with a stick.
     Citizen Ruth follows Ruth Stoops (Laura Dern), a huffer by inclination
that has been charged with criminally endangering her fetus.  Now, here
starts the offensive part: the judge has made an offer to reduce the charges
if she decides to get an abortion.  While in jail awaiting trial, a group of
rabid pro-lifers called the "baby savers" (with the centerpiece players
being Kurtwood Smith, Mary Kay Place, and Burt Reynolds) bail her out and
decide to make sure that she has the baby (mainly motivated not even out of
a concern for the baby but because they want to take the judge and hang him
out to dry.)
    These people are the stereotypes.  They are Republicans, owning a
mortgaged house and having two kids (one a rebellious slut (Alicia Witt)
underneath their nose).  The husband works, the wife does not.  The son
makes model planes.  The husband has a wandering eye.  They sing praises to
Christ until the cows come home.
     Ruth, of course, is the complete antithesis of them.  She wants to
watch a TV which they don't have.  She wants to party, which is, of course,
a sin.  And, in order to avoid going to jail, she wants to have an abortion.
So they send her to an anti-abortion clinic where caring is supposed to be
the doctrine but it ends up being more like complete hatred.
     When you're starting to really get the point about how hypocritical the
anti-abortion people are being, you then get to see the pro-choicers
skewered like a shiskabob.  Ruth ends up being kicked out of the pro-lifer's
home and into the hands of a self-proclaimed "spy in the war", Diane
(Swoosie Kurtz).  Diane, Democrat to the bone, has been playing as if she
hates abortion so she could go undercover and get inside information to
sabotage the baby savers plans.  Can you say "psycho?"
     Diane is a lesbian, pagan, new-age fanatic who wants nothing more than
to make sure that Ruth gets the abortion.  She calls in Harlan (M.C.
Gainey), ex-special forces commando that makes absolutely sure the
pro-lifers don't disturb their well-laid plans.
     As the debate increases much like a cold war, money is laid down on the
table.  The pro-lifers start by offering $15,000.  The pro-choicers
counterbid.  Ruth, feeling like she has won the lottery, is ecstatic.
     Now most of you with strong opinions are probably going for your
shotguns trying to find where I and the people who made this film lived.
Please, leave us alone.  As I said, Citizen Ruth never really speculates on
whether abortion is right or wrong it only states that when you take an
opinion too strongly, things go wrong.
     Look at it!  You have a group of people saying that they want to save
the baby that don't care anything about the baby!  In the other corner, you
have a group saying that they want to save the woman that doesn't care
anything about the woman!  The message Citizen Ruth displays is for all of
the disillusioned souls who have gotten caught up so much in the war over
right and wrong that they have forgotten right and wrong in and of
themselves.
     The movie ends up being laughable thanks to the excellent performance
by Dern, who shines through as always and doesn't make the mistake of trying
to make Ruth nice.  Were Ruth a nice person, the story would lose its point,
and no one would want that.
     The film is bitterly ironic to the end, as shown in the fact that both
sides, professing endlessly to care about Ruth, are too busy shouting each
other down to notice that she's gone.  Oh, well.
     For anyone with or without a militant opinion, this movie should show
you why you should not possess it.  It is a movie with a political motive, a
satiric means, and a wonderful end.  I'd say enjoy, but it's not quite the
right word.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
CITIZEN RUTH (director: Alexander Payne; cast: Laura Dern (Ruth Stoops),
Swoozie Kurtz
(Diane), Kurtwood Smith (Norm Stoney), Mary Kay Place (Gail Stoney),
Kelly Preston (Rachel), M.C. Gainey (Harlan), Tippi Hedren (Pro-Choice
Activist), Burt Reynolds (Pro-life Activist), Kenneth Mars (Pro-life
Doctor), David Graf (Judge Richter), 1996)
Citizen Ruth will not gets its hands dirty by taking a side in this
controversial film about the abortion argument being waged by pro-choice
or pro-life forces. It takes place in a Southwestern city, supposedly a
representative place of how middle America is thinking. Though the film
subtly is weighted in favor on the feminist side of the question, it
still for most of the film chooses, instead, to overtly attack both
sides for caring only about their opinions and not about the individual.
Their weapon of choice in this attack is satirical comedy not preaching.
The main focus of the film is on Ruth Stoops (Dern), who is a sniffer of
chemicals, an alcoholic, and all-around dead-beat. She has numerous
arrests and scores of failures in the court's substance abuse program.
This time she is caught sniffing a patio sealant and is also pregnant
for the fifth time. None of her children remain in her custody. So the
question becomes, what should society do with her; nothing tried so far
has altered her deleterious behavior.
Since the film will not offer its opinion about what to do with this not
so nice or redeemable idler, but chooses to show its fairness by
unfairly attacking both sides of the abortion argument. This leaves us
wondering how much the filmmaker really cared about Ruth. She seemed to
be used by them, for the purposes of making this film, in the same way
they are accusing both sides of doing. Is their answer that she is
hopeless and we shouldn't waste our time with her problems. They offer
no solutions for her drug abuse, which is just about where the current
political climate in America is, anyway. So it doesn't really surprise
me that a film tackling a taboo political subject should be so cautious
and centrist in its views. But what bothers me, is that this film came
on pretending to be hip to the problems of the homeless.
The judge decides to charge Ruth with a felony of endangering the life
of a fetus through drug abuse and will only reduce her sentence if she
agrees to an abortion. While in jail, she meets some members of a
Christian pro-life group called "Baby Savers". They vow to help her and
start by bailing her out into the home of one of their leaders, Norm
Stoney (Kurtwood). He is a blue-collar family man, with two children, a
young boy who builds model airplanes and a teen-age daughter who is a
tramp (the family doesn't know this). Norm echoes all the obnoxious
slogans and dogmas and hypocrisies of his fundamental Christian beliefs.
At work he is humbled by his department store manager, who deplores him
for bringing his cause into the workplace. Yet, among his group members
and his wife, he is a pillar of strength for the cause.
When at the Stoney's, Ruth realizes she is at the center of a national
battle between pro-life and
pro-choice forces. The dim Ruth is a selfish "huffer" (smeller of any
chemical in a paper bag) and could care less about anyone but satisfying
herself; in other words, she is not a very sympathetic person. If there
is any excuse offered for her behavior, it is that she was an abused
child. The Stoney's are not her kind of people, and their insistence
that she keep the baby does not play well with Ruth. So things take a
bad turn there, and she is turned over to another household of
pro-lifers. But the catch is, that Diane (Swoozie) is a spy for the
pro-choice group and now influences Ruth to get the abortion. In her
camp, we meet a crazed ex-Viet Nam special force veteran Harlan (M.C.),
who handles security for the group. And we see that there is a lesbian
relationship between Diane and Rachel, another pro-choice group member.
Ruth looks upon these do-gooders without identifying with them. Both
groups are the "haves" to her.
Everyone in the film is stereotyped: the pro-lifers are Republicans,
religious fanatics, family value people, sexually repressed, drivers of
station wagons, and self-righteous. The pro-choicers are Democrats,
lesbians, pagan worshippers, those with loose morals, without God, and
insincere. Ruth is a stereotype of a white-thrash druggie, who is
childish and irresponsible, someone who must find instant gratification
to exist. She has no salient values and is not looked upon as a real
person.
With the stakes raised by the national attention on this fight, the
local groups call in the heavy hitters from their national headquarters.
Again, the arguments against both sides is handled in an even-handed
manner. Both leaders are viewed as hypocrites. Burt Reynolds is the
wealthy pro-life minister of the Baby Savers group. He flies in to offer
his help and the group's resources to fight to save the baby. This group
offers Ruth initially 15,000 to have the child, but doubles the offer on
Burt's insistence. His family value argument is underscored by the "boy
slave" he keeps in tow.
The pro-choice group calls in their wealthy national head Tippi Hedren,
who pushes her fashionable weight around and relishes in the publicity.
When Ruth is about to jump at the 15,000 grand of the pro-life group,
Harlan offers to match the money on his own. That is money he settled
with the government for an agent orange claim (this offer seemed
incredulous). It comes apparent to even the dim Ruth that both sides are
using her as a political pawn. That her only hope is to look out for
number one.
The only thing that can save this film from its cautious stand, is what
you thought of Dern's performance. She is the only character in the
story who is allowed to grow out of her one dimensional role, be it,
only into a two dimensional one. And that is the rub against the
picture, it can't get beyond the absurd nature of its satire, as
everyone in the film remains a cartoon figure. So the outcome should
come as no particular surprise. We see Ruth rejecting both political
sides and floundering along on her own; she is last seen with a gun and
a bagful of cash, running down an alley to escape from all sides. Could
this really be Payne's idea of how to resolve the issue? As for Dern's
grating and, at times, just too much of an annoying performance, it
failed to evoke concern for her plight. By the film's end she still
appeared to be white-trash, to be laughed at and dismissed as being
someone society can't help. The entire film's satire was a futile effort
at comedy. It's weak position on the issues allowed it to throw stones
at everyone and seem like it was hip to what was going on, but in
reality it changed no one's mind about abortion; and, in the bargain, it
wasn't a particularly funny film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
