Title
Review for Wild Bunch, The (1969)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Will FitzHugh
Sam Peckinpah's classic western just got a limited theatrical run with
some restored footage.  I've seen it a couple of times on video, late
at night and kind of woozy, so I decided to go see it on the big
screen.  I sat in the front row; for this epic I didn't want anything
between me and the screen.  I wanted to see Ernest Borgnine's nostrils
like two railway tunnels.
Peckinpah portrays the west as a grimy, sweaty place populated by the
stupid, the weak and the dishonest.  Against this backdrop, William
Holden's gang of outlaws seems princely.  They're fucked up, too, but
they at least retain some shreds of morality and purpose.  The only new
scenes in this release are some flashbacks that show Robert Ryan and
Holden as friends and then show Ryan captured and sent to jail.  Their
relationship was never fully explained in the earlier version but I
never really wondered too much; it wasn't really that complicated.
The first scene finds the gang, which includes Borgnine, Bo Hopkins
(not for long, though) and Warren Oates, robbing a bank in a small
border town in Texas.  They are being set up by Ryan, who got his
freedom from prison by agreeing to hunt down his former partners.
Luckily for Holden, Ryan is surrounded by idiots, including the
especially stinky, gun-kissing Strother Martin.  Most of the outlaws
escape with the loot when a Temperance Union parade catches most of the
bullets meant for them.  This first scene is classic Peckinpah.  It's
relentless, violent, and honest (when was the last time you saw an
innocent bystander die in a Hollywood action flick?).  The slow-motion
shots of horses and people falling are disgusting and grand at the same
time.  Is he glorifying violence, lovingly caressing it like Martin and
his 'aught-six', or is he trying to horrify us with the reality of it?
Who knows?  I was relieved when the scene ended but half an hour later
I was yearning for the next eruption of violence.
The movie follows the gang into Mexico, where they find they've risked
their lives for sacks full of steel washers.  They drift further south,
pausing for tequila and woman in the home village of their lone Mexican
member, Angel.  Then they plan a heist of an American Army shipment of
rifles for a Mexican rebel general, whose tequila and woman they enjoy
in some wacky, drunken scenes.  Ryan anticipates the theft but they get
away this time with the rifles and a machine gun in a breathless chase
scene.  They negotiate the trade for the rifles, but the general
captures Angel when he discovers that one of his cases of rifles was
given to the villagers.
The final scene has the four remaining gang members taking on all of
the general's men in a suicidal attempt to rescue Angel.  They may be
criminals, but they'd rather die than leave one of their partners to be
tortured to death by being dragged behind the general's ultra-modern
roadster.  This scene satisfied the thirst for blood I'd been
suppressing for most of the movie.  It seems to go on forever, a litany
of gunshots, flopping bodies and death-grimaces.  Peckinpah is
proclaiming not only the death of the 'Wild Bunch' but of the western.
A world of machine guns and fancy cars is no place for a gang of
outlaws, anyway.

Author
Eric Grossman
     THE WILD BUNCH, Sam Peckinpah's magnum opus has returned to the
big screen.  The late William Holden stars as Pike Bishop, the
leader of an aging gang of outlaws who are trying for their last big
haul before they hang up their
guns.
     When it came out in 1969, the western appeared to be dying but
director Peckinpah created a film that was fresh stylistically and
thematically.  Today, with its honest depiction of violence and how it
effects men, women and children, THE WILD BUNCH is as relevant as
ever.
     Holden, with his mixture of bravado, humor and remorse, gave one
of his best performances in this film.   Bishop is morally ambivalent
but we find ourselves caring greatly for him and his bunch because in
the cruel, unlawful world they inhabit, they at least have their own
code of ethics.  Other members of the all-star cast include the late
Robert Ryan, Ernest Borgnine and the late Edmond O'Brien.
     Shot on location in Mexico, THE WILD BUNCH overflows with
atmosphere and realism which contrasts sharply with the westerns that
feel as if they take place on a movie set.   Production designer Edward
Carrere was so concerned with authenticity, he had 12,000 Red Harvester
ants and 12 gray scorpions flown in.  Peckinpah and cinematographer
Lucien Ballard beautifully capture the desert landscape in all of its
heat, dirt, and vastness.
     Editors Lou Lombardo and associate editor Robert Wolf  took action
sequences to new heights by juxtaposing slow-motion images with footage
shot at regular speed.  A revolutionary technique at the time, it made
the gunfights appear almost poetic.  This type of action editing is
copied all of the time today but the effect is generally nowhere near
as potent.
     In addition to a restored sound-track and color correction, THE
WILD BUNCH has about ten minutes of additional footage that was excised
from the director's cut before its initial release.  Time has told,
this movie is an American classic and the best way to appreciate all of
its, fun, gritty, bloody grandeur, is on the big screen.

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are various ways people can show their appreciation of
truly great films. The author of this review has found one
interesting example in local newspaper few years ago. THE
WILD BUNCH, 1969 anti-western classic by Sam Peckinpah was
to be aired on national television. TV section editor
obviously wanted to warn audience not to miss this cinematic
gem, so he took rather interesting and unconventional
approach. Instead of simply putting the film description
with photograph, he hired an artist to draw the most
memorable scene of the film in comic book fashion, with
characters saying the most memorable lines. Similar practice
was later abandoned in this newspaper, but THE WILD BUNCH,
being one of the most important films in history of cinema,
surely deserved such treatment.
The plot, based on the Oscar-nominated screenplay by Sam
Peckinpah, Waylon Green and Roy N. Sickner, begins in South
Texan city of San Rafael in 1913. Group of bandits, dressed
in U.S. Army uniforms and led by middle-aged Pike Bishop
(played by William Holden), comes to town in order to rob
railroad company offices. But their raid is nothing more
than an excellent opportunity for railroad's company
unscrupulous executive Harrigan (played by Albert Dekker),
who gathers bunch of bounty hunters and sets up an ambush.
In a violent shootout Pike and three of his comrades escape,
but they are pursued by bounty hunters, who receive aid from
Deke Thornton (played by Robert Ryan), Pike's former partner
who had agreed to betray his friend in order to get paroled
out of jail. Pike seeks shelter across the border, in
Mexico, which is in the middle of revolution. Local warlord
who calls himself Generalissimo Mapache (played by Emilio
Fernandez) needs new, modern weapons in order to get an
upper hand in his fight against Pancho Villa, so he hires
Pike and his gang to steal those weapons from U.S. Army
train. One of Pike's partners is Angel (played by Jaime
Sanchez), young Mexican who doesn't feel comfortable with
the idea of giving guns to someone who is oppressing his
people.
It is impossible to write a history of modern cinema without
mentioning THE WILD BUNCH. The most common reason is
Peckinpah's realistic depiction of violence, quite
revolutionary for late 1960s. Although Arthur Penn came
first with squibs and "death ballet" scene in BONNIE AND
CLYDE two years earlier, Peckinpah actually perfected those
techniques in THE WILD BUNCH and combined with the excellent
photography by Lucien Ballard, thus creating
blood-splattering images that were quite shocking for 1969
audiences. Controversies over the limits in which the
filmmaker can depict violence on the screen later allowed
Peckinpah to get himself honoured by Monty Python parody.
However, today all that seems rather tame, but many of
latter-day directors who excelled in blood-and-guts action
scenes, including Walter Hill and John Woo, owe its success
to Peckinpah's combination of speed editing, blood
splattering and slow motion shots.
However, there is one important difference between THE WILD
BUNCH and most of the other films that contains such levels
of on-screen violence. Carnage in this film makes perfect
sense in the context of the story, characters and, finally,
the subject of the film. Peckinpah uses new techniques (and
lower censorship standards of the time) to unburden his soul
and create a disturbing and uncompromising but also an
original vision of the state of the Old West. Unlike Sergio
Leone, who was an outsider and confronted myths of old
idealistic Westerns with realistic yet ironical approach,
Peckinpah grew up in American West. His debunking of Western
myths has more personal motivations and Peckinpah remains
dead serious about things that bother him. For him, the
twilight of the Frontier was a sad event and the
civilisation, instead of bringing peace and prosperity,
brought nothing but greed, hypocrisy and complete breakdown
of all moral order. This is perfectly demonstrated in the
opening scene, featuring outlaws as impeccable, disciplined
and gentlemanly soldiers, while the lawman happen to be the
worst scum of the earth. The progress, is symbolised with
new, modern equipment - automobiles, automatic pistols, pump
shotguns and machineguns - which is almost exclusively used
as the tools of destruction or torture. And that violence
and destruction is impersonal and indiscriminate - innocent
bystanders, women and children get killed in the same manner
as soldiers, bounty hunters and bandits. Very often violence
in this film is irrational and self-destructive, from acts
of retarded young bandit who stays in railroad office in the
beginning until the last memorable scene. Homicidal madness
is everywhere and characters often act against their better
judgement, only adding to slow-evolving but inevitable
escalation of conflict and violence. Another thing that
bothers Peckinpah is the corrupting influence of the
civilisation, which manifests itself in children. Almost all
the violence in the film is seen through the eyes of
children, who get themselves bewildered and, in the final
acts, even take active participation, which would only lead
to another cycle of increasing carnage in the future.
The Old West, in its romantic, primordial state is
symbolised by the protagonists - tired old men who are aware
that their best days are gone and who unsuccessfully try to
adapt to new, frightening times. William Holden was the
perfect choice for the role of the outlaw who is confused
and who finds only sense of life in the old, over-idealised
code of honour, same code that would lead him to the
powerful last stand. Everyone else - Ernest Borgnine, Robert
Ryan, Ben Johnson, Warren Oates and Edmond O'Brien - is in
the same league; old men whose characters are the dying
breed, "ancient race" from Leone's ONCE UPPON A TIME AT
WEST, and whose last moments in the film resemble their own
careers, going downhill in rapidly changing Hollywood that
don't need screen legends any more. There is deep sadness
and melancholy in their performances which humanises this
film, that would otherwise be remembered as nothing more
than almost pornographic depiction of senseless, irrational
violence.
THE WILD BUNCH is, like the majority of films, also a
product of its time and the influences of Vietnam War could
be found in its content. Peckinpah in this film captures the
spirit of America coming to grips with its worst national
trauma and fills the screen with images from Southeast Asia
battlefields. We see foreign advisors aiding corrupt and
bloodthirsty third world dictators, boy soldiers dying like
flies and, finally, hundreds of innocent people getting
caught in the crossfire and foreshadowing of another war
which is supposed to show the ultimate destructive potential
of the new technology. Perhaps today's audience, people who
grew up after Cold War or had another, more romantic vision
of Vietnam and similar carnage in Ramboid movies, won't
understand this aspect of film. But they would nevertheless
enjoy it in an excellent piece of cinema that connects the
classic and modern in the best possible way.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

WILD BUNCH, THE (director/writer: Sam Peckinpah; screenwriter: from
story by Walon Green and Roy N Sickner/Walon Green; cinematographer:
Lucien Ballard; editor: Lou Lombardo; cast: William Holden (Pike
Bishop), Ernest Borgnine (Dutch), Robert Ryan (Deke Thornton), Edmond
O'Brien (Sykes), Warren Oates (Lyle Gorch), Ben Johnson (Tector Gorch),
Jaime Sanchez (Angel), Strother Martin (Coffer), Albert Dekker
(Harrigan), L.Q. Jones (T.C.), Bo Hopkins (Crazy Lee), Emilio Fernandez
(Mapache); Runtime: 145; Warner Brothers; 1969)
This is Sam Peckinpah's masterpiece. The ultimate in violent Westerns,
filled with clichés and violence drawn to extremes. In Peckinpah's
rugged masculine world, brutality and innocence (children) co-exist. The
opening scene highlights Peckinpah's theme of man's inherent violent
nature from childhood and points to the bloodshed that will come in the
film's payoff, as he shows a bunch of Mexican children poking a stick at
a writhing scorpion being devoured by killer ants and of them laughing
as they watch. This is witnessed by a gang of outlaws on their way to a
brutal robbery.
A band of soldiers led by Pike Bishop (Holden) and his right-hand man
Dutch Engstrom (Ernest Borgnine) by his side, ride into town by horse in
a military manner. They are not really soldiers, but they are in this
dusty South Texas border town dressed that way to rob the railroad
office of its gold. The only problem is, that they are being set-up for
an ambush, arranged by a particularly despicable railroad magnate named
Harrigan (Dekker).
Things start to go wrong immediately for the ambushers awaiting on the
roof of the building across from the railroad office, who are led by
Deke Thornton (Robert Ryan). His low-life bounty hunters get on the
nerve of the professional gunman by pointing their rifles upward in
sight of the street, showing their ineptitude. Thornton once rode with
Pike's gang, but he felt that Pike betrayed him through his carelessness
which resulted in his arrest, and he now sees this assignment as both a
chance to get revenge and to be free from his prison term, as he now has
a deal with Harrigan that if he brings Pike and his gang in, he will be
released from prison. He has given his word that he will get Pike, and
his word is all that is needed as a bond that he will not run away.
Pike's men soon see the glint of the rifles on the roof and prepare for
a fast escape. To make matters worst, a Temperance Union meeting just
breaks up and they are marching in front of the robbery scene. The six
men trapped in the railroad office, besides Pike and Dutch -- are the
brothers Lyle Gorch (Warren Oates) and Tector Gorch (Ben Johnson), and a
Mexican just taken into the gang, Angel (Jaime Sánchez). The sixth
member is Crazy Lee (Bo Hopkins). He is asked to remain behind and guard
the hostages in the railroad office. The gang uses the marchers,
consisting largely of children and women, as shields for their escape,
and Thornton's men do not hesitate for a second, firing into the crowd
and killing some of the marchers and in the chaos 5 of the 6 bandits
escape with the bags of gold, only the one they left behind gets killed.
When the bandits go to their rendezvous point to get fresh horses and
split up the loot, the old geezer who is part of the gang, Sykes (Edmond
O'Brien), greets them with maddening cackles of jubilation. When they
open up their railroad bags, they are surprised to find them filled with
washers. Discouraged but still able to laugh at their misfortune, Pike's
gang goes to Mexico and passes through Angel's ravaged home village,
with the bounty hunters in hot pursuit.
The film is set in 1913 and Europe is nearing the outbreak of WW1, while
in Mexico there is a revolution taking place and a self-appointed
dictator with the help of Germany, is looting the country and arming
himself while trying to put down the revolution. Angel turns out to be
opposed to the local dictator, Mapache (Emilio Fernandez), who has
sacked his village and, on a personal basis, he is revolted to learn
that his girlfriend has voluntarily run off with the generalissimo.
Pike sees in this generalissimo an opportunity to get gold, as he is
told when he meets him of a U.S. Army shipment of weapons coming through
by rail, which he doesn't want to rob himself because he doesn't want to
alienate the U.S.. The gringos agree to do it for the money promised
them by the dictator, as they have nothing to lose because they are
wanted anyway back in the States, with a heavy price tag on their heads.
Only Angel is upset by this, saying he sides with the people in the
mountains fighting the dictator. So a deal is secretly worked out
whereas they will allow Angel to take one crate of rifles to the freedom
fighters and they will tell the dictator they lost one shipment of
rifles.
These outlaws are seen as the last of a dying breed. Their bonds are
formed through loyalty: by giving their word, whoring together, getting
boozed up together, and being bad desperadoes, willing to die for their
outlaw lifestyle, they have formed a comraderie that even humanizes
their violent ways to a certain extent. But there are changes in the air
and these are seen by them clearly while they are on the run--such as,
the generalissimo's automobile, the telegraph wires and the railroad now
linking the country, and the worn expressions they have when riding
their horses. They realize America and the West as they knew it -- is
history, and that there is no place for them in the new America.
They thusly side with the freedom fighters when they had a chance to
keep the money and escape the bounty hunters. They come to rescue Angel
who is being tortured in the generalissimo's headquarters by being
dragged on the ground while tied by rope to the dictator's automobile
going around in circles and the children in the village laughing and
lobbing firecrackers at him, as he is there because he was ratted out
for stealing the rifles by the mother of his girlfriend. Thereby the
memorable closing scene, which is a picture of pure violence as an
answer to everything, as the generalissimo's men and Pike's remaining
men shoot it out, leaving no survivors. It is only Thornton and Sykes
who live and find salvation by staying in Mexico and joining with the
freedom fighters. Sykes when wounded by the bounty hunters and left to
die, was rescued from certain death by the freedom fighters who
discovered him in the desert. Thornton's bounty hunters, including two
vicious vultures, Coffer (Strother Martin) and T.C. (L.Q. Jones), try to
go back home with their bounty of the deadmen: Pike and his gang, to
collect their reward, but are not successful. While Thornton makes it
clear that he has no respect for the law, for the capitalists, or for
the U.S. Army, but he respects Pike because he stood for something real
and he realizes that the two of them have this in common, and he has
been brooding about their troubled relationship ever since he took on
this assignment. His conscience is also clear about not returning,
because he only gave his word to get Pike and not to what he would do
afterwards. He can now only laugh at what he's been through, as he heads
to the hills to be a gunfighter for the cause he might or might not
understand, but he has given his word to the revolutionaries and his
word is his badge of honor.
They don't make violent Westerns like this one anymore, but they tried
to imitate it many times, but they could never quite capture the spirit
that this classic Western had.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: original release 1969; re-release begins 2/95
Running Length: 2:25
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, language, mature themes, brief nudity)
Starring: William Holden, Ernest Borgnine, Robert Ryan, Edmond O'Brien,
          Warren Oates, Jaime Sanchez, Ben Johnson
Director: Sam Peckinpah
Producer: Phil Feldman
Screenplay: Sam Peckinpah and Walon Green based on a story by Walon Green
            and Roy N. Sickner
Cinematography: Lucien Ballard
Music: Jerry Fielding
Released by Warner Brothers
     Violence comes in many shapes, sizes, and forms.  Twenty-six years
ago, when Sam Peckinpah's THE WILD BUNCH was first released, it caused a
stir because of its gritty, uncompromising style. The deaths in this film
are neither sterile nor heroic.  When a gun is fired, the result is
inevitably messy.  In many ways, especially in its determination not to
glorify bloodshed, THE WILD BUNCH shares key themes with Clint Eastwood's
UNFORGIVEN--only this film came twenty-three years earlier.  A classic
in its original theatrical cut, THE WILD BUNCH is nevertheless improved
with eleven minutes of footage restored.
     The movie opens during 1913 in the small south Texas town of San
Rafael.  The Wild Bunch--a gang of six--have moved in to pull off a
robbery.  What they don't know is that it's a setup--the sacks of money
are filled with washers and there are dozens of gun-toting bounty hunters
hidden in ambush.  Things turn bloody and numerous innocent citizens are
caught in the crossfire.  The gang escapes with the bounty hunters hot on
their trail.
     Leading the Wild Bunch is Pike (William Holden), an aging outlaw who
enjoys planning his capers as much as carrying them out.  He's beginning
to feel his age, however--an old wound makes it nearly impossible for
him to mount his horse and he wonders how many more jobs he'll be good
for.  Pike's right-hand man is Dutch (Ernest Borgnine), another grizzled
veteran of the robbery circuit.  The gang is rounded out by Sykes (Edmond
O'Brien), Angel (Jaime Sanchez), and the Gorch Brothers (Warren Oates and
Ben Johnson).  One member of the Bunch is missing, however.  Thornton
(Robert Ryan), once Pike's closest friend, was arrested as a result of a
past screw-up, and now commands the mercenaries hunting his old buddies.
     It's possible to view THE WILD BUNCH as a straight action picture,
albeit a highly stylized one--Peckinpah's use of multiple angles and
quick cuts is amazing.  All the traditional elements of the genre are
present:  shoot-outs, male bonding, and a high body count.  The
director's methods of orchestrating tension are such that the movie has
its fair share of edge-of-the-seat moments.  But there's a lot more here.
THE WILD BUNCH has level upon level of complexity even beyond the obvious
metaphor of Vietnam, and has been structured to satisfy the more
discriminating movie-goer.
     Loyalty is certainly one theme.  For all the internal strife within
the Bunch, the bonds that tie them together are far more powerful than
those which seek to break them apart.  Betrayal of any sort is
unthinkable, which gives added resonance to the dynamics between Pike and
Thornton.  Once companions, now enemies, only death can free one from the
other.  Oaths are important because they cement loyalty.  One line,
spoken by Pike, summarizes the film's viewpoint:  "When you side with a
man, you stay with him."
     More striking than THE WILD BUNCH's consideration of loyalty is the
way the movie relates children to the violence surrounding them.
Peckinpah populates his film with many young faces, most of whom have no
lines.  Through every scene of slaughter, they are there, cringing
fearfully out of the way, eyes glued to the carnage, their souls slowly
corrupted.  With sadistic glee, they pit red ants against scorpions, then
set fire to all the combatants.  Aging men, weary of the violence of
life, see children as innocents--"We all dream of being a child, even
the worst of us.  Perhaps the worst of us most of all."--but they don't
see that hardships leave their mark early.  In THE WILD BUNCH, there are
always children watching, until the very end, when one does much more.
This transition from observer to participant drives home Peckinpah's
message.
     For anyone who doubts the importance of THE WILD BUNCH, this new
version is recommended viewing--an opportunity to witness a style that
has influenced film makers from Scorsese to Tarantino.  Not only does THE
WILD BUNCH illustrate Peckinpah's mastery of his medium, but it presents
a story that is effective on nearly every level:  the emotional, the
visual, and the visceral.  There aren't many epic motion pictures of this
scope these days, so it's a rare treat to look back more than two decades
and see something on the big screen that is as potent and relevant today
as when it was first released.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Dan Hartung
     Sam Peckinpah is not around for this reissue, but his presence
colors a wide swath of the action films made today, as this film makes
clear.  If you live near a major city and can go see this in the
theater, you are in for a filmgoer's treat--certainly one of the best
Westerns ever made, and easily on my Top 100 list.
     "Nine men who came too late and stayed too long" is one of the
blurbs for the original release, and it is apt.  The focus of the film
is on the traditional elements of the Western: honor, loyalty, the
ethics of violence.  But the underlying theme sets it apart, beginning
with the time: at the end of the West, when civilization and law were
encroaching on the men who had chosen this life for its freedoms.
Watching it again, it's interesting to see how many background elements
as well as basic plot elements and dialog snippets refer to this
theme.  From the juxtaposition of a religious rally and a gunfight to
one of the gunmen toppling off his horse into a dress shop, from
Thornton's conversation with Harrington ("How does it feel to be
*right*?"  "Good.") to Pike's confrontation with Dutch over the ethics
of loyalty, the sense of men being unable to cope with a changing
society is clear.  Yet at the same time Peckinpah suggests that
violence, cruelty, and venality are omnipresent elements in all men's
character.
     There are eleven more minutes added to this release, mostly
violence and female nudity; but they are enlightening additions to
have.  Two are flashbacks by Thornton and Pike, the two adversaries, to
moments when their character was formed: these are revealing moments.
Another, expansive addition is an entire battle sequence between
General Zamorra and Pancho Villa's men, placed just before the meeting
between Pike's men and Zamorra's lieutenant.  This is not only a
terrifically staged sequence, with another classic Peckinpah moment of
a young boy exposed to horrific violence, but it lends urgency and
motivation to the meeting that is simply not there in the video
version.  (Curiously, though, unless I was distracted, they seem to
have lost the exchange where Angel negotiates with Pike for a box of
rifles; this just suddenly happens, and if I hadn't been familiar with
the story, I might believe that Angel did indeed "steal" the rifles.)
Finally, of course, and most important, seeing this film on the wide
screen restores 40% of the movie that is lost when seen on video.
Peckinpah knows very well that he's got a lot of room to compose shots
in this format, and he uses every inch.  When I saw this on video in
1994, it was one of a short list that I dearly wished I could see in
its full glory, so I was elated to hear about this reissue.
     To watch this film is to realize how important a source Peckinpah
is for the action directors of our day--James Cameron, Spielberg,
Quentin Tarantino.  Not all of them have learned their lessons well.
This movie, today, would be pitched as a "roller-coaster ride," rolling
smoothly from one action sequence to another, the tension rarely
letting up.  Studios today owe Peckinpah a large debt.  But what they
have not paid attention to are the complex character dynamics, both
between, and within, individuals.  In this film, the
protagonists--anti-heroes all the way--are definitely affected by the
violence they experience and do, and by the end are permanently
changed.  Few Hollywood films of the nineties would dare to dress up a
big summer star-fueled blockbuster with such distractions and
philosophical undercuts.  Just like Arnold or Sly today, the main
characters are having a certain amount of fun, but not at the expense
of the audience's intelligence.  We know there's no way this story can
have a triumphant ending, yet even so we expect a heroic resolution
with honor, and we are not disappointed.
--
 Daniel A. Hartung * dhartung@mcs.com * http://www.mcs.net/~dhartung/home.html

Author
Steve Kong
Not being a huge fan of the Western genre I had only one reason to watch
The Wild Bunch.  The Wild Bunch director Sam Peckinpah is one the main
influences of my favourite director John Woo.  I was not expecting much
from this western.  Lets just say that by the end of the film I found
myself completely engrossed in the film and its characters.
The Wild Bunch is a group of six bank robbers led by Pike (William Holden)
a fellow who's getting old and is looking for something else to do.  In
1913, the Wild Bunch embarks on their last robbery, but unknown to them,
the place they are robbing isn't as cash-rich as they're led to believe.
After a bloody gun battle with a band of mercenary headhunters led by a
former Wild Bunch member, Deke Thornton (Robert Ryan), the Wild Bunch
escapes.  The town that they leave is left in tatters with citizens lying
dead in the streets.
The film follows Pike and his band of robbers as they try to find one more
robbery to do before retiring.  The band of robbers finally sign up to help
a Mexican general steal weapons from a US Military train.  Not far behind
them is Thornton.  Thornton's main drive to catch Pike is that if he
doesn't do it within 30 days, he'll be sent back to jail.  Thornton cut a
deal with the devil for his freedom from prison, in order to keep his
freedom, he must led a posse of inept bounty hunters in their chase of Pike.
Peckinpah is by no means an indirect director.  In The Wild Bunch he takes
on many themes including the main one of loyalty within a group.  And it is
with his unfiltered look at this band of robbers and the bounty hunters
that we see the contrast between the two groups in their loyalty.
Peckinpah doesn't make anything light or fluffy, including the action.
The action in The Wild Bunch is amazing.  I can see exactly where Woo gets
his influence.  There are two big action set pieces in the film that show
just how brutal Peckinpah wanted the film to be.  There are no pretty
deaths in this film everything is messy.  Peckinpah uses slow motion, quick
cuts, and multiple angles to capture the sense of urgency in the action set
pieces and does it so well that I was pulled right into the film during
those minutes.  But, as much as The Wild Bunch can be seen as an action
film, it has much more than that.
Peckinpah uses many objects and people in the film to not so subtly hit
home different messages.  His use of children in the film is one of the
best examples of this.  As the film opens we are treated to the image of
children, scorpions, and ants.  This whole montage is a foreshadowing of
what will happen in the town.  And as the film continues, we see that the
children in film are changing as the Wild Bunch is also.  From good and
innocent  flinching at the deaths in the town  to remorseless and immoral
the little soldier children.
Although all of the performers in the film are brilliant, there are three
that are standout.  William Holden as Pike is the absolute best casting for
this part.  With a face that shows a sense of tiredness at what he is
doing, Holden makes Pike a likeable bank robber/murderer.  Ernest Borgnine
as `Dutch', Pike's best friend, switches from different emotions as quickly
as needed and is completely believable: watch him after Pike `helps' one of
the Wild Bunch members who is blinded during a gun fight.  But, the best
performance, though not one that gets a lot of screen time, is Robert
Ryan's as the reluctant Thornton.  Although Thornton has to keep his word
and do his job, he is reluctant to do so because he doesn't have the right
people in his band of bounty hunters and because he is still has a little
loyalty to Pike.  Ryan gives a brilliant performance as Thornton.
Released in 1969 The Wild Bunch was a violent film that created a lot of
news  I'm not old enough to know, being born in 1975, but my friend John
Higdon who saw The Wild Bunch in theatres says, `As I recall, it was the
first movie I ever saw that had guts spewing out when folks got shot.'
Viewed today, the violence is still pretty gritty and gruesome, but a bit
on the lighter side because of the purveyance of gratuitous violence in
Hollywood.  The version of The Wild Bunch that I screened was the 1995
director's cut of the film.  I have not seen the original version and could
not tell you what the differences are, but the director's cut of the film
is amazing.  Don't Miss The Wild Bunch.  You can find the director's cut of
the film on DVD.
 a guy with a helluva attitude that loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.
