Title
Review for Unforgettable (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Christopher Null
     Winner of this year's "Most Ironic Title" award, UNFORGETTABLE is
anything but, taking a subject with some promise--memory transfer--and
managing to butcher it into a hackneyed thriller.
     UNFORGETTABLE reteams star Linda Fiorentino with director John Dahl,
who worked so well together in 1994's THE LAST SEDUCTION.  Unfortunately,
Fiorentino, who was mentioned more than once as that year's best actress,
has been in free-fall ever since, starting with JADE and now turning to
this.  In UNFORGETTABLE, Ray Liotta plays David Krane, a Seattle medical
examiner whose wife was murdered years earlier.  Krane was the prime
suspect, but a technicality got him off, all the while with him protesting
his innocence (yes, it's O.J. *again*).
     When a similar crime takes place, Krane goes on he prowl for the
killer, eventually hooking up with Martha Briggs (Fiorentino), a ditzy
neurobiologist who has invented a serum which, when combined with
someone's cerebro-spinal fluid, can transfer memories.  Krane steals some
of the serum and experiences the lives (and gruesome deaths) of the murder
victims, including his wife.  All the while, the side effects begin to
take their toll on Krane's body, as he tries to solve the case before they
become fatal.
     Sadly, UNFORGETTABLE is somehow able to be confusing and predictable
at the same time, relying on mild shock value and graphic violence to keep
the viewer interested.  It doesn't really work, and the picture drags on
until the silly ending and the requisite playing of Nat King Cole's title
song.  Dahl's direction is otherwise good, but it's wasted on Bill
Geddie's dull script.  The supporting cast (including Peter Coyote,
Christopher McDonald, Kim Cattrall, and David Paymer) perform with
workmanlike effort--there's really not a lot here for them to do, as the
story just gets in the way.
     All said and done, do like the moviegoing public will do when
UNFORGETTABLE is screened:  forget it.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter / Novelist / Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
David Krane (Liotta) is a police medical examiner, accused of the
murder of his wife.  Although acquitted, the memory continues to
haunt him as he wonders why his wife was killed.  One day at a
crime scene he uncovers signs that his wife's killer is in the
area.  Serendipitously, he later attends a talk by researcher
Briggs (Fiorentino), who has managed to transfer memories between
rats ...
Another John Dahl and Linda Fiorentino film? After the
masterful and assured noir of "The Last Seduction", such an
effort would have to be (to use a tired phrase) compulsory
viewing.  But "Unforgettable" crept into the cinemas and slunk
away a few weeks later to mediocre reviews.  This is less than it
deserves - while it has its problems, it has a lot of good things
to offer too.
The SFnal device that drives "Unforgettable" is patently
absurd, especially to anyone who has done any amount of
neurophysiology.  The memory transfer procedure involves
intravenous injection of the cerebrospinal fluid of the "donor",
coupled with a cocktail of random drugs (the names seemingly
lifted from a first-year physiology textbook).  But the manner
and implication of the process is handled with some verve and
imagination.  The transfer emphasises vivid, shocking memories
and requires exposure to a cue for the original memory - such as
the scene of a murder, the face of someone involved.  The
memories are not simple knowledge but a re-experience, complete
with the original trauma and fear.  As Krane tries to unlock his
wife's murder, he accumulates a head of memories that clash and
merge unpredictably, his body suffering from the side-effects of
the transfer procedure and the accumulated psychic shock.
This intriguing setup is let down to some extent by the
plotting and acting.  Although Dahl has competently used
coincidence and cliche in the past (as in the absurd but
delightful "Red Rock West"), the strain shows as "Unforgettable"
winds down every 30 minutes before being kickstarted to life by a
fresh flurry of machinations and improbabilities.  As the climax
arrives, it also begins to lose its originality and confidence.
A mark of this is when the identity of Krane's mysterious nemesis
is questioned.  Anyone who has seen a film in the last ten years
will instantly finger the two unnecessary characters as
candidates, only leaving the question of whether it is the
blatantly obvious one or the equally blatant unobvious one.  It
is no mark of quality that both seem probable.
Peter Coyote turns in a good if minor performance as a glum
cop friend.  Liotta, never a great actor, does a good turn as the
slowly disintegrating and obsessed Krane.  As for Linda
Fiorentino ...
Despite these faults, "Unforgettable" is a good film even if
it is more a competent mystery than it is the clever treatise
that it might be.  [***/interesting] and Woody Allen films on the
Sid and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]

Author
Steve Rhodes
     UNFORGETTABLE isn't.  Although I was tempted to leave those two
lines as the whole review, I will tell you more.  Last year, usually
excellent director John Dahl (THE LAST SEDUCTION and RED ROCK WEST)
made a film about memory transferal.  I did not see the film when it
came out, unless I saw it and forgot it, but it is now available on pay
per view where I think I saw it for the first time.
     UNFORGETTABLE is a confused film that can't figure out what it
wants to be.  Sometimes the script by Bill Geddie thinks it wants to be
a thriller, but other times it tries to be sci-fi flick.  At its worst,
it descends into a picture with horror show overtones.  If the blood
doesn't get to you, then the editing makes the film into such a whirl
that you feel like you are on a roller coaster where various murders
flash by your eyes in a dizzying collage.
     The film opens with a gory crime scene.  A local drugstore has
been held up, and the killer has left bodies strewn everywhere.
Medical examiner Dr. David Krane (Ray Liotta) arrives on the scene and
finds a matchbook twisted in an obscure manner.
     It seems that Dr. Krane was arrested years earlier for the murder
of his wife.  He got off at the trial on a technicality, but continues
to claim he was innocent.  At his wife's crime scene there was a
similarly twisted matchbook so he becomes convinced that the two crimes
are related.  Detective Don Bresler (Peter Coyote) shows up and tells
him to give it a rest since the matchbook proves nothing.  All of the
cops still think he did it.
     One evening Dr. Krane goes to a medical society dinner where
researcher Dr. Martha Briggs (Linda Fiorentino) is speaking.  She tells
of her experiments with mice where she can use certain bodily fluids to
transfer memory from one mouse to another.  Dr. Krane gets the idea he
can use some of his wife's fluid conveniently stored in the morgue and
transfer her memory to his and thereby find out the identity of her
killer.
     He does the transfer of her fluid as well as the fluid of one of
the victim's of the drugstore crime.  Each time, we have a horror movie
sequence where he relives the crimes from the victim's eyes and body,
and each time it weakens Dr. Krane's heart.
     Will he die before finding out the killer?  How many people's
memory will he have to transfer to his before he can solve the mystery?
And then there is the biggest question of all, since he has all of
these memories firing up in his brain together, how can he keep them
all straight?  Yes, this is a movie that taxes your ability to suspend
disbelief.  It over taxed mine.
     The single good line in the show occurs when Dr. Krane first tells
Dr. Briggs that he has stolen and used her medicine, and it works on
humans.  She lectures him about how she does not yet understand the
side-effects even on mice.  He retorts, "I'm telling you your formula
works, and you're talking to me about rats?"
     If you manage to stay awake, you can solve the mystery in the
first fifteen minutes of the show.  They might as well have hung a sign
around the guy that did it.
     The acting is pretty shallow all-around.  Ray Liotta does a
by-the-numbers rendition of the devil's got my body routine.  Peter
Coyote barely moves a muscle in most of his scenes.  Saddest of all is
explosive actress Linda Fiorentino who has a meaningless part that
doesn't give her a single decent line.  What a waste.  If you want to
see her acting ability, rent THE LAST SEDUCTION where she should have
at least been nominated for an Academy Award.  Since THE LAST SEDUCTION
was shown first, albeit briefly, on a cable channel, it was ruled
ineligible for nomination.
     Actually UNFORGETTABLE plays like a TV movie.  Although it is kind
of fun watching the mystery play out, my favorite part was the
chemistry between the two doctors.  It was not much, but in a
lightweight show like this, you enjoy what you can.
     The standard thriller music by Christopher Young has the
obligatory long violin notes to help put you in the mood.  Sad to say,
there isn't much more than mood.
     UNFORGETTABLE runs too long at 1:57 for such a transparent
mystery.  It is rated R for language and violence.  Teenagers not prone
to nightmares should be able to handle it, but I don't see why they'd
bother.  I give it a thumbs down and award it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(MGM/UA)
Directed by     John Dahl
Written by      Bill Geddie
Cast            Ray Liotta, Linda Fiorentino, Peter Coyote, Christopher
                McDonald, Kim Cattrall, Kim Coates, David Paymer
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time    117 minutes
Reviewed at     General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh, NC (24FEB96)
      Unforgettable-- not.  Cross THE FUGITIVE with STRANGE DAYS and you
get Ray Liotta as a Seattle medical examiner acquitted of killing his
wife and now trying to catch the Real Killer by re-experiencing her
memories.  (Through an injection of her preserved cerebrospinal fluid,
among other things.) A collection of top talent both before and behind
the camera-- including Linda Fiorentino in the non-bitch role of a
biochemist-- is impressive, but Bill Geddie's script is too densely
plotted to be of use to anyone.  Director John Dahl (THE LAST SEDUCTION,
RED ROCK WEST) is so busy connecting the dots that he fails to remember
the bare necessities, such as natural tension or character development.
The last thirty minutes are the worst:  Dahl playing catch-up with a
series of imbedded flashbacks, not realizing that his film ceased to be
interesting almost an hour ago.  What a waste.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>
