Title
Review for Copycat (1995)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Craig Good
     I had a conversation with a sagacious friend at work last week
about the current rash of serial killer movies.  Naturally the subject
turned to SILENCE OF THE LAMBS.   Here we had a movie which was a
critical and box office smash.  As my friend Jeff noted, Hollywood
loves to copy a success, but they often copy the wrong thing.  Some
collection of empty suits evidently thought that SILENCE succeeded
because it had serial killers.  They were wrong.  It succeeded because
it had well drawn characters who had an interesting relationship, and
because the movie generated genuine tension in the audience.  Enter the
ironically named COPYCAT.
     COPYCAT fails completely as a thriller.  It did not raise my pulse
once.  Aside from the odd "boo!," I sat unmoved.  There were a few
character moments, and one good line ("Helen!  I seem to have cured
your agoraphobia!").  And I'll admit that there wasn't much that I
actively disliked about the film.  But neither did it do much to win me
over.  All in all it played about like an old "NBC Mystery Movie"
except with blood, profanity and naked corpses. (I may be doing
injustice to the old TV show.  Most episodes of "Columbo" were much
more satisfying.)
     The only real surprise in the film was the way one character was
killed off.  The surprise came entirely from the staging and from the
fact that it was completely pointless.  He wasn't even killed by the
serial killer, but rather by some random tertiary character introduced
out of nowhere to play just this one scene.  I rather suspect that the
screenwriter just didn't want to have to deal with him at the end of
the movie.  Or maybe it was just another in a succession of cheap
thrills.
     I, for one, am looking forward to the end of the current fad of
cinema sadism.  While we wait for the boardroom brain trust in
Hollywood to start copying the wrong thing from some other hit movie,
we can at least cast a tiny vote for originality by spending our $7.00
on something other than COPYCAT.

Author
Christopher Null
     Hot on the heels of SEVEN, another very unconventional thriller
has arrived in theaters:  COPYCAT, an equally creepy film with the
thematic premise that there really are an awful lot of sick people out
there.
     Judging from COPYCAT, there's more of them than we're giving
credit to.  COPYCAT is the story of a serial killer apparently chasing
psychologist Helen Hudson (Sigourney Weaver).  The only problem is,
some thirteen months earlier, another killer (Harry Connick, Jr.)
almost got her, and the experience was enough for her to lock herself
into her snazzy apartment for good.  When killer #2 comes around, two
detectives, M.J.  (Holly Hunter) and Ruben (Dermot Mulroney) try to
solve the mystery.  This is a much more disturbing and difficult task
than it first seems, entangling everyone in an intensely engaging plot
full of surprises and "rule-breaking" twists.
     The acting in COPYCAT is top-notch.  Even the normally blas
Mulroney seems to be remarkably cognizant of his surroundings and
manages to bring his character to life.  Weaver is typically good,
nearly reprising her fabulous role in DEATH AND THE MAIDEN, but Hunter
frequently steals the show from everyone.  Connick is immensely
disturbing in his small part, with which he obviously had a lot of fun;
you won't hear his crooning the same again.  Jon Amiel's direction is
similarly good.
     Unfortunately, much like SEVEN, COPYCAT has a number of *long*
periods of expository drama at its beginning, plainly attempting to
replicate the cool interaction among the characters in THE SILENCE OF
THE LAMBS.  This is where SEVEN and COPYCAT both failed:  it's simply
impossible to figure out why the killer is that interested in the
heroes, or to become that enthralled with them ourselves.  Luckily, by
the time we hit 45 minutes, the almost painful suspense has far
overtaken the sappy melodrama.
     And that suspense is worth it.  COPYCAT is well-paced and
inevitably reaches a nail-biting conclusion that I wouldn't dare
reveal.  Not to mention, the film actually has the first really
worthwhile denouement I've seen in years.  Be sure to stick around
until you see the credits roll.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     In COPYCAT, a thriller about a serial killer, there are two
Hunters :  San Francisco police detective M.J.  Monahan, played by Holly
Hunter, and criminal psychologist Sigourney Weaver, whose "nom de film"
is Helen Hunter.  In their own ways, they're both hunting the murderer.
     While Helen Hunter is delivering a lecture on serial killers, she
sees in the audience a man making a menacing gesture at her.  He is
Darryl Lee, in whose trial Helen had testified.  The part is played by
musician Harry Connick, made-up as a chilling low-life with terrible
teeth.  Minutes later, in the washroom, through a satanical but
preposterous scheme, he kills the cop guarding Weaver and hangs the
lady.  How Connick got there, carried, set up and used his equipment and
why Weaver did not die, are mysteries.
     Nevertheless, this opening is taut and really scary.  Indeed, so
frightened is Helen that when we cut to thirteen months later, we learn
that she had a breakdown, became agoraphobic, lives in paranoid panic,
pops pills, drinks cognac and plays Italian operas.  Cloistered in her
ritzy apartment, she sees only one human, her gay companion-employee.
All other contacts with the world are through her several TV monitors
and the computers that get her on the Internet.
     M.J. and sidekick Ruben (Dermot Mulroney) suspect that a series of
murders in San Francisco are related.  Getting suggestions in anonymous
calls soon traced to Helen, the detectives, not without difficulty,
visit the psychologist and convince her to help.  She has figured out
that the murderer is replicating the methods of famous serial killers
such as the Son of  Sam, Jeffrey Dahmer, the Boston Strangler, the
Hillside Strangler and others.
     The hunters hunt but also become the hunted in a convoluted plot.
Though not new, the twist would still be serviceable were it not for
its major improbabilities, lacunae, arbitrary editing, telegraphed
developments.  Worse, it goes into many of the cliches of the genre, so
that "copycat" describes the film's operating procedure as well as the
killer's.
     COPYCAT is an alternating mix of  acceptable logic and of
incoherence, the latter predominating.  M.J. is likable, has impressive
professional skills but is not terribly expressive.  Helen is pitiable,
has impressive professional skills but is not terribly expressive.  The
serial killer has unlikely skills of divination and impressive
techniques, including mastery of computers.  He uses these to terrorize
Helen or taunt the police.  Many of his other means are also
unbelievable, including the supply of hardware and electronics he
always seems to have on hand.
     He is revealed in sketchy, disconnected bits that past a certain
point are more confusing than interesting.  He is also the alter ego of
the Harry Connick character who is shown in prison and used in ways
that further obfuscate matters.
     COPYCAT alternates between the unexplained, which is a bad thing,
and the deja vu, which occasionally provides chills to audiences well
trained in suspense devices.  When Helen. for a change, smiles, you
suspect danger.  When she looks into her clothes closet, you expect
something horrible to be there.  When she takes a shower, you think of
PSYCHO.  Whether or not  anything happens, those are derivative tricks
and manipulations.
     A larger flaw is the non-development of  characters.  Some of the
best examples of real people are in the works of  Alfred Hitchcock.
His thrillers were generally complicated, but with "clean" lines.
Hitchcock knew when to say "enough" to twists and let you concentrate
on the suspense rather than worry about what's going on.  He had
humor.  His protagonists were well-rounded--not only in the more
"serious" thrillers where there is ongoing analysis of characters (cf.
SHADOW OF A DOUBT, ROPE, VERTIGO, etc.) but in lighter ones too.
     In NORTH BY NORTHWEST, hero Roger Thornhill (Cary Grant) comes
through as a complete person, via his behavior, his reactions, his
talks with his mother, his amorous advances, his quips ... down to his
bookmatch cover that spells R.O.T. ("the O stands for nothing").  Or to
take the case of  a  most clever classic thriller, the French
DIABOLIQUE, the beautifully laid-on character traits always
reinforce  the twists and the surprises, and vice versa.
     Compared to such accomplishments COPYCAT is weak.  Its killer
remains a cipher.  M.J. is a dedicated, serious, unflirtatious,
businesslike cop, but that's about all.  Helen gets a few more touches,
like her long sexual frustration, but that's not enough.
     Too much gimmickry and elliptical plotting--130 long minutes of
it--overtakes the movie.  It does have its moments, but too few of
them.  It also has as silly and absurd an ending as the start was
good.  Note how, when the killer gets to his Connick-copycat number,
M.J. does not act immediately as any alert cop would.  All the while
the entire audience is two steps ahead of her.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sigourney Weaver, Holly Hunter, Dermot Mulroney, Harry Connick
      Jr., William McNamara, Will Patton, John Rothman, J.E. Freeman
Director: Jon Amiel
Producers: Arnon Milchan and Mark Tarlov
Screenplay: Ann Biderman and David Madsen
Cinematography: Laszlo Kovacs
Music: Christopher Young
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Move over, SILENCE OF THE LAMBS!  COPYCAT has usurped the position
at the top of the all-time serial killer movie heap.  With its rare
mixture of intelligent plotting, flawless acting, and start-to-finish
tension, COPYCAT is a force to be reckoned with--hopefully both at the
box office and when Oscars are given out next spring.  It amazes me that
an entry from this genre, which is normally known for pointless gore and
contrived storylines (see--or rather don't see--DON'T TALK TO
STRANGERS), has turned out a motion picture this keen and complex.
     COPYCAT opens in a college lecture hall.  Dr. Helen Hudson
(Sigourney Weaver), a psychiatrist who specializes in serial killers, is
giving a talk on her pet subject.  Her words drive home the point:
these people get turned on by what they do.  They feel no remorse--only
anticipation of the next kill.  After finishing the seminar, Helen heads
for the restrooms, where she comes face-to-face with Daryll Lee Cullem
(Harry Connick Jr.), a man with murderous intentions who has been
stalking her.
     Thirteen months later, Helen is an agoraphobiac recovering from a
nervous breakdown.  She hides inside her apartment, connected to the
Internet while downing pills and booze in roughly equal quantities.
She's useless to herself or anyone else.  Then the police, led by Mary
Jane Monahan (Holly Hunter) and Reuben Goetz (Dermot Mulroney), arrive
at her door.  They need help tracking a serial killer who has been
terrorizing young women in the San Francisco area, and who better to go
to than an expert with 20 years of having "serial killers on the brain"?
Although at first reluctant, Helen eventually relents and lends her
experience to the investigation.  Her first contribution is to identify
the killer as a copycat.  He is mimicking the great serial killers--the
Boston Strangler, Son of Sam, the Hillside Strangler, Dahmer, and
Bundy--and there's no way to tell who or how he will murder next.  On
top of everything, he has decided to play Internet games with Helen, the
"Muse of Serial Killers."
     It's a difficult task to perfect this sort of story.  There are so
many areas where the script can fail that it's astounding how seamlessly
COPYCAT overcomes all obstacles.  There are no stupid characters,
contrived resolutions, or deus ex machinas.  The police are smart, but
so is the killer.  And the movie doesn't play games with the villain's
identity--we aren't left wondering whether he's one of the supposed
"good guys."  Like SEVEN, COPYCAT isn't concerned with whodunnit, but
why they did it and how they will strike next.  In contrast to the Brad
Pitt/Morgan Freeman movie, however, this picture has a rock-solid
storyline with no gaping holes in logic.
     I've never been a big fan of Sigourney Weaver, but what she
accomplishes here is impressive.  I can't help wonder how much better
DEATH AND THE MAIDEN would have been had she turned in a similar caliber
performance there.  From the opening scene in COPYCAT, Weaver has a good
sense of Dr. Hudson, and she holds onto the character through all the
emotional ups and downs.  This is doubtlessly the actresses' best work
to date.
     Holly Hunter, following her Oscar-winning mute role in THE PIANO,
shows her range by doing something radically different.  Strong-willed,
tough, and extremely competent, her MJ Monahan is the kind of smart,
multi-layered role actors relish, and Hunter is on target with her
portrayal.  This is a contained, dynamic performance without a hint of
overacting.  In many ways, what the actress does here exceeds what she
managed in Jane Campion's New Zealand period drama.
     The supporting cast is solid.  Dermot Mulroney projects a likable
cockiness as Monahan's partner.  Harry Connick Jr. is creepy as Hudson's
stalker.  While no Hannibal the Cannibal, Connick's Daryll Lee is still
a frighteningly demented man.  Equally disturbing is William McNamara as
the title character, one of the most chilling since Michael Rooker's
lead in HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER.
     The worst thing that can happen in a movie like this is for the
characters to be a step behind the audience.  That's not the case in
COPYCAT, where the viewer is in synch with what's occurring on-screen.
Tension and atmosphere are excellent, and director Jon Amiel pays
careful attention to detail.  Parts of this film are frightening, and
will have many viewers either on the edge of their seat or hiding their
eyes.  And, unlike in many so-called thrillers, the ending is not a let-
down.  Comparisons with SILENCE OF THE LAMBS are inevitable, but this
movie is no mere copycat of Jonathan Demme's 1991 feature--it's a
well-crafted improvement.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Gerard Martin
Directed by : Jon Amiel
Photographed by : Laszlo Kovacs.
Written by : Ann Biderman and David Madsen
Edited by : Alan Heim and Jim Clark
Music by : Christopher Young.
Starring : Sigourney Weaver, Harry Connick Jr., Holly Hunter,
           Dermot Mulroney, William McNamara, Will Patton
     In Jon Amiel's film COPYCAT, a vicious and premeditated act of
murder is more than a perfunctory plot concept, more than a cinematic
reconstruction of a fatal event, and more than an immoral lethal act.
Long before psychologist Helen Hudson, played by Sigourney Weaver,
takes a magnifying glass to COPYCAT's first murder scene glossies, the
act of murder is defined as something more elaborate than the mere
slaying of a life.
     Serial murder as the art of semi-ritualized killing would
ordinarily be the movie's principal overriding theme if not for the
unexpected presence of a possibly clandestine narrative element that
finds its analog somewhere in the modern-day dint of a powerfully
ubiquitous communication media infrastructure.
     In today's rapid-transit communication environment, "media" is,
after all, the plural of medium, and a copy of a copy is often far more
than the double sum of its number.  At some point, a copy or replication
of thought, point of view, bias or prejudice becomes memetic--so many
replicated components seeking to attach themselves to value systems of
previously existing memes.
     A "meme" is defined by cultural evolutionists as a
cognitive-behavioral pattern that can be transmitted from one
individual to another through communication.  Memes are ideas that
function in the mind in much the same way as a gene or virus would
function in the body.  Just as viruses can leap from body to body,
ideas will leap from mind to mind.
     COPYCAT begins with a birds-eye view of a university campus grassy
glade.  Students have flocked together in groups of two and three.  As
our point of view descends, we also see briefly where a female student
is silently reading a book.
     As our field of vision descends even further, a building appears
in the distance.  A narrative voice-over is heard describing the scene
of a murder.  As the scene changes to a view inside the building, the
spoken words are emanating from a large projection screen.  A more
complete view of the stage shows Dr. Helen Hudson, the speaker behind
the podium, who has just finished a book about serial killers.  She is
the celebrity of her own lecture.
     In a matter of seconds, three powerful media--the book, the
lecture and the television screen--are introduced and revealed as the
powerful agents of dissemination that they are.  Then briefly our
attention is directed into the shadows of a capacity audience where FBI
statistics would suggest that possibly one of our nation's "35 white
males aged 20 to 35 years" serial killers might be lurking.  Seconds
later in the lecture hall audience--a hand gesture, a silently mouthed
threat, a revolver cocking, hesitation at the podium--and we know that
he has just been located.  Signs are evident that Dr. Helen Hudson is
about to begin the ride of her life.
     Minutes later into the story but months later in real life; having
survived a brutal assault on her life, Helen Hudson remains a
house-bound victim suffering the agony of acute agoraphobia and
intermittent attacks of anxiety.  She is a prisoner in her own home.
We can see her but Dr. Hudson is not sure that she wants to see us.
     The murder rate in San Francisco must be comparable to most any
other city of its size in North America.  But what makes a series of
murders serial?  This is where the insights of Dr. Hudson become
inestimable.  Though evidence indicates that each of the killings was
performed by a different person, Dr. Hudson insists on a serial pattern
for the crimes.  After fourteen frantic attempts to communicate her
knowledge to police, homicide investigating officer M.J.  Monahan,
played by Holly Hunter, takes the telephone receiver and quickly judges
her "knowledge" to be inconsequential.  Monahan is, of course, soon
apprised of Dr. Hudson's estimable credentials.  We very quickly see
them together again at her apartment where apologies and requests for
assistance are negotiated and settled.
     Dr. Hudson is perhaps correct in her assessment of a serial
pattern to the crimes.  Soon realized is the full extent to which this
is no ordinary killing spree.  But how could she know?  The serial
murderer, played by William McNamara, very meticulously pays homage to
every detail of other previous slayings by past nefarious darlings of
the broadcast media -- Dahmer, Son of Sam, the Boston Strangler and
others--who were all made famous through relentless media coverage.  It
is as though he became those people and they became his modus
operandi!
     The copycat nature of the crime surely suggests that the victims
of the story were killed more by media "meme" than by mere mortal man?
Memes of a harmful nature can obviously be very deadly when we consider
how the spread of thoughts and ideas might actually be analogous to the
rapid spread of a deadly virus.  Instead of moving from body the body,
the analogy would be a rapid or exponential ideological movement from
mind to mind.  Indeed, if direct bodily contact is necessary for the
spread of a disease, what different kinds of direct contact might
assist the spread of a meme?
     We might first ask ourselves about some of the more popular memes
in existence.  Writer-zoologist, Richard Dawkins who coined the term,
gives us a host of them--the belief in Santa Clause, the existence of
the tooth fairy, and then, for the adults, potentially parasitic memes
like the advertiser's slogan or jingle.
     But what of some of the potentially more deadly memes like those
leading up to the events of the post World War II Marxist-Leninist
Soviet Union, the soon thereafter immense military industrial build-up
during the cold-war, and present-day neo-Nazi assertions that the
killing of six million Jews never happened?
     Never missing an instance, COPYCAT offers us an utterly complete
tour of every circuit, every pathway, every promiscuous avenue by which
memes and their carriers can reach our eyes, ears and other vital
organs.  Even Dr. Hudson, who would never leave her apartment, is not
immune.  The best display of this is the full extent to which she is
hard-wired to the Internet--multiple graphical windows on her computer
workstation screen, real-time chess games in colorful three dimensions,
and extravagant video animation with full teleconferencing potential.
As if the most important carriers were limited to a computer desktop,
there is then her television, her police radio scanner and almost
always the telephone, right? If still not convinced, then listen for a
catchy tune by THE POLICE.
     COPYCAT gives us the usual for our money.  However, considering
that this movie is riding in the wake of other successes of the genre
like THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS and, more recently, SEVEN, the "usual" is
understandably not always enough.  Fortunately, COPYCAT offers more
than the usual.  In addition to intense co-protagonist performances by
Sigourney Weaver and Holly Hunter, this film is brimming with subtle
intelligence and satire--even from the villains!  In a cinematic
portrayal where the tiniest memetic details can echo and reverberate up
and down through the multi-threaded channels of our media-tuned
make-up, this movie is a treat that, like all good thrillers, will soon
bear rewatching!

Author
Steve Rhodes
     COPYCAT is cinema at its best.  We are talking edge of the seat
thriller, but not because it's shocking, which is frequently is, but
because it is an extremely well written, directed, and acted movie.
This is the sort of movie that draws its audience into the story like a
spider into its web until in the end, the picture is life, and you feel
a part of it.  When the house lights came up, I could hardly move.  My
one comment was a huge wow!
     The show starts like any good murder mystery or thriller.  It
seems that people are being killed by a serial killer.  My first
reaction was this was going to be an enjoyable cop show with some good
acting.  Think of the show as a Japanese bullet train.  It starts off
at a normal pace from the station, but by the time the show is a third
over, you are flying along.  Moreover, the last quarter of the movie is
a leap into hyperspace the tension gets so thick, but at no time does
the movie play with your emotions and no matter how gory the crime
scenes, they never cross over the line by over doing any of the scenes.
     The San Francisco police team, lead by Detective Mary Jane, a.k.a.
M. J., Monahan (Holly Hunter) and her sidekick Reuben Goetz (Dermot
Mulroney) avoid saying the killings were done by a serial killer until
it becomes obvious.  When M. J.'s boss (Thomas Quinn) wants to take her
off of the case because it is too big for her, she tells him, "Nobody
in this department has ever worked on a serial case."  Her boss
replies, "I did too, the Zodiac case" To which M. J. retorts, "Wasn't
he never caught, and didn't he die of old age?"
     Hunter is one of my favorite actresses perhaps because I have a
Southern accent like hers and am on the small side so I always identify
with her.  Actually, I think she is more my idol.  Here she gives a
possible Academy Award nomination performance.  She has not been so
good since one of my all time favorite movies, BROADCAST NEWS, which I
think no human being can see too often it is so brilliant.  I am
unhappy to report that the producers (Arnon Milchan and Mark Tarlov) of
COPYCAT felt she needed a dialog coach to tone down her Southern accent
a bit.  Hey, people with Southern accents do move to places like San
Francisco and keep their accents.  I know; I did, and its okay.  We do
not need people to come and tell us how to speak "right".
     Dr. Helen Hudson (Sigourney Weaver) is a world renown psychiatrist
who lectures on serial killers.  She is attached by one, Darryl Lee
Cullum (Henry Connick Jr.), and after that becomes a severe agoraphobia
spending almost the entire movie in her apartment.  Even with her
live-in gay companion Andy (John Rothman), she is scared to death.  She
is so frighten that when the paper carrier delivers her paper four feet
away from the door she goes into a sever panic attack.  Weaver, who I
think it is generally terrific, has been known to overdo it if not
carefully directed.  In a similar role in DEATH AND THE MAIDEN she lost
control of her acting.  Here she delivers a near perfect performance of
a woman living on the edge.  She is a shoe-in for an Academy Award
nomination for her portrayal.
     Eventually, the good doctor and the detective form a bond and join
forces to thwart the serial killer, Peter Foley (William McNamara).
Foley's specialty is like that of a great forger since he reproduces in
sequence some of the most heinous serial killers of this century.  This
turns out to be a fascinating plot device and the script treats each
small point, like how the sequence is determined, carefully.  Soon the
killer draws the doctor into his diabolical schemes, and the tension
reaches higher and higher fever pitches.  The tightly drawn violins of
the music by Christopher Young add immensely to the overall feeling of
dread and impending doom.
     The script by first time screenwriters Ann Biderman and David
Madsen is brilliant and the dialog is smart.  Like PULP FICTION the
writers know how to push the edge of the envelope, but they never step
out of the bounds of good taste and reasonableness no matter how
gruesome the material.  The whole character of the agoraphobic is one
which is so easy to make into caricature which they skillfully avoid.
They even know when to introduce laughs to cut through the tension.
The story is made highly creditable and believable from start to
finish.  The ending is perfect, and they avoid several possible cliched
epilogues.  These writers are in total control of their material.  I
look forward to many more movies from them.
     As good as the script is, there is a throw away part in it of an
old love interest of M. J.'s, a cop named Nico (Will Patton) and of
Nico's jealousy of Reuben.  This subplot was not of the same quality as
the rest of the story, and if Nico's entire role had been purged, the
story would have been tighter and stronger still.
     The subtle but effective cinematography by Laszlo Kovacs has just
the right blend of lightness and darkness to give an eeriness to
everything without ever overpowering any of the scenes.  The editing
cuts at all of the right moments for maximum intensity.  The makeup,
especially on the doctor, adds to the realism.
     Now for the real star of COPYCAT, the director, Jon Amiel.  Like
the first time screenwriters, there is nothing in his background to
suggest greatness.  His few previous pictures included SOMMERSBY and
the TV miniseries "The Singing Detective".  Both of these were good
shows but nothing outstanding.  Here he keeps his actors and actresses
so tightly wound and yet under control at the same time that is a joy
to watch such directorial craft in action.  I sure hope he decides to
do many more thrillers.  I can't wait.
     COPYCAT runs for 2:03, but you won't spend much time checking your
watch.  Other than deleting the Nico subplot, I think the show is near
perfection and the pacing exactly right, albeit bordering on heart
attach pace.  The movie is rated R for violence, gory dead bodies, and
nudity.  The show would be suitable for teenagers, only if they are
quite mature and are not prone to nightmares.  I strongly recommend
this show to you.  You may want to see this picture with a friend who
can walk you to the car afterwards.  It is pretty intense, but don't be
scared off; it is a don't miss movie.  It gets my rare, full ****
rating.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ed Powell
     COPYCAT is a suspense/thriller, where Sigourney Weaver plays a
criminal psychologist, that is attacked by a serial killer.
Fortunately for her, she isn't killed, and the killer is sent to
prison.  The attack has, however, left her mentally scarred, and she
now suffered from agrophobia (sp?).  Thirteen months later, still
scarred, she is asked by a police detective (Holly Hunter) to help
solve a series of murders.  It turns out that there is a serial killer
at work, and as you may have guessed, he is copying the methods of
other serial killers.  And ... to top it all off ... he is in league
with the serial killer that attacked Sigourney's character.
     The pace of this film seemed slow at times, but it wasn't boring.
It was suspenseful, but it wasn't edge-of-your-seat nail-biting
thrilling.  The story itself seemed real enough to have come from
today's headlines.  The script was well researched and was thoroughly
engrossing.
     The acting in this film was top-notch.  Sigourney played her part
of a criminal psychologist who drinks and takes a wide assortment of
medication in order to be able to get through the day without having a
mental breakdown quite well.  Holly, while not as believeable in the
role of a police detective, nevertheless was quite convincing in the
role.  A good deal of the male roles in the film seemed to get killed
off, but their roles were well played.
     Direction of this film was well above top notch.  I may not agree
with the director's (Jon Amiel) decision in using a few shots that made
me want to reach for a barf bag, he made the film a true visual
delight.
     COPYCAT is tamer than some suspense films I have seen, but it is a
great extra-dramatic experience.  If you have some or any interest in
what goes on in the minds of serial killers, this is great
entertainment.  Go see this film.
Produced by Arnon Milchary and Mark Tarlov.  Directed by Jon Amiel.
A Regency Enterprises/Warner Brothers release.

Author
Steve Kong
I'll start this review with the end on the review.  CopyCat is a tense,
scary, and intelligent thriller that everyone has to see.
The difference between CopyCat and most other thrillers is that the two
leads are both intelligent women.  It's not a cheap thriller where the
muscle-bound gun toting man comes and rescues the screaming ditsy blonde
from the bad guy.  It treats the audience as smart people and slowly builds
us up to a strange, but satisfying, ending.
Sigourney Weaver plays Helen Hudson, a crime analyst and author haunted by
an attempt on her life by a serial killer.  She has not left the house in
over a year.  She knows her serial killers.  Holly Hunter plays a cop, Mary
Jane Monahan, who is working her first serial case.  She tracks down
Weaver's character, Hudson, after Hudson calls the precinct to give clues
to the serial murders.  Mary Jane wants Hudson to help out with the case
because of her familiarity with serial killers.
The story follows the case of the serial killer who is copying the styles
of different serial killers in history.  And the final victim seems to be
Hudson herself.
Harry Connick Jr. has a short but important part in CopyCat.  He gives a
very creepy performance.  Holly Hunter gives the best performance as Mary
Jane.  Weaver is good, but not as good as Hunter.
Worth mentioning is the musical score by Christopher Young which gives a
eerie mood to the film.  Jon Amiel does a good job at keeping the movie's
pace quick and keepinig the tension high.
To end this review I'll ask, do you remember the beginning?

Author
Choo Eng Aun
     With stars like Sigourney Weaver ("Alien" trilogy) and Academy
Award Winner Holly Hunter (THE PIANO, RAISING ARIZONA, etc.) together
in a single Hollywood production, one would immediately identify the
film as a potential Academy Award hot shot.  Sadly for COPYCAT, though
tightly scripted and nicely plot, is still at heart, a typical
Hollywood thriller.
     Helen (Weaver), after a traumatic near death encounter with a
serial killer, Darryl (Harry Connick Jr.), has developed a phobia for
being outdoors, so to speak.  Incidentally, Helen is also an expert on
the subject of serial killers, which make her a juicy target for serial
killer wannabes.  A year has passed and strange deaths begin to
terrorise the city of San Francisco.  Detective Monahan (Hunter) and
Getz (Mulroney), baffled by the unorthodox methods of killing used by
the killer, seeks the professional help of Helen, who, as expected was
reluctant at first.
     COPYCAT "borrows" a lot from SILENCE OF THE LAMBS and in most
cases, it did work.  But COPYCAT tries to be a little bit more by
immersing the audience into the lives of its main characters to give
them more believability, this was rather unnecessary as the scenes seem
to disrupt the mood of the entire film and also ... much of the time
wasted could've been used to build up the suspense and injected with
drama.  Even so, Weaver and Hunter act very well in their own
departments ...  Weaver being the vulnerable yet strong-within
character (as in Aliens) and Hunter being the short, tough, Texan
speaking cop (as in Raising Arizona).  Harry Connick Jr., a very good
jazz singer, shines as the imprisoned serial killer a la Hannibal
Lecter.
     Which comes to the moment of judgement (drum roll please...).
COPYCAT is a good thriller.  Although the plot is highly predictable
and one can actually predict the rest of the movie after about 45
minutes into the show, COPYCAT survives from the moments of
anticipation where the audience are held on to their seats, in
anticipation of the killers next immediate move.  This worked pretty
well and will offer audiences a couple of unexpected jolts.  Nice movie
to bring your girlfriend to....

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Released too close to SEVEN and
     suffering heavily by comparison, this is the story of
     another serial killer with a theme to his killings.  In
     this case the killer is imitating famous serial killers
     of the past.  But here the killer's personal theme is
     more McGuffin and less the driving force of the plot.
     Too much of this film falls into the realm of "woman in
     distress versus stalker" cliche.  Over-rated
     performances by Weaver and Hunter are sufficient, but
     not memorable.  Rating: low +1 (-4 to +4).
     As serial killer films go, COPYCAT is above average in gloss and
suspense, but it was disastrous to release it just a few weeks after
SEVEN.  What this film does best, SEVEN did even better.  Both were
about serial killers whose crimes formed a pattern.  In SEVEN that
pattern really drove the plot, in this film the theme makes the
killings more interesting, but it is much less essential to the plot.
While that film had a dark atmosphere of impending evil, this film is
slick and wastes the viewer's time with familiar sequences of the
killer stalking and terrorizing his victim in traditional fashion.
     Popular crime psychologist Helen Hudson (played by Sigourney
Weaver) is severely traumatized by an all-too-close encounter with
killer Daryll Lee Cullum (Harry Connick, Jr.).  She has retreated into
her overly-gorgeous apartment and refuses to leave.  A little over a
year later there is another serial killer and hard-as-nails police
detective M. J. Monahan (Holly Hunter) reluctantly enlists Hudson's
help to hunt down the killer.  Unfortunately the killer has decided
that Hudson is the victim he most wants to see as a trophy.  While he
recreates the crimes of the great serial killers of the past he is also
zeroing in on Hudson.  Like Rex Stout, Hudson tries to solve the crime
without ever leaving her apartment but her agoraphobia also makes hera
sitting target for the killer.
     If it sounds too much like every other serial killer film on
cable, the story is a bit more complex, but not a lot.  There is some
interest value in Hunter's performance as the tough cop.  If it were a
man in the role it would not merit a second glance, but the casting of
Hunter gives this film a bit more attention than it really deserves.
This story of a formula killer is written by Ann Biderman and David
Madsen, themselves no slouches in following formulae.  How do they
express that Hudson has a sterile intellect?  She listens to opera, of
course.  How do they turn up the tension?  Well, have the killer stalk
Hudson while she is vulnerable in the shower.  How do we make the
killer a formidable opponent?  Well give him any talent or ability he
needs to carry the plot.  This is a man who is a technical expert, an
expert housebreaker, a terrific computer hacker, and someone who can
arrange convenient coincidences as the occasion requires.  He seems
clever by mandate of the scriptwriter, not because he impresses us with
his thought processes.  Director Jon Amiel is not known for suspense
work in the past, his best known work being TV's "The Singing
Detective" and SOMMERSBY.  His first foray into suspense just pushes a
lot of familiar buttons.
     COPYCAT may not be a copycat film, but much too much has been done
before and much too much of the tense climactic sequence is
telegraphed.  This is a disappointing low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Gerard Martin
Directed by: Jon Amiel
Photographed by: Laszlo Kovacs
Written by: Ann Biderman and David Madsen
Edited by: Alan Heim and Jim Clark
Music by: Christopher Young
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Harry Connick Jr., Holly Hunter,
          Dermot Mulroney, William McNamara, Will Patton
     In Jon Amiel's film COPYCAT, a vicious and premeditated act of
murder is more than a perfunctory plot concept, more than a
cinematic reconstruction of a fatal event, and more than an immoral
lethal act.  Long before psychologist Helen Hudson, played by
Sigourney Weaver, takes a magnifying glass to COPYCAT's first murder
scene glossies, the act of murder is defined as something more
elaborate than the mere slaying of a life.
     Serial murder as the art of semi-ritualized killing would
ordinarily be the movie's principal overriding theme if not for the
unexpected presence of a possibly clandestine narrative element that
finds its analog somewhere in the modern-day dint of a powerfully
ubiquitous communication media.
     In today's rapid-transit communication environment, "media" is,
afterall, the plural of medium, and a copy of a copy is often far more
than the doubling sum of its number.  At some point, a copy or
replication of thought, point of view, bias or prejudice becomes
"memetic"--so many replicating components seeking to attach themselves
to value systems of previously existing memes.
     A "meme" is defined by cultural evolutionists as a
cognitive-behavioral pattern that can be transmitted from one
individual to another through communication.  Memes are ideas that
function in the mind in much the same way as a gene or virus would
function in the body.  Just as viruses can leap from body to body,
ideas will leap from mind to mind.
     COPYCAT begins with a birds-eye view of a university campus grassy
glade.  Students have flocked together in groups of two and three.  As
our point of view descends, we also see briefly where a female student
is silently reading a book.
     As our field of vision descends even further, a building appears
in the distance.  A narrative voice-over is heard describing the scene
of a murder.  As the scene changes to a view inside the building, the
spoken words are emanating from a large projection screen.  A more
complete view of the stage shows Dr. Helen Hudson, the speaker behind
the podium, who has just written an authoritative textbook on serial
killers.  She is on a publicity lecture tour.
     In a matter of seconds, three powerful media--the book, the
lecture and the television screen--have been introduced and revealed
as the powerful agents of dissemination that they are.  Briefly our
attention is directed into the shadows of a capacity audience where FBI
statistics would suggest that possibly one of our nation's "35 white
males aged 20 to 35 years" serial killers might be lurking.  Seconds
later in the lecture hall audience--a hand gesture, a silently mouthed
threat, a revolver cocking, hesitation at the podium--and we know that
he has just been located.  Signs are evident that Dr. Helen Hudson is
about to begin the ride of her life.
     Minutes later into the story but months later in real life; having
survived a brutal assault on her life, Helen Hudson remains a
house-bound victim suffering the agony of acute agoraphobia and
intermittent attacks of anxiety.  She is a prisoner in her own home.
We can see her but Dr. Hudson is not sure that she wants to see us.
     The murder rate in San Francisco must be comparable to most any
other city of its size in North America.  But what makes a series of
murders serial? This is where the insights of Dr. Hudson become
inestimable.  Though evidence indicates that each of the killings was
performed by a different person, Dr. Hudson insists on a serial
pattern for the crimes.  After fourteen frantic attempts to communicate
her knowledge to police, homicide investigating officer M.J.  Monahan,
played by Holly Hunter, takes the telephone receiver only to quickly
judges her "knowledge" to be inconsequential.  Monahan is, of course,
soon apprised of the psychologist doctor's estimable credentials.  We
very quickly see them together again at Dr. Hudson's apartment where
apologies and requests for assistance are negotiated and fulfilled.
     Dr. Hudson is perhaps correct in her assessment of a serial
pattern to the crimes.  Yet, soon realized is the full extent to which
this is no ordinary killing spree.  But how could she know? The serial
murderer, played by William McNamara, very meticulously pays homage to
every detail of other previous slayings by past nefarious darlings of
the broadcast media--Jeffrey Dahmer, John Wayne Gacy, Son of Sam, the
Boston Strangler and others--who were all made famous through
relentless media coverage.  It is as though he became those people and
they became his modus operandi!
     The COPYCAT nature of the crime surely suggests that the victims
of the story were killed more by media "meme" than by mere mortal man.
Memes of a harmful nature can obviously be very deadly when we consider
how the spread of thoughts and ideas might actually be analogous to the
rapid spread of a deadly virus.  Instead of moving from body the body,
the analogy would be a rapid or exponential ideological movement from
mind to mind.  Indeed, if direct bodily contact is necessary for the
spread of a disease, what different kinds of direct contact might
assist the spread of a meme?
     We might first ask ourselves about some of the more popular memes
in existence.  Ethologist and evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins,
who coined the term meme, gives us a host of them--the belief in Santa
Clause, the existence of the tooth fairy, and then, for the adults,
potentially parasitic memes like the advertiser's slogan or jingle.
     But what of some of the arguably more deadly memes like those
leading up to the events of the post World War II Marxist-Leninist
Soviet Union, the soon thereafter immense military industrial build-up
during the cold-war, and present-day neo-Nazi assertions that the
killing of six million Jews never happened?
     Never missing an instance, COPYCAT offers us an utterly complete
tour of every circuit, every pathway, every promiscuous avenue by which
memes and their carriers can reach our eyes, ears and other vital
organs.  Even Dr. Hudson, who would never leave her apartment, is not
immune.  The best display of this is the full extent to which she is
hard-wired to the Internet--multiple graphical windows on her computer
workstation screen, real-time chess games in colorful three dimensions,
and extravagant video animation with full teleconferencing potential.
As if the most important carriers were limited to a computer desktop,
there is then her television, her police radio scanner and almost
always the telephone, right? If still not convinced, then listen for a
catchy tune by THE POLICE.
     COPYCAT gives us the usual for our money.  However, considering
that this movie is riding in the wake of other successes of the genre
like THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS and, more recently, SEVEN, the "usual" is
understandably not always enough.  Fortunately, COPYCAT offers more
than the usual.  In addition to intense co-protagonist performances by
Sigourney Weaver and Holly Hunter, this film is brimming with subtle
intelligence and satire--even from the villains!  In a cinematic
portrayal where the tiniest memetic details can echo and reverberate up
and down through the multi-threaded channels of our media-tuned
make-up, this movie is a treat that, like all good thrillers, will soon
bare rewatching!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(WB)
Directed by   Jon Amiel
Written by    Ann Biderman and David Madsen
Cast          Sigourney Weaver, Holly Hunter, Dermot Mulroney,
              William McNamara, Will Patton, Harry Connick Jr.
MPAA Rating   "R" (presumably for violence, language, and gore)
Running Time  123 minutes
Reviewed at   General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh, (27OCT95)
     In the new thriller COPYCAT, Sigourney Weaver plays Helen Hunter,
a criminal psychologist whose specialty is serial killers.  That is,
whose specialty *was*.  She's since retired, after an attack thirteen
months ago left her an agoraphobic alcoholic.  (She can't leave her
heavily-reinforced home without a drink and a panic attack, and not
necessarily in that order.)  Into Helen's protected world steps a
diminutive detective (*Holly* Hunter), who needs her help in solving a
string of brutal murders.  (Is there any other kind?)  As it turns out,
there's another demented, young white male on the loose.  Except this
one is imitating the most infamous killers in history.
     Sitting-duck slasher pics don't come much more effective than
this.  Directory Jon Amiel (SOMMERSBY) keeps twisting the screws,
combining a stalker's POV in almost every other shot, with plenty of
throbbing music, and gratuitous scenes of the killer planning his
crimes.  (Ladies, please trim your fingernails before attending with
your dates.)  All very effective devices that are dressed-up
considerably by screenwriters Ann Bidermand and David Madsen.  Their
story is intelligent, though way too overplotted to be logical.**  The
psychology adds up okay, even if this is really just a big boo-house at
heart.  Where SEVEN was stylish, COPYCAT is shameless.  Where MANHUNTER
was moody, COPYCAT is manipulative.  And so on.
     The casting is choice.  After three ALIEN bug-hunts, Sigourney
Weaver certainly can play peril.  Her foil, Holly Hunter, is
surprisingly effective, despite her small size and smaller voice.
"Have the mice stopped screaming, Clarice?"  The partner is played a
solid Dermot Mulroney.  (Together, they patrol the streets of San
Francisco as "Monahan and Getz."  Such great cop names!)  In a
substantially smaller role, Harry Connick Jr. is a hoot as a backwoods
bad guy whose resemblance to Jim Varney suggests the title for the
inevitable sequel:  ERNEST GOES A-KILLIN'.
**- The audience has too much time to wonder about such things as why   
    Weaver's character doesn't own a gun.  Or, where and on what 
    planet did she find such a fast modem for her computer?  Or, if 
    anybody else thinks that Weaver could pass for Hugh Grant's older 
    sister?

Author
Christian MacInnis
While I was still in midst of finding a thriller that did the genre
justice, I decided to detour around the usual
stalker-wearing-the-white-mask flick for something more of a contemporary
nature.  Coincidentally, I was also somewhere towards the middle of Caleb
Carr's novel "The Alienist", which focuses on the quick uprising of serial
killers in New York City in 1896.  Having been captivated by the mindset
that Carr's killer seemed to have, I was curious to see just how nutty
Harry Connick Jr. was capable of being.  I decided to take my chances with
yet another Sigourney Weaver movie.
The movie opens with a scene which was psychologically shocking and clever
enough to keep even the desensitized interested.  The film begins to unfold
into the life of the housebound psychologist Dr. Helen Hudson (Weaver) who
has been unable to leave her house (without experiencing vertigo) for
thirteen months due to her agoraphobia, at which time she had an
unfortunate run in with serial killer Daryll Lee Cullum (Connick Jr.). 
>From her private apartment she connects with the outside world only through
her computer and her housekeeper Andy (played by John Rothman, whom I
haven't seen since BIG), until a copycat killer decides to step into her
world and tease her with knowledge of the crimes he is about to commit.  As
the killer continues to copycat some of the world's most infamous serial
killers, Dr. Hudson is forced to work with two detectives (Holly Hunter and
Dermot Mulroney) in order to catch him before he catches her.
What COPYCAT lacks in acting ability it picks up in script.  The
not-so-convincing performance by Will Patton as the third-wheel cop who can
never seem to get his man or get the girl, is counter-balanced by the
clever plot twists and the emphasis put on the urgency of finding the man. 
William McNamara plays Peter Foley, a sexually frustrated computer geek
who's character potential gets patronized by McNamara's inability to
capture certain moments.  For the brief moments where Harry Connick Jr. is
in the film, he consistently scares and disturbs in more ways than any
other pianist out there.  As the bumpkin-esque Daryll Lee he convinces you
throughout the film that there are way too many sick people floating around
our there.  I just feel bad that all of the main stars were unable to pull
their weight when it came to character development.
Biderman & Madsen's script hits you right until the end credits begin
rolling.  I congratulate them again in reactivating the talents we saw from
Connick Jr. in Little Man Tate.  Other than a few not-so-believable
performances and some continuity errors that only a communication and film
student would notice, COPYCAT delivers some right moves at right times,
partially thanks to the strong development in the way of Holly Hunter and
Dermot Mulroney. 
Witty, suspenseful, fun (if that's your kind of thing), and definitely one
of those movies which probably worked much better as a novel, COPYCAT
receives 
***1/2 (out or *****) simply because it doesn't rip roar you around as you
expect it to. But, if you're looking for a way out of what's become a
monotonous line of thrillers, give it a try and you probably won't be
disappointed at all. 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sigourney Weaver, Holly Hunter, Dermot Mulroney, Harry Connick
      Jr., William McNamara, Will Patton, John Rothman, J.E. Freeman
Director: Jon Amiel
Producers: Arnon Milchan and Mark Tarlov
Screenplay: Ann Biderman and David Madsen
Cinematography: Laszlo Kovacs
Music: Christopher Young
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Move over, SILENCE OF THE LAMBS!  COPYCAT has usurped the position
at the top of the all-time serial killer movie heap.  With its rare
mixture of intelligent plotting, flawless acting, and start-to-finish
tension, COPYCAT is a force to be reckoned with--hopefully both at the
box office and when Oscars are given out next spring.  It amazes me that
an entry from this genre, which is normally known for pointless gore and
contrived storylines (see--or rather don't see--DON'T TALK TO
STRANGERS), has turned out a motion picture this keen and complex.
     COPYCAT opens in a college lecture hall.  Dr. Helen Hudson
(Sigourney Weaver), a psychiatrist who specializes in serial killers,
is giving a talk on her pet subject.  Her words drive home the point:
these people get turned on by what they do.  They feel no remorse--only
anticipation of the next kill.  After finishing the seminar, Helen
heads for the restrooms, where she comes face-to-face with Daryll Lee
Cullem (Harry Connick Jr.), a man with murderous intentions who has
been stalking her.
     Thirteen months later, Helen is an agoraphobiac recovering from a
nervous breakdown.  She hides inside her apartment, connected to the
Internet while downing pills and booze in roughly equal quantities.
She's useless to herself or anyone else.  Then the police, led by Mary
Jane Monahan (Holly Hunter) and Reuben Goetz (Dermot Mulroney), arrive
at her door.  They need help tracking a serial killer who has been
terrorizing young women in the San Francisco area, and who better to go
to than an expert with twenty years of having "serial killers on the
brain"?  Although at first reluctant, Helen eventually relents and
lends her experience to the investigation.  Her first contribution is
to identify the killer as a copycat.  He is mimicking the great serial
killers--the Boston Strangler, Son of Sam, the Hillside Strangler,
Dahmer, and Bundy--and there's no way to tell who or how he will murder
next.  On top of everything, he has decided to play Internet games with
Helen, the "Muse of Serial Killers."
     It's a difficult task to perfect this sort of story.  There are so
many areas where the script can fail that it's astounding how seamlessly
COPYCAT overcomes all obstacles.  There are no stupid characters,
contrived resolutions, or deus ex machinas.  The police are smart, but
so is the killer.  And the movie doesn't play games with the villain's
identity--we aren't left wondering whether he's one of the supposed
"good guys."  Like SEVEN, COPYCAT isn't concerned with whodunnit, but
why they did it and how they will strike next.  In contrast to the Brad
Pitt/Morgan Freeman movie, however, this picture has a rock-solid
storyline with no gaping holes in logic.
     I've never been a big fan of Sigourney Weaver, but what she
accomplishes here is impressive.  I can't help wonder how much better
DEATH AND THE MAIDEN would have been had she turned in a similar caliber
performance there.  From the opening scene in COPYCAT, Weaver has a good
sense of Dr. Hudson, and she holds onto the character through all the
emotional ups and downs.  This is doubtlessly the actresses' best work
to date.
     Holly Hunter, following her Oscar-winning mute role in THE PIANO,
shows her range by doing something radically different.  Strong-willed,
tough, and extremely competent, her MJ Monahan is the kind of smart,
multi-layered role actors relish, and Hunter is on target with her
portrayal.  This is a contained, dynamic performance without a hint of
overacting.  In many ways, what the actress does here exceeds what she
managed in Jane Campion's New Zealand period drama.
     The supporting cast is solid.  Dermot Mulroney projects a likable
cockiness as Monahan's partner.  Harry Connick Jr. is creepy as Hudson's
stalker.  While no Hannibal the Cannibal, Connick's Daryll Lee is still
a frighteningly demented man.  Equally disturbing is William McNamara as
the title character, one of the most chilling since Michael Rooker's
lead in HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER.
     The worst thing that can happen in a movie like this is for the
characters to be a step behind the audience.  That's not the case in
COPYCAT, where the viewer is in synch with what's occurring on-screen.
Tension and atmosphere are excellent, and director Jon Amiel pays
careful attention to detail.  Parts of this film are frightening, and
will have many viewers either on the edge of their seat or hiding their
eyes.  And, unlike in many so-called thrillers, the ending is not a let-
down.  Comparisons with SILENCE OF THE LAMBS are inevitable, but this
movie is no mere copycat of Jonathan Demme's 1991 feature--it's a
well-crafted improvement.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
