Title
Review for House of the Spirits, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jeremy Irons, Meryl Streep, Glenn Close, Winona Ryder,
Antonio Banderas.
Screenplay/Director:  Bille August.
     Early in THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS, the narrative voice of Winona
Ryder describes her mother's reason for keeping extensive diaries:
"Everything happens so fast that we don't have time to understand
events."  And that just about covers most of what is wrong with this
adaptation of Isabel Allende's novel.  There are plenty of other things
wrong--inappropriate tone, dreadful miscasting, laughable acting--but
the fundamental failing of THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS is a screenplay
which races from scenario to scenario without any apparent concern for
the establishment of character.  When this two hour-plus "epic"
concluded, I felt nothing for the characters and embarrassment for the
cast.
     THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS spans forty-five years in the life of
Esteban Trueba (Jeremy Irons), an ambitious man in an unnamed South
American country.  Esteban soon becomes a wealthy landowner, and
eventually decides to marry Clara (Meryl Streep), the sister of his
former fiancee and a woman with supernatural gifts.  Also coming to the
Trueba home is Esteban's spinster sister Ferula (Glenn Close), who is
strangely fascinated by Clara.  Esteban and Clara have a daughter,
Blanca, who as a young woman (Winona Ryder) falls in love with poor
laborer Pedro (Antonio Banderas).  Pedro becomes a leader of the
socialist wave sweeping the country, and Esteban forbids their
romance.  As the country is torn apart by civil strife, so are the
Truebas torn apart in many different ways.
     It is difficult to comprehend how Bille August thought he could
accomplish everything it seems he wanted to accomplish in only 140
minutes.  In fact, after only twenty minutes I could tell that THE
HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS should have been a miniseries, and should have
been directed by someone else.  There is no texture, no depth and no
life to any of these characters; August directs as though he is
interested only in getting in, doing a scene, and getting out.  As just
one example, the scene in which Clara asks Ferula to come live with her
and Esteban should have been packed with emotion, as a woman who has
lived her whole life doing for others has kindness shown to her,
perhaps for the first time.  But Close has just a few minutes of screen
time before this scene, giving Ferula no chance to develop that
history.  Later, Blanca and Pedro meet after Blanca returns from
boarding school, a meeting we are told has taken place over several
summers.  The problem is that this scene is the first time Ryder and
Banderas are on screen together, making her profession of love ring
totally false.  Everything is too densely compressed and without
resonance, and THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS blasts through six decades
without leaving any emotion in its wake.
     With such a basic flaw at the core of the film, all other
criticism seems like nit-picking.  However, it is difficult not to note
that THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS could have been much better with a cast
that seemed at all comfortable in these roles.  The primary culprit is
Jeremy Irons, whose performance here is, quite simply, appalling.
Esteban is the pivotal character in this story, but Irons gives no
subtlety to his systematic alienation of his family.  In his defense,
he does have to deliver his lines through an obviously annoying set of
false teeth, but he still mugs his way shamelessly through scenes which
required an understanding of traditional Latino conceptions of
masculinity which he clearly did not have.  Winona Ryder continues to
act out of her depth, although she has some good scenes in the final
half hour when the political drama takes center stage.  Close has a
thankless, twitchy role, and Streep merely looks radiant without having
any real presence.  Only Banderas and Joaquin Martinez, as Esteban's
bastard son, show any spark.  How curious ... that two Hispanic actors
should seem to grasp this material.  It sort of makes you wonder what
might have been.
     Miramax must have looked at the pedigree on this film and thought
it had a purebred winner on its hands.  Instead they got a hyperactive
shaggy dog.  I hope someday someone films THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS as a
miniseries.  In Spanish.  The material deserves a second chance.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Jeremy Irons, Meryl Streep, Glenn Close, Winona Ryder, 
           Antonio Banderas, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Vanessa Redgrave, 
           Vincent Gallo, Maria Conchita Alonso 
Director:  Bille August 
Producer:  Bernd Eichinger 
Screenplay:  Bille August based on the novel LA CASA DE LOS 
             ESPIRITUS by Isabel Allende 
Music:  Hans Zimmer 
Released by Miramax Films 
     Sometimes, it's impossible not to contemplate what a motion
picture could have been, had a few things about it been different.
Often, especially for very good or very bad movies, the changes will
make little difference.  However, in the case of THE HOUSE OF THE
SPIRITS, which is a worthy effort as it stands, certain alterations
(not all of which would have been simple to execute) might have
transformed this into a devastating film.  Alas, deficiencies rob the
picture of a share of its impact, limiting the ultimate emotional
appeal and power of Bille August's adaptation of Isabel Allende's
novel.
     THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS is a story that spans six decades,
beginning in South America in 1926 and ending in the same country in
the early 1970s.  The primary focus is on Esteban Trueba (Jeremy Irons)
who, as a young man, comes courting the beautiful and gentle Rosa Del
Valle (Teri Polo).  The two are set to be married when Rosa
accidentally drinks from a poisoned glass of wine meant for her father
Severo (Armin Mueller-Stahl).  Following the death of his fiancee,
Esteban travels to the countryside to claim the plantation of Tres
Marias, which he moulds into a thriving estate using the labor of those
living on the land.  In 1944, he returns to the village of his birth to
ask the other Del Valle daughter, the clairvoyant Clara (Meryl Streep),
to be his wife.  The pair marry and, along with Esteban's sister Ferula
(Glenn Close), move to Tres Marias where a stormy life, filled with
deceptions and brutality, unfolds in the shadow of revolution.
     THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS is driven by its complex and many-faceted
plot, not by the characters that populate the film.  The story moves
along at a rapid pace, sometimes glossing over the more trivial events
that might have bolstered the substance of the protagonists.  Events
fly by as fast as the decades, with political activities gaining
importance as the movie races towards its conclusion.  What starts out
as a relatively simple love story ends as a clash between cultures and
classes, between the old ways and the new ones.
     Many of the characters, both major and minor, are little more than
ciphers for a certain point-of-view or belief.  This includes Pedro
(Antonio Banderas), the lower-class revolutionary; Esteban Garcia
(Vincent Gallo), the unprincipled army officer; and even Ferula, the
maligned and misunderstood sister who wants only to be shown love and
affection.
     Even Jeremy Irons' Esteban remains relatively undeveloped until
well into the second half, when events conspire to re-mould his
previously intransigent personality, lending it depth and dimension.
Meryl Streep's Clara is one of the few characters to be well-rounded
from the start, although even in her case, there is unplumbed
territory--her odd psychic powers are only occasionally brought into
use, and then as minor plot devices, when so much more could have been
formed from that raw material.
     Winona Ryder is given perhaps her most difficult role to date, and
carries it off with aplomb.  As Blanca, the daughter of Esteban and
Clara, she plays an integral part in all the develops during the second
half of the motion picture, including the events that finally open her
father's eyes to those basic truths which he had been hiding from.
     In addition to that of Ms. Ryder, the best performances are given
by Ms. Close, Ms. Streep, and Mr. Irons (although it becomes something
of an annoyance trying to pin down what Esteban's accent is supposed to
be).  Each member of this well-respected trio does the kind of job
expected of them.  It's surely a bit of a stretch for Ms. Streep to
appear as a young woman in her early twenties, but with the help of the
makeup artist, she succeeds in suspending our disbelief.
     Perhaps director August was constrained by running time, but his
latest project shows little of the careful examination of character
that his two most celebrated films--PELLE THE CONQUEROR and THE BEST
INTENTIONS--exhibit.  In fact, THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS is in many
ways the antithesis of THE BEST INTENTIONS.  While the latter was a
slow-moving piece that allowed its participants time to grow and
breathe, this new film seems at times constrained and cramped.
     Regardless of its flaws, however, THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS is an
engrossing motion picture.  It doesn't capitulate with the "Hollywood
mentality" that demands a complete ending, willing instead to risk
something open-ended.  The story attains a momentum of its own that
sweeps the viewer along until the end.  This movie is one-hundred
forty- two minutes long, but could easily have been double that, had
the screenplay demanded it.
     At its best, THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS interweaves the very
personal story of its main characters with the turbulent political
backdrop which frames their actions.  Bille August has done a fine job
with Isabel Allende's tale, crafting a captivating motion picture, but
it's hard not to recognize the flaws, and wonder about the lost
potential.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Ralph Benner
        No first novel since Harper Lee's TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD has moved
me more deeply than Isabel Allende's THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS. For days
after completing it, I wondered why: among the legion of international
readers overwhelmed, I too was dizzied by the swirling romanticism, stoned
on the superbly crafted interweaving of close family observation and
political raison d'etre -- the most educated of Latin American countries
succumbing to the historic inevitability of fascism. But why were there
these waves of emotions every so often that crushed me? Why did I
suddenly, frequently start welling up, even before the ending? In a word
-- Barrabas. Cynics might describe the use of Clara the Clairvoyant's dog
as manipulative, and if a reader has never been attached to a pet of any
kind, shrugging off his importance isn't only easy, it's fatal to one's
receptiveness: Barrabas isn't the center of this sprawling yet intimate
epic of the Trueba family, but he is its spiritual symbol. Barrabas, more
than celestial Clara, rises from the ashes of ruin. 
        THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS has been compared to Nobel prize winner
Gabriel Garcia Marquez's ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF SOLITUDE, about a Colombian
family named the Buendias and through which Garcia Marquez turns a
century's worth of the ordinary and the solitude of their lives into
"magic realism." For nearly four decades Latin American novelists, short
story tellers and poets who have employed this legerdemain as genre have
been the rage among the literati, who have exalted to the most high Garcia
Marquez as its master, sometimes without acknowledging that Jorge Luis
Borges's A UNIVERSAL HISTORY OF INFAMY carpet rides through Garcia
Marquez's most famous work. The smart set doesn't remind us, either, that
Cuban novelists Alejo Carpentier, with his THE LOST STEPS, and Jose Lezama
Lima, with his PARADISO and Peruvian Mario Vargas Llosa were the early
laborers-keepers of the path Borges helped explore. There's scarce mention
of the first Latin American ever to win the Nobel for literature, Chilean
Gabriela Mistral, for her passionately spiritual poetry, and, having
become her protege and subsequent winner of the coveted prize, even rarer
tribute to Pablo Neruda, whose poems established him as first a symbolist,
then surrealist, finally a realist. The same mostly Latin intellectuals,
who shower acclaim on Manuel Puig's melodramatics like the fraudulent KISS
OF THE SPIDER WOMAN, genuflect to Carlos Fuentes, fake an understanding of
Borges's avant garde puzzle making, mention rather cursorily Isabel
Allende, as if not to would be the larger crime than not giving her the
praise she so justly earns for THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS. The reticence may
be the result of how machismo has for long governed the established
dictates of Latin protocol: the weaker vessel as novelist is not thought
to be worthy of serious consideration. Shortly into the first chapters of
THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS, we're not only hooked, we're in the presence of
a writer so graceful and enveloping that how could we be anything but in
awe over how, borrowing from Garcia Marquez's metier, she enlarges the
experience of a magical mystery tour by breaking our hearts and at the
same time fill us with joy? The feeling derived is similar to a comment
Neruda made about his most widely read book TWENTY LOVE POEMS AND A SONG
OF DESPAIR: "By some miracle which I do not understand, this tormented
book has opened the road to happiness for many, many people." ONE HUNDRED
YEARS OF SOLITUDE might have drown of incredulity had Garcia Marquez not
been an alchemist swimmer -- a virtuoso who strokes words into pieces of
the hidden St. Joseph's gold and make them, despite the surrounding sea of
detail, "glow like embers in the darkness." The lava-like rush that comes
at the conclusion of his novel would have been more impacting than it is
had, one, he not foreshadowed the storm (one of those irritating genre
traits), and two, had he a real or reader-felt emotional investment in his
characters and not his technique of transmutation. His is a wondrous,
flabbergasting achievement but a queerly cold-blooded "fervor for the
written word (as) an interweaving of solemn respect and gossipy
irreverence." Allende's a loving tribute to Garcia Marquez, yet, as if
using her skills as a long time journalist to dissect and discover what
was left wanting of ONE HUNDRED YEARS, an emotional blockbuster. She does
the impossible: we glide effortlessly through her entrancing, precisioned
prose -- we're never in danger of sinking to her near-bottomless pit of
itemization. We're not weighed down by the hocus pocus Garcia Marquez
sometimes infuriates with -- like Remedios the Beauty's ascent to heaven
without a follow-up (readers wanted a news flash about Heaven) or his pair
of doomed lovers fornicating in muriatic acid. And we don't lose our
patience as we came close to doing with Garcia Marquez's exasperating
repetition of genealogical nomenclature (which required of me twenty pages
of notes just to keep track of) or risk tolerance with her like some of us
did over the insanity of Puig's belief that it's acceptable to make a
heroine out of gay man by sacrificing himself as something or someone he's
not, and never was. (Puig's Molina is really a candidate for
transsexuality.) With Allende, we reel in a high with no after-effects:
she's not only penning a quixotic diary-romance within the realities of
Chile's tragedy -- her slain uncle Salvador Allende is here, as well as
Neruda, who, as the Chilean Ambassador to France, lost his life during the
early stages of the Pinochet coup -- but she's also taking us on an
exhilarating journey to the heart of egalitarianism, a doctrine that will
be used again in the EVA LUNA stories and her first novel on America, the
touristy THE INFINITE PLAN.
        As we get deep into Allende's slightly autobiographical novel and
come across Clara, her twin boys, daughter Blanca, granddaughter Alba, the
"Mora Sisters, the Rosicrucians, the Theosophists, the telepathists, the
rainmakers, the peripatetics," we're positive they'd all be perfectly at
home in Garcia Marquez's Macondo. Early in HOUSE Allende mocks a priest's
visions of hell and damnation through Clara's one-liner, while Garcia
Marquez has a priest failing to attract people to his church by using
levitation (and one of the many Jose Arcadio Buendias tries to answer the
question of the existence of God by attempting to photograph him); in
HOUSE there's a builder of animal-based crŠches, in ONE HUNDRED YEARS a
maker of little fish; both books have characters who ethereally wander. If
Allende's book dedication is any measure, however, I'd postulate she might
have been more feministly influenced by Humberto Sol s's 1968 movie epic
of Cuban independence, LUCIA, a trilogy of political epochs told from the
point of view of three women named the same. And perhaps shaded her novel
with factually-based realism out of Patricio Guzman's documentary THE
BATTLE OF CHILE. Both of these films tend to expose their explicit
political themes: LUCIA tries, with one part delirium, one part
melancholy, one part demagogic sexism, to applaud Communism, Castro-style,
but what it ends up as is a celebration of true freedom; despite the
mandatory exclamation points as virtues of Communism, LUCIA subversively
reveals the folly of a bankrupt system by bringing to the surface emotions
and sex that betray the very intentions aimed for. And though THE BATTLE 
OF CHILE seems to have the heaven-sent imprimatur of the dead first
Marxist-Socialist president of Chile, by the time it's over, we're fairly
sure that any attempt-experiment to enforce Marxism through constitutional
law is an unenforceable contradiction. Allende's novel has the feel of an
artful polemic, too, but she's a humanitarian foremost; skirting
definitive failure and blame, she allows her uncle to escape severe
excoriation by more than suggesting his administration was maligned not
only by the Conservatives and the military, with assistance from Nixon and
Kissinger (we had ships off the coast of Chile during the coup), but also
by the huge influx of naive, inexperienced socialist reformers who knew
not the ways to navigate and manipulate the otherwise paralyzing labyrinth
of bureaucracy. As with LUCIA, Allende frames her women as victims of
cultural traps. This pitfall as trait -- building a political and life
style base out of pumped-up pride and sexual prowess that is so very
distinctive in Latin countries -- is part of the basis that makes machismo
the most dangerously attractive of all isms. Those  experiences with Latin
men, like the women in LUCIA, ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF SOLITUDE and THE HOUSE
OF THE SPIRITS, would I think agree there's little that's more demonic or
demagogic than Latin machismo and the worship of it gone amuck. 
        This kind of worship tends to discourage equality movements and
dampen convictions and helps create a void shrouded by premonition: In ONE
HUNDRED YEARS, Garcia Marquez flirts with the "insomnia plague," which,
until there's an arrival of antidote, causes the residents of Macondo to
forget everything -- even forget that they're forgetting. (A bit like
Borges' A THEOLOGIAN IN DEATH.) Readers wait for the plague to be used as
a metaphor for what V.S. Naipaul, in his THE RETURN OF EVA PERON, wrote of
Argentina: "A country where government has never been open and
intellectual resources are scant, the rhetoric of the regime is usually
all that survives to explain it. Argentina has the apparatus of an
educated, open society. There are newspapers and magazines and
universities and publishing houses; there is even a film industry. But the
country has as yet no idea of itself. Streets and avenues are named after
presidents and generals, but there is no art of historical (and critical)
analysis; there is no art of biography. There is legend and antiquarian
romance, but no real history." In describing Macondo's banana workers'
rebellion that saw three thousand killed and dumped in the sea and later
covered up not only by the government but also by all but three of
Macondo's residents, and in the novel's very last sentences, Garcia
Marquez confirms that denying realities and human rights means being
repeatedly condemned to oppression. As Michael Wood's SWEAT OF THE SUN,
TEARS OF THE MOON likewise attests, in Latin America this seemingly
inherited forgetfulness springs forth the plague of the legacy of
Bolivarian machismo -- a fatalism that ensures fascism. (America has its
own fascist plague -- the WRWC, the White Right Wing Christers.)
         If you either read the novel and weren't caught up in Allende's
spell, or didn't read it, you'll most probably dislike Bille August's
adaptation of THE HOUSE  OF THE SPIRITS, perhaps intensely: he's neither
magician nor sensualist and one and preferably both are sine qua non. If,
however, you're among those overwhelmed by the novel, then the movie will
be like a refresher course; watching it, even with its changes, the
original story comes flooding back. That is both praise and caution: Bille
August and his too extraordinary cast have given us a labor of love, and
no lover of the book could deem it less charitably; the concern is that
the big Anglo names, who worked for next-to-nothing salaries in order to
help secure the financing, might displace Allende's intimate epic on Chile
and become, more or less, guest victimas -- a Juicio en Santiago. There is
a risky element of the trickster as we watch August roll out Jeremy Irons,
Vanessa Redgrave, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Glenn Close, and, most apparent,
Meryl Streep. Some of us even felt fear: that the cast would generate
derision, and in pre-release screenings howls from detractors erupted,
especially with Irons' flattened, tongue-twisted accent and Streep being
at a minimum two decades too old to play a young Clara the Clairvoyant.
It's common knowledge that Garcia Marquez has forbade any discussion of
ONE HUNDRED YEARS as movie, and it's been reported that he'd release LOVE
IN THE TIME OF CHOLERA only to a Latin American movie maker. (He had a
Latin direct a handful of his own screenplays, including OLD MAN WITH
ENORMOUS WING, THE SUMMER OF MISS FORBES with Hanna Schygulla, and I'M THE
ONE YOU'RE LOOKING FOR, which had the most promise: about a rape victim
seeking out her attacker, only to discover that what she wishes
retribution for is what she wants, it lacks the delirious lust that drives
such obsessions.) The carpers are saying that, at the least, a Latin
should have filmed THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS, because, they bitch, how can
Irons, Streep, Close, Redgrave, Ryder pose as Chileans when they're
unquestionably WASPy and the director's a milky white, frosty Dane? Some
of the reviewers are balking that the movie doesn't even look South
American. In a desperate ploy to gain audience share, Miramax is printing
in full Janet Maslin's favorable N.Y. Times review, yet in it she says
that purists should beware: the movie does "not retain the flavor of
Allende's setting, which here seems oddly European at times." Nescience
knows no bounds: Santiago, like Buenos Aires, was, and remains largely, a
carbon copy of a European capital. My travel agent hit it on the head when
he said of B.A.: "It's Vienna on a bad day." If it weren't for the
co-mingling of Indian-blooded, often serape-clad South Americans in these
cities, you'd swear the city dwellers were European. Because so many,
especially the ruling class, are of European blood, they see themselves as
Europeans first -- as does the patriarch of the Trueba family -- and Latin
second. (Colombian Garcia Marquez looks Barcelonian; the late Puig
resembled a bit the late Borges, whom few would have tagged as Argentine;
and Allende's physicality is now lost to Californization, but in certain
pictures she looks amazingly like Jihan Sadat.) I'm more than suggesting
that as August casts the principals, he's not to be castigated for not
going "native." And, proving the carpers didn't read much of the novel,
Santiago is not predominantly used; it's an equal split between a
fictitiously named capital and the countryside. Though exteriors were shot
in Portugal, what he gave us is more than sufficient.
        It takes some time to accept this cast, that much I grant. While
the novel has six women who are the hub of spiritual and egalitarian
emanations, as if touched by Gabriela Mistral, the movie, because of time
constraints, rather daringly puts curmudgeon patriarch Esteban Trueba at
the center, with Blanca, his and Clara's daughter, the narrator. In
biological and political terms, Esteban is the nucleus of the book: all
that happens he's either directly or subversively involved. He's a
walking, talking dinosaur of sexism, of archaic conservative persuasion,
and as much as a reader wants to hate him, his firecracker responses are
Scroogy funny and even when he's at his ugliest -- raping a girl not
totally as a means of power or violence but of sexual release, attempting
to kill his daughter's lover, denying his bastard Indian son, sleeping
with the junta -- there's a suspicion held all along in the reader that
he's going to evolve into someone honorable. To play and retain the
ruinous stubbornness of Esteban, Jeremy Irons strips himself of his own
British voice and gives us something like a hoarse Sam Elliott rattling
off a patrician form of Esperanto. Not very long into the picture and up
to the point of aging as an old man, when he looks somewhat like Burt
Lancaster walking like Borges, Irons is surprisingly butch in his snobbish
portliness -- like a tanned, old-world Edward Albee. (On horse and wearing
a riding hat, he brings to mind Sam Neill as Albee.) This mutability
doesn't hurt him; in fact he may be one of the rarest of British actors
who is best not being British, though what makes this apparently true is
unfair: his physicality can make one's flesh crawl, as it did for me
watching his snot-filled virility in DAMAGE, Louis Malle's insipid rip-off
of LAST TANGO IN PARIS. (Or in Harold Pinter's unyielding BETRAYAL.)
Working away from his country's sickly, drab demeanor, Irons springs to
entertaining life: inexplicably it's his prissified masculinity that makes
him so unimaginably right for the twin psychos in DEAD RINGER and equally
super-fitting for the chilled-out, postured indifference of necrophilic
vampire Claus von Bulow in Barbet Schroder's ghoulish REVERSAL OF FORTUNE.
(When Irons declares, "Innocence has always been my position," he earns
the undisputed crown for giving the star performance of 1990 -- the most
sophisticatedly kinky-sick let-it-bleed assault on drollness since any
you-name-it by Sir John Gielgud; it spooked the hell out of me much more
than Hopkins' munchies.) Hating his stuffy Esteban is as much "solemn" fun
as it is in the novel, but in that August cuts out the symbolic Barrabas,
viewers are short-changed of the concluding uplift of spirituality -- a
finale which, Allende confessed on a Discovery Channel documentary about
sleep, came to her in a vivid dream.
        Before the movie began, some audience members wondered outloud
what accent Meryl Streep would foist on us as Clara. Castilian? Catalan? A
hybrid? The laughs Irons gets from the clods at the beginning quickly
becomes one of disappointment when Streep doesn't provide any. There's a
second or two of shock that she has the courage to play Clara as a young
woman, when no matter what director August does to help her (and it isn't
much), the inescapable fact is, there's no way for her to convince us that
she can -- and troubling because it's so damn distracting. She doesn't
help ingratiate herself to us, either: there's an aura of depression, not
the supernatural, hanging around her -- she looks and acts exhausted, not
too unlike Julie Andrews's last hour in HAWAII. Allende describes Clara as
"the most elegant, discreet and charming lady of (her) social circle," but
you'd be hard-pressed to find traces of these attributes in the movie. If
you haven't read the novel, then Clara's self-imposed muting will confuse.
August changes the focus of the "respectful" at Clara's funeral: gone is
"the hodgepodge of delegations -- poor children, students, labor
unionists, nuns, mongoloid children, bohemians, spiritualists" and in are
the conspirators, right out of THE BATTLE OF CHILE. A minor miracle,
though, that we believe it when Streep's Clara says good-bye to Esteban's
sister Ferula, played by Glenn Close, or when she makes after-death
visitations. She does a great collapse when Irons slaps her, and she wears
her hair as illustrated on the cover of the 1986 Bantam book edition. As
Clara's parents, Vanessa Redgrave is merely extending her magnanimity from
Howards End, and Armin Mueller-Stahl sounds as if he's looping in real
time his own performance. Hinting once more at Anne Revere, this time as
an Oriental version, Close, who was August's first choice to play Clara
some years back (with William Hurt as Esteban), has the movie's one
totally manufactured bit -- going to the priest to confess her attraction
to Clara. The accusation of the lesbian is in the novel but expressed only
by Esteban, but why August thought it necessary for us to have this movie
Ferula suffer the embarrassment of the probable truth isn't quite
understandable: doesn't August realize that Ferula would literally die
before she could ever admit it? Her death is precipitated by having been
denied by the jealous Esteban her friendship and loving care of Clara, and
likely by her guilt of amorous feelings she couldn't handle. A more
satisfactory alteration would have been for Close, before her character
wills herself to death, to rage at Irons, because there's plenty to rage
about. And no American actress rages more chillingly than Close. (This is
the second movie in which she plays a victim to Irons -- the first as the
nincompoopy Sonny in REVERSAL OF FORTUNE.) Am I the only to have noticed
that when Ferula's & Esteban's mother dies, the size of the coffin
wouldn't be quite up to the task? 
        Allende describes Blanca as having "Arabian eyes," a "Moorish,
languid air about her. She was tall and well endowed, of a rather helpless
and tearful temperament that roused men's ancestral instinct for
protection." Winona Ryder looks neither Arabic nor tall and teary, and the
toughness she brings to the role is duality: to compress the tragedies
within the family tree, August has Blanca endure what her own daughter
Alba does in the novel -- the torture of the junta. (Allende has Blanca
and her beloved Pedro escaping to Canada while Alba is left behind and
repeatedly violated by one of Esteban's offspring.) This change
unobjectionable in that the story lines of Blanca and Alba are much the
same, but what isn't acceptable -- and is the movie's biggest mistake --
is Ryder's narration. Her voice is so ordinary, overly uninspired and
lacking of resonance and out of pithy sync with the sweeping emotionality
of Allende's plangent language that both the author's and our
sensitivities get mugged. 
        Watching Bille August's version, I was startled by what fidelity
he held to the narrative itself; compacting the novel's major scenes, he
gets to the quick of each and only in a few major instances did I feel he
skimped glaringly: the truncation of how the Conservative politicians, in
cahoots with the military headed by Pinochet and assisted by American
hanky panky, sabotaged Salvador Allende's attempts at social and political
reform, and the absence of Barrabas. The lack of the former is easier to
pardon because author Allende, as the niece of the slain Chilean
president, provides a safety net for herself: she's practically taking
aspirin to reduce the rising fever of socialism and her political scenes
are all clich‚s and truisms. Her most daring bit is using Nobel-winning
Neruda as The Poet and having him die under Pinochet's junta, a death that
passed in America without regret. (Neither Richard Nixon in his
recollections nor Henry Kissinger in his two bloated volumes of mendacious
memoirs have the decency to call the junta they supported to account for
the outrage, probably because Neruda was in fact the Chilean Communist
Party's candidate for president in 1970, and his politics caused him
trouble as far back as 1948, when he was indicted as a subversive and had
to escape to the Andes on horseback.) The Poet is not included in the
movie, and American involvement is only insinuated. 
        Barrabas's absence is another matter altogether. Being a sucker
for dogs, when in the novel Barrabas is assassinated as political warning,
I don't think I'm the only reader who quickly choked up. The shock and
cruelty of it seemed like rivets pounded into the heart. When Esteban has
the dog taxidermied as rug for Clara, at whose feet he died, there's a
riff between intention and outcome: the rug was done to please Clara the
eternal spiritualist, but she will have no part of it; she condemns the
remains to the basement. But Barrabas rises from the cellar in two moments
of such breathtaking love that I still get goose bumps thinking about it:
when Clara dies, her beloved granddaughter Alba is found after the funeral
to be sleeping on Barrabas, and, after Esteban slowly acknowledges and
regrets that his acquiescence to the military in order to "save" the
country from Allende has been submission to fascism, he surreptitiously
works to free both his daughter and her lover from the hands of Pinochet's
henchmen and, as if to cleanse, decides to open up his Santiago home and
put on loving display Barrabas. "Let's leave him here," he says, "this is
where he always should have been." Though Allende claims to like -- and
approve of the changes for -- the movie, August only proved that a movie
maker could make THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS. Unlike ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF
SOLITUDE, which is rather like a movie fantasist's dream of a screenplay
never to be dared, HOUSE isn't an insurmountable challenge -- in that the
story is factually based, its magic has receptive narrative continuity.
What August proved even more is that the next time around, probably as a
deluxe TV miniseries, the book will be in the hands of a sensualist like
Bertolucci or perhaps a fantasist like Hector Babenco, or better yet
Humberto Sol s (who could bring out the appropriate melancholic refrains
over failed Revolutions, as he tried to do in 1975's CANATA DE CHILE) and
marvellous facets of imagination like green hair, Nivea's head, Clara's
twins and the Mora Sisters will return and, above all else, Barrabas will
rise, not fall.

Author
Tim Voon
Starring: Jeremy Irons, Meryl Streep, Glenn Close, Winona Ryder, Antonio
Banderas, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Vanessa Redgrave, Vincent Gallo, Maria
Conchita Alonso Director: Bille August Screenplay: Bille August based on
the novel LA CASA DE LOS ESPIRITUS by Isabel Allende Music: Hans Zimmer
This is the story of a male, chauvinistic pig, who has nothing; gains
something; marries a girl from a respectable family; thinks his spinster
sister is having an affair with his wife, so exiles her; rapes his
servant girls in the heat of passion; beats his daughter for falling in
love with a peasant boy; but mellows out in his old age.
I think I had better. Jeremy Irons plays the role of the sadistic
pioneering plantation owner, who unfortunately doesn't age fast enough.
Meryl Streep, arguably the best character actress of her generation, is
laughable as a sixteen year old girl, but swings into class acting mode
after adolescence. Glen Close plays the elderly spinster sister to a teen
- hey she is a spinster! Isn't she? Winona Ryder carries that wide-eyed
innocent sweetness that we have come to know and love. Antonio Banderas
at this point in time was probably still learning English as his third
or fourth language. He speaks the words but what do they mean?
Comment: Clearly the 'House of the Damned'.

Author
Mark R. Leeper

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Written and directed by Bille August, based on the novel by Isabel Allende
Starring Jeremy Irons, Meryl Streep, Winona Ryder, Antonio Banderas,
         Armin Mueller-Stahl and Vanessa Redgrave
MPAA Rating     Presumably "R" for rape, torture, and nudity.
Running Time    138 minutes
     THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS is a huge, sprawling train-wreck of a
drama that requires some serious suspension of disbelief to take
seriously.  The problem here is casting and if you can accept Jeremy
Irons as a South American and Meryl Streep as a psychic and Winona
Ryder as a mother, then you're halfway on your way to "enjoying" Bille
August's adaption of Isabell Allende's acclaimed 1985 novel.
     THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS opens in a rather Chile South American
country in 1926 and introduces Esteban Trueba (Irons).  He's a young
miner who plans to prosper and, later, marry the daughter of a
prominent aristocrat (Mueller-Stahl).  But by the time he strikes gold,
the daughter is dead--an event foreseen by her psychic little sister
Clara.  Esteban rides off into the hills and Clara, shocked by her
ability to foresee fatality, turns mute.
     Twenty years pass and Esteban has become a powerful (and quite
cruel) rancher.  When he returns to town to mourn his mother, he spies
the now-grown and now-gorgeous Clara (Streep) at the funeral.  He
proposes, she speaks, the furniture levitates on their honeymoon and,
at the moment of her impregnation, Clara jumps up and declares "it will
be a girl."  Said girl grows up looking like Winona Ryder and takes a
lover (Banderas) who is a revolutionary and causes her father all sorts
of grief because, by that time, Dad is a senior member of the
conservative government.
     The initial problem is pacing and SPIRITS doesn't flow worth a
damn.  The director's eye is good--there's no shortage of arresting
images here--but his timing is awful.  Much of the first half of the
film is comprised of truncated scenes--powerful, inspiring incidents
that are compressed into moments so momentary that they barely stay on
the screen long enough to register.
     (The first eighty minutes could be highlights from *another* film,
for all we know!)
     SPIRITS slows in the second half, thank God, and spends *some*
quality time with the story.  But even a lively coup d'etat--complete
with Winona Ryder undergoing torture--is no help to the viewer, who
has been stuck in a twilight zone where the chracters age at different
rates.
     Watching THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS is like watching a high-school
production where all of your best friends are playing people of older
ages.  Except, instead of kids playing adults, it's adults playing
kids.  Come on, Jeremy Irons in his twenties?  You can't tell the age
of *any* major character without doing some serious in-your-head
arithmetic.  And that's no fun.
     Age, innocence, or otherwise, the "international" cast is a bust.
     The less-than-ethnic-looking Irons puts a wealth of effort into
his role of Esteban even though he's saddled with a goofy accent and,
what looks suspiciously like, Dustin Hoffman's fake teeth from HOOK.
Streep is graceful and serenely strong and has her hilarious moment
when filmed asleep in her bed with her hair, arms, and cheekbones
perfectly poised.
     Vanessa Redgrave and Armin Mueller-Stahl are all but wasted as
Clara's parents.  So are Winona Ryder and Antonio Banderas--though
listed in the credits, they do little more than stand around and look
sincere.  By default, the standout is Glenn Close as Esteban's spinster
sister.  She stares and glares and never wears anything but black.  But
she *does* walk away with most of the film's funny lines.
     In fact, THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS is filled with more
*un*intentional humor than otherwise.  Stop, look, and listen for such
laughable laurels as Ryder's drab narration, inexplicably awful
dubbing, and a vintage automobile that collides with a train and
explodes like something from a Mel Gibson movie.
