Title
Review for Ladybird Ladybird (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release 12/94-2/95  
Running Length: 1:42 
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Language, violence, mature themes) 
     Theoretically, the function of the social worker is to help families 
through difficulties.  In Ken Loach's latest, LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD,  it's 
shown that good intentions don't always have beneficial results.  Loach's 
films (such as RIFF-RAFF and RAINING STONES) are always doped with social 
commentary, and this one is no different.  Here, the villain is a process 
that places regulations over human interests, where a child becomes a 
pawn in a struggle between the State and the Mother. 
     In this case, the Mother is Maggie (Crissy Rock), a passionate and 
lively woman with four children--each from a different liaison.  The 
latest's father, with whom Maggie is now living, is violently abusive.  
To get away from him, Maggie checks into a woman's shelter, but an 
accident there nearly causes her oldest child to die in a fire, and the 
social agencies take all four children into custody. Court appearances 
turn into bitter shouting matches, and Maggie's offspring are placed into 
foster care. 
     Meanwhile, Maggie has met Jorge (Vladimir Vega), a rare "good" man. 
He's a political refugee from Paraguay whose English visa has expired.  
But he remains as an illegal alien and takes a low-paying job in order to 
stay with Maggie.  Together, the two have a child (her fifth; his first), 
but social workers have long memories and all it takes is one nasty word 
from a nosy neighbor to put Maggie's maternal fitness in question once 
more. 
     As powerful and stinging a story as LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD is (and it's 
based on real events), it's the performance of Crissy Rock that makes the 
film work.  Rock, a standup comic with no previous acting experience, is 
incredible.  Her high-voltage rendering of Maggie is so emotionally 
volatile that the movie becomes a draining experience to view.  You don't 
just watch Maggie; you experience along with her--and what she's going 
through isn't the sort of thing that anyone wants to be a part of. 
     The questions raised by LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD are compelling, if not 
unique.  Loach frequently uses film to examine the inadequacies of the 
British social system, and here we're forced to consider the issue of 
when a woman is truly incapable of raising a child.  While there seems to 
be reasonable justification for taking Maggie's first four offspring, 
what happens thereafter illustrates the kind of capricious horror that 
can occur when those in power don't really understand a situation. 
     Often, LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD is brutally unpleasant.  However, Loach 
has never been known for lightweight movies, and comparisons between his 
work and Mike Leigh's NAKED are well-deserved.  Those disturbed by that 
picture are unlikely to feel comfortable during LADYBIRD--but comfort 
certainly isn't what the director was aiming for.  In large part because 
of Rock's performance, this production becomes far more than a simple 
tale of one woman's fight to raise a family.  Instead, it's an 
unforgettable portrait of human anguish and the price that any society 
must pay when its best intentions go awry. 
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD is a shocking true story from England.  This is
one of those movies that if it were not true, you would see it and
complain about how the screenwriter, director, and lead actress had all
stretched believability beyond all reasonable bounds.  Yet, this is
supposedly a very accurate portrayal of the events, and I believe it.
     LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD tells the story of Maggie Conlon (played by
first time actress Crissy Rock--more on her amazing acting later).
Maggie's life is full of problems.  Early on we see a scene where she
witnesses her Dad beating her Mom senseless in front of Maggie when she
is about 5.  She cries incessantly while watching her Mom being
brutalized.  Her Dad is full of anger and rage.
     When we first meet Crissy she already has four children.  The
family looks like the United Nations as she points out that she has had
children with four different men she has lived with, and they have
left, in some cases to go back to their native lands.  She was never
married to any of them.  They all share one common thread, however,
they beat her constantly with the same rage her Dad beat her Mom.  She
says she still loves them and keeps trying to go back to them.
     In the first scene of the show she is in a bar and meets a new
boyfriend (Vladimir Vega) from Venezuela.  Naturally, she sleeps with
him shortly thereafter.  He appears to be a real gentlemen.  She tells
him that her four kids have been taken by Social Services, and she is
suing to get them back.
     Most of the movie has to do with Maggie and her battle with the
local government.  She is the worst defendant imaginable.  She screams
the F-word constantly in court to the judge, to the Social Services
people, and even to her own attorney (barrister I guess I should say).
     You are going to be very surprised about the sequence of events in
the show.  I did not guess many of the twists and turns.  Suffice it to
say you may think that the writer's name was Franz Kafka where as the
writer and director was Ken Loach.
     Crissy Rock worked in a bar until she was discovered by the
director.  Her performance is so outstanding that both Siskel and Ebert
wanted her to get an Academy Award nomination for it, and I agree.  She
plays Maggie as the unlikable and tormented character that she is.
     Rock is shaped like the Rock of Gibraltar and is about as good
looking.  This seemed like perfect casting to me.  Maggie is so angry
to everyone you find yourself amazed that she has any friends left at
all, much less a long succession of lovers.  She is literally a walking
time bomb in the show, but one with a meantime to explosion of 30
seconds.  I do not know if the show is ultimately about abuse, anger,
or morality--perhaps all three equally.
     The movie runs about right at 1:42.  It is unrated, but would be a
hard R for scary, explicit, and bloody domestic violence scenes plus
zillions of uses of the F-word.  I recommend this show, but only for
adults.  It is a depressing but enlightening show.  I give it ***.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: February 2, 1995
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Arriving as it does in the middle of the Newt Gingrich-generated
national discussion on the benefits of removing children from unstable
homes, LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD could not be more timely.  Although set in
England rather than the U.S., it presents a fact-based, textbook case
for the esteemed speaker's social services plan.  And while director
Ken Loach could not possibly have realized it, he has made a film which
should inspire both sides in this debate to consider their points of
view more carefully.  Harrowing, challenging yet never pedantic,
LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD is about as balanced a presentation of a difficult
issue as one could hope for, a portrait of a self-destructive woman
colliding with a by-the-book system, and brought to breathtaking life
by a knockout debut performance from Crissy Rock.
     Rock plays Maggie Conlon, a working-class lounge singer who
seems never to have had a break in her life.  The child of an
abusive father, she has gone on to a series of relationships which
has produced four children, all by different fathers.  Early in the
film, she meets Jorge (Vladimir Vega), a Paraguayan political
activist and a refugee from his home country, and describes in
flashback how she came to lose custody of her children to social
services.  Maggie and Jorge grow closer, and soon decide to begin a
family of their own.  However, Maggie finds it impossible to escape
from her past, and as the government continues to follow her every
move she finds her own abrasive personality making matters worse at
every turn.
     Director Loach, the poet laureate of the contemporary English
working class (RIFF RAFF, RAINING STONES) has delivered perhaps his
most powerful film yet with LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD.  He tells Maggie's
story in a straight-ahead fashion, eschewing cinematic hyperbole or
heavy musical cues.  It is a dramatic enough story in its own right,
and Loach knows it.  A pair of scenes in the film show two children,
one the young Maggie and the other one of Maggie's own children,
responding to witnessing an abusive father, and there is little else
Loach needs to do to demonstrate the self-perpetuating cycle
domestic violence creates.  He also trusts the audience to draw its
own conclusions from Maggie's story, and presents both Maggie and
the government social workers alternately as the solution and the
problem.  This is a story in which, ultimately, there are no
winners, and Loach refuses to let us off the hook by giving us a
convenient villain.
     What really makes the ambiguity work is the incendiary
performance by Crissy Rock, who had never acted before LADYBIRD.
Hard-edged and painfully low on self-esteem, Maggie repeatedly
torpedoes her own chances for happiness by refusing to believe that
she deserves any, and Rock plays this out in several incredibly
emotional scenes, every one of which feels completely honest.  She
layers Maggie's character so expertly that at times it truly does
appear that she is an unfit mother, making it hard to fault the
government's intentions.  It's powerful work by a performer who
understands instinctively that a character like this has to be real,
and Rock truly becomes Maggie.  In fact, she's so powerful that she
completely eclipses Vladimir Vega's Jorge, whose character is never
developed quite as fully as Maggie's.  There's a reason that he
sticks by her through so much hardship, but I, like Maggie, wasn't
always sure what that reason was.
     The screenplay by Rona Munro, though based on a true story, is
dramatically unwieldy towards the end; scenes begin to repeat
themselves, and I started to feel that I was being put through an
emotional wringer.  It's one of those cases where a bit of license
with fact might have made for a tighter and even more effective
story.  But it amounts to quibbling to fault LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD for
being too true to a gripping story.  It's a film that makes demands
of its audience, specifically to look at this story and to reach its
own conclusions about whether or not Maggie was treated fairly.  Her
story is so riveting, and so spectacularly re-created by Crissy
Rock, that any audience should be up to that challenge.
