Title
Review for Dracula 2000 (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Patrick Lussier
Written by: Joel Soisson, Patrick Lussier
Abraham Van Helsing (Christopher Plummer) is an antiques dealer with a 
secret in the cellar of his massive home. No one is entirely sure what he 
has buried down there, guarded by a high tech security system, but Marcus 
(Omar Epps) and his team of cyber thieves intend to find out. What they 
discover is not the gold and jewels they came for. Instead, they find 
Dracula himself (Gerard Butler), buried for over a hundred years. Dracula is 
soon released from his prison and seeks out Van Helsing's daughter, Mary 
(Justine Waddell), whom he is connected to in ways even he doesn't fully 
understand. So, Van Helsing and his assistant, Simon (Jonny Lee Miller), 
track the prince of darkness across Europe. As they travel, Simon (Belmont 
maybe?) soon realizes that all the legends aren't true. Dracula may hate 
crosses, but they don't exactly hurt him. Silver stakes are the way to go, 
and Drac's hatred of Christianity and silver may be the key to finding his 
weakness and killing him once and for all.
Hey Patrick, Dracula may be immortal, but we're not, and you just wasted two 
precious hours of our lives. Oh and what a waste of time this movie is. If 
you're like me, you'll spend your time trying vainly to keep from falling 
asleep (I asked the girl next to me to please slap me upside the head if I 
started drifting off. She seemed to like that idea and hit me even when I 
wasn't falling asleep) or chatting with folks next to you about the good old 
days when Dracula movies were entertaining. You know, the moment Dimension's 
logo hit the screen at the film's start, I got this sick feeling in my 
stomach. I had to wonder, why should I feel this way? Afterall, Dimension 
brought us Scream and From Dusk Til Dawn; two films which 
perfectly combine horror and comedy for a rousing good time. Then it dawned 
on me, while Dimension may have given us those great flicks, what have the 
brought us lately? Highlander: Endgame? Reindeer Games? That's 
not much of a resume there, and despite my hopes that Dracula 2000 
would pull them out of their rut with Wes Craven's name attached to it, this 
was not to be.
Hey, look everyone, it's another cast full of young and talentless actors. 
Jonny Lee Miller (Mansfield Park) leads our fairly talentless cast 
with a performance that almost borders on tolerable at times. He tries to 
deliver his lines with something resembling flair, but when your dialogue is 
about as wooden as the stake your trying to stick through Dracula (sorry, 
they're silver stakes now; when did that happen?), you can't be expected to 
do too much. Then there's Justine Waddell (Mansfield Park... 
interesting), about as attractive as your average teen actor, and just about 
as talented. How about Gerard Butler as the prince/princess/wolf/bat/leech 
of darkness? Try to imagine a nancy boy wearing a black trench-coat that's 
about two sizes too large, staring at everyone with a wide-eyed look that 
seems to say "Hey, look at me, I'm in a movie! Teehee!" That's our boy. The 
only saving grace comes from Omar Epps (The Wood), who does what he 
can with a seriously underwritten role, and the great Christopher Plummer 
(The Insider). When these two are on screen the film is almost 
tolerable. Almost being the key word there.
Here's a quick lesson for all you aspiring directors out there: a few 
startles do not a horror movie make. Does Dracula 2000 have startles? 
Oh yes, of the cheap, cheesy, I would have seen it coming if I'd been paying 
attention to the movie variety. Does it have any scares? Not only does it 
not have a single scare, it doesn't have anything even remotely resembling a 
scare. It's as though Lussier intentionally avoided scaring his audiences. 
Yet it wasn't the lack of scares that surprised me. I've come to expect that 
from modern horror movies. What really surprised me is that there was no 
humor here either. The closest the film ever gets to a humorous moment is 
Dracula watching a music video filled with images of fire and people wearing 
leather. There is a look of sheer admiration on his face as he whispers, 
"brilliant." Other than that, don't expect a chuckle this time around. Why 
is this lack of humor surprising? Because most modern horror and slasher 
films have decided to forgo horror in favor of self-aware humor. Dracula 
2000 has ditched horror in favor of... what exactly?
So, what works in the film? The first twenty or so minutes, in which we see 
the high-tech, high energy break in is quite entertaining. After watching it 
I'd settled in for what looked to be an entertaining movie. My mistake. 
That's about all that works in the film, but let me tell you right now what 
really, REALLY doesn't work. You ready? This is a minor spoiler (not that 
you should care). Forget everything you thought you knew about Dracula, 
folks. Forget all those stories about his once being Vlad the Impaler, a 
Transylvanian. According to Patrick Lussier, Dracula was actually the man 
responsible for turning Jesus in for his ten pieces of silver. Umm... what? 
I can forgive a bad horror movie, but I'm not too willing to forgive a bad 
horror movie that rewrites a good one. I've got to briefly mention the 
film's soundtrack, which is an unusual combination of modern rock songs and 
operatic singing which sounds like a bad Hans Zimmer imitation. While the 
soundtrack's disjointed feeling does rather fit the tone of the movie, 
that's not necessarily a good thing. Dracula 2000 runs far too long 
at 127 minutes. I'd recommend the film to those who think modern horror 
movies "rule" (you people confuse me) and give it two and a half out of five 
stars. By the way, there is one legitimate scare in the film. It's preceded 
by five, count them, five different teen-flick previews. Lord have mercy.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
James Brundage
Well, it's the holiday season and what better way to celebrate than by
sucking everyone dry?  No... it's not your neighborhood Christmas Key
Party, it's Dracula 2000, a gift to all you horror fans for Christmas.
And it's got all of those earmarks of just about every Dracula, a
director no one has heard of (Craven just bankrolled it), a series of
barely recognizable actors, and a feeling of having been shelved for
about four years oh yeah, and a bunch of religious undertones so the
crew can work through their theological schizophrenia a la Anne Rice.
The film opens in 1892, where we see a ship with all hands dead bound
for London and with Aramaic written on the sails.  Cut to 2000, when a
ragtag band of thieves and morons raid an antiquity dealer's basement
because they don't know what's there.  Even after seeing fanged skull
upon fanged skull and losing two men to booby traps, they decide to take
the silver coffin they find out with them and, after good old Vlad the
Impaler (Gerard Butler) awakens and vampifies everyone, we wind up in
New Orleans.
Of course it's Mardi Gras and ultra-Catholic Goth girl (Justine Waddell)
who works at the Virgin Megastore (Can you say product placement?) finds
herself the object of Drac's affection.  The original vampire hunter
(Christopher Plummer) and his assistant (Jonny Lee Miller) hunt Drac,
and the assistant is falling for Drac's girl.  Needless to say, Vlad
ain't happy.
Unlike most horror flicks, which are content at being a splatterfest and
accepting of their brainlessness, Dracula 2000 opts to be a
Stigmata/lesbian-vampire-flick hybrid which raises more pitiful
religious questions than it gives in entertainment value.  Although it's
set to a metal soundtrack so commercial salespeople hawk it at the door,
even half of the horror fans in my audience went away pissed.  I
probably don't need to tell you at this point, the movie isn't even
worth the time in line for popcorn, let alone in the theatre.
With Dracula calling a Goth music video absolutely brilliant and the
fact that half of the film either features a Virgin Megastore logo or
takes place in the Virgin Megastore, it's pretty clear that Dracula 2000
is a bit more advertisement than art.  Sure, most movies these days are
complete commercials, but they're also pretty slick -- and Dracula 2000
can't even manage to pull that off.  The one thing Dracula 2000 does
have is a monopoly on big-screen bloodsuckers for the time being.  But
don't despair, horror fans: January is only a few days away, and soon
you'll have all the recycled horror you can stomach.
Director: Patrick Lussier
Producer: W.K. Border, Joel Soisson
Writer: Joel Soisson
Starring: Jonny Lee Miller, Justine Waddell, Gerard Butler, Colleen
Fitzpatrick, Jennifer Esposito, Danny Masterson, Jeri Ryan, Lochlyn
Munro, Sean Patrick Thomas, Omar Epps, Christopher Plummer, Shane West
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Brandon Herring

Hey guys...Im going to be sending reviews again in email, but I am not going 
to have a website of my own, instead you can read my reviews here:  The Movie 
Insider  or here:  reviews by Brandon Herring.I have a new format, but my 
writing is going to stay the same. ~Brandon
Dracula 2000   * * out of * * * *
Directed by: Patrick Lussier
Running Time: 97 Minutes
Rated R: strong vampire violence, gore, sexuality, language, bried nudity.
Cast: Gerard Butler, Christopher Plummer, Jonny Lee Miller, Justine Waddell, 
Colleen Fitzpatrick (aka 'Vitamin C'), Danny Masterson, Jeri Ryan, Jennifer 
Esposito, Lochlyn Munro, Omar Epps, Sean Patrick Thomas.
In 1922 an original, and very scary film came out called "Nosferatu"...he was 
the first image of a character of Dracula...and now almost eighty years later 
Dracula is resurrected to the big screen once again in this mind-numbing 
effort from first time director Patrick Lussier, who is Wes Craven's editor. 
This is the billionth Dracula film ever made, and to me it seems the more 
they make them, the worse they make them.
The last good Dracula film (actually the last Dracula film) was 1992's 
lavishly made "Bram Stoker's Dracula" which gained critical and audience 
raves, and made a ton of money at the box office. Sixty years before that was 
the movie that made Bela Lugosi popular and that was "Dracula". This year we 
get a new Dracula film for a new generation.
"Dracula 2000" opens with an interesting montage of scenes from a ship years 
ago, with dead and bloody people on the ship, obviously attacked by some 
creature. We then shoot to London, England 2000 where we meet Simon (Jonny 
Lee Miller) and his father like figure Abraham Van Hesling (Christopher 
Plummer). They run a museum with a very special exhibit locked away deep 
inside a vault. When the vault is robbed of it's exhibit, Abraham reveals 
what was locked away in this vault: Dracula himself...now he is on the loose 
in modern day London.
Meanwhile Mary (Justine Waddell) is having visual nightmares of a black 
haired man who haunts her in her dreams, he stalks her, finds her, and then 
disappears as she wakes up. Her friend Lucy (Colleen Fitzpatrick) thinks she 
is just lacking sleep, but Mary knows something is wrong, something deep 
down, something in her family. After Abraham reveals yet another shocking 
secret, he and Simon must find Mary and save her from Dracula, before it's 
too late, whilst Dracula stalks around town, making even more vampires appear 
in the town.
Wes Craven's lead editor Patrick Lussier clocks in his directorial debut 
(although he directed last years direct to video "The Prophecy III") and he 
does a good enough job keeping the film on it's heels, but somewhere towards 
the fourty-minute mark the film takes a turn and starts to get oddly 
confusing, and the rest of the film I was so confused I had to ask my friend 
what just happened, he couldn't answer my questions, for he was as confused 
as I was.
Lussier seems to want to make more of an action film, than a hardcore Vampire 
film, in the ending climax "The Matrix" technique using slow-motion while 
showing the trail of a bullet is excessively overused, and gets really old, 
really fast. The acting on the other hand is very well done with Justine 
Waddell clocking in a grat performace as the lead woman Mary, Christopher 
Plummer and Jonny Lee Miller are great as well, and the rest of the 
supporting cast with Jennifer Esposito (who is as beautiful as she is 
talented) is the stand-out in the supporting cast.
Lussier also wrote and edited the film, which only one he did successfully, 
the writing is not that good at all, and this film I can safely say has a 
terrible script, with some bad dialogue and bad jokes, however the editing is 
fantastic and Lussier seems to be able to do at least one thing good. Overall 
Dracula 2000 is a so-so horror film, that isn't scary at all, but seemed to 
keep my attention throughout it's short runtime of 97 minutes. See it with 
caution, and don't expect to see too much.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 12/22/00.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Even if WES CRAVEN PRESENTS DRACULA 2000 -- what a modest title -- 
features the undead, the movie itself is completely and utterly dead.  
Without a scintilla of new ideas, it rehashes the Dracula legend.  You 
know the drill.  The guy is a woman's man, who prowls at night and gets 
a major heartburn when silver stakes are thrust into his chest.  His 
love bites are quite messy, spurting blood everywhere.  Once bitten, 
however, the victim joins his little club and goes off to put hickeys on 
other necks.  About the only variation in DRACULA 2000 is that chopping 
off the head of a vampire is said to work just as well as the old 
stake-in-the-heart routine.  Then again, maybe this has always been a 
lesser know rule of devamping.
The film, scripted by Joel Soisson and directed by Patrick Lussier, 
features a group of B-list actors and B-list actor wannabes.  Only 
Christopher Plummer (THE SOUND OF MUSIC), who phones in his performance, 
gives the movie anything even approaching credibility.
Any movie pretentious enough to include the year of the millennium in 
its title should be smart enough to include a fair amount of 
self-deprecating humor, as did GODZILLA 2000.  DRACULA 2000, however, 
with its buckets of fake blood, still takes itself completely seriously.  
Neither a comedy nor a horror picture, DRACULA 2000 plays more like a 
bad industrial video for vampire exterminators.  It is certainly about 
as much fun as an instructional video, which is to say, no fun 
whatsoever.
If there is anything worth laughing at in the story it is the stunning 
level of stupidity of the characters.  If you came upon a locked tomb 
decorated by skulls, would you want to crack open the coffin inside to 
see what it contained?  Solina (Jennifer Esposito) does.  After all, she 
reasons, "If it's worth locking up, it's worth taking."  Here is 
something worth taking.  Take my advice.  Don't come anywhere near this 
comatose picture.  But if you think that this genre is hopeless, rent a 
copy of Larry Fessenden's HABIT.  Now, that is a fascinating vampire 
film with some real imagination.
WES CRAVEN PRESENTS DRACULA 2000 runs a very long 2:07.  It is rated R 
for violence/gore, language and some sexuality and would be acceptable 
for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Can you ever have enough Dracula movies? Yeah, probably. But this time
around, filmmakers have given the ol' man a little MTV twist for the kids
and a new look at his origins. Was I looking forward to seeing this movie?
Certainly not. The trailer was pretty lame and it basically looked like
another generic teen horror flick with Dracula in there just for kicks. I
was expecting bad acting, plot holes galore and some pretty bad effects.
What did I get? Find out below.
PLOT:
The most popular vampire in the world, Dracula, is once again unleashed upon
an unsuspecting modern-day world. This time around, the bloodsucker wants to
grab himself a specific soul, one that belongs to the daughter of the man
who caught and incarcerated him for over 100 years.
CRITIQUE:
A fun vampire movie. This film was quite the surprise for me. It actually
featured some okay acting, an interesting plot line, lotsa blood and some
pretty cool effects. It also wasn't as cheesy as I thought it was gonna be,
and featured plenty of bloodsucking, decapitations, neck bitings and sexy
women with heaving bosoms. Now how could you go wrong with that? Seriously
though, this flick is sure to be a nice treat for anyone who enjoys vampire
flicks and heavy soundtracks, and those who don't mind a new twist on a
renowned character. In fact, the revelation at the end of this movie about
the origins of Dracula is both unique and believable. I bought it and I
certainly bought most of the movie, which despite a nice groove, doesn't
really offer a lot of depth (if that's what you're looking for). But the
movie never bored me either, as it moved from bloody impalings to bloody
Matrix-esque fights to bloody heads flying all over the place. And you gotta
admire that in any vampire movie! God knows that any film featuring a man
who sucks blood for a living, is required to have lotsa crimson wetness
splashing around.
I was however disappointed with the lack of T&A in the movie. I mean,
there's a time and place for T&A and this was it! Mardi Gras? Sexy
vampiresses? C'mon! If you're gonna have this much violence in a movie, how
about lightening up our mood every now and then with some nifty boob shots.
Then again, maybe that's just my Jerry Ryan fixation talking...hehehe. In
the end, the movie entertained me and that is what I generally look for in
most films. If the film manages to entertain me during its entire runtime,
it's generally worthy of at least one look (according to me). One thing did
kinda stick out in my mind though. Despite enjoying the lead Dracula's
performance in the film, I do think that a "cooler" looking Dracul would've
been a better choice. This dude just looked too much like that singer from
the 80s, Richard Marx, and his puffy hair just bothered me throughout. A
slicker Prince of Darkness might've been able to elevate this film to a
certain cult-ish level. But in the end, I still consider this movie to be a
novel adaptation of an old time legend. Definitely geared more towards the
teens, but enough cheap scares for pretty much anyone looking for some
enjoyable bloody fun.
