Title
Review for Hunchback of Notre Dame, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Nobody lays it on quite as thick as Walt Disney.  Their newest
seasonal juggernaut, an animated operetta based on the Victor Hugo
classic, is just as big, bright, and beautiful as the marketing and
merchandising assault would lead us to believe.  Heck, we *already* know
most of what we're getting.  Having purchased our limited-edition
copies of THE LITTLE MERMAID, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, ALADDIN, THE LION
KING, and POCAHANTAS, we're pumped and primed for the schmaltzy ballads,
anthropomorphic critters, adult in-jokes, and, of course, an everybody-
cries ending.  Throw in the strange sight of a singing hunchback, some
more of that nifty computer- aided artwork, and a trio of finger-
snapping, wise-cracking gargoyles (led by the voice of "Seinfeld's"
Jason Alexander) and, viola, Disney's done it again...  except, this
time, with a twist.
     Under the direction of Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise (both from
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST), the animators have broken the mold in many
places.  This is a very Gothic movie that festers with surprisingly dark
and sinister deeds.  In the first ten minutes, alone, we witness both a
murder and attempted infanticide!  (You may want to keep the three- and
four-year olds away from this one.)  There are plenty of other adult
references, some serious and some side-splitting.  It's all a well-
deserved form of compensation for us grown ups; a reward, if you will,
for having to endure all the trailers, the tie-ins, and those dreadful
cardboard figures in the lobby.
     Yeah, the commercialism *is* crass.  (And, perhaps, in the case of
most major studios, entirely co-dependent to the creative process.)
However, I challenge anyone to name another movie this season (or year?)
that shows as much inspiration as perspiration.  No child, for example,
is likely to understand the agonies of the villainous Frolio, the
repressed Parisian judge who is tormented by his desire for the feisty
gypsy girl Esmeralda (voiced and modeled after Demi Moore).  But just as
they laughed at pink elephants on parade and without knowing a thing
about inebriation, so can children marvel at the demons that erupt from
Frolio's fireplace as he imagines the Hell that awaits his condemned
soul.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring the voices of Tom Hulce, Tony Jay, Demi Moore, Kevin Kline, 
      Paul Kendall, Jason Alexander, Charles Kimbrough, Mary Wickes, 
      David Ogden Stiers
Directors: Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise
Producer: Don Hahn
Story for the Screen by Tab Murphy, freely adapted from the novel by 
      Victor Hugo
Music: Alan Menken
Lyrics: Stephen Schwartz
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     Out of respect for the stunning visuals and family entertainment 
value of Disney's 34th animated feature, I can do no less than recommend 
THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME.  Sadly, however, this is the least-
enjoyable animated feature to come from the studio since its 1989 
rebirth.  THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME is a notch below last year's 
POCAHONTAS, which, in turn, was a drop from the previous year's THE LION 
KING.  Apparently, Disney's new wave of animation peaked early; their 
releases have been in a slow-but-steady decline since the delightful 
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.
     Still, all things considered, THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME isn't 
bad, it's just a little disappointing.  Despite the over-hyped and 
overexaggerated "darkness" of the production, kids will love it, so a 
box office success is assured.  And those who carefully review the 
family entertainment competition this summer will rightfully conclude 
that HUNCHBACK is the surest bet.
     It's curious that the movie to use the most adult source material 
has yielded the least potent results.  Obviously, Victor Hugo's vision 
of THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME couldn't be made into a Disney cartoon -- 
it violates almost every aspect of the studio's traditional, feel-
good/happy ending formula.  So, predictably, the screenwriters diluted 
it, but, in doing so, they siphoned off the elements that give the story 
its unique power.  With the darkest and most unpleasant aspects of 
Hugo's tragedy eradicated, there's not much left.  The poorly-focused 
remains are likely to appeal most strongly to the under-12 crowd.  
Unlike past efforts, there aren't many in-jokes and double-entendres to 
catch the attention of the adults in the audience.
     The film loosely follows Hugo's narrative.  After opening with a 
six-minute prologue describing how Judge Claude Frollo (voice of Tony 
Jay) becomes the guardian of the deformed bell-ringer of Notre Dame, 
Quasimodo (voice of Tom Hulce), HUNCHBACK launches into the meat of its 
story, which involves a curious love quadrangle.  The center of 
attention is the gypsy Esmeralda (who looks and sounds like Demi Moore).  
Frollo, a powerful magistrate in 15th century Paris, whose self-
proclaimed duty is to eradicate sin, wants all the gypsies dead, 
including Esmeralda.  At the same time, however, he's having trouble 
fighting a lustful desire for her.  The captain of his guards, Phoebus 
(voice of Kevin Kline), has fallen madly in love with the gypsy girl, as 
has Quasimodo, who becomes her friend and confidante.  In Hugo's book, 
the interaction between these characters fuels a complex and multi-
layered drama.  Not so in this movie, where Quasimodo's three talking 
gargoyle companions (Victor, Hugo, and Laverne; voiced by Charles 
Kimbrough, Jason Alexander, and Mary Wickes, respectively) exhibit more 
personality than the humans.  For, although we come to feel for "Quasi", 
neither Esmeralda nor Phoebus makes a dent in our sympathy.
     With his twisted back and distorted features, Quasimodo is an 
atypical Disney hero.  However, to avoid giving children nightmares, the 
animators have softened his appearance.  He's not monstrous or ugly; 
he's just different.  Children who consider themselves oddballs or 
outcasts will likely identify with the hunchback.  And the life-lesson 
about tolerance and respect for others will be understood by nearly 
everyone who watches the film.
     According to Disney, Frollo is the most conflicted and complex 
villain to have ever been brought to the animated screen.  I suppose 
that's true on one level -- after all, he's tormented by his own lustful 
impulses, and acts out of religious zeal rather than plain nastiness -- 
but I doubt many viewers will notice.  Ultimately, Frollo comes across 
as a bigoted, intolerant, but not overly-frightening, bad guy.  The most 
impressive thing about him is Tony Jay's deep, resonant voice.  
     From a musical standpoint, THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME is lifeless.  
The songs, co-written by composer Alan Menken and lyricist Stephen 
Schwartz, lack energy.  There are no show-stopping, toe-tapping numbers.  
In fact, there's nothing remotely memorable about any aspect of 
HUNCHBACK's soundtrack -- it's easily the poorest effort to come from 
Menken since he started churning out scores for Disney (he's done all of 
the new wave animated features except THE LION KING).
     On the other hand, the animation is crisper and more impressive 
than anything since BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, and certain computer-aided 
sequences are even more eye-popping than BEAUTY's sterling ballroom 
scene.  The Festival of Fools, where Quasimodo first ventures out of the 
bell tower, is a riot of color and movement, with intricately-animated 
backgrounds that are more interesting than the foregrounds.  Later in 
the film, when Paris is burning, the audience is treated to a stunning 
display of crimson and orange.  And the sequence where Frollo confronts 
his lustful inner demons, with images of Esmeralda painted by tongues of 
fire, is inspired.
     If you believe that the primary purpose for animated films is to 
enthrall children, THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME is an unquestionable 
success.  If you're looking for entertainment for the whole family, this 
movie will fit the bill.  But if you're anticipating something that's as 
diverting for adults as for younger viewers, HUNCHBACK may disappoint.  
Since the release of THE LITTLE MERMAID, Disney has set a high standard 
for its animated work, and, for the first time, one of the studio's 
releases struggles to distinguish itself.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ben Hoffman
One of the more difficult tasks of writing screenplays is that of
converting a classic into a film.  When you add to that that the film
will be an animation, your work is really Herculean.  Nevertheless,
animation story/screenwriter Tab Murphy was equal to the task; as a
result we have a film which is enjoyable and enlightening for both
young and old.
To achieve this end, condensation of Victor Hugo's classic story of a
hunchback who is ugly and partially deaf, license had to be taken in
order to bring it to the screen.  The world being what it is, and
Disney under fire by Baptist Fundamentalists, the original bad guy,
Frollo, (voice: Tony Jay) who in Hugo's story was a high-ranking member
of the Church, is here made to be a secular judge.  How could they make
a movie with a Churchman having a sexual crush on the heroine, the sexy
Gypsy girl, Esmerelda? (voice: Demi Moore).
I remember well my first viewing of the Hunchback, Quasimodo, way back
in 1923 with Lon Chaney, Sr.  One look at him and I went flying out the
theater, scared out of my wits.   In 1939 I was better able to handle
Charles Laughton's great performance as the hunchback.  In the current
1996 animated version, Quasimodo (voice: Tom Hulce) is made much less
horrifying-looking and he is not deaf.  Thus while the original classic
story is retained, a few changes were made with the story to make it
more palatable and much less frightening for youngsters; at the same
time, adults will get the nuances and the message that people who look
or are "different" than ourselves should not be ridiculed or harmed.
When I saw the real Notre Dame on a visit to Paris many years ago, the
stone gargoyles near the bell tower did not talk; the movie brings them
in for a bit of humor, advice and pathos.  Other voices: Kevin Kline,
Paul Kandel.  Original score and songs by Alan Menken with lyrics by
Stephen Schwartz.
Congratulations to all who worked to make this Disney film a
wonderfully entertaining movie.
Directed by Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise.

Author
Lewis Butler
I haqve to vent a little here, so go ahead an skip this paragraph if you
think all cartoons should be rated G, no matter what.  THE HUNCHBACK OF
NOTRE DAME starts with the murder of Quasimoto's mother on the steps of
Notre Dame.  This murder is quite visual (not like the distant shot in
Bambi) and quite obvious.  This movie should have been rated PG, and a
solid PG.  This is not the only time THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME shows
a violent streak, but it is the first, and it would have quite an impact on
any child much under 8.  If this movie had been live-action, with identical
shots, it would have been rated PG-13.  Now, I'm not saying it should have
been rated PG-13, but a PG rating would have been appropriate in this case.
Now, as for the film.  The voice talents are good.  Even Demi Moore, who I
was worried about, performed well.  The story is quite faithful to the
other movie versions, up until the last five minutes.  There is some
wonderfully done computer animation of the crowds and some flocks of birds.
As I said, the music is there, but not memorable in anyway.
There is one interesting shot where Quasimoto is singing from the roof of
Notre Dame, leaning over a gargoyle.  The scene reminded me so much of a
similar shot from AN AMERICAN TAIL that I'm convinced the hunchback was
singing "Somwehre out there."
The brightest spot of the movie, I think, was Jason Alexander as the voice
of one of the Gargoyles.  His gargoyle is something like a cross between
the "Crazy Eddie" in LION KING and his Duckman persona from the USA cable
show.
Obligatory "Disney is racist" comment:  If Quasi is a gypsy and all the
gypsies in the movie are shown with dark skin, why is Q so fair?
The ending of the movie could have easily destroyed whatever there was to
appreciate in this film, but it manages not to, somehow.  Despite the happy
hollywood ending, it doesn't get too smarmy.  Yes, Quasimoto lives, this is
a Disney movie after all, what did you expect?  Still, the movie makes it
mostly work.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL ">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme>          | 
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data

Author
Jim Maguire
Featuring the voices of:
        Tom Hulce, Demi Moore, Jason Alexander, Kevin Kline, Charles 
Kimbrough, Mary Wickes, Tony Jay.
        Victor Hugo's tale THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME was an extremely 
long book - 600 pages- and showed us a lot about poor, evil, and the 
forces that surround all human beings. As they say, everything can be 
turned into Disney. First it was POCAHONTAS, now this. Disney, however, 
has really struck on something big. Although I had various reasons for 
not liking POCAHONTAS, THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME has turned around all 
the complaints given by critics.
        First of all, the voices in HUNCHBACK are fresh, and surprisingly 
free. POCAHONTAS, however, is incredulously under-voiced. If the Disney 
animators care about comedy in their features, why don't the animals 
talk. NOTRE DAME has three refreshing gargoyles, voiced by Charles 
Kimbrough, SEINFELD's Jason Alexander, and the late Mary Wickes. 
        Second, POCAHONTAS tries to convey emotion in terms of violence, 
sloth, and greed. On a comic note, it has all the seven sins from the 
Morgan Freeman movie SEVEN. HUNCHBACK puts more love in between the two, 
and less anger. Disney has finally realized that the comedy and romance 
is where their stories spring, not the lust.
        Third, and last, POCAHONTAS's songs are incredibly dry; it's the 
first Disney movie that actually had me annoyed from having songs in my 
head. For example, in the song " Mine, Mine, Mine" in POCAHONTAS said 
"mine, mine, mine" so much that I felt like stabbing all the characters 
who sung it. THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, however, had me muttering "the 
bells of notre dame" everywhere I went. 
        With beautiful love contrasts between Demi Moore and Tom Hulce ( 
Quasi and Esmeralda,) who wants to have a history lesson???

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME is a carefully constructed show with
stunning visuals.  The sets are crafted with a wide range from
surrealistic crimson cast skies to a skyscraper looking cathedral that
is so real that you will feel like you must be wearing 3D glasses. 
Disney takes a lot of risks in adapting this controversial Victor Hugo
novel to the screen.  It manages not to offend anyone, even the church
which most movies are happy to ridicule ad nauseam.  
     Although I like the film and recommend it, I will admit upfront
that I was disappointed.  Based on the hype, I thought it would be much
better than last year's POCAHONTAS, but I found them about equal. 
Although THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME is dramatic, I found only a few
scenes moving.  The characters are created with a great flourish, but
they are not compelling enough to make us care about them more than
superficially.  Remember how concerned you were about Bambi and Dumbo? 
Well, Disney just does not demonstrate that ability to touch us here.
     What I missed most of all was the great Disney humor.  In THE LION
KING, Timon and Pumbaa are hilarious.  The gargoyles, Victor (voice by
Charles Kimbrough), Hugo (voice by Jason Alexander) and Laverne (voice
by Mary Wickes), had the potential to be much funnier, but the lines
screenwriters Tab Murphy and David Stainton come up are lame.  If you
want to see how good a feature length cartoon can be and especially how
one can create hilarious characters that are full of pathos then you
need look no further back than last year's TOY STORY.  It, of course,
did not come from the Disney studio at all, but rather from a young
upstart.
     Okay, okay, so I have expressed my disappointment, but what did you
like about the movie other than the look, you ask?  Well, that is not a
fair question since I want to tell you more about the visual statement
this picture makes.  I think Disney's animation represents the best in
American art today.  I am sure Disney would have Monet under contract if
he were still alive.
     Let me try to capture some of what I think makes these visuals so
outstanding.  First, the use of light has all of the realism of a
Vermeer.  As the clouds move across the sky and as the characters walk
around the room, the light moves realistically and dramatically across
the characters' faces.  The colors are done in a slightly hazy blend of
shades of roses and blues.  Most impressive of all are the transitions
from the Impressionistic landscape scenes to the imposing scenes of
massive buildings that seem to shoot straight out of the canvas, I mean
screen.  My favorite part of the drawing is that of Esmeralda's eyes. 
They are so large with a blue green luminesce that they steal any scene
they are in.
     Although I had expected more, the story does have many good
scenes.  Judge Claude Frollo (voice by Tony Jay) has a small scene where
he smushes ants with his thumb and thereby demonstrates his
sinisterness.  Esmeralda (voice by Demi Moore) is given to making
speeches every now and then like "You speak of justice and yet you are
cruel to those most in need of justice."  Here we are generally saved
from the political correctness dogma that was so pervasive in
POCAHONTAS.  In fact one of funnier lines comes when Esmeralda sees
Quasimodo (voice by Tom Hulce) at the Feast of Fools and tells him, "By
the way, great mask," about his face.  The most poignant scene in the
film is when Esmeralda frees Quasimodo when he is being pelted with
fruit.  The drawing of Quasimodo is a well chosen compromise.  He is
disfigured, but not so horrible looking that he might scare small
children.
     The movie is filled with songs (Alan Menken and Stephen Schwartz),
but I found all of them instantly forgettable.  Clearly the worst set of
songs from Disney in years.
     THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME runs 1:35 which is just about right. 
The film is rated G.  There is no nudity, sex, or bad language, and the
violence is mild.  There are a few scenes like the fire one or the one
with a person falling from a building that may scare kids under 4 as may
the overall dark tone of the show.  My son Jeffrey (age 7) who is
hypersensitive to violence thinks it would be fine for kids of all
ages.  He loves the show and recommends it.  I like it too albeit not as
much as Jeffrey.  I recommend it to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael Dequina
Last summer, Disney made a bold move by tinkering with its
tried-and-true formula for kid-friendly animated features and releasing the
underrated, surprisingly serious and more adult-oriented Pocahontas.
Believe it or not, Disney has made an even bolder move with its ambitious
34th full-length animated feature, The Hunchback of Notre Dame.  Startlingly
adult and with an  oppressive dark tone, Hunchback is also quite simply the
most brilliant and poignant animated feature to come from Disney since
1991's Oscar-nominated Beauty and the Beast.
This adaptation of Victor Hugo's classic novel tells the tale of
Quasimodo (voice of Tom Hulce), the deformed bell-ringer of the Notre Dame
cathedral in Paris.  Locked in the bell tower since his youth by the cruel
Minister of Justice Frollo (Tony Jay), Quasimodo yearns to be "out there"
among the people.  He gets his chance during a town festival and instantly
falls in love with sultry gypsy dancer Esmeralda (Demi Moore), who befriends
the lonely Quasimodo but becomes enamored with the gallant captain of the
guard Phoebus (Kevin Kline).
Sounds like typical Disney fodder--an outcast hero, a beautiful
heroine (who's also an outcast), a truly hissable villain, and much romantic
longing and angst.  But Hunchback is the most atypical of all Disney
animated features.  Bravely, wisely, directors Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise
(who also did Beauty) and screenwriters Tab Murphy, Irene Mecchi, Bob
Tzudiker, Noni White, and Jonathan Roberts, while adding a dollop of humor
in the form of three wisecracking gargoyle companions (voiced by Jason
Alexander, Charles Kimbrough, and the late Mary Wickes), have not
extensively sugarcoated Hugo's dark tale.  The result is shocking--and
incredibly potent.  Right in the prologue, we see Frollo murder Quasimodo's
mother and attempt to drown the infant Quasimodo in a well; from then on,
the audience becomes witness to the unspeakable abuse Quasimodo receives,
from the townspeople, who crown him king of the festival only to mock him;
to more from the embodiment of cruelty that is Frollo, who continuously
belittles his appearance and his worth as a person--in song, no less.  What
makes it all the more heartbreaking is that Quasimodo sings along with him.
For all the lighthearted moments--and, unlike in the nearly totally straight
Pocahontas, there are quite a few--there's no escaping the atmosphere of
dread and sadness, from the intricately detailed, cold, imposing walls of
Notre Dame and the shadows that engulf each corridor to the always sad,
often crying face of Quasimodo and the ominous music.
Alan Menken's score is definitely his most daring for an animated
feature, adopting an appropriate Gothic sound full minor chords and choirs
chanting in Latin.  Menken and lyricist Stephen Schwartz also push the
envelope in terms of subject matter, too: in the eerie dirge "Hellfire," the
pious Frollo expounds on his hypocritical, consuming lust for
Esmeralda--"Hellfire/Dark fire/The fire in my skin/This burning/Desire/Is
turning me to sin."  Not exactly kids' stuff; in fact, you'd be pretty
hard-pressed to find a song that children will find especially singable.
The two lighthearted tunes, including a comic showcase for the gargoyles
called "A Guy Like You," aren't nearly as catchy and infectious as an "Under
the Sea" or "Be Our Guest."  But there are a couple of gems here--namely,
the two central ballads: the traditional protagonist "I Want" song, "Out
There"; and Esmeralda's haunting prayer "God Help the Outcasts," definitely
the most spiritual and transendent tune to emerge from an animated feature.
More than any other Disney animated feature, Hunchback lends itself to a
second life as a Broadway show; the opening number, "The Bells of Notre
Dame," isn't so much a song as it is a group of sung recitative lines, a
writing technique commonly found on the stage.
Hunchback is also the most visually stunning animated feature to
come from Disney or anywhere else.  The exterior walls of the cathedral are
rendered in such intricate detail, as are the legendary bells, and the faces
are extraordinarly expressive.  There are more than a few knockout sequences
visually, the most memorable being the "God Help the Outcasts" number, in
which Esmeralda walks through the cathedral, lit only by candles and,
ultimately, light shining through a colorful, astonishingly detailed stained
glass window; and Quasimodo's daring rescue of Esmeralda.  Trousdale and
Wise have said that they tried to take animation to visual lengths never
attempted; they certainly succeeded in that respect.
Hunchback's all-around success also extends to the voice casting.
Hulce brings great vulnerability and gentleness in speaking and singing
Quasimodo, firmly establishing this "monster"'s humanity.  Moore imbues
Esmeralda with her characteristic sexual bravado and insouciance; it's
amazing how much the character resembles Moore, both physically and
spiritually.   Kline makes Phoebus a charming, likable lug by giving him an
appealing sense of self-effacing humor, and Kimbrough, Wickes, and
especially Alexander hit the right comic notes as the gargoyles.  The
breakout star in the piece, however, is Jay, whose deep, Brit-inflected
tones just ooze menace and evil, making Frollo perhaps the most despicable
villain in Disney history.
Hunchback's darkness will, in all likelihood, prevent it from
receiving Lion King-size grosses, but don't be surprised if it just happens
to win an Oscar nomination for Best Picture next year.  It is much more than
just a moving, emotionally resonant cartoon--it is a moving, emotionally
resonant motion picture, period.    

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     By any objective standards, point for point, this is the best
animated film that has come from Disney Studios.  It has the best
animation, the most complex story, and even the most interesting
characters of any Disney Studios animated film.  The reason that this
film is getting flak--and I am not saying that it is not fully
deserved--is that the violence that the Disney people invariably do to
the story is this time being done to a different type of story.  It is
a story with which many people have both a passing acquaintance and,
even more important, a certain respect.  This is an adaptation of the
often-filmed 1831 novel NOTRE DAME DE PARIS by Victor Hugo.  But this
time when the Disney people turn the characters inside-out, totally
distorting them, and there is a sizable proportion of the audience who
know what is going on.
     There is a canonical version of the story of Aladdin--the one
translated by Sir Richard Burton from the Arabic--but few people
actually know the details of the plot.  So if the Disney film moves the
setting from China to Arabia and bases the story more on "The Thief of
Bagdad" than on the original Burton version, few people notice or care.
But just about every review I have written of a Disney animated film
contains the complaint someplace that the story is not accurate to the
original story on which it is based.  This time around the Disney
people have chosen a classic that is cynical, misanthropic, and
extremely angry (not unlike the emotions I felt when I first heard that
Disney would be doing HUNCHBACK.)  But having resigned myself to seeing
a novel I really like being desecrated on the screen, the film that
Disney Studios have made is about as well-made as that studio has ever
done.  And it is not as if the classic Charles Laughton version was
tremendously accurate to the novel either.  It distorted the Hugo badly
also, though nowhere nearly as badly as the new animated film.
     This version is something of a saddlepoint, being on one hand the
worst adaptation of the five well-known English language versions of
novel.  (I have not seen the two French versions nor the 1917 version
THE DARLING OF PARIS with Theda Bara--and I am not sure I want to.)
And yet, in my opinion at least, this is the best Disney animated film
to date, beating out even BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. This is the darkest-
themed of any of the Disney films and has some of the most complex
characters, for what that is worth.  There is little wrong with this
film that could not have been fixed by re-titling it BELL-RINGER OF
NOTRE DAME, changing all the character names, and saying that this was
"suggested by" NOTRE DAME DE PARIS.
     Though never stated in the film, the year is 1482, during the
reign of Louis XI.  In this version Quasimodo is cutely deformed in
much the same way a troll doll is.  He lives in seclusion (though not
in deafness) because he is forbidden to leave Notre Dame by his harsh
guardian, Judge Frollo, and because he is shy, being stigmatized by his
deformity.  In this version, the people of Paris are unknowingly cruel
to him when they first see him close up, but are basically good at
heart.  The cathedral is run by people who are also good, and the chief
evil in Paris is Judge Frollo.  Quasimodo's only friends have been
three gargoyles who come to life just for him, not unlike the tiger toy
in "Calvin and Hobbes."  But risking rejection, Quasimodo makes friends
with the rambunctious and buxom gypsy woman Esmeralda and the dashing
and noble Phoebus, Captain of the Guards and a man with a strong sense
of morality and chivalry.  Even in just this much plot the story has
been horribly and painfully twisted.
     The screenplay--by five people, always a bad sign--invariably
finds the most vulnerable places to undermine Hugo's story and to
distort nearly everything about it.  It is almost impressive how they
take such liberties as they do and still leave the story at least
recognizable with so much of the screen story just the reverse of the
Hugo novel.  For example, Esmeralda has one quick moment of shock when
she realizes that the ugliness of "Quasi" is not just a mask, and from
that point on she has nothing but admiration from him.  "You are a
surprise from every angle," she sings.  It took a great deal of sugar-
coating to make the story innocuous enough that it could be a Disney
film.  And still it is the darkest and most powerful of Disney's
animated features, which is perhaps not saying very much.
     As bad as the distortion of the novel is, the writers have some
powerful scenes.  Where Frollo describes the Gypsies as being vermin,
like ants crawling under a stone, the scene has the power of some of
the anti- Jewish propaganda films of Nazi Germany.  There is a terrific
scene of the sexually-frustrated Frollo seeing images of Esmeralda in a
fire that very nicely gets across to even fairly young children the
thorny concept that Frollo's hatred of Esmeralda springs from his own
desire for her.  And the script also borrows from other film versions.
There is a scene where Esmeralda prays in the Cathedral for nothing for
herself, but for God to help her people.  This scene was invented for
the 1939 film version, but is the basis for a musical number in this
film.
     Being fair, Disney's HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME is also a technical
marvel.  The Disney animators are no longer trying to make a computer
animated film look like it was entirely hand-drawn.  Instead they are
mixing in images of such technical perfection they could only have been
created by computer.  Gone is the feeling of just six or seven planes
of flat images.  The images now create a heightened sense of depth that
is far too perfect to be done by hand.  This film has jaw-dropping
scenes that could never be filmed in live-action on animated without a
computer.  When Quasimodo swings down over the heads of the crowd to
rescue Esmeralda and the viewer goes with him arching down, it is one
of the most spectacular animated sequences in any feature film.  Still
that scene is flawed, perhaps intentionally.  It does have the problem
that everybody in the crown seems to be the same height to give the
feel of a plane of heads.  But it is a terrific image, nevertheless.
There are some other problems with the animation.  Once again a
different team animates each major character.  But the styles of
animation do not quite match.  While Phoebus has a natural, rotoscoped
look about him, Quasimodo has a flatter look and feel.  When the two
walk together they do not look right.  It almost looks like a human
walking with a Toon.  Nor is the artwork particularly original.  In
face Frollo looks far too much like the witch from SLEEPING BEAUTY
turned into a man.  And Esmeralda looks ... well, like Disney animators
have lost their innocence and are now into drawing heroines with big
breasts.
     There is a lot of film here for a short 86 minutes, a lot that is
terrific and a lot that is terrible.  On balance I give THE HUNCHBACK
OF NOTRE DAME a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  I wish Disney had stuck
to a lesser-known and lesser-loved book.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Disney)
Voices:  Tom Hulce, Demi Moore, Kevin Kline, Tony Jay, Jason Alexander,
Charles Kimbrough, Mary Wickes.
Screenplay: Tab Murphy, Irene Mecchi, Bob Tzudiker, Nomi White, Jonathan
Roberts.
Producer:  Don Hahn.
Directors:  Kirk Wise and Gary Trousdale.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     As I sat in my car twenty minutes after the conclusion of THE
HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, tears still welling up in my eyes, I though about
what made me respond to Disney's recent animated hits, even flawed
efforts like POCAHONTAS.  It was not simply animation to which I was
responding, since animated films like BALTO had left me unmoved, and I
like to believe that Disney's ubiquitous marketing had no influence.  I
thought about the moments in films like BEAUTY AND THE BEAST and THE
LITTLE MERMAID which had filled me with the pure joy of film artistry, and
I realized the connection:  music.  THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME is dark,
enchanting, visually spectacular and richer in thematic depth than 99% of
the live action films I see, but I know that it was the power of grand
opera which pushed me over the edge.
     Based on Victor Hugo's 1831 classic, THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME
tells of Quasimodo (voice of Tom Hulce), the deformed bellringer living in
the tower of Paris' Notre Dame Cathedral.  Raised since infancy by the
cruel Minister of Justice Claude Frollo (Tony Jay), Quasimodo lives a
lonely existence with only the stone gargoyles of the cathedral as his
friends:  Victor (Charles Kimbrough), Hugo (Jason Alexander) and Laverne
(Mary Wickes).  But on the Festival of Fools, Quasimodo decides to venture
into the streets, where he is rescued from an uncaring crowd by the
beautiful gypsy Esmeralda (Demi Moore).  Quasimodo becomes enchanted with
Esmeralda, but a furious Frollo, who considers gypsies evil, demands that
she be arrested and punished.  When Frollo's Captain of the Guard Phoebus
(Kevin Kline) decides to help Esmeralda, Quasimodo finds him a rival for
Esmeralda's affections, but an ally in the struggle to save her from
Frollo's wrath.
     There is no question that computer technology is allowing Disney
animators an ever-increasing freedom, and the opportunity to create some
astonishing images.  There are scenes involving thousands of "extras"
which are simply extraordinary, and a swooping shot as Quasimodo comes to
Esmeralda's rescue which is breath-taking.  Still, the conventional
character animation might be even better.  It seems almost unfair to
single out one star, but I will:  Kathy Zielinski, the character
supervisor for Frollo.  She has designed one of Disney's most complicated
villains ever, a tormented and hateful zealot with a mouth so cruel and
subtly expressive that he makes you want to shudder every time he smiles.
With superb voice work by Tony Jay, Frollo becomes a brilliant
characterization.  If an animator ever deserved credit for a Best
Supporting Actor performance, this might be the case.
     Frollo's tortured soul (revealed in a creepy and very un-Disney-like
song called "Hellfire") is just one of many rather adult subjects which
gives HUNCHBACK a surprising resonance.  Frollo's relationship with
Quasimodo is that of an abusive parent who tears down his child's
self-esteem, then makes him feel grateful because he still takes care of
the child.  Quasimodo's cowering respect for Frollo is heart-breaking,
rendered poignantly by Tom Hulce.  HUNCHBACK also tackles prejudice and
religious hypocrisy, with Esmeralda's entreaty "God Help the Outcasts"
observing that Jesus was "once an outcast too."  There is certainly a fair
amount of comic relief, mostly provided by the gargoyles and the lively
number "A Guy Like You," but if HUNCHBACK is at all a film for children,
it is one which exposes them to issues their parents should be prepared to
discuss.
     The messages in HUNCHBACK are powerful, and they are skillfully
handled, but there is something that happens when they are set to music.
The songs by Alan Menken and Steven Schwartz are not particularly
memorable by Disney standards, nothing you will be humming for days
afterwards like "Be Our Guest" or "Under the Sea," but they are evocative.
A heartfelt sentiment which is sung rather than spoken draws its emotion
from a different place.  Hollywood seems to believe that no one wants to
see a musical in 1996, and that Disney's films are aberrations because
they are animated.  I'm not convinced that the real issue isn't choice of
material.  Disney selects timeless tales, and a timeless tale in song is a
powerful thing.
     There are certainly more than a few similarities between THE
HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME and BEAUTY AND THE BEAST (also directed by Kirk
Wise and Gary Trousdale); if it had been live action, I'd have sworn that
they re-used some of the same sets in the opening number.  BEAUTY AND THE
BEAST is a better film, a classic, and yet there I was, twenty minutes
after the conclusion of HUNCHBACK, tears still welling up in my eyes,
emotionally invested in the life of an animated character.  And though the
songs may not have been on my lips, I know they were in my heart.

Author
Arthur Hu
With a title like Hunchback, it looks like Disney really dropped the 
political correctness ball on this one. Heck, even the townspeople call 
him the "bell ringer". Maybe they should just call him "appearance 
challenged. At least they'll be having Americans saying "No - Tra Dom", 
instead of pronouncing it like the football team. 
When multiculturalism is supposed to be about exposing minority children 
to people who look just like themselves, why take them to Paris? What do 
inner city children need to know about a minor religious landmark that 
only rich white and Japanese vacationers will ever live to see? But the 
dark-skinned Gypsies show that even Europe has diversity. In this 
country, we don't have much of a Gypsy "problem", yet when the American 
Jewish Committee did a poll of the best liked and worst hated ethnic 
groups, the people on the bottom weren't black, or Jewish, they were the 
Gypsies. You've got to wonder what these guys did to get such a 
reputation even in this country. One problem is that the Gypsies aren't 
Catholic, or even Judeo-Christian. They believe in fortune telling and 
magic, which draws complaints from some Christians today every time 
Halloween rolls around.
We hear about great African Americans every Black History Month. But the 
best Isabel Fonseca's book "Bury Me Standing" can come up with about the 
Gypsies is that while not all of them are habitual transients, liars, 
and criminals, a lot of them were and still are. She compares them to 
the Jews, but nobody ever accused the Gypsies of being over-achievers. 
The New York Times profiled a Gypsy murder suspect whose mother said 
"Gypsies don't keep regular jobs, but at least they don't kill people", 
and said that the Gypsies make a career of living apart from the 
civilized mainstream. 
Maybe Disney thought they were just simplifying things, but by making 
Clopin the King of the Gypsies, they made all of the Gypsies into the 
beggars and thieves, instead of the poor Frenchmen in the original 
story. We all avoid the "N" word, but don't even realize that to use the 
word `gyp' as a verb implies all Gypsies are cheats. Even that term is 
misleading because they really came from India, not Egypt (which would 
actually make them Asian) These days, many would prefer to be called the 
"Romani". 
Interestingly, the Seattle may be the only school district in the nation 
that breaks out the Gypsies as a disadvantaged group. Well, they might 
have problems elsewhere, but the Seattle data book shows that the 
Gypsies score just as well or better than other white children in test 
scores and grades, and no worse in dropouts or suspensions. When the 
Bell-Curve school says that groups at the bottom are genetically 
destined to stay there, this may prove that at least this white group 
can assimilate into the norm.
In this updated story, Quasimoto's gargoyle friends still sing in "A Guy 
Like You" that his looks are one of a kind. But where the early movies 
were placed in the horror category, Disney's Quasi is just a boy in a 
tower with a big song and dance number. Like the Little Mermaid, 
Quasimoto wants to go "out there" and mix up with the other people. 
He's practically a prisoner in the care of the evil Judge Frollo long 
before the days of child protective services. Talk about your one-parent 
Disney families. Esmerelda is the latest Disney heroine who wouldn't 
look out of place on the cover of Cosmo. If NOW complained about 
Pocahontas's looks, this working girl makes a living making guy's eyes 
pop out. 
Pheobus is the blond he-man who eventually switches teams and joins up 
with the geek to save the girl. It's Phoebus that gets packaged with the 
girl in the Mattell 2 figure gift pack, not title character. The 
creators said that Quasimoto has "puppy" love for Esmerelda, and Phoebus 
has real love. But Spike Lee's "Jungle fever" would probably put the 
outcasts together. Disney made a reasonably happy ending, but in the 
1939 version, Phoebus gets killed halfway through, Quasimoto flings 
Frodo out of the tower, Esmerelda gets tortured, Clopin gets hit in a 
friendly fire incident, and Gringoire, the wimpy poet who got dropped 
entirely by Disney gets the girl. Boy they don't make them like they 
used to.
Two years from now, Disney is slated to give us a legend set in China. 
That is, if we can get over human rights issues, pirated Michael Jackson 
CD's, and see if they hire enough Asian Americans in the cast.
Net pointers - check out the disney site www.disney.com for promotional 
background. The real gem is hidden under the Disney publishing section, 
they are putting up the full pictures from the children's book that 
pretty much gives a condensed plot.
ps, I'm picking up extra burger king toys and I have some
sets of the Skybox cards that were givven out at the
travelling exhibitions with all the characters if anybody
needs them. I'll be putting up the toys on my home page soon.
** Views do not reflect any other organization or group ***
Arthur Hu  fax 206-814-2711 for hot news to pass on.
To comment or join "Fairness in Diversity" mailing list, contact  
arthurhu@halcyon.com  index at http://www.halcyon.com/arthurhu/  
12422 107th Pl NE Kirkland WA 98034

Author
Tim Voon
Featuring the voices of Tom Hulce, Tony Jay, Demi Moore, Kevin Kline,
Paul Kendall, Jason Alexander, Charles Kimbrough, Mary Wickes, David
Ogden Stiers Directors: Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise Story for the
Screen by Tab Murphy, freely adapted from the novel by Victor Hugo
Music: Alan Menken Lyrics: Stephen Schwartz
Friendships develop from common interests and similar situations. So it
is not surprising when a beautiful gypsy girl, who is considered an
outcast, befriends an ugly, hunchback, who is alienated from human kind.
What is considered by fellow critics as a dark, Disney venture, is in
fact the most true to life cartoon epic to date. 'Alladin' was fun,
'Beauty and the Beast' was romantic, but unrealistic, 'The Lion King'
was about good and bad animals, and 'Pocahontas' well, that  little
Indian Princess was a little too much for me. In 'Hunchback' there's no
beast that transforms into a prince at the end, and the 'hero' does not
end up happily ever after. The road he walks can only be filled with
life's difficult hurdles created by the misfortune of his deformity.
This is a tale of living with ridicule, triumphing over self-doubt and
understanding self-worth, where sacrifice over selfishness is the
ultimate gift. Like most of us, the Hunchback ends up alone without the
'pretty girl'. His only reward for his good deed, being a better
understanding of himself, and a steadfast belief of what he is capable
of.
Comment: What next? The Elephant Man?
