Title
Review for Son in Law (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:36, Comedy, 1993
MPAA rating: PG-13 (explicit language, adult situations, adult
                    humor, violence)
Rating: five (on a scale of zero to five)
Director: Steve Rash
Cast: Pauly Shore, Carla Gugino, Lane Smith, Cindy Pickett, Mason Adams,
      Dan Gauthier, Tiffani-Amber Thiessen, Dennis Burkley, Patrick Renna,
      Brenden Frasier
     Carla Gugino graduates from high school and instead of staying in
her small farming town, she goes to college in California.  There she
meets the residential advisor Pauly Shore, who is a city boy.  When
Gugino goes back home for Thanksgiving, she brings Shore with her, and
her parents (Lane Smith and Cindy Pickett) are less than thrilled.  Dan
Gauthier, Gugino's boyfriend from high school, proposes to Gugino.
Gugino isn't ready for anything like this so she makes up the story
that she is engaged to Shore.  She and Shore have to make it look like
they are engaged while her parents try to make it end.
     Forget JURASSIC PARK, CLIFFHANGER, THE FIRM and LAST ACTION HERO,
SON-IN-LAW is the film to see this summer.  SON-IN-LAW is a great
romantic comedy that should please the viewers, especially fans of the
Wiez.  When SON-IN-LAW is long gone and forgotten, the blockbuster
summer films will still be playing and you will have a chance to see
them then.  This film could also make great video fare for those that
are leery of spending seven dollars on it.  Nothing will be lost by
watching it on a television screen.
     Although the basic story line has been done many, many times
before, the film is still fun to watch.  The laughs are plentiful,
especially when the Wiez is around.  The way some of the jokes are done
are new, even though some of the jokes are old.  There are also several
new jokes that, at least, I haven't seen before.  Still, when presented
right, even old material can be funny still.  This film is just
basically a light comedy that is great to see if you are in the right
mood that doesn't contain much violence or any nudity that is
definitely worth full ticket price.
     The cast for this film does an excellent job.  Pauly Shore (ENCINO
MAN) is the star attraction of this film.  He is great, and knows how
to entertain the audience.  Pauly Shore just seems to take over the
entire screen when he is on with expressions and comments that are
hilarious.  This film would definitely not have been as good with
anyone else in this role.  Carla Gugino does a very good job as the
farm girl gone city girl.  She makes her character believable, on some
levels, yet interesting at the same time.  The person who played the
grandfather (Mason Adams, I believe) also does a great job.  The way he
delivered his lines kept me laughing throughout the time that he was on
the screen.  Patrick Renna, who played Gugino's little brother, was a
little annoying, but no where as near as Macaulay Culkin, and for only
part of the time, so I can forgive him.  Tiffani-Amber Thiessen (A
KILLER AMONG FRIENDS, "Saved by the Bell") does a reasonably good job
for the time that she is on screen.  She shows that she may have a
potential in movies if she can get out of the corny young adults
programming on television.  She wasn't given overly much to do in the
film, but what she had, she does a good job with.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Pauly Shore, Carla Gugino, Lane Smith, Cindy Pickett, 
           Mason Adams, Dan Gauthier
Director:  Steve Rash
Producers:  Michael Rotenberg and Peter M. Lenkov
Screenplay:  Fax Bahr, Adam Small, and Shawn Schepps based on a story 
             by Patrick J. Clifton, Susan McMartin, and Peter M. Lenkov
Music:  Richard Gibbs
Released by Hollywood Pictures
     Following graduation from a small school in Midwestern America,
Rebecca Warner (Carla Gugino) opts for a change.  Instead of sticking
close to home, she wants to go to college in Southern California.
Although her father Walter (Lane Smith) and mother Connie (Cindy
Pickett) are uncertain about the idea, they agree that it's Becca's
life, and make the two-day drive to her new school.  There they
encounter her Residential Advisor, Crawl (Pauly Shore).  The next time
the Warners meet Crawl, it's when he comes home for Thanksgiving with
Rebecca.  The person who gets off the plane isn't the same shy,
reserved girl that left three months ago, but her change in attitude
and appearance isn't the only surprise she has in store for her
family.  In order to get out of marrying an old boyfriend (Dan
Gauthier), she pretends to be engaged to Crawl.
     Some people like Pauly Shore (mostly teenagers, I suspect).  After
all, if those people didn't exist, SON-IN-LAW would have never been
made.  Clearly, the role of Crawl was scripted specifically for him.
Oddly enough, with someone marginally less annoying, this could have
been a somewhat charming, albeit predictable, film.  But to put Shore
in a romantic comedy is asking for trouble.
     There are times when it almost works, but most of those occasions
are when he abandons his stupid stage personae and does something that
approaches acting.  Unfortunately, there are too few of those moments
and, as soon as they pass, the aggravating side of Mr. Shore quickly
re-surfaces.  There are times when it becomes exceptionally difficult
to accept--not to mention like--the character of Crawl.
     The film has its humorous scenes, but these are formula-driven and
lacking in originality.  Perhaps the most inventive moment of
SON-IN-LAW comes as the result of a cameo by Brenden Frasier, reprising
the role he played in last summer's dud, ENCINO MAN.  It says something
about the rest of this film to site that as one of SON-IN-LAW's
highlights.
     The plot is stock romantic comedy material, complete with the
usual misunderstandings, break-ups, and resolutions.  The ending of
SON-IN-LAW is so sickeningly sweet that I almost went into sugar
shock.  This gives an entirely new meaning to the term "happy ending."
Blech.  I'm not against happy endings in general, but this kind of
sappiness is impossible to stomach.
     Carla Gugino, who has the somewhat thankless role of Rebecca, does
a fine job with the material she's been given.  In many ways, she
reminds me of Kimberly Williams (Steve Martin's daughter in the remake
of FATHER OF THE BRIDE).  Both have a certain freshness that's
enjoyable to watch.  This is especially true of Gugino in this film,
where she mercifully gives us a stable counterbalance to Shore's
idiotic antics.
     Since SON-IN-LAW takes place on a farm, there exists the usual run
of city-boy-out-of-his-element gags.  Of course, there's a cow milking
scene, and Shore gets to feed the pigs, pluck a turkey, and try his
hand at fishing.  It's all pretty routine stuff.  The few laughs
garnered by this line of tried-and-true humor aren't worth sitting
through ninety-five minutes of lame drivel.
     SON-IN-LAW is a singularly unexceptional comedy, the content of
which is well-represented by the theater trailers and TV ads.  It's
perfect fare for watching on cable, but not worth the time or effort of
making a trip to a theater.  Those who can't stand Pauly Shore would do
well to stay away, and those that love him will go regardless of what I
say.  So, for those who don't care one way or another, be aware that
SON-IN-LAW gives exactly what you expect:  a dumb, predictable romantic
comedy that has more animals than laughs.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
