Title
Review for Sally Marshall Is Not an Alien (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
SALLY MARSHALL IS NOT AN ALIEN (G).  
(UIP)
Director: Mario Andreacchio
Stars: Helen Neville, Natalie Vansier, Glenn McMillan, Thea Gumbert, 
Peter O'Brien, Vince Poletto, Melissa Jaffer
Running time: 95 minutes.
Sally Marshall (played by 12 year old Canadian actress Natalie
Vansier) is the new girl in town, and she seems a little weird.  Her
family move in next door to young Pip Lawson (Helen Neville), who has
an interest in astronomy, and hopes to discover a new comet.  Although
Pip wonders about the strange noises and lights that come from the
Marshall's backyard shed every night, she thinks the new girl is
basically harmless.
But local play ground bully Rhonnie Branson (Thea Gumbert)
decides that someone as weird as Sally must be an alien, and mobilises
her gang against the new girl.  Pip is forced to wager her beloved
telescope in a bet with Rhonnie to prove that Sally is not an alien,
but merely a girl with a few strange habits.  Against her better
judgement, Pip finds herself spying on Sally and her family.
Eventually a friendship develops between these two girls who are
considered misfits by Rhonnie's "in-crowd".
The intriguingly titled Sally Marshall Is Not An Alien deals
with some important issues, such as tolerance, peer group pressure,
the importance of individuality, and friendship.  However, this well
meaning film is let down by some uninspired direction from
Adelaide-born Mario Andreacchio (Napoleon, Paws, etc).  Andreacchio
specialises in entertainment aimed squarely at family audiences, but
apart from the far superior The Real Macaw, his films seem to lack any
sense of sophistication and polish.  When compared to American films
aimed at a similar audience (The Babysitters' Club, Harriet the Spy,
etc) Andreacchio's clumsy approach becomes apparent.  The script is
underdeveloped and several key scenes fall flat.
Most of the young cast are new to feature films, and their
performances are embarrassingly amateurish and over the top.  They
lack the natural charm that most young child actors from Hollywood
seem able to turn on at will, regardless of their lack of experience.
The adult characters fare even worse as they are given little to do.
Former soapy star Peter O'Brien (Neighbours, etc) lacks impact as
Pip's understanding father, while all the others are virtually
relegated to the background, and make little impression on the
material.
Sally Marshall Is Not An Alien is aimed at young female
audiences, who may identify with the two lead characters and their
dilemma.  While it may prove popular amongst pre-teen girls during the
school holidays, this is far from the best film on offer.  Audiences
looking for something a bit more exciting or inspiring would be
advised to give this rather disappointing film a wide berth.
