Title
Review for Eva (1948)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mattias Thuresson
Cast: Birger Malmsten, Eva Stiberg, Eva Dahlbeck, Stig Olin
This is an early Ingmar Bergman. But it's not he who
has directed it, that was made by another giant in
the swedish film history, Gustaf Molander.
It's WW2 and the sailor Bo is returning home to
meet his parents for the first time in two years.
His father works as a station manager at the
railway and when train passes a certain place
he remembers what happened on the same place
when he was 12 years old.
The train drivers had always let him see the
engine, blowing the whistle or test-drive the locomotives.
But one night a group of travelling musicians
stopped in the neighbourhood for the night
and Bo met a girl in his age. She was blind
but to show off he stole one of the train engines
and off they went. Being inexperienced he caused
a trainwreck and the blind girl died without ever
knowing what hit her. Ever since then, Bo
has had feelings of guilt, and his faith in
God has disappeared. Visiting his neighbours,
he tells Eva, a girl he falls in love with, of his fear of
death: "There is something called the closeness
of the death: Can your feel it? It's awful, awful!"
and "Death is like a giant shadow who catches hold
of everything and destroys it. There is nothing
alive that won't die!"
Pretty heavy stuff. Speaking for myself, I can't
imagine somebody in Bo's age talking about his
fear of death to a girl he wants to date.
Anyone who has seen a few of Bergman's works from
the 1940s and 1950s understands that this is
obviously his writing: the religous doubts of a
man, the feelings of guilt for the lack of faith
and the envy for those who have it since this
means a solution to all problems.
Bo's fear of death is a theme that is repeated through
the movie: Back in Stockholm, he shares an apartment with
his best friend Göran and Göran's flirtatious wife
Susanne. She is obviously sexually interested in Göran
and one night he has a nightmare that he and Susanne
kills Göran. He wakes up screaming: once again he
has caused the death of someone.
The third time, Eva and Bo has married and moved
to an isolated island off the coast. Eva is pregnant in
the eight month when it is time to give birth. Being
on an island, Bo has to row like an Olympic Games champion
across the sound to get her to the midwife. During this his
nightmares returns: Will it be the third time he kills
somebody, this time his wife?
This was also a pleasant surprise coming from director
Gustaf Molander. He is mostly known for his silly
upper-class comedies or heavy drama. This shows
the importance of a good writer having the benefit
of a good director and vice versa. And for the actors,
Birger Malmsten is certainly impressing as Bo. And
Eva Dahlbeck, here making her first of her eleven
Ingmar Bergman movies also gives a convincing performance
as the sexually starved but flirtatious wife.
E-mail: mattias.thuresson@mbox300.swipnet.se
Hey! Don't forget my A Star is Born page:
http://home1.swipnet.se/~w-18501/Bilder/Star/sib.htm
