Title
Review for Renaissance Man (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Danny DeVito, Gregory Hines, Stacey Dash, 
           Kadeem Hardison, Khalil Kain, Marky Mark, James Remar, 
           Cliff Robertson 
Director:  Penny Marshall 
Producers:  Sara Colleton, Elliot Abbott, and Robert Greenhut 
Screenplay:  Jim Burnstein 
Cinematography:  Adam Greenberg 
Music:  Hans Zimmer 
Released by Touchstone Pictures 
     Penny Marshall films (BIG, AWAKENINGS, A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN) are
like cotton candy--pure sugar spun into a semblance of form that
collapses and dissolves after consumption.  That's generally not a bad
thing and, as far as motion pictures are concerned, it has its place.
Unfortunately, RENAISSANCE MAN is far from the director's best effort.
In fact, it's like someone injected a dash of bitter lemon to the
confection.
     Danny DeVito plays Bill Rago, a big-time ad man who loses his job
when his tardiness at a meeting costs his firm a $6 million contract.
After enduring the rigors of the unemployment line, Bill lands a job as
a teacher at an army base.  His function at Fort McClane is to take the
eight most educationally-challenged recruits and "teach them to
comprehend" so that they can graduate.  There are problems, however
(there have to be, otherwise there wouldn't be a movie).  First, Bill
has never taught before.  Second, he doesn't want to teach now--his
desire is to return to advertising.  And third, his students don't
respect him because he's a civilian.
     Taken as a whole, RENAISSANCE MAN is a typical offering from the
director.  It's about earning mutual respect, righting wrongs, and
enjoying a too-sappy happy ending.  However, along the way, this movie
wanders, never offering much insight into any of the characters,
relying on poorly-concealed plot devices, and manipulating with a
surprising heavy-handedness.  The feel is not right, and it has as much
to do with the movie's failed attempt to deal with too many individuals
as with its overlong running time.
     One of the first rules of storytelling, whether it's through
cinema or another medium, is "show, don't tell."  RENAISSANCE MAN
violates this from the start, having each of the eight students recite
a brief history.  As if hearing a poignant snippet is going to create
an immediate emotional attachment....
     HAMLET and HENRY V are Bill's principal teaching materials.  While
the circumstances of Shakespeare's introduction into the classroom are
forced, once the students get into the Bard's work, there are some
worthwhile moments (including a lively rap synopsis of HAMLET).
There's not enough content for RENAISSANCE MAN to function as a
Cliffnotes, but those familiar with the plays shouldn't have any
problem following along.
     What saves RENAISSANCE MAN is its cast.  From Danny DeVito and
Gregory Hines on down, everyone turns in a fine performance.  While all
of the actors portraying students are convincing, a couple are worth
singling out.  Stacey Dash, who plays Miranda Myers, the only female
member of Bill's group, is tremendous, combining energy, sex appeal,
and intelligence in a lively mix.  Marky Mark, hitherto known only as a
"personality", proves that he can actually do some acting.  His low-key
style is oddly reminiscent of that of a young Tommy Lee Jones.
     RENAISSANCE MAN is a movie of moments, too many of which are
mediocre or unfulfilling.  Feel-good movies are a staple of summer
viewing, and in order to succeed with one, there has to be enough
originality to transcend the run-of-the-mill product.  This film, with
its total predictability, misses the bullseye.  A bad Penny Marshall
picture still has appeal, but RENAISSANCE MAN is a disappointment, and
far from the best that's available.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
dnf@nauvax.ucc.nau.edu
Warning:  Some *minor* spoilers follow.  I'll try not to give away too
much plot, but I do have some things to say about certain aspects of
the movie....
     Let's start with the opening credits: Talk about product
placement!  Penny Marshall plays a game of "let's see how many major
labels we can fit in the first two mintues of the movie while still
looking like we're just trying to establish Chicago as the backdrop of
this film."
     If you've seen ON DEADLY GROUND (even if you haven't, you've
probably heard about the famous bit of dialogue), you remember
something along the lines of:  "How long will it take for man to learn
to be good?" says the good-guy.  "All I need is some time to change,"
replies the bad-guy.  Excuse me while I barf.  ON DEADLY GROUND pretty
much stuffed its morals down your throat.  If you've seen WITH HONORS,
you remember dialogue along the lines of, "Our Constitution was written
by good men who wanted to make sure that power is in the hands of the
people," etc., etc., etc....  Once again, Hollywood stuffs its morals
down your throat *so blatantly* that you don't have to read between
*any* lines to get the message!  Hollywood thinks we're all dumb!
     Well, once again, a movie comes out that is so in-your-face with
its message that no thinking is required at all.  This time, though,
the dialogue is as follows:
     Danny DeVito is a teacher in the Army (I suppose I should have
mentioned that earlier, so you all would know what I'm talking about),
and a drill-sergeant is played by Gregory Hines.  Hines is a fine
actor, but is not used to his potential at all in this film, largely
because he was very miscast.  In a confrontation between Hines and
DeVito, DeVito manages to get Hines upset.  Hines lunges towards
DeVito, but it looks mostly like he just sorta wants to knock some
sense into him.  He is stopped before he even reaches DeVito, but
overall, Hines does not seem like a deadly character.  The very next
scene has DeVito talking to some high-ranking guy who says, "He could
have killed you.  He would have been court-martialed, but he could have
killed you."  Wait a minute!  Hines *never* looked like he wanted to
kill him!  Or even like he is the kind of person who *would* have
*ever* wanted to kill him!  ARGH!  So much about this movie frustrated
me!
     DeVito teaches HAMLET to a bunch of Army recruits who need to be
smart in order to pass military academy.  But it doesn't seem like they
really learned anything about grammar or any of the other areas in
which they lacked, just by reading HAMLET.  They just sort of liked the
story about incest, sex, and murder.  And if the entire plot revolved
around him teaching HAMLET, he could have at *least* taught it
*properly*!
     Penny Marshall is a wonderful director.  She doesn't do anything
too outlandish in any of her films, and the same is true for
RENAISSANCE MAN.  As usual, she is pretty straight-forward in her
story-telling.
     This film definitely has potential.  The script-writer (whoever
he/she/they may be) obviously knows a lot about comedy, because there
certainly were many comedic moments in the film.  Plenty of opportunity
to laugh out loud.  But they knew *nothing* about writing drama.  The
dramatic arts of the films were *way* poorly written.  It's a shame
that it didn't get a couple other drafts because it really could have
been good.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This is the Army?  Clean-talking, soft-spoken drill sergeants?
Cadence calling to the tune of "Tiny Bubbles?"  Has Disney transformed
our nation's fighting force into a pack of PC professionals?
     Or, in the case of RENAISSANCE MAN, not-so-professionals.
     The eight recruits assigned to ad-man-turned-teacher Bill Rago
(Devito) are bottom-of-the-barrel at best.  They can't even think on
their feet and won't complete basic training without some much-needed
brain food.  In comes Rago, a civilian instructor who discovers in his
students a hankering for "Hamlet."
     Think DEAD POETS SOCIETY-in-fatigues.  Director Penny Marshall--
who specializes in these squishy, celluloid hugs--serves up sterile
soldiers in a super-safe story with a happy happy ending for everyone.
Suspense?  At ease.  Even DeVito gets a late-entry love-interest in
this one.  Puh-lease.
     Sugar content notwithstanding, RENAISSANCE MAN *is* watchable.
The humor is good and anyone with a military background can savor such
succulent bits as DeVito getting directions from a base guard.  Of
course, *any* Army-as-a-way-of-life film is amusing when poking fun at
the retentive rigidity of military command.
     The film's characterizations are comfortably callow.  Writer Jim
Burnstein never fleshes out the role of Bill Rago.  Nor is the
diminutive director the best person for the part. (He never comes as
alive as the role requires.) But DeVito's a lovable lout and he carries
the film.
     Rago's roster of students include TV actor Kadeem Hardison and
rapper Marky Mark.  They and the other recruits are all engaging,
despite their cliched characterizations.  Other strong supporters
include Gregory Hines, James Remar, and, for two scenes, Cliff
Robertson.
     Running right at two-hours-plus-change, RENAISSANCE MAN is a
long-sit.  There are *some* rewards, such as the curious sight of
DeVito rappelling from a training tower.  The comedy is okay, but the
feel-good drama doesn't wash with the subject matter.  Come on, these
are guys who are training to kill each other!
     Then again, how can you trash a film that tries to bring "Hamlet"
to the masses?  To gripe or not to gripe, that is the question.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Danny DeVito, Gregory Hines, Kadeem Hardison, Mark Wahlberg,
           Stacey Dash, Khalil Kain, Lillo Brancato, James Remar.
Screenplay:  Jim Burnstein.
Director:  Penny Marshall.
     It was inevitable that RENAISSANCE MAN would be compared to DEAD
POETS SOCIETY.  The 1988 Robin Williams vehicle was a critical and
commercial success, and the comparison makes for ready-made epithets
(DEAD POETS PLATOON, "Oh drill sergeant my drill sergeant").  But the
comparison is really rather specious; once you get beyond the classroom
setting, there really isn't all that much substance or tone in common
between the two.  It's much more useful to think of RENAISSANCE MAN as
SISTER ACT 2 on an army base--as well as much more depressing.
Constructed around pre-fabricated emotion and a premise that's sporting
liver spots, RENAISSANCE MAN is only slightly more entertaining than
last year's Whoopi Goldberg debacle, and twenty minutes too long
besides.
     Danny DeVito stars as Bill Rago, a Detroit advertising executive
whose creative cold streak and chaotic personal life land him on the
unemployment line.  There they find Bill a temporary job at the local
army base, and it's not advertising.  Despite no previous teaching
experience, Bill is assigned the task of teaching basic thinking skills
to a group of eight under-achieving recruits know as the Double D's.
Bill seems content just to put in his time, and to needle the drill
sergeant (Gregory Hines), until a lesson on "Hamlet" seems to spark the
interest of his charges, as well as Bill's own interest.  One by one
the Double D's are able to confront their problems, and even the
teacher learns a few lessons.
     It's indicative of how sloppy the writing is that Jim Burnstein
anticipates the film's key credibility question--why doesn't the Army
just kick the Double D's out--without bothering to answer it.  Maybe
the base commander (nicely played by Cliff Robertson) could have
confessed that he was once like those troubled kids, or something of
the sort.  But Burnstein offers little more than a shrug of the
shoulders.  "I've given you the movie," he seems to be saying; "you
fill in the motivation."  And so it goes in a script that's like a
Chinese combination platter: one from Column A, one from Column B.
Only without any of the flavor.
     That goes for a meticulously integrated collection of Double D's,
craftily acted to a one but established from their sledge-hammer
opening confessionals in the broadest possible terms.  Hobbs (Khalil
Kain) is the Smart One; Jamaal (Kadeem Hardison) is the Jive-Talking
One; Junior (Peter Simmons) is the Sensitive One; and so on.  They play
their parts, then dutifully emerge on the other side of the film as
Better People.  The Sweathogs were given more depth.
     Then there is Danny DeVito, who is all wrong as Bill Rago.  He
should have been much slicker, a hustler who discovers his heart like
Steve Martin in LEAP OF FAITH.  DeVito never looks for a minute like
someone who is obsessed with money and career, which makes his
"transformation" virtually indiscernible.  With his Ewok hugability,
DeVito can't pull off the hard-edged Rago of the film's early scenes.
     Nuances of character aside, RENAISSANCE MAN is simply an unfunny,
earthbound comedy.  There are at least three too many Double D's, each
requiring a personal epiphany of varying magnitude, and Penny Marshall
has to spread the film far too thin to accomodate them.  There is no
spark, no energy, no anything to RENAISSANCE MAN's laboriously staged
set pieces but musical crying cues.  Marshall's old-fashioned brand of
sentimentality doesn't play without characters the audience cares
about, and RENAISSANCE MAN chugs to its conclusion without an ounce of
genuine humanity.
     RENAISSANCE MAN is the kind of film that wears its emotion in such
lines as "Victory starts here" (accompanied by an emphatic gesture to
the head), and exchanges between Rago and his daughter like:  "Do you
want your pennant?"  "No, I just want you to believe in me."  Usually I
respond to such films in spite of myself, but not this time.
RENAISSANCE MAN is a glossy mess that, like its young protagonists,
just can't shoot straight.
