Title
Review for Tokyo orimpikku (1965)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
The Summer Olympics were held in Tokyo in 1964,
the first time that the games were hosted in
Asia.  "Tokyo Olympiad" is an excellent
documentary of the '64 games, with the focus
on cinematography over narration.
Director Kon Ichikawa has no interest in
counting gold medals.  Watching this film
will not tell you whether the U.S. or the
U.S.S.R. won the most medals.  Ichikawa also
makes little use of human interest stories.
We learn that the Ethiopian who won the
marathon had his appendix removed the month
before.  We briefly follow the story of an
obscure athlete from Chad, a country
participating in their first Olympics with
only two athletes in their delegation.
That's about it for human interest, which is
a fixation for American broadcast journalists
during the games.  Another surprise is the
disinterest in men's basketball, which
receives about two seconds of coverage, the
same as the water polo final.
The final surprise, at least for me, is
that Germany competed as a single team.
Given the virility of the cold war during
the previous four years (the Berlin Wall,
the Berlin airlift, the Cuban Missle crisis,
the Bay of Pigs) it must have been inspiring
for Germans to see athletics overcoming
politics.
The cinematography is outstanding.  There are
many close-ups and slow-mo shots of athletes
in action.  The camera captures the emotions
of the competitors, from the tension before
an event to the joy, exhaustion, and/or
disappointment that follows.  The narration
is in Japanese of course, with partial subtitles
in English.  Being unable to understand the
occasional jabbering may actually be a plus,
as the viewer can concentrate on the photography.
Some of the athletes became famous, like
sprinter Bob Hayes or boxer Joe Frazier.
But even the gold medal winners are mostly
obscure today, their fleeting moment of
glory captured in time but now forgotten.
"Tokyo Olympiad" is nearly three hours long,
but the documentary never drags.  It was
distributed in America in a heavily edited
version with insipid dubbed narration, but
now the original is available again.  "Chariots
of Fire" has the reputation of being the best
film about the Olympics.  But "Tokyo Olympiad"
is easily the better film.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
