Title
Review for 1492: Conquest of Paradise (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott J Gorcey
[I apologize for the delay in this and subsequent reviews.  I was on
vacation for three weeks and they piled up.  I will get them out as fast
as possible.  -Moderator]
     Christopher Columbus did not discover America.
     He discovered the Bahamas, built the first Club Med there,
extended his hand in greeting to the Natives, and proceeded to kill
every last one of them.
     Was Columbus the romantic visionary, who struck a deal with  Queen
Isabella to sail beyond the sunset--and return with a secret shortcut to
Asia?  Or was Columbus the vicious technocrat, who chanced upon Eden in
the 15th Century, bled it dry and razed it to the ground?
     "For a long time, there was the cliche of the hero," says  Roselyne
Bosch, the French journalist who wrote 1492.  "Now I'm  afraid there is
the cliche of the genocide.  The truth is in  between."
     Director Ridley Scott seems to think the two are not mutually
exclusive--and it's a good thing.  In all the controversy surrounding
the 500th anniversary of his Landfall, what people arguing on both sides
of the issue have forgotten is this: Columbus was a man.
     1492 is a remarkable two-and-a-half hour epic character study
examining that "in between."
     Perhaps for the first time, Columbus is put in his place:
Inquisition-Era Spain, a place where people were burned as heretics for
eating meat on Good Friday.  A place where Moors and Jews were being
slaughtered or deported in Christ's Name.
     "He was a Renaissance Man looking for a renaissance," says Scott.
He found one across the sea, and planned to built Utopia as envisioned
by Leonardo da Vinci there.
     Ridley Scott brings both the Paradise and the Hell--and the
environs of 15th Century Spain, from monasteries to cathedrals to royal
palaces--to gorgeous, captivating life on the screen.  But visual
ecstasy is just par for the course from the director of ALIEN and
BLADERUNNER.  It's expected.
     Here's the unexpected: 1492 is Scott's most beautiful film to date.
Perhaps this is only because these locations are real--as opposed to the
gothic corridors of the space freighter Nostromo, or a hundred-mile high
Los Angeles "twenty minutes into the future"--but to think so undercuts
the director's greatest achievement: the portrait of the man.
     Ranging from culture clash to class conflict, to the political
climate that both forced Columbus to make the voyage and ensured its
failure, Scott has brought a substance and complexity to 1492 that is
notably absent from most of his previous films.
     As on his last project, THELMA & LOUISE, Scott seems to have become
as obsessed with painting a picture of the person, and his personal
voyage, as he is with painting a picture of the world that person lived
in.
     Bringing that painting to life is Gerard Depardieu, who took the
Best Actor prize at the 1990 Cannes Film Festival for CYRANO DE
BERGERAC.  Depardieu can summon fire to his eyes and ice water to his
veins; he can age twenty years in two hours without the benefit of
prosthetic makeup.  He makes us feel as if we know Columbus without
making us choose which Columbus to know.
     If Depardieu doesn't present a definitive Columbus--how could
anyone even try?--1492 does present a man who fits Columbus' 
description--all the descriptions.  1492 does carry us to the heights of
his hope and inspiration, and it does drop us into the puts of his
tragedy and genocide.

Author
Kirsten Starcher
     I really expected to like this movie a lot.  I'd heard so much
about it -- how it was the great epic of the year, definite Oscar
nominee, blah, blah, blah.
     For the first hour, I believed it.  I was completely blown away by
the sets, the costumes, the ships; I thought Depardieu was super; the
plot was really captivating; there were some wonderfully powerful
moments, i.e., when he first sights land, etc., etc.  It seemed really
good.
     But the rest of the movie, after he returns to Spain and then goes
back to the New World to establish a colony, just ... died.  The plot
became disjointed and confusing -- no explanations were made for a
number of events (the civil war, though it had been building for a bit,
just came and went without much ceremony, for example).  The movie
started to move *SLOWLY*.  I mean, dragging.  It was as if they'd made a
reasonably slow-paced movie that was three and a half hours long, and
then realized, "We can't do this!" and had to cut parts out, leaving
the rest of it as slow-moving chunks of action.  [Actually, rumor has
it that that is precisely what *did* happen.  -Moderator]
     I really didn't like Sigourney Weaver as the Queen.  She may have
looked all right for the part, but she just didn't have any believable
royal presence.  Add to that the American accent -- it didn't really fit
in with Depardieu's French accent and the dozen or so other accents
mixed in throughout the movie.
     I also found the dialogue, at times, incomprehensible; I'm sure I
missed some vital bits of information because I just couldn't catch what
the characters were saying.  I wasn't the only one to mention this,
either; I've heard this from one or two others.  It's not just me going
deaf.  :-)
     There was no real character development of any of the characters
besides Columbus, either.  The "bad guy" (Minoxa? I can't remember) was
just a "bad guy."  I read the press kit and it cleared up something that
was never made clear in the movie; that Minoxa resented a foreign
peasant having such power, and found it simply intolerable.  I mean, I
could tell he didn't like Columbus and his ways, but I didn't really see
anything else until I read that.
     Also, throughout the movie, Columbus refers to the "New World."
The few history books I've looked at on the topic all state that
Columbus went to his grave believing that he'd found a new route to
Asia; he didn't ever find out that he'd found a whole new continent.
Bit of an inconsistency, isn't it?
     To summarize:  This movie tries really hard but just piddles to a
halt.  Fantastic sets, wonderful attention to detail (except the damn
accents) but just can't last the 2.5 hours.  Wait for videotape.
