Title
Review for Lunarcop (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Famous SF author Isaac Asimov wrote a story in which
inhabitants of future Moon colonies think of their
artificial low-gravity home as much better alternative to
natural yet savage Earth. Lunar colonists in LUNARCOP, 1994
science fiction film directed by Boaz Davidson, might argue
with that, but they don't have much of a choice -
twenty-seven years ago Earth suffered ecological collapse
that turned entire surface into inhospitable desert. The
lucky and privileged few that had found shelter on the Moon
managed to develop "Amaranth" - serum which might change the
climate of Earth all over again. The stuff has fallen into
the hands of dangerous fanatics and lunar policeman Joe
Brody (played by Michael Pare) is being sent to Earth to
stop the disaster. On the surface of ravaged Earth he finds
small communities of survivors who are constantly threatened
by motorcycle gangs, the meanest of them being led by evil
Kay (played by Billy Drago). Brody decides to set his
mission aside for a time being and protect the villagers.
Plot that doesn't make much sense, Terrence Pare's script
that employs too many overused cliches from MAD MAX and
TERMINATOR movies, and, finally Michael Pare in the lead
role - all those are the reasons why LUNARCOP doesn't look
very good at the first glance. Director Boaz Davidson, who
used to make Israeli sex comedies in late 1970s and early
1980s, obviously can't cope well with the genre of science
fiction and his ablities are further constrained by tiny
budget, painfully visible in the scenes that feature poor
special effects. On the other hand, some action scenes are
impressive, and Billy Drago is very entertaining in another
of his many over-the-top villain roles. In the end, Davidson
manages something that many other more talented filmmakers
failed to do - surprise audience with twist ending. Because
of that, LUNARCOP, although far from being recommendable, is
a much better film than it was supposed to be.
Review written on September 20th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
