Title
Review for Barton Fink (1991)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Kevin Patterson
Barton Fink (R, 1991)
Directed by Joel Coen. Written by Joel and Ethan Coen.
Starring John Turturro, John Goodman.
        The Coen brothers have made a name for themselves largely through
their wacky tales of crime gone wrong, such as Fargo  and Raising Arizona.  In
Barton Fink,  however, they craft what is probably their best and most
personal work to date by tackling a different subject: the arts and
entertainment business.
On one end of the spectrum are the movie moguls, such as the studio
executive who hires the film's protagonist, a young New York playwright named
Barton Fink (John Turturro), to write a B-grade wrestling movie and warns him
against "fruity" stories. On the other end is Barton himself, a pretentious
writer who aspires to "art" at the same time that he claims to be writing for
the "common man." Indeed, this claim seems a little shallow when Barton
actually encounters a "common man" such as his neighbor Charlie (John
Goodman); he welcomes Charlie's company, but he also occasionally insults him
without seeming to realize it and doesn't seem all that interested in his
lifestyle and tastes.
Flawed though he may be, Barton is not wholly unlikeable; there is a
sense that he means well and that he at least has an artistic vision to which
he wants to remain honest, even if he is naive about its supposed social
relevance. The film follows Barton as he is gradually made aware of two
unpleasant truths-that the Hollywood establishment is cynical and cheap, and
that he needs to be more sensitive to those for whom he claims to be writing.
For example, when he meets W.P. Mayhew, a screenwriter whom he has always
admired, he discovers that the man is an alcoholic and that his secretary
wrote most of his scripts and novels. Meanwhile, through his relationship with
Charlie, he slowly begins to realize what it really means to respect the
common man and repents of his earlier condescending attitude.
What really makes the film so special, however, is the vivid yet
surreal manner in which the story develops. The satire of Hollywood is
achieved partly through more traditional comedy, such as when the goofy
executive fires his assistant for failing to kiss Barton's feet, but there is
a much more subtle and disturbing aspect of the film as well. That is, Barton
is nervous and uncomfortable just about everywhere he goes, especially in his
hotel room where he sits for hours on end in front of the typewriter,
afflicted by a bad case of writer's bock. Through the Coens' visual mastery
and attention to odd details, such as a peeling piece of wallpaper, a
strangely distracting painting, and bizarre sounds that echo through the long
hallways, as well as Turturro's outstanding performance as Barton Fink, we get
the sense that Barton is simply out of his element and should not be in Hollywood.
The surrealism is heightened in the second half of the film, when
Barton awakes one morning to find a bloody corpse in his bed and begins to
think Charlie may have been responsible after he is questioned and harassed by
two anti-Semitic cops. The story grows increasingly bizarre-at one point
Barton and Charlie are seen talking in Barton's hotel room, seemingly
unalarmed by the fact that the hotel is burning down around them-to the point
that we start to think that this can't possibly be "real" and that Barton is
having some sort of nervous breakdown. What "really happens," however, is not
nearly as important as the truths that are revealed to Barton, about himself
and about the dangers of selling out, through these sequences. Barton Fink  is
a classic-and outstandingly successful-example of a story that is told through
abstract, symbolic images rather than through carefully defined plot developments.
Like most of the Coens' efforts, then, Barton Fink  is clever and at
times uproariously funny, but it makes the final leap from good to excellent
because of its character-oriented focus and its note of personal tragedy in
Barton's descent into sell-out hell. I was not there myself, of course, but I
would be willing to bet that Barton Fink  deserved the three awards it won at
the Cannes Film Festival in 1991, and as of now it stands as the Coens' one
unqualified masterpiece.
Grade: A+

Author
Ed Nilges
     Note: this review may spoil Barton Fink for those of us who go to
the movies primarily for the cheap frisson of surprise.  This review is
therefore best read *after* seeing Barton Fink.
     BARTON FINK is a movie I think the French will like; I understand
it's already won several awards at Cannes.  It is an extremely,
surprisingly intelligent movie which at the same time is eminently
watchable, despite descriptions of it which make it sound fairly boring.
Our expectations of BARTON FINK is somewhat like our expectations of MY
DINNER WITH ANDRE.  It would appear that a movie about a blocked nerd of
a writer in a fleabag hotel would be about as boring as, well, spending
time with a blocked nerd of a writer in a fleabag hotel.  BARTON FINK
surprises in somewhat the same way as MY DINNER WITH ANDRE.
     Structurally speaking, BARTON FINK has hints of THE DAY OF THE
LOCUST and of Dashiell Hammett as East Coast (Barton Fink, a
Depression-era writer on the model of Clifford Odets) meets West Coast
and confronts an astonishing spiritual wasteland in himself.  There is
the criminal common man in the form of John Goodman, who has become
since Roseanne a sort of King of the Slobs, there is a dame, a corpse,
and a pair of lowlife cops (who I predict the French will especially
like.)
     Fink is a screenwriter, which is a central and crucially
self-reflexive fact.  The Hollywood screenwriter views himself, perhaps
with some justification, as the creator of the entire dream, for of
course a script has to be much more than a collection of dialogue: it
has hopefully adequate descriptions of camera angles, lighting and a
myriad of other details.  In some sort of Leninist screenwriter's Land
of Cockaigne or Big Rock Candy Mountain, the screenwriter would work
poolside, attended by hordes of willing female slaves (for his gender
would be unreflectingly male) and doted upon by studio moguls.
     This is of course bunkum, and hooey.  A movie is a social art,
constituted in the labor of thousands of people...actors, extras, and
those mysteriously named gaffers and best boys.  It is also constituted
in the paradoxical but real labor of management as studio executives
acquire hardened arteries in marshaling the forces that make the movie.
Even more paradoxically it can be argued that, beyond the ushers and
ticket collectors (and beyond the video store clerks) the very audience
is laboring to produce LA GRANDE ILLUSION as it sits munching popcorn in
the darkened multiplex or in its cluttered parlor.
     The explicit rejection of Barton's pretensions is defiantly
philistine yet necessarily implied by the very content of those
pretensions.  The ringing cry of 1789 for the rights of man and the
radical equality of all our dreams when taken up by women and by
non-Europeans gives the lie to Barton's attempt to privilege himself vis
a vis insurance salesmen and GIs.  1789 became 1989, with its myriad
calls for self-determination and an end to screenwriting and
scriptwriting of *all* sorts, including top-down, dirigiste models of
economic development, in Russia, in Latvia, and in Ethiopia.
     There is more than one marvelous cut to Barton's blocked and
painful attempt to write the story of a Hegelian confrontation he knows
nothing about ("a grade B wrestling picture with Wallace Beery") to the
ease and effortless flow of a secretary's typing.  Ordinarily, the
"male" struggle of the writer, nonwithstanding that it may use the
identical tools as the labor of the secretary, has nothing to do with a
secretary's work, although the same brand names may appear on their
typewriters or, now, their personal computers.  The Barton/secretary cut
undermines this distinction.  The secretary and Barton, the cut seems to
say, are *both* "writers" if all we look at is their behavior of typing
(and isn't behavior all there is?).  If there is any difference, the
secretary is the better, more effortless writer.  When it is of course
objected that the secretary is merely transcribing another's words
whereas Barton is being creative, we might do well to side with the
managers in the film, who decry any such pretension on the part of
screenwriters and who have decried it ever since the days of F. Scott
Fitzgerald's Pat Hobby Stories.  "Creative x," where x has a strong
commercial component, has always had a suspicious odor in America (try
"creative accounting" for example.)  And screenwriters have always been
reminded by studio moguls that they are replaceable parts of what is a
machine, first and foremost, for making money.
     Such is the lowly position of the writer (screenwriter or other-
wise) that modern-day productions of Shakespeare, such as Kenneth
Branagh's HENRY V, eschew mention of Shakespeare's name anywhere on
their publicity posters.
     This review is addressed to a computer net which perforce consists
not completely but preponderantly of computer programmers, support
specialists, and that ilk.  These would do well to reflect that the
position of programmer in our industry is structurally identical
(isomorphic) to that of the Hollywood screenwriter and it inherits the
poignance of writing.  The old-fashioned programmer viewed him- self as
productive of the entire software illusion, only to be continually and
consistently reminded both by computer-resistant ordinary people and the
moguls of his industry (located also in California) of the social nature
of his work.
     The secretary's position brings us to that of the character played
by John Goodman, who, despite his name, has played such ambivalent
roles...a fat common man with a voice like Arthur Godfrey, an attractive
bear, who nonetheless is capable in this movie and in movies like THE
BIG EASY (in which he played a minor role as a corrupt New Orleans cop)
of turning into ursus horribilis at a moment's notice, and then (in this
movie) of even more abrupt and dizzying reversals.
     BARTON FINK refuses to privilege John Goodman; for to replay Aaron
Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man" at this late date, when it is the
common man who has destroyed rain forests and who has marched in Pol
Pot's legions, is to repeat Barton's essential mistake: the illusion
that *any* unitary voice can speak for "the people" when it is essential
that "the people" speak duplicitously and often repeat stories they've
heard elsewhere.  The movie appears in an era when the very idea of a
positive and held-in-common signifier is a cruel mockery in places with
names like Zagreb and Addis Ababa.
     The burning question is whether people can live with this negation
and not restore their Czar (which, along with the restoration of the old
name of Leningrad to St.  Petersburg, has been a seriously considered
possibility in recent weeks) or their old religious illusions.  The
message of BARTON FINK (if it must have a message) is fairly bleak for
those who, Prufrock-like, would wear white flannel trousers and walk
along the beach (very likely fouled by Saddam's oil spill).  It is as
bleak as Marlowe's, in THE JEW OF MALTA:
     "...thou has committed fornication, but that was in another
     country: and besides, the wench is dead."

Author
Randy Parker
        Hollywood movies, good or bad, tend to be fairly predictable, since
they almost always conform to the conventions of a genre.  A successful
movie can overcome this limitation in a number of ways.  It may add a novel
twist to an otherwise familiar story line.  Or it may, for example, make
you worry about the protagonist even though you KNOW he or she will triumph
in the end.  And then, there's BARTON FINK, which favors breaking the mold
over bending the rules.
        Written, directed, and produced by brothers Joel and Ethan Coen
(BLOOD SIMPLE, RAISING ARIZONA, MILLER'S CROSSING), BARTON FINK is a
shockingly original vision, that rare Hollywood production which strays
from the pack to create its own unique universe.  Remarkably, the Coens
have made a film which is virtually impossible to pigeon hole into any one
particular genre (or any three for that matter), and it is precisely this
elusive quality which makes BARTON FINK such a rewarding experience.  The
Coens offer the viewer genuine suspense, the kind where you don't have a
clue what's going to happen next.  It's a strange and wonderful sensation.
        Set in 1941, the movie stars John Turturro in the title role as an
idealistic playwright whose burning desire is to convey the plight of the
common man.  When his latest play becomes a hit on Broadway, Fink's agent
talks him into moving to Hollywood, where he can make good money writing
movies.  In L.A., Fink encounters a cornucopia of oddballs, starting with
the bossy studio chief (Michael Lerner), who assigns him to write a
B-wrestling picture.  In his flea-bag hotel, Fink strikes up a friendship
with his down-to-earth next door neighbor, Charlie Meadows, a door-to-door
insurance salesman played by John Goodman.  Suffering from writer's block,
Fink finds himself spending more time shooting the breeze with Charlie than
he does writing.  So he seeks the advice of W.P. Mayhew, an alcoholic
novelist who is modelled after William Faulkner and played with verve by
John Mahoney.  Mayhew isn't much help, but Fink hits it off with the famed
writer's secretary/lover (Judy Davis).  And there you have the key players
in a bizarre tale which has minimal plot but plenty of atmosphere and
off-beat humor.
        The movie plunges you into Fink's psyche and creates a dream-like
mood which is reminiscent (but not derivative) of David Lynch's best work.
The Coens demand absolute creative control over their films, and you can
clearly see the results in BARTON FINK.  Their idiosyncratic perspective
hasn't been diluted by script doctors or meddling studio executives, and
consequently, the style and tone of BARTON FINK are exceptionally
consistent and assured.  Dripping with metaphors, the movie revels in
ambiguity and offers heaping portions of food for thought.
        The Coen brothers are widely respected in Hollywood for their
writing, especially for their sharp, intelligent dialogue.  But they are
also masters of visual storytelling, and BARTON FINK finds them at the top
of their game.  Joel's fluid direction, Roger Deakins' mesmerizing
cinematography, and Dennis Gassner's surrealistic production design come
together to cast a hypnotic spell, transfixing you to the screen.  The
haunting film lingers in memory long after the credits roll and the lights
come up.
        Of course, directing also involves working with the actors, and
Joel has elicited inspired performances from his cast.  Turturro, who
masterfully conveys Fink's self-absorption, plays an unappealing character.
But when he's on the screen, you can't take your eyes off of him; he's
simply riveting.  Goodman, who has a near-perfect batting average in
supporting roles, convincingly plays Charlie Meadows as the ultimate common
man, but it's not until the film's finale that you realize just how
effective the performance has been.  As the hyperactive studio mogul,
Lerner is hilarious; his animated delivery is deliciously energetic and
deserves an Oscar nomination.  The movie stumbles only in the casting of
Davis, who seems wrong for her small but important role as Fink's romantic
interest.
        BARTON FINK has other pleasures as well, including Carter Burwell's
musical score, the recreation of 1940s Hollywood, and a wickedly macabre
sense of humor.  This rich, unconventional fable may be too much for some
viewers to swallow, but one thing is certain: the movie won't go in one ear
and out the other.  Don't leave your brain at the door; you're going to
need it for this one.

Author
Dave Cowen
Every year, somebody posts the "Barton Fink makes absolutely no sense and
never will" post.  Believe it or not, while the Coen boys had a wonderful
time throwing curve balls at the audience, most of the more absurd elements
of Barton Fink _do_ fit together.  Quite nicely, mostly something 
approximating a very clever symbolic joke.  So, I feel compelled to post my 
standard spoiler warning: 
DON'T READ FARTHER IF YOU HAVEN'T SEEN THE FILM BARTON FINK!
and trudge on with interpreting some of the more obscure elements of Barton 
Fink, including the wallpaper, the picture, orphans and dames.
One of the most obvious thematic elements in Barton Fink is the conflict 
between "high art" and "low art".  Barton's a Jewish pseudointellectual,
a New York playwright who likes to think that his uninspired, highfalutin
work is actually "about and for the common man".  Because he avoids themes
about royalty or other themes commonly found in the more pretentious work
of otherwise dull artists, one senses a sort of smugness in Barton, as 
if he feels he's doing some sort of great service to the common man by
writing about him.  In the plot of the film, however, he is forced to 
come to terms with the fact that he is a poseur: when faced with making 
the kind of "low art" that will truly appeal to the "common man" of 
Barton's story, a wrestling picture, Barton is stymied, and suffers 
writer's block.  This conflict is what drives many of the surreal happenings
that occur in the Hotel Earle.
I GUESS THE HEAT'S SWEATING OFF THE WALLPAPER.
Throughout Barton's stay at the Earle, the wallpaper oozes down the wall,
dripping "goopus" as it goes.  This is, for all intensive purposes, a 
symbolic joke.
The Coens, throughout the film, involve Barton and Charlie in what is typically 
some of the most common and pretentious symbolism found in "high" art: the
fire/water dichotomy.  The first time we catch wind of this (pun 
intended), Barton is entering the Hotel Earle.  We see a shot of waves
crashing against a large rock...and the water dissolving into the floor
of the Hotel Earle, as though the brown carpeting were sand.  Throughout
the film, Barton turns for solace to the picture of the girl sitting by the 
water, as the sounds of crashing waves come up in the soundtrack.  Barton is 
tormented, in his room, by a mosquito... depite the fact that Ben Geisler 
assures Barton that "there are no mosquitos in Los Angeles.  Mosquitos breed 
in swamps.  This is a desert!"  Finally, Barton ends up at the shoreline at
the end of film.  No question about it, the symbol of water seems to be
following Barton around.
I don't have to convince you about the link between Charlie Meadows and fire.
As Charlie's temper heightens, so does the temperature.  At the high point 
of his anger, flames literally erupt behind him, setting the hallway of the
Earle ablaze.  The man sweats -- it's HOT...water is purged from his body in
the form of sweat.
What many don't catch is the reference to the pipes behind the walls of
Barton's room.  This is one of the most important threads in the film -- 
early on, when Charlie is talking about hearing the couple engaging in
intercourse in the room next doorthat Barton hears earlier, Barton leaves 
the  room.  Charlie cringes in sadness, and says "Seem like I hear everything 
in this dump.  Must be the pipes or something."  When Barton comes back 
in, Charlie quickly hides his anger, his anger stemming from having to be 
subjected to the sounds of lovemaking being carried in the pipes.
Later, Charlie hears lovemaking again.  Barton starts yelling about
W.P. Mayhew when Audrey comes over to "help with his script" -- which would
have had to wake up Charlie.in the next room.  When Audrey and Barton roll 
onto the bed (with a hilarious reference to the Hayes code rule that in a 
lovemaking scene, a man had to have at least one of his feet on the floor), 
the camera pans over and enters the bathroom.  The sounds of Barton and Audrey 
are echoed as the camera heads into the pipe...the sounds being carried over 
into the Charlie's room.
When cold _water_ is carried through pipes in _hot_ weather, condensation 
forms on pipes -- we all know that.  If the pipe is directly behind 
wallpaper, the sweaty condensation gets through the wall into the 
wallpaper's glue, loosens the glue, and the wallpaper peels.
What a dump.  The Coens manage to take some very highfalutin, pretentious 
symbolism, and turn it into a basic, common, everyday problem in the film.
It doesn't take much symbolic interpretation to realize that the Hotel 
Earle is hell.  Chet, the servant, comes up from the underworld to greet
Barton.  The first three letters out of the elevator operator's mouth 
happen to be sixes.  "A day or a lifetime," reads the stationary.  Take 
note that the pencil which Barton moves from the stationary has no lead.  Not 
a good omen for a writer.
Charlie Meadows is the hotel's resident fallen angel.  And I don't just 
use "fallen angel" in a sense of referring to the big horny red guy himself, 
Charlie is truly is a fallen angel in all senses.  Charlie genuinely wants
to help people, wants to keep people out of the hell that he's in, to keep 
them from the ways he feels.  Note that Charlie trys to sell FIRE and 
casualty insurance.  And hell yeah, he believes in it.  Unfortunately, some
people just don't listen... and in the end, the people who don't buy
insurance tend to get burned.
Many of the early scenes of the film are spent with Charlie trying to
help Barton.  Despite being annoyed at Barton's noise complaint, Barton's
fake sympathy ("I thought you might be...in distress.") gives Charlie the
impression that Barton might be an OK guy, that Barton could help fill some 
of the loneliness in his life, provides him with some empathy.  So, Charlie 
pines to be Barton's muse.  "I could tell ya some stories!" he bellows, 
attempting desperately to be Barton's inspiration for his impending 
wrestling picture.
But the kind of empathy that Charlie desires never arrives.  When Lipnick,
the head of Capitol Pictures, asks Barton which it'll be, "Orphan, or Dame",
Barton responds "Both, maybe"... but we all know that that's not the way
the story will pan out.
Barton tends to ignore Charlie, instead ranting about modern theatre, 
interrupting Charlie at any point when Charlie trys to interject something
important.  It seems that nobody listens to Charlie.  "Opportunities galore," 
he says, talking about his sexual exploits -- but you know this isn't true.  
The same housewives he talks about there are found murdered by the end of the 
film.  Any sort of emotional contact is blocked by his weight ("that's my 
cross to bear"), despite the fact that he has an interesting, lively 
personality.  When he hears the "lovebirds" down the hall, this brings out a
crushing pain in him about what he'll never have.
In the end, Barton chooses the Dame.  Instead of calling to Charlie when
he needs help writing the script, he calls Audrey -- and Audrey comes by
to gie "Bah-ton" that special sort of "undahstahndin'" which Charlie has
never experienced.
When Barton asks him why he killed Audrey, Charlie erupts "Because YOU DON'T 
LISTEN!" and the pus oozes out of his ear.  This, for all intents and
purposes, appears to be a sexual release for Charlie's pent-up aggressions.
Very likely, the wallpaper glue also probably represents sexual fluids.  
Finally, at the end of the film, after Barton and Charlie's confrontation,
Charlie mentions the Finks and Uncle Maury, whose address Barton had given
Charlie earlier in the film.  Barton's frantic telephone call at the end
of the film indicates that the worst has happened: the orphan, to pay back
Barton for choosing the dame, has orphaned Barton.
If any figures in recent history have been seen as literal devils, creating a 
hell on earth, it is without doubt the Nazi regime.  Charlie, before pulling 
the trigger, hails the fuhrer.  His real name is "Mundt," an obviously German 
name.  Even more evidence of the link between Nazi symbolism and the film 
comes with Charlie's presentation of the box that Barton carries with him for 
the end of the film.  The wrapping paper looks remarkably like dried human 
flesh.  This angel has fallen hard.  Perhaps Barton's "common man" wasn't
so common after all... or was he?
"While co-writing the script for their 1990 gangster hit, the brutally 
beautiful _Miller's Crossing_, the found themselves overpowered by
writer's block.  To jolt themselves back into action, they wrote the
first draft of what would later become BARTON FINK..."
The above is from the laserdisc jacket of Barton Fink.  It's fairly 
common knowledge that the Coen's wrote Fink during a bout of writer's
block... so it's fair game to point out the autobiographical elements.
The Coens just happen to be a couple of Jewish scriptwriters whose films
play to the art house crowds but feature more "common" characters.  
Miller's Crossing was a genre film, which ends up being more about 
Tom and Leo's fight for Verna than about gangsterism, a fruity movie
that ended up playing to the critics and not to the common man.
When Barton is writing "The Burlyman", one of the instructions he 
writes into the script is "A young hussy opens the door"... an
instruction from the opening scenes of Miller's Crossing.  I don't
think that there's any question that the film Barton Fink is art 
imitating life.
Where the film shines in irony is in its final scene.  All through the 
film, Barton stares into a representation of possibly the lowest form
of art: a hotel painting.  In the end, he finds himself a part of that
picture: Barton's life imitating the lowest form of art.  The Coens 
turn one of the most pretentious and self-serving forms of art, the 
autobiography, on its head by showing the exact opposite happen.
Finally, as for Joyce, the final scenes of Barton Fink at the beach,
link in beautifully with the final scenes of James Joyce's autobiographical 
Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, which paints a very similar scenario.
It's a very apt, circular, reference.
All of this is in my humble opinion, of course -- I wouldn't be pretentious
enough to try and speak for whatever it is rattling around inside the
Coen's collective heads.  However, in response to the original comment, I 
would hope the above interpretations would be considered strong enough to 
dispel the notion that the symbolism in Barton Fink is "meaningless", when
it's really a very intricately structured story.
Anyway, I've spouted off enough tonight.  I'll shut up now. 
esch@fische.com               
(Eschatfische.) --------------------------------- http://www.fische.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Very strange but supremely well-crafted
     film from Joel and Ethan Coen.  The Coen Brothers have the
     best batting average in Hollywood.  They have made four films
     and each of the four is highly recommended.  During a bout of
     writer's block (which they obviously got over) writing
     MILLER'S CROSSING they wrote this strange film about a young
     playwright facing writer's block in Hollywood.  Great
     performances, great photography, strange film.  Rating: +3
     (-4 to +4).  (Spoiler follows the main body of this review.)
     Joel and Ethan Coen have managed to do what no other American film
makers have been able to do.  Even Woody Allen turns out the occasional
misfire.  Allen is extremely creative and the really creative take chances.
Sometimes they win, sometimes they lose.  The Coen Brothers have made four
films: BLOOD SIMPLE, RAISING ARIZONA, MILLER'S CROSSING, and now BARTON
FINK.  Each has been a totally original film and each has been spell-
binding.  They have made four winners out of four.  If they made TEXAS
CHAINSAW MASSACRE 6, every tuxedoed film critic in the country would be
waiting in hushed excitement to see TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE 6.  Well, the
concept of a chainsaw film at least sounds like it might have some action.
But the idea of a comedy-drama about writer's block sounds like it is asking
too much of even the Coen Brothers.  What could be less cinematic than
writer's block?  It is something that is internal and creates no visual
sparks for the viewer.  Well, believe it or not, the Coen Brothers have made
a fascinating and entertaining film about writer's block.
     In the early 1940s, a great new social playwright, Barton Fink (played
by John Turturro) has had his first play produced.  It is a moving story
about the sort of fishmongers he saw around his home on Fulton Street in New
York.  For a moment he has fame and that is just what he does not need.  A
Hollywood studio chief who has never seen his play wants the status of
having Fink writing his pictures.  With the force of big money he plucks
Fink out of New York and lays him down in Hollywood.  Fink has a tremendous
fire in his belly to help humanity ("What do you do for a living?"  "I try
to make a difference.").  But instead of a social drama he is given the task
of writing a wrestling film for Wallace Beery, much like Clifford Odets
wrote GOLDEN BOY.
     Fink looks at Hollywood like a baby looking through the bars of a crib,
with a combination of amazement and a lack of comprehension.  It was as if
he had suddenly been transported to another world.  So that he will not lose
touch with the common man he decides not to stay in glitzy Hollywood hotels,
but at the economical and just slightly sleezy Hotel Earle.  The Earle is
just beginning to fall apart and boasts a staff that looks like the living
dead.  There in his room Fink sits trying to write a great film to make a
difference for the common man--which will also be a wrestling picture for
Wallace Beery.
     One paragraph comes out of his typewriter and then nothing.  His
overwhelming drive to write is blocked by a symphony of minutiae.  His room
seems to become a living breathing creature.  Some law of conservation
maintains always exactly one mosquito in the room. The walls digest the glue
that holds on the wallpaper.  Then there is Charlie Meadows.  John Goodman
plays Charlie Meadows, who starts as a distraction, a noisy neighbor, and
becomes Barton's only friend and confidante.  Barton writes about the common
man, but we get the feeling he has never really known one, in spite of his
Fulton Street origins.  Barton's play was literary and eloquent, but not
very realistic.  Charlie *is* the common man.  The two make a stark
contrast.  Barton pulls everything he has inward in a tighter and tighter
ball--even his hair seems tense.  In contrast, Charlie lets everything out.
He is outspoken; he oozes sweat and occasionally pus.  His belly bulges and
casually rolls out and over the top of his pants.  And Barton is fascinated
by the casual, unashamed animalness of his new friend.  The scene shifts
from his hours in the hotel trying to write and talking to Charlie to the
weird alien world of the Hollywood studio.  The studio life is back-stabbing
politics (it is Barton's bad luck that the studio boss likes him, we are
told and later come to believe).  At the studio we meet weird people with
whom Barton hilariously fails to connect.  And Barton meets W. P. Mayhew,
one of America's great writers, who has in recent years been sucked dry by
Hollywood like a fly in a spider web.  He meets and is attracted to Audrey
Taylor, Mayhew's highly personal secretary.  And thereby hangs a tale.
     Many of the faces in BARTON FINK will be familiar to most viewers.
Turturro is here in his second Coen Brothers film.  His role as Bernie in
their MILLER'S CROSSING will probably be the one for which he will be best
remembered in years to come, though this performance probably equals that
one.  Another respected film maker, Spike Lee, has featured Turturro in no
less than three films.  John Goodman is also a repeat Coen Brothers actor,
having played Gale Snopes in RAISING ARIZONA.  He is, of course, well known
for theater, film, and television work.  Michael Lerner and John Polito (the
latter of MILLER'S CROSSING) are incredibly boorish and weird as the studio
chief and his favorite yes-man.  Judy Davis of MY BRILLIANT CAREER, A
PASSAGE TO INDIA, and the recent IMPROMPTU plays Audrey Taylor.
     Coen Brothers' films are strong on good dialogue, but they also have a
marvelous visual style that perfectly creates an atmosphere.  As with
MILLER'S CROSSING, their period feel in BARTON FINK is almost too rich to be
believed.  Here they bring us a  sepia-toned 1940s worlds.  The credits are
shown over brown 1940s wallpaper that prepares us for the claustrophobic
story to come.  When we see the hotel room itself, it is decorated with
perfectly placed slabs of light--sunlight reflected off dust in the air.  It
is a pleasure to watch a film as carefully crafted as this one.  Peculiarly,
there is one very bad continuity error and one it is hard to imagine was
missed in the editing.  Toward the end of the film we see a man in a
military uniform.  The ribbons on his chest seem securely in place and
falling off in alternate shots.  That one surprising fluff aside, this film
is a visual marvel.  Academy Awards are really deserved here.
     My first reaction after seeing Barton Fink was that watching this film
was like watching an expert gymnast on a trampoline who jumped just
perfectly but came down wrong.  When this story seems to be slowing down
late in the film, it is only to allow it to make an acute left turn, one
shockingly unexpected.  On consideration, I think that is a sort of self-
referential touch.  The most common and banal of genres in Hollywood today
is the psychotic killer film.  BARTON FINK is a psycho-killer film as it
would have been written by Barton Fink.  Fink knew he was writing a
wrestling film all along but kept the wrestling to a minimum and even then
wanted to do a different take on wrestling.  That is just what the Coen
Brothers do with the psycho-killer plot.  Alfred Hitchcock showed a psycho-
killer film could become a genuine classic.  It took the Coen Brothers to
make one good enough to win the Golden Palm at Cannes.

Author
Chad Polenz
Barton Fink
*** (out of 4 = good)
1991, R, 117 minutes [1 hour, 57 minutes]
[drama/satire]
starring: John Turturro (Barton Fink), John Goodman (Charlie Meadows), John
Mahoney (W.P. Mayhew), Judy Davis (Audrey Taylor), produced by Ethan Coen,
written by Ethan and Joel Coen, directed by Joel Coen.
Sometimes the movies have a way of playing with our heads by confusing us,
not necessarily plot-wise, but mood-wise. Sometimes we can't tell what's real
and what's a dream. "Barton Fink" is a journey into that world of vertigo
where what's real seems more like a dream with constant surprises and
unexplained occurrences. It's a satire, obviously, but what is it satirical
of?
The Coen brothers are no strangers to the world of the bizarre, many of
their films are seemingly normal with very unusual twists to them. We
recognize the objects, but they become foreign to us in the way they are
presented. That fascinating sense of the surreal is what this film is all
about - usual characters in most unusual circumstances. 
We meet our main character, Barton Fink, played wonderfully by John
Turturro. He is a struggling Jewish playwright in 1940s New York who is given
rave reviews but isn't satisfied. He knows there's something out there for
him but just doesn't know what it is. When Barton is asked by a major
Hollywood studio to come out and write for them he thinks this may be his
chance to make a difference. Unfortunately, he is assigned to write a campy B
movie that has no value whatsoever. This is reflective of the society in
which it is produced; a place where only action and money matter, where
reality becomes blurred because of the isolation from the regular world. 
Barton moves into a dumpy hotel and is befriended by his next door neighbor
Charlie Meadows (Goodman), a portly insurance salesman who seems to be the
most normal and most caring person in Hollywood. Charlie's dialogue is
composed in such a way that it seems very "written," but it also enhances the
satirical mood.
Barton's problem is that he feels he is too good for everyone, but does not
realize it. He writes about the common man, yet he does not accept the notion
he is a common man. He insults Charlie to his face but does not realize that
he is doing so. The chemistry between the characters is portrayed very well
as Turturro and Goodman work off of each so well because of their
differences.
When Barton meets W.P. Mayhew (Mahoney), his favorite writer, he is shocked
that he is an an alcoholic. His mistress Audrey (Davis), probably did all his
writing, and an attraction between the two is evident. There is potential for
a typical movie affair but it is not carried out over time and in secrecy,
just a one night stand that ends in tragedy. The film had seemed rather
offbeat until this time, but suddenly it becomes almost incomprehensible.
Maybe the Coen brothers got the idea for "Barton Fink" from a dream. We are
not placed in this type of atmosphere for shock value, but for a glance
through the looking glass. 
Visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
Captivated fans of the Oscar-winning "Fargo" would be remiss if
they didn't rent a 1991 beauty called "Barton Fink". Directed by
Joel Coen, produced by his brother Ethan, and written by both of
them, this '91 gem epitomizes the fresh, original style and
substance that movies can showcase.
Taking a delicious stab at the Hollywood film industry, the Coens
seem to be parodying vintage Hollywood or even Billy Wilder's
masterpiece, "Sunset Blvd."! Featuring superior set design,
fantastic cinematography, meticulous detail, and great acting,
this picture (set in 1941) sets a high standard of intelligence
and manages to keep the two-hour story at that level throughout.
Some critics might sniff at the bizarre plot-turns--and they
certainly are weird--but those twists add flavour, not blandness.
John Turturro (a Coen regular) plays Barton Fink, a New York
playwright hired by Capital Pictures to pen a wrestling script.
Moving to a seedy hotel in Los Angeles, Fink sets out to write
the story. He receives both beratings and praises from the
producer (Michael Lerner in a Oscar-nominated supporting
performance) while trying to find that all-important
'inspiration'. It seems that he has a rough case of writer's
block and whenever he seems ready to put something on paper, he's
interrupted by his neighbour Charlie Meadows (John Goodman).
However, don't believe what you see because this film is full of
metaphors. Let's just say that Goodman is well-cast as a
buffoonish travelling salesman.
In his travails, Fink also "meets" a revered writer, W.P. Mayhew,
(John Mahoney) and his wife, Audrey (Judy Davis). Mayhew has
become a pathetic souse and Audrey is the true author of many of
her husband's creations. Fink invites Audrey to his dilapidated
hotel room to work on his "failing" script. From this point on,
things take that weird turn I mentioned above. If there is a
weakness to this movie, it would have to be that things become a
little crazy. Meadows is revealed as serial killer "Madman Muntz"
and takes the script to strange new places. I'm going to stop
giving away the story though. This is one of those, "make of it
what you will" sort of films, where not everything is as it
seems.
Contained within are some of the niftiest twists, smartest jokes,
and juiciest plot lines shown in this decade. A technical
delight, "Barton Fink" has every sort of efficient use of
lighting, camera angles, editing, and the trademark Coen
attention to detail. In the climax, the film combines special
effects, long camera lenses, and great dialogue. A fine subtlety
was the highway-length hotel hallway with faint wind sounds
creeping below. No fancy explosions or computer graphics need
apply here. "Barton Fink" proves that a good script can still be
written in Tinseltown.
After the first viewing, some of the material whooshed over my
head, but the gist of the tale brilliantly parodies film-making,
angst-ridden (Woody Allen-ish) writers, and the strange decade of
the '40s. With solid, sometimes snickeringly sensational
supporting performances by Steve Buscemi, Jon Polito, Richard
Portnow, and Christopher Murney, this is a dead-on lampoon.
Portnow and Murney portray detectives with the utmost of
silliness in their parody of the '40s film noir/cop movie genre.
Of course, Michael Lerner is the scene-stealer and he was
nominated for an Academy Award for his fine work.
The Coen brothers have done two great films in their
careers--"Fargo" and the vastly underrated "Miller's Crossing".
"Barton Fink" is a shade below that level, but only a shade. This
is the kind of film that doesn't sit well with the
Godzilla-loving movie-going public in the late '90s, but REAL
movie fans will discover a gem in this piece of work. Rent this
film soon and enter Barton's living hell.
USELESS TRIVIA--John Turturro appeared in a small, hilarious role
in 1998's "The Big Lebowski" as Jesus the flamboyant bowler. The
Coen brothers use Turturro, Goodman, Buscemi, and others quite
regularly--a rare sort of loyalty in Hollywood today.


Author
Frank Maloney
     BARTON FINK is a film directed by Joel Coen, written by Joel and
Ethan Coen.  The film stars John Turturro, John Goodman, John Mahoney,
Judy Davis, Michael Lerner.  With Jon Polito and Steve Buscemi.  Rated R
for language.
     BARTON FINK is the most puzzling movie I've seen in a long time,
which is not to say I didn't enjoy it.  I did, I enjoyed the hell out of
it.  Just don't ask me what it's about.
     I find it impossible to say anything about BARTON FINK that needs
saying without possibly giving something away.  This is a film that
amazes and surprises in virtually every scene.  So be warned:
     You've probably heard about the story and I'm not going to get into
that, except to say that Barton Fink (John Turturro) is a self-absorbed
playwright with his first hit on Broadway who gets himself co-opted by
Hollywood in 1941.  Hollywood, in this case, is personified by mogul
Jack Lipnick (Michael Lerner).  Fink is thrown into a totally unsuitable
project, a B wrestling picture for Wallace Beery.
     He lives in the Hotel Earle, which has got to be the Official Hotel
for the Twilight Zone.  The hotel is dark, hotel, vast, and populated
exclusively by Fink, a very strange bell boy/room clerk Chet (Steve
Buscemi), a superannuated elevator operator who thinks he may heard of
the Bible, and Charlie Meadows (John Goodman), Fink's next-door
neighbor, an insurance salesman with a gift for gab.
     Fink also makes the acquaintance of another studio writer,
W. P. Mayhew (John Mahoney) and Mayhew's secretary/lover, Audrey Taylor
(Judy Davis).
     If you're a Hollywood buff, you may find yourself caught up in the
roman-a-clef aspect of the script: is Fink Clifford Odets, is Mayhew
William Faulkner, Lipnick Louis B.  Mayer with a touch of Harry Cohen?
What do you do with the fact that Beery actually did make a wrestling
picture, FLESH, in 1932, directed by John Ford and reputed to be a
pretty good flick?  Time is only one of the things that are out of joint
in this film.
     Indeed, there are whole lot of facta that I have no idea what to do
with (if that's a sentence).  The disgusting, sweating, peeling
wallpaper, the fan that doesn't blow any air, the horrific murder, the
flaming corridor that no one seems to notice.  I keep returning to John
Goodman charging down that hallway with his shotgun intent on mayhem and
shouting "the life of the mind" over and over.  Is this really what
BARTON FINK is about: the life of the mind?  If so what does it say
about this?  All the characters are frauds, a third of the action may or
may not be happening to the characters in the same way it's happening to
us, the audience.  And then there's the pin-up over Barton's writing
desk who seems to end the film on the beach.  Barton says, "You're very
pretty.  Are you in the pictures?"  She says, "Don't be silly."  What?
I gasped to myself.  "Don't be silly"?  Wait, I cried, don't end the
movie now!  If the movie itself a deliberate fraud?  Do I want to hear
that?
     If you go to the movies to see wonderful performances, this is a
choice for you.  Turturro, who previously played the psychotic crybaby
in MILLER'S CROSSING, is absolutely wonderful in the weird title role,
making Fink interesting even while skewering Fink with his own ego.  And
John Goodman, sweating with a passion I've never seen from him, is
alternately boobish and horrifying and enigmatic.  Lerner as the mogul
goes far beyond the call of duty in his portrait of the degeneracy of
absolute power: a man who will do anything because he can.  The other
actors each create memorable characterizations, even as you shake your
head over each one's mystery and corruption.
     The camera work is bold, the editing tight and ingenious, the
acting and direction totally over the top.  Unfortunately, for the more
conventional movie-goer BARTON FINK displays a kind of contempt for
story-telling, dropping major story lines into the abyss of enigma.  The
Coens give no quarter and ask none.
     I recommend BARTON FINK to anyone who can tolerate a movie that
will leave him or her on his or her own, a movie that may give one
something to talk about for a long time after leaving the theater.  And
I recommend it as full price.  It's worth it.
