Title
Review for Wax, or the Discovery of Television Among the Bees (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A computer programmer and part-time beekeeper who lives in Alamogordo,
New Mexico is introduced to an alternative, electronic reality by his
bees.  The bees are really the souls of the future dead, and communicate
with the beekeeper via "bee television", projected telepathic images.
An inventive and innovative video that includes striking computer
graphics and special video effects.  Although the effects are repetitive
at times, the video should appeal to those with an interest in computer
graphics.  However, it's probably too weird for a general audience.
U.S.A., video, color, 1991, 85 minutes.
Director/Writer: David Blair.
     The video begins with the story of Jacob "Hive" Maker, who went to
Mesopotamia (Iraq) early in this century, and brought "Mesopotamian"
bees to England.  Later he moved to the U.S., and brought along his
bees.  The story then jumps to the present, with Jacob Maker's grandson
living and working in Alamogordo, New Mexico.  The grandson is a
computer programmer, working on flight weapons simulators.  He is
currently working on a helicopter simulator for the U.S. Army.
     In his spare time the grandson, also named Jacob Maker, takes care
of a number of hives of Mesopotamian bees, descendents of the bees his
grandfather brought back from Iraq.  He is mesmerized by the bees.
Slowly they open a communications link, "bee television", to their
world, which is another dimension, an alternate electronic reality.  Set
against a backdrop of missile shots and (beautiful!) computer graphics
from a flight simulator, the bees explain that weapons have souls too.
     Eventually the bees lead Jacob to a secret cave, under the Trinity
Atom Bomb test site in New Mexico.  To the physical eye, it is just a
cave.  But for the bees, it is a major center of their alternate
dimension or reality.  The story continues as Jacob seeks to accomplish
the task the bees have assigned him....
     The plot outline above is only a brief simplification; the complete
plot is rather more complicated.  The story frequently shifts from past
to present to future, from physical reality to the electronic reality of
the bees, and back again.  Despite the frequent shifts, the story
unfolds smoothly.
     I found the video to be enjoyable and interesting, and particularly
appreciated the extensive use of computer graphics and special effects.
The graphics are not as flashy as in TERMINATOR 2, but they are
interesting anyway.  Some of the special video effects are used to
excess, but this does not detract from the video too much.
     Some viewers may be overcome by the total weirdness of the video.
However, it is not a campy weirdness, and appears to be integral to the
story line.  The frequent time shifts may bother a few viewers,
particularly the shifts into the past, the relevancy of which is not
fully realized until the latter part of the video.
     I would recommend the video to people interested in computer
graphics and video art.  May also be of interest to some fans of science
fiction and fantasy.  Not recommended for a general audience.

Author
Caleb J. Howard
     Hi there.  I just thought I'd share a small thing.  Last night I
saw a movie by the above title at the Bloor Cinema in Toronto as a part
of the Festival of Grand Illusions.  The film is 85 minutes, produced by
Independent Electronic Cinema, and consists of a powerful mixture of
computer imagery, military footage of weapons guidance systems, state of
the art video post-production techniques, and a *lot* of Babylonian
subterranean bees.
     I'll use the terms I'm familiar with to describe the movie as it
appealed to me, because that's my option.
     The plot of the film traced the karmic journey of the protagonist,
a designer of targeting sights on flight simulators and beekeeper,
through his links backward through time to his grandfather, and forward
through time to his destiny.  The concept of time was illustrated as
fluid and malleable at the spiritual level.  The use of video processing
and computer techniques to smoothly move the viewer from the spiritual
perspective of the protagonist to the perspective of a huge hive of bees
to the perspective of the dead souls held on reels of magnetic tape that
contain the landscape data of the flight simulators.  This is intended
to convey the flavour of the film rather than as an in-depth review, so
I will leave it as such.
     Concepts of interest to me especially well illustrated in the movie
include the state of consciousness of the hive of bees taken as a whole
and how this state of mind reflects the global state of mind of humanity
and all life taken as a whole.  Also well illustrated are the
interactions of mind, television, reality and virtual reality.
Especially neat was the exploration of the state of mind of a
semi-intelligent guidance computer in the nose of a tank-killer missile
in the Gulf War.  
     As far as I'm concerned, the movie is absolutely inspired, and is a
precursor to the future of media events.  I was consumed by the imagery
and enlightened by the vision of the film and the mastery with which it
was executed.  I also felt at the end of the film that perhaps a half a
dozen others in the theatre were similarly enthusiastic, and that the
majority were left completely cold.  Several people left the theatre
during the film (one man was really angry at having wasted his money on
the film).  At the end, there were only about six or seven of us
applauding, and the rest were looking at us, puzzled.
     I thought it was great, but would only recommend it to people with
an appetite for the surreal and the symbolic.  
