Title
Review for Mediterraneo (1991)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Pedro Sena
While there were many people that were involved in World War II, many dies,
many also survived by a stroke of luck, the type of luck that  they did not
imagine until much later in life, or even right after the end of the war.
A battle ship is set to go to a Greek Island, on a mission to either help
others, or search for enemy outposts.  When they get there, it appears that
the island is empty.  They go in, and set up camp.  And the story begins.
Their boat is destroyed, and it isn't clear what really did it, though their
is a suggestion ( not caught on the subtitles ) that it was a German ( ? )
boat that did in this one.  And in their emotional upheaval state, they get
scared during the night, and also damage their radio.  And now they are all
alone, with little communication with the outside world, and can't figure
out what to do.
As time passes by the town populace begins to appear.  First appear the
elderly, and soon a Greek Orthodox priest.  And all of a sudden they are the
town.  And after the elderly begin appearing children and soon the women.
One is a prostitute, that immediately sets up shop with all the soldiers.
As time goes by, they all have tried her
except one.  And when he does, he wants to marry her, and take out a bit of
the fun that the others had.  But it didn't seem to matter to much.  By this
time, they have mellowed out some, and are no longer neurotic about the
romantic side of battling the enemy.
The war ends, time goes by, no one notices it.  One day an English boat
appears and takes back to Italy who ever wishes to leave.  The married one
hides and does not leave.
The film jumps ahead, and the other old ones return to the island. The
captain had wanted to go and change Italy for the better.  He comes back
disgusted saying that Italy was not interested in getting better, or
changing.
While it isn't a great film, it is nice to see the characters change from
the young guns to the older, nicer men that they become.  And their view of
the island and the world has changed. No longer do they have a view which is
distorted by the idealism of youth.
Well directed film, that plods along nicely, with some funny moments.
4 GIBLOONS

Author
Sri Rajeev
     MEDITERRANEO is one of those small, surprising and delightful films
- such as the French used to make at one time - that leave a smile on
your face without taxing you overly.  I hate to denigrate it by calling
it a perfect summer movie, but that really is what it is: good, clean
entertainment.  By the way, it did win an Academy Award for Best Foreign
Film, I think in 1991.
     The film is in Italian, set on a small Greek island in the
Mediterranean.  The island is of dubious strategic value, and to the
small troupe of Second World War Italian soldiers (self-described by
the schoolmaster Lieutenant as a bunch of misfits) sent to capture and
hold the island, it appears to be an exercise in futility.  The island
seems completely devoid of human habitation, and since they are pretty
much incommunicado (their transport ship having been shot up and
destroyed by the enemy, and their radio broken by one of the soldiers in
a fit of pique), they seem to have a time of total boredom ahead of
them.  But all of a sudden (and the viewer becomes a willing believer
in this convenient fiction), the inhabitants of the village reappear.
It turns out they had hidden themselves in the caves because their
previous experience with occupying soldiers (German as it happens) had
been none too nice - the Germans had taken away all the able-bodied men.
     Then follows a very pleasant time for the soldiers: they are
accepted by the Greeks as comrades (for some reason they all keep
saying, "One race, one face" - although eventually someone does counter
with "One race, one stomach" after a particularly large meal.)  They
lead a blissful, Lotos-Eater existence for several years.  The
Lieutenant, an amateur artist, is commissioned to repaint the murals in
the church; various of the men find agreeable female companionship.
     Eventually, of course, all this good stuff must come to an end, and
reality strikes in the personages of two rather pompous British naval
ensigns who appear to take the Italians home in the aftermath of the
war.  They are suitably nonplussed by the scruffy Italian soldiers who
have gone native, complete with baggy trousers and vests.
     All in all, a thoroughly enjoyable film; even the (obligatory?)
Turkish villain and the starchy Brits were treated with good humor.  The
blue-green Mediterranean and the dazzlingly whitewashed Greek village
make one long to take a trip!
(Probably rated R for nudity, adult situations)
--
Sri Rajeev, Marketing Manager, Display Products
MTV 15-46, Sun Microsystems, 2550 Garcia Ave, Mt. View, CA 94043
(415)-336-1101  rajeev@travancore.eng.sun.com

Author
Ben Hoffman
This is a most entertaining, charming anti-war film that willenchant
you with its simple story and its beautiful photography.
A decrepit Italian warship is sent for no apparent good reason (during
WWII) to an insignificant Greek Island to capture it.  When the ship
arrives with its crew of ordinary, unwarlike Italian young men, they
find the island deserted. . . or so they think.  When their one radio
gets broken, their only contact with Italy and the outside world, they
have no way of knowing or caring about what is happening elsewhere.
Happily, they have discovered the island does have inhabitants.  The
young men of the island have been removed some time ago by the
Germans.  Only the women and some old men remain.   From this simple
premise the director has made a most delightful film which without
being preachy demonstrates the folly of war.  A real winner.
The film stars Diego Abatantuono, Claudio Biagli, Giuseppi Cederna and
Claudio Bisio.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It's an old story really.  The conqueror conquers the land, stays, and
then the land conquers the conqueror.  It happened many times in Chinese
history.  It is really what LOCAL HERO and DANCES WITH WOLVES were about.
There are references to it happening in James Michener's HAWAII  (There are
probably better examples.)  In MEDITERRANEO, set during World War II, eight
fairly incompetent Italian soldiers are sent to secure a small Greek island.
An enemy attack destroys their boat and incompetence destroys the radio.
There is nothing they can do but secure the island for Italy and wait out
the war with almost no responsibility.  Over the course of three years they
become more Greek than Italian.
     This is an amiable and likable comedy that won the Academy Award for
Best Foreign-Language Film of 1991.  While many of the situations are
cliched, the film never appears to be trying to be more than it actually is.
The Italians are led by Lt. Montini (played by Claudio Bigagli), who wants
to make art, not war.  Considerably more aggressive is Sgt. Lo Russo (played
by Diego Abatantuono), who is anxious to get on with the war but will settle
for soccer.  If the film has any message it is that people can learn to
adapt to good climate, beautiful scenery, dance, easy sex, soccer, drugs,
and no responsibility.
     One place the film does have a problem is in the passage of time.  What
seems to the viewer to be a couple of months the dialogue tells us is three
years.  Then again, good climate, beautiful scenery, dance, easy sex,
soccer, drugs, and no responsibility might easily make three years feel like
two months.  MEDITERRANEO is directed by Gabriele Salvatores, who previously
directed MARRAKECH EXPRESS and TURNE.  This one is guaranteed to lower your
blood pressure.  I rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     MEDITERRANEO is an Italian film directed by Gabriele Salvatores,
from a script by Vincenzo Monteleone.  It stars Diego Abatantuono,
Claudio Bisio, and Giuseppa Cederna.  Unrated, includes nudity.  In
Italian, with English subtitles.
     MEDITERRANEO, which won this year's Academy Award for Best Foreign
Film, is a sweet, harmless fantasy about a group of misfits from the
Italian Army who in 1941 are supposed to occupy an obscure Greek island.
Instead, it would be fair to say that it is the island that occupies
them.  This is a retelling in some ways of the episode of the island of
the Lotus-Eaters from the Odyssey, as the script is at some pains to
remind us from time to time, even though the literary and cultural
references are largely pro forma, and certainly meaningless.
     And sitting through the movie is like a trip to lotus land for the
audience as well.  We rather cheerfully suspend reality as we begin to
savor the idyllic life the Italians find there.  The placidity, the lack
of conflict, the abundance, willingness to share, all these things seem
almost normal to us as we slip into the role of the conqueror who is
conquered.  The photography exploits the stunning scenery to the utmost.
And we are lulled by the brilliant white rock, the glowing blue water,
the inviting and dappled shade.
     As escapism goes this film is like a little vacation.  As films go,
escapism needs some work, in both the sense that it lacks focus and in
the sense of needing something to do.  It's all pretty aimless and
pointless, and whatever successes are scored in the main body of the
film, the whole affair is weakened by an epilogue that could have been
bittersweet, but instead is merely an exercise in "where are they now"
and that worst of Italian cinematic weaknesses, sentimentality.  If the
film is meant to be an anti-war film, it could use a little conflict to
show us what it is that it is against.  At least there are no small
children tugging at our heartstrings.
     Now, I do not believe there is anything inherently wrong with
beautiful scenery, lovely nude bodies of either sex, misfit soldier
comedy, or easy-going fantasy.  But I do rather find it all the more
satisfying if there is some informing intelligence behind it all, some
sense that there is point to be made, some vision of either the world
that is or the world that ought to be.  None of that obtains in
MEDITERRANEO.  
     If you liked CINEMA PARADISO or KING OF HEARTS, you will probably
like this film.  If you're curious about what it takes to the Foreign
Film Oscar, you might want to take this in, too, but you should pay
matinee prices, or wait for a cheap video.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
90 min., not rated, Drama, 1992, In Italian with English subtitles
Director: Gabriele Salvatores
Cast: Diego Abatantuono, Claudio Bigaglili, Guiseppe Cederna,
      Claudio Bilso, Luigi Alberti, Ugo Conti, Memo Dini,
      Vasco Mirandola, Luigi Montini, Irene Grazioli, Antonio Catania,
      Vanna Barba
     Several Italian soldiers are sent to a Greek island for four
months.  After they arrive, their ship gets blown up.  At first the
island appears to be empty, but the soldiers who are cut off from the
world soon, find the villagers.  The soldiers have to start new lives on
the island because they can't get off of it.
     MEDITERRANEO is a wonderful film, and I strongly urge you to go see
it.  The film completely entertained me for the full hour and a half,
but I wished that it was longer because I found myself wanting to know
more about the soldiers.  I am really glad that I got to go see this
film and I feel that it is worth full ticket price, whatever it is.  On
a scale of zero to five, I give MEDITERRANEO a five.  MEDITERRANEO is
not rated but contains female nudity, adult situations, and explicit
language.
     The locations used for the film were great; the island is
beautiful, especially in the mountain country and in the bay area.  The
shots overlooking the ocean are fascinating and really made me want to
go visit this island.  The people on the island were well portrayed,
which added to the film.
     The film has comedy sprinkled through it, which I found made the
film more enjoyable.  I tend to like a film better when it makes me
laugh a few times.  The plot is not overpowering and is one that I don't
think I have seen before.  The soldiers were interesting people, they
were given personalities, traits, hobbies, etc.  The actors who
portrayed the soldiers did a great job.  I am glad that this film won an
Oscar for the best foreign language film in the 1992 Oscars because I
feel that it really deserved it.
     MEDITERRANEO I think is the best film that I have seen this year
and ranks as one of my favorite films out of all the films that I have
seen.  It is just a great film in its cinematography, directing, acting,
and story line.  If you tend to like foreign films, definitely go see
this one even if you have to travel to do so.
