Title
Review for Royal Tenenbaums, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rachel Gordon
Family isn't based on sweet kisses on the cheek.  Affection between
parent and child is not established by saying the magical phrase "I love
you."  Instead, the strongest conversations often come through in stares
and sarcastic remarks.  As the old saying goes, you only hurt the ones
you love, and family members are usually first in line.
This adage is wholly true for the Tenenbaums, a charismatic
dysfunctional family set in a slightly surreal New York City.  With an
all-star cast and crisp dialogue, this film does what many other films
of its genre lack -- it creates a family environment that is
entertaining as well as easy to relate to.
The three kids of the family are each geniuses in their own right.  Chas
(Ben Stiller) started his own business in his early teens by selling
Dalmatian rats overseas and reinvesting in real estate.  Richie (Luke
Wilson) was a champion tennis player, and Margot (Gwyneth Paltrow), who
is continually reminded that she was adopted, won a grant for
playwriting at the ripe age of 14.
But father Royal (Gene Hackman) was kicked out by their mother, Etheline
(Angelica Huston), while the kids were still young, due to infidelity
and other nasty habits.  Eventually, the kids move back home with mom,
which prompts Royal to try and connive his way back into the family's
good graces.
Categorically, Royal is a selfish prick.  He fakes illness to be allowed
back in the house.  He doesn't know Margot's middle name.  He forgets
that Chas is a widower.  He picks a fight with Etheline's suitor Henry
(Danny Glover).  But for every idiotic verbal stumble to come out of
Royal, he's clearly trying so hard that you want him to gain some kind
of affection from his estranged kin.  Once Royal enters the picture, his
interaction with others pulls us along, and what an engaging ride it is.
Behind the scenes, Wes Anderson and Owen Wilson team up again, after
their deservedly successful Rushmore, to pen this masterpiece.  (They
also wrote Bottle Rocket together.)  Wilson rarely gets the credit he
deserves, playing characters with little gray matter in such films as
The Minus Man and Zoolander.  But, because this script is so well
written, Wilson's Eli Cash gets to play an intricate, poignant part in
the Tenenbaum environment.  Having grown up across the street from the
eccentric family, he has always wanted to join their ranks.  This is a
normal jealousy for most children, that the home life of their friends
must be better than their own.  Only through watching the Tenenbaums
unravel can Eli come to grips with his own life.
And Wilson isn't the only actor who shines through the brilliant
material.  Paltrow is the best she has ever been.  Stiller doesn't
choose dramatic roles often, but watching his inner resentment strikes a
powerful chord.  Gene Hackman is the most charismatic jerk ever
portrayed on film.  The characters and their situations might be old,
but this fabulous cast finds a way of adding new and fascinating layers
to every moment.
The beautiful sincerity of this collage comes through a rational
reactivity rarely found in family dramas.  While dire circumstances
normally bring people together in a rush to forget their grievances, The
Royal Tenenbaums doesn't treat the possibility of death as an excuse for
all to be miraculously happy with one another.  When Royal moves back
into the homestead for treatment of his "illness," none of the
Tenenbaums rush into his arms and forget his prior failures.  Instead,
he is tolerated and taken care of from a distance.  It's the little,
intelligent details that totally make the picture.
To get into the plot too much further would ruin some of its freshness. 
Suffice it to say that for all the seriousness presupposed when watching
a family story unfold, The Royal Tenenbaums is surprisingly pure
entertainment, with well-timed and original humor based on old problems
that recur in any family.  There is no such thing as forgetting the
past, but there is a point at which you can purge your system of anger,
laugh at it, and live easier with those blood relations you never got to
choose in the first place.
Screened at the 2001 New York Film Festival (feature coming soon).
Director: Wes Anderson
Producer: Wes Anderson, Barry Mendel, Scott Rudin
Writer: Wes Anderson, Owen Wilson
Starring: Gene Hackman, Angelica Huston, Ben Stiller, Luke Wilson,
Gwyneth Paltrow, Danny Glover
http://bventertainment.go.com/movies/royal/index.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
