Title
Review for Soapdish (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Frankie Paiva
Daytime soap operas are always fun to watch because they easily can be made fun
of. Endless plot twists and script changes have to be made every single day on
the set of these shows which sometimes last over thirty or forty years. This is
the setting for the film Soapdish, sort of a soap opera within a soap opera.
It’s the story of the fictional soap opera The Sun Also Sets, and what goes
on behind the scenes when someone tries to sabotage the show. The wild of the
zany antics of the characters may be a little unbelievable, but it’s look at
the television and daytime programming industry is not. 
Celeste Talbert (Field) plays Maggie, the female lead on a long-running popular
soap opera called The Sun Also Sets. The night that she wins the Daytime Emmy,
her husband leaves her for his former wife.  This sends Celeste into a
breakdown and she becomes increasingly stressed and ecstatic. Montana Moorehead
(Cathy Moriarty who steals the show) is an evil, jealous bitch who wants to be
queen of the soaps, but she can’t because Celeste is standing in her way. She
seduces the show’s producer named David (Robert Downey Jr.) into cutting her
out of the show. Determined to get his hands on her David hires a man who was
beheaded years ago on the show that Celeste absolutely hated. Jeffrey Anderson
(Kevin Kline, great as always) was the lead in Death of a Salesman at a Florida
dinner theater for the elderly. Despite her bitter hate for him, Celeste soon
finds herself utterly attracted to the man she had written off the show. 
As the plot on the soap opera unfolds, so does the real life soap opera.
Balloon deliverer Lori Craven (Shue) is cast as a mute homeless girl who turns
out to be Maggie’s daughter but also seems to have some sort of real life
bond with the actress. From there the plot twists and turns until reaching its
final conclusion that the whole television world will be watching. True
identities are revealed, dark secrets emerge, and love conquers all. It’s
just like your regular old daytime soap opera.
Everyone here seems to be playing it over the top and they do it remarkably
well. Sally Field is great as the aging soap actress who’s looking for
someone to love her. The rest of the supporting cast is also great with Kevin
Kline and Robert Downey Jr. sparkling the brightest. There are several scenes
in this movie that I liked. My favorite is probably when the show’s writer
(Whoopi Goldberg being serious, yes, you read me correctly, being serious)
stages a fake celebrity sighting in the mall. Many lines are very funny and
everyone plays well off of each other’s characters. Garry Marshall also makes
an appearance as a TV executive who is drawn to what’s happening on the
television show. This is a great film that shows us what might really happen on
the set of a soap.  There are some minor problems though. The film is too long
(even at 97 minutes), and there always seems to be a bit too much going on for
us to be able to grasp it all in one sitting. They also never mention the fact
that any other soap operas might also be competition for ratings. A great
rental, the fun Soapdish gets *** stars.
The Young-Uns: There is some brief language as well as some sensuality. Good
Age: 11 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     SOAPDISH was sneaked here last night.  It's a very sharp satire of
soap operas.  If you need a silly movie and just want to laugh for 90
minutes, you can't do much better than SOAPDISH.  I hadn't laughed so
much at a movie in a long time.
     In SOAPDISH, Sally Field plays an hyperactive, aging ingenue,
Whoopi Goldberg reprises her wise woman from Ghost, Robert Downey Jr.
plays a young producer torn in about fifteen different directions, and
Cathy Moriarty steals the show as Montana, a vixenish actress who plays
a nurse.  Garry Marshall (normally the director of movies like Pretty
Woman) does an amusing turn as "the man from upstairs," the network
executive in charge of daytime programming.  There are lots of surprises
in this movie, and probably most of them don't hold up to much scrutiny,
but what-the-hell.  The movie goes to truly ridiculous lengths about how
silly soaps are, and how neurotic most people involved with soaps are.
You may need to have been a soap fan at one point in your life to truly
appreciate this movie, but I suspect if you liked the soap opera stuff
in TOOTSIE, you'll enjoy SOAPDISH.

Author
Frank Maloney
     SOAPDISH is a film starring Sally Fields, Kevin Kline, Robert
Downey, Jr., Cathy Moriarty, and Whoopi Goldberg.  Elizabeth Shue also
has a major role, but doesn't get mentioned in the display ads.
     SOAPDISH is a very funny movie, a farce that understands perfectly
the weirdness of the soap opera, the "continuing daytime drama" as the
TV guys like to put it, and understands equally well that people like
their soaps.  It exploits this weirdness until I was howling, yet never
makes itself superior to the genre.  It satirizes without patronizing
and it works wonderfully well.  There is hardly a mean bubble in this
soap.
     Sally Fields is not my favorite actor.  The last time I liked her
ditzy energy was in that movie about stand-up comics, the one that
everyone else in world loathed and abominated apparently.  SOAPDISH
makes me a fan; she is perfect as the aging queen of the soaps,
"America's sweetheart," whose professional and personal lives are
coming apart.  Her live-in boyfriend goes back to his wife; her producer
and one of her co-stars (Cathy Moriarty) are plotting to push her out of
her long-running soap.  A demon (Kevin Kline) from the past shows up in
both her worlds unwelcome and unbidden.  Her misery is perfect,
comically exaggerated and intense, agonizingly funny, just as her
vulnerability and desperation make her human and appealing.  We laugh
ourselves silly at her expense, but we never dislike her.  This seems to
be exactly what is missing from most Hollywood comedies these days; does
anyone *like* John Candy, par exemple?
     Kevin Kline can do no wrong, as far as I'm concerned.  He's not so
driven here as he was in A FISH CALLED WANDA, but instead he's a lot
more human.  When we first meet him, in a geriatric dinner theater in
Florida, playing Willy Loman, we know that he can relate to his role.
He is an excellent foil to Fields' craziness, more in control but just
as desperate, just as determined to win through, and just as funny.
     Robert Downey, Jr., and Cathy Moriarty are the conspirators, the
heavies, he driven by his lust for Montana (Moriarty), she driven by her
need to be the queen of the soaps.  Downey is really quite wonderful
here, his timing, delivery giving his part a kind of snappy hilarity
that makes him appealing and adorable in a sleazy way.  Moriarty is
strange; about her I can't say too much without talking about plot,
something I try to avoid in these notices.  Leave us say merely that she
makes a major contribution to the hilarity.
     Whoopi Goldberg is Fields's head writer and only friend.  She looks
wonderful in her slightly wacky outfits.  She is the only
straight-thinking, honorable person is the soapy world of ratings and
rivalries.  She has her funny moments, but her major role is that of
second banana to Fields, something Goldberg carries off with surprising
skill considering her own enormous comedic skills.
     Elizabeth Shue plays the newcomer who throws everyone's lives and
plots into the trashcan.  This role has to be a boost in her somewhat
floundering career; after all, I don't think she's carried a movie since
ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING, in which she sang the memorable "Babysitter's
Blues."  She looks good, she acts well, she's a more than competent
comedienne.  Since I'm expecting SOAPDISH to be a major money machine, I
think Shue's name will in all likelihood be moving up above the title
one of these days soon.
     This is a very funny movie that achieves its high level of hilarity
through a combination of sight gags, sexual humor, farce, satire, and a
respect for the audience that is extremely rare and successful.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I have come back from three-and-a-half weeks in eastern Europe, so I
have a lot of catching up to do.  I do not really have the time to go out
and see a lot of movies and write reviews.  Oh, I am still seeing movies,
but for a while I will have time to review only the biggees.  I have now
seen three comedies, for none of which did I really plan to do my full
write-up.  But three small reviews can go together to make one article.  I
will review them in order of increasing respect.
     NAKED GUN 2-1/2: THE SMELL OF FEAR is something of a disappointment.
The team of Zucker, Abrahams, and Zucker worked like a well-oiled machine to
make some pretty funny comedies.  Now they have split up and gone in three
directions.  With this film that machine is operating on only one piston,
David Zucker.  He wrote and directed the film without either of the other
two people.  The film has about the same number of jokes, but only about a
third of the laughs and nothing particularly hilarious.  What is worse, the
film tries to be about a serious subject.  In AIRPLANE! the trio was, in
part, saying how silly their own story was.  Even the original NAKED GUN
tried to steer clear of any hint of seriousness.  Here we have a bunch of
just okay jokes hung on a paper-thin plot about a conspiracy against the
environment.  The film has a laugh or two but in general is kind of tired.
I give this one only a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale, though I did enjoy Lloyd
Bochner's allusion to what is probably his most famous role.  (I don't count
that a spoiler, because who remembers Bochner's famous role anyway?)
     Better constructed and with some better gags is SOAPDISH.  This is
occasionally a pretty funny comedy, though never as madcap as intended.  The
story, of course, is about the back-stabbing, the politics, and the personal
crises that go on behind the scenes of a popular soap opera, "The Sun Also
Sets."  Sally Field plays the main character of the program, but will not be
for long if another actress (played by Cathy Moriarty) has anything to do
with it.  The jealous Moriarty constantly flirts with the show's producer
(played by Robert Downey, Jr.), getting him to make decisions that are
driving Field crazy, including bringing back Kevin Kline, who many years
before was Field's on- and off-screen lover.  Whoopi Goldberg brings her
STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION personality to the screen as Field's friend
and confidante as well as the show's writer.  The plot is contrived and this
is hardly a believable picture of how a soap opera is made, but at least the
gags are mostly funny.  I rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  The best
scene if Kevin Kline's DEATH OF A SALESMAN.
     Not too surprisingly, the best comedy is from the writers of
PARENTHOOD.  Three upper-middle-class Easterners in their late thirties end
up fish out of water in a real cowboy cattle drive.  Yeah, it sounds like
eight different bad movies on cable, except it's not teenagers.  But that
does not mean that this film could not possibly be done right, and writers
Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel do pull this one off with attention to
character and some solid human values.  This is not the kind of script that
Chevy Chase and Dan Aykroyd get, in part because they just do not deserve
it.  This is a film about mid-life crisis and the meaning of friendship.
Once you realize these are characters who have fears and consciences and
feel pain, when there are action scenes they mean much more.  The three are
played by Billy Crystal, Daniel Stern, and Bruno Kirby as childhood friends
who take unusual vacations together.  This time they take a packaged
vacation to learn basic cowboy skills and go on a real cattle drive--more
real than they at first expect.  They have a chance to talk out their
problems and their relationships and learn to operate as a team.  There is a
major character named Norman and Billy Crystal's reaction to Norman's first
appearance makes the best scene of any of these three films, and also is
perhaps the most real.  CITY SLICKERS is worth seeing and rates a +2 on the
-4 to +4 scale.
