Title
Review for Koyaanisqatsi (1983)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Samir Khan
I originally saw Koyaanisqatsi on a laserdisc a few years ago.  
This afternoon I watched it at a cinema on a brand new print.
Koyaanisqatsi is an 87 minute film with no narration, just 
images of nature and mankind accompanied with music by Philip 
Glass.  The message is pretty obvious: we're messing up earth, 
and if you look at things objectively, everything we do and 
everything we build doesn't really matter.
It removes us from our traditional frame of reference by speeding 
everything up.  Motorways start to resemble blood flowing through 
veins and people walking through crowded city streets look like 
water in a stream.  Individuals seem worthless.
The first 10 minutes looks at the natural landscapes of America and 
is very impressive.  There's no human life in these images of natural 
beauty.  The bulk of the film is made up of images of cities, 
buildings and technology, time-lapsed and speeded up to look unnatural, 
ridiculous and strangely worthless.  
Technically this film is excellent.  One image sticks in my mind.  
A woman on a tube-train.  We're looking straight at her, with the 
window behind her.  Everything outside is speeded up and blurred, 
but she's sitting perfectly still. 
Time-lapse tracking shots are used.  We walk through a train station 
while everyone else madly races past.  
I'm not sure if one and a half hours was needed, but it certainly does 
pass quickly.  The music is very haunting and fit the visuals perfectly.  
Sometimes Glass's score sounds like a loud mess.  But that was probably the point.
On a television this film would lose most of its impact.  The film rests 
on its visuals and the details would be hard to see.  Aside from this, 
this is one film that would be perfect on DVD.  I'd buy it for sure.
SUMMARY:
If you want to see something engaging, mesmerising and different, watch this.

Author
Stuart Cracraft
     (This is a Francis Ford Coppola presentation, produced and directed by
Godfrey Reggio, music by Philip Glass, cinematography by Ron Fricke.)
     This film is a visually dazzling, audio-inspiring, vaguely anti-war
statement.  It is pretty transparent, and I knew we were in trouble about 10
minutes into this film when it switched from beautiful nature landscapes to
big, ugly man-made machines.
     So, the director chose to portray man in an essentially negative light.
No one is happy in this film.  Lots of H-bombs blow up in between the pretty
pictures of time-lapse photography.
     At the very end, when the credits are finished, we find out it is "An Ire
Production".  Tsk, tsk.  There's little quite so irritating as video morality
and video political left-wing leanings.
     Also, it falls into the Lucas-trap of edits that are so fast, one hardly
has a chance to choose to accept or reject the images being flooded into the
audience's mind.  In this respect, it is a film meant for non-thinkers.
