Title
Review for Our Song (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If you dug American High, the canceled high-school-based reality show
recently brought back to life by PBS, you should definitely check out Jim
McKay's Our Song, a gritty but fictitious look at the lives of three young
girls and how they spent their summer.  McKay shot the entire film using a
handheld camera, which, given the overabundance of reality programming as of
late, makes Song look and feel too real to be watching from an
air-conditioned theatre.  This is the kind of thing you watch from your
couch, possibly while involved in some kind of drinking game (every time
Mike says something to piss off Coral, you have to drink a shot).
Armed with a budget of under $500,000, writer/director McKay (Girls Town)
headed to Crown Heights, Brooklyn to tell this story of three girls hovering
around their 16th birthdays.  Each is a member of the Jackie Robinson
Steppers Marching Band, who may be headed to Alaska for a competition, and
each has just found out their school is being closed because of a recently
discovered asbestos problem.  Instead of rejoicing, like most kids their
age, these girls are upset, realizing the commute to a new school could add
hours to their scholastic day.  They're good kids, for the most part, which
is part of the film's offbeat realism.
The girls are played by Anna Simpson, Melissa Martinez and the promising
Kerry Washington, who had a part in Save the Last Dance.  Like real girls
their age, they have to deal with the various everyday problems causing teen
angst: divorce, pregnancy, suicide, clashes with parents and fights with
siblings. But there's fun stuff, like movies, ice cream, sleepovers,
birthday parties and shoplifting, to offset the trauma.  There isn't a lot
of excitement, as the film is meant to be a slice of life, but it also makes
the 95-minute running time seem to last forever.
The coolest thing about Song may be the opening credits, where McKay forgoes
the typical "A Film By" credit and lists the names of everyone involved in
the production instead of just his own.  Song looks terrific, with
photography courtesy of Jim Denault (Boys Don't Cry).  R.E.M. frontman
Michael Stipe serves as the film's executive producer.
1:35 - R for language and some teen drug use

Author
Steve Rhodes
OUR SONG, the second feature film by writer/director Jim McKay (GIRLS TOWN), is
a pretentiously paced picture that tosses out a few big societal problems
(drugs, shoplifting and, most of all, teen pregnancy) as nonchalantly as turning
on a light switch.  
The girls in the story, Lanisha Brown (Kerry Washington), Joycelyn Clifton (Anna
Simpson) and Maria Hernandez (Melissa Martinez), don't get excited about much of
anything, save the possibility of some designer clothes.  They're shocked that
someone would be sent to jail just for "selling weed," but not particularly
surprised that a high school girl is pregnant with her second child.  Maria, who
is not yet a high school sophomore, is on the way to having her first baby. 
Almost nothing will cause Maria and her friends to talk much above a whisper,
which makes this glacially paced, emotionally dead film hard to stay with. 
Sure, its topics are extremely important, but this story isn't worthy of them.
The title is partially derived from the marching band, "The Jackie Robinson
Steppers," to which the girls belong.  You might expect that the band would at
least form a significant subtheme since it gets a lot of screen time, but it
doesn't.  
Periodically, the movie attempts to make important statements about kids facing
adult problems.  In a scene set in one of their bedrooms, the girls talk about
their lives.  Beside them is a Candyland board game to remind us that they were
little girls not that long ago.  The scene ends as one girl throws out a line
about how it would be a relief to be shot dead.  The scene then fades to black. 
If the actors had any emotional attachment to their parts, this could have been
a powerful moment.  But, like the rest of OUR SONG, it just doesn't resonate
because we never believe that the girls mean anything that they say.
OUR SONG runs a long 1:35.  It is rated R for language and some teen drug use
and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 10, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
OUR SONG (2000)
Rated R; running time 95 minutes
Genre: Drama
Official site: http://www.magiclanternpr.com/films/ifc_oursong.html
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0244244
Written by: Jim McKay
Directed by: Jim McKay
Cast: Kerry Washington, Anna Simpson, Melissa Martinez, Marlene Forte,
Raymond Anthony Thomas, Rosalyn Coleman, Carmen Lopez, Tyrone Brown,
Kim Howard, Juan Romero Jr., Lorraine Berry, Natasha Frith
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsoursong.html
Ah, summer movie season.  A time when much of what you see on the Silver
Screen involves big explosions, lots of sound and fury, and action
plotting that insists there be a big tub of popcorn handy.
Sorry hon, this is the theater for OUR SONG; "Big Summer Explosions 4:
Die Hardest" is two screens down, take a right...
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
OUR SONG is a simple - but not mindless - story of three young friends
in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, during one hot summer.  Lanisha (Kerry
Washington), Maria (Melissa Martinez), and Joycelyn (Anna Simpson) are
members of the Jackie Robinson Steppers, a marching band that's highly
respected and supported in their neighborhood; and the bandleader, Mr.
Miller (Tyrone Brown) works hard to keep it that way, keeping the
members motivated toward being the best they can be.
Each of the girls' family members support them in varying degrees;
Lanisha's mother Pilar (Marlene Forte) and father Carl (Ray Anthony
Thomas) seem to be right behind Lanisha, whereas Maria and her mother
Rita (Carmen Lopez) and numbnut brother Alex (Reginald Washington) have
some serious Issues, and Joy's mother Dawn (Rosalyn Coleman) seems more
intent on having a Good Time on the streets than in helping her daughter
grow up.  And even the strong bond they have as friends, is threatened
when Joy pulls away from them and gets closer to her Stepper friends Kim
(Lorraine Berry) and Keisha (Natasha Frith).
Big things, like the closing of their school, boyfriend Issues they each
have, and unforeseen events involving their friend Eleanor (Kim Howard)
and her young son Samson (Juan Romero Jr.), affect each of the girls.
But Lanisha, Maria, and Joy have the same goals and aspirations as many
a young person in Anytown, USA - and like those nameless others, it's
the small things in life that can have the biggest impact on them.
The Upshot:
As a movie critic, I try to stay objective about what I'm watching, but
still stay involved enough to give a reasoned opinion.  But as a member
of the human race and of one of its subsets - namely, Black Folk - I
sometimes find my presumptions about What Usually Happens Next, a bit
disturbing.  I started out with any number of expectations,
presumptions, and prejudices, mainly revolving around its Inner-City
setting and subject matter.  If you were to take a look at the notes I
made while watching OUR SONG, you might see things like "I bet a
beat-down is coming next", or "I bet Character X turns out to be a major
drug dealer".  Color me surprised when I got to the end credits, and saw
that many of my presumptions about what makes a Hood Flick, were (ahem)
shot down.
In fact, OUR SONG surprised me at nearly every turn, but quietly so.
The lack of Big! Dramatic! Events! was somewhat unnerving, probably
because I have become conditioned to expect exactly that after hours and
hours of mainstream movies clouding my brain.  Still, it was great to
revisit previous pages in my notebook and write "nope, I was wrong about
that".  I'm happy to note, though, that I wasn't wrong about the way the
remake of "Ooh Child" would continually be used throughout the movie.
It's a good, inspirational song, even as a remake, but they almost wore
it to the ground.
Yet another surprise for me: the natural feel of the main characters,
and the charm and talent of the young actors playing them.  Melissa
Martinez (Maria), Anna Simpson (Joycelyn), and especially Kerry
Washington (Lanisha), had a strong film presence that is all the more
amazing considering that this was the first feature film for each of
them.  They were able to seemingly effortlessly blend humor with drama,
diminishing neither.  Washington, Martinez, and Simpson are definitely
worth looking for in the future; I just hope that Mainstream Hollywood
doesn't lock them into dead-end Welfare Mama/Crackhead "NYPD-Blue"-type
roles - but you'll notice I'm not holding my breath.
In any case, the lasting impact of OUR SONG is that it is an Everyman's
film, about the everyday life of young folks in a particular corner of
the world.  No Gritty plot points, no Patron Saint to come rescue the
poor hoodie rats, no big drama for your mama - and that's the point.
The circumstances might be different, the shading might change, the mood
music might be in a different key - but the groove of OUR SONG, whether
on the streets of New York, in the suburbs of Colorado, or on the street
where *you* live, might just be universal.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
I often get get email slamming me when I point out the ways that [SOME]
Black folk do [SOME] things differently from [SOME] White folk [What?
You didn't know?  Shocking, innit?]. Let's run this up the flag pole,
see who salutes.
The Jackie Robinson Steppers marching band is another illustration of
(sub)cultural differences.  I may have missed it in my rush to avoid All
Things Sports, but I live for the day that a funked-up marching band
like the fabulous Steppers, become the rule instead of the exception.
Pardon my lack of Racially-Neutral Words here, but I think a little
non-gladiator color might do American sports audiences some good.  And
no, pre-manufactured Boy Bands don't count.
[Ok, that address is bams@3blackchicks.com; just use the subject line
"HOW *DARE* YOU SAY THAT BLACK FOLK ARE DIFFERENT FROM WHITE FOLK! WE'RE
ALL THE SAME UNDER THE SKIN! KUUMBAYA, MY LORD!!!", so I'll know where
to file it].
Bammer's Bottom Line:
This summer brings an interesting, stark contrast of Life In The Hood
from the cameras of two directors: John Singleton's larger-than-life,
death-waiting-on-every-corner BABY BOY, and Jim McKay's slice-of-life
OUR SONG.  I find it fascinating that the three girls in "Song" could be
my baby cousins - and that I know no one even remotely resembling
Singleton's Boys.
OUR SONG (rating: greenlight):
Do something different this summer: check out a film that reminds you
that the little things in life count as much - if not more - as the Big
Dramatic Stuff.  Yes, even in the Hood.
