Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
46

Author
Christopher Null
     With his highly anticipated JURASSIC PARK sequel, Steven Spielberg
grubs through the filmmaking archives for every plot device, camera
trick, and cliched scene you can think of, and rolls it into one big
mess.  Only with dinosaurs.  Lots of 'em!
     With the low-angle, out-of-focus, washed-out photography, it looks
like Spielberg slapped this thing together on his weekends away from
DreamWorks.  The result is a film that's mostly painful to watch save
for a few big action sequences (admittedly impressive) and a finale that
other critics are certain to ruin for you.
     THE LOST WORLD (plot: more dinosaurs) follows the "Action! --
s-l-o-w exposition -- Action! -- s-l-o-w exposition" sequence of events,
an exercise which really bogs down the beginning of the film, and
combined with just plain goofy plot development (hunters on
motorcycles?  patching a baby T. Rex's broken leg?) robs the movie of
any real terror.  Not even Julianne Moore -- probably best known for
being my favorite actress -- can help much.  So to compensate, Spielberg
calls for many, many automobiles to be toppled over.
     Throw in your sequel-begging ending (don't do it!) and you've got
the makings of a franchise headed the way of Spielberg's first big
monster movie -- Jaws.  JURASSIC PARK 3-D, anyone?  I didn't think so.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Whereas Steven Spielberg's original JURASSIC PARK filled viewers
with awe over the grandeur of nature, his sequel, THE LOST WORLD:
JURASSIC PARK, achieves 134 minutes of tedium.  After a long and boring
introduction, the movie slips into its rhythm of attack, lull, attack.
The mean time between dinosaur attacks gets shorter and shorter until
we have one every other minute.  Those subscribing to the
more-is-always-better philosophy may enjoy Spielberg's overkill, but
most viewers will probably find the film more tiring than scary.
     The two films look different as well.  The original had gorgeous
cinematography by Dean Cundey.  The sequel, as filmed by Janusz
Kaminski, is strikingly ugly.  Every scene looks flat and dirty as if
the camera lens had gotten too much jungle grime on it.
     The strikingly bad camerawork is a shame since the best part of
the film, and the only reason to see it, are the impressive special
effects.  Special effects technology has advanced significantly in last
four years.  The result is even more realistic images than last time.
This can best be seen when the humans interact close-up with the
dinosaurs in the same frame.
     The story this time has John Hammond (Richard Attenborough) back,
but converted from capitalist to naturalist.  He summons his favorite
chaos theoretician, Dr. Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum), to tell him that
there is another island full of dinosaurs, and John wants Ian to go to
the island to observe the creatures with 3 others, one being Ian's
girlfriend, world famous paleontologist Dr. Sarah Harding (Julianne
Moore).  Moore brings nothing to her underwritten role, and Goldblum
plays a type of character he has done many times before, but he seems
to have lost interest.  He was stronger and funnier in last year's
blockbuster, INDEPENDENCE DAY.
     Joining the two are gadget expert Eddie Carr (Richard Schiff), who
almost has the word "expendable" written on his forehead, and
photographer Nick Van Owen (Vince Vaughn), who joined Greenpeace
because that's where the babes are.  Eighty percent female you see.
     Ian doesn't want to go, but John assures him, "Don't worry, I'm
not making the same mistakes again." Giving him a yeah-right look,
Malcolm retorts, "No, you're making all new ones."
     Since it seems that Ian's girlfriend has already gone alone to the
island, Ian reluctantly agrees to go anyway.  That she would go totally
alone to a island full of ferocious dinosaurs is the first of many
ridiculous parts of David Koepp's script, based on the book by Michael
Crichton.  I'll discuss more of these problems later.
     Ian now has an African-American daughter, which I thought reeked
of tokenism given the otherwise all-white leads, named Kelly Curtis
(Vanessa Lee Chester).  As soon as you see her, you know she will
become a stowaway and will be in danger many times.
     Soon after they get to the island, another group arrives.  Pete
Postlethwaite (IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER), in the only memorable
performance of the movie, plays big game hunter Roland Tembo.
Postlethwaite steals every scene he is in.  Playing it dead serious and
always angry, he makes the show come alive when he is present.  "Saddle
up," he barks out to the scores of people around him.  "Let's get this
moveable feast underway."
     Roland is accompanied by a greedy businessman named Peter Ludlow,
played blandly and unconvincingly by Arliss Howard.  Ludlow wants to
build a Jurassic Park in San Diego near Sea World and the San Diego
Zoo.  Profits should be incredible near the Southern California
population masses.
     As realistic as the dinosaurs are, the attacks come so often that
I never found them scary.  The single truly frightening scene has Sarah
laying on a piece of plate glass hung over a canyon.  You can hear it
rapidly breaking, and if she moves, it will shatter, plummeting her a
thousand feet below to certain death.  The choreography of this, and
only this, scene is worthy of a Hitchcock.
     Now, about the film's absurd aspects.  Let me give just a few.
Would you take an injured T-Rex baby back to your trailer knowing full
well that his parents will smell his scent and hear his cries?  If you
were camping out among carnivorous dinosaurs, would you stay at the
edge of the camp listening to loud music on your headphones, oblivious
to the sounds of attacking dinos?  Would you wander off from the others
just to go to the bathroom?  Would you sleep with a light on in your
tent if you knew that hungry T-Rexs are roaming nearby?
     And in my favorite unbelievable part, how does a T-Rex get out of
the locked cargo hold of a ship at sea, eat everyone on deck and then
lock himself back in?
     At some point in this story you will crack.  The sum total of its
stupidity will overwhelm you, and you will burst out in laughter.  For
me the moment came when a kid looks outside his bedroom window to see a
ferocious T-Rex who has eaten his dog and still has the dog house
hanging from a chain with the other end attached to the dog in his
mouth.  Is the kid scared?  Not too much.  He gets his flash camera and
takes a picture.  Soon his family will be dinner.
     "Hang on," Ian says early in the film.  "This is going to be bad."
How prophetic.
     THE LOST WORLD: JURASSIC PARK runs an incredibly long 2:14.  It is
rated PG-13 for dinosaur violence with people eaten alive and body
parts strewn everywhere.  The movie is fine for teenagers, but kids
under 13 will need strong stomachs.  As a rule of thumb, I'd say if
they can handle JURASSIC PARK with no problems, they would be okay for
the sequel, but if the original troubles them at all, pass on its
sequel.  I cannot recommend this mess and give it just barely ** for
the great special effects and for Postlethwaite's performance.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore and Pete Posthewilate 
A Universal Picture
So we finally get the long anticipated sequel to Jurrasic
Park. And it's better than the orinigal. It's far more
suspenseful, darker and scarier than the first one, and also
has some very good set pieces. But, of course, the plot and
writing is not really up to par. But the directing is
excellent.
The film starts with a horrifying incident with a young girl,
and then Sir Richard Attenbourough saying that there is a
second island. Goldblum and his girlfriend, plus another
guy and a photgrapher go over, to see how it's going.
Goldblums daughter smuggles onto the boat which is
taking them, so she ends up there aswell. 
At the island, after the oohing and aahing at the dinosaurs,
they get down to buisness. But then, evil agents from
InGen come to the island, led by Pete, who want to
capture the dinosaurs and take them back to a theme park
in San Diego (which Hammond started but never finished)
So Goldblum and Co fight to save the dinos. 
There are some incredible set pieces in the film. One,
involving a trailer hanging over a cliff, is way too long, but
is directed so well by Speilberg, that you have no choice
but to enjoy it. Also, the Raptor scene in the long grass is a
excellent piece of filmaking. To be honest, many of the
scenes are better than the ones in Jurrasic Park. Sure, the
plot has wholes big enough for a T-Rex to walk through,
but it IS great fun (much like Batman and Robin) If you
liked the original, you're going to love this. Highly
recommended 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     THE LOST WORLD made me sweat, which may be the highest compliment
that I can pay to what's really just a jokey, at-times-intentionally
hokey monster movie.  For better or worse, the Master (again along with
writer David Koepp, loosely adapting from Michael Crichton's best-
selling screenplay, er, novel) has simply cut and pasted the same scare-
tactics from the first film:  thud scream chomp run repeat.  Only, this
time, there's more.  More mechanical dinos.  More high-tech toys to
smash.  More humans getting gobbled, from the four-person research team
sent to Site B (a *second* island, where the creatures have been running
amok for four years) to the band of big-game hunters, who are also on
hand.  Same-o same-o, really, but with a handful of changes and one up-
roarious final sequence, set on the streets of... well, now, that would
be telling!
     The most noticeable change in Steven Spielberg's sequel is that
it's darker than the original, both literally (photography) and
figuratively (tone).  There's more death, though most of the munching
occurs off-screen.  (What you *do* see, you won't forget.  Such as, heh,
two Tyrannosaurii playing "wishbone.") And there's more humor.  Jeff
Goldblum, still wearing black leather in the tropics, gets off a good
number of sarcastic quips and exasperated asides.  ("She can't not
touch," he exclaims when his paleontologist girlfriend pets a baby
stegosaurus.) The other human actors (Julian Moore as said girlfriend,
Pete Postlethwaite as the Great White Hunter, etc.) are less funny and
largely less interesting.  Those stars with the *least* personality,
however, are the dinos.  Rex Galore exhibits nothing in the way of wit,
intelligence, or good manners, and, frankly, if they didn't keep killing
people and smashing stuff, this would be one boring amusing ride.  Which
it isn't, unless you're expecting something other than a give-them-what-
they-say-they-want sequel.
     My dinosaur bones of contention are few and far between.  The over-
lighting at the beginning is a bit distracting.  As are most of Spiel-
berg's trademark reaction shots.  (I would submit that *any* shot that
gets in-between the good stuff and more good stuff is counter-productive
to a creature-feature's best intentions.) So, no, the sequel to the
highest grossing film of all time isn't exactly the leanest thing on
either two or four legs.  Nor is it entirely mean.  Despite the darker,
harder edge-- for a pleasant change, a Disaster Movie Dog *doesn't* make
it out alive-- THE LOST WORLD is very much a corporate-sponsored family
film.  And while it does push the "PG-13" rating to new limits, this
WORLD is still *way* too nice.  No mass death.  No chunks of gore.  No
ordnance-induced animal control.  By, hey, it may make you sweat!

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997)
Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Pete Postlethwaite, Arliss Howard, Richard 
Attenborough, Vince Vaughn, Vanessa Lee Chester. Directed by Steven 
Spielberg.
Rated PG-13, *** stars (out of *****). 
Remember when JURASSIC PARK first came out? Most critics panned the movie,
 stating that while the dinosaurs were spectacular, the film itself was 
flimsy stuff, sorely lacking in plot and characterization. Of course, 
they failed to realize that we weren't particularly concerned with plot 
or characterization. We just wanted to see a movie overflowing with big-
ass, realistic-looking, living, breathing dinosaurs. JURASSIC PARK 
delivered the dinosaurs and we flocked to the theaters, making it the 
largest grossing film of all time. 
Well, it's four years later and the inevitable sequel, THE LOST WORLD: 
JURASSIC PARK, has arrived. So what are we looking for this time? Most of 
the people I spoke with said the same thing. More big-ass dinosaurs and 
non-stop action. Director Steven Spielberg, no dummy when it comes to 
anticipating audience expectations, has crafted a film that gives us 
relentless action and scores of incredibly realistic dinosaurs. While the 
film suffers from the been-there, done-that syndrome, and has some major 
structural problems, as far as sequels go, THE LOST WORLD is one of the 
better ones.
Here's the premise. John Hammond (Richard Attenborough) really had two 
dinosaur islands. The one we saw in the original, and a second, where the 
dinosaurs were actually bred, and now live in uncontrolled ecological 
balance. Two groups of humans go to the island. The good ones, 
reluctantly led by Dr. Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum,) merely want to study 
the creatures. The bad ones want to hunt the dinosaurs for a new Jurassic 
Park, ready to open in San Diego. In short order, of course, all hell 
breaks loose and everyone scrambles madly about, trying to avoid becoming 
Dinosaur Chow.
THE LOST WORLD wastes no time getting to the action. Following the 
obligatory teaser and ten minutes of squabbling between Goldblum and 
Attenborough, the film whips out the lizards in grand fashion. The 
dinosaurs look significantly better than in the original; so good, in 
fact, that it's easy to imagine that the filmmakers somehow got their 
hands on real dinosaurs. Come to think of it, we've been reading news 
stories about real-life cloning successes for months now. Steven 
Spielberg is an incredibly rich man. Do you suppose that maybe he used 
his financial resources to…oh, never mind. I'm getting so cute here that 
I'm actually annoying myself. Time to get back to business.
The thrills come fast and furious in THE LOST WORLD. Early in the film 
there is a spectacular Tyrannosaurus Rex attack, leading to an extended, 
extremely intense scene that leaves Dr. Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore) 
dangling over a huge cliff, separated from the rocky surf hundreds of 
feet below only by a single pane of glass that splinters further and 
further in torturous fashion. The scene is totally gripping and one of 
the best set pieces in the film. 
As for the acting, Jeff Goldblum, promoted from secondary comic relief 
figure in the first film to leading man, handles his role well, leaping 
about in heroic fashion while tossing off caustic one-liners (when 
Attenborough assures Goldblum that he has learned from his mistakes, 
Goldblum spits back "Yeah, now you're making all new mistakes.") Vince 
Vaughn, the breakout performer from last years wonderful comedy SWINGERS, 
creates a distinct, compelling presence as Nick Van Owen, an 
environmental activist working for the good guys. Vanessa Lee Chester has 
some nice moments as Kelly, Goldblum's daughter who joins the expedition 
as a stowaway. The rest of the cast are generic event-movie archetypes, 
chewing scenery until the dinosaurs chew them. 
That's one of the problems with THE LOST WORLD. In JURASSIC PARK there 
were relatively few characters, allowing the audience a chance to get to 
know them and to care about their fates. THE LOST WORLD has so many 
people swarming over the island that it's hard to keep track of who's who,
 let alone become emotionally involved with them. When one character gets 
pulling in half by two dinosaurs, the audience reaction is "Cool!", which 
says something very good about the special effects and something very bad 
about the screenplay. 
The biggest problem with THE LOST WORLD is it's climax. A Tyrannosaurus 
Rex gets loose in San Diego and goes on a rampage. Things begin well, as 
the T-Rex roams through dark suburban backyards. Things get better as the 
monster goes berserk in the city streets, shredding a gas station and 
several vehicles. And then, just when you're ready for the big final 
confrontation between the raging beast and humankind, everything gets 
resolved, way too quickly and in a very anticlimactic way. For an action-
packed film, the climax simply doesn't have enough action.
Regardless of its flaws, THE LOST WORLD fares better than most sequels. 
Its fast pace helps to minimize the sense of deja vu, and the dinosaurs 
are absolutely superb. I was frustrated with JURASSIC PARK for not 
showing any pterodactyls. In one of THE LOST WORLD's best shots, several 
of the flying reptiles soar through the sky. One lands close to the 
camera and slowly stretches out until its wings are fully extended, with 
sunlight glinting through the membranes. At that moment I realized that 
for hard core dinosaur-watchers, THE LOST WORLD is as good as it gets.   

Author
Jonathan Pringle
        It is now the night after I have seen the movie, and my opinion has
changed slightly.  Right after the showing, I was somewhat
disappointed.  I went in hoping for a four star movie, but came out and
gave it a 2 1/2 star rating.  I thought that even that was generous. 
Maybe it's because I had been anticipating this film for so long that
when I actually saw it, It didn't mean anything to me.
        My first complaints were with John William's almost non-existent
score.  Jurassic Park had much better music, especially the first
brachiosaur scene.  The second complaint would have to be the character
of Kelly.  She was almost useless (except for an incredibly fake
gymnastic scene that really should have been taken out).  To clear up
the
confusion, I found out that Kelly was an adopted child.  Her family had
just left her behind, and Dr. Malcolm took her in.
        Thirdly, the role of Nick Van Owen was utterly useless.  His character
(and many of the other's were very undeveloped).  But with special
effects that were this believable, WHO CARES about the plot?
        The sudden entrance of the hunters was also badly introduced.  Their
entire entrance happened in less than 3 minutes.  Laslty, I was very
disappointed that Laura Dern wasn't around for this one.  She, in my
opinion, was the best actor from the first Jurassic Park.  It was nice
to see Jeff Goldblum and Richard Attenborough return.  Also, It was
wierd seeing how much older Lex and Tim looked in the short scene they
had.
        Now for the good stuff.  Tons of realistic dinosaurs.  Especially the
baby t-rex and the huge stegosaurs.  The San Diego scene was also
incredible.  The best scene, though, had to be the trailer scene and the
slowly cracking glass.  I was on the edge of my seat for that part.
        The violence is much darker and more obvious in this movie, but that's
what makes it better.  We don't want a kids movie here.  It definitely
stretches the PG-13 rating to the max.  Oh yeah and the sound effects
were incredible! They did a great job with however they got the sounds.
        Now that It's the morning after I have seen the movie, my opinion has
changed.  I would change my 2 1/2 stars to 3 stars for this time.  I
don't know if I'll see it again.  I don't think I could sit through the
boring first 1/2 hour again.  Oh well, congrats Mr. Spielberg, you did
it again.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Universal)
Starring:  Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Pete Postlethwaite, Arliss
Howard, Vanessa Lee Chester, Vince Vaughn.
Screenplay:  David Koepp, based on the novel by Michael Crichton.
Producers:  Gerald R. Molen and Colin Wilson.
Director:  Steven Spielberg.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, violence)
Running Time:  127 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Four years ago, a friend of mine explained very succinctly the reason
he was looking forward to Steven Spielberg's JURASSIC PARK:  "Big
mechanical lizards."  Sure, the lizards in question were not entirely
mechanical, but I got the point.  He wanted to see dinosaurs live and
breathe on the big screen, as did millions of other movie-goers around the
world.  Four years and over a billion dollars in worldwide grosses later,
everyone has seen dinosaurs live and breathe on the big screen, which begs
one major question when considering a sequel:  now what?
     As it turns out, the "now what" is more:  more different kinds of
dinosaurs, more scenes of the dinosaurs attacking, more people around to
suffer creatively agonizing deaths.  It also turns out to be, more or
less, more of the same.  THE LOST WORLD offers all the shallow
characterization and pointless plotting of JURASSIC PARK without the sense
of discovery.  Only in the hands of Steven Spielberg could that recipe add
up to something moderately diverting instead of a compete disaster.
     THE LOST WORLD is based on (so loosely as to re-define "based on" as
"with the same title as") Michael Crichton's sequel novel, which
introduced us to a second island where dinosaurs were being genetically
engineered.  Unlike Jurassic Park's Isla Nublar, however, Isla Sorna has
been allowed to develop as a complete ecosystem, with dinosaurs roaming
free of fences or human interference.  Unfortunately, InGen Technologies
is in some financial trouble, inspiring new boss Peter Ludlow (Arliss
Howard) to consider exploiting a major corporate resource.  Enter John
Hammond (Richard Attenborough), now convinced of the error of his ways and
determined to prevent further jurassicatastrophies.  He recruits a team of
researchers to collect evidence for leaving the dinosaurs alone, a team
headed by a reluctant Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum).  Once on the island,
Malcolm and his crew discover that Ludlow has brought his own team, and
that they are on a mission guaranteed to create more death and
destruction.
     In many ways, THE LOST WORLD is actually an improvement over JURASSIC
PARK, if for no other reason than that it is more honest.  Spielberg takes
exactly two minutes to show us the first dinosaur in THE LOST WORLD,
clearly aware that there's no point in creating build-up any longer.  He
also takes a note from a clever line in David Koepp's script given to
Malcolm:  "Yeah, ooh ahh...that's always how it starts.  Then later comes
the running and screaming."  JURASSIC PARK was almost obliged to provide 
the wide-eyed wonder of the completely new; THE LOST WORLD, appropriately,
delivers a much higher ratio of "running and screaming" to "ooh ahh."  It
also doesn't have Laura Dern as a dumber-than-Triceratops-dung
paleobotanist, giggling like a schoolgirl over Malcolm's description of
chaos theory, or Ariana Richards shrieking about Unix systems.
     What THE LOST WORLD _does_ have is a generous helping of scenes and
characters which are awfully familiar.  Pete Postlethwaite plays this
year's version of the Great White Hunter while Arliss Howard plays this
year's version of the Corporate Scum; the gallimimus stampede of JP
becomes LOST WORLD'S parasauralophus stampede.  Though Ariana Richards and
Joseph Mazzello appear only in cameos back on the mainland, there is still
a youngster to be terrorized (Malcolm's daughter Kelly, played by Vanessa
Lee Chester). Even the sequence of attacks feels derivative:  T. rex
attacks a vehicle and tries to push it over a cliff, T. rex chases people,
people trek toward a distant goal, velociraptors take their turn.
JURASSIC PARK was more enjoyable than it should have been because we had
never seen this stuff before.  LOST WORLD is the same stuff, just in
greater quantities.
     Those greater quantities are probably going to satisfy movie-goers
who like their action fast and furious, with minimal interruption for
silly little things like character development.  No one will argue that
that THE LOST WORLD is much more than a string of set pieces; there is
also little question that a few of those set pieces are directed with that
indescribable Spielberg something.  The first T. rex attack is brilliant,
placing Julianne Moore hundreds of feet above the crashing surf, separated
from certain death by nothing more than a pane of glass gradually
dissolving into spiderweb cracks.  When Spielberg is "on," the results can
be dizzying, and he's "on" just often enough to give THE LOST WORLD a
few satisfying sparks.  The rest of the time, he's on auto-pilot.  Like
us, he's been there and done that.
     I believe I have seen JURASSIC PARK four times since its initial
release, and I have enjoyed it less each time.  If I had seen THE LOST
WORLD for the first time in 1993 -- if the order of the two films had been
reversed -- I suspect I would have found it positively thrilling.  In
1997, it's just like watching JURASSIC PARK for the fifth time, when it's
hard to get worked up over a film which has little going for it besides
big mechanical lizards.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Anyone who has seen the original JURASSIC PARK will surely want to see
the sequel.  As with the first, it is filled with dinosaurs, both big
and little, more menacing than I recall in the one that preceded this.
For this reason, it is incumbent upon me to suggest that parents of
children under 9-years-old and those of sensitive 10-year-olds take
their offspring to other movies.    It is a bit frightening to see a
couple of tyrannosaurs  engaged in pulling apart a human they have
captured, or to see hundreds of little dinosaurs about the size of
small geese, poke out the eyes of humans, chew at their lips and
cheeks.   It is a kind of THE BIRDS except with dinosaurs.
Then, too, the photography. like much of the story, is dark.  Hardly
any daylight, sunlight, penetrates the huge trees and brush of the
dense forest.   This, when it is in the whole movie, is in itself
depressing.  Nevertheless, the special effects are, as expected,
spectacular though not more so than in the original.  For one thing,
the dinosaurs do not come across as shocking, surprising, as when
first seen in JURASSIC PARK.  There really is nothing here to compare
with our first view in the 1993 version of the dinosaur lifting its
head above the trees in a graceful movement that astonished and
delighted us.    While it is true that THE LOST WORLD utilizes new
computer technology to make the animals move more gracefully, the
improvement was not noticeable.   The original Jurassic Park was
spectacularly wonderful with  Live Action Dinosaurs' Stan Winston in
charge both then and now.
As for the story:  You will recall that John Hammond had discovered
that embedded in amber were bits of DNA.  He was able to utilize the
DNA to grow full- sized prehistoric animals.  It was his dream to have
an amusement park on an island off Costa Rica where visitors could
come to view the dinosaurs and other beasts.  The park was going to be
foolproof safe. Dr. Ian Malcolm, a brilliant mathematician, said there
was no such thing as 100% safe.  As predicted, disaster struck and
everyone fled the island and all the prehistoric animals died . . . or
so everyone thought.
Four years have elapsed since John Hammond's dream came to a disastrous
end. Just when it was believed that the dinosaurs and other prehistoric
animals had all died, it now appears that there were some survivors
living on the nearby island of Isla Sorna where they were free of human
interference   Having learned his lesson that one must not tamper with
nature, Hammond (in this version played by Richard Attenborough) wants
sightseers kept away and the island policed so the prehistoric animals
can live in  peaceful surroundings. To this end, he talks
mathematician Ian  Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum) into overseeing that his
wishes come true.  Things do not quite work out that way.
Others hired by Hammond for chronicling of the island's inhabitants are
paleontologist  Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore),  maker of video
documentaries (Vince Vaughn) and a field equipment specialist (Richard
Schiff) to enable the three to carry on their mission.
The film's villain is Hammond's money-hungry nephew, Peter Ludlow
(Arliiss Howard), who takes control of the company and sets out to
breed the creatures, bring them to the island and set it up as another
Park. Ludlow hires an adventurer, Roland Tembo (Pete Postlethwaite) to
be in charge on the island.
Also in the cast is young Kelly, (Vanessa Lee Chester) who stowed away
on the ship going to the island where deadly dinosaurs roam.   Little
did Kelly know what she was going to experience.
If you loved JURASSIC PARK, as almost everyone apparently did, and you
want more of the same, THE LOST WORLD  will again turn you on.
Based on  Michael Crichton's novel, THE LOST WORLD.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Steven Spielberg
Writer: David Koepp (kinda based on the novel by Michael Crichton)
Starring: Jeff Goldblum, Jullianne Moore, Pete Postlethwaite, Vince
Vaughn, Arliss Howard, Richard Schiff, Peter Stormare, Vanessa Lee
Carter, Richard Attenborough, Ariana Richards, Joseph Mazello
I saw "The Lost World," the sequel to "Jurassic Park," for a buck
twenty-five at my college's cheap movie theater, since I wouldn't pay a
good five bucks to see it in a regular one when the rest of the world
was seeing it.  Since I had passed a good environment up for crap
quality, a pan-and-scan format, and sound that was muffled and blaring,
as well as the question of whether or not the whole screen would even be
in focus, you can tell I had low expectations.
Yeah, I really liked "Jurassic Park."  It was breathtaking, scary, and
just good old fun.  But, well, you know that good sequels are about as
plentiful as good college food (so I have no school spirit...).  With
the rare exceptions ("Empire Strikes Back," "The Godfather Part II,"
"T2," "Addams Family Values" - that was about it), the sequel is pretty
much just a gimmick to make even more money on a gimmick that worked
once.   I mean, was it just me, or was "Home Alone 2" just "Home Alone,"
just in a different locale?
No, "The Lost World" is not nearly as good as the first one.  But did it
thrill me?  Oh yeah.
Many people criticize this film, and with good reason, but let's face
it: Steven Spielberg knew there wasn't much he could do with this, but
just wanted to make a fun movie, and toss in some little guilty pleasure
stuff he couldn't work into the original because he was trying to make a
little message.  So, while the first one was majestic, and somewhat
satirical in respects to cloning (though not a masterpiece or anything),
this one is darker, more violent and gorey, and even features one and a
half more T-Rex's.  Why one and a half?  Because one of them is only a
baby.
Of course, when you're making a film like this, where you want suspense
scene after suspense scene, you're bound to run into some little
problems.  For one, he never really builds up any of the characters,
with the exception of the only person from the original to have a major
part - Dr. Ian Malcom (Jeff Goldblum) - but that's because he was IN the
first one.  Also, the script is only marginally funny, with most of the
cool lines going to Ian (duh), while it does what most big
budget/let's-give-the-audience-what-they-want-and-deserve flicks do: use
characters' idosyncrasies as cheap plot devices (i.e. a characters
sadism towards the smallest dinosaurs on screen, another characters' gum
chewing, etc, etc, etc).  And there are more plot holes than you can
shake a stick at.
The plot is anti-climactically cheesy and flat: there was ANOTHER
island, where they bred hte dinosaurs or something, and the "capitalist
turned humanist" John Hammond (Richard Attenborough, proving again that
he is a better actor than a director) asks Ian to go back to the
dinosaurs and make sure they're okay.  Obviously he wouldn't want to go
back there, but we have an incredibly cheap plot device where his
girlfriend (Jullianne Moore) is already there.  So off to the other
island for some more dinosaur adventures.
Unlike the first one which pitted a couple characters together with one
goal - getting off the island in one group - we have two groups.  One
the good side are Ian, his girlfriend, his stowaway daughter (Vanessa
Lee Carter, who's mallato-ness caused a bit of a stir in the audience),
a buff photographer ("Swingers"' Vince Vaughn), and Mr. First-Death
(Richard Schiff, who was a scene-stealer in "City Hall").
And on the bad side are the company stereotypes, and their employees. 
We have the nephew of Hammond (Arliss Howard, who NEVER looks the same
in any of his movies), the big hunter chief guy (Pete Postlethwaite), a
sadistic hunter (Peter Stormare, lukewarm off of "Fargo," although I
think he rocks), and a couple of other guys (read: dino food).  They are
united about halfway through the film, following one of the big suspense
scenes.
After the traditional "Jurassic Park" long opening (although not nearly
as awesome as the beginning of the first one, since you were being kind
of educated and awed), we get to the point of the film: to scare the
shit out of you with improbable but highly skilled suspense scenes. 
Yes, the truck-hanging-over-the-cliff sequence is totally unbelievable
for nearly every second, but when you're watching, you're too freaked
out to even notice.  Spielberg, as it turns out, is a pretty good
director, and even if he lets plot holes like "why did Ian not make sure
his daughter was on a train or something before leaving" fly out into
the open, he knows exactly how to frighten us.  There were times, like
in the original, when I jumped, and even when I actually let out a
little Ted-like scream.
The ending, which is the most improbable of them all (the T-Rex is let
loose in the streets of San Diego), is actually done well.  It's all
tongue-in-cheek, with lots of inside jokes (a "Burger King" sign on a
ravaged bus - get it?), as well as blatantly funny ones (the video store
has signs for Robin Williams in "Jack and the Beanstalk" and Ah-nold
Schwarzennegger in "King Lear"), and even a couple parodies tossed in
for good measure (three japs running in terror from the Rex).  The
ending is not as satisfying as the original, mainly because we've been
scared for no good reason.
So is that a bad thing?  Not really.  I mean, yeah, we were scared in
the original, AND there was a reason for it.  But I personally see no
real reason why being scared for the sake of being scared is a bad
thing, other than that means you have to watch this film numerous times
intermittently.  No, the cloning-is-bad message is no longer really
there, but who cares?  It's a sequel.
The cast is amazing, yet there aren't any real acting stand-outs, let
alone Postlethwaite (big shock).  Goldblum isn't nearly as entertaining
as he was in the first one, but has a couple good lines here and there,
and is nicely done by good old Jeff (who should really start demanding a
percentage of the profit of his movies).  Moore, who can shift smoothly
between big budget film and indie, is okay.  The big sadness here, other
than Storemare having such a small and crappy part, is Vince Vaughn. 
After demonstrating exactly what a star-making performance really is in
"Swingers," he gets an under-written role that merely requires him to
look and act cool.  I mean, yeah, he rocks, but if you're gonna have
raptors jumping around and sneaking up on people in 4-foot-high grass,
you might as well toss in a scene where he jumps on top of a building
with a big gun and starts shooting those bastards.  It's only fair.
And as for the whole unlike-the-book spiel, I'll have you know that the
script and the book are two different entities.  They were written at
the same time to do well in their specific mediums.  I mean, I read the
book a long time ago, but I think Ian actually DIED in the first book,
but he's alive here, and starring.  So stop bitching, you Chricton-ites!
The darker tone, and the vicious-ness is a welcome surprise to the film,
causing it to become more fun than the original, in cases.  Sure, it had
plot hole after plot hole, stupidity after stupidity, and a plot weaker
than an Ethiopian (a joke, okay, a joke), but it wasn't aiming for
brilliance.  This was made to make money and entertain.  And I think it
achieved both of those, although not in any kind of spades.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Kong
There are some movies that you go to see for the plot and character 
development.  Then there are the movies that you go to see for the fun factor 
and the special effects.  The Lost World is in the latter category.
After seeing the first movie, Jurassic Park, I did not expect too much walking 
into the theatre.  I was there to see dinosaurs.  In The Lost World we find 
out that there is a Site B from the first movie.  Hammond used Site B, located 
about 80 miles away from the original island, to breed and raise dinosaurs for 
the main Jurassic Park island.  We find out that after the first island was 
dismantled and all the dinosaurs killed, no one knew about the second island.  
The dinosaurs thrived there and continued to live without human interruption.  
That is until a rich family sails to the island.  A dinosaur attacks the 
daughter of the family and this sets off the story.  InGen has now been taken 
over by Hammond's nephew.  Hammond is still alive and wants to leave the 
island alone and let the dinosaurs live there.  Hammond's nephew has other 
ideas.  Hammond calls four people to go and document the dinosaurs on the 
island in their natural habitat before his nephew and InGen get there.  Ian 
Malcolm is forced into going to the island because Hammond has sent his 
girlfriend there.  Ian's daughter hitches a ride and shows up on the island 
too.  It isn't long until InGen shows up.  They, under the command of 
Hammond's nephew, are there to round up dinosaurs for the Jurassic Park in San 
Diego.  After this point, there story stops and the action begins.
The dinosaurs this time around have more screen time.  And they look better 
than ever.  The scenes in which the dinosaurs interact with humans are so 
amazing, that it would leave most people wondering how they did that.  One 
example of this would be a scene in the beginning where the InGen team is 
rounding up dinosaurs.  Humans are tying up dinosaurs.  If you are going to 
see this film for the dinosaurs, you will not be disappointed.
The actual look of the film is darker and grittier than the first.  The first 
was filled with bright colors and sunlight.  The costumes were as if they came 
out of a comic book.  This time around though, most of the action takes place 
at night.  The film itself looks grainier.  There is an overall more serious 
feel to the film.
The one that I have to mention is the sound.  Jurassic Park launched DTS, 
Digital Theatre Sound.  The Lost World also uses DTS, and the end result is 
wonderful.  Sounds literally circle the theatre.  If you have the chance be 
sure to see The Lost World in a DTS equipped theatre.
The bottom line for The Lost World is to go into the theatre not expecting too 
much in the plot, character, and story department.  Go to see The Lost World 
for the fun factor and special effects.  Unlike last summer's special effects 
driven Independence Day, Spielberg wastes no time in between action sequences 
and special effects sequences.  The movie is fast moving and does not stop 
once everyone reaches the island.  As for taking the kids to see The Lost 
World, this movie is very intense, and I would not recommend it for younger 
children.

Author
Seth Bookey
  Seen with Byron for $3 on 21 August 1997 at the Cineplex Odeon Worldwide
   Something has survived, and it still stinks.
   A review of this movie would be pretty much similar to those for the
   first (Jurassic Park), except that this is even worse. To quote Bart
   Simpson, "it's crappy crap crap crap."
   Four years after the Lost World theme park was destroyed by
   genetically revived dinosaurs running amok, ruining a big investment,
   and killing a few people, it turns out "something has survived."
   Actually, it turns out dinosaurs were also bred on nearby on a nearby,
   also off Costa Rica. Sort of the alpha version of the Jurassic Park,
   which was destroyed many many opening weekends ago. The movie opens
   briskly by putting a little girl in jeopardy and then cuts away
   without showing what has happened to her. A bad sign.
   The principal character now is Dr. Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum), who
   winds up back on the island when John Hammond (Richard Attenborough)
   convinces Ian's girlfriend Dr. Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore) to
   document the dinosaurs in actions. She is a paleontologist on the go.
   Along with two other photographers, they are going to show what the
   island is like without man's interference. It turns out the bad folks
   at Ingen want to resurrect the theme park idea, where tourists would
   happily pay to see T-Rex--in San Diego.
   When the corporate bad guys show up, the movie takes the first of many
   tragic turns into laughability. It's a labyrinth of conflicting
   incohesive theme. The environmentalists versus the evil corporate
   slant. There are lots of ridiculous plots in here: Malcolm returning
   to do relay races with dinosaurs, now with stowaway black daughter in
   tow (putting a child at risk for "dramatic effect" is a longstanding
   cinema faux pas); Sarah's insisting on setting the broken leg of a
   baby T-Rex, not believing its Ma and Pa will hunt it down and actually
   be dangerous (this is when Byron exclaimed that she should be the
   first to get eaten); a T-Rex is holed up in the boat's cargo bay, so
   how does it kill people at the helm (leaving just a hand on the wheel)
   without any destruction on the ship?
   A slew of stereotypes ensue as well. The bad guys invariably have
   British accents, like Pete Postlewaite as Roland Tembo, whose dream is
   to hunt a buck T-Rex. Time for a new dream, bub. There's the wide-eyed
   black man running from the T-Rex in San Diego that evokes the
   "manservant" from jungle movies yelling "da Mummy is on da loose!"
   There's the mambo-listening hispanic inexplicably named "Carter."
   There are the panicky Asian tourists, with cameras, fleeing the T-Rex.
   I guess they only expect Godzilla in Tokyo.
   It's insulting to expect us to suspend all disbelife and care too. If
   you want to create a tense thriller with great special effects and
   lifelike dinosaurs, do that, but don't throw machismo, blended
   families and their traumas, conservation politics, and impossible
   feats of agility at us in a noisy mishmash. If grown men are plucked
   out of cars and torn asunder, can we really believe a 12-year-old girl
   can conquer an overgrown lizard with her gymnastics routine?
   The only worthwhile portion of the movie is the overlong scene where
   Sarah's life is literally hinging on the shattering of a windowpane.
   Of course it steals from other masters, but it works, until it goes on
   far longer than it should.
   The Lost World represents two hours plus that I can never reclaim,
   with an idiotic unendurable moralizing finale. Luckily, with Wondee
   Siam around the corner, we able to bolt the theatre and have something
   to look forward to.
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Andrew Hicks
        THE LOST WORLD is one of those rare movies we all go to 
see because we think we have to. There are one or two of these every 
year, and each one seems a bigger `event' than the last one. These 
movies aren't really any better than most of the other ones we line 
up to see, but for these – and God knows why – we'll stand in line 
twice as long and take cramped seats in crowded theaters. THE 
LOST WORLD is the only sequel to an event movie that's been a 
bigger event than the original. And, as usual, none of us know why.
        This is Steven Spielberg's first film since Schindler's List. 
>From looking at it, he must have taken a nice three-year vacation, 
because he certainly wasn't throwing all that work into THE LOST 
WORLD. By now, Spielberg and the audience know how these 
action sequels go. The returning characters know they're dooming 
themselves to more near-death experiences for no good reason, but 
they go anyway. Kind of like all of us lining up to see the movies 
themselves.
        Lost in the LOST WORLD casting this time around are Sam 
Neill, Laura Dern and Samuel L. Jackson. The only ones to return 
are Jeff Goldblum, Richard Attenborough and those two bratty kids. 
Luckily, the last three are limited to a cameo appearances at the 
beginning and end. Attenborough's purpose in the sequel is the 
same – he has to be the idiot who sends humans into the dinosaurs' 
natural environment. This time, he's converted `from capitalist to 
naturalist,' interested only in the welfare of the surviving dinosaurs.
        The original JURASSIC PARK island has been destroyed, 
but naturally there is a `Site B' island not mentioned in the first 
movie. Lots and lots of computer-generated dinosaurs, and 
Attenborough wants to send a team of experts in there to endorse the 
habitat, or else his board of directors will wrestle control away from 
him. You see, things are already going wrong on the hidden island. 
A little girl was attacked by a group of tiny dinosaurs. She lived, of 
course. Little girls don't die in these movies.
        He wants Goldblum to be one of the four to go onto the 
island, but of course Goldblum resists, remembering the T-Rex 
attack the last time he listened to Attenborough. I was wondering 
just how stupid he'd have to be to agree to set foot on another 
dino-infested island, when a convenient plot device was thrown in. 
Goldblum's paleontologist girlfriend (Julianne Moore) is already on 
the island, jumping at the chance to study real live extinct dinosaurs. 
So he has to go protect her personally.
        Goldblum heads to the island in a camouflage Mercedes 
with a photographer and some other guy. It's a bad sign that we 
have no idea about this third guy – bad for him, anyway. It means he 
becomes dino-meat before the end of the first hour. There's also a 
stowaway; Goldblum's young daughter hides in the equipment 
trailer, eager for a chance to bond with Dad. God knows there's no 
better way to get close to your parents than running from 
velociraptors together.
        And, in another Michael Crichton plot twist left over from 
TWISTER, there's a rival team of experts in the picture, but these 
guys aren't good because they're only interesting in harnessing the 
dinosaurs for physical profit. That means lots of victims for the 
dinosaurs. One of them, heaven forbid, has come for the sole 
purpose of killing a Tyrannosaurus. It's the ultimate macho hunting 
expedition for him and, sure, this is pathetic, but are we really 
supposed to hate him for capturing a baby T-Rex and using it as bait 
for the adult? I mean, come on, Tyrannosaurs aren't choir boys; 
they're deadly killers. They ate that lawyer in the first movie.
        Things move pretty slowly for the first hour or so, like the 
original JURASSIC PARK, although the slow parts of the first film 
were interesting because they explained the processes for bringing 
dinosaurs back to life. It was educational; I was able to resurrect a 
stegosaurus in my backyard the very next week. This time we have a 
little bickering between Goldblum and Moore and Goldblum and the 
daughter.
        It's bad filler, and the action scenes aren't a whole lot 
better. There's a tired 20-minute scene with two T-Rexes trying to 
push the trailer (with Goldblum, Moore and the photographer 
inside) over a cliff. In grand action flick tradition, the trailer hangs 
precariously for a few minutes while the three of them almost fall 
out of it, then the three hang from a rope for a few minutes and 
almost fall from that. A whole eighth of the movie is wasted on this 
one tired sequence.
        THE LOST WORLD can't match JURASSIC PARK for 
sheer action. The entire last half of the first movie was devoted to 
non-stop action scenes with the dinosaurs and other threats, most of 
which were genuinely thrilling. This time, some of the stuff seems 
like a parody of the original. One need only watch the scene with 
Goldblum's daughter defeating a velociraptor through a gymnastic 
act on a bar to know what I'm talking about.
        The novelty of dinosaurs in the modern-day world has worn 
off since the last movie; now we need something one step further. 
What we get from Spielberg is an inferior retread of the first movie, 
minus most of the characters. It's mostly second-rate, including a 
climax in which one of the Tyrannosaurs gets loose in modern-day 
San Diego. Nothing we haven't seen in 30 Godzilla movies. Let's 
just hope Spielberg's next project isn't a sequel to SCHINDLER'S 
LOST, although he could use the same slogan as THE LOST 
WORLD: `something has survived.'
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Max Scheinin
Reduced to the video screen, its still a pleasure visiting Steven
Spielberg's The Lost World, a land where dinosaurs roam free, and wreak
havok. In the first few moments, in which a little girl is approached by a
little dinosaur ("What are you?...Some kind of bird?"), I worried that,
reduced to this size, his "popcorn" movie wouldn't work. By the time Ian
Malcom (Jeff Goldblum) reached the fabled island, I was sure of it. But
then, two T-Rexes began to nudge a trailer off a cliff...and I was hooked.
Many of the moments on the island are truly magical -- they don't -- can't
-- live up to anything out of King Kong. But they still engage you with all
your senses. This is a lush land, paradise, but, humans should not be here.
The mechanical creatures sputter out of bushes. And even if they aren't too
real, the atmosphere is so delicious, that you buy it. This film is a
sample of that land, and more. Returning to San Diego, we experience, in an
over-used term, a roller-coaster ride. Sheer exhilaration results from this
action packed hour and a half. By the end, we have learned that man
shouldn't mess with nature -- so, it remains a mystery that this sequel
doesn't suck. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"Movies are really a kind of dream state, or like taking dope. And the
shock of walking out of the theatre into broad daylight can be terrifying.
I watch movies all the time, and I am also very bad at waking up."
- Martin Scorsese, from Scorsese on Scorsese

Author
Jeff Shooman

There's not much to say about Steven Spielberg's latest venture into the
dinosaur world, except that its sole purpose is to make money.  Now you pose
the question, don't all other movies aim to make money?  Yes, I agree, it is
the goal of the film execs to make money.  However, most of the time, with
few exception, it is the goal of the filmmaker to make a good movie.  Here I
must speculate, with the brilliant talent of Mr. Spielberg, his sole purpose
in making this "sequel" was to make money.  
Here, however, the filmmaker didn't concentrate on making a good movie.  He
concentrated on making a loud movie where digital dinosaurs eat people,
providing that sporadic jolt that this movie so desperately needed.  There's
no plot here, unless you think that David Koepp's attempt at it, trying to
entangle greed and science, consists of a plot.  
Still, the film passes some muster.  Why?  The effects.  The effects here are
astounding, and it is no wonder why Mr. Spielberg and others stand to make
millions from it.  The technological display here is absolutely second to
none.  
And do you know what was also a plus with this film?  John Williams's score.
 I was roused at certain moments, where the music was one note away from the
Luke-Darth Vader scene in RETURN OF THE JEDI music.  Williams proves again
why he is such an invaulable asset to Hollywood, and why his scores leave the
audience humming for hours and hours.  
So, this movie turned out average.  Again, the effects are marvelous.  The
plot is non-existant.  And the ending descends to that of a "B" monster movie
(MOTHRA).  All in all, this movie is like Spielberg's JURASSIC PARK (1993),
except here, the plot has worn thin, and the concept has grown old.

Author
Michael Redman
Steven Spielberg's sequel to "Jurassic Park" signals the beginning of
the big bang summer films. Unfortunately it also begins the season of
major disappointments.
It turns out that the dinosaurs n the original were breed elsewhere and
shipped to the theme park. Now there is a battle for control of the
island where the beasts have roamed free for the past four years. The
grandfatherly corporate big wig John Hammond (Richard Attenborough),
having had a change of heart, wants to let the lizards roam free. His
greedy capitalist pig nephew Peter Ludlow (Arliss Howard) has taken over
the company and decides to bring them to San Diego for a mainland
Dinoland.
Hammond calls in the expert in chaos theory from the first film Ian
Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum) to head up a four-person team to document life
on the island to sway public opinion so that the prehistoric creatures
can stay where they are. Malcolm, no fool he, declines the offer, but
heads for terrorville anyhow to convince his current significant other,
paleontologist Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore) that she is in the wrong
place at the wrong time.
Once in the land of the very large predators, bad turns to worse as
Malcolm discovers that his teenage daughter Kelly (Vanessa Lee Chester),
who was never mentioned in the first film and just happens to be black,
has stowed away. Continuing the trend towards disaster, the evil company
has sent a team to round up dinosaurs in rodeo style.
That's about as much of a plot as we get. There's a lot of destruction,
human-eating and loud screams on the island. A T-Rex is shipped back to
the mainland and then there's even more destruction, human-eating and
loud screams.
As you might expect, the effects are stupendous. The stegosauri and tiny
piranha-raptors are awesome (in the pre-eighties meaning of the word).
Everything looks even better than it did in "Jurassic Park"c.
One of the problems with the original was that the dinosaurs were more
real and interesting than the human cardboard cut-outs with the
exception of Jeff Goldburg. The same is true here, but even Goldblum
succumbs to the blandness.
After an amusing scene where a yacht accidentally discovers the island,
the first clue that we're in for trouble comes in a brief but seemingly
eternal scene with Malcolm and Ludlow. Goldblum hems and haws through
the conversation leaving the audience to wonder whether Malcolm had a
lobotomy or Goldblum just slept late and forgot to memorize his lines.
Where is the cocky Ian who was the only redeeming person in the
original?
The plot is full of holes and the people, remarkably stupid. 
Harding, who has studied dinosaurs for years, hangs out petting a baby
stegosaurus while its parents are heading towards them. She is oblivious
to any danger. Then she hijacks a baby T Rex to set its broken leg,
little suspecting that mom will come looking for her kid. And then
she wears her dinosaur blood-soaked jacket as they try to make their way
through a land of critters with the best sniffing ability in the world.
She must have gotten her degree from the Institute Of Really Dumb Things
To Do.
Even the velociraptors are out of character. In the first movie, they
were the perfect killing machines: intelligent and hunting in organized
packs. Here they eat backpacks and fight with one another as their prey
saunters off.
If someone can explain to me exactly what happened on the ship carrying
the T-Rex to San Diego, the film might make a little more sense, but I
don't have much hope.
If you want to catch some extraordinarily realistic dinosaurs, see this
at the matinee, but be prepared to be unamazed at the rest of the film.
During the first movie, the audience screams were in terror. Here
they're also in terror, but aimed at the script. I suppose it should be
expected since it's a sequel. I can only think of a couple of things
that are better the second time.
[This appeared in the 5/29/97 issue of the "Bloomington Voice",
Bloomington, Indiana. Michael Redman can be reached at
mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Phil Brady
Well, on the good news side, the dinos are back..more dinosaurs,
better than ever. While Jurassic Park introduced us to "real live"
dinosaurs, the FX crew has had time to become acquainted with their
cutting-edge technology. They have produced much more lifelike
creatures, and the action is not stingy. One corollary  to this is: more
killing. The body count in Lost World rivals the numbers racked up by
Sly and Arnie. You can judge for yourself whether it's good or bad news
that Jeff Goldblum is actually the star of this film, as opposed to just
attending Jurassic Park and ID4. But the big disappointment is Steven
Spielberg's backslide into mindless action/horror cliches. He, better
than most understands how to do it right. How could he let this happen? 
The story opens with a good scene of a shore party coming upon some
small dinos that are not as cute as they look. Cut to Jeff Goldblum
being persuaded to go back to "Site B". It goes against all his
instincts, but his palentologist girlfriend (Julianne Moore) is already
there, so he must follow her to get her to safety. She's having none of
that..this is an opportunity of a lifetime, and besides, it's her job to
move the plot along by getting everybody into trouble! Spielberg lets
her character alternate between trying to preserve natural habitats and
trying to disrupt them.
As soon as we meet her, she rattles off a bunch of observations about
the stegosuarus family structure, then she walks up to a nest with a
baby steg, and pets it! Even modern-day birds would abandon a chick with
a human scent; the only reason to touch the baby is so we can see her
imperiled by the angry parents. Later, she comes across a baby T-rex
with a broken leg, and she decides to carry it back (200 lb, easy) to
the base camp, to set a splint. What a surprise that the parents show up
and trash the camp! The ensuing FX are very good, but Spielberg has
gotten flabby, letting these totally impossible actions move the story.
Would it have been so tough to have a baby killed by another dino, and
have the vengeful parent mistake something left by the humans as a scent
clue? Okay, you need the baby later in the movie, so make the T-rex
brood have two babies. How tough would that have been?
Later, corporate mercenaries round up some dinos for sale to zoos.
Their Hatari!-inspired techniques are exciting. Our heroes sneak into
the camp and break open the cages of these not-so-fuzzy creatures. A
melee follows, destroying the camp..seems to me that they would be found
guilty of murder, or manslaughter, at the least. Not a good lesson for
the kids, but you don't want your kids to see this anyway. Way too many
scenes seem to have been designed to inspire nightmares in youngsters.
Spielberg tops his own lawyer-chomping scene by having two T-rex's "make
a wish." Late in the film, A captured T-rex breaks loose, Kong-style, in
San Diego. This lets us see some Godzilla scenes in a residential area.
Spielberg punctuates his homage by having one streetful of fleeing
pedestrians all Asian.
There's lotsa good stuff packed into this movie. Pete Posthelwaite,
always a plus, plays a Great White Hunter leading the corporate team.
And the action scenes are so good, I'll probably have to see the movie
at least two more times. I doubt that Spielberg could have topped the
original, but sometimes it looked like he wasn't even trying. I remember
adolescence, when one friend after another drifted away from the group,
as they got interested in sports, girls, or whatever. The super-child
Steven doesn't want to come out and play anymore..Say it ain't so,
Steven.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Vince Vaughn, Arliss Howard, 
      Peter Stormare, Pete Postlethwaite, Richard Schiff, 
      Vanessa Lee Chester, Richard Attenborough
Director: Steven Spielberg
Producers: Jerry Molen, Colin Wilson
Screenplay: David Koepp based on the novel by Michael Crichton
Cinematography: Janusz Kaminski
Music: John Williams
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     When JURASSIC PARK was released in 1993, it set a new standard for 
state-of-the-art visual and audio effects.  It was suddenly possible to 
see humans and dinosaurs interacting in a way that had never before been 
possible, and to feel the entire theater shake with the approach of a 
Tyrannosaurus Rex.  Four years later, not a whole lot has changed.  
Effects houses like Industrial Lights and Magic have tackled bigger, 
more imposing objects such as tornadoes and volcanoes, but it's still 
basically the same technology that JURASSIC PARK ushered in.  And, 
because THE LOST WORLD doesn't offer anything especially innovative, it 
seems rather familiar and almost (but not quite) disappointing.  
     Like its predecessor, THE LOST WORLD is basically a big-budget 
monster movie of the sort that has been popular ever since the dawn of 
motion pictures.  Unfortunately, like many entries into the genre, it 
falls into expected patterns.  As a result, much of this movie seems 
like a retread of JURASSIC PARK (with a little KING KONG thrown in at 
the end), not because director Steven Spielberg is intentionally copying 
himself, but because there's really not much more that he can do with 
the premise.  If there's a third movie in the series, it will probably 
follow pretty much the same storyline as the first and second 
installments.
     Still, repetitiveness notwithstanding, THE LOST WORLD boasts 
several edge-of-the-seat moments.  The dinosaurs aren't nearly as awe-
inspiring, but they remain formidable adversaries for a group of plucky, 
overmatched humans.  The standout sequence in this film features two T-
Rexs, a lot of rain, spiderweb fissures in glass, and a literal 
cliffhanger.  The ending, which takes place in San Diego rather than on 
a tropical island (where most of the film transpires), is a little 
anticlimactic.  Next year's GODZILLA will hopefully do a more impressive 
job with the "dinosaur loose in a city" concept.
     Returning from the first film is Jeff Goldblum as Dr. Ian Malcolm, 
a mathematician with an analytical mind and a wry sense of humor.  This 
time, he has an adolescent daughter, Kelly (Vanessa Lee Chester), and a 
paleontologist girlfriend, Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore).  Ian gets 
pulled back into the dinosaur game when Sarah joins an expedition to the 
island of Isla Sorna, which is populated by a wide variety of 
genetically-engineered extinct species.  John Hammond (Richard 
Attenborough), older and wiser after his JURASSIC PARK experience, no 
longer intends to open an amusement park; he simply wants to study 
dinosaurs in a natural environment.  So, a reluctant Ian, along with 
Sarah, a nature photographer named Nick Van Owen (Vince Vaughn), and a 
gadgets expert, Eddie Carr (Richard Schiff), begins a "look-but-don't-
touch" foray.  Little do they know, however, that Hammond's nephew 
(Arliss Howard) is on his way to the island with far less benevolent 
intentions.  He wants to bring dinosaurs back to San Diego for a 
prehistoric zoo.  Accompanying him is big game hunter Roland Tembo (Pete 
Postlethwaite), whose goal is to bag a male T-Rex.
     The differences between JURASSIC PARK and THE LOST WORLD can be 
summed up relatively simply:  more dinosaurs, fewer legitimate thrills.  
In this case, familiarity doesn't breed contempt, but it results in a 
movie that's unlikely to keep viewers going back time-after-time the way 
they did for the original.  THE LOST WORLD is solid entertainment the 
first time; it's not something I have any great desire to sit through 
again.  
     One could argue that giving Ian a daughter and a girlfriend is an 
attempt to broaden his character.  If so, it really doesn't work.  The 
self-deprecating scientist is likable exclusively because of Jeff 
Goldblum; even after two films, he's still relatively one-dimensional.  
The rest of the characters are pretty much interchangeable from their 
counterparts in JURASSIC PARK (different names; similar functions).  
Vanessa Lee Chester is this film's child in danger; Julianne Moore 
replaces Laura Dern; and SWINGERS' Vince Vaughn takes over for Sam 
Neill.  Meanwhile, Arliss Howard represents the obligatory nasty 
corporate villain type.
     Perhaps the most disappointing thing about THE LOST WORLD is how 
perfunctory and unimaginative Steven Spielberg's direction often is.  In 
his more than two decades of film making, Spielberg has been responsible 
for a variety of innovative action/adventure movies -- JAWS, RAIDERS OF 
THE LOST ARK, and JURASSIC PARK, to name a few.  On this occasion, he 
seems content to turn things over to the gurus at ILM.  The magical 
spark that characterizes so many Spielberg films is largely absent.
     THE LOST WORLD ends up being what a British acquaintance of mine 
calls "a jolly good romp."  It is to this year what INDEPENDENCE DAY was 
to last year -- the summer's single "can't miss" motion picture (or so 
the advertisers would have us believe).  It also comes early enough in 
the season so that we're not already sick to death of this kind of 
effects-oriented action/adventure.  So, although THE LOST WORLD has its 
share of problems, chief of which is the familiarity factor, it still 
offers a couple hours of glitzy, hi-tech fun.  And that's just about all 
that anyone can reasonably expect from this kind of blockbuster.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Cameron Shelley
Review by:
       Cameron Shelley -- May 25, 1997.
Review URL:
       http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/Reviews/tlw.html
Cast:
       Jeff Goldblum (Dr. Ian Malcolm), Julianne Moore (Dr.
       Sarah Harding), Richard Shiff (Eddie Carr), Vince
       Vaughn (Nick Van Owen), Arliss Howard (Peter
       Ludlow), Pete Postlethwaite (Roland Tembo), Vanessa
       Lee Chester (Kelly Malcolm), Richard Attenborough
       (John Hammond). 
The Lost World: Jurassic Park gives the distinct impression of
being part sequel and part remake. I think it is largely
disappointing in either respect, although it does noticeably
worse as a sequel than as a remake. Let me explain. 
There are, of course, no fixed criteria according to which a
movie constitutes a good sequel to another one, but TLW does
meet the minimal requirements. Many of the same characters
(or their equivalents) from Jurassic Park return to face the
results of that film. But aside from story continuity, one might
expect a sequel to develop some of the themes raised in the
original, or introduce some new ones. Any such development
in TLW is purely incidental. In the original JP, the dinosaurs
of Isla Nublar served both as a cautionary example of the results
of greed and crass commercialism, and as reminders of how to
lead a life in accord with the dictates of nature. The result was
not really a convincing lesson so much as a warm, fuzzy
feeling, but at least these themes were used aptly to tie the
narrative together into a coherent whole. In TLW, Spielberg
picks up these themes again, but in a purely repetitive way. The
crass commercialism has been transfered from John Hammond
to his shifty nephew Arliss Ludlow, while the exposure of
nurturing talents is transferred from Dr.s Grant and Sattler to
the dinosaurs themselves (most notably the T-rex) which have
been running loose on Isla Sorna (Site B) the whole time. Dr.
Malcolm makes a return visit, and some attempt is made to
explore the nurturing side of his nature, but this element drops
out abruptly around the middle of the movie, after his daughter
drop kicks a Velociraptor (shades of Gymkata)! Of course, no
one expects much themewise from a big budget, effects picture,
but the attempts made in this picture are notably haphazard and
half-hearted. Sequels don't have to be played from the same
hand as their predecessors; something more original would
have almost certainly been an improvement. 
In other respects, TLW works best where it almost constitutes
a remake of the original. The first act of the movie revisits
much of the look and feel (and story - with some insertions
from the original novel) of JP and seems to land Spielberg in
his element, with the result that he recreates much of JP's
suspense and excitement. The timing, direction, and special
effects were generally very good and fastened all eyes on the
screen. (The sound was a bit of a drawback - more on that later.)
Spielberg clearly realized that he could not draw out the
exposure of the audience to the dinosaurs as much as in JP, so
he switched to presenting more dinosaurs doing more things -
good move. Scenes were smoothly and deftly linked by simple
but effective use of visual continuities, and the frequent facial
closeups made the events more involving than they might
otherwise have been (although this last technique started to
look mechanical later in the film). This first part of the picture
works well at the level of an amusement park ride (in fact, I
believe the Universal Studios ride based on TLW is already up
and running), with the humans going from chasing the
dinosaurs to being chased by them. Lots of suspense, some
action, no drama. Ok. 
But with the exit from Isla Sorna, the movie completely
changes tone and coasts home. Roland Tembo, the big game
hunter who leads Ludlow's dinosaur salvage operation, bows
out; a shame, as he was the most interesting and best rendered
character in the film. Two live T-rex (a juvenile and its parent)
are shipped to San Diego to be part of a glorified carnival
exhibit. Suspense goes out the window in favor of a comic
carnivorous romp through various neighborhoods of San
Diego. The comedy works at a superficial level: The audience
recognized and laughed at the car crashes, the fleeing humans,
and the numerous little movie in-jokes. In the first half, people
were marked for death due to their moral failures; now they die
for a quick laugh. This aspect of the TLW is the biggest
letdown compared with JP. In JP the comedy was subtler and
fundamental to the development of the plot, whereas here it is
manufactured and attached with duct tape. But even without
considering JP, the second act of TLW succeeds perhaps too
well as a burlesque of the first act, and inadvertently plants the
suggestion that TLW is just like any generic B movie, but
distinguished by a monster budget. 
As a sideline, I should add that I saw TLW in a cineplex
without the DTS sound system. Unfortunately, it appears that
Spielberg is distributing the movie in only this sound format,
with the result that the sound as I got it lacked some depth. In
an effects picture, this is an important consideration.
Moviegoers should either seek out cinemas with the DTS
system, or take umbrage at this odd (grasping?) commercial
tactic and avoid TLW altogether. 
Anyway, although TLW features lots of technically excellent
effects and direction, it also features a story that lacks basic
coherence and eventually even undercuts itself. TLW does
best where it recreates the sense of menace and spectacle from
JP, but fails as its attempts at independent development simply
turn into diversions. 
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
Dept: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/PHIL/cpshelle/philosophy.html>

Author
Stephen Macy
     Steven Spielberg's latest film is an immense failure. The Lost World
disappoints as a thriller, as an action/adventure film, and as a
reworking of the equally dissatisfying Jurassic Park. Spielberg, I
suppose, is the ideal director to helm these special-effects-dependent
films; he's proven himself with both the technically challenging
"monster" picture (Jaws) and the F/X extravaganza (Close Encounters of
the Third Kind). He's an intelligent director, as well. He's aware of
his audience and how they will respond to his films (not unlike
Hitchcock). Even the idea---a scientifically initiated rebirth of
prehistoric creatures---is an intriguing one, but now, with the release
of The Lost World, Spielberg has taken two stabs at it and failed
miserably in both instances.
The film's plot is virtually nonexistent. Within twenty minutes, every
principal character has arrived on the island, and the remaining 2 hours
are devoted to constant carnage, with only the occasional interruption.
Along the way, characters are ripped to shreds on-screen and off,
unctuous and ultra-sophisticated bad boys alike get their comeuppance,
and the prominent heroes (of course) eventually save the day. The script
was concocted by David Koepp, who was also partly responsible for
Jurassic Park. He's not exactly void of talent (he penned the
interesting Brian De Palma film, Carlito's Way), but here his work seems
to function as nothing more than a perfunctory background to paste the
fancy special effects upon. The script is a drab Colorform. The dialogue
is embarrassingly banal, and the action sequences are defiantly
unimaginative--- albeit one marvelous Hitchcockian moment involving a
cliff and a sheet of glass.
The performances are mostly uninspired. Jeff Goldblum can be genuinely
captivating when given the appropriate role, such as the quirky
scientist in David Cronenberg's The Fly. Here his character is
essentially normal and calculated, and Goldblum's unconventional
delivery simply doesn't belong. His love interest is played by Julianne
Moore, who is given nothing even remotely engaging to say; bad news for
a rather bland actress. Goldblum's daughter is played by a young black
actress. Unfortunately, this racial discrepancy is hardly acknowledged;
it only lends a certain awkwardness and an opportunity for a half-assed
joke about family resemblance. Vince Vaughn and Richard Schiff offer
unspectacular supporting performances.
Spielberg, who can usually be depended upon to deliver at the very
least interesting, if not brilliant, direction, fails here, as well. His
methods become conspicuously tedious midway through the film. The
unsubtle portent reduces the suspense and augments the predictability.
This is exemplified by the camera techniques Spielberg utilizes when
danger approaches. He often places the camera low, observing the subject
at hazard from an awkward angle; as the subject realizes she is in
jeopardy, the camera will dolly forward. The threat will then appear in
the frame behind her, or we are treated to a reverse angle. Spielberg
puts to use some of the most hackneyed cinematic conventions known to
man. During the scene where a pack of diminutive compsognathuses chase a
particularly nasty hunter, the camera assumes the position of one the
critters, low and fidgety (I believe this technique was employed
extensively in Puppet Master III: Toulon's Revenge, realized by a
considerably less talented director). Equally as trite is the hunter's
eventual death. His actual demise is obstructed by a large, collapsed
tree trunk, but we are offered the sight of blood flowing from the small
stream beneath the log. This treatment of death may have been considered
masterly suggestive thirty or so years ago; today, it is familiar and an
obvious attempt to be "cinematic." The aforementioned Hitchcockian glass
sequence is the sole display of Spielberg's skill. And even that is
overlong.
The music is yet another disappointment. John Williams's recent scores
have been so derivative of his earlier efforts you may be provoked to
smack some sense into him with a 50-piece orchestra. The Lost World's
arrangement is no exception. Initially it sears beyond feeling,
interfering rather than integrating. Then it broods, and it's torpid and
unaffecting.
I suppose the true attraction to many moviegoers is this film's special
effects. And while they are impressive from a technical standpoint (the
dinosaurs never appear computer generated), we've essentially been
treated to the same magic once before in Jurassic Park. A magic trick is
considerably less spectacular and awe-inspiring the second time around.
One of the strengths of Spielberg's Jaws was his refusal to
anthropomorphize the beast; the shark wasn't much more than a machine
that could detect the scent of blood. Conversely, the "monsters" in The
Lost World are remarkably expressive and motherly. Their moans are laced
with pain, and, of course, they must be provoked before the real
horrorshow begins. Why these creatures are instilled with pathos is
beyond me; what made the shark in Jaws so frightening was its deadly
lack of rhyme and reason.
Spielberg has mentioned he's settled to do "one for the studio, one
for me," in alternation. With the gross sum he's about to collect from
this film, perhaps he can take a hiatus from this plan. His "me" films
aren't always artistically successful, but they have given birth to
Schindler's List, his best work since Jaws. And, as an additional
incentive, you presumably won't be seeing heroic acrobatics or Godzilla
parodies in his more personal endeavors.
-- Visit PREMATURE THOUGHTS ON FILM --
-- Temporarily at:
http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/smj/smjindex.html --

Author
Geoff Cashman
It is exceptionally rare that I ever think poorly of a movie.  I tend
to be very easy to sway with movies.  I easily suspend disbelief, and
get involved in some of the most idiotic of movies. 
Jurassic Park, the original, was an outstanding movie from a few 
different perspectives.  The special effects were of course amazing,
and even today people talk about them.  The acting was tolerable or
better, and had some excellent moments.  It was easy to get involved
in the movie (for me) and actually be concerned about the fate of
most of the characters (though the lawyer was a dead giveaway as 
a deadman).  I still pop this movie into the VCR occasionally, 4 years
after it was released.  I think that says enough.
First, the acting...
There were some very minor moments when the acting became acceptable,
but for the most part it was horrid.  Jeff Goldblum is a talented 
individual, but working as a lead without other strong acting leaves
him blowing in the breeze.  His one liners added a strong dimension to
the original, and ruined this movie. The rest of the actors were dismal
for the most part.  The would-be predator queen is fake and depthless.
The second Ingen team leaders are pathetic, droll, remakes of a mishmash
of characters from 1950s movies.  The evil corporate nasty nephew is
so awful he incited giggles in me. 
Casting: Tolerable for the most part.  But why an African-American
for Goldblum's kid?  Completely shallow point to attempt to make the
movie politically correct (in-movie comments about noting that she
couldn't be his real kid was disgusting at best).  Sprinkle in pointless
environmentalist, would-be do-gooder team leader, and well it just
becomes pathetic. 
Plot: Hi! Let's make a second island so that we can trash another
forest!  Totally unbelievable in fabrication.  Next, let's make a
theme park complete with a name and gosh nobody noticed it being
built and wondered what it was for.  Add in lame attempts at making
t-rex seem parental (wtf for? So we sympathize with the beasts?), and
setting one free in San Diego (at least the producers had the decency
to make fun of themselves for their obvious Godzilla rip offs), and the
plot becomes a dismal modernized version of a big evil monster with
a heart goes crazy scenario overplayed in movies decades old. 
In the first movie, the dinosaurs had depth. The raptors were incredible,
and done exceptionally well.  The T-rex was left as he should be for
a movie of this kind...a semi-psychotic carnivore of massive proportions.
Any efforts at giving depth to the big reptillian birds in this one was
like lofting a feather in a gale force breeze. 
o  People  standing on a dock watching a freighter
   coming at them at 26kts and *not* running until it crashes into
   the dock. 
o  Getting into the high hide or whatever they called it.  Ummm...
   can't the jeep holding the cable be broken?  Umm... Can't the
   tree be knocked down?  Ummm... is there a functional problem here?
   Nah, couldn't be.  This is a Speilberg movie.
o  Dinosaur breaks leg. Let's save it while the parents are looking
   for it.  They won't look here will they?  The T-rex just has the
   largest olfactory cavity of any of them.  He own't smell us here.
   Nope. Neither will momma T-rex.  Not a chance.  COMPLETELY manufactur
   scene. 
o  Raptors attack party, picking off people at the back of the
   running group of about people.  Nobody notices a thing until they're
   the next one getting jumped by a raptor.  Duh, gee George, what's
   all that noise behind us?  Shouldn't we like, duh, check it out?
   No Lenny, keep running, and don't use your gun.  Criminy.  How about
   a knock down drag out fire fight with the raptors for crying out loud?
   Action movie?  Eat fest is more like it. 
o  Let's all run down this valley while being chased by a t-rex and 
   run into this waterfall.  No, we don't know what's behind it....
   probably a wall, but let's run into it anyways.  Oh wow! There's 
   a cave here!  Oh my, that T-rex tongue feels amazingly like an
   R.O.U.S. (Princess Bride reference). 
o  The stampede scene was ludicrous.  Gizmodified jeeps and cycles
   chase down rampaging horde of dinosaurs. Insert Token to play game.
I could rattle on here for a while.  Heck, if I continued I might
have a chance of boring everyone as much as this movie bored me.
The *only* strong point about the movie was the special effects.
This computer imaging stuff is really coming along nicely, and 
it's beginning to become indistinguishable from the real thing. 
The effects deserve a nomination if not an Oscar. Bravo!
Quick summary:  This movie was a complete money grab.  After
Speilberg did Schindler's List it seemed like he was really
trying to make a go of it as an artist, rather than a capitalist
with alot of movie making talent.  Now, I'm not so sure.  This movie
is raking in big bucks (breaking every major record in its first 
4 days of release, over $100 million already in the coffers) though
and that will keep the studio happy.  Horrible acting, totally
manufactured plot in development and execution, and outstanding
special effects make for a movie that is pure eye candy and nothing
more. 
One the Dino scale: 4 unhatched compy eggs out of a possible
4 mature T-Rexs.

Author
Terri Buchman
Geez, ya ever go to the movies with your kids and you just know that you
ain't seeing the same flick they are?  That was the case with THE LOST
WORLD.  I saw a fairly slow and poorly written film that had few thrills
and uneven pacing.  I thought it was a C+, at best.  My kids saw a great
movie with huge dinosaurs and great special effects and enough spills and
chills to give them nightmares for a couple of days.  They gave it an A and
are telling all their friends about it.  So, with respect to both
viewpoints, a split review.
Parents: Geez Louise why do I always get stuck next to the guy who has to
explain every damn scene to his apparently brain-dead girlfriend? How the
hell hard can it be?  Scientist escaped from Dinosaur Island the last time
and doesn't want to go back and play 'hide the salami' with the T-Rexes any
more.  Wise old former Capitalist waives money, scientific curiosity and
the threat of having the guy's girlfriend eaten by giant dinos and --
poof-- scientist goes back to the island.  Nasty bad old capitalist idiots
decide to also go to the island and "meddle where man was not meant to go."
(This is bad.  They are going to get eaten. We know this 'cuz we saw the
last movie and nasty people like lawyers and greedy capitalists and
gun-totting morons with slack-jaws always become lunch.  Law of the jungle
baby.  I mean geez, what are they going to do, let the dinos eat the kids
or the heroes?  No way.  That doesn't leave anyone for the next sequel.)
Everybody screws around with scientific stuff that isn't very sturdy, wind
up pissing off the dinosaurs and then just barely escape with their lives.
Extremely stupid capitalists decide to bring dinos back to 'civilization'
(well, California, but it counts in the movie.) Nobody in this movie ever
saw KING KONG and doesn't know what any pre-schoolers knows; never bring
giant killer animals into the city.  The animals don't like the city, they
can't get good take-out in the suburbs and they get pissed off and start
stomping on cars.  Everything turns out allright though because the dinos
get back to nature, the bad and greedy capitalists are wiped out by
liability suits and the scientists get to go home and watch TV.  That's
about it.
Ah, I've seen better.  The movie is really, really slow.  I liked the
beginning, wherein a little kid is almost eaten by tiny dinosaurs. Hey, I'm
a parent and there are times when you take your children to the movies with
the expectation that something in the damn movie will scare them.  If dinos
only eat adults then how the hell are the kids supposed to get scared.
"Hey, sit up and be good or I'll send you to Jurassic Park where you'll get
eaten by giant T-Rexes with bad breath and humungo teeth."  "Yeah right Ma,
dinos only eat grown-ups.  You're the only one who'd be in trouble." At
least now we know that tiny dinosaurs do have a taste for small children.
It's a start.
I was bored with the first hour of LOST WORLD.  It was slow, filled with
dull people with dull jobs and unintelligible dialogue.  I liked Jeff
Goldblum, but mostly because he's Jeff Goldblum and he has an interesting
and unique way of delivering a line.  (He has a sort of hushed and
breathless delivery filled with accents on off words that I find slightly
disorienting and enjoyable.) The woman who played his girlfriend wasn't
interesting enough to remember though she did scream well.  The hunky guy
who was a photographer for at least part of the movie before he
metaphorphisized into a Rambo clone was nice to look at.  (What was that
all about?  Was he really a photographer or just one of your standard
movie-issue hunky Rambo guys who only pretend to be a photographer?  I have
no idea.)
The guy who was in FARGO was good, although he was actually playing the
same character.  (Though he had more dialogue in this movie than in FARGO.)
There was also an English guy playing  a hunter in the picture who was evil
because he wanted to hunt down a male T-Rex. (I am not sure why this guy
was evil.  The T-Rex wanted to hunt the English guy down and eat him, but
the T-Rex wasn't considered evil, he was just doing his job as a devoted
husband and father.  But the hunter guy was evil.  Really really evil.  I
mean, they even cast an English guy as the hunter, that's how evil he was.)
And there was the cute kid who played Jeff Goldblum's daughter.  She was,
ahm, cute and read her lines well and screamed well.  Unfortunately she
also had to act in a scene that called for her to do a really ludicrous bit
of gymnastic daring-do that
was a truly dumb moment of film-making.  Poor kid.
The best part of the picture was when a T-Rex got loose in San Diego.  I
felt bad for the dino because I've been in San Diego and it's really hard
to get around that city as a tourist.  The dino was angry and tired and
scared that his kid was hanging out with a bad element.  When he wound up
in the suburbs, stuck without a map and unable to see the street signs
because of the poor lighting and all, well, my heart bled for him.
Fortunately the T-Rex was able to rescue his kid and beat a path back home
before his old lady found out and kicked him out of the nest.  Phewh!  I'm
really glad he made it.
Kids:  Wow!  What a great movie!  The dinosaurs were like ten, no twenty,
no fifty feet tall.  They were so cool.  And they, like, ate people and
like dripped blood all over everything and it was so coo-ooo-l.   I loved
that movie.  And, like, they only ate grown-ups which was really good
because the kids didn't really want to hurt them but some of the adults did
so that was good.
The guy who was in ID4 was in this only he was like he was when he was in
the first JURASSIC PARK and not like he was when he was like saving the
world and stuff.  (He was cool when he was saving the world and got to fly
in a spaceship and hang out with Will Smith and stuff only he wasn't doing
that in this movie cuz he was different.)  This movie was just like
JURASSIC PARK only it was different. In JURASSIC PARK the dinosaurs were
pretty good but in this movie they are even better.  And they, like, drip
blood when they eat people, you know.  I don't think they dripped blood
before, but my friend has the tape so I could check and find out.  The
T-Rex didn't eat anybody like a lawyer in this movie, but he was still
like, eating people and stuff, so it was the same thing, only different.
Anyway, see this movie.  It was GREAT! It was really scary and funny and
good and it had giant dinosaurs kicking cars around and stuff and I really
liked it.  My Mom didn't like it, but she's old and so it wasn't really even
a movie for her, so what difference does she make anyway.  See it!

Author
Monika Huebner
Director: Steven Spielberg
Cast: Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Vince Vaughn, Peter Stormare,
Pete Postlethwaite
"Something has survived" we are advised by the movie poster. Ian
Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum) who remembers his terrible experience at
Jurassic Park four years ago only too well, is horrified when he finds
out. The dinosaurs should have died of lack of lysine according to
their genetic makeup, but they didn't only survive on Isla Sorna but
formed a new closed eco system. John Hammond (Richard Attenborough),
has turned from evil capitalist to reformed environmentalist and wants
to send a team on the island to watch the dinosaurs in their natural
environment.
He hopes for Malcolm to be the fourth man on the team and is surprised
to find him less than enthusiastic about the whole idea. Malcolm has
lost his job after spreading stories about dinosaurs in public and
really doesn't have much of an alternative. But he only changes his
mind when he finds out that the team's paleontologist is his girl
friend Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore) and that she is already on the
island on her own. Now he rushes the other participants, camera man
Nick Van Owen and technical specialist Eddie Carr, to leave
immediately.
After their arrival on Isla Sorna they first find Sarah's torn back
pack and then herself, happy as pie and just about to watch a group of
stegosaurs with their young. On returning to their trailers they find
Malcolm's teenage daughter Kelly (Vanessa Lee Chester) who came along
without her father's knowledge. Malcolm wants his girl friend and
daughter off the island immediately but can't handle the radio
equipment and Sarah's resistance. 
In the meantime a second team led by Hammond's nephew Peter Ludlow
(Arliss Howard) lands on the island. They are not here to take
pictures, though. They want to catch dinosaurs for their theme park in
San Diego. Ludlow hired big game hunter Roland Tembo and his team,
among them hunter and loudmouth Dieter Stark (Peter Stormare) and
paleontologist Robert Burke (Thomas F. Duffy). In spite of their
contrary interests both teams end up depending on each other in their
fight for survival. The second team is successful: they manage to load
a T. rex on their ship and take him to San Diego for the showdown.
When JURASSIC PARK hit the movie theaters five years ago it seemed
hard to believe that those special effects could be topped. Nothing is
as short-lived as the computer industry and you can tell right away
that enormous progress has been made. The dinosaurs in THE LOST WORLD
are unbelievably real. Of course some anatomic details are off just as
in JURASSIC PARK, but who cares about details when a herd of
stegosaurs tramples over the screen as if this could happen any day or
when some angry pachycephalosaurs work out by ramming the intruders'
cars. Incredible. The animatronic models are just as good as the
computer generated dinos.
The dinosaurs are the stars of the movie and easily push their human
counterparts aside, even if THE LOST WORLD boasts a number of fine
actors.
Jeff Goldblum reprises his role of chaotic chaotician Ian Malcolm, who
didn't have much to do in JURASSIC PARK except for warning everybody
about the consequences of genetic engineering and wasn't too nice a
guy there either. Including him in the movie again was a good choice,
and he can handle his lead. Bizarre parts seem to be just up his
alley. This time he gets to be the hero instead of breaking his bones
five minutes into the movie. His cool speeches are plenty and provide
the neccessary humor. He also shows that the movie isn't taking itself
too seriously. 
No such luck for Julianne Moore. She and Vanessa Lee Chester are the
token women of the movie. The script sees her in one function only:
the woman that can be rescued by the guys whenever the need arises.
Although she supposedly is a paleontologist and behaviorist she
introduces herself by patting a baby stegosaur - the dumbest scene in
the movie by far. The second dumbest thing she does is hanging her
jacket with baby T. rex blood in her tent to dry off. She might as
well put up a sign "Dinner's ready, come and get it!" But her method
is more effective, since dinosaurs can't read.
As far as the part of Sarah Harding is concerned the auther should
have stuck to Michael Crichton's book a lot more. But the scenario
"Sarah saves Ian" can't be accepted by Hollywood as yet. So she has to
depend on her luck which luckily never leaves her even as in the end
she crosses paths with some velociraptors who prefer to fight among
themselves instead of going for the easier prey.
Richard Schiff, Vince Vaughn and Vanessa Lee Chester are the rest of
the "good guys". Obviously a Spielberg movie can't do without kids and
so Malcolm is stuck with a daughter left to him by one of his
ex-wifes. Kelly is there to save her father from a velociraptor in
one of the not so well done action scenes. Vince Vaughn saves an
injured T. rex baby with Sarah. That wasn't so good an idea after all,
because the frightening reptiles turn out to be good parents and don't
like this at all. They provide for one of the most gripping scenes in
the movie when they push the trailer over a cliff although their young
has been given back to them. This is Richard Schiff's big moment. He
tries to pull the trailers back or at least save the people inside.
Unfortunately mommy and daddy are still very angry and he finds a
tragic end.
The outstanding bad guys are Pete Postlethwaite and Peter Stormare.
Postlethwaite is big game hunter Roland Tembo whose grand desire it is
to add a male T. rex to his hunting trophies. Anybody can have a
deer's, elk's or lion's head hanging on his wall, but a T. rex... He
supposedly never heard of sexual dimorphism of tyrannosaurs or else
he'd have prefered a female whose head would have been bigger. Well,
he gets neither but is one of the more interesting characters. Peter
Stormare as Dieter Stark lives up to his sadist image from FARGO. He
tortures a procompsognathus with an electric stick after making sure
with Robert Burke that this species is harmless. Boy was he wrong.
Animal rights activists will be glad to see that punishment isn't far
away.
Robert Burke is one of the movie's best in-jokes. Unfortunately not
too many Europeans are likely to notice. Paleontologists are public
figures in the USA. For example the enfant terrible paleontologist
Robert Bakker who upsets the experts with his revolutionary theories.
All those who are familiar with Bakker's appearance will notice the
incredible likeness with LOST WORLD scientist Rober Burke. Hat,
glasses, beard, down to the tips of his shoes. That of course is
intended. Actor Thomas F. Duffy allegedly spent a day with Bakker at
excavations to study him. He brings the scientific touch to the movie
by calling the dinosaurs by their correct names and explaining when
and where they were discovered. Those who don't agree with Bakker's
theories may enjoy the fact that his movie alter ego falls victim to a
lively T. rex - as Bakker defends the theory that dinosaurs were
active, warm blooded animals.
THE LOST WORLD provides 129 minutes of exitement. One action scene
chases the other, leaving the story behind at times, but you don't
expect a drama full of dialogue when you go to see this movie. It is
very funny until the end. Especially the dinosaur chase in San Diego
is full of funny little details. You only have to look for them. E. g.
japanese tourists running from the T. rex who resembles Godzilla or
the cameo by David Koepp, the author of the script. He suffers the
same fate as Robert Burke. Feeding time for dinosaurs.
Homepage: Book and movie reviews
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin/indexalt.html

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
Chaos mathematician Ian Malcolm (Goldblum), having had nothing to
do in "Jurassic Park", is given a second chance when his
girlfriend (Moore) is dispatched to another island of dinosaurs.
Going out there with the obligatory cute kid and lots of vehicles
that can be wrecked by rampaging dinos, they meet up with company
representatives on a rival mission.  After hearing their English
and South African accents, the dinosaurs eat the corporate goons
and later rampage through San Diego.  At that point there is no
more room left on the back of the Minties wrapper the plot was
written on, so the film ends.
If your brain is the size of a peanut and in your tail, have I
got a movie for you!
In case you haven't heard, "The Lost World" is distinctly 
ordinary.  "Jurassic Park" was no great shakes on the braincell 
scale, but at least it had some story, novel and rather wonderful 
special effects and some halfway decent action.  (Remember the 
raptors hunting the children in the kitchen?)  But "The Lost 
World" just hauls its surly carcass up onto the screen and slops 
out the warmed over leftovers of "Jurassic".  The writing is 
criminally stupid and derivative.  I found myself groaning aloud 
as I second-guessed every plot twist.  (And let me assure you 
that i mean _every_ plot twist.)  It is interesting that "The 
Lost World" does not bother to remind you of the previous film or 
explain anything again (assuming you remember JP well), but still 
expects you to be amazed by serving up exactly the same dish.  
(The cinema here had teamed it up with "Beavis and Butthead Do 
America" which had a certain sense: "Hehe, hehe, dinosaurs ...  
this is so cool.")
The lacklustre plotting of "Jurassic Park' was to some extent
made up for by its SFX. Despite much touted improvements, those
of "The Lost World" are only incrementally better, some of the
matting being downright clumsy.  Now that CGI can do anything,
special effects alone are not enough to push a film.  The
direction and photography are reasonably accomplished, given the
story problems.  (One notes Spielberg's total inability to scare
anyone except with in-your-face surprises and loud noises.)
Conversely, the acting fails to survive the travails.  Jeff
Goldblum (the thinking man's Christopher Lambert) loses his
luddite speeches of the first film and gets some neat one-liners,
but fails to convince us that he is in anyway in jeopardy during
the film.  Julianne Moore's career is going straight to movie
hell if she doesn't break out of bland roles like this.  Her sole
function seems to be to accidently endanger the rest of the
party.  It's difficult to care about anyone else during the film,
because it's difficult to even catch their name.  Only Pete
Postlethwaite shows any depth as a hunter with a philosophical bent.
The film finally comes to life at the end with a T. Rex rampaging
through the city.  Unfortunately the cuteness of this part is
diminished by the no-brain setup.  (The dinosaur kills everyone
on the boat, including those below deck or in the small rooms,
and locks itself in the cargo hold?  Right ...)
In summary, "The Lost World" is only slightly more stupid than
predecessor but more lazily plotted and vastly less original and
hence much less interesting.  This is nowhere near the worse film
you could see this year, but it is one of the least inventive.
It might also be added that it is amazingly violent for the
rating it got and is unsuitable as a children's movie.
[*/misfire] and Friday's fish returning as Monday's fish
casserole on the Sid and Nancy scale.
"The Lost World"
Directed by Steven Spielberg.
Based on the novel by Michael Crichton.
Starring Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Pete Postlethwaite, Arliss
Howard, Vanessa Lee Chester, Vince Vaughn.
Released 1997.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Vince Vaughn, Arliss Howard,
      Peter Stormare, Pete Postlethwaite, Richard Schiff,
      Vanessa Lee Chester, Richard Attenborough
Director: Steven Spielberg
Producers: Jerry Molen, Colin Wilson
Screenplay: David Koepp based on the novel by Michael Crichton
Cinematography: Janusz Kaminski
Music: John Williams
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
What else can I say so much already has been said about this movie?
But despite all of its wows and hypes there are some problems with it
that I just have to point out.
Firstly, a PG rating
Hmmmm I wonder how the kids responded to T-Rex ripping a man in half (I
mean it was all there to see, believe me Spielberg didn't hold back on
that one) or those carnivorous, 'hyena' like, tiny little dinosaurs
attacking a little girl, or hunting down a man in packs. Just wandering
if they inspire nightmares?
Then there's cute baby T-rex who has his leg broken and needs plastering
from those crazy scientists. Mom and Dad T-Rex soon come to the rescue
and before you know it, baby T-rex is free and a couple of scenes down
the track is running around quite happily (without the plaster) and
capable of feasting on a man (not so cute any more).
Then one of the scientists unloads the bullets of the guns of one of the
hunters, knowing quite well that T-Rex is on the hunt for them. Was he
hoping to make friends????????
Otherwise, Stephen Spielberg has done what he achieved with the original
Jurassic Park another dinosaur epic.
Those who like the original Jurassic will undoubtedly also like this
movie and will rate at least an 8/10
Those who didn't will probably give it a 6/10

Author
Michael Dequina
The Lost World: Jurassic Park (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
On paper, Steven Spielberg's The Lost World: Jurassic Park has the
makings of a vast improvement over the entertaining but wildly overrated
original film: the most remotely interesting human in the original cast,
Jeff Goldblum, is the only major returnee; the blah Laura Dern and Sam Neill
are supplanted by the vastly more interesting Julianne Moore and Vince
Vaughn;  a wider menagerie of dinosaurs is featured; there are enhanced
dinosaur effects; and all of the necessary exposition is already covered in
the first film.  Yet despite all of the basic improvements going into the
production, the perfectly entertaining finished product still somehow
manages to fall short of the original film.
This time around, Dr. Ian Malcolm (Goldblum) very reluctantly joins
girlfriend and paleontologist Sarah Harding (Moore), environmentalist
videographer Nick Van Owen (Vaughn) on an expedition to Site B, a second
dinosaur-populated island, where the creatures were bred for the ill-fated
Jurassic Park.  Add a child stowaway for the trip--in this case, Malcolm's
daughter (Vanessa Lee Chester)--and you have your perfunctory framework for
prehistoric mayhem, thrills, and chills.
The promise appears to be fulfilled in the first major dinosaur
suspense sequence, involving two very angry T-rexes and our heroes trapped
in a double trailer dangling off of a cliff.  This scene, which features a
tense moment with Sarah on top of a slowly cracking horizontal window pane
and some choice dino feeding action, comes quite early in the film, and it
sets the stage up for greater thrills.  But they don't come.  The problem?
Miscalculations and missed opportunities.  Other than this early scene and a
T-rex attack on a camp (complete with the return of the image of quivering
water), the major set pieces don't quite go for the kill.  Especially
dismaying is the showcase raptor sequence.  With the raptors chasing our
heroes in, on, and around an abandoned, run-down building, it is an
effective, suspenseful scene... until the end comes.  Jurassic Park had its
share of corny moments (the bonding-with-kids-while-feeding-the-brontosaurus
scene comes to mind), but it never crossed the line to outright camp and
cheese, which is what Spielberg and scripter David Koepp let The Lost World
do in its resolution of the raptor scene.  I won't give it away, but it left
me and the audience with which I saw the film completely aghast at its
idiotic awfulness.  Certainly, a film about dinosaurs in the present day
requires a suspension of disbelief, but to even the most openminded viewer,
the end of the raptor scene will ring completely false.  The film's third
act centers on an unexpected twist involving the T-rex, but the
possibilities this surprise idea brings aren't satisfactorily realized.  The
T-rex is roars a lot, breaks stuff--but, shockingly enough, he doesn't
really help himself to the veritable buffet of people running from him.
What's the fun of a T-rex who's not hungry?
On a similar note, the promise of the casting does not pay off,
mostly due to Koepp's lazy screenplay.  Once again, Goldblum is the only
remotely interesting human, getting all of the best lines.  Moore does not
fall into the same trap that befell the original's overwrought Dern, who
attacked her role as if she wanted an Oscar nomination.  However, once the
deadlier dinosaurs arrive, her brilliant scientist is reduced to being a
token screamer, and there's precious little left for the talented Moore to
work with.  Vaughn is a very lively actor (see Swingers), but you would not
get that impression from his "role" here, which is a mere one-dimensional
placeholder.  Pete Postlethwaite's character, a determined hunter after a
T-rex, is potentially interesting, but he goes nowhere.  Chester, despite
having a key part in the horrendous raptor resolution, is a big step up from
the first film's kids, Joseph Mazzello and Ariana Richards (who both,
unfortunately, resurface in a cameo, albeit mercifully brief), but anyone
would have been an improvement over that annoying duo.
After all my griping, my giving The Lost World: Jurassic Park a
passing grade may seem a bit hypocritical, but up to this point I have been
focusing on what the film isn't rather than what it is: an enjoyable
adventure that never bores, even with a two-hour, fourteen-minute running
time.   It delivers exactly what one would expect from a dinosaur movie--a
wide array of very convincing animatronic and computer-generated prehistoric
reptiles (even more impressive than in the original) destroying things and
people in more than a few reasonably thrilling set pieces.   And as such, it
fits the bill of summer popcorn entertainment.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Christina Gross
  With Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Vince Vaughn, Pete Postlethwaite
The lights are on but nobody's home. This is a movie without any
storyline worth mentioning, a bunch of good actors who aren't allowed
to act and marvelous dinosaurs. Let's start with the good things. The
computer generated dinosaurs as well as the animatronics seem even
more real than in 'Jurassic Park'. I also liked the way they were
used, exept for the T. rexes who had to be the typical small family.
It was for the sake of the dinosaurs that I don't regret having spent
more than two hours in a movie theater. I didn't even care that the
dinos were shown off without any story worth mentioning to wrap them
up in. Let's hear it for progress. Too bad that so many movie makers
think they don't have to care about anything else
if only they creatively play with their special effects .Why worry
about something like a good script, for example. The few strings of
story David Koepp wove to connect the dino scenes can only be called
annoying.
Cynical, serene Ian Malcolm as we know him from the books and the
first movie has changed into a chauvinist jerk. Even Jeff Goldblum
can't save the part. The script condemns him to save his seemingly
stupid girl friend Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore) from the dinosaurs.
She allegedly is a paleontologist familiar with predators. Still she
breaks even the most simple of rules like don't touch the young, don't
walk around in bloody clothing. Apart from that she utters cool
speeches, stares into the camera and screams.
Oh, well, as we all know women only watch this kind of movie only for
their boy friends' or husbands' sakes. So why create a credible female
lead that women in the audience can identify with and rob the guys of
this cozy "Women!" -feeling.
Isla Sorna, the dinosaur island, is a paradise for real men. On the
good guys' team apart from  Malcolm we have Nick Van Owen (Vince
Vaughn), radical environmentalist, lovable on-duty macho and
one-man-backup-plan and nice Eddie Carr (Richard Schiff) who ends up
being the only good guy eaten by the T. rexes.
On the bad guys' team there are Roland Tembo (Pete Postlethwaite), the
Great White Hunter with the noble heart who is looking for the
ultimate trophy and psychopathic dino-torturer Dieter Stark (Peter
Stormare) who first meets a swarm of compies and then his maker
because his pal prefers to listen to his walkman instead of Dieter's
cries for help. Morale: evil always is punished justly.
For a negative role model the men are presented with wimp Peter Ludlow
(Arliss Howard) who may be rich but no real man. Even his own men
rather follow Nick Van Owen. Tsk, tsk.
Michael Crichton could have saved himself the trouble of writing a
sequel to 'Jurassic Park'. All that is left of it in David Koepp's
script is the trailer scene and some names. My favorite dinosaur
scenes are taken from the first book. The rest is stolen from other
movies - oops, sorry, that's called hommage. John Wayne certainly
would have loved the technical advancement of animal catching in the
'Hatari'-scene.
About half way through the movie I reached the point when I didn't
want to see another face staring open mouthed into the camera or
another vibration in a puddle. But there was no mercy... In spite of
all this I cannot help but admire Steven Spielberg. How he could keep
a straight face in various interviews as he claimed to have focused on
character developement is beyond me. Maybe he should take up acting.
And once more the dinosaurs are not wiped off the face of the Earth,
as Michael Crichton had planned in his first dinosaur book. John
Hammond (Richard Attenborough) suggests to maintain a dino reservation
on Isla Sorna. I see another sequel coming up. Money can keep rolling
in when real men want to measure their strength against the
prehistoric giants. 
Who needs Marlborough Country...
Gesehen und Gelesen: Buch- und Filmkritiken
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin

Author
Shane Burridge
A few years ago I saw a festival release of Orson Welles' 1948
MACBETH, one of a number of Welles films screening during that week. 
Before it was halfway through the audience began to leave, until only
half were left seated for the final credits.  My viewing of the film
was distracted twofold: firstly by the slow exodus of patrons, and
secondly by the question that kept going through my mind: What Were
They Expecting?  You go to see Welles playing Macbeth....surely you
expect to see just that - Welles playing Macbeth.
I have never responded the same to film criticism since.  In the case
of THE LOST WORLD, this argument would translate thusly: You go to see
a movie about dinosaurs on the rampage, and what do you expect to see?
 Dinosaurs on the rampage.  Your expectations are satisfied.  If you
go in expecting to see insights of any interpersonal, religious,
philosophical, scientific, or religious nature; if you go in looking
for subtexts , or representations of the human condition, or the
growth and/or learning of individuals within group dynamics, then, my
friend, it is time for you to start reassessing your critical acumen,
or go see a different movie.
Having attended a preview of THE LOST WORLD I was in the fortunate
position of not having heard or read a single word about it (I confess
this took some effort of ignorance on my part - and thank goodness I
had no inkling about the final twenty minutes), yet I had a foreboding
about Spielberg's new film well before I saw it.  It may not be
fashionable to like Spielberg this year, and the critics may sneer at
his dinosaur movie.  Why?  That question could easily be answered with
another: What  Were They Expecting?  Or, more simply, it could be that
some people just don't like to see anybody else having a good time.
As for my own reaction?  As far as adventure movies go, THE LOST WORLD
is a peach.  It may be an even better ride than JURASSIC PARK, which
it reworks unabashedly.  The first forty-five minutes lack
involvement, but once Spielberg hits his stride (in a boffo set-piece
inside a trailer) the film never lets up.  The dinosaur attacks are
relentless - and the assorted dinos get far more screen time than in
the original - but even though THE LOST WORLD turns out to be a
wholesale human slaughter, we're never made to feel the dinosaurs are
villains.  Spielberg restrains sentimentality and doesn't get us
feeling they are the good guys either - they're simply enormous
animals, and there is no need to portray them as enraged monsters
(although there is a humorous reference to GODZILLA at one point). 
The dinosaurs work: not because they have been meticulously and
stunningly recreated by ILM, but because, as in JURASSIC PARK, their
behaviors and reactions are entirely believable.
Fans of Crichton's book JURASSIC PARK will be pleased to see some
moments from the original story make their way into the movie sequel -
notably the opening scene on a beach, and a sequence with a T-Rex at a
waterfall.  And it's great to see the raptors utilising one of their
scarier talents in the book by really leaping about everywhere. 
Screenwriter David Koepp, who worked with Crichton on the first film,
goes solo this time and eliminates most of the unnecessary
fussing-about -between-locations of the novel in favour of a more
linear narrative.  Spielberg choreographs his stunts and twists with
relish - his only misjudged moment involves a youngster and some
unlikely acrobatics - but there is a peculiar, distancing tone to his
work.  JURASSIC PARK's underlying philosophy was optimistic: the dream
of an enthusiast which turns out badly.  THE LOST WORLD is darker,
unsympathetic, and far from noble, in which the innocent as well as
the guilty pay the price.  This, ultimately, may be what prevents it
from being enjoyable to some viewers - while others may feel it 
plainly isn't dark enough.
Will there be a third?  If so, Spielberg does not feel, at this stage,
that he needs to helm it.  With THE LOST WORLD he has revisited
JURASSIC PARK and expanded on every set piece of that predecessor (the
knockabout scene with the raptors is a highlight) as well as adding
new surprises.  It's about as good as any dinosaur movie could be (Oh
yeah, there were human actors in it too - Jeff Goldblum, Julianne
Moore, Pete Postlethwaite - they're all fine) and if it winds up being
wearily dismissed by the ever-growing number of critics that seem to
have forgotten what it was like to go to the movies as a kid, well
then, one can only wonder if Spielberg might not do it all again after
all.  JURASSIC PARK 3: An island, a pack of raptors, half-a-dozen
Tyrannosaurs, and a hand-picked selection of  film critics.  I'd pay
to see that.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Money talks, but do dinosaurs run the marathon? In this movie
they do; too bad the humans don't shut up.
The worst part about THE LOST WORLD, like its prequel JURASSIC PARK,
is the humans.  I'm reminded, oddly, of the more-or-less equally
stupid humans in the garbage movie STARSHIP TROOPERS, who didn't know
when to leave well enough alone either. I've never enjoyed watching
movies that are about stupid people and don't know it, and THE LOST
WORLD is no different. It is a few gorgeously done effects surrounded
by Sargasso Seas of insanely dumb behavior. It's just so very, very
tired that I'm amazed they didn't just stick a sequel number on it and
dispense with the subtitle.
The plot (what there is of it) focuses on the dinosaurs who have more
or less colonized the island that the original Jurassic Park was
constructed on. It also brings back Ian Malcom (Jeff Goldblum), the
doom-saying mathematician of the first movie, although his presence
here isn't cemented: he's here because his wife is here, not because
of plot demands. That sounds odd, coming from someone who preaches
constantly about movies which have too much plot and too little
character, but the characterization in this movie is thin enough that
I was willing to reverse my rules for the time being. For enemies, we
get a gang of hunters who want to bring back a T.Rex. What're they
going to do, mount the head on the wall?
The story is handled in a manner I could call "Spielberg lite": the
strained relationships between the generations, the urgent
quasi-liberal flavor to the movie's "themes", the moments of breakneck
action. In this movie they add up to virtually nothing, because it's
not happening to anyone who merits our attention.  Malcom we know
about, but what's so important about him (or his wife or kid, for that
matter) that we need to spend two hours with them? Aside from the way
they nursemaid a baby dinosaur (and get the tar mauled out of them for
doing so, in a scene of exponentially-exploding preposterousness),
nothing. They're only smart enough to get them out of whatever the
plot hands them. There's no sense that they're actually INVOLVED in
any of this.
There are so many little betrayals that contribute to the big
betrayals as well.  For instance. Pete Postlewaite's character,
allegedly a big game hunter, apparently doesn't even know how to hold
his rifle to prevent it from filling up with rainwater. The incidental
roles, like the sleazy corporate people (who get eaten and stepped on
like jelly beans), aren't filled out with any details that would make
them more interesting as anything except set-pieces.
There is a magnificent book out there called DINOTOPIA. It is a work
of real vision, a story about a world where the dinosaurs did not die
out and were in fact domesticated by man. Buy it and read it with your
children, and spare them the tiresomeness of this movie -- and the one
that preceded it, and the one(s) that will almost certainly follow it.

Author
Paul Miller
Jurassic Park was a movie that revolutionized the way that we perceived
movies.  We began to think....what if we could clones dinosaurs again
after seeing this movie, we had to begin to think that we wouldn't
really want to.  The Lost World shows that not only would that be a
grave mistake but that it could lead to extintion of the human race.
The movie starts out with Ian Malcolm being "summoned" by John Hamond. 
John has a proposition...Go to Isla Sorna which is 80 miles SW of Isla
Nablar.  There is "Site B".  The Isla Nablar mueseum is for the best of
the best from Isla Sorna.  Jurassic Park were only the healthy dinos
that were bread at Sorna.  Hammond knew that eventually someone would
find it and it would be pilaged.  Ian refused until he found out that
his girlfriend, Sarah Harding was one of the four on the expedition.  He
went there, not for research, but to get his loved one out of harms way.
He goes there only to find his daughter has tagged along for the ride. 
He finds his girlfriend.  No sooner then he finds her then 10-15
helocopters land with jeeps, hummers, you name it.  They are INGEN, John
Hammonds corpoation.  They begin to mess up the island...trapping
dinosaurs, caging them, etc.  The leader is Hammonds Nephew.  His
sidekick if you will, is a hunter that wants nothing more than a Male
T-Rex.  
This movie was great...however not near as good as Jurassic Park.  You
will hear countless people say..."This was 1000x worse than the book." 
Well, here's how I look at it.  They are two completely different
stories.  The movie didn't follow the book at all except for bits and
pieces. You can't compare apples and oranges, which is what the book and
the movie were.  Looking solely at the movie, it was solid, well acted,
and amazing special effects.  If you loved Jurassic Park, you will love
the Lost World.
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?carson%40epix%2Enet%20%28Paul%20Miller%29

Author
David Wilcock
Please note, there are *SPOILERS* here. If you have not seen the film,
please do not read on, unless you want to spoil it.
Many people consider the The Lost World to be 'disappointing', and 'not as
good as Jurassic Park' However, The Lost World (to be known as TLW from now
on) is far, far superior to Jurassic Park. Let me explain.
1) The action sequences. In JP, there just wasn't enough. There were only
two good scenes that had any amount of suspense. The T-REX scene, of
course, and the kitchen scene. I was very, very disappointed by any other
action scenes that they were. However, TLW, not just had better action
sequences, but more of them. JP seemed to think it was a drama, but the
characters weren't strong enough for that. TLW, however, gave up completly
on plot and characters. It just wanted to give the audience a good time.
The action scenes in TLW were among Spielberg's best. The trailer scene,
although streched out, was fantastic fun. There was a lot of tension. It
was far more exciting than the T-Rex escaping scene in JP, because a) It
was a much bigger drop, and b) We didn't have a clue when the T-Rex would
come back, which just added to the danger.
2) The tone overall was much darker than JP. JP seemed too light for what
was quite a horrific movie. At least TLW was dark and horrific
3) There were much more 'rollercoaster ride' elements in it. The scene
where the hunters first arrive, and they duck between the dinosaurs legs
were awesome fun. This scene was far more adventurous than anything really
in JP
4) The ending. Call it silly, but I thought a T-Rex wandering around San
Diego like something out of Godzilla was hillarous. And Steven knew it too.
The whole thing was tongue in cheek, mocking the film but making people
(and dogs!) getting eaten, and causing mass destruction. Call it a time
filler, but I loved it.
5) The bad guys died at the END of the film. JP really annoyed me in this
respect. In just about every Spielberg film, the bad guys always die in a
horrific way at the END of the film. The Indiana Jones Trilogy shows this.
But not in JP. The only remotely bad guy, Gennearo, died in the middle.
Great. If there's one thing I love doing, it's guessing in what totally
horrible way the bad guy will die. TLW didn't disappoint. The guy with the
specs, getting eaten by the baby T-Rex (after being nudged by it's Mom,
which was a cute touch) was a great demise. I loved it.
6) It was much, much scarier than JP. The beginning with the little girl
was really scary. The way the guy from Fargo was killed was scary, yet
funny at the same time. Also, the way the camera pans down to show the
severed hand, gave the audience a rush of fright. Didn't experience that
once in JP. Nothing really scared me at all like the scenes above.
7) Pete Postheiwate (sp?) and Jeff Goldblum. Both were excellent. Even the
kid wasn't that bad. (Thankfully, she didn't really say much. More on her
in a mo)
Of course, TLW had its bad points. The girl only appeared to be in the
film at all to kick the raptor off the ledge. The music, by the great John
Williams, was awful, tuneless rubbish. And the much discussed boat scene
was poorly explained. But overall, the film was far better than Jurassic
Park. So there!

Author
Walter Frith
'LOST WORLD STILL MANAGES TO BE COMPELLING DESPITE LOST FRESHNESS IN SUBJECT
MATTER'
Comments on this review may also be sent to wfrith@icom.ca
Technology is the saving grace that ignites 'The Lost World:  Jurassic Park'.
 That and a commanding presence by leading man Jeff Goldblum who reprises his
role as a scientist trying to bring reason to a chaotic scenario known as
dinosaur reproduction.  His theories were correct four years ago and while
the people in charge in 1993's 'Jurassic Park' didn't listen to him, you
would think they've learned their lesson, right?  Wrong.  
Richard Attenborough also reprises his role in a cameo appearance as the
developer of the original theme park in which dinosaurs ran amuck who tries
to persuade Goldblum to return to a location close to the original film's
sight and it seems that the first film was the exhibition sight and now they
go to the island where the manufacturing is actually done.  This means an
increasing number of prehistoric creatures since the last time we saw them
and a lot more people are involved this time around as well.  Goldblum is
re-united with his female companion (Julianne Moore) who was also persuaded
to go along for the ride and their small team of observers is joined by a
crew aiming to capture the dino beasts and take them to a newly created theme
park built in San Diego, California.  
Steven Spielberg said he wouldn't make a sequel to the original film unless
it could be better and Spielberg is indeed a man of integrity as far as his
word is concerned and proof of this is in the fact that no sequel was ever
made to 'E.T., The Extra-Terrestrial' (1982) and Spielberg has done it with
the Jurassic story by increasing the amount of excitement in the form of
dazzling technology which he was correct in assuming would look better than
his original film.  'The Lost World' is also enhanced with nail biting
suspense and excitement just as compelling in many areas as the first film
and has a climax better than 'Jurassic Park'.  Overall it is not better than
the original film because the dinosaur concept was so original back in 1993
and kept our focus unparalleled to any other film in special effects history
but now the original magic is gone and while 'The Lost World' is not a
sensational film, only Spielberg could find ways to make it nearly as
enjoyable as his first effort in this series.
Visit Mr. Frith's 'Movie Reviews' section of 'The Review' at
http://www.arrowweb.com/review 

Author
Michael R. Thompson
The Lost World is the sequel to Jurassic Park, and let me start by
saying that it is not as good a film as the original.  A return is
made to a different island populated by dinosaurs brought back to 
life through modern science, and a big melee ensues as 20th century
man starts to interact with the Dinos.  The thing is that in the 
original movie, although it didn't have terrific acting, the action
sequences with the dinosaurs were tense and smart, the special effects
were incredible and novel, and there was a fairly coherent story
line.  In The Lost World the special effects are the only solidly 
positive thing I can point out about the movie, but they really
aren't worth the price of a ticket, even with THX.  This film
might still be very entertaining/scary for kids, but I doubt you
would enjoy it if you are an adult.
I left Jurassic Park knowing there would be a sequel, and
already hoping that it would be like Aliens was to Alien, 
a surprising improvement.  Unfortunately, The Lost World 
is not an improvement on, or even comparable to Jurassic Park.  
I was particularly surprised by this because I read the novel
The Lost World awhile ago, and was pleasantly surprised by it
(You might read it; it bears little resemblance to the movie),
and felt it would make a very passable sequel.  The reason that
The Lost World is not very entertaining, in my opinion, is that
(a) the story is convoluted and gratuitous (did a T-Rex really 
need to make it to shore in the US), and (b) the action
sequences were not up to what I usually look for from Spielberg.
The following discussion doesn't give away any of the movie's plot,
but is probably more interesting to someone who has seen the film, 
and recalls the specific action sequences. Many people say that you
need to suspend your belief when you walk into a movie like The 
Lost World, and I do up to a point.
I accept that I'm going to see movie where dinosaurs come back
to life, but not where people get to defy the Laws of Physics 
for the sake of big pyrotechnics.  
Let me give an  example of the types of action sequences I find 
good and bad.  In Jurassic Park there was a scene where
a Velociraptor chased a kid into a kitchen, and the child gets the
Velociraptor to run into a reflection of itself in a stainless 
steel door, knocking the raptor out.  I could believe this sequence, 
and it was extremely tense.  In The Lost World, in a similar 
scenario a velociraptor breaks into an equipment shed, and then
waits patiently while Jeff Golblum's daughter performs a parallel
bar routine before kicking the raptor through the wall.  It was the
longest setup for a joke that I have seen in a while.  
The trailer over the cliff scene in The Lost World was similarly
implausible, if someone had gotten a piece of their clothing 
caught on the trailer as it slid over the cliff after they 
climbed up, and then got pulled halfway to oblivion, I would have 
liked the scene a lot better than seeing three people hanging on one
rope slide through the center of the trailer.  Anyways, I have
ranted enough, suffice it to say that I expected the kind of
action I've seen in Indiana Jones and Jurassic Park, but got the
kind of scenes that seem to be proliferating in movies like
Mission Impossible, The Rock, etc.

Author
Marty Mapes
***1/2 (out of 4)   Lost World: Jurassic Park is the epitome of
American mainstream action movies. Spielberg has been through this
routine so many times that it has become second nature. He is a master
at what he does. It's not that he makes it look easy, it's that he
makes it seamless. One doesn't notice the acting or the editing or the
music; instead, we get caught up in the story and hold on to our
seats.
For the six of you on the planet who didn't see Jurassic Park, a
scientist, John Hammond, found a way to bring dinosaurs back to life by
cloning ancient DNA.  The dinosaurs were bred and raised as exhibits
for a brand-new safari park. At the park's premiere, the dinosaurs ran
amok and killed lots of people.
At the beginning of Lost World, we learn that those dinosaurs were
destroyed, but that other dinosaurs on another island survived. Now,
naturalists are going to the island to study dinosaur behavior and
"adventurers" are going back for fun and profit. Ian Malcolm, a
mathematician who survived Jurassic Park, is going to the island to
save his girlfriend (Dr. Sarah Harding, played by Julianne Moore).
But really, what does plot matter when you have an excellent summer
action movie with cool special effects?
Spielberg said something like, "Last time we invented the instrument.
This time we learned how to play it." That's a very apt summary of Lost
World. In Jurassic Park, the dinosaurs were treated with a sense of
awe: their mere existence (both on film and in the film) was enough.
The first time we see them, the characters spend a few moments staring
at the brachiosaurs. They didn't really have to do anything because we
hadn't seen them before.This time, Spielberg gets to the dinosaur
scenes more quickly and spends less time introducing them.  This allows
for more screen time devoted to seeing them doing cool stuff, like
eating people.
There are new dinosaurs in this movie. The little "compys" attack in
little hops, jumps, and nips. But because of their sheer numbers they
are almost more frightening than the big Tyrannosaurus Rexes. There are
two T. Rexes this time, along with a little baby one. And of course the
velociraptors are back (though not as prominently featured as last
time).
There is also an excellent action sequence that involves a T. Rex
pushing an occupied bus over a cliff. The sequence lasts several
minutes, and the tension never lets up.
Another sequence shows the dinosaurs on the run from the hunters. In
perhaps the most amazing shot, the camera follows a motorcycle through
the legs of a running dinosaur.
For the six of you on the planet who are going to this movie to see the
characters, they were alright. The big game hunter Roland Tembo (played
impatiently by Pete Postlethwaite -- don't you just love saying that
name?) was hard not to like.  Goldblum played the same character as
last time, a little flatly, but he was given some good lines. His
daughter was likeably headstrong without being a "tomboy." That she was
a different race and that the movie didn't apologize for it or explain
it away was a nice bow to color blindness (reminiscent of the casting
of Kenneth Branagh and Denzel Washington in Much Ado about Nothing).
A few little jokes are hidden in the movie near the end. Japanese
businessmen run away from the rampaging monster in a wry little quote
from Godzilla. A pedestrian who gets eaten is played by David Koepp,
the screenwriter. In another quick shot, we see two posters in a video
store: one for a Robin Williams version of Jack and the Beanstalk (the
last movie from Williams, a friend of Spielberg, was called Jack), and
a Schwarzenegger version of Shakspeare's King Lear.
A friend of mine said that there was too much King Kong/Godzilla going
on at the end, and she's right that it didn't really fit with the rest
of the movie, but it seems to be part of the action genre to throw in a
little tongue-in-cheek humor here and there. Keep that in mind, and you
won't have to roll your eyes at the humor.
It's hard to imagine anyone not knowing what they're getting into when
they go see Lost World. So since you're not expecting artful costumes,
insightful dialog, or careful exploration of themes, I can safely
recommend this movie as another great summer escape.
Check out more current movie reviews or read my crackpot theory on Lost
World at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
James Brundage
Speilburg's "Lost World" suffers from lost storyline
Directed by Steven Spielberg
Starring Vince Vaughn, Julianne Moore, Jeff Goldblum, Pete Posthelwaite
Thursday, May 22, I go to the UA at Marketfair expecting to reserve a ticket
to "The Lost World"'s first showing tomorrow. What I see surprises me, four
shows at 10, 10:15, 10:30, and 10:45. I promptly buy a ticket for the ten o'
clock showing so I can have my pride as a critic and see what's destined to
be this summer's biggest blockbuster before anyone else. Being the neurotic
that I am, I make sure that I get my seat an hour early in the front row and
center and proceed to take out the book that I brought and read a few
chapters that were assigned as homework.
At Ten O'clock, the movie comes on and I watch attentively, chewing popcorn
and paying attention with my critical eye. The movie opens on Isla Sorna,
part of Les Sinco Mortes (The Five Deaths), eighty-seven miles southwest of
Isla Nublar (The site of the ill-fated "Jurassic Park"). Even though, with
the cinematography, I am sure that the island that this one was filmed on
was the same as the first. The stereotyped British family is relaxing on the
island just before their daughter is bitten by compys (something from the
first novel).
Just as the mother begins her pitiful scream, you see Ian Malcom (played by
Jeff Goldblum) on a background of a jungle in a subway station, heading to
see John Hammond (who wasn't even in the novel). There is a time consuming
cameo by the kids Tim and Lex from the first movie and then a begrudged
confrontation between Hammond's nephew (Arliss Howard). Upon meeting
Hammond, he is told about Site B (Isla Sorna), and also informed that his
girlfriend, Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore), is already on the island.
That, ladies and gentlemen, is all that it takes to start the movie, in
contrast to the hour that "Jurassic Park" took to get into the thrills.
As soon as you are on the island, and for the next hour or so, you are
confronted with original thrills after original thrills, and David Keopp is
actually half-decent as a screenwriter (In my mind, he is the bane of modern
literature). However, in contrast to the first movie, this one has almost no
elements of similarity save a scene involving a trailer, two parent T-rex's
and a vicious attack that defies belief.
For that hour I was truly dazzled as a watcher, getting my pulse as high as
ninety-five beats per minute (was it the movie or was it the fact that it
was so cold in the theater?). For about forty minutes, the T-rex's dominate,
acting so much better than in the first one. But for the last twenty minutes
of that hour, it truly gets fun as the velociraptors wreak total havoc upon
the party of explorers on the island.
Then the movie doesn't take itself seriously at all.
After that mystic hour, you end up seeing the T-rex in San Diego, where the
movie parodies itself and other things such as "Speed", "Godzilla", and
"Speed 2".
The CGI's (Computer Generated Images) are low quality compared to the ILM
standard, verging on a word which, because of the high-school nature of this
publication, I cannot say. The script has almost no dialogue and is the
absolute worst adaptation of a novel that I have ever seen.
I will close with this. "The Lost World" was over-hyped, and not anything
that I expected. It was a movie to see for the laughs but not one to see for
the thrills. I can sum it up in two words: Nothing Special.

Author
David Landers
RATING: ** out of **** - 5.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Jeff Goldblum (Dr. Ian Malcolm), Julianne Moore (Dr. Sarah Harding),
Vince Vaughn (Nick Van Owen), Arliss Howard (Peter Ludlow), Vanessa Lee
Chester (Kelly Malcolm), Richard Attenborough (John Hammond)
DIRECTOR: Steven Spielberg
CERTIFICATION: PG-13 (USA) for excessive violence with little blood 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1997
THE LOST WORLD is probably one of the most disappointing sequels in recent
years.  Based on the novel "The Lost World" by Michael Crichton, THE LOST
WORLD is the, unfortunately, much anticipated sequel to the box office
smash-hit, JURASSIC PARK.  In a word, this movie is bad and is lacking
many things, but most especially, a good script and a good cast.  If you
enjoyed JURASSIC PARK, you will not enjoy its sequel.
The story revolves around Dr. Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum), one of the
survivors of the incident on the first Jurassic Park island, Isla Nubular.
He is approached by John Hammond (Richard Attenborough) to visit the test
island for Jurassic Park, a similar island 80 miles away from Isla
Nubular.  In the words of the trailer, "something has survived", and Ian,
along with a few others, must visit the island to document what is still
there.  At first, of course, he is not interested.  But when he learns
that his girlfriend, Dr. Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore) is already there,
he must rescue her from the certain doom she is facing.
The problem with this, for me, is rather simple.  Why would anyone go back
to an island that is going to contain the same creatures that nearly
had you for dinner four years earlier?  Unfortunately, this movie is full
of questionable situations like this one, and some of the later instances
are even more unbelievable.
Still another unbelievable situation in this movie is the main plot.
After what happened to the first park on his first island, John Hammond
insists on creating another one, this time in San Diego.  From his
standpoint, it would seem unthinkable to create the possibility of another
disaster.  Yet, he seems to care nothing for what happened earlier.  It
also is quite unbelievable that the United States government would have no
problem with such a situation, either.
Continuing on, many more situations like this are presented to the
audience in a fashion that seems to be perfectly legitimate.  Aside from
the unreal and very unadmirable characters, the dinosaurs themselves, the
main attraction for this movie, are hardly diverse and unique from the
original film.  This film concentrates again on the T-Rex especially, with
second concentration on the Velociraptor.  A small attempt is made to
feature some other dinosaurs, but when it looks like they will be
featured, the concentration shifts back to the two spotlight dinosaurs.
The main reason for this is probably the intended audience: children.
Although this film is not supposed to be intended for this audience, it is
silently being advertised entirely towards them.  The kids don't care for
the plot and dialogue.  All they care about and want to see is the "big"
dinosaurs eating people, which this movie unfortunately capitalizes on in
a large way.
In a nutshell, THE LOST WORLD is a large disappointment.  If you come
expecting a nicely formulated plot with admirable characters, you will be
disappointed.  If you come looking for lots of suspenseful situations, you
will not be as disappointed but you will not be extremely satisfied.
Arguably, the only audience that will really enjoy this movie are children
around the ages of 7 to 13.  THE LOST WORLD is pretty much a lost cause.


Author
Kevin Patterson
The Lost World (PG-13, 1997)
Directed by Stephen Spielberg. Screenplay by David Koepp. Based on the
novel by Michael Crichton. Starring Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore.
        Let's start with the good news: The Lost World  is a decent,
entertaining summer thriller. The special effects team does a wonderful job in
bringing these dinosaurs to life, and there is plenty of fast-paced action and
suspense to make it fun to watch. Jeff Goldblum returns as Dr. Ian Malcolm,
the mathematician and chaos theorist from Jurassic Park,  delivering his lines
with a nervous deadpan that would make Fox "Spooky" Mulder of X-Files  fame
proud. It has all the necessary ingredients for its status as the summer
blockbuster of the year.
        Now for the bad news. First of all, the plot is for the most part a
re-hash of the first film: Humans arrive on island populated by genetically
resurrected dinosaurs. Humans manage to piss off said dinosaurs. The main
characters are attacked by a Tyrannosaurus Rex while in an automobile and one
of them gets eaten, then they escape and run around in the jungle for a while
before they reach a power station which they use to call for help. The only
difference here is that one T. Rex manages to find its way to San Diego,
which, surprise surprise, results in more chases, more destruction, and more
people being eaten. It also sinks even further into action-movie clich*s-did
anyone really think that Dr. Malcolm's estranged daughter wasn't  going to end
up on the trip to the island somehow?
        Perhaps in an attempt to differentiate itself from Jurassic Park, 
this one seems to be trying to find an uneasy compromise between the
kind-of-scary-but-family-friendly nature of the first movie (after all, these
are dinosaurs) and sheer cold-blooded terror. It doesn't always work: a scene
in which a boy wakes up in the middle of the night and tells his incredulous
parents that "there's a dinosaur in our back yard" kind of ceases to be cute
and endearing when it ends with the family's dog (and probably the family
themselves) being gobbled up. It also tries to push a message about
conservation, which I guess is admirable, but I wonder how many
environmentalists would appreciate the script's conflation of Greenpeace
activists with Earth First! eco-terrorists.
        This is not to take anything away from Spielberg, who clearly still
knows how to direct a tight, suspenseful thriller with dazzling special
effects and stunts. I just don't think this is one of his better films, nor is
it even that important an addition to the Jurassic Park  legacy. Like
Independence Day, whose box-office records it has now broken, it seems like
just another summer sensation that will probably be forgotten in a year or two.

Author
Eric C. Robinette
Starring Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Arliss Howard, Pete Postlethwaite,
Vanessa Lee Chester, Richard Attenborough
Written by David Koepp based (loosely) on the novel by Michael Crichton
Directed by Steven Spielberg
Who's that? Oh, Mr. DNA! Where did you come from? You're not in the sequel
to Jurassic Park!
"No, but I'm everywhere evident in the picture. You see, this time around,
Mr. Spielberg and company have taken  up cloning to produce this sequel to
their earlier thrill machine, not only of the first movie but of some of
Mr. Spielberg's other products."
So I noticed. You'll be delighted to know, Mr. DNA, that unlike a lot of
other critic types, I thought the experiment was successful, for the most
part.
"Do you really think so? That's great! So many of you fellas complain that
I can only create a thin story and cardboard characters."
To be frank, Mr. DNA, those people are pretty much right. But unlike a lot
of those other reviewers,  I'm pretty forgiving of suspense movies, for
better or for worse. As long as I come out of the movie taking small,
stiff-legged strides to my car, I say you pulled it off. I clocked myself
at taking a full minute to limp to  my car, where otherwise it would have
taken me 45 seconds. Not bad!
"Well, thank you. You know, we're bound too make a ton of green stuff  on
the movie, so they'll probably be asking me to come up with another one.
I'd love to hear your thoughts. What did you think of the core helix
structure?
You mean the basic plot? Well, your cloning didn't work too well there,
I'm afraid. It's a typical case of sequilitis, and not too inspired. Dr.
Ian Malcolm, is recruited to go back to a second island filled with dinos
that conveniently escaped the attention of the characters in the first
movie. Personally, I thought that the sequel would be based on that can of
shaving cream with dinosaur embryos Wayne Knight dropped in the first
movie, especially since Spielberg devoted four or five shots to it falling
into a mudslide. That would have made more sense.
Don't worry about it. Spielberg gets things going at a pretty good clip,
which is the right thing to do when you have a thin story thread. At any
rate, against his best wishes, Malcolm goes back to the island with a
stowaway daughter (Vanessa Lee Chester) to retrieve his girlfriend Sarah
Harding (Julianne Moore) and your typical ragtag band of cohorts, most of
whom will be digested by the end of the movie. Pretty simple, but it's
good at getting the characters into one dangerous situation after another,
which is all that counts in this movie.
"Uh-huh. What did you think of the other cloning I did, with Spielberg's
other movies?"
Now, that worked--you did some good gene resequencing. Basically, you were
wise to eschew the mawkish attempts at human relations that tended to bog
down the first movie, which was more in the Jaws mode of a close-knit unit
hunted by monsters, and went straight for one chase scene after another.
In that way, it's more like one of the Indiana Jones movies. Roland, the
game hunter was very vividly played by Pete Postlethwaite, and even looked
a bit like Indy. Spielberg continues to show that he knows just the right
shot to use, and when to use it.  The pacing and visuals are fantastic.
The best example is a scene in which a trailer is pushed over a cliff by a
couple of angry T-Rexes, and Julianne Moore lays against the glass that
slowly cracks bit by bit, threatening to plunge her into the waters below.
That imagery is classic Spielberg. The raptor scene is especially well
done, with a lot of great "gotcha" moments. I especially liked the
overhead shot of the raptors in a grassy field silently closing in on the
hunters, with the dark lines of  collapsing plants converging on the
humans. There were many moments when I thought the characters were goners,
yet they managed to escape in some novel way. Great fun.
"What about the behind-the-scenes stuff, with the effects and all?"
Well. of course those were well done. The dinos are more realistic, and
much more mobile and fluid than before, particularly in a scene where the
hunters try to rope up various species while speeding along in jeeps. It's
nearly impossible to tell where Spielberg stops, and Industrial Light and
Magic and Stan Winston start. Once again, their work is thrilling, and
Oscar-caliber.
"Well, I'm glad you liked it so much.  But what about the humans I concocted?
Well, you still need a little more work there, Mr. DNA.  As I Mentioned,
the best character is the foreboding but charismatic Roland. Arliss
Howard, playing the scheming nephew of John Hammond pales by comparison.
Goldblum is once again bitingly funny, but since he has to carry this
picture, he tends to get overwhelmed by the reptiles. Vanessa Lee Chester
gives a solid performance as the obligatory child in distress, but you
underused her. You didn't get nearly as much mileage from her as the
original kids, Joseph Mazello and Ariana Richards, who make a fleeting
appearance.
"I've got it. Work on the characters, don't change the action."
Hold that thought, Mr. DNA. There is one action sequence that is
disappointingly short: the much ballyhooed San Diego scene with the T-Rex.
"What? I thought people would love a Godzilla reference."
Well, the scene works, Mr. DNA, but it's too short. There are some
wonderful moments, but not enough of them to make it pay off.  It seems
like you were so enthralled with the idea, you didn't try to work it out
to the fullest. After all those other great set pieces, it's a bit
anti-climactic. I did like the set-up for part three, though.
"We're thinking about it. So how'd we stack up with the first movie?"
I'd say almost as good, but not quite. The characters in the first movie
were thin, but they were better developed than most of the people here, so
you need to work on that. Plus there's that old problem with movie
cloning: there simply isn't that sense of discovery and ingenuity that
comes with a first movie. I missed some of the clever touches of the
first, such as yourself, Mr. DNA. 
Don't worry about it. All in all, as a thrill machine, the movie operates
nearly at full speed, just like the first did, and that's the key. . It
just needed a little more gas at the end.
"Gotcha. Well, gotta get back to work on the other summer movies."
It wouldn't be the same without you Mr. DNA. Just ease off on the
volcanoes, OK?

Author
Chuck Dowling
The Lost World:Jurassic Park (1997) **** out of ***** - Cast: Jeff Goldblum,
Julianne Moore, Arliss Howard, Richard Attenborough. Written by: David
Koepp. Directed by: Steven Spielberg. Running Time: 130 minutes.
"The Lost World" perfectly embodies the qualities of a "summer movie". It's
immensely entertaining, yet it's hardly intelligent in a creative sense. It
is one great ride of a movie though.
"The Lost World" (and really guys, either call it "The Lost World: Jurassic
Park 2" or lose the subtitle altogether) is the sequel to the biggest movie
of all time, "Jurassic Park". Taking place four years after the events of
the first film, Dr. Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum) finds himself to be an
outcast both publically and professionally for trying to expose the events
which occurred four years earlier. One day he is called to the home of John
Hammond (Richard Attenborough, briefly reprising his role from the first
film) who informs him that Jurassic Park was not the only place where the
dinosaurs existed. The dinosaurs were created and allowed to thrive on a
seperate island before being shipped to the park. Now he wants to send a
team of researchers and photographers to the lost world (get it?) in order
to document the life which lives there. And he wants Malcolm to go along as
well.
Malcolm of course wants no part of it, until he learns that his current
girlfriend (Moore) is one of the scientists on the expedition. He
reluctantly agrees to go, but only to convince the team to return with him
as soon as possible. Once arriving on the island, they are soon joined by
"the bad guys", a group from Hammond's company who still believe that the
Jurassic Park concept is a good one. Of course, the two groups clash.
"The Lost World" is a hit and miss effort. It had much more potential than
it capitalized on, but luckily when it does hit, it hits big. It takes
forever to get the film going, and the biggest flaw against the film is the
introduction of Ian Malcolm's daughter, who sneaks her way onto the island.
"The Lost World" could have succeeded where "Jurassic Park" almost went
astray by leaving out the kids. Her character being in the film produces a
scene late in the film which, for lack of a better phrase, is nothing short
of being retarded. When you see it you'll know exactly which scene I mean.
Also, I didn't buy that there was a relationship between Goldblum and
Moore's characters. I don't believe they ever touched each other
romantically. Knowing how Spielberg really likes to develop his characters
makes that even more puzzling.
Now once the film gets going, it REALLY goes. About an hour into the film is
when it starts. At that point there's a 20 minute sequence where the T. Rex
makes it's first appearance, which is just about one of the greatest
action/suspense sequences ever put to film. Those 20 minutes alone rank
right up there with the best work Speilberg has ever done.
After the sequence was over, I felt that it was so good that I seriously
doubted that whatever could be dreamt up for the finale could be better. And
for the most part, I was wrong about that. Now I'm not going to reveal what
happens in the film's final scenes, even though I'm sure a week or so after
the film's release there will be clips of it in every commercial for the
film. But going into the theater, I had absolutely no idea that it was going
to go in the direction it did. It's not as well-crafted as the sequence I
mentioned earlier, but just in it's concept it's brilliant "summer movie"
hijinks.
So how does this one compare to the original? In actuality, I enjoyed them
each about the same. While "The Lost World" does have its moments which I
enjoyed much more than any scene in the original, "Jurassic Park" was paced
better. "Jurassic Park" seemed to flow along, evenly paced, while "The Lost
World" takes a while to flow, then crashes, then starts again, etc. Also,
"The Lost World" doesn't seem like a big commercial for itself. We don't
have to see the Jurassic Park logo every ten seconds as we did in the
original. We hardly see it at all.
"The Lost World" is just a great time at the movies. It sometimes slips too
far into silliness, but makes up for it with fantastic special effects, a
good score by John Williams, an entertaining performance from Goldblum, a
couple of moments which will genuinely make you jump, and two outstanding
sequences of action and suspense. Suspend all your critical thinking and
just enjoy the perfect example of a no-brainer summer movie. The master
storyteller Spielberg has done it again. [PG-13]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
C.J Hill
Possibly the years the most anticipated film and finally it arrives here
in the UK.
It smashed U.S box office office records in it's opening weekend and
will no doubt do the same here.
But is it any good?  In a word, no.  I'll elaborate further.
The story is as follows.  Apparently there were TWO islands with
dinosaurs on.  One where the dinos lived untouched by mankind and the
other a tourist attraction which failed before it even opened.  (See
Jurrasic Park.)
Imgen, the company that funded Jurrasic Park, want to reccover their
losses by taking more dinos off the other island and move them to a new
attraction in San Diago.
Realizing what a bad idea this is, Proffessor John Hammond (Richard
Attenborough) decides to send a team to document the Dinosaurs, so as to
rally public support to preserve the island.
Enter familiar mumbling man Jeff Goldblum who only agrees to go when
told his girlfriend is already there.
So, basically, what you have is this.  Two teams, one sent to catch and
move some dinosaurs to the mainland and the other, trying to document
them, being forced to work together, fighting for survival against the 
dinosaurs' firm intentions on eating them.
A fairly good idea, however it's let down by one slight problem.
Over two hours of chase scenes gets way too boring, way too quiclky.
Add to this a terrible script and some feeble attempts at some
occasional characterisation and you end up very disinterested.
It becomes background noise while your mind starts concentrating on
things like, 'what's for tea?' and 'should you cut the lawn later?'
(yes, you should).
It's a shame then really, that Spielberg has lowered himself into making
what essentially is a blatant cash in, which adds practically nothing to
the far superior Jurrasic park.
With only a few creative and genuinely tense scenes and fabulous c.g.i
dinosaurs (the t.rex's have to be seen to be believed), there is nothing
else to recommend The Lost World.
A very dissapointing sequel, indeed.

Author
Michael Redman
Steven Spielberg's sequel to "Jurassic Park" signals the beginning of
the big bang summer films. Unfortunately it also begins the season of
major disappointments.
It turns out that the dinosaurs n the original were breed elsewhere and
shipped to the theme park. Now there is a battle for control of the
island where the beasts have roamed free for the past four years. The
grandfatherly corporate big wig John Hammond (Richard Attenborough),
having had a change of heart, wants to let the lizards roam free. His
greedy capitalist pig nephew Peter Ludlow (Arliss Howard) has taken over
the company and decides to bring them to San Diego for a mainland
Dinoland.
Hammond calls in the expert in chaos theory from the first film Ian
Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum) to head up a four-person team to document life
on the island to sway public opinion so that the prehistoric creatures
can stay where they are. Malcolm, no fool he, declines the offer, but
heads for terrorville anyhow to convince his current significant other,
paleontologist Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore) that she is in the wrong
place at the wrong time.
Once in the land of the very large predators, bad turns to worse as
Malcolm discovers that his teenage daughter Kelly (Vanessa Lee Chester),
who was never mentioned in the first film and just happens to be black,
has stowed away. Continuing the trend towards disaster, the evil company
has sent a team to round up dinosaurs in rodeo style.
That's about as much of a plot as we get. There's a lot of destruction,
human-eating and loud screams on the island. A T-Rex is shipped back to
the mainland and then there's even more destruction, human-eating and
loud screams.
As you might expect, the effects are stupendous. The stegosauri and tiny
piranha-raptors are awesome (in the pre-eighties meaning of the word).
Everything looks even better than it did in "Jurassic Park".
One of the problems with the original was that the dinosaurs were more
real and interesting than the human cardboard cut-outs with the
exception of Jeff Goldburg. The same is true here, but even Goldblum
succumbs to the blandness.
After an amusing scene where a yacht accidentally discovers the island,
the first clue that we're in for trouble comes in a brief but seemingly
eternal scene with Malcolm and Ludlow. Goldblum hems and haws through
the conversation leaving the audience to wonder whether Malcolm had a
lobotomy or Goldblum just slept late and forgot to memorize his lines.
Where is the cocky Ian who was the only redeeming person in the
original?
The plot is full of holes and the people, remarkably stupid. 
Harding, who has studied dinosaurs for years, hangs out petting a baby
stegosaurus while its parents are heading towards them. She is oblivious
to any danger. Then she hijacks a baby T-Rex to set its broken leg,
little suspecting that mom will come looking for her kid. And then
she wears her dinosaur blood-soaked jacket as they try to make their way
through a land of critters with the best sniffing ability in the world.
She must have gotten her degree from the Institute Of Really Dumb Things
To Do.
Even the velociraptors are out of character. In the first movie, they
were the perfect killing machines: intelligent and hunting in organized
packs. Here they eat backpacks and fight with one another as their prey
saunters off.
If someone can explain to me exactly what happened on the ship carrying
the T-Rex to San Diego, the film might make a little more sense, but I
don't have much hope.
If you want to catch some extraordinarily realistic dinosaurs, see this
at the matinee, but be prepared to be unamazed at the rest of the film.
During the first movie, the audience screams were in terror. Here
they're also in terror, but aimed at the script. I suppose it should be
expected since it's a sequel. I can only think of a couple of things
that are better the second time.
[This appeared in the 5/29/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Tracy W. Bush
I went to a screening of The Lost World this weekend, and admittedly
what I saw was not the final cut of the movie.  Those of you who know me
know that I generally appreciate a movie for its entertainment value,
and am not hypercritical of plot holes or sometimes even the absence of
plot.  However, I have to say that without a doubt, this movie SUCKED.
I mean, the BOOK was better than this movie, and the book wasn't all
that great.  In this movie we have like 5 minutes of exposition at the
beginning and then BOOM we're back on a different island where all the
dinosaurs are roaming free without cages.  Then, a bunch of other guys
show up wanting to trap the dinosaurs for a theme park in San Diego. 
Naturally, the dinosaurs overwhelm them and everyone is getting eaten
and blah blah blah, and they have to escape and it's tense and blah blah
blah.  We've seen it all before.
I will say that the special effects are much much better this time
around, the interaction between the CGI dinosaurs and the filmed actors
is really breathtaking, I mean forget that LA Times ad with the guy in
the mineshaft, this is infinitely more believable, but during the whole
movie, and this thing is LONG, we're talking two and a half hours, I
just kept thinking "I just don't care.  All these people could be killed
in this movie, and I just don't care."
Implausible escapes, one after the other.  NO plot.  Little morality
plays about how mankind is so exploitative and murderous.  Weak, flimsy
and pathetic life-embracing ending.  One amusing moment when a guy gets
eaten by a T Rex in front of a Blockbuster Video in San Diego.
One final note:  I am sick of Spielberg movies.  Most of his scenes are
shot exactly the same way - all the characters freeze, and we have
reaction shots for a minute and a half.  One high overhead shot panning
down to just above head level, of people looking at something.  One
crotch level shop, panning up to eye level, of people looking at
something.  Then we go to POV and we see the effect.  This goes on for
the whole movie.
Oh, yeah, and he makes fun of fat people in this movie again.
Anyway, if you want to see the special effects, go ahead and see the
movie, but JEEZ this is a bad film.  It'll make bank simply because the
people who saw the first one will want to see the second one, but
hopefully we won't be subjected to a third.
To put things in perspective, this is the most disappointing sequel I've
seen since "Highlander 2:  The Quickening".

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen with Byron for $3 on 21 August 1997 at the Cineplex Odeon Worldwide.
A review of this movie would be pretty much similar to those for the first
(Jurassic Park), except that this is even worse. To quote Bart Simpson,
"it's crappy crap crap crap."  Four years after the Lost World theme park
was destroyed by genetically revived dinosaurs running amok, ruining a big
investment, and killing a few people, it turns out "something has
survived." Actually, it turns out dinosaurs were also bred on nearby on a
nearby, also off Costa Rica. Sort of the alpha version of the Jurassic
Park, which was destroyed many many opening weekends ago. The movie opens
briskly by putting a little girl in jeopardy and then cuts away without
showing what has happened to her. A bad sign. 
The principal character now is Dr. Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum), who winds
up back on the island when John Hammond (Richard Attenborough) convinces
Ian's girlfriend Dr. Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore) to document the
dinosaurs in actions. She is a paleontologist on the go. Along with two
other photographers, they are going to show what the island is like
without man's interference. It turns out the bad folks at Ingen want to
resurrect the theme park idea, where tourists would happily pay to see
T-Rex--in San Diego.
When the corporate bad guys show up, the movie takes the first of many
tragic turns into laughability. It's a labyrinth of conflicting incohesive
theme.  The environmentalists versus the evil corporate slant. There are
lots of ridiculous plots in here: Malcolm returning to do relay races with
dinosaurs, now with stowaway black daughter in tow (putting a child at
risk for "dramatic effect" is a longstanding cinema faux pas); Sarah's
insisting on setting the broken leg of a baby T-Rex, not believing its Ma
and Pa will hunt it down and actually be dangerous (this is when Byron
exclaimed that she should be the first to get eaten); a T-Rex is holed up
in the boat's cargo bay, so how does it kill people at the helm (leaving
just a hand on the wheel) without any destruction on the ship?
A slew of stereotypes ensue as well. The bad guys invariably have British
accents, like Pete Postlewaite as Roland Tembo, whose dream is to hunt a
buck T-Rex. Time for a new dream, bub.  There's the wide-eyed black man
running from the T-Rex in San Diego that evokes the "manservant" from
jungle movies yelling "da Mummy is on da loose!" There's the
mambo-listening hispanic inexplicably named "Carter."  There are the
panicky Asian tourists, with cameras, fleeing the T-Rex. I guess they only
expect Godzilla in Tokyo.
It's insulting to expect us to suspend all disbelife and care too. If you
want to create a tense thriller with great special effects and lifelike
dinosaurs, do that, but don't throw machismo, blended families and their
traumas, conservation politics, and impossible feats of agility at us in a
noisy mishmash. If grown men are plucked out of cars and torn asunder, can
we really believe a 12-year-old girl can conquer an overgrown lizard with
her gymnastics routine?
The only worthwhile portion of the movie is the overlong scene where
Sarah's life is literally hinging on the shattering of a windowpane.  Of
course it steals from other masters, but it works, until it goes on far
longer than it should. 
The Lost World represents two hours plus that I can never reclaim, with an
idiotic unendurable moralizing finale. Luckily, with Wondee Siam around
the corner, we able to bolt the theatre and have something to look forward
to. 
Note: As in the case of Career Girls, this Cineplex Odeon theatre showed a
"Mr. Bean" short before the previews. 
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021, sethbook@panix.com
More film reviews by Seth J. Bookey can be seen at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Steven Spielberg has fashioned a sequel to his supremely
successful JURASSIC PARK that in many ways does what a sequel should
do: it continues the story rather than remaking it.  The film features
the same terrific dinosaur effects, but this time around Spielberg
changes the tone to make a darker and more somber exercise.  At the
same time has removed much of the anti-science sentiment of the
previous film.  But perhaps the most interesting touch is that since it
is based on Michael Crichton's novel which borrows the title of Arthur
Conan Doyle's classic novel, Spielberg has played up the similarities
in plot to the Doyle novel and its 1925 film adaptation.  THE LOST
WORLD: JURASSIC PARK also borrows from KING KONG and GORGO.  On the
negative side the character it builds the story around is Dr. Ian
Malcolm (played again by Jeff Goldblum).  This was not a very good
decision since while Goldblum had some good lines in the first film,
his character was never very well developed and does not have the
appeal to carry the sequel.
     It is four years after the incidents of JURASSIC PARK.  The entire
experiment has been hushed up.  Ian Malcolm has tried to tell his story
to the world and has been made to look like a sensationalist kook.
Meanwhile there has been a power struggle at John Hammond's company
Ingen.  Each faction wants control of an island that was a laboratory
and breeding ground for the ill-fated park and where, unbeknownst to
the world dinosaurs still live and breed.  John Hammond has sent a team
of four scientists to the laboratory island to document what is there.
Ingen, now led by Hammond's nephew Peter Ludlow (Arliss Howard) has
sent a team to secure the island.  The team leader is hunter and
mercenary, Roland Tembo (Pete Postlethwaite).  Tembo's team is composed
of what are supposed to be crack mercenaries, but Tembo knows them to
be unprepared for the situation they will be facing.  The hunter cares
little that his team is incompetent so long as they can provide him
with an opportunity to kill a T. rex.  As with the earlier film David
Koepp has adapted the Crichton novel.  His film is mostly dark and
somber until the last half-hour when finally the film cuts loose for
some fun.
     To make Goldblum's Ian Malcolm the tie to the previous film seems
almost an act of desperation.  Alan Grant or Ellie Sattler's characters
had more appealing personalities.  Malcolm was slickly obnoxious and
remains so in this film.  The worst fault of the script is its failure
to create a character that that audience really cares about.  In this
film Pete Postlethwaite's villain is almost as appealing as the hero.
Of course with dangerous dinosaurs on the loose, it is not clear the
story really needed a human villain to start with.
     In contrast to JURASSIC PARK, Spielberg has chosen to visualize
this story in muted colors, often with light sources blurred.  There is
intentionally no natural scene that looks as beautiful as the
helicopter landing in the last film.  The new island is not to be
confused with a paradise.  The film has more time on the screen of
dinosaur effects, but in many it is harder to make out details.  Also
curiously some of the effects sequences are cut short, as if they were
not completed to save time.  There will be a stegosaurus attack and the
camera will flash to Goldblum who says something like "they're
leaving," rather than showing them leave.  Spielberg does have some
feel for suspense, and this film includes one suspenseful sequence
involving a glass window that is almost sure to be borrowed by other
films in the future.  John Williams has scored the film, but this is
sure to be considered one of his lesser scores with some standard
suspense music and no really memorable new themes.
     The most impressive touch in THE LOST WORLD: JURASSIC PARK is how
successfully it pulled together the plots of both Crichton and Doyle.
It delivers a few thrills, some nice dinosaur effects, and packed
theaters.  I rate it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Doug Skiles
THE LOST WORLD: JURASSIC PARK Starring: Jeff Goldblum (Dr. Ian Malcolm),
Julianne Moore (Dr. Sarah Harding) Directed by: Steven Spielberg Written
by: David Koepp RATED PG-13 by the MPAA for strong language and
violence.
When summer hits, sequels can't be far behind.  Often, that means it's
time for a cast of faces we all know playing characters that we all know
as they run the paces through a carbon copy of the original film.
Which is why THE LOST WORLD is such a pleasant surprise.
When was the last time you saw a sequel that you felt was better than
the original, or at least on equal ground with it?  Was it ALIENS? 
TERMINATOR 2?  Maybe BATMAN RETURNS?  These things are few and far
between.  Welcome to THE LOST WORLD, a sequel which outshines the
original JURASSIC PARK.
What makes this a superior film?  How about a better lead character? 
More likable supporting characters?  An army of human villians along
with the dangerous dinosaurs?  More intense action sequences?  Better
effects?  An ending that truly screams "FINALE!!!" and provides a real
sense of closure?  A better pulse-pounding John Williams score?  A
darker overall tone?  And a plotline that ends up being far superior to
that of the Michael Crichton book on which it is based?
Flaws?  Well, the concept of "There's another island!" isn't reasoned
out as well as it was in the book.  Luckily, Jeff Goldblum's own
disbelief as portrayed in both words and expressions helps to somehow
ease the disbelief of the audience.  Plus, Sarah makes one really stupid
mistake, endangering the group on the island, which seems a little
strange considering her supposed expertise in such areas.  However, it's
plausible that, given the hell she was through, she didn't have time to
think straight enough to realize what a boneheaded manuver she was
pulling.  Finally, the only other obvious flaw would be that the Nick
Van Owen character (Vince Vaughn) did some things that seemed smart in
execution, but finally proved idiotic, making his supposedly "heroic"
character easy to dislike.
But these three little problems can't stop viewers from grinning like
maniacs during the whole production and applauding their hearts out at
the end.  Spielberg took audiences into another world with 1993's
JURASSIC PARK.  Now, again managing to work his magic, he gives us THE
LOST WORLD.  Neither of the Indiana Jones adventures after RAIDERS OF
THE LOST ARK managed to top that first one, but THE LOST WORLD does
manage to be a fantastic Spielberg adventure, one that is even better
that his first trip into dino-land.
Maybe all of Spielberg's action films should have LOST in the title...
This is the chance to witness something extremely rare.  The sequel that
improves on the first concept.  The summer of '97 has, so far, proven to
be infinitely better than that of '96 in the movie industry.  THE LOST
WORLD alone is better than any movie released last summer.  May the
INDEPENDENCE DAYs and TWISTERs of the world tremble in fear.  Steven
Spielberg is here to show you how it's done.  Go out there and learn
your lesson while you can still catch it in the theater.  And if you see
just three movies this summer, please, make them CONTACT, FACE/OFF...
and THE LOST WORLD: JURASSIC PARK.

Author
Matt Petras
        Well if you are up for stellar effects then this is the movie
for you. Because thats all that there really is.... I found that after
watching this movie it had many many gaps and flaws in simple logic in
the Plot. For one thing, a white leading actor who has a black
daughter does leave some curiosity.... I am not saying that this isn't
possible.. but it does leave one to wonder...I know I did. Another
thing is that this movie has sections which are painfully stretched
out.... and certain Scenes are repeated essentially but with slight
variations. There was one scene that should have been short... but it
was horribly stretched and somewhere in the middle of it I found
myself thinking.. OK enough already get on with it. There are also
times where you have to wonder why things happen the way they do...
things just magically happen and there is no prelude or anything of
the sort... another thing that I noticed towards the end was that some
characters just vanished without a trace but they were fairly major
through most of the beginning. This movie is also very predictable...
you can almost tell the final story somewhere in the middle and you
definitely know what will happen at a given moment.. granted this is
hard to omit but here its just blatant it sits there and stares at
you. Also some of the things that happen are a little TOO predictable
and several cliques are repeated... It gets boring at times to tell
you the truth... even though there is still action going on. Another
little point I might add is that the main character is supposed to be
a quiet chaos mathematician not some Shoot them up type of Hero. Some
of the characters are not proper for their roles. The acting is fine
but the characters just don't seem to add up. If I was to base my
review totally on the plot then I wouldn't rate this movie too highly
        But that's just the thing this movie isn't just the plot, its
the whole package and this package is really well done. The whole
movie is really well done and looks really good and if one was to
overlook the flaws in the plot and characters then this is really a
movie. The special effects are just amazing, you can't tell that the
dinosaurs are created it looks like they were there live, in a few
instances of course you know its fake but there are other times that
you just wouldn't be able to say that the creature wasn't there during
filming, extinct or not. Another thing is the Destruction scenes...
WOW, those were masterpieces.. well some of them were they were well
choreographed and along with the Dino's make this one of the reasons
to see this movie. This movie is fairly long but it is action packed
so it should do well in the box office.. unfortunately it will take
away from Fifth element but alas what can we do.. I may be too cynical
for my age but this movie is only worth seeing for the effects and for
it few funny moments.. go see it in a matinee if you really must see
it its not worth full price if you ask me.
        One Little side note, although my opinion of this movie may
not have been the best the way that this movie was marketed and how
many theaters it was shown in Toronto this opening weekend is nothing
short of stupid, there were 10 theater movie theaters that were
playing this movie around the clock I think that some people really
want money badly.... and I think that this type of activity hurts the
movie industry let the other movies also have a chance.... you know
any movie with that much play would succeed even if it was the worst
movie ever made..... I thought I'd put this here to deflate the movie
hype about this flick... its not that bad a movie but its not THAT
great either hope you people realize this.


Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1997, PG-13, 134 minutes [2 hours, 14 minutes]
starring: Jeff Goldblum (Dr. Ian Malcolm), Julianne Moore (Dr. Sarah
Harding), Vince Vaughn (Nick Van Owen), Arliss Howard (Peter Ludlow); written
by David Koepp; produced by Gerald R. Molen, Colin Wilson; directed by Steven
Spielberg; based on the novel by Michael Crichton.
Seen November 29, 1997 on home video (rented).
They say when you've got a winning strategy don't change your game plan.
That's good advice, unfortunately the one place it doesn't work is Hollywood,
or else "The Lost World: Jurassic Park" might have been something original.
Instead, it's just a repeat of everything Spielberg's done before and proves
some things are only impressive once.
The film opens in typical Spielberg fashion with a supposedly charming scene
that also shows the advances made in special effects. Initially, it is
interesting to watch, but within a few minutes we get a lot of screaming and
off-screen bloodshed, and it's apparent the film is going to be much like the
original "Jurassic Park."
That feeling of deja vu continues to manifest itself as the story unfolds
much like another mediocre sci-fi thriller, "Aliens." We catch up with Dr.
Ian Malcolm (Goldblum), who has apparently been shunned from the scientific
community for "telling stories" about what happened on that South American
island four years ago. He visits Dr. John Hammond (Richard Attenborough), the
owner and curator of the park who tells him there is another island full of
dinosaurs which he is in danger of losing to either the government or
poachers (I couldn't really tell from all the jargon). He wants Malcolm,
along with palentologist Dr. Sarah Harding (who just happens to be Malcolm's
girlfriend), and photographer Nick Van Owen (Vaughn), to go there and make
sure the park is stable. Of course Malcolm panics when he realizes Harding is
already down there, and agrees to go "rescue" her.
It's not surprising how quickly the opening act is paced. This film is meant
to be a special effects thrill ride, so it doesn't want to waste anyone's
time with a story (God forbid!). Only the bare essentials are necessary, such
as Hammond's arrogant newphew Peter Ludlow (Howard), who constantly berates
Malcolm, or the fact Malcolm is a bad father to his adopted daughter. The
dialogue between these character is trite and blatantly foreshadowing. All
the characters are generic, and thus Goldblum sticks out like a sore thumb
since he's the only character with depth.
Once the main characters reach the dinosaur island the film practically
becomes a remake of the original. We get many shots of dinosaurs roaming the
island which are impressive visually, but almost boring intellectually
because of the bland story. It's no surprise that once a team of hunters
invade the island all Hell breaks lose and the film becomes a 100-minute
chase scene. We get another scene of the dinosaurs pushing a vehicle off a
cliff with our characters inside dangling by a thread. There's more
hide-and-seek scenes with those nasty raptors, who are conviently delt with
by the daughter's gymnastics talent. And of course the brave, mighty hunters
turn into cowards and many are eaten as they flee.
But the film's problem isn't just the fact it repeats itself (and its
predecessor), it's the way it does so. There is no sense of satire here,
which means the film wants to be taken seriously, which is hard to do
considering how corny and contrived the screenplay is. It often wanders from
the main characters for large blocks of time just to show other people be
eaten by the dinosaurs (which is just an excuse to dodge the story and show
off the effects). Not to mention how badly it over-doses on the cliffhangers.
The last act somehow shifts the setting to San Diego and much like a modern
"Godzilla," we get a T-Rex wreaking havoc there. Not surprisingly, the ending
isn't quite resolved which could (and probably will) leave room for another
sequel.
It seems like "The Lost World: Jurassic Park" was meant to be a genuine,
intense thriller, but it's too ridiculous to take seriously. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe" in the header.
