Title
Review for Huozhe (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Brian Koller
Better known by its English translation "To Live",
"Huozhe" tells the story of a small Chinese family,
from the 1940s through the 1960s.  The great political
turmoil of that country, from the Civil War to the
resulting Communist dictatorship, the economic
hardships and political purges, are themes examined
from the family's point of view.
The story begins with Fugui (You Ge) gambling away
the family home of his elderly father.  Fugui and
young pregnant wife Jiazhen (Li Gong) are left
destitute.  Fugui scrapes a living as a puppeteer,
then is forced to serve in both the Nationalist
and the Communist armies.  Fugui is reunited with
his family, which struggles to survive the dynamic
and dangerous political winds.  There are family
triumphs and tragedies.
Fugui has a major character transformation once
he becomes homeless.  Before, he was proud, curt
and self-destructive.  After, he is humble, hard-working,
and determined to make things best for his family.
This transformation would not be credible in most
films, but is done so skillfully in "To Live" that
it seems natural.
The novel and screenplay were both co-written by
Yu Hua and Wei Lu.  They succeed in getting across,
without ever becoming pedantic, the problems
that come with Communist dictatorships:
everyone is equally poor, brainwashed with political
slogans that eventually are seen through, with
harsh penalties for acts arbitrarily interpreted as
capitalistic or "counter-revolutionary".  Too much
success can be dangerous.
I liked the character of Fugui's rebellious son
Youqing (Deng Fei).  Being a child, Fei is not the
best actor.  A scene where he engages in a streetfight
isn't convincing.  But his impish personality and
actions keep Fugui and Jiazhen, as well as the
audience, guessing as to what will happen next.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TO LIVE is an incredible story of life in Communist China from the
beginnings of Mao's revolutionary victory through the Great Leap
Forward and the Cultural Revolution and ending with ascendancy of the
Red Guard.  It is all told with the story of a single working class
family with the husband played by Ge You and the wife by Gong Li.
     The movie is divided by decades.  Each of the three decades (40s,
50s, and 60s) in turn covers only a small time slice of the decade so
that in the end you feel like the husband and wife are old friends that
you have known for a long time and that, moreover, you know them
extremely well.  The script's layout and the brilliant writing make
this possible.
     We start with the husband as an idle landowner who ignores his
wife and who wastes his life and his fortunes in the gambling dens that
were popular just before the Communist takeover.  His only passion and
the only talent he has is his hobby of singing during shadow puppet
performances.  Soon, however, he is swept into the throws of the
revolution.  Throughout the show his puppet singing provides both a
metaphor for the spirit of each decade and his constant solace.
     I have never seen a more anti-Communist movie.  The horrors of
this ideology were everywhere.  When they are ordered to give up all of
their cooking utensils in order that the entire village could make the
equivalent of three cannon balls, the people are told not to worry
because Communism will provide for them.
     In another example of the horrors of the time, the Red Guard takes
over the hospital and throws out all of the doctors and nurses since
they are old and counter-revolutionary.  In their place, they have
young students attempt to guess at what to do for sick people.  Suffice
it to say that it did not work.
     In every decade, as their standard of living gets worse, they
still believe that it will be good someday.  It was not a very safe
time to be alive either.  If you were of working class stock, if you
managed never to get to be a party official, and if you laid low and
agreed to do whatever the party said and hate whomever the party said
to hate including your (ex-)friends, then and only then did you stand
much chance of survival.
     The movie, however, uses the backdrop of Communism more as a way
to explain the harsh living conditions of the family.  This show is
about family love more than anything else.  If your family could
survive this and be not only in tact, but happy, then it is a strong
family indeed!
     There are a couple of devastatingly awful tragedies that strike
this family.  It is easy to cry they are so terrible, and yet the film
is never manipulative.  I am glad the horrors were shown since it made
their ability to smile at adversity seem even more amazing.
     I know it will never happen, but Ge You deserves an academy
nomination and maybe the award as well.  To say his performance was
moving is a gigantic understatement.  Although Gong Li was not quite as
good, hers was an outstanding performance.  The movie is so real that
you had to pinch yourself to remember it was not a documentary.
     If you liked The Joy Luck Club, then you should love this since it
is an order of magnitude better made and more realistic.  TO LIVE was
one of the most life affirming movies of the year.
     TO LIVE is in Mandarin with easy to follow English subtitles.  It
runs 2:13 which is just about perfect although it was good enough to
make it a 6 hour movie in my opinion.  I recommend everyone over the
age of about 10 see it.  It is unrated, but I suspect it would be rated
PG-13 for some scenes of violence.  There is no sex, nudity, or bad
language.  I give it my top rating of ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
     "I believe that for a long time now Chinese films have been too
abstract, conceptual, gimmicky.  They don't relate at all to the lives
of ordinary Chinese people.  I'm certain that most audiences will like
this film.  We haven't gone overboard on the tragic elements, but
rather have focused on the minute, amusing details in the life of a
nobody.  There are tears and laughter, one following the other in a
gentle rhythm like the breath of a bellows."
          - Zhang Yimou, director of TO LIVE
     TO LIVE, Zhang Yimou's sixth feature, explores territory that is
rapidly becoming familiar to those who view the works of China's
so-called "Fifth Generation" film makers.  The events of the middle
decades of the twentieth century, including the Communist Civil War,
the "Great Leap Forward", and the Cultural Revolution, represent
fertile ground for grand stories of mingled tragedy and triumph.
However, this marvelously textured movie, which is by turns funny and
touching, takes a different approach from pictures like MY BLUE KITE
and FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE.  Instead of viewing the cultural changes on
an epic scale, TO LIVE gives a far more intimate, and affecting,
perspective.
     Fugui (Ge You), Jiazhen (Gong Li), and their two children are
normal, hard-working Chinese citizens caught up in the chaotic changes
transforming their country.  Unlike many of their counterparts in
other, similarly-themed films, they are not accused of acting against
Mao Tse- tung's Red government, but their faithfulness to the new order
doesn't keep tragedy from touching their lives.  As one of the film's
explanatory capsules states, few families in China were not affected by
the Cultural Revolution.
     Although TO LIVE has been banned in its country of origin because
of a supposed negative portrayal of certain pro-Maoist historical
events, Zhang's presentation of three turbulent decades of life in
China seems reasonably balanced.  Other films (most notably FAREWELL MY
CONCUBINE) have more openly attacked the Communist Revolution and its
aftermath.
     The characters are powerfully developed and realized, representing
some of the most "real" men and women to populate any of 1994's films.
>From the 1940s to the early 1970s, we follow Fugui's family through
good times and bad.  Zhang's skill is such that we become less a
detached observer and more a passive participant.  Gong and Ge (both of
whom appeared in FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE), who imbue Fugui and Jiazhen
with life and humanity, are perfect choices for the central
characters.
     Few films approach the level of honesty reached by TO LIVE.  This
is a story whose underlying central theme is expressed in the title:
through all the struggles, hardships, and moments of rare magic and
joy, the characters continue their lives.  As Jiazhen points out, no
matter how bleak circumstances appear, the only choice is to go on.
     With TO LIVE added to an impressive list of credits that already
includes JU DOU and RAISE THE RED LANTERN, Zhang has cemented his
reputation as one of today's premier directors.  It is an accolade not
lightly accorded, but the film maker has earned it through his telling
of rare stories brimming with humanity and unforced drama.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of
Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
David Wong Shee
     Zhang Yi-Mou's (RED SORGHUM, RAISE THE RED LANTERN, JU DOU) most
recent film is TO LIVE again featuring Gong Li in a principal role.
The film follows the fortunes, and misfortunes, of family that lives
through the communist revolution of 1949 and the later cultural
revolution.  The depiction of both the family melodrama and of the
tumultuous historical backdrop against which it is set, combine to make
this a film of considerable value.
     "Political correctness" is also a theme of sorts.  The characters
constantly struggle to keep in step with the shifting ideological
requirements of those in power, often under threat of imprisonment or
execution.  Ironically while the characters in TO LIVE succeed in this
Zhang Yi-Mou has not.  As I understand it he has been barred from any
further international collaborations for the next five years because
the treatment of the Chinese Communist Party in this film.  This is in
spite of fact that communist party officials in the film are portrayed
as genuinely sympathetic and well meaning individuals.
     The film implies that to those who lived through China's recent
history it is obvious that many people suffered as a result of
imperfections and inconsistencies in Party policy.  This suffering,
even though it may have been inflicted inadvertently, still demands of
that those who experienced it a need to come to terms with it.  TO LIVE
can be seen to be as an attempt to do this.
     The Party however is obviously still sensitive criticism of this
sort and so have put Zhang Yi-Mou in a five-year "time capsule."  The
positive side is perhaps that they did not punish him more overtly and
did not actively suppress the film from international circulation.

Author
Raymond Johnston
Dir: Zhang Yimou
Starring: Ge You, Gong Li, Niu Ben, Guo Tao
Based on the novel by Yu Hau
Winner of Best Actor and Grand Jury Prizes at Cannes
ERA International Films in association with Shanghai Film Studios
     Zhang Yimou helped put Mainland Chinese cinema on the world map.
He is one of the leaders of China's "fifth generation" of  film
makers.  JU DUO and RAISE THE RED LANTERN both told tragic period
stories in visually colorful settings.  His new project, TO LIVE; or as
it appears on the film itself, LIFETIMES; attempts to expand his
horizons from telling simple period tales to telling an epic  covering
all of recent Chinese history.
     TO LIVE follows the life of a decadent gambler's family from the
waning days of the Nationalist Government through the Communist
Revolution, the Great Leap Forward, the Cultural Revolution, and its
aftermath.  Each of these eras is set off by a separate title.  The
events of this family's life are picked up and continued with
characters being a decade older.
     The drama is quite touching but increasingly turns from being a
clever and original story full of sharp plot twists to being a story of
predictable plot devices.  The odd events that bring the gambler from
being a rich man to being an itinerant puppet master become in the
second half of the film a series of standard family tragedies.  The
film is best when it tries to convey the paranoia of the post-
revolution chaos.  Characters are aware that missing an important rally
could mean the suggestion of being counter-revolutionary, and
ultimately death.  The film is worst when it tries to personalize the
events of the Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution routine
melodrama.  Zhang Yimou's other films are notable for brilliant and
vibrant color schemes.  Much of this film is in a drab blue and grey,
the omnipresent colors of the post-revolution village and villagers.
     Somewhat compensating for this are several truly engaging
performances by Ge You as the one time gambler and Gong Li as his
wife.  They, and all the cast, depict their characters with extreme
conviction.  The settings, from colorful mansions to drab communal
buildings are also entirely credible if not always visually
interesting.  The ability of the characters to find elements of joy in
their increasingly chaotic lives is also a theme of the film that is
well realised.  Through all of the turbulence of historical events
depicted, the main characters manage to experience the full range of
human emotion.  They manage as the title suggests, to live.
     All of this is not to say the film is not good, but following so
closely on the heels of the very similar FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE it is
by comparison a disappointment.  That film gets much more mileage out
of the Chinese opera than this film gets out of puppet shows.  FAREWELL
MY CONCUBINE also builds up to higher and more significant
crescendos.  The terror of the Cultural Revolution is more real in
FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE because more of the action is on screen.  In
TO LIVE, much of that action is off screen, people run to and from
events that we do not see.  Bernardo Bertolucci's THE LAST EMPEROR,
not strictly speaking a Chinese film, also covers many of the same
events with more emotion and visual impact.  I recommend TO LIVE, but
it covers already well trod ground in a sometimes too predictable way.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TO LIVE is an incredible story of life in Communist China from the
beginnings of Mao's revolutionary victory through the Great Leap
Forward and the Cultural Revolution and ending with ascendancy of the
Red Guard.  It is all told with the story of a single working class
family with the husband played by Ge You and the wife by Gong Li.
     The movie is divided by decades.  Each of the three decades (40s,
50s, and 60s) in turn covers only a small time slice of the decade so
that in the end you feel like the husband and wife are old friends that
you have known for a long time and that, moreover, you know them
extremely well.  The script's layout and the brilliant writing make
this possible.
     We start with the husband as an idle landowner who ignores his
wife and who wastes his life and his fortunes in the gambling dens that
were popular just before the Communist takeover.  His only passion and
the only talent he has is his hobby of singing during shadow puppet
performances.  Soon, however, he is swept into the throws of the
revolution.  Throughout the show his puppet singing provides both a
metaphor for the spirit of each decade and his constant solace.
     I have never seen a more anti-Communist movie.  The horrors of
this ideology were everywhere.  When they are ordered to give up all of
their cooking utensils in order that the entire village could make the
equivalent of three cannon balls, the people are told not to worry
because Communism will provide for them.
     In another example of the horrors of the time, the Red Guard takes
over the hospital and throws out all of the doctors and nurses since
they are old and counter-revolutionary.  In their place, they have
young students attempt to guess at what to do for sick people.  Suffice
it to say that it did not work.
     In every decade, as their standard of living gets worse, they
still believe that it will be good someday.  It was not a very safe
time to be alive either.  If you were of working class stock, if you
managed never to get to be a party official, and if you laid low and
agreed to do whatever the party said and hate whomever the party said
to hate including your (ex-)friends, then and only then did you stand
much chance of survival.
     The movie, however, uses the backdrop of Communism more as a way
to explain the harsh living conditions of the family.  This show is
about family love more than anything else.  If your family could
survive this and be not only in tact, but happy, then it is a strong
family indeed!
     There are a couple of devastatingly awful tragedies that strike
this family.  It is easy to cry they are so terrible, and yet the film
is never manipulative.  I am glad the horrors were shown since it made
their ability to smile at adversity seem even more amazing.
     I know it will never happen, but Ge You deserves an academy
nomination and maybe the award as well.  To say his performance was
moving is a gigantic understatement.  Although Gong Li was not quite as
good, hers was an outstanding performance.  The movie is so real that
you had to pinch yourself to remember it was not a documentary.
     If you liked The Joy Luck Club, then you should love this since it
is an order of magnitude better made and more realistic.  TO LIVE was
one of the most life affirming movies of the year.
     TO LIVE is in Mandarin with easy to follow English subtitles.  It
runs 2:13 which is just about perfect although it was good enough to
make it a 6 hour movie in my opinion.  I recommend everyone over the
age of about 10 see it.  It is unrated, but I suspect it would be rated
PG-13 for some scenes of violence.  There is no sex, nudity, or bad
language.  I give it my top rating of ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Perhaps at present one of the best directors in the world is Zhang
Yimou, mainland China's prolific filmmaker.  In 1988, his RED SORGHUM
caught the attention of the West with the story of village wine makers
warding off the Japanese.  This was followed in 1990 with JU DOU, the
tragedy of illicit love in a society dominated by males.  RAISE THE
RED LANTERN, in 1991, had the intriguing story of a young girl who at
her parents' insistence marries a wealthy man in whose house she
becomes "the Fourth Mistress."  1993 brought us into the current world
of China with THE STORY OF QUI JU, a woman who attempts to fight the
bureaucracy.
     In TO LIVE, we cover some forty-plus years in China that include
Mao's The Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution, the Red
Guard, and the terrible toll on ordinary people.  Yimou uses one
family's travails as an illustration of what happened to the many
millions who had to live through those years.  As this review is being
written, the film is banned in China even though it includes nothing of
the current turmoil, imprisonments, etc.
     As in most of Yimou's films, his favorite (on and off the screen),
the beautiful actress Gong Li plays the lead.  Here she is a mother
with a young son and daughter, and a husband (Ge You) who, addicted to
gambling, ends up losing their home.  The film covers his career in the
army, his trade, which is that of a puppeteer, (of a kind I have never
before seen), his return to his home after the war to find that things
have changed in many ways, mostly politically.  The extremism of the
Left appears no more gentle than the kind found among the Right in
other countries of the world.
     If anyone knows how to tell a story, to get you involved with "the
big picture" as well as the individuals in it, Zhang Yimou is our man.
