Title
Review for Qiji (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
The sweetly silly MIRACLES (QIJI), stars Jackie Chan (RUSH HOUR and 
SHANGHAI NOON), who also serves as the film's writer and director.  
Originally released in 1989, a new, uncut and undubbed version is being 
shown in selected theaters now in the United States.  With a handsome 
new print that shows off the picture's sumptuous and colorful sets and 
costumes, the movie manages to rise above its slapstick roots.  
For those who go to Chan films only to see his signature brand of comic 
kung fu -- he prides himself in doing his stunts himself, no matter how 
painful -- the movie may be disappointing.  Not until a long ending 
sequence set in a rope factory does Chan really allow himself to cut 
loose and show off.  When he does, it is such a treat that even those 
who find the body of the story flagging will think it is worth the wait.  
The plot has the always adorable Chan, as Cheng Wah Kuo, accidentally 
becoming the leader of a group of Hong Kong gangsters, who are never 
happier that when their Tommy guns are blazing.  (The period isn't 
specified but appears to be the Roaring Twenties or perhaps just a bit 
later.)  Kuo wants his gang to find more respectable ways to earn a 
living, so he starts a nightclub called the Ritz in which Luming Yang 
(Anita Mui) becomes the lead singer.
The least interesting subplot has Kuo's rival, Tiger (Chun Hiang Ko), 
trying to extort half of the nightclub's earnings.  The main story 
concerns Kuo's big-hearted attempt to turn a flower woman, Madam Kao 
(Yah-Leh Gui), into a wealthy socialite for a short time in order to 
impress the family of the Shanghai man that her daughter, Belle (Gloria 
Yip), wants to marry.  Lies beget more lies as Kuo tries his best to 
help Madam Kao impress her future son-in-law's parents so that they will 
give their permission for him to marry her daughter.
"I'm tired of this farce," Kuo's right-hand man says at one point.  And 
to be honest, so was I.  A little trimming sometime could be a good 
thing.  Still, even if it does drag a bit, Chan's charm saves the day.  
It's a good-spirited production that's certain to leave a smile on your 
face.
MIRACLES runs 2:07.  The film is in Cantonese with English subtitles.  
It is rated PG-13 for action violence and some language and would be 
acceptable for kids old enough to read subtitles.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, seeing his first subtitled film, gave it ** 1/2.  
He said that he liked it and that it was cool and funny.  He found the 
subtitles -- it's a talky film -- a bit hard to keep up with at times.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Jackie Chan is a Hong Kong martial artist with a sense of humor.
His films are already quite popular in the US.  This film (also known
as THE CHINESE GODFATHER) is reportedly his favorite of all his films
and it is also a genuine cinematic curiosity.  While there are some
martial arts sequences, for the most part it is a remake of an old
Frank Capra film that Capra himself remade.  The films from Capra are
LADY FOR A DAY and A POCKET FULL OF MIRACLES.  This is so unlikely a
story for Chan to want to remake as a martial arts film it had to be
seen.  Chan plays a sort of country bumpkin from Canton whose martial
arts temporarily save the life of a crime lord.  In spite of Chan's
efforts however the crime lord dies of a natural death.  As he is dying
he names Chan as his successor.  Chan attributes his success to having
just bought a rose from an elderly street vendor.  Chan decides to go
ahead and take the role as gang boss put pushes the new gang into
legitimate enterprises including opening a new night club.  Whenever he
needs luck he buys a rose from the same street vendor. From here the
story is a very much LADY FOR A DAY.  Most scenes are directly borrowed
from the Capra.  The rose vendor has convinced her daughter that the
family is affluent.  The daughter has a wealthy fiance whose family
wants to meet the bride-to-be's mother.  They would never consent to
the marriage if they knew the mother-in-law was a lowly street vendor.
Chan learns of the rose vendor's problem and determines to carry out an
elaborate ruse to make his friend appear to be the society woman she
has pretended to be.  Before he is done he has traditional enemies
cooperating in his good deed.  The alternate title THE CHINESE
GODFATHER is an allusion not to the crime elements but to the young
couple saying they want Chan to be the godfather of their first child.
     Chan takes the opportunity to make this film even more different
from his usual fare.  Included is an extended tracking shot that took
three days to film. While it does not stand up to the tracking shots of
THE PLAYER and TOUCH OF EVIL, it is remarkable that it is present. Also
for the night club scenes he has a lavish singing production number.
It took tremendous chutzpah to pass off this sentimental comedy to
audiences who had come for an action film, but the result could be
Chan's most unusual film and it certainly seems to be unique in the
martial arts genre.   The one complaint is that this is territory that
has so frequently been visited.  Capra, of course, did the story twice.
But also with a few substitutions the plot was reused for LA CAGE AUX
FOLLES and THE BIRDCAGE.  I rate this film a +6 on the 0 to 10 scale
and a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
