Title
Review for Paperhouse (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Randy Parker
        PAPERHOUSE is probably one of those movies you've never heard of,
which is a shame because it's a gem.  The film was released in 1989 to a
handful of rave reviews, but it failed to find an audience and quickly
disappeared from the theaters.  It is now available on videocassette.  I
rented it expecting a solid little thriller; I did not expect to be swept
away--to be deeply moved, disturbed, and frightened.  PAPERHOUSE was,
without question, one of 1989's most striking and haunting films.  I'm
kicking myself for having missed the movie in the theater where it would
have had even greater visual and emotional impact.
        The movie (based on the novel MARIANNE DREAMS by Catherine Storr)
revolves around Anna, a precocious 11-year old played by Charlotte Burke.
Anna is a bratty troublemaker, miserable to everyone around her.  She gives
her teacher hell, she lies, and she is crabby to her mother (Glenne
Headly).  Then again, Anna has good reason to be bitter: she doesn't get
enough attention from her working mother and her father is never around
because his job keeps him away from home.
        PAPERHOUSE begins on Anna's eleventh birthday, and it's not a good
one.  First she gets detention at school, and then she comes down with a
glandular illness and starts running a fever and having fainting spells.
Happy birthday!  Anna's doctor orders her to stay in bed for at least a
week, a fate worth than death for a hyperactive eleven-year-old.  Anna
fills the time by drawing pictures.  In particular, she creates a drawing
of a house in a field with a boy looking out the second story window.
Then, a strange thing happens: every time Anna sleeps or faints, she has
vivid dreams of the house and boy in her drawing.  Anna soon discovers that
any change she makes to the drawing creates a corresponding change in her
dream world.
        In her dreams, Anna befriends Marc, the boy in the window, who
turns out to be paralyzed from the waist down.  The movie really plunges
into the twilight zone when Anna discovers that her doctor has a patient
named Marc who suffers from cerebral palsy; he is paralyzed from the waist
down!  In short, Anna knows Marc from her dreams despite having never met
him in her waking life.  The film is an eerie love story between a boy and
a girl who know each other only in their dreams.
        PAPERHOUSE is much more sophisticated and provocative than any of
the NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET films.  Director Bernard Rose and screenwriter
Matthew Jacobs realize that the most frightening horror lies not in special
effects but in the subconscious mind.  PAPERHOUSE dives into Anna's psyche,
exploring, among other things, her resentment toward her father and her
budding sexuality.  But at the same time, the character of Marc (Elliott
Spiers) gives the film a supernatural twist.  Marc, like Anna, exists in
both the dream world and the real world, which suggests that there is some
sort of weird psychic connection between the two, even though they have
never met.  The filmmakers wisely leave the fantastical elements of the
movie unexplained.  PAPERHOUSE walks a delicate line between psychological
drama and supernatural horror.  The ending, which easily could have ruined
the movie, is strangely satisfying: on one hand, it answers all of our
questions--on the other hand, it answers none of them.
        Three key ingredients make the movie effective.  First and
foremost, there is Burke's extraordinary performance as Anna.  Although
Spiers (as Marc) and Headly (as Anna's mother) are outstanding, PAPERHOUSE
is really Burke's show.  Her acting is invisible, or seamless.  That is, we
are never conscious of a performance; all we see is a fully realized
character.  Second, there is the stunning production design which brings
Anna's dream world to life.  The dream house is dark, dank, and depressing.
A sense of dread lurks in the air, and it makes you want to flee.  Third,
there is the flawless direction by Rose, whose experience as a music video
director evidently prepared him well for the visual challenge of making
PAPERHOUSE, his directorial debut.
        PAPERHOUSE is hard to shake once it catches you in its grip.  It is
a truly imaginative creation, and it just may be the scariest film since
THE LADY IN WHITE, which is another overlooked treasure also available on
home video.

Author
Shane Burridge
     Catherine Storr's cult children's novel  MARIANNE DREAMS had
already been made into a British television serial, ESCAPE INTO NIGHT,
fifteen years before this film version appeared.  While the television
adaptation followed the plot and ideas of the story faithfully, Matthew
Jacobs' new screenplay takes liberties which fans of the novel may not
enjoy.  The premise is basically the same:  A young girl (named Anne in
the film) falls sick and is confined to bed for several weeks.  She
begins to have dreams about drawings she has made in a sketchbook and,
upon discovering that a boy (Elliot Spiers) in her dreams actually
exists in the outside world, becomes convinced that the control over
her dreams is linked with the direction of real events.
     Rather than the naive child of the novel, Anne's character is a
rebellious sub-teen whose fantasy dreamworld has now been redefined as
Freudian subconscious.  It's a difficult role for audiences to
sympathize with, but Charlotte Burke plays the part convincingly.  In
fact it is less her growing relationship with Marc (the boy) than her
ambivalent feelings toward her absent father that determines the
direction of the story.  These feelings cause her to (unconsciously?)
recreate him as the agent of her sexual awakening - he becomes
literally the man of her dreams.  The climax of the story, in which her
father drags her from the paperhouse employs imagery of a vaginal
(fiery fissures opening in the ground around them) and phallic (the
lighthouse waiting for her in the distance) nature, but is more
`climax' than conclusion.  The film seems to end three or four times
before Anne finally stands before the lighthouse - in the real world,
this time - at the edge of a cliff (she is at the brink of womanhood)
with her arms open, inviting what may come.  This subtext makes for an
interesting examination of the emotional confusion associated with the
onset of puberty, but in doing so loses the children's audience that
might have otherwise been attracted to the story.  Neither, however,
does the film seem intended specifically for adults.  The real appeal,
as in the book, comes from watching Anne's drawings materialize
three-dimensionally in her dreams, and Bernard Rose handles the
transitory sequences well, imbuing the dream (later nightmare)
sequences with their own plausible reality.
