Title
Review for Gun Smith Cats (1995) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
news@jeeves.usfca.edu
Is it me or has anyone else noticed that rubber neckers are
the source of all traffic mess?  Think about it -- if
there's someone slow, you can always pass them by.  But when
there are rubber neckers who just want to see that stalled
car on the side, they have to slam on the break and crawl at
5 mph in hopes of seeing some gore.  Heaven forbit if they
ever see one, or else they'll cause an innocent car to
collide.  Oh yeah, and they're the one who bitch and moan
about the traffic mess when they're the cause of it all.
Speaking of bloody mess, GUN SMITH CATS, Chapter One (an
anime) came out so I had to go check it out.  It's about
this duo of gun shop owners who takes on jobs as bounty
hunters to suppliment their income.  Of course, the famous
babes with big guns apply.  And yes, the babes with fast
cars apply too.  Oh yeah, you can't forget about all kinds
of guns and explosions too.
No nakkid boobs.  6 dozen bullets.  No real dead bodies.  23
on the vomit meter.  No moon shots.  What we got here are:
Cobra-fu, telephone call from hell-fu, shotgun pointing the
wrong direction-fu, smoke bomb-fu, attack of careless
cop-fu, infomous ATF-fu, making the bail-fu, warehouse-fu
and of course, attack of killer baby sitter-fu.  Video hall
of fame to May for saying stuff like "at least you have
clean pair on" and to Rally for saying stuff like "you mean
like this?"  Three stars.  Shaggy Bob says wicked!
Spoilers - Ok, it's an anime.  Ok, it's too short (30min).
Ok, it's one of those typical babes with guns. Ok, there's
no real plot to get in the way of the story line.  So what?
It's got clear and concise plot that flows and keeps you on
the edge.  No real violence on the screen except for people
firing guns.  At least the two heroine's chemistry works as
well as the ATF guy's blackmail to recruit these women.  If
you're sitting around, waiting for the phone call from
Brittney Powell, pop this tape in while you're waiting.  If
she does call, you can always rewind to that point again.
Alien Alert!  Did ya hear that crime rate is at 10 year low?
I don't know about you but I sure don't feel any safer
considering juvenile crimes are up.  Now, we can get mugged,
beaten and killed by younger kids than by older ones.  Big
deal.  When there's virtually no crime, then we may have
something.  I think one is one too many.
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that reply key now.
