Title
Review for Trance (1998/I)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Dalgleish
"Everything that is, is in the process of becoming something else."
Starring Alison Elliott, Jared Harris, Christopher Walken, Lois Smith;
Written and Directed by Michael Almereyda;
Cinematography by Jim Denault
        It's hard to make a gloomy mansion possessed by an undead spirit
seem like an original conceit, but American writer/director Michael
Almereyda gives it his best shot in TRANCE (aka THE ETERNAL).  He makes
sophisticated use of dark fantasy tropes and a sombre visual palette in
this horror story about a 2000-year-old druid haunting the ancestral home
of an Irish family, but ultimately fails to transcend the circumscribed
limits of the generic material.
        The movie begins in America, where Nora (Alison Elliott) and Jim
(Jared Harris) and their eight-year-old son are about to leave to visit
Nora's aging grandmother in Ireland.  Nora falls down a staircase and has
to see her doctor; he advises her to call off the trip and reminds her that
she should stop drinking because of her headaches.  She ignores him.  Next
stop, Ireland, for a couple of pints of Guiness in a village pub, and,
then, as the family drives down the winding road to their destination,
strange images obscure Nora's vision, and she crashes the car.  The family
is miraculously uninjured, and they exit the damaged vehicle to find Alice,
who lives with Nora's grandfather and uncle, standing solemnly by the side
of the road.  She leads them to the family home--a huge ancient house by
the dark, treacherous bog.
        Almereyda effectively develops a mood of unease and foreboding in
the early scenes, suggesting that Nora and Jim drown their personal demons
with heavy drinking, and anticipating the incursion of the supernatural
into the mundane world by showing us brief elliptical images in Nora's head
and having Alice appear with uncannily precise timing.  Things become
stranger when we meet Nora's uncle (Christopher Walken, sporting an
intermittent Irish accent).  He is a strange, reclusive fellow, perhaps
insane--at night, he leads Nora to the cellar, where he reveals the
preserved peat-encrusted body of an ancient druid woman.  Of course, the
druid will come to life, and she will kill people.  And the phone line is
down.  It is a horror story, after all.
        It's a superior example of its kind in large part because
Almereyda, in tandem with cinematographer Jim Denault (THE BOOK OF LIFE,
CLOCKWATCHERS), establishes a mesmeric, disquieting appearance for the
film: it looks the way horror movies should look.  Long shots of dim
hallways where characters stand shrouded in shadow, silhouetted by distant
light.  Malfunctioning electric lights which bathe scenes in stark ominous
flickering blue luminescence.  Abrupt images of weirdly solemn children who
appear at odd moments and say nothing.  TRANCE is fundamentally a
conventional tale, but it is distinguished by its visual elegance,
including some sequences shot in Super-8 and, so I'm told, Fisher-Price
Pixelvision; the latter produces extremely low-fi images which are
remarkably effective here as a vehicle for dissociative and enigmatic
flashbacks.
        TRANCE also stretches the limits of its genre by making supple
metaphoric use of supernatural motifs.  Almereyda is interested in using
the conventions of horror to explore the persona of Nora rather than to
exploit their shock value.  Nora's return home, from New World to Old
World, seems intended as a symbolic encounter with her past identity, a
coming-to-terms with the passionate girl she used to be, before she left
for America and the comfort of her vapid marriage to glib, superficial Jim.
        The druid, when she comes to life, appears in Nora's form, and
functions as an external manifestation of Nora's repressed self, as doubles
often do in supernatural tales (Poe's "William Wilson" is a classic
example).  While Nora is emotive, civilized, neurotic and peaceable, the
druid is silent, feral, implacable and violent; Alison Elliott is good in
the double role, conveying the differences without overplaying them.  The
film becomes a confrontation between two aspects of the same woman: it is
about the need to acknowledge the past and to assimilate our buried selves.
        Unfortunately, whatever its intentions, TRANCE devolves into
moments of predictable horror during the final third, which weaken the
otherwise intriguing finale.  There is, for instance, a ludicrous reversal
of situation when a character on the verge of death is saved by an
off-screen--and implausible--gunshot.  Later, the druid advances menacingly
down the hall of the old house while gusts of meteorogically unlikely wind
whip her hair about and swirl redundant leaves about her feet.  Almereyda
has a strong sense of irony, and brings style and flair even to these
routine moments; nevertheless, such moments root the film within a moribund
genre, when it should be stepping beyond it.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: This is the kind of film you used to see in the 60s from
small studios like Tigon.  An American couple finds themselves in a
huge old Irish house with a mad woman stalking the hallways, and, oh
yes, a 2000-year-old Druid witch is also running around and shape-
changing.  Once it gets going it is entertaining but it would be hard
to claim it is actually a good film.  Rating: 5 (0 to 10),  low +1 (-4
to +4)
   - Written and directed by Michael Almereyda who directed the vampire
     film NADJA.
   - Far less experimental than NADJA but more coherent.
   - Alcoholic American couple Nora (Alison Eliot) and Jeff (Jared
     Harris) take young son and visit wife's family mansion in Ireland.
   - Huge brooding mansion beside the ocean.  Nora's grandmother is
     near 90 and senile.  Her uncle is nearly blind, but he continues
     his experimentation with a 2000-year-old petrified body found in
     the bogs and now in the basement.
   - Nora and Jeff are trying to give up alcohol, or so they tell
     themselves.  Very flip as if always drunk.
   - Irish accent is hard to understand at times.
   - Harris's acting style is very much like Christopher Walken's.
   - Myth of Earth and Sky: At the beginning of the world there was
     just Earth and Sky and they greatly loved each other.  Then they
     were separated.  When it rains the Sky is trying to touch the
     Earth.
