Title
Review for Little Princess, A (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In 1993 Warner Brothers scored a coup with the critics for their
adaptation of THE SECRET GARDEN by Frances Hodgson Burnett.  That wasa
cloyingly sweet if unconvincing moral tale for children.  Perhaps
sensing the mood of the country is moving back to the same sort of
sympathies it had at that time, Warner Brothers is again adapting one
of Burnett's stories, this one--A LITTLE PRINCESS--has been done twice
before, once with Mary Pickford in 1917 and again with Shirley Temple
in 1939.  I will say at the outset that this is not the kind of story
that does much for me,  It is not that I do not like children's films,
but Caroline Thompson's excellent BLACK BEAUTY is much closer to what
would appeal to me.  In spite of the fact that that film is a story
told by a horse, I found it far more touching and believable than this
exaggerated and contrived tale.  A far better treatment of similar
themes was in another example of a better children's film THE JOURNEY
OF NATTY GANN.
     As with THE SECRET GARDEN, this film opens with a young girl
brought up in India but having to return to her native country.  In
this case it is imaginative Sara Crewe (Liesel Matthews) who loves the
tales she has been told from the Ramayana.  But it is 1914 and called
to war is Sara's widower father (Liam Cunningham, who also plays the
blue-skinned Prince Rama in the too few dramatized sequences from the
Ramayana).  Sara is placed in Minchin School for Girls in New York.
The school is ruled over by the very repressed and autocratic Miss
Minchin (Eleanor Bron, veteran of films going back to the great
BEDAZZLED).  Minchin is clearly jealous of the advantages that wealth
has brought Sara.  But the audience knows that Sara's popularity is the
result of her story-telling ability which she uses to enliven the lives
of the other students.  Sara believes that a happy fantasy is better
than a grim reality.  When Sara's fortunes are reversed, however, Miss
Minchin is quick to turn Sara from a pampered student into a cruelly
used slave.  Sara is forced to give up her studies and work in the
school instead.  Still Sara has the ability to make and keep friends
including the other girls at the school and (from across the way) the
enigmatic Indian servant Ram Dass (Errol Sitahol) and his monkey
called--what else?--Hanuman, after the king of monkeys from the
Ramayana.
     Top billing goes to Eleanor Bron with a Frankensteinian shock of
gray hair.  Second billing goes to Liam Cunningham as the slightly too
good to be true father.  Liesel Matthews, who carries the film, must be
content with third billing because she is a child and a newcomer.
Almost all to the other cast members are unfamiliar, but the acting is
uniformly good.
     A LITTLE PRINCESS, like THE SECRET GARDEN, wants to be a moral
tale but falls more into the realm of kiddie film noir.  It is not her
virtue that saves Sara.  Coincidence is what saves her.  And her
virtues are a big part of what gets her into the trouble in the first
place.  The film does, to its credit, show some of the value of
imagination.  The villainous Miss Minchin is trying to eradicate any
imagination from her girls.  Yet it is the escape that comes from the
imagination that the girls really need.  This would be a very
interesting film to see paired with Peter Jackson's HEAVENLY CREATURES.
     Mexican director Alfonso Cuaron gives the film a nice feel for a
New York girls' school of the time (though actually the novel was set
in an English girls' school).  His film most comes alive when he is
portraying scenes from the Ramayana and he seriously might consider
lengthier dramatizations of that epic work.  He gets some details
wrong.  My wife noticed that his map of World War I Europe included a
Yugoslavia that would not come into existence until after the war.  His
depiction of gas warfare might be strong stuff for children if they
really understood what they were seeing.
     But the biggest fault is this.  A LITTLE PRINCESS is a superbly
contrived story in which a young girl seems destined to be badly
punished for being intelligent and imaginative.  Then the extremely
unsubtle hand of the author reaches out and saves the poor girl at the
last possible moment by a series of unconvincing and nearly impossible
coincidences.  There is little doubt that in the real world Sara would
not have been so fortunate.  Boy, am I glad I didn't read this one when
I was young and impressionable.
     I am afraid that I am just not destined to like any film based on
Frances Hodgson Burnett books.  This was only a little better than THE
SECRET GARDEN and I give it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Brian Koller
"A Little Princess" is a fantasy targeted to young girls,
of about the age of ten.  This means that adult males
whose notion of a great movie is watching Clint Eastwood
get the bad guys (sometimes that can be my idea of a
great movie as well) will likely find the film to be
unwatchable.
If you watch a film for action, "A Little Princess" is
painfully slow.  But if you are looking for emotion, the
film delivers the goods: privilege, injustice, revenge,
liberation, generosity, and suffering are among the themes.
While the entire plot could be condensed into an episode
of "Wishbone", the story merely provides a vehicle for
displaying the intense emotions that a little girl can feel.
The story is familiar, because it has been done before.
The original is from the children's novel by Frances Hodgson
Burnett.  There were four earlier cinematic versions,
including a silent from 1917.  The most famous version
is a Shirley Temple vehicle from 1939, which is almost
but not quite as good.
Sara (Liesel Matthews) is a young girl dotingly raised in
India by her wealthy and widowed father.  He must fight in
World War I, and he places her in a New York boarding school
run by the intimidating Miss Minchin (Eleanor Bron).
Sara becomes very popular, earning the jealousy of schoolmate
Amelia (Rusty Schwimmer).  However, Sara's father is killed
in the war and his assets are siezed.  Her tuition cannot
be paid, and she is forced into servitude, much to the
pleasure of Minchin and Amelia.  But a magical Indian servant
(Errol Sitahal) takes an interest in her fortunes.
Bron has the best role, in the fine tradition of Louise Fletcher
from "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest".  She dislikes the
independent Sara, but tolerates her as long as the bills are
paid.  When Sara can no longer afford tuition, Bron dresses her
in black, steals her possessions and relegates her to the attic.
This isn't all bad, as Sara is now able to be with the shunned
black servant girl, and can show her generosity by buying flowers
from street beggars (it only becomes generous when you are
nearly a beggar yourself).
The sets, such as World War I battlefields and New York alleys,
are well done although the budget requires them to be small in
scale.  The magical Indian is present to validate Sara's childish
fantasy stories, and to make plausible the incredible coincidences
behind the reuniting of father and daughter.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A LITTLE PRINCESS is at least the third film version of the book
of the same name by Frances Hodgson Burnett.  Shirley Temple was in the 
1939 version.  You may have seen the last film version of one of 
Burnett's books a couple of years ago - the delightful THE SECRET 
GARDEN.  She also wrote LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY and other kids classics.
     A LITTLE PRINCESS tells a magical, tragic, and dark and foreboding
tale.  Sara Crewe, played by first time movie actress Liesel Matthews, 
is a girl of I guess about the age of 10.  She lives a wonderful life 
in India.  She spends her days creating delightful stories of a 
princess and an Indian god.  Her idyllic life is shattered when her 
father (Liam Cunningham) must go off to World War I.
     Her father takes her to New York to stay in a marvelous private
room at the best boarding school for young girls he can find.  It is 
run by the evil Miss Minchin (Eleanor Bron from last year's BLACK 
BEAUTY).  She exudes charm to the parents so she can siphon off their 
money.  Her pupils are treated like prisoners, and she provides them 
with a mediocre education while probably skimming off large profits for 
herself.
     Sara with her story telling ability and her inherent likableness,
is an instant hit with almost all of the schoolgirls.  Among her many 
friends is Becky (Vanessa Lee Chester) who is the only girl servant at 
the school and the only black.  Sara's life soon takes a dramatic turn 
for the worse and that sets up the drama in the movie as well as the 
completely predictable ending.
     There is much to admire in this children's movie.  The acting is
pretty good.  Liesel Matthews gives a straight forward and simple 
rendition of Sara.  She never tries to manipulate your emotions; she 
just smiles a lot and delivers her lines.  I am not sure if she has 
much talent or not, but she is sweet.  Vanessa Lee Chester was given a 
small part and her acting consisted mainly of a lot nice smiling.
     The best performance in the movie is that of the actress playing
the villain, Eleanor Bron - an easy person to hate.  Liam Cunningham 
gives a lifeless performance as the father.  I wished the director 
(Alfonso Cuaron) had kicked him in the pants a few times to get a 
little more energy out of him or even better had cast someone stronger. 
The Indian manservant who almost never spoke and whose name I did not 
catch was extremely effective.  Powerful eyes.
     The real reason to see the show is for the magic of the images.
The set decoration by Robert W. Welch gave us golden leaves for the 
hopeful scenes and gray snow for the sad.  The street scenes of New 
York were wonderful and reminiscent of THE AGE OF INNOCENCE.  The 
cinematography by Emmanuel Lubezki, who should have won an Academy 
Award for LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, was worthy of Renoir.  The radiant 
colors in the story within a story set in India were incredible.  The 
best scene in the show had to be the one where the white snow burst 
into Sara's room like swirling white confetti and she danced in it in 
slow motion.
     What was wrong with the show, other than the actors being too low
key and relying too much on smiles to carry the day, was the script by 
Elizabeth Chandler and Richard LaGravenese.  For some reason, they felt 
obliged to add overly dark, sinister, and scary parts to a movie that 
had a fine evil villain already in Eleanor Bron.
     A movie that gets and flaunts his G rating needs not to be one
that can so easily and so needlessly scare small children.  Even 
Jeffrey, my 6 year old, got scared by it.  Be warned, therefore, than 
this is truly a PG show regardless of the advertising and of the 
official MPAA rating of G.
     Let me give a few examples.  First, why do you have people dying
in war with bombs bursting everywhere in a G show?  Why have scene 
after scene of realistic battle carnage?  Why have a frightening 
monster with numerous heads that lash out biting at the screen as if 
they are about to eat every kid in the theater?  Finally, why must we 
have a realistic scene of a child about to die in a horrible accident? 
If all of these plot devices are necessary, make them less explicit, 
insist on getting a PG rating and warn parents.  I recently saw a 
harmless show, THE ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP A HILL, BUT CAME DOWN A 
MOUNTAIN, which got a PG rating for a couple of damns - which most kids 
hear everyday.  Very few children have ever seen real battle carnage. 
End of diatribe.  The movie IS good nevertheless.
     A LITTLE PRINCESS runs a well edited (Steve Weisberg) 1:40.  My
son gave it a thumb sideways.  He hated the war scene he said, and 
although he claimed to have liked parts of the show, he was unable, 
when pressed, to name a single one.  I suspect kids 8 and older may 
like the movie more, and I suspect girls may be more fond of it than 
boys.  I enjoyed the picture and am awarding it ** 1/2. I recommend it 
to you with the above caveats about the violence.
______________________________________________________________________ 
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year.  A must see film. 
***  = Excellent show.  Look for it.
**   = Average movie.  Kind of enjoyable. 
*    = Poor show.  Don't waste your money.
0    = One of the worst films of this or any year.  Totally unbearable.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     Towards the end of A LITTLE PRINCESS, there is a scene where
the young heroine awakes to find that something purely magical has
occurred.  The night before, she and her friend had been using their
imagination to escape from the sad realism of their world.  In the
morning, they discover that what they had imagined had become
reality.  Magic is the *only* explanation that the film offers for
this event.  The scene works completely because, by this point, the
movie has completely convinced the audience that magic is truly
possible as long as you believe in it hard enough.
     This is the second film adaptation of Frances Hodgson
Burnett's classic children's novel "Sara Crewe", which was previously
filmed in 1939 with Shirley Temple (in a film that was also entitled
A LITTLE PRINCESS).  Screenwriters Richard LaGravenese and Elizabeth
Chandler along with director Alfonso Cuaron have created an absolute
gem of a movie, by far the best of 1995 to date.
     Fantasy is frequently an important part of the movies, but
this is a special film that is *about* fantasy and the power of the
human imagination.  The story is centered around young Sara Crewe
(Liesel Matthews), the daughter of a British Army captain.  After her
mother's death, her father has raised her on his own in India.  When
the father has to go off to fight in World War I, Sara is sent to a
New York boarding school run by the cruel and strict Miss Minchin
(Eleanor Bron).
     Even in the oppressive environment of the boarding school,
Sara maintains an unswerving belief in the power of imagination and
the existence of magic.  Through her undying spirit, she is able to
bring new life to everyone around her with the exception Miss
Minchin.  This is largely accomplished through Sara's telling of
elaborate, fantastic stories about life in India.  Cuaron beautifully
intercuts this storytelling with colorful fantasy sequences that 
visually bring the stories to life.  These fantasy sequences really
work because they actually seem like they are being shown from the
point-of-view of Sara's own imagination.
     Bron plays Miss Minchin as a menacing and controlling villain,
but she isn't purely evil. It seems clear that Miss Minchin feels
*threatened* by Sara's complete acceptance of magic and fantasy. Miss
Minchin is so completely steeped in the "real" world that she is not
only unwilling, but also *unable* to recognize the power of the
imagination.  In one key scene, Sara directly confronts Miss Minchin
with her belief that it is the right of all girls to be princesses. 
After this scene, it was a bit startling to realize that the look on
Miss Minchin's face is *regret* that she is unable to see the world
the same way.
     As Sara, Liesel Matthews gives a very natural, convincing
performance.  She truly has the *look* of a "little princess."  Some
of this comes from her natural appearance, but even more it comes
from the way that she carries herself and by her facial expressions. 
She appears to be wise, but not in a precocious way.  At all times,
she seems like a *real* child, but one that truly understands the
wonder of childhood.
     Initially, the early scenes between Sara and her father (Liam
Cunningham) may seem a little overly sappy.  Their relationship is so
loving and good that it stretches believability a little bit.  After
a while, though, I found that I understood the reasons that the
relationship was portrayed in this manner.  This relationship
*needed* to seem ideal in order for some of the later events of the
film to have their proper impact.
     Sometimes the right music score can greatly enhance even the
finest films.  Patrick Doyle has provided some absolutely amazing
music for this one.  Ever since he burst onto the scene with his
powerful score to Kenneth Branagh's HENRY V, Doyle has been one of
the most exciting working film composers.  This score is probably his
best effort to date.  He has provided a magical, almost operatic
score that mixes soaring orchestral music with some terrific vocal
and choral pieces.
     After a tragedy occurs towards the middle of the film, Sara
begins to lose her spirit.  That spirit is rekindled in a powerful
and magical sequence where she awakes in the night and discovers that
it has started to snow.  We are able to literally *feel* her faith in
magic returning as she dances in the snow.  The scene simply would
not have worked without the accompaniment Doyle's hauntingly
beautiful song "Kindle My Heart."  In the liner notes for the
soundtrack CD, Cuaron explains that the scene was literally designed 
*around* that song.  What an incredible testament to the power of
Doyle's music.
     So much of the impact of A LITTLE PRINCESS is purely emotional
that it is a somewhat difficult film to review.  It is tough to
precisely put my finger on exactly *why* this film works so well.  In
the end, I always come back to my total acceptance of that one
magical scene that I referenced at the beginning of this review.  For
me, the best movies are the ones that tell a story so convincingly
that I am willing to completely accept anything that happens, no
matter how unlikely.  That is exactly what happened here. 
     I actually saw the film a few weeks ago, but did not feel
ready to write my review before this.  It has surprised me a bit how
much I have found myself thinking about the film.  Even at this late
date, I feel that it is important for me to make an attempt to
capture some of my feelings about the film in writing.
     I also feel that this review is a worthwhile effort because
the movie really *needs* all of the support it can get. 
Unfortunately, Warner Bros has chosen to dump the film with little
support.  Here in Columbus, Ohio they released the film with
virtually no advertising and without even holding advance screenings
for local reviewers.  The critic for the largest local newspaper
didn't manage to get his rave review for the film published until 4
days after the movie opened (and after its opening weekend had
passed).  At this time, the film has already virtually disappeared
from theaters.  I urge anyone reading this *not* to let this
wonderful movie get away.  I also want to emphasize that this is not
just a movie for small children.  It is a movie for *anyone* that
appreciates good stories and magical filmmaking.
-- 
Jeffrey P. Graebner
Columbus, Ohio

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Liesel Matthews, Eleanor Bron, Liam Cunningham, Vanessa Lee
Chester, Errol Sitahal Director: Alfonso Cuaron Screenplay: Richard
LaGravanese and Elizabeth Chandler based on the novel SARA CREWE by
Frances Hodgson Burnett
Strip away the pink petty coats, frills and white lace and you're left
with a pair of shiny silk stockings. Like these stockings, this movie
shines a star or two above the mundane nylon/cotton crap giving the
general public an outbreak of jock itch, and other fungal infections. "A
Little Princess" is like a gem hidden beneath layers of sugar and spice,
and everything nice. Just don't choke on the rock when you guzzle down
the desert.
I was enchanted by the sweet experience of growing up in a fairy tale
world, where the niceties of living include having an adorable father
who adores you even more. This is the story of a child who goes from
riches to rags, with a life and death experience thrown in somewhere
between. Despite being maltreated and traumatised, this orphan keeps her
dignity and compassion throughout the ordeal. She holds firm to her
belief that every child is "A Little Princess" - meaning that all
children are special, despite their circumstance. This message holds
true with every child, but can the same be said in ten years time when
they grow into bratty, selfish teenagers? Or in thirty years time when
they develop power hungry tendencies? By sixty they should all have some
form of coronary heart disease.
I was impressed by the brazen colours, the bold images and insightful
themes. The most potent point in the movie is when the orphan girl
confronts her tormentor, the spinster head mistress, with a powerful
statement - "Didn't your father ever tell you that you were a princess?"
The Mistress's face grows cold, her eyes narrow and she storms out of
the room in a fit of rage - evidently not. All children are like royalty
when they enter the world, but depending on how they live their life,
the same cannot be said about them when they make a hasty exit.
This is an exceptional true to life story for children of all ages. Well
recommended and much enjoyed.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Liesel Matthews, Eleanor Bron, Liam Cunningham, Vanessa Lee 
      Chester, Errol Sitahal 
Director: Alfonso Cuaron 
Producer: Mark Johnson 
Screenplay: Richard LaGravanese and Elizabeth Chandler based on the 
            novel SARA CREWE by Frances Hodgson Burnett 
Cinematography: Emmanuel Lubezki 
Music: Patrick Doyle 
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers 
     A "family movie" is often loosely defined as a motion picture that, 
aimed at children, is likely to bore parents to tears.  Numerous 
examples leap to mind, most of them from Walt Disney Studios, a 
production company that holds the curious distinction of making animated 
features that are more mature than live-action ones.  However, A LITTLE 
PRINCESS isn't from Disney, it's from Warner Brothers.  Most 
importantly, it's not only suitable for consumption by those over age 
10, it's actually enjoyable.   
     The film is based on the popular 1888 children's book SARA CREWE by 
Frances Hodgson Burnett.  This is the third filmed version, following 
1917's A LITTLE PRINCESS with Mary Pickford and 1939's, which featured 
Shirley Temple.  While not as good as 1993's THE SECRET GARDEN (another 
movie based on a Hodgson story), this new version of A LITTLE PRINCESS 
can more than hold its own in a sea of overly-commercial attempts to 
grab children's hard-earned money.  Unfortunately, since it actually 
takes the time to develop characters and a story while eschewing 
explosions, it's unlikely to garner much at the box office.  Witness the 
performance of similar recent films if you doubt that. 
     The main character is Sara, played delightfully by newcomer Liesel 
Matthews.  The motherless girl has grown up in India, a land where "the 
air is so hot you can taste it."  In fact, the scenes there are filmed 
with warmth and color to emphasize the beauty as seen through Sara's 
eyes.  The year is 1914, and World War One is in full swing.  When 
Sara's father (played by Liam Cunningham), a British army captain, 
decides to rejoin his regiment, he deposits Sara in an exclusive girls' 
school in New York City.  Run by the nasty Miss Minchin (Eleanor Bron), 
this is a place that stifles creativity in favor of etiquette and strict 
rules.  Sara is immediately unhappy there, but her fortunes go from bad 
to worse when her father is declared dead in Europe and all his assets 
are seized by the Indian government.  Sara is left penniless and forced 
to work as a servant to earn her keep. 
     A LITTLE PRINCESS is an engaging tale about self-respect and the 
importance of imagination.  In India, Sara is told that "all girls are 
princesses", and this is a lesson she clings to when forced to mop 
floors and serve meals.  Even dressed in rags and living in a bare attic 
room, she is special -- and so are all the others around her, regardless 
of whether they're nice, snobbish, or bossy.  Princess or pauper, 
there's no difference in Sara's eyes.   
     She also accepts magic.  In her father's words, "Magic has to be 
believed -- that's the only way it's real."  Her stories about Princess 
Sita and Prince Rama not only enchant her schoolmates, but they give 
Sara an escape route once her father has been declared dead.  She uses 
fantasy as a tonic for her bleak reality without ever losing sight of 
what's happening around her.  Together with her friend Becky (Vanessa 
Lee Chester), she ventures to amazing places without leaving her room. 
     To be sure, A LITTLE PRINCESS has a few missteps.  For one thing, 
Miss Minchin could have been played with less villainy, but younger 
viewers will probably appreciate the one-dimensional nastiness.  There 
are also a few moments of overt sweetness, but these are easily 
forgiven.  Actually, there's very little this movie has to apologize for 
-- it's the rare kind of picture that can be enjoyed by viewers of 
eight, eighteen, and eighty. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
