Title
Review for Per un pugno di dollari (1964)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS (PER UN PUGNO DI DOLLARI) (director/writer:
 Sergio Leone; cinematographer: Massimo Dallamano; editor: Roberto
 Cinquini; cast: Clint Eastwood (The Man With No Name - Joe), Marianne
 Koch (Marisol), Gian Maria Volonté (Ramon Rojo), Wolfgang Lukschy
 (John Baxter), Sieghardt Rupp (Esteban), Joseph Egger (Piripero),
 Antonio Prieto (Benito Rojo), Pepe Calvo (Silvanito), Margarita Lozano
 (Consuelo), Mario Brega (Chico), Bruno Carotenuto (Antonio), Benito
 Stefanelli (Rubio); Runtime: 96; United Artists; 1964-Italy/W. Ger
 /Sp.)
A reworking of Kurosawa's "Yojimbo (61)." This Italian made western,
filmed in Spain, began the craze of so-called Spaghetti Westerns. Clint
Eastwood plays 'The Man With No Name,' in the first of the three films
made with the same theme (the others were: "For a Few Dollars More"(65)
and "The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly" (1966)). Clint was on TV doing the
Rawhide series and jumped at the chance to go to Europe to make these
films when both James Coburn and then Charles Bronson were offered the
parts by director Sergio Leone, but wanted more than the $15,000
available. The films became popular in Europe where Clint became a big
star, and three years later United Artists bought all three of 'The Man
With No Name' films and showed them with great success in America. The
film is a no message one, where violence is glorified by the hero who is
as amoral as the villains. This kind of attitude changed the way
Westerns were made. It's an entertaining film, gore and all, its only
drawbacks being the poor dubbing job and that Leone hasn't perfected all
his moves yet in a smooth way. Yet this film, not as rewarding as his
others, still has the style of the director's later works, plus the same
themes of graphic violence, a laconic hero, and the thrill of gunfights
galore.
Clint arrives in the dusty Mexican border town of San Miguel where
visitors just don't come without wanting something illegal. An old
bell-ringer tells the newcomer that in this town folks get to be either
rich or dead. Clint while riding through town on his mule is shot at by
the gunmen of the Baxter clan. He soon learns from bartender Silvanito
(Pepe Calvo) that there are two warring gangs in town: the Baxters and
the Rojos. They control the gunrunning and liquor business, and are in
an uneasy truce. The Baxters consist of: Sheriff John Baxter (Wolfgang
Lukschy), his shrewd business attuned wife Consuela (Margarita Lozano)
and their dumb son Antonio (Bruno Carotenuto). The rivals are the Rojo
brothers: Ramon (Gian Maria Volonté), Esteban (Sieghardt Rupp) and
Benito (Antonio Prieto). Their most trusted gunman is Chico (Brega).
Both sides have many hired guns, but the Rojo family is the stronger
clan. Clint decides he's clever enough to play them off one against the
other, and try to get all the money he can from both sides. He hires
himself out with the Rojos, and to earn his pay he kills the gunmen who
shot at him. Clint chomps at the end of his cigar without smoking it,
says little, wears a Mexican poncho, and is always with his trusted
.45s. He makes an imposing figure, as he's tall, bearded, and mean
looking.
Clint sees the possibility of big money coming his way when he witnesses
Ramon Rojo and his gang kill a Mexican calvary unit for their gold. He
steals two calvary corpses and tells each side to watch out for the
other, and thereby gets them into a shooting war. This results in lots
of corpses for the friendly coffin maker in town. But this scene was
shot in a shoddy way, as it was hard to comprehend that the two gangs
were so stupid that they would so easily believe that the stiffs they
were fighting over were real.
Clint does a good deed by rescuing the beautiful Marisol (Koch), who is
being held hostage by Ramon. He slays the Rojo gunmen guarding her and
returns her to her son and husband. For this he gets tortured by Ramon,
but escapes to watch the Rojo brothers burn down the Baxter house and
kill all of them. Then Clint returns to get into a shootout with the
Rojos, saving Ramon for last. He then rides off with the gold, instead
of with the pretty girl.
In this Western parody, there's some humor behind all the choreographed
violence and there's also a passable Ennio Morricone's score to instill
a sense of melodrama. What makes this mythical film noteworthy, is that
it serves an historical purpose as the start of a new trend in making
Westerns.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Sergio Leone
Writers: Sergio Leone and Peter Fernandez
Starring: Clint Eastwood, Gian Maria Volonte
Ever see either "Back to the Future II" or "III?"  Well, there was this
once scene in the second one where Biff in his hot tub with a bunch of
scantily-clad chicks watch this film's finale where Eastwood walks into
town where all the bad guys want to kill him, and he keeps being shot by
the leader, yet keeps getting up.  He then reveals an iron plate under
his mexican rug and proceeds to shoot all of them in a total of three
seconds.  It was also parodied in the third one, where Michael J. Fox
outsmarts Biff's grandfather (or is it great-grandfather) by using this
exact technique.  Leone's film is a classic film, as it was the
trendsetter for producing the anti-western: where the good guy isn't
necessarily "good," and the bad guys aren't always "bad," but they're
what Hitchcock called "greys."  Combined with Leone's amoral outlook on
the west, where most people were just greedy schmucks, this is one
bitching classic.
Basically a remake of Kurosawa's "Yojimbo" (which I haven't seen yet,
but I imagine is awesome as hell), "Fistful of Dollars" doesn't
necessarily limit itself to being just a "remake," but has a style all
its own, or rather that of director Sergio Leone's.  The first in a
trilogy that also featured "For a Few Dollars More" and "The Good, the
Bad, and the Ugly," this one introduces us to the eclectic and
mysterious character, The Man With No Name (Clint Eastwood), called that
because, well, we never find out his name.  Here we find Eastwood
looking his absolutely coolest: the three-day beard, the cigarette in
his mouth, the cool-ass cowboy hat, the mexican rug draped over his
body, the squinting eyes, and the hushed voice.  Also what seems to be
the fastest gun in the west, which pops out suddenly, firing with one
hand, and hitting the hammer with the other, for maximum speed.
He drops in on an anonomys village somewhere west ruled by two bands of
outlaws.  Emerging as a kind of fallen angel, not really sure whether he
wants the goodness of heaven or the luxuries of hell, he starts not only
playing for both teams of outlaws, but also starts helping the more
innocent people in town, like a family who's mother has been kidnapped
by the leader of the one band as his "chick" who Eastwood decides to
rescue and deliver her to her family once again, even if it might mean
being found out by his employers.
Eastwood comes into town on a mule, which is greeted with bullets by
some of the more asswholish bandits.  He parks it, walks over to them,
and tells them that his mule doesn't like people laughing at him and
wants an apology for the shooting.  The bandits laugh again, and
Eastwood looks up and tells them he doesn't appreciate the laughter.  He
then pulls his gun out, fires several times, and kills all of them
before they can even touch their guns.  The sheriff approaches him about
it, and Eastwood just shrugs off his warning by telling him to just get
the stiffs in the ground.  This is just one of many classic scenes,
amazingly directed by Leone, and acted well by Eastwood.
Eastwood hangs out in the local inn, befriends the owner, and begins
working both sides of the city, just for money.  They're having a big
war, which he doesn't care about, and eventually he gets rich and begins
taking down both sides of the bandits, and hopefully restoring it to a
good town.  The finale, which I talked about, involves Eastwood and one
side of the town, run by Ramon (Gian Maria Volonte).  
The amazing soundtrack by Ennio Morricone meshes well with the cool ass
direction by Leone, who, like Peckinpah and Woo, knows how to
orchestrate an action sequence, getting the maximum effect by the
audience, and even tossing in a satirical message.  And Eastwood doesn't
really need to act - his persona is perfect for the role.  But the Man
With No Name is no acting feat, although name one other person who could
have done it as effectively.
"Fistful of Dollars" is a classic of cinema, and is somtimes underrated
when people refer to westerns.  It is an anti-western: a film that
refuses to abide by the good John Wayne type overcoming the villains and
getting the girl.  Eastwood doesn't get the girl, but he takes off at
the end with a bag full of money.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dragan Antulov
Long time ago, I was in a used book store and stumbled upon
a scholarly book about westerns. The book covered all major
westerns up to 1975, but the chapter I had been interested
in was conspicuously short. The author gave only a lip
service to "spaghetti westerns", considering them to be
nothing more than the travesty of the genre. Validity of
such notion might be debatable, but not for the critics in
late 1960s and early 1970s, who had been seeing that genre
with the same snobbish disdain as blaxploitation or kung fu
movies. However, there was one director who had managed to
give "spaghetti westerns" good name. Sergio Leone is one of
the greatest and most influential Italian directors and his
films often considered to be masterpieces. That was
especially the case with three of his films known as Man
With No Name trilogy, which brought subgenre of "spaghetti
westerns" to the perfection. However, every beginning was
hard and FISTFUL OF DOLLARS, made in 1964, is a proof for
that.
Leone was often accused of not being too original in his
first major film. Plot of FISTFULL OF DOLLARS looks very
much like the one used in YOJIMBO, 1960 samurai classic by
Akira Kurosawa. However, even Kurosawa found his inspiration
elsewhere, and Dashiel Hammett's 1931 novel RED HARVEST is
often credited as the first one to use the same plot. Some
of the latter critics, on the other hand, claimed that Leone
found his inspiration in 18th century comic stage play by
Italian author Carlo Goldoni.
In any way, original or not, plot of this film begins when
Joe (played by Clint Eastwood), mysterious poncho-wearing
and mule-riding stranger, comes to San Miguel, small Mexican
town on US border. The town seems dead, and the reason for
that is soon revealed in the conversation with local
bartender (played by Joseph Egger). Town is ruled by two
gangs - Rojos brothers, liquor smugglers led by vicious
Ramon (played by Gian Maria Volonte) and Baxters, arms
smugglers nominally led by sheriff John Baxter (played by
Wolfgang Lukschy) and really by his wife Consuelo (played by
Margarita Lozano). Those two gangs are fighting for the
control, and the town is full of hired guns and killings
became part of every day life. Joe, being fast on the
trigger, sees that as an opportunity. He offers his
gunslinging services to both clans, switches sides and then
manipulates them into shootouts, earning lots of money in
the process.
FISTFUL OF DOLLARS, being the first Leone's spaghetti
western, is, naturally, inferior to his latter classical
works like THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE UGLY. The cheap budget
is much visible, script seems rather unpolished and full of
some interesting plot holes (town on Mexican side of the
border having the sheriff is one of them). The acting at
times, especially during the ultra-sentimentalist scenes in
Marisol subplot, is plain terrible. The ending is weak,
sacrificing believability for the sake of the neat little
happy end.
On the other hand, even at his worst, Leone shows his
immense talent. Pacing is brilliant, scenes excellently shot
and his trademark of extreme close-up used with great
success. Black humour is also present in this film. And, of
course, Leone used services of great Ennio Morricone, one of
the best and most prolific music composers in the history of
cinema. Leone has, as he would do in all of his latter
films, used Morricone's score as the basis for his scenes,
and not the other way around. Morricone (billed as Dan Savio
on the credits) was here in his prime, using some of the
motives that would be enhanced and even more effective in
FOR A FEW DOLLARS MORE and THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE UGLY.
Apart from Leone, this film was important for another great
talent. Clint Eastwood had already became famous in
TV-series RAWHIDE, but the role of The Man With No Name
(although actually named in this film) was the one that
launched him to orbit. Eastwood here plays one of the first
great antiheroes of cinema - tough, cynical and utterly
materialistic man who doesn't have any problems with money
through bloodshed. The audience roots for him not for the
sake of his moral superiority, but simply because he happens
to be much smarter and more successful than others. On the
other hand, Leone's script shows that under the mask of
cynicism lies kind human heart; Joe doesn't want to do the
right thing not because he is bad; he is pragmatic because
he knows better. And when actually does the right thing, he
suffers because of it.
Eastwood was the only major American actor in this film, but
that didn't prevent him for being partner with truly
talented actors. Gian Maria Volonte (billed as Johnny Wels)
is impressive as villain, and he would improve his villainy
in next Leone's film. This film also features whole bunch of
actors whose faces are more than familiar to the fans of
Leone's spaghetti westerns.
FISTFUL OF DOLLARS is definitely pale in comparison to other
films by Sergio Leone, but even such imperfect and inferior
example of that master's work should be recommended as very
entertaining film, even for those who are familiar with his
masterpieces.
