Title
Review for Last Summer in the Hamptons (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS is a Henry Jaglom film.  He is the
director, the editor, and to the extent there is a script, he wrote it.
As in most of his movies, he also plays a role, albeit a small role in
this film.  Jaglom is arguably the most independent of film makers in
America today.  He makes his movies for himself and allows the audience
to view them much as your neighbor might invite you over for some home
movies.  He is frequently criticized for being self-indulgent, but to
me that is his charm.
     Although Jaglom films can be pretentious one moment and totally
off the wall the next, they always push the edge of the envelope.  My
favorite is ALWAYS (1985) which should not be confused with Spielberg's
ALWAYS (1989) with Holly Hunter.  Jaglom's ALWAYS is a
pseudo-documentary about the signing of his divorce papers and has a
subtitle of BUT NOT NECESSARILY FOREVER.  In ALWAYS he has a weekend
party and invites his soon to be ex over along with all of their
friends.  It was one of my top ten movies of the 80s.
     Jaglom does not mind experimenting which means some of his movies
are turkeys, but others are brilliant successes.  I found LAST SUMMER
IN THE HAMPTONS to be a minimally enjoyable movie, but one that,
nevertheless, has a certain fascination.  It starts with the strains of
"Accentuate the Positive".  This choice of this tune has a meaning you
may want to ponder during the slow parts of the film.  In typical
Jaglom style the picture is shot (Hanania Baer) frequently with a
single handheld camera and too many pans and zooms that leave the
audience dizzy.
     In LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS, Helena Mora (Viveca Lindfors) the
matriarch of an artistic family invites everyone back for the last
summer they will have in the family home in the Hamptons before it is
sold.  Helena is a great star who owns the large sprawling home.
Although retired from acting herself, she teaches it to others.  Her
family consists of her son-in-law, avant-garde director Ivan Axelrod
(Andre Gregory), his daughter Trish (Melissa Leo) and his playwright
son Jake (Jon Robin Baitz), Helena's son Eli Garield (Ron Rifkin) and
his daughter Chlow (Martha Plimpton), and others.  To the estate they
have invited the currently famous actress Oona Hart (Victoria Foyt).
     The family is one who prides themselves in taking forever to
produce their artistic endeavors and not caring if they are financially
successful.  Jake however informs the audience that "the dirty little
secret of the avant-garde is they are jealous of money."  It is as if
Jaglom is saying this himself.  As if he is saying, I only make these
art house pictures and although I claim not to care, I wish one would
become a major hit that would make me filthy rich.
     When Jaglom shows up in the movie, he plays Oona's agent Max.  Max
wants her to play a sequel to the mindless but popular movie she just
finished.  He claims that if she does this, she could start commanding
two to three million dollars per picture.  She is angry because she
feels her life is being wasted and tells him forcefully, "We could have
done something important Max.  We could have fought child abuse or
Republicans!"
     Although Oona is successful, she keeps trying to improve her
craft.  She does this by acting as a baby seal, a leopard, and a heron.
She has long scenes where she converses with people acting and talking
like these animals.  A great but failed attempt by Jaglom at
creativity.  Poor Foyt really put herself out on a limb and tried hard,
but ended up looking bizarre and totally ridiculous.  When he has Andre
Gregory (MY DINNER WITH ANDRE and VANYA ON 42ND STREET) act as a
leopard wooing Foyt's leopard, you want to yell at the screen to get
serious.
     The best and only part of show that really works is the way it
deals with Trish and her incestuous relationship with her gay brother
Jake.  None of the rest of the characters in this movie are the least
bit believable, but Jake and especially Trish are.  They have a serious
problem to deal with and the movie handles the touchy subject of incest
honestly and amazingly well.  To further complicate things, Trish
complains that Jake steals all of her boyfriends.
     LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS runs overly long at 1:45.  It is rated
R for some bad language and for the incest themes.  It is a soft R and
would be fine for teenagers.  Although I can not recommend the movie,
I'm glad I gave it a try.  Mining Jagloms can sometimes turn up gold,
but then again, sometimes not.  For the risk taking and for the
excellent acting by Melissa Leo and Jon Robin Baitz, I give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS *** 1/4  Directed by Henry Jaglom. 
Written by Jaglom & Victoria Foyt. Produced by Judith 
Wolinsky. Photography, Hanania Baer. Cast: Viveca Lindfors 
(Helena Mora), Kristoffer Tabori (Nick Mora), Victoria Foyt 
(Oona Hart), Jon Robin Baitz (Jake Axelrod), Savannah Boucher 
(Suzanne), Roscoe Lee Browne (Freddy), Andre Gregory (Ivan 
Axelrod), Nick Gregory (George), Melissa Leo (Trish Axelrod), 
Roddy McDowall (Thomas), Martha Plimpton (Chloe Garfield), Ron 
Rifkin (Eli Garfield), Diane Salinger (Marian Mora Garfield), 
Brooke Smith (Lois Garfield), Holland Taylor (Davis Mora 
Axelrod) and Henry Jaglom (Max Berger).  A Rainbow Film Co. 
release. 106 mins. Rated R (occasional adult expressions and 
references to incest)
Irritating for some, intriguing for others, clever and 
fascinating for many, Henry Jaglom's latest picture is, 
whatever the reactions, one of the sharpest depictions of  the 
hearts, minds and above all, fixations on careers of theater 
people: actors, playwrights, directors, teachers, satellites. 
The one major exception is Oona Hart (Victoria Foyt, the 
current Mrs. Jaglom) who visits from Hollywood.
Oona goes to a large country house in the ritzy Hamptons. For 
financial reasons, the owner, aged stage actress (and ex-movie 
star) Helena Mora(Viveca Lindfors), has put it up for sale. 
As is customary,  matriarch Helena's large, extended and 
talented family, all in theater, gather there in the summer. 
This is their last weekend. Traditionally too, the clan has 
mounted a play for a single performance, a yearly, 
artistic-cum-social event attended strictly with limited 
invitations.  
Oona enters the new milieu with trepidation and a load of 
complexes. She earns far more from movies than anyone around 
from stagecraft, but she is insecure, in awe of real pros and 
(I guess) because while bankable she has not attained true 
stardom. Without becoming a catalyst she is the main thread of 
the film as it presents us with a multitude of situations 
among the regulars. 
What sets everyone apart from common mortals is ego and 
egocentrism, terms that are not synonymous. The second, in 
addition to self-importance, includes colossal 
self-absorption. Oona's ego may not be larger than the 
others', but in an ocean of "I, I, I," her share is gigantic.  
She is also a specialist in "You, you, you." In that other 
thespian movie, "All About Eve," cynic George Sanders advises 
Marilyn Monroe to go and do herself some good. That's just 
what Oona is about.
Flitting from person to person, she networks, schmoozes, 
dispenses gobs of hyperbolic compliments, transparent 
flattery, heavy adulation and outpourings of fraudulent 
sincerity. Buttering up director Ivan Axelrod (stage director 
Andre Gregory of "My Dinner with Andre") she gushes about his 
work, then admits she has never seen any of it: "But I've 
heard about it ... You're like a legend."
What, in showbiz lingo, tops the gag, is that Ivan accepts 
this hook, line and sinker. He doesn't even smile ironically. 
Later, in fact, he cuddles Oona. At another point he has 
something like near sex with her as she does her panther 
exercise, jumping, clawing and roaring. (When she does her 
baby seal exercise she's just as hilarious). 
The performers, all excellent, have zip, zing and verve. I 
only regret that the great, distinctive Roscoe Lee Browne who 
can radiate intelligence and irony like nobody's business, has 
such a tiny role. 
The structure of the film is like a string of improvisations, 
but in reality it is a careful charting of encounters. Large 
family reunions around Helena's table are done in most 
un-gourmet fashion as food is barely the background and talk 
is all. Smaller groups are formed. Dominant are the repeated 
tete-a-tete two-shots, with the same couple or with a 
different partner.
Seldom has a movie deserved more the description of "bits and 
pieces." So many of them that they may try your powers of 
concentration as you attempt to figure out who's who or what 
to whom.  
Unlike the conventions of the "well-made play," where the 
exposition starts as the curtain goes up on Act I, Scene 1 and 
soon we are given basic information about many characters, 
"Last Summer" is hyper-realistic. It's like getting plopped 
into a big party and having to fend for yourself in figuring 
out the identities of others guests.
When Jean Renoir's classic "The Rules of the Game" (an obvious 
inspiration for "Last Summer") gathered a motley weekend crowd 
in a chateau, the diverse characters stood out with clarity, 
as they do in Jaglom's other models: Chekhov's "The Cherry 
Orchard," the older novel, play and film "Grand Hotel," Ingmar 
Bergman's "Smiles of a Summer Night," its clever Woody Allen 
version "A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy," etc. 
Jaglom takes his non-method a bit far. I thought of viewers 
who complain that too many subtitles in inordinately talky 
foreign films block the looking at screen images. Mr. Jaglom 
might have used occasional identifications, like those on TV 
news or documentaries: "Henry Purcell, Rio Tonto Police 
Chief." Not too many of course, since part of the game is 
figuring out the characters.  
English-born (1939)Henry Jaglom, first an actor on American 
TV, entered movies as an editorial consultant (whatever that 
means) for "Easy Rider" (1969) before turning writer-director 
with "A Safe Place" in 1971. "Last Summer" is, as per Jaglom, 
his eleventh film, but in reality his twelfth if you count his 
co-direction of the theatrically unreleased "National Lampoon 
Goes to the Movies" (1981). 
Jaglom is an independent and a maverick who makes decidedly 
non-Hollywoodian movies, super talky affairs of staged 
"cinema-verite" (documentary),with players who range from many 
unknown or little known to second-stringers. In his filmic 
cocktails, he mixes and stirs them with "real" people, often 
filmmakers like Orson Welles, Bob Rafelson, Monte Hellman, 
Milos Forman, John Landis. 
The average cast is large. Names and no-names generally share 
the pie democratically.With "Always," Jaglom started 
increasing the number of parts. With "Someone to Love," 
"Eating," "Venice-Venice" (60 parts, albeit many microscopic) 
and "Babyfever" Jaglom became the Cecil B. DeMille of 
Kammerspiel.
In "Last Summer" what we don't learn about theater people is 
hardly worth mentioning. Among the revelations (to those 
unfamiliar with the profession) is that everything, including 
personal life, is ever sacrificed to getting a part. 
Oona, cynically encouraged by her visiting lover (Jaglom) has 
a fling with a talented grandson of Helena's. He, poor soul, 
deludes himself that Oona might follow him to the wilds of the 
Midwest. She: "I don't even know where Missouri is!" 
We learn that ambition goes so far that a "gorgeous 
apprentice" (Nick Gregory) fakes being gay and comes on to 
young playwright Jake (real playwright Jon Robin Baitz) to 
advance his (the phony's) career. We learn that a director 
father is jealous of his successful son and that the first 
sexual experience of a young woman was with her gay brother. 
We learn about family relations, problems, alienations, about 
truths, lies, deceptions, self-deceptions and the terrible 
toll of aging.  
Helena explains that she left Hollywood and returned to the 
stage because there she could learn much more about her craft. 
True enough, but wasn't it also because getting old demotes 
one to lesser parts?   
In the most moving scenes, twice Helena watches herself on TV. 
She sees Viveca Lindfors in her two initial movies, after 
Hollywood imported her from Sweden. Her first US film ("Night 
Unto Night") was in 1947, opposite Ronald Reagan. It was 
shelved until 1949 so that her public screen debut was with 
Errol Flynn, in 1948  ("The Adventures of Don Juan"). One 
picture may have been a dud, the other a potboiling 
swashbuckler, but even if we know those facts, there is pathos 
in stars looking at their glory days. Think of  "Sunset 
Boulevard." 
Miss Lindfors died while on tour in Sweden in 1995. Unlike 
Helena, she never left the cinema although she did also return 
to the stage. Her penultimate movie was the 1994 "Stargate." 
She worked in almost 60 films, few of them worthy of her 
talents--unlike "Last Summer," where her last appearance is a 
fitting, touching grand exit. 
