Title
Review for Post-coďtum, animal triste (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Post Coitum is an unusual film about human sexual relations - both
because it's told completely from the woman's perspective and because
it shows graphically but always tastefully the heat of passion.
     Starting with a close-up of a cat with a serious case of heat,
director Brigitte Rouan cuts to a scene of herself - she's also the
star - alone in bed in a similar fit of heat.  The remarkably frank
story by Santiago Amigorena, Jean-Louis Richard, Brigitte Rouan and Guy
Zylberstein studies the impact of an affair by a middle-aged married
woman, Diane Clovier (Rouan), a successful publisher who nurtures her
authors like their mother.
     Diane has a wonderful husband, a successful trial lawyer named
Phillipe (Patrick Chesnais), and two lovely young teenage sons.  Diane
is a good "mum," who likes playing soccer with her boys in the park.
With her everywoman looks - attractive but nothing special - Rouan is
the perfect choice for the part.
     Into her life one day walks a young hunk named Emilio Pessi,
played with animal instincts by a suave and sexy Boris Terral who, with
his long curly hair and deep eyes, would attract any woman's attention.
Emilio tells her he is a "plumber," a "hydraulic engineer for the Third
World" to be precise.
     Soon they are locked in the throws - and I do mean throws - of
passion.  Most movies about adultery have a quick tryst and then the
character spends the rest of the movie in anguish.  POST COITUM, on the
other hand, doesn't pull any punches in showing the joy of the affair.
When the movie turns tragic, Rouan the director should have retained
better control of Rouan the actor, but in the protagonist's downfall,
as in her ecstasy, her emotions are quite palpable.
     The movie is encumbered with two needless side-plots.  One
involves a murderer whom Phillipe is defending, and another is about an
author suffering from second-book syndrome.  Eliminating both would
have made for a cleaner narrative.
     "Absolute passion is a tragedy," Phillipe says in a practice
summation to the jury about a case of an elderly murderer.  His speech
is filled with double meanings.  If someone had defended Diane's
actions, they might argue that she loved too much and none too wisely.
     POST COITUM runs 1:37.  The movie is in French with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would probably get an R for nudity,
graphic sex, and profanity.  The movie is not appropriate for
teenagers.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Brigitte Roüan, Boris Terral, Patrick Chesnais, 
      Jean-Louis Richard, Nils Tavernier, Françoise Arnoul
Director: Brigitte Roüan
Producer: Humbert Balsan
Screenplay: Santiago Amigorena, Jean-Louis Richard, Brigitte Roüan, 
      Guy Zylberstein
Cinematography: Pierre Dupouey
Music: Michel Musseau, Umberto Tozzi
U.S. Distributor: New Yorker Films
In French with subtitles
     One of the great things about movies is the depth of emotion they 
are capable of conveying.  In THE SWEET HEREAFTER, we feel the wrenching 
loss of a town stripped of its children.  In BLUE, we suffer alongside a 
woman on a quest to assuage her grief.  In UN COEUR EN HIVER and THE 
REMAINS OF THE DAY, we are suffused by the frustration that comes from 
emotional paralysis.  As unforgettable as these and countless other 
films are, there's a flip-side to this kind of power, and it's most 
evident when a picture tries unsuccessfully to tap into our emotions.  
POST COITUM (the full title, truncated for American release, is POST 
COITUM, ANIMAL TRISTE, or, literally translated, AFTER SEX, ANIMAL 
SADNESS) is such a movie -- weak, superficial, and unconvincing, it 
turns what could have been a searing experience into a trite, 
overwrought melodrama.
     The problems begin at the outset, with a quartet of scenes 
seemingly designed to baffle even the most astute viewer.  The first is 
of a cat meowing and sensuously stretching as it rolls across a floor.  
Then we see a half-naked woman, who turns out to be protagonist Diane 
Clovier (Brigitte Rouan), writhing in agony on her bed.  Cut to an 
elderly couple preparing to eat dinner -- suddenly, the woman, Madame 
Lepluche (Francoise Arnoul), stabs her husband in the throat with a 
fork, killing him.  Next, Diane, no longer in the throes of emotional 
turmoil, but in complete possession of herself and dressed smartly, 
enters a darkened apartment and proceeds to wake up a man named Francois 
(Nils Tavernier), his girlfriend, and his room mate, Emilio (Boris 
Terral).
     Eventually, it becomes clear what's going on.  The bulk of the 
movie, which centers on the May-December affair between the young, 
virile Emilio (a twenty-something hydraulic engineer), and the mature, 
married Diane (a forty-something book publisher), is presented in 
flashback from the perspective of the woman, who is unable to cope with 
the end of this relationship.  At the same time, we are told the story 
of Madame Lepluche, a client of Diane's lawyer husband, Philippe 
(Patrick Chesnais), who, after 43 years of marriage, killed her spouse 
rather than letting him divorce her.  These disparate plot elements, 
which begin widely-separated in time, tone, and intent, eventually 
converge as the film moves through a sometimes-tedious final half-hour 
towards an awkward conclusion.  
     Director Brigitte Rouan, who also plays the lead role, fails in two 
key areas:  she never creates believable, three-dimensional characters 
and she doesn't delve sufficiently deeply beneath the surface of a 
shallow plot.  We are supposed to feel Diane's joy and exuberance at re-
discovering her lost youth and sexuality when the affair begins, then 
join her on a descent into near-madness and alcoholism after Emilio 
dumps her.  Unfortunately, Diane isn't a credible character -- she is 
sketchily developed, and this led to a profound lack of interest on my 
part about her fate once she switched into the self-destructive mode.  
Approached differently, this story could have been devastating, but 
Rouan elects to keep everything surface-deep rather than exploring the 
murky wellspring of emotional pain that drives Diane.  As a result, 
instead of reaching into the territory inhabited by the likes of LEAVING 
LAS VEGAS, POST COITUM comes across as nothing more compelling than a 
97-minute soap opera.  It's heavy-handed, obvious, and not the least bit 
moving.  
     The acting can best be described as uneven.  Rouan gives a raw, 
courageous performance, showing Diane in modes that range from unchecked 
lust to rampant self-pity, but the strength of the actress' passion does 
not guarantee consistently effective work, and she has a tendency to go 
over-the-top (especially in those awful scenes that bookend and 
punctuate the flashbacks).  As Emilio, Boris Terral is bland.  Aside 
from his good looks, he doesn't bring much to the part -- it's difficult 
to see this character as anything more than a function of the plot.  
Rouan needs someone for Diane to have the fling with, but she never 
develops him into something more substantial than a generic younger 
lover.  More impressive than the two leads are the primary supporting 
characters.  Patrick Chesnais creates the film's only sympathetic and 
original individual -- as Diane's husband, he's torn between anger at 
his wife's betrayal, jealousy that she comes alive for another man, and 
impotence that he can do nothing to assuage the consuming pain she feels 
when her lover leaves her.  Finally, as Francois, the writer who relies 
upon Diane for his artistic inspiration, Nils Tavernier gives a solid 
performance in an underwritten part.
     Rouan's intentions are obvious -- she wanted this film to be an 
autopsy of both sides of an unexpected, all-consuming passion:  
exhilaration and devastation.  However, the script betrays her, and POST 
COITUM wallows in half-baked melodrama with a character who seems to be 
hugely overreacting to the end of a short affair (it's Rouan's duty to 
convey why Diane's collapse is well-motivated, but she never does this -
- instead, she relies on the real-life experiences of her viewers to 
fill in the blanks).  POST COITUM almost seems like some kind of 
cinematic shorthand for a more ambitious project.  We see what Rouan is 
striving for, but, at the same time, recognize that she hasn't achieved 
it.  So, like all shorthand, this has more meaning to the author than to 
anyone else.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
POST COITUM, ANIMAL TRISTE
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Ognon Pictures
 Director:  Brigitte Rouan
 Writer:  Brigitte Rouan, Santiago Amigorena, Jean-Louis
Richard, Guy Zilberstein, Philippe Le Guay
 Cast: Brigitte Rouan, Patrick Chesnais, Boris Terral, Nils
Tavernier, Jean-Louis Richard, Francoise Arnoul
   A teen-aged boy tells this story, which is at the heart of the
movie...A mouse wanders around the railroad tracks when a
train comes and cuts off his tail.  The mouse does not notice
this until he arrives home.  The next day he runs back to the
tracks to search for what's missing when a train comes and
cuts off his head.  The moral of the story: If you chase tail,
you'll lose your head.  "Post Coitum, Animal Triste" is the
story of a woman who chases tail, so to speak, who loses her
head, but who gets an opportunity to set it right back on
again.  It's a love story--and the French know about such
things--and it goes against the stereotype that French
romances are talk, talk, talk and little action.  There is some
interesting talk, all right, but the passions are so strong that
the visceral reactions of the principal character Diane Clovier
(Brigitte Rouan) will make you squirm.  
   This girl-gets-boy, girl-loses-boy story engages us because
of the way director Brigitte Rouan cleverly weaves a subplot
into her principal focus, but even more because of Ms.
Rouan's remarkable acting.  She has the uncanny ability to
change from a writhing, despair-ridden, suicidal victim of lost
love, as we see her in the opening scene, to a woman
involved in her career, then on to a peak of sexual frenzy and
ecstasy and back again, playing all parts beautifully.
   Diane proves that women can have mid-life crises that
easily rival those of the male gender.  She has hit the big 4-0,
has a job of some power at a small publishing company,
enjoys the love of her husband and two teen kids.  What's
wrong with this picture?  Nothing, that is, provided that no
outside force intervene.  But when the 20-year-old friend of a
writer she is encouraging, Emilio (Boris Terral), 
literally sweeps her off her feet, her love-at-first-sight becomes
an addiction for both.  They meet, sometimes openly in a
park, in one instance brazenly in a public ladies' room, where
they consummate their affection with utter freedom.  All the
while Diane must try to get one of her authors, Francois (Nils
Tavernier) to overcome writers' block--he claims he cannot
understand a woman's desires.  Conveniently enough, Diane
has a new experience to help him over the hurdles.
   In a fascinating subplot involving the gruesome and sudden
murder of a cheating man by his wife of 43 years, Madame
Lepluche (Francoise Arnoul), Rouann, successfully adapting
the screenplay she wrote with four others, shows us yet
another way a mouse can lose his head by chasing tail. 
Helpfully, Mme. Lepluche is defended in court by Diane's
loving husband Philippe (Patrick Chesnais), and will be able
to use his own cuckoldry to try to move the jury.
   "Post Coitum Animal Triste," which bears the French title
"Un Certain Regard," closed the 50th Cannes International
Film Festival 1997 before being screened at New York's own
annual festival.  It includes one visual which is particularly
humorous of Diane literally floating on a cloud while in the
throes of her new passion and a convincing chemistry
between Diane and the lover who is twenty years her junior. 
The enormous trouble which marital betrayal brings hits home
in this movie through both a swift but graphic murder scene
involving a woman who stabs her cheating husband in the
neck with a carving fork--and the break-up of Diane's own
family through her own mad fling.  "Post Coitum" is wonderful
at bringing out an adage repeated by Diane: "When you're
twenty and love goes wrong, you cry because you think you'll
never love anyone again.  After 40, you cry because it's far
more likely that you never will again." Not Rated.  Running
Time: 95 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten
