Title
Review for Memento (2000)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Memento (2000)
Guy Pearce, Carrie-Anne Moss, Joe Pantoliano, Stephen Tobolowsky,
Harriet Sansom Harris, Callum Keith Rennie, Jorja Fox. Screenplay by
Christopher Nolan, based on a story by Jonathan Nolan. Directed by
Christopher Nolan. 113 minutes.
Rated R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Leonard Shelby can't make new memories. He shares this fact with each
person he meets, then shares it all over again the next time he sees
them, because he doesn't remember the previous encounter. Then he shares
it all over again the next time he sees them, because he doesn't
remember the previous encounter. Leonard's long term memory is fine, but
brain damage destroyed his ability to retain anything new. So he lives
in a perpetual state of now, propelled by one overwhelming need.
Leonard Shelby is on a blood quest. His injury occurred during an attack
that took the life of his wife, the last event he remembers. Leonard is
determined to find and exact revenge on the man that raped and murdered
her.
Leonard Shelby is methodical. A former insurance investigator, he
devises methods to work around his disability. He takes Polaroid
snapshots of significant people and places and writes notes to himself
on the photos. When he decides a piece of information is vital, he
tattoos it on his body. Leonard is a walking notepad of cues and clues,
of grief and hate.
Leonard Shelby is not working alone. A bartender named Natalie helps
him. He keeps her annotated photo with him at all times. The other
significant figure in Leonard's minute by minute existence is Teddy, who
pops up everywhere to offer advice.
"Memento" presents Leonard's story in reverse, beginning at the end and
jerking, one extended scene at a time, backwards in time to the start.
This presentation style works very well, showing us a consequence and
then the action that preceded it. Peeling away a layer at a time, the
genesis of his perpetual nightmare gradually becomes clear. To us, that
is, but not Leonard.
Leonard Shelby has a tattoo on his hand that says, "Remember Sammy
Jankis." Sammy also suffered from a lack of short-term memory and
Leonard was the agent assigned to his case. The events in Sammy's life
are intercut throughout the film in black and white fragments that move
in standard chronological order. There is something for Leonard to learn
from this.
By using two sets of timelines, writer and director Christopher Nolan
throws us into a state of confusion; nothing as severe as Leonard's, but
enough to make us relate. Leonard's situation poses some disturbing
questions about the relationship between memory and one's sense of self.
Who hasn't experienced discomfort trying to recall a forgotten fact? Who
hasn't tried to cover a small sense of panic when they bump into a
person they vaguely remember, but can't quite place?
Then there is Alzheimer's disease, which terrifies us. We watch
afflicted loved ones suffer as the information they hold most precious
slips away, throwing them into a nightmarish state of continual
disorientation, and we fear the same may someday happen to us. It forces
us to look at what constitutes identity. Are we the sum of our memories
and, if so, how many memories can a soul lose before the sense of self
disappears as well?
"Memento" is an ingenuous, disquieting thriller aided by unusual rhythms
and a first-rate cast. In the lead role, Aussie actor Guy Pearce, best
known as the straight arrow cop in "L.A. Confidential," adds the perfect
shadings to his character. His Leonard retains the investigative skills
from his pre-accident days and, as any good detective would do, hides
his ignorance with a mask of knowing confidence. Leonard is at once a
grieving husband, a lost child, a dogged sleuth and an obsessed threat,
and the underrated Pearce effectively conveys all of those qualities.
Carrie-Ann Moss, who burst into the public eye as a cool warrior in "The
Matrix," is striking as Natalie, revealing a bit more of the complex
woman with each new scene. Best remembered as the pesky insurance
salesman in "Groundhog Day," Stephen Tobolowsky is credible and touching
as memory-loss victim Sammy Jankis. In the pivotal role of Teddy, Joe
Pantoliano glides from sincere to smarmy and back again with the
greatest of ease. Pantoliano has played similar types in everything from
"The Matrix" to "The Sopranos," but he remains a pleasure to watch.
Funny thing about this guy: No matter what he is doing, he always
appears to be popping his teeth on a stick of chewing gum.
Like "The Sixth Sense" and "The Matrix," "Memento" is a strongly acted
and neatly constructed puzzle movie, but the comparison ends there.
Whether viewed as an existential exercise or just a snappy thriller,
this is a true original. In a year that has so far brought a numbing
collection of vapid big screen retreads, it stands out even more.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Even though this review contains ** NO SPOILERS **, I would highly suggest
that any of you interested in seeing this film, try not to read much about
it, because the less you know, the more likely you are to enjoy the entire
process. Trust me.
PLOT:
I am seriously not going to say much about this film's plot other than to
point out that it's about a guy who has a rare disorder which deletes his
short-term memory and that he's essentially trying to find the person who
raped and murdered his wife. Now strap on the mental cap, do not turn away
from the screen for more than a second, and enjoy the groovy ride.
CRITIQUE:
Every now and again, a film comes out and reminds us how cool movie watching
can be. How a film can just take a hold of your mind, massage it a little
here, toss you a little clue there, show you something here, and allow you
the opportunity to take part in a real-life mystery of the mind. Wow, this
movie blew me away! I mean, I'm still thinking about it as I type this, and
I dig that kind of thing! The puzzle of the story, the development of the
characters, the unsure nature of the entire premise soaked in lotsa style,
innovative filmmaking techniques and superb acting (Guy Pearce deserves a
lot of recognition for this one). But before you read the next sentence, you
must also appreciate the fact that this film is not for everyone. It is a
film designed for people who love to think at the movies. Now don't me
wrong, I love popcorn cheese-fests as much as the next guy (see my ode to
such in my review of ARMAGEDDON, natch!), but I also love all types of other
films too, and boy, is this ever another type of film! The basic premise of
this movie is an interesting one to begin with. Here's a guy who cannot
access his short term memory and he's looking for a murderer. Now you'd
think that a "regular" murder investigation would be difficult enough as it
is, but without any short-term memory? How does he do it? How does he know
how things are evolving, who to trust, who's lying, who's talking behind his
back and if he's getting any closer...if he can't remember something he did
fifteen minutes ago!?!
Anyway, needless to say, this quandary is one that is delved into completely
in this movie, and within that, the entire structure of the film is
remarkable. The deconstruction of the story, the actual participation of the
audience as we, essentially, learn things along with the protagonist, the
suspense, the humor (yes, there are actually a few very funny moments in
this movie as well) and the denouement, which boggles the mind as it
unfolds, and continues to boggle as you walk out of the theatre. This is the
kind of movie that'll have you talking about it all the way down the stairs,
into your specific mode of transportation, out of your transport, into your
house and onto the phone for even more bla-blas. The Arrow and I dissected
this puppy for at least an hour after the movie, and continued to learn new
things as we conversed. A triumph. A genuinely original film which makes you
want to see it over and over and over again.
I don't think I've ever seen a film which gives the viewer a greater
understanding of what it's like to be in the skin of the film's lead
character. This movie really does make you feel like you are learning things
along with the main man, and as his past begins to clear up, so do the
events leading up to the film's eventual ending. Now does all that sound
like an interesting idea to you? Are you grooving on that concept or does
the whole thing just leave you shrugging your shoulders? Well, if you're not
in the mood to think or ingest loads of information, as you struggle to hold
onto the information which was passed along to you right before that, I
suggest you not take part in the viewing of this film, cause you will most
likely not appreciate it. But for those people, those few proud men and
women, those who love to watch movies and talk movies and shit movies, I
tell you, there probably isn't going to be many better films than this one
this year, so buy that ticket, shut out all those external circumstances and
people (in other words, don't see it in a busy theater or with someone who
wants to talk crap while you watch) and get ready to allow your mind to be
thoroughly f*cked through the ringer...but in a good way! :) Hitchcock and
Kubrick would be proud. Thank God...this movie has single-handedly restored
my hope in the rest of the films coming out this year. Woo-hoo...bring it
on!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Blair Witch 2 (7/10) - Dead Again (8/10) - Fight Club (10/10) - Groundhog's
Day (8/10) - Lost Highway (10/10) - Pulp Fiction (8/10) - The Sixth Sense
(8/10)- The Spanish Prisoner (9/10)

Author
David N. Butterworth
        I went into "Memento" knowing only three things about it: 1. it's about a
guy (played by Guy Pearce) who suffers from short-term memory loss; 2. it
co-stars Carrie-Anne Moss and Joe Pantoliano (both from "The Matrix"); and
3. it's received some pretty good press.  But that's all I knew.  In many
ways this is already too much information since the less you know about the
film going in the more likely you are to enjoy it.  For reasons that are
hard to explain, I had an innate sense that this film was going to be
good--very good, in fact--so I avoided reading anything about it
beforehand.  That proved to my advantage.  For you to be at a similar
advantage, stop reading this review now, go and see the film (and don't
talk to *anyone* who's seen it before you do), then come back and finish
reading from where you left off. 
        "Memento," a crisp, stylish film noir that plays havoc with the senses (if
anything it's more a physiological than a psychological thriller), is
written and directed by Christopher Nolan (this is only his second
feature).  Its storyline concerns an insurance investigator, Leonard Shelby
(Pearce), who suffers from chronic loss of memory.  He cannot remember much
of anything, cannot create new memories, cannot remember someone he was
introduced to moments before--he has to rely on prolific note-taking, body
tattoos, and
Polaroids to keep track of who he is, and what he's doing.  What he's doing
is trying to find the man who raped and murdered his wife.  Again, it's
unfortunate knowing that particular piece of information, for example,
beforehand since the way this plot detail is revealed in the film is
extremely powerful. 
        So Nolan centers his intelligent, fine-looking film around this man with a
mission.  Leonard's investigation itself is complex and intricate.  Then we
have his condition, which adds to the complexity and intricacy of the
narrative.  These two elements make the film extremely engaging, but Nolan
doesn't stop there.  Perhaps the most intriguing component of the film is
the way in which it's put together.  Events happen not chronologically, but
backwards in time.  Nolan's film isn't the first to do this, of course.
"Betrayal" (from 1983) documents, from a cuckolded husband's point of view,
an extramarital affair in reverse chronological order.  And Quentin
Tarantino's masterful "Pulp Fiction" plays around with continuity like no
other contemporary piece of filmmaking.  In "Memento," this rarely
attempted cinematic technique seems less like a plot device and more an
integral part of the film's framework, working superbly in context given
the medical condition of its lead--Leonard is always backtracking, checking
his notes, trying to remember things; it's the perfect combination of
substance *and* style. 
        In that regard, "Memento" excels on every imaginable level.  The writing
is sophisticated--clever one minute, funny the next, gut-wrenching
thereafter; the acting (by Moss, Pantoliano, and above all Pearce) is
sublime; and the direction is brave and intellectually stimulating. 
        If you've heard *anything* about this film you've probably heard how good
it is and of that you can be assured.  "Memento" is quite simply the best
film of the year.  It's the smartest noir thriller since "The Last
Seduction," the most brilliantly structured film since "Timecode," and the
most mesmerizing mystery story I can remember seeing in a long, long time.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Newmarket Films
 Director: Christopher Nolan
 Writer:  Christopher Nolan based on Jonathan Nolan's short
story
 Cast: Guy Pearce, Carrie-Anne Moss, Joe Pantoliano, Mark
Boone Junior, Stephen Tobolowsky, Jorja Fox, Harriet Harris
  Patient: "Doctor, doctor, I have a serious problem.  You've
got to help me.  I can't remember anything."
   Whether or not Jonathan Nolan ever heard that one, his
short story illustrates not so much the hokey wit behind the
sally but the horror that inhabits the body of a man actually
afflicted with this rare disease.  In the story adapted and
directed by the writer's brother, Christopher Nolan,
"Memento" tells of a thirty-something insurance investigator
who, in the process of rescuing his wife from a rapist, suffers
a blow to his head that causes him short-term memory.  He
cannot remember facts, names or faces once they are out of
his mind for a few minutes, though memories of his life
before the encounter with the attacker seem to be no
problem for him.  Or so he believes.  As a memento of each
meeting with a man, a woman or even a car, he snaps a
Polaroid picture, captioning each shot with a fleeting
statement like "Don't believe his lies," and dedicates his life
to avenging his wife's rape-murder.  Since the thought of
revenge compels his every action, he actually tattoos vital
information to his body, even having license numbers etched
into his thigh and letters across his chest running
backward so that they will appear normal when he faces
himself in the mirror.  Most chilling is the simple
announcement written in reverse across his chest, "John G.
raped and murdered my wife."
   A thinking person's thriller with some occasionally startling
albeit split-second sounds and striking imagery, Nolan's
movie is an original.  The story is told backwards, but this is
not a mere gimmick such as that used to no useful effect by
Mike Figgis, who divided his screen for "Time Code" into
quadrants.  Nolan is attempting to put the viewer into the
poor guy's mind to show the confusion that has taken over
his life, in effect making the audience as flustered as the
brain-damaged Leonard--whose role is performed almost as a
one-man show by the alarmingly talented Guy Pearce ("L.A.
Confidential").  
   The story begins, then, with the conclusion.  Leonard has
wrestled a man known as Teddy (Joe Pantoliano) to the
ground and has put a gun to Teddy's face prepared to do him
in for the murder of his wife.  But who, really, is Teddy?  Is
he the perpetrator against whom Leonard is justifiably
seeking revenge?  We don't know because Leonard himself
doesn't know, a concept that gives the picture its fascinating
intrigue.  "Memento" is a jigsaw puzzle which, each time you
think you have the pieces in place, you are confronted with a
new twist that keeps you guessing about each individual's
role.  
   For example, who is the mysterious Natalie (Carrie-Anne
Moss), a woman willing to help Leonard gain his revenge?  Is
she merely using him to gain the satisfaction that she seeks,
a vengeance against a man who has beaten her silly?  Or
does she take pity on this bewildered individual, empathizing
with his tragedy and willing to go the distance for the stranger
out of sheer compassion?  Why does Nolan bring in the
character of Sammy (Stephen Tobolowsky), a man who has
apparently suffered a similar ailment as Leonard and whom
Leonard is investigating to determine whether Sammy's
affliction is an insurance-covered physical condition or an
insurance exempted psychological one?
    Most of all, who is Leonard and why has he been able to
afford to drive a Jaguar and wear designer suits on the salary
of an insurance investigator?  He doesn't know, so we are
kept in the dark as well. By the final minutes of the film (that
is, the beginning of the action), some but not all of the
enigma is resolved.  This is not the kind of solution that most
people in the audience would have guessed, I would imagine,
making "Memento" a satisfying puzzle throughout and,
perhaps equally important, a vehicle for 32-year-old Guy
Pearce's tour de force performance--which is backed up well
by an ensemble which includes Mark Boone Junior as Burt,
who manages one of the motels in which Leonard is living
anonymously and especially Carrie-Anne Moss (seen in
November of 2000 in the far bigger-budgeted but less
challenging "Red Planet").  Viewers accustomed to clever
indies such as this one already know that you don't need
megabucks to challenge and entertain.  With the limited
budget available to the producers and the circumscribed time
afforded to its filming, Nolan's work is probably edgier than it
would have been had the intensity and focus been missing.
Not Rated.  Running time: 113 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Imagine you can't form new memories, although you can retain all your old
ones to a specific point in time.  Imagine that your last memory is the rape 
and murder of your wife.  Leonard Shelby (Guy Pearce, "L.A. Confidential")
is living that life, trying to find a murderer based on extensive notes, 
body tattoos and Polaroids from which he must reestablish his reality every
10-15 minutes in writer director Christopher Nolan's "Memento."
"Memento" begins with a Polaroid of a grisly murder scene undeveloping and
reentering the camera, establishing the backwards motion of the plot.  We
begin at the end, where Leonard has found his man, John G. aka Teddy (Joe
Pantoliano, "The Matrix").   His own handwriting on the photo identifying
Teddy advises 'don't believe his lies; he is the one - kill him.'  We're in
the same boat as Leonard at this point, basing reality on Leonard's notes,
but Nolan will let us see what Leonard can't know - how he got there.
The film progresses (regresses, actually) with a brief black and white segue
of Leonard alone going through his reestablishing investigative process before
rewinding to show the action which preceded what we have just seen, always
ending where the previous segment began.  This technique is easier to follow
than it sounds, also pulling the audience into mystery-solving mode.
Leonard's been delivered his man by Natalie (Carrie-Anne Moss, "Chocolat")
who he's noted to himself has also lost someone, so will help him out of pity.
The problem is, however, that Natalie seems to be tied to drug dealers and
Fact #5 tattooed on his thigh is that his man is a drug dealer.  Is Natalie
playing him to kill the wrong man?  Leonard (don't call him Lenny - his wife 
used to and he hated it - an odd sentiment to be reminded of by a man whose 
sole reason for existence is her murder's vengeance) bases trust on someone's 
knowledge of his Sammy Jankis story.  Remember Sammy Jankis is tattooed on 
his hand, recalling a heartbreaking tale of a client who also suffered from 
anterograde memory loss whom Leonard encountered in his prior life as an 
insurance investigator.  Natalie knows about Sammy, but then, so does Teddy.
"Memento" is an assured sophomore film from writer/director Christopher
Nolan ("Following"), who fleshed out an idea proposed by his writer brother
Jonathan.  While this unique spin on the troubled private detective may play a 
little fast and loose with its facts, Nolan has a magician's flair for
distracting his audience's attention while he accomplishes his trickery.
Other films have told their stories backwards (the 1983 adaptation of Harold
Pintner's "Betrayal" comes to mind) and many have used amnesia, but short
term memory loss, as presented here, is a more frightening concept.
Nolan chose Burbank, California to project nowhere-ville and director of
photography Wally Pfister ("Scotland, PA") effectively captures the grunge.
The cast work well together with Pearce's withdrawn approach fitting his
mental handicap, Moss' ability to flip from tough to tender keeping us off
balance and Pantoliano's snake oil salesman sleeze making us buy into 
Leonard's world view at the onset.  Mark Boone Junior ("The General's
Daughter") helps provide most of the film's humor as the sympathetic motel
clerk who can't resist an occasional urge to mess with Leonard's head.
Stephen Tobolowsky ("Bossa Nova") and Harriet Sansom Harris ("Nurse Betty")
effectively flesh out Leonard's guilty recollections of the tragic Jankis 
couple.
"Memento" is an intriguing reflection on the relationship between memory
and identify cloaked in a mind puzzler of a mystery.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom

 Memento (2000) 4 stars out of 4. Starring Guy Pearce, Carrie-Anne Moss,
Joe Pantoliano, Mark Boone Junior, Stephen Tobolowsky and Jorja Fox.
Screenplay by Christopher Nolan based on a short story by Jonathan
Nolan. Directed by Christopher Nolan. Rated. R.
 Memento is an experience for serious filmgoers, those who have the
stamina to focus on what is happening on the screen.
 Memento is a cinematic jigsaw puzzle; turn away for a moment and you
might miss a clue. This is a feature in which the audience is as much in
the dark as the protagonist.
 Leonard Shelby (Guy Pearce) is a former insurance investigator
suffering from short-term memory loss inflicted the night his wife was
raped and murdered. Leonard uses notes, tattoos and snapshots to hunt
down the man responsible for shattering his life.
 Yet how do you know whoís your friend and whoís your enemy when you
canít remember meeting them 10 minutes earlier?
 Director-screenwriter Christopher Nolan, who adapted the script from a
short story written by his brother, Jonathan, begins at the end and
works his way backwards. The film opens with a bang and the viewer then
traces what led Leonard to that moment.
 Leonard is like a walking ghost, explaining his condition to everyone
he meets, not realizing he has met these people before and already
filled them in on his mental state.
 This is a film in which you cannot really describe what transpires. You
simply go along for the ride, watching as Leonard tries to put together
the pieces of his life.
 Memento is a most original and arresting feature. It is
audience-involvement cinema, in which the viewer plays detective along
with Leonard. Your allegiances shift from scene to scene as more and
more of Leonardís past gets filled in. No one is whom they seem to be.
 As the movie progresses ó or is it regresses? ó you question your
perception of events as well as motivations.
Pearce gives a dynamic performance as a man constantly in a fog, relying
on snapshots, scraps of papers and clues tattooed to his body as he
attempts to reconstruct his life.
 Carrie-Anne Moss is cynical and weary as the bartender who becomes
involved in Leonardís quest.
 Also on hand is that wonderful character actor Joe Pantoliano (best
known as the turncoat in The Matrix, and currently seen as the fierce
Ralphie on HBOís The Sopranos). Pantolianoís Teddy is a wisecracking
individual whoís involvement with Leonard is suspect.
 Director Nolan does a masterful job of keeping the audience in his
vise. He grabs you from the outset and leads you through his mental
maze.
 Memento is a movie that has to be seen from the beginning. Miss one
scene and nothing else will make sense. It is a masterful piece of
filmmaking, one of the cleverest and inventive works to hit the screen
in a long time.
 If you like puzzles, then Memento will floor you. This is not for those
who indulge in mindless action. This is a thinking person's feature that
gives you much to ponder.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com. Other
reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Christopher Null
Amnesia and a murder mystery?  Isn't this usually the kind of thing that
hackneyed thrillers are made of -- stuff like Unforgettable, so bad you
had to scrape it off your shoe the minute you left the theater?
Usually it is.  But Memento proves that a skilled director, writer, and
cast can take even the most tired of formulas -- the man with the lost
memory -- and spin it into something so refreshingly different and new
that I don't hesitate to call it one of the best films I've ever seen.
As the picture opens, we are presented with the face of Leonard (L.A.
Confidential's Guy Pearce in a daring yet comfortable performance), a
tormented man on an unexplained quest of vengeance.  And he's got it: In
the first scene he is pulling the trigger to blow open the head of a guy
named Teddy (Joe Pantoliano).  Soon the facts rise to the surface: 
Leonard was searching for the man who killed his wife, and Teddy was the
prime suspect.  Only there's a twist:  Due to a head injury, Leonard has
no short-term memory and cannot create any new ones -- his mind is stuck
on the day his wife was killed.
To deal with this, Leonard has generated an intricate replacement for
his mind.  For immediate needs, he snaps Polaroids of people and places,
jotting notes on the back.  For long-term goals, he has messages to
himself tattooed on his body (for example: "Find him and kill him").
Heavy stuff.  Leonard's problem is so unfathomable and complex it is a
constant struggle for him just to get through daily life -- much less if
you're thigh-deep in a revenge scheme.  All of a sudden -- pop -- here's
Leonard, on the run through a trailer park.  But is he chasing that guy,
or is that guy chasing him?  It's deliciously complicated and so
circular that it's fun.
But wait, there's more!  Soon enough we find that the whole film is
presented in reverse (not backwards -- the scenes are reordered from end
to beginning).  While the movie begins with the death of Teddy, it
traces back through time as we learn how we arrived at that point. 
Think Betrayal meets The Fugitive.
In other words, we know how the movie ends, but not how it begins.  And
thanks to Leonard's condition, the audience knows what's happening
(well, sort of), but his character doesn't.  Eventually it becomes clear
that Leonard is an unwitting patsy being used at the hands of those even
more nefarious than himself.
It's deeper than you can make a gimmick like this sound -- and to be
honest, it is just a gimmick -- but it's a gimmick that works.  The
movie, written and directed by Christopher Nolan (and based on his
brother's short story) is vibrant and harrowing, unpredictable despite
an ending long since given away.  Unfathomably, the film gets
progressively better as it goes along, and I found myself inching closer
and closer to the edge of my seat throughout the movie.
It's difficult to put Memento's staggering festival raves out of mind,
but this is the genuine article, I assure you.  Those niggling questions
-- Would the movie work if it wasn't told in reverse?  If Leonard can't
remember anything since his accident, how does he know he has the
condition at all? -- only serve to make the story that much more twisty,
and I mean that in the best possible way.
Ultimately, Memento stands on its own as a thriller, but it also works
as a profound tragedy, stunning in its portrayal of a man teetering on
the edge, though he doesn't even know it.  It asks some serious
questions about how we know what to believe, since our senses and our
memory all lie to us.
And in the end, Memento gives us our answer:  We simply believe what we
choose to.
Director: Christopher Nolan
Producer: Jennifer Todd, Suzanne Todd
Writer: Christopher Nolan
Starring: Guy Pearce, Carrie-Anne Moss, Joe Pantoliano, Mark Boone
Junior, Stephen Tobolowsky, Harriet Sansom Harris, Callum Keith Rennie
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Christopher Nolan. Screenplay by Christopher Nolan, from a
story by Jonathan Nolan. Starring Guy Pierce, Joe Pantoliano, Carrie-Anne
Moss. Running time: 115 minutes. Rated AA for offensive language and
violent scenes by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 26th, 2001.
Synopsis: Leonard Shelby (Pearce) is a former insurance investigator on 
the trail of the man who killed his wife. Leonard has only a few clues to 
the murderer's identity; to make matters worse, he suffers from a 
condition which inhibits the creation of short-term memories, meaning that 
Leonard is always forgetting what happened just minutes earlier. Because 
of this, Leonard is forced to rely on notes he leaves for himself. 
"Memento" traces the investigation back in time from its apparent 
culmination.
Review: "Memento" is the sort of movie I wish I'd written; I can think of 
no higher praise than that. I am envious that Nolan has concocted such a 
brilliant, involved, original movie as this. An instant film noir classic, 
"Memento" is virtually flawless. The script is unlike any I have ever seen 
-- a notable achievement in these days of recycled Hollywood homogeneity. 
Although the idea of starting at the "conclusion" of the plotline and then 
moving backward in time to the "start" is not entirely new, never before 
have I witnessed it executed with such flair and coherence. "Memento" is 
endlessly exciting and inventive, a rare story which keeps the viewers 
guessing during the film itself, and mulling over its connotations long 
after leaving the theatre. And it is not merely an exercise in 
cerebrality; there is plenty of action and an unexpected dose of humour to 
keep the proceedings lively. Nolan's direction is equally effective, never 
losing its crispness and clarity despite "Memento"'s challenging gimmick. 
And to top everything off, all the performances rise to the occasion. 
Pierce is terrific as the troubled Leonard; Moss shows great range as 
enigmatic Natalie; and Pantoliano's Teddy achieves a splendidly affable 
yet sinister quality. "Memento" may be the year's best screenplay, and is 
certainly amongst the top theatrical attractions of 2001.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger's review of "MEMENTO" (Newmarket Films)
  "Memories are just an interpretation, not a record. Facts are facts." That's what Leonard Shelby (Guy Pearce), an insurance claims investigator, keeps repeating to himself as he recalls discovering his wife sprawled on their bathroom floor and then being hit on the head from behind. That blow caused a permanent condition called short-term memory loss, meaning that, while he can draw on memories from before the accident, Leonard cannot recall what happened from one moment to another since. He constantly forgets what he's doing, where he's going and whom he can trust. To maintain some semblance of order in his life, he snaps Polaroid photos of people he meets, jotting cautionary captions on each, like "Don't believe his lies." For other pertinent information, he tattoos his body, like "John G. raped and murdered my wife" on his chest. Which is important, because Leonard's determined to avenge his wife's death. Writer/director Christopher Nolan, working from his brother!
 Jonathan Nolan's short story and with cinematographer Wally Pfister, tautly alternates color with black-and-white sequences to reveal Leonard's recollections backwards. Jumbled imagery fits together like pieces of an intricate jigsaw puzzle, and the audience is as confused as Leonard. As the brain-damaged protagonist, Guy Pearce ("L.A. Confidential") delivers an ironic, tour-de-force performance, particularly playing off Carrie-Ann Moss, who enjoys messing with his mind, and Joe Pantoliano, who could be either a friend or foe. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Memento" is an edgy, disconcerting 9. It's a weird, murky thriller that toys with your mind, culminating in an unsettling universal truth, as Leonard admits, "I have to believe that, when my eyes are closed, the world's still here."

Author
Steve Rhodes
A disease like diabetes can be treated with insulin, but, for a severe 
short-term memory loss problem, Leonard Shelby (Guy Pearce, L.A. 
CONFIDENTIAL) turns to more unusual aids than drugs, namely Polaroid 
pictures, a ballpoint pen to write notes on his skin and a mass of 
memory-jogging tattoos.  
Christopher Nolan's MEMENTO is easily the most bizarrely original film 
since BEING JOHN MALKOVICH.  Opening with the Polaroid picture of a 
murdered body, the movie shows the photo slowly undevelop and shoot back 
into the camera.  This turns out to be the ending of the story.  The 
movie skips backwards and forwards thereafter with pieces of scenes 
being repeated, showing more context each time.  The viewers find 
themselves absolutely mesmerized as they piece together this film which 
is like a jigsaw puzzle of an Escher print in which pieces keep 
disappearing and reappearing.  Flaunting its ambiguity, almost every 
scene is open to alternate interpretations.  And each new scene adds 
combinatorial possibilities to the explanations of previous scenes.  
People who like puzzles will adore this movie, as will all moviegoers 
who relish intelligent scripts that challenge their gray matter.
One of the many questions that the film poses is whether Leonard killed 
the right man, the man who raped and murdered his wife and who caused 
his infamous accident.  After the blow to his head caused by his wife's 
murderer, Leonard has a short-term memory that lasts only seconds.  He 
remembers everything before the accident but nothing after.  This makes 
a man who knows who he was but not who he is.  It also makes him prey to 
the unscrupulous.  Spit in his beer, or much worse, and a minute later 
he will remember nothing about the incident.
Leonard takes pictures of his car and his motel so that he will be able 
to find them.  On these visual note cards, he also makes important 
written notes to himself.  On Teddy's (Joe Pantoliano) picture, for 
example, he reminds himself not to believe his lies.  He no longer 
remembers what caused him to record this warning and how accurate it 
might be.  His body is a walking billboard of personal reminders to 
himself.  In mirror image across his chest, he has written, "John G. 
raped and murdered my wife."  And on his arm, he has tattooed, "Don't 
answer the phone."  As Leonard says, "Memory is treachery."
Told in heavy narration, the most common question Leonard finds himself 
asking is, "Where am I?"  One of the places he finds himself waking is 
in the bed of Natalie (Carrie-Anne Moss, THE MATRIX), whose place in his 
life changes as rapidly as does Teddy's.  Trying to fit these two into 
Leonard's story becomes a fascinating exercise for the audience as the 
story keeps doubling back on itself.
Although an edge-of-the-seat thriller, it is frequently quite funny.  
Leonard wakes in his cheap motel one morning to find a gun in the drawer 
next to the Gideon Bible and a guy tied up in the closet.  When Teddy 
asks him about whether the gun belongs to him or the guy in closet, 
Leonard says, "Must have been his.  I don't think they'd let someone 
like me own a gun."
The film also contains an intriguing back story about Leonard.  It seems 
that before he went bonkers, he was an insurance investigator.  One of 
the claims he looked into was from the wife of a guy named Sammy 
(Stephen Tobolowsky), who had the same type short-term memory loss 
problem that Leonard developed.  Serving both as a story in its own 
right and as a mechanism to explain Leonard's illness, this is one of 
the best subplots in a long time.
Although it is a brilliantly conceived and executed movie, there are a 
few disappointments: the ending is a bit of a letdown and the film would 
have been crisper if the storyline had had a few less iterations.  These 
are minor quibbles, and this is the sort of picture that is so 
engrossing that you'll want to come back and see it again soon.  
Probably a couple of times more.
MEMENTO runs 1:48.  It is rated R for violence, language and some drug 
content and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jerry Saravia
"I can't make new memories. Everything fades, nothing sticks. By the time we 
finish this conversation I won't remember how it started, and the next time I 
see you I won't know that I've ever met you before." - Leonard.
Thus, the above quotation says it all for "Memento," one of the most 
electrifying of all postmodern noir thrillers in years. Whereas "Run Lola 
Run" and "Pulp Fiction" revelled in irony, hipness and fractured timelines to 
tell their stories, "Memento" is a more eager return to what makes noir what 
it is - the purely existential. Martin Scorsese dared to go through such 
existential leaps minus the irony in "Bringing Out the Dead" as did Sean Penn 
in the brilliant "The Pledge." "Memento," though, will be remembered as the 
most disorienting and fatalistic of the new century, linking to the most 
frightening ordeal man could ever face, the inability to make new memories. 
Such is the case with Leonard (Guy Pearce), a former insurance claims investi
gator who suffers from a rare disorder defined as "anterior grade memory 
loss" (also known as Korsokoff's syndrome). You see Leonard can't make new 
memories and the only way he can remember anything is by writing it down or 
by tatooing his body with written messages. After a few minutes, if he fails 
to write down important information or clues (usually on a handy Polaroid he 
shoots of any person he meets), he will forget as if the incident had never 
occured. 
At the beginning of the film, Leonard kills an unarmed man named Teddy (Joe 
Pantoliano). Teddy's murder seems cold-blooded and, like most noir films that 
deal with a central narrator (that being Leonard), we expect flashbacks to 
see what led up to this event. A strange thing happens, though, in "Memento." 
Rather than seeing typical flashbacks in a convential, linear fashion, the 
story is told backwards thus the ending of the film is really the beginning 
and the beginning of the film is really the ending. Now the audience is faced 
with the daunting task of keeping all the facts straight in their minds as 
the events unfold on screen. I did not find it daunting as much as 
challenging and this Harold Pinter approach serves the purpose of the film. 
It would not be fair to reveal much of "Memento" because the thrill of the 
film is in its surprise factor. This much can be said about the plot: Leonard 
is investigating the death of his wife by some character named "John G." His 
investigation leads to a sour, sweetly morose barmaid, Natalie (Carrie-Anne 
Moss), who has gone through a similar loss and can help him out of pity. 
Naturally, as the film regresses, we learn Natalie is not quite the sour, 
kind woman we thought she was - your typical femme fatale. Then there's 
Teddy, the smiling cop or drug dealer (depending on your interpretation) who 
may be trying to help Leonard or may be trying to kill him. Add to the mix a 
local drug dealer, Leonard's memory of Sammy Jankis who supposedly suffered 
similar memory loss (and was part of Leonard's insurance claims), and co
nstant betrayals and backstabbing ploys. There is also a motel clerk who is 
nonplussed to learn that Leonard never remembers any conversation they have 
had, and thus tries to jokingly cheat Leonard out of a better motel room. No 
one is ever what they seem in this morally ambiguous universe and by 
structuring the film backwards, we learn the evolution of each character 
through Leonard's point-of-view. This also serves a more finite attraction: 
when we learn new information about a character as the film regresses, we 
realize the character's prior behavior and begin to see that Leonard may have 
the wrong idea or wrong motive for his later actions. This nonlinear 
breakdown of the story will no doubt lead to further viewings just to keep 
the characters straight.
"Memento" has a great, meaty story but if it were not for the beautifully 
restrained performances from the cast, the film would not work the same way. 
Guy Pearce is fierce and alive in every scene he is in. He is vulnerable and 
yet impulsive, no doubt due to his constant memory loss. He is not quite your 
typical hero, more of a disillusioned antihero. In a sense, Pearce undergoes 
a rather strange dilemma - if he does not remember what a person had done to 
him, he can just easily hurt the person who may have tried to help him. The 
Polaroids and the tattoos are messages that could lead to dangerous avenues 
if he is not quick enough to jot down finite details. All he does remember is 
that he has a condition (though that often escapes him as well) and he knows 
his wife was raped and murdered and he is aware of his former job. But as the 
film comes to a surprisingly fatalistic finish, we also sense that Leonard 
may have mixed up certain facts or perhaps he is in denial about his own 
mysterious past. Pearce brings Leonard to life in such an intoxicating manner 
that he becomes something of a human mine - don't step on him or you will 
explode.
Carrie-Anne Moss gives her first truly great performance here as the 
mysterious, duplicitous Natalie, exuding both toughness and sincerity with 
equal aplomb. She has a memorably frightening moment where she takes 
advantage of Leonard's condition and taunts him. Joe Pantoliano (who 
co-starred with Moss in "The Matrix") gives one of his funniest, quixotic 
performances in years as Teddy, and his character remains as much an enigma 
as Leonard does. Teddy may seem trustworthy but could he be using Leonard as 
well? 
Harold Pinter's "Betrayal" was a tale of divorce told backwards and probably 
the first to use such a complicated device. There was also the hilarious 
"Seinfeld" episode that was told backwards and succeeded in delivering its 
punchlines with more gusto than usual. But "Memento" uses a gimmicky device 
to its advantage. We, the audience, only know as much information as Leonard 
knows thus his short-term memory loss is accentuated by telling the story 
backwards, especially since he can't make new memories. When Leonard is 
unsure of something, so are we. When he is disoriented, so are we. It is rare 
for a noir tale like this to make us feel the internal anxieties and fears of 
its main character. Watching "Memento" is like enduring an endless nightmare 
where our memory is a constant illusion in search of the truth. In the case 
of Leonard, his search for the truth may be fruitless and all we are left 
with are mementos to remind us of his own journey. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at Faust668@aol.com or 
at faustus_08520@yahoo.com
