Title
Review for Nattevagten (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Bryant Frazer
     The first indication you get that this movie might suck comes in
the very first scene, when, just as a television report makes mention
of a brutal stabbing, someone knocks over a bottle of red wine.  This
sort of club-footed imagery could be quaint if it weren't for the
director's irritating use of cheap, incidental shock tactics (Boo!
Just kidding) to get a rise out of viewers.  For a movie that flirts
with prostitution, mutilation and necrophilia, NIGHTWATCH is
dispiritingly timid.  By the time truly weird things start to happen,
the movie has already worn out its welcome.
     The story, promisingly enough, concerns a law student (Martin) who
takes a job as a night watchman in a morgue.  Every night, he must
steel himself to patrol the corpse storage room, up an aisle in between
a half-dozen bodies on gurneys, with blue toes sticking stiffly out
from under white sheets.  The audience shares Martin's apprehension,
and weird stories about corpse abuse and reports of a serial killer on
the loose (one of the bodies is wheeled into the morgue on Martin's
shift) add to an aura of perversity and dread.
     Unfortunately, we also have to put up with a standard-issue buddy
story.  Martin's pal Jens is a free, vulgar spirit and a practical
joker.  The two have girlfriends (who are fairly incidental to the plot
until one of them becomes a damsel in distress), but naturally each of
the men understands things about the other that their lovers never
can.  The character development that this secondary plot involves pays
off toward the end of the film, when Martin begins to wonder just who
the killer might be, but by then your eyelids may be dropping.  The
film-festival crowd I saw it with (Chicago) seemed to love the movie,
but the twists and turns that so entranced them are the same sort of
meaningless whodunit tease that gave BASIC INSTINCT a reason to
live.  Eeny-meeney-miney-mo, pick a killer by the toe ... but I
digress.
     Director Ole Bornedal has infused a few of the early scenes with
an admirable tension, but undercuts that atmosphere as he struggles to
set up the story's complex denouement by repeatedly dwelling on the
relationship between Martin and Jens.  And one truly disconcerting
sequence involving a missing body is thrown away and never explained or
alluded to again.  The first unremarkable hour is almost redeemed by
the climax, which is undeniably exciting and in which one of the leads
is forced to figure a most unsavory way out of a brutal dilemma.
Still, the final scenes borrow heavily and without inspiration from the
recent history of Hollywood action films.  Certainly it's a kick for
buffs of the macabre to see a reasonably intelligent, well-acted film
(with subtitles!) set among so many corpses, but as far as the
possibilities of the horror film, NIGHTWATCH is treading strictly
shallow waters.
