Title
Review for Udju Azul di Yonta (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Max Hoffmann
Rating: 8.0 (B, ****)
Seen 5/6/93 SF Film Festival
Date Released: none, no distributor for North America
Country of Origin:  Guinea-Bissau/Portugal 1992
In Portuguese and Creole with English subtitles
Running Length:   95 min
Rating: none.  No sex/violence/language
Cast: Maysa Marta, Antonio Simao Mendes, Pedro Dias, Dina Vaz
Director: Flora Gomes
Producer: Paulo de Sousa
Screenplay: Gomes, David Lang, Ina Cesaire, Manuel Rambout Barceles
Camera: Dominique Gentil
Editor: Dominique Paris
IN A NUTSHELL: touching, quirky foreign film about a country you've
probably never heard of, populated with people you'll never forget.
Visually compelling, due to splashy native color, flawed by wooden
acting amongst the supporting cast.  At times reminiscent of the
surrealistic images/humor of a Luis Bunuel film.  Overall the film is a
refreshing, original experience.
     Yonta's eyes aren't really blue.  Perhaps the anonymous
love-letter praising her blue eyes refers to her azure eye shadow,
striking against her burnished ebony skin.  Or perhaps it is a
reference to the reflected blue from the disco lights of "El
Tropicana."  Maysa Marta is a very compelling presence in the screen
role of Yonta, the most beautiful girl in the tiny west African country
of Guinea-Bissau (a former Portuguese colony which achieved
independence in 1973.)  Yonta is the catalyst that affects several
lives in her orbit.
     Far from self-obsessed with her own hypnotic beauty, she is very
practical and level-headed.  Though living in a Third World country,
this girl knows what she wants and where she's going.  We see her
handle sidewalk wolves and customer with equal diplomacy.  She's in
love with the older, emotionally remote Vincente (Antonio Simao
Mendes), while her young secret admirer, the directionless Ze (Pedro
Dias) pines away for her.  When her tipsy girl friend reads her
anonymous love letter out loud to the disco crowd (unaware that the
painfully shy writer is in attendance), we follow a path with the film
that delves deep into areas of personal pride and hurt.
     The film has an intriguing setting, a former African colony,
twenty years after the revolution ... when reality has set in.  Power
failures occur with alarming frequency, and the camera captures the
domino effects on everyday life, e.g., no refrigeration, no fish, no
means of income for the local market women.  If nothing else, the film
will make you pause, and imagine the human price paid in so many page
one stories of famine and revolution we skim over during morning
coffee.  A strong sense of family and community buoys the film, from
the neighborhood children who sneak an evicted widows belongings back
into her house, to the bonds between girlfriends preparing for a
wedding.  Revolutionary heros cope with living in the past, while
Yonta, the fountainhead of the new generation, makes peace with the
unwelcome present.
     Although the film is a satisfying experience overall, much of the
supporting cast has a very wooden acting style by western standards.
(Who knows, it may be the normal demeanor in this remote land.) I
recommend this film, though be forewarned that as with Opera, many
allowances need to be made in view of the different cultural values,
and approach to presentation.  The film is filled with several
unforgettable images, from the dark, brooding Vincente conversing with
the carved statues of his ancestors, to the Dali-esque wedding that the
film culminates in.
