Title
Review for Trading Places (1983)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Wilcock
STARRING DAN ACKROYD, EDDIE MURPHY, JAMIE LEE CURTIS,
DON AMECHE AND RAPLH BELLAMY.
John Landis's classic comedy is quite funny, although not as funny as
everynoe likes to make out. The stroy centres around The Duke Brothers
(Ameche and Bellamy) making a bet to see if a good buisnessman comes
from its genes, or is environment. The two unlucky victims are Ackroyd
(there accountant) and Murphy (a tramp.)
Watching Ackroyd go downhill thanks to the Dukes (and a corrupt cop) is
funny, and watching Murphy taking advantage of his new lifestyle is ok
aswell. The movie then goes a bit dead near the middle, with not much
going.
But its near the end that the film really starts to pick up. First, we
see Ackroyd try to frame Murphy (while in a Santa Clause suit, stuffed
with food) and then trying to kill himself. Also, the fancy dress party
on the train sequence is funny aswell. (With a dodgy sub plot centering
around a horny gorilla)
Overall, this film is generally quite funny, and the performances make
this film funnier than it really should be.

Author
Mike Borzumate

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
Rating: 7.5 and $8.00
Plot teaser: Louis Winthorpe III (Dan Aykroyd) is rich and Billy Ray
Valentine (Eddie Murphy) is poor.  For now.
    I think I first saw this movie on TV so many years ago I can't recall
exactly when.  It's great.  I liked it so much I bought it from a video
store that was going out of business around here.
    The strength of this movie is its plot, as strange as that might sound
these days.  Some very important issues are tackled, but in an enjoyable
and entertaining fashion.
    All the acting is superb.  I can't think of anyone who gave even a
mediocre performance.  You can tell everyone had fun making this movie and
yet took their roles seriously.
    The big players are fine.  Aykroyd, Murphy, and Jamie Lee Curtis play
their characters well.  Their transformations are believable and
convincing.  Why don't actors always take their jobs this seriously
anymore?
    Even the secondary characters are excellent.  The butler Coleman
(Denholm Elliott) is dryly humorous.  The dude who says "yeah" (James D.
Taylor?) cracks me up. 
    A lot of the filming was done "on location" in the streets of
Philadelphia.  That gives the movie much more believability and depth.
    The plot covers lots of the classic issues: racism, poverty, class
conflict... yet it doesn't take itself too seriously.
    Rent this thoroughly enjoyable film.  You can even rent it from
Blockbu$ter.  It's worth it!

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.
