Title
Review for Ganheddo (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
The computer Chiron-5 went rogue in 2025 and took over the
factory island 8JO. 13 years later a group of scavengers arrive
to steal valuable computer chips.  When they and a team of Texas
Air Rangers are slaughtered by Chiron, the survivors (Takashima
and Bakke) must team up to reactivate the killer robot Gunhed so
as to defeat Chiron.
It didn't look so bad to start with.  There are some nice
shots of massive half-seen robots lurching about in the dark, big
sets and the prospect of the slinky Brenda Bakke (Selina Coombs
from TV's "American Gothic") as a hard-bitten Texas Ranger.  But
no.
Hamstring by the perpetually sulky Takashima (as crack
mechanic Brooklyn, with a charisma deficit so severe that he'll
be in arrears until the year 2020) and poor quality dubbing (even
Bakke doesn't mesh with her own voice) "Gunhed" combines the
problems of anime with the difficulties of a live production.
The initially impressive robots are revealed to be completely
inflexible, sub-Anderson creations that cannot move their arms or
head.  A "diving bell for head" android appears to menace the
group but it mostly just reminds you of "Robot Monster".  Two
irritating children materialise by which point you're shouting
"Chiron - I knew Skynet.  And you're no Skynet!"
One of the lovable aspects of anime is its completely
demented logic. (Where do the Puma sisters keep their guns?
What's so wonderful about A-ko? Surely someone would notice the
Knight Sabers taking off and landing from their condo hideout?)
But "Gunhed" is just completely demented, so arbitrary as to be
impossible to follow. Characters appear and disappear at random,
act on whim and the layout of the factory doesn't even have the
logic of a computer game. Focus on that line in the credits
"Produced by: Gunhed Production Committee".
Hideous.  [*/misfire] and bad improvisational jazz on the Sid
and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]
