Title
Review for Leila (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael Dequina
This subtle and thought-provoking drama from Iran tells the modern-day
story of the title character (Leila Hatami), a young newlywed who forces
her very loving husband Reza (Ali Mosaffa) to take another wife after she
learns she cannot bear children.  The decision, however, is not so much
hers as it is that of her manipulative and selfish mother-in-law (Jamileh
Sheikhi), who plants seeds of doubt in Leila regarding Reza's love and
loyalty; and that of society in general.
Dariush Mehrjui's film may end on a (forced) bittersweet note, but it is
overall a film of great sadness, the tragedy of a love torn apart by each
partner's overeagerness to please the other.  While the relationship
between Leila and Reza is the film's focus, the film belongs to Leila,
beautifully played with great understatement by Hatami.  Her despair and
desperation dominates the film, and the audience feels it quite
intimately--due not only to Hatami's extraordinary work but that of
Mehrjui, who wisely never strays from Leila's point of view, enabling the
viewer to experience her uncertainty and resulting confusion.  
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Dennis Schwartz

LEILA (director/writer: Dariush Mehrjui; screenwriter: from a story by
Mahnaz Ansarian; cinematographer: Mahmud Kalari; editor: Mostafa
Kherqepush; cast: Leila Hatami (Leila), Ali Mosaffa (Reza, the Husband),
Jamileh Sheikhi (Reza's Mother), Mohammad Reza Sharifinia (Leila's
Uncle), Turan Mehrzad (Leila's Mother), Shaqayeq Farahani (Second Wife),
Amir Pievar (Reza's Father); Runtime: 124; 1996-Iran)
Dariush Mehrjui is one of Iran's finest modern filmmakers, his
speciality is making films about relationships among the
upper-middle-class illuminati, and especially love stories about women.
This drama is a very powerful, poignant and mesmerizing love story,
about the pressures of dealing with Moslem traditions and of a woman's
own sense of being.
A very warm couple, the handsome Reza (Ali Mosaffa) and the beautiful
Leila (Leila Hatami), perfectly suited for each other in temperament
find happiness in their first year of marriage. Why this marriage should
turn ice cold, when everything is so blissful, is amazing to watch as it
unfolds. This is a truly heartbreaking tale without contrivances, that
examines a woman's psyche, looking carefully at her wants and her
expectations. The trouble starts when after a year, there is no child.
The couple go to a doctor and are tested to see if either one has
infertility problems. They swear their love for each other, and in their
own quiet way, say that it doesn't matter who is to blame, they will
stay married no matter what. The problem comes from Leila's overbearing
mother-in-law (Jamileh Sheikhi), a monster, if there ever was one. She
rattles the poor, sensitive girl and completely intimidates her,
stressing how important it is to have a son to carry out the family
name. The wealthy Reza, who works in his father's company, is the only
son, there are four daughters. When the news from the lab comes back
that Leila is barren, that her hormonal levels are too low to ever have
children, the mother-in-law heartlessly puts the burden on her,
naggingly telling her that she is holding her son back from raising a
family, as he confided to others that he really wants one.
The weak son never confronts his mother, as he seems perplexed, even as
his wife begins to slowly sink into a shell, confused and ashamed about
herself, unwilling to confide in anyone, not even her mother. She
receives passive support from Reza, but she can't face the treacherous
mother-in-law when alone, who has the gift of twisting things around
during her visits while pretending to be nice by bearing gifts and then
she turns on the acid tongue, making Leila feel inadequate, as she just
tries to please her by agreeing with whatever she says. The mother is so
invasive of the couple's privacy, that she calls them always at the
wrong moment and the ringing phone is like a knife sticking in Leila, it
is so painful to just watch the phone and hear it ringing, and watch
Leila cringe at the thought of hearing what her mother-in-law has to
say.
The selfish mother-in-law after two years of intimidating the girl,
telling her Reza wants a child so much he will sneak behind her back and
have a child with another woman, and then have the nerve to suggest that
Leila give her permission for Reza to get another wife, as evidently,
polygamy is permitted in Iran.
Reza reacts by saying he doesn't want another wife, and that he can live
happily without children, just as long as she returns to being the old
playful Leila, who smiles so easily and is close to him. But he never
reassures her that he means what he says, and she grows more distant
from him, talking to herself aloud, so that we could hear her hurtful
thoughts, things that she feels she can't tell anyone else. She can't
take the pressure anymore, so she pushes Reza to look for a new wife. On
each occasion, when Reza goes courting, he requests that she ride with
him to meet his perspective bride, as he drops her off by the  stores to
shop while he goes to look over the woman his Aunt Shamsi or his
mother-in-law chose for him.
Reza is never forceful enough in his statements telling her that it
doesn't matter that she can't have children, as Leila has nagging doubts
about whether he really means it or is just saying it. The couple have
all the creature comforts of modern life and act like modern people do,
and are seen playfully watching Dr. Zhivago on TV together, but
tradition is also very strong. She stays home and does the cooking and
the womanly chores, while wearing, as she must, by Iranian law, a chador
to cover her head. There seems to be no problem following these
traditions, but this modern couple has its feet stuck in two different
worlds and they seem confused as to where they really want to be
standing.
I recently saw another film from the Middle-East, "Kadosh," an Israeli
film with the same topic and the same intransigent attitude was
displayed by those who call themselves orthodox believers in God, who
believe a woman who is barren has been cursed by God, they were Hasidim,
a sect of the Jewish religion.
It is curious that the men are so docile, that Reza never tells his
mother to mind her own business, and even though Reza's father disagrees
with what his wife is doing, he never stops her from ruining his son's
marriage. And when he takes a second wife, Leila has had enough. She
can't live with him anymore in the same house, though she bears no
grudge against his new wife, she still returns to her mother's house and
withdraws from Reza completely, quietly disrespecting him and filling
herself with self-pity. She says that she has turned to stone. When she
learns that the new wife gives birth to a baby girl, she anxiously takes
a peek at the girl, but has no love anymore for Reza and as she once
refused to answer him when he told her after the wedding that he would
divorce his new wife if she would return, she still refuses his offers.
It is too late for him to regain her love and his dignity as a man. When
the new wife divorces him because he can't love her and gets a generous
alimony and then weds her old suitor, because she now has the kind of
money she never had before, she ironically leaves the baby girl to be
raised by Reza's mother. The perfect marriage is destroyed forever as 10
years have passed since we first saw the happy couple meeting at a
family communal where they made a traditional pudding, and all Reza
could now do is be angry with his mother for ruining his life, still
unaware of how weakly he behaved.
This is a very compelling and subtle film, on one hand it shows the
current conflict in Iran between modernity and Islamic tradition, but on
the other hand, this is a penetrating film about the universal problem
of love, as seen through the psyche of a woman who is stripped of her
self-esteem, and even though she is beautiful and has a considerate
husband, she is still not sure of what her role is in society. This is a
very sensitive tale; it is film that was convincing in every possible
situation it presented; it is the work of a great director.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
FilmFan16@aol.com
Directed by Dariush Mehrjui.
Cast: Leila Hatami, Ali Mosaffa, Jamileh Sheikhi, Amir Pievar, Turan 
Mehrzad, Mohammad Reza Sharifinia, Shaqayeq Farahani.
1999 - 125 minutes 
Opens May 16 at New York's Cinema Village; May 21 in LA).
Iranian; in Farsi with English subtitles.
Not Rated (equivalent of a PG-13 for adult themes).
Reviewed April 19, 1999.
The thought-provoking question of tradition over morals is the subject 
directly at the core of "Leila," a powerfully articulated and subtle 
drama from famous Iranian director Dariush Mehrjui, that is his first 
motion picture in a prosperous thirty-year career to gain U.S. 
distribution, thanks to First Run Features. Although unfamiliar with 
Mehrjui's previous directing efforts, perhaps the reason for this is 
that, while the predicament at hand is no doubt exclusive to its own 
country, the heartbreaking and solely truthful emotions of the 
characters can easily be understood by all viewers.
Set in modern-day Iran, "Leila" begins on the birthday of the title 
character (Leila Hatami), after a brief prologue in which we are shown 
the first encounter between Leila and her future husband, Reza (Ali 
Mosaffa). As Leila and Reza set off to visit his parents, and then hers, 
where a birthday celebration has been planned, things seem rosy for the 
couple on the outside, but for Leila, life isn't quite as sweet. 
Earlier, on that very same day, Leila had gone to see her physician, and 
has ultimately discovered that she holds very little chance of ever 
conceiving a child. When all of the conditions are ruled out, and Leila 
passes up the possibility of adoption, Reza firmly and lovingly tells 
her that he married her, and doesn't care at all about having children. 
Nonetheless, Leila is ashamed that she will never be able to give him a 
baby, which is the societal norm, and her self-esteem is not helped at 
all by her domineering mother-in-law (Jamileh Sheikhi), whose hopes to 
carry on the sacred family name vanishes once hearing the news (Reza is 
her only son). Bluntly explaining to Leila that Reza has always wished 
for children and, in a country where polygamy is an accepted tradition, 
she suggests that he take a second wife to bear a child with. Leila 
hesitantly agrees, and while she and Reza are able to shallowly laugh 
afterwards about the hopeful womens' inadequacies, Reza finally does 
meet a woman whom he claims to like, even though he refuses to go 
through with the marriage if Leila doesn't give her full blessing. 
There are no easy answers to be found within "Leila," a film that 
thoughtfully examines the central character's unfortunate plight, as 
well as the inner workings of Leila herself, told through matter-of-fact 
narration. Almost completely taken over by her own shame, she has no 
option but to agree to her forceful mother-in-law's requests, even 
though she is unsure of how she will react if Reza really does end up 
marrying another woman. Maybe because "Leila" is from Iran, the film 
will unquestionably be shocking for American audiences, since the 
concept of polygamy is looked upon by the characters as a more or less 
everyday occurrence. Leila, however, is unable to come to terms with the 
idea quite as easily, but feels it is her duty to make her husband 
happy, no matter what the circumstances.
One of the strongest aspects of the film is in its portrayal of the 
relationship between Leila and Reza, who married only three months after 
their first meeting, but obviously love each other very deeply. It is 
this relationship that is the key ingredient to making what follows the 
opening scenes all the more powerful, and director Mehrjui has succeeded 
just about as well as possible. Although seemingly unimportant at first 
glance, an early sequence where Leila and Reza are eating dinner and 
both are laughing, nearly uncontrollably, actually is one of the most 
vital moments in the first half, as it unmistakably sets the boundary 
for their unrequisite love for one another. Ditto for another scene in 
which Reza gives Leila a large stuffed animal for her birthday, and then 
reveals a beautiful necklace he has also gotten her. These "small" 
moments are the perfect contrast for the solemn, outraging sequences in 
the latter half, in which Reza drops Leila off at the side of a busy 
road, and then zooms off to go on a date with another woman. Left there 
to ponder her quickly diminishing marriage, foolishly unbeknownst to 
Reza, Leila prays each time that the date will not go well, so she will 
be able to keep her husband to herself for a little while longer. 
Refusing to stay over at her parent's house, the film inevitably leads 
up to the second wedding night between Reza and another woman, and in a 
sequence of extraordinary sorrow and potency, Leila finds her whole 
being emotionally torn apart, as she is closed up in an upstairs bedroom 
as the marriage proceedings are going on down below. Despite her initial 
agreement to such a thing, Leila realizes how much she has been betrayed 
by Reza, whom she believed cared for her as much as she did of him. 
Sure, the whole second marriage was his mother's idea, but if he really 
did believe what he initially had told her about not wanting any 
children, then he could have still easily backed out, couldn't he?
In the pivotal role of Leila, who appears in every scene, Leila Hatami 
is nothing short of remarkable, injecting her character with an equal 
measure of startling strength, unavoidable vulnerability, and utter 
despair. Unlike most American films, in which everything always has to 
be spelled out for audiences, Hatami says much more with just an elusive 
expression on her face than could possibly have been conveyed by words. 
Every bit a perfect match for Hatami is Ali Mosaffa, as Reza, a man who, 
I believe, does hold an unbreakable bond with his wife, but is too naive 
to realize what he will be doing to Leila if he marries someone else.
For all of its strong aspects, "Leila" isn't a perfect film. On a 
technical level, I found many blatant punctiation and spelling mistakes 
within the subtitles that need to be fixed. And concerning the plot 
developments, the final five minutes ring false when compared with 
everything that has come before. Mehrjui's decision to use an extremely 
stylized approach to the ending was the wrong choice, particularly in 
his almost comedic way of wrapping up the character of the spiteful 
mother-in-law, played memorably by Jamileh Sheikhi.
Despite these minor missteps, "Leila" is an important motion picture 
that should definately be sought out upon its limited May 16 release at 
New York's Cinema Village, and then on May 21 in LA. The 
thought-provoking questions that the film deals with is balanced evenly 
with its uneasy morales, and when the climax arrives, Leila's self-worth 
is startlingly stripped away to reveal a victim led into complete 
devastation, to which there is no return. It's difficult to not consider 
how Leila's culminating interior demise could have been so simply 
avoided, had the other characters taken a second out of their own 
selfish lives to consider what Leila, the major pawn in the unforgivable 
scheme, was going through.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
