Title
Review for Remembering the Cosmos Flower (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Junichi Suzuki.
Cast: Akane Oda, Megumi Matsushita, Mari Natsuki.
1999 - 103 minutes (in Japanese w/English Subtitles).
Not Rated (equivalent of a PG rating for mature themes).
Reviewed July 19, 1999.
Japanese filmmaker Junichi Suzuki's "Remembering the Cosmos Flower" is such a 
well-meaning drama that you almost feel guilty criticizing it, but, 
ultimately, the movie paints a decidedly syrupy, manipulative picture on the 
subject of the AIDS virus. Foreign films, more often than not, are far more 
intelligent than American films, because it is often said that foreigners 
write about adults while Americans write about children. With "Remembering 
the Cosmos Flower," this theory unfortunately doesn't hold up, as you can 
always see Suzuki straining to get the viewer to shed some tears. I almost 
did once; I admittedly felt myself welling up all so slightly, but only 
because my tear ducts felt as if they were being violently yanked about.
After being away for seven years in South America, 15-year-old Akiko (Akane 
Oda) returns to her hometown in Japan with her mother. While overseas, she 
and her father were in an automobile accident; he died, while she was given a 
blood transfusion, as well as AIDS. Word spreads quickly through the Japanese 
town as many parents start threatening to keep their children out of school 
if Akiko attends, oblivious to the reality of AIDS, which is that it can't be 
passed through the air or simple touch. Akiko and her caring mother (Mari 
Natsuki) are strong-willed people, and things brighten up when Akiko is 
reunited with her childhood friend, Natsumi (Megumi Matsushita), who is also 
cautious at first until she is educated more on the disease and realizes how 
much pain Akiko is going through, both physically and emotionally. Akiko 
knows she isn't going to be living for much longer and is terrified of death, 
but keeps her chin held high and desperately tries to not let anything 
negative affect her. As the town's festival approaches, Akiko and Natsumi 
plan out a comedy skit to perform in the school talent show, but when Akiko 
falls ill in the hospital, Natsumi is urged to carry on their original plans 
alone.
"Remembering the Cosmos Flower" is mature and realistic when it deals with 
Akiko and Natsumi's close friendship, as well as the portrayal of how 
everyone deals with her inevitable death, but along the way Suzuki has felt 
the need to include several melodramtic scenes that ring with a resounding 
falseness. One such scene comes toward the end, when Natsumi goes on-stage to 
perform their comedy act alone and is greeted by the audience with several 
prejudiced remarks about Akiko. Standing up there in front of everyone, 
Natsumi makes a heartfelt speech defending her friend and educating everyone 
on the seriousness of AIDS, which concludes with half the audience crying and 
everyone clapping. Film scenes like this always rub me the wrong way because 
they are so far-strung from reality, and it doesn't help that the movie seems 
outdated. Ten or fifteen years ago I may have believed this story because 
AIDS was a relatively new disease that not many people knew much about. 
Coming in the late-'90s, however, the characters that inhabit the town in 
this film apparently know nothing about AIDS and react in a ludicrous manner 
that I couldn't believe for a second.
On the positive side, the performances by the two leads are winning and 
poignant. Akane Oda effectively presents Akika as a girl coping day by day 
with her disease, even amidst all of the negativity that is thrown at her and 
her mother. Megumi Matsushita is equally superb as Natsumi, Akika's best 
friend who gradually studies up on AIDS and learns that Akika is just like 
everyone else, except that she has a far more difficult battle ahead of her 
for the rest of her life. Natsumi's conflicted relationship with her stubborn 
father is well-done also, as he constantly is trying to stop his daughter and 
Akika from spending time together, and in one of the film's more truthful 
moments, Natsumi blows up at her dad for being so narrow-minded under the 
circumstances.
"Remembering the Cosmos Flower" cannot be faulted for its superior actors or 
some of the memorable relationships that are developed here, but it is an 
otherwise mechanical motion picture, one that is both predictable, in a sappy 
sort of way, and out-of-date. Its heart is obviously in the right place, but 
as a portrait of a closed-up, uneducated society on the reality of the very 
serious AIDS virus, it comes at least a decade too late.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
