Title
Review for Clubland (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The fact that Saul Rubinek's directorial debut - Jerry and Tom - wasn't seen
by more people is one of the greatest travesties of the '90s, right after
the break-up of The Ramones and the cancellation of My So Called Life.  The
hitman dramedy, adapted by Rick Cleveland (an occasional writer and producer
on The West Wing) and based on his three-man play, was a competitor at the
1998 Sundance Festival, and then later that fall at Montreal and Toronto,
where it played to strong reviews.  Then it collected dust on a shelf at
Miramax until its August 2000 video release.  That's right - Jerry went
straight to video.
Rubinek, an actor last seen on the screen as Nic Cage's boss in Family Man,
packs his second effort - Club Land - with more of the same long, unedited
shots and stunning jumps from scene to scene that made Jerry so enjoyable.
Unfortunately, it's all for naught.  Cleveland's intelligently written
script is followed up with one penned by Steven Weber.  Yes, that Steven
Weber - the same vanilla no-talent who had the name of his television show
changed from Cursed to The Weber Show because nobody knew he was on it.
Weber writes about as well as he acts, which dooms Club Land from the
get-go.  He also stars in the film, playing Stuey Walters, a Korean War vet
who is forced to go into the family business - talent management.  Stuey's
father, Willie (Alan Alda, What Women Want), is an old-school hard-ass who
constantly breaks his son's balls for not being into the management game.
"You look like you fell out of a bum's ass," he yells at Stuey, who seems
more content scouting skirts than talent.
When Willie's one decent money-making act quits, the Walters boys become
even more outwardly hostile toward each other, while simultaneously growing
closer on the inside.  It's a story that should be taken out back and shot.
Club Land is Broadway Danny Rose without the humor, or the heart.  It wastes
the talent of Alda (who looks like he's having fun, for some reason) and
Happiness' Louise Lasser, while accentuating Weber's complete lack of
aptitude.
The only thing remotely interesting here is going on behind the camera.
Rubinek's direction and Sloane Klevin's editing (he also worked on Jerry)
are the lone standouts, creating odd scene transitions using clever camera
angles and mirrors.  But it's still not enough to make Club Land worth
watching.
1:50 - TV-14 for adult language, light sexual content and brief nudity
