Title
Review for Artemisia (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Dennis Schwartz
ARTEMISIA (director: Agnes Merlet; cast: Valentina Cervi (Artemisia
Gentileschi), Michel Serrault (Orazio), Miki Manojlovic (Agostino
Tassi), Luca Zingaretti (Cosimo), 1997-Fr./It.)
An emotionally flat but intelligently competent biopic about the first
woman who received a commission to be an artist in the modern world, the
17th-century Italian Baroque painter, Artemisia Gentileschi (Cervi). Her
major work was accomplished in 1612, "Judith Beheading Holophernes." She
was virtually undiscovered until the 1970s, that is when the feminist
movement brought her some recognition, as they discovered her work
linked to the themes of women being suppressed in society. Today some of
her work hangs in the Louvre and in New York's Metropolitan Museum of
Art; and, her above named major work hangs in the Offices Gallery in
Florence, Italy.
The main thesis of the film's plot might not be true, since the love
affair between the 17-year- old virgin Artemisia and the painter
Agostino (Miki) might not have happened, court documents reveal only
that he was charged with rape and there is no evidence of a love affair
occurring between them.
Art is linked here to sexuality for the curious Artemisia, who is
unhappily in a convent school, but soon to be released from that type of
purgatory by her materially successful painter father Orazio (Serrault),
who dotingly rescues her, by going against the grain of that period's
traditional beliefs that a woman's place is in the home, by taking  her
to work in his studio, but following the traditions of the times he
would not let her paint male nudes. She realizes that she can't get
anywhere without doing what the male painters are doing, so she secretly
paints a local fisherboy in the nude.
When she feels she has learned all she can from her father, she turns to
a friendly rival of her father, Agostino, and implores him to take her
on as a pupil. Being all charged up with passion and fervent urges,
which intermingle between sex and art, she uses this energy to become
more adept as an artist and falls for the Rabelaisian-like Agostino and
his seduced by him, when it comes to the attention of her very
protective and proper father, it leads to a clash of wills between the
two adament men, and Artemisia is caught in the middle of a bad
situation.
The repressive church enters the picture as the arbitrator of the
dispute and settles things in its own inimical authoritative style,
torturing the girl to confess that she had been raped, but getting only
a confession of rape out of the beleaguered Agostino, who does this to
stop them from further torturing Artemisia.
The film is beautiful to watch. Its sense of colors are breathtakingly
gorgeous. The attractive Cervi is properly suited for her role,
conveying a charming innocence that showed that she can be bold enough
to be erotic, while she can also be driven to lustfully paint. Serrault
added a strong presence to the story, and Agostino was more than
adequate as the womanizer with a soft heart.
So why wasn't I thrilled with this presentation? It is because I didn't
feel any passion about what was happening, it all seemed like "old hat"
arguments against repression that were politically correct, but left me
wondering... so, what else is new! I just wish the film had more of an
edge to it.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
     ARTEMISIA, the purportedly true story of Artemisia Gentileschi, a
seventeenth century Roman artist who was the first female member of the
Academy in Florence, suffers from the same confusion of purpose that a
similar film, DANGEROUS BEAUTY, did earlier this year.  DANGEROUS
BEAUTY, which featured a high paid poet-prostitute from the same period
and area, tried to emphasize its credentials as a statement about female
independence in a male dominated world, but spent most of time in
various sexual encounters.
     So it is with ARTEMISIA, which starts off well by considering the
hardships of becoming a respected artist, especially a female one, in
1670.  The film immerses us in the minutia of painting from the
preparation of the paints to the setting of the scenery scaffolding to
the art of choosing just the right naked body to paint.  (Nope, that
one's too skinny.  Breasts are too large on that one.  His rear's all
wrong.)
     When we first meet Artemisia, she is taking off her clothes.  With
a handheld mirror she examines and sketches every part of the female
anatomy.  One of the biggest barriers to Artemisia's success in the art
world, however, was that women were not permitted by the Pope to paint
nude males.  You can probably guess that she will entice a friend to
take his clothes off and that there will eventually be a big trial where
the charge of painting the male genitalia is brought against our
heroine.  DANGEROUS BEAUTY followed a similarly predictable path.
     Valentina Cervi plays Artemisia with an earnest and unvarying
composure.  Her father Orazio, played by Michel Serrault from NELLY &
MONSIEUR ARNAUD, does not approve of the nightly debauchery of his
fellow artists.  He complains that their life consists of "painting
saints by day and sinning by night."  Artemisia loves to peer in the
open window at night to watch dozens of naked men and women groping each
other.  (There's an artist on hand to record their proclivities.)
     Orazio, a painter of some considerable repute himself, introduces
his daughter to Agostino Tassi (Miki Manojlovic) to learn more about
painting.  The virginal Artemisia and Agostino soon become lovers, much
to the father's dismay.  Neither member of this love affair demonstrates
any genuine passion.  Both of the actors give a rather distant and
ethereal reading of their parts, artistic and sexual.
     The movie spends most of the time drifting along aimlessly.
Director Agnes Merlet sets a languid pace that would be in danger of
putting the audience to sleep were it not for the frequent nudity and
sex. But even with the full-frontal male and female nudity, the sex is
as cold as a picture from some cheesy soft porn magazine so some may
still find themselves nodding off.
     Although the painting aspect is undeniably interesting, the story
wastes most of its time with sexual titillation.  Why can't we have a
film about a woman from that era who prospers without the need for
constant disrobing?
     ARTEMISIA runs 1:38.  The movie is in French with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would probably be an R for complete
nudity, sex, profanity, and brief violence and would be acceptable for
older and mature teenagers.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
      If you've ever visited the Offices Gallery in Florence, Italy,
you doubtless saw the most dramatic painting in the hall,
"Judith Beheading Holofemis," inspired by a biblical story. 
You don't have to look closely at it to guess that it's the work
of a woman painter.  Two women are standing over the
bearded, defeated general Holofemis, one holding a sword at
his neck, the other helping to hold him down to a bed.  It
almost looks like a rape scene initiated by the women, and
perhaps its passionate painter wanted to give the work a
double meaning.  Any art student worth his or her palette
would be impatient to know more about the painter, and any
generalist with a broad education would be enthusiastic about
hearing the story.  If you were accompanied in the gallery by
a decent guide with the appropriate background and an ardor
for teaching his tourists and students, your curiosity would be
at a fever pitch.
   Luckily, there is now a film about the painter, and what an
artist she was...in fact she was for all practical purposes the
first woman painter in art history--just as Aphra Behn is today
considered (for the same practical purposes) to be the first
woman playwright.  Why?  Both Behn and the subject of the
movie, Artemisia Gentileschi, were paid for what they did. 
Essentially, Artemisia was the first woman painter we know
who was commissioned for her work.  Agnes Merlet's
"Artemisia" is a French production featuring in the starring
roles an Italian, Valentina Cervi, whom you might have
recognized for her role in "Portrait of a Lady;" a Frenchman,
Michel Serrault, who should need no introduction and would
be known even by the general audience who saw him in "The
Birdcage;" and a Serb, Miki Manojlovic, who played a starring
role in Emil Kusturica's "Underground."  All speak French
fluently in the film.
   You don't have to be an artist or student of painting to know
that there's an intimate connection between passion and
creativity.  Often the passion is of a sexual nature.  We
observe that the great Florentine painter of the Seventeenth
Century, Agostino Tassi (Miki Manojlovic), was a frequent
guest at bordellos, and modern audience will accept the fact
that Artemisia (Valentina Cervi) is herself inspired in her own
work by her intimate relationship with Agostino.  But in the
year 1610, the idea that a 17-year-old woman would have an
interest in drawing the nude male body or would cavort with a
man not her husband was anathema; positively sinful. 
Artemisia had such interests--not that this preoccupation
prevented her from acceptance in the prestigious Academy in
which her father, Orazio Gentileschi (Michel Serrault) and
Agostino are members.  She was a woman and painting was
simply not considered the proper occupation for the fair sex,
even if she were concerned only with landscapes.
   "Artemesia," then, is based on the true story of the world's
first recognized woman artist, written by its director, who was
a student at the School of Fine Arts in Orleans.  Using her
imagination to fill in the blanks where the actual facts are a
matter of conjecture, she displays for us a colorful account. 
There is one major disappointment: it exhibits the subject's
works only superficially, preferring to concentrate on the
romance between Artemisia and her teacher, Agostino, as if
Ms. Merlet felt that the movie would thereby appeal to a larger
audience.  For better or worse (depending on the viewer's
predilections), she avoids the gauzy look of the Merchant-
Ivory films, portraying her characters with almost matter-of-
fact realism.  Perhaps Ms. Merlet wants to impress us with
the truthfulness of the account, fearing that a gossamer look
would have us believe the story was simply the product of an
energetic imagination.
   Merlet takes us first to a scene in Rome where an
ensemble of painters are belting out a flurry of drawings and
paintings of saints and angels, all inspired by a Papal
commission.  Orazio seems to have been the most successful
of the group, and has taught her daughter Artemisia all that
he knows.  But now a younger man, Agostino, is gaining
favor, particularly with the nobility, for exploiting innovations in
the field, particularly with the use of light and shade to
enhance the stories portrayed on the canvasses.  While
Artemisia is refused admission to the Academy purely on
gender grounds, her father convinces the great Agostino to
take her on as a pupil.  Artemisia, who has shown a healthy
desire to paint the nude male body and who has used a
fisherman, Fulvio (Yahn Tregouet) as a model, is enthusiastic. 
When Artemisia and Agostino's relationship evolve to more
than that of a student and pupil, her father is incensed and
accuses the young man of rape.  A trial ensues.  Given the
subordinate position of women throughout most of civilization,
it is no wonder that this tribunal is one of the first in history
ever to consider such a charge.
   A film of this nature runs the risk of being considered a
woman's movie and, in fact, at a recent critics's screening,
over 3/4 of the audience were women.  Given the feminist
emphasis of the film, such an constituency is more likely than
one composed of painters.  To ghettoize this--or any other
film--based on genre or accent would be to do it a disservice,
and "Artemisia" deserves to be seen by film buffs of both
genders.  "Artemisia" is well-acted, with an imposing
soundtrack of both baroque and contemporary music, which
avoids pontification and any form of didactic narration.  Merely
a second feature of a gifted director, "Artemisia" will hopefully
encourage Ms. Merlet to tackle similar films of prominent
women who have made historic firsts but who even today are
known only by others in similar fields of endeavor.  Not Rated. 
Running time: 96 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
James Berardinelli
France, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 5/15/98 (limited)
Running Length: 1:42
MPAA Classification: R (Graphic sexuality, frontal nudity, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     For its first two-thirds, Agnes Merlet's ARTEMISIA is a fine 
examination of the process of creating art and the inextricable (if 
sometimes tenuous) link that binds it to sexuality.  However, while the 
movie's final half-hour is adequate as a melodrama, its conformance to 
certain expectations of the "historical romance" genre robs it of the 
vitality that characterizes the early portions of the film.  As a 
result, although ARTEMISIA is an engaging and occasionally fascinating 
motion picture, it is not a landmark cinematic biography.
     Born on July 8, 1593 in Rome, during and era when many professions 
were forbidden to women, Artemisia Gentileschi was one of the first 
female painters to make a living as an artist.  In the immediate 
centuries following her death, her work was largely-forgotten, only to 
be re-discovered in the last forty years.  Her best-known painting, 
"Judith Beheading Holophernes," was completed in 1612, and has often 
been cited as one of the most passionate and proficient works of art 
crafted by a woman during the seventeenth century.  Today, Artemisia's 
surviving canvasses are recognized throughout the West, and several of 
them reside in the Louvre.
     Merlet's speculative treatment of a chapter in Artemisia's life 
(many of the actual details from the period are unknown, so the film 
maker is able to fashion her own interpretation of the historical 
record) begins in 1610, the year when her artistic urges become too 
powerful to suppress, and ends in 1612, after a rape trial separates her 
from her mentor and lover, Agostino Tassi.  Tassi, an artist working 
with Artemisia's father, Orazio, in painting a series of religious 
frescos, agreed to teach Artemisia after the girl's request for 
admission to the males-only Academy of Fine Arts was rejected.  Their 
relationship, which improved Artemisia's understanding of the technical 
aspects of painting, eventually turned sexual, and led to Tassi's arrest 
on rape charges.
     Italian-born Valentina Cervi (PORTRAIT OF A LADY) plays the lead 
character with the right mix of innocence and sensuality.  As essayed in 
this film, Artemisia is a brilliant, headstrong, passionate woman whose 
tribulations made her a better artist.  Cervi's portrayal is stunning, 
giving us another young international actress who is as talented as she 
is beautiful.  Appearing opposite Cervi is Miki Manojlovic, whose 
interpretation of Tassi is that of an older man hopelessly enraptured by 
a woman who should remain forbidden to him.  Rounding out the main cast 
is veteran French actor Michel Serrault (LA CAGE AUX FOLLES, NELLY & M. 
ARNAUD), who brings an air of quiet dignity to his performance as 
Orazio.
     It's debatable how accurate Merlet's treatment of Artemisia's 
affair with Tassi is (the surviving court records of the rape trial 
indicate that it was a somewhat less romantic liaison than is presented 
here), but it makes for a compelling story.  Especially noteworthy are 
the scenes in which Tassi instructs Artemisia about the techniques of 
art, reigning in her natural passion and allowing her to harness a 
burgeoning talent.  Tassi is presented as a volatile man who loves his 
student as much as his craft.  Artemisia's fascination with sex and the 
naked male body leads to an ever-present subtext about the relationship 
between eroticism and art -- a subject that has fascinated scholars and 
laymen alike throughout history.  In the context of this film, it not 
only impels the narrative, but captures and holds the viewer's 
attention.  With ARTEMISIA,  Merlet paints a beautiful and intriguing, 
if somewhat incomplete, picture.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Joy Wyse
In these days of sexual harassment cases, I suggest that people go to see
ARTEMISIA  to see what sexual harassment really is.  
The true story opens in Rome in 1610 where 15 year old Artemisia is living
in a convent.  She takes a candle from the chapel to enable her to have
light in the late hours in her room to draw.  Her ability to sketch the
human body comes from her use of this candle and a mirror to examine and
recreate her own naked body.  When her artist father, Messier Gentileschi,
is shown her drawings he takes her from the convent to become his
assistant.  She does much of the painting that is passed off as his work.  
She wants to learn as much as possible but is not allowed to attend the
academy, simply because she is a female.   Her desire to learn about the
male body is fulfilled when she convinces a young worker to take off his
clothes for her, in exchange for a kiss.  She sketches what she has seen.
In the art world of that era females are only used as nude models and
participants in after hour orgies.  When her father is hired to work with
Agostino Tassi in painting the frescoes for a new church, Artemisia 
learns even more when she peeks through the window at one of the orgies. 
She prevails upon Tassi to become her art teacher and shows him her
sketches.  When he sees the male nudes that she has done, he surmises that
she is much more experienced than she is, and he is very surprised when
she loses her virginity to him.  
When her father learns of their indiscretions, he has Tassi arrested, for
rape.  Artemisia insists that he did not rape her, but her father is
trying to save her reputation, even at the cost of Tassi's career and
freedom.    Some of the scenes that follow had the audience gasping at
what happens next.  
The epilogue gives a condensed version of what became of them.  Artemisia
did, in fact, become a recognized artist, with works on exhibition at the
Louvre, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
This is an excellent movie, although it will not appeal to everyone.  I'm
very glad that I saw it.  I learned from it and I wouldn't mind seeing it
again.

Author
James Sanford
ARTEMISIA
Directed by Agnes Merlet
 Controversy is swirling around "Artemisia," French filmmaker Agnes Merlet's
study of the early career of Italian painter Artemisia Gentileschi, who is
celebrated by contemporary feminists for the strides she made for women in
the male-dominated art world of the 17th century. Both Merlet and her
critics -- fronted by Gloria Steinem -- agree on Artemisia's importance both
as an artist and as a heroine. What seperates the two camps is Merlet's
attitude toward Artemisia's relationship with Agostino Tassi, whose
reputation as a Lothario, some say, was far more deserved than his acclaim
as a painter.
 "Using the few historical records remaining and her own imagination Merlet
creates a fresh interpretation of  (Artemisia's) life," says the publicity
material from Miramax Films, which is distributing the film. In
writer-director Merlet's mind, the story of Artemisia and Tassi is one of
love thwarted. Barely 17, Artemisia (played with the right combination of
innocence and fire by Valentina Cervi) prevails upon her father Orazio
(Michel Serrault) to let her study art with his friend Tassi (Miki
Manojlovic), a Baroque painter of some renown. But in the early 1600s, this
proves to be a dicey arrangement: The church forbids women to paint the
figure of the male nude and generally discourages feminine participation in
the arts as a rule.
 Artemisia refuses to heed such taboos, even though it means sacrificing her
virginity to the worldly Tassi. Out of this violation of the teacher-student
relationship comes a deep and all-consuming passion shared by both partners,
both for art and for each other. But when Orazio learns of the affair, she
charges Tassi with raping his daughter and a lascivious trial results,
complete with nuns who attempt to determine how many times Artemisia has had
sex and finger-twisting tortures to get answers from witnesses. Monica
Lewinski had better hope Ken Starr doesn't screen this picture and get
ideas.
 For what it is, essentially a steamy and well-made period-piece,
"Artemisia" plays fairly effectively. There's some heavy erotic content
between Cervi and Manojlovic that almost earned the film a dreaded NC-17
rating, but Merlet also manages to put forth the theory that Artemisia's
entire career grew out of this early heartbreak and the scandal that
followed it.
 Artist June Wayne, who supports Steinem's position against the movie,
disagrees.
"Merlet has turned Artemisia's life into just another hot pillow story,"
Wayne told the Los Angeles Times. "The film is a bodice-ripper that misses
everything important about this woman--and aesthetically she did break
ground." Wayne and Steinem are particularly offended by Merlet's
romanticization of the bond between Artemisia and Tassi, but the conflicted
emotions that drive them -- Artemisia adores her lover but fears her
father's wrath, while the more experienced Tassi seems to realize the
relationship can never work out -- make for absorbing drama.
 Indeed, the biggest disappointment in "Artemisia" comes at the end, when a
rolling title tells us that after the trial ended Artemisia went on to
marry, have a daughter and study in Rome (possibly disguised as a man,
according to some sources). At the time of her death, she was running her
own workshop in Naples and was earning a living in her chosen profession.
That part of the story would have been at least as interesting as the
sex-scandal Merlet has chosen to focus on and would probably have given its
filmmakers far fewer headaches. B
