Title
Review for Dangerous Ground (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
(New Line)
Starring:  Ice Cube, Elizabeth Hurley, Ving Rhames, Sechaba Morojele.
Screenplay:  Darrell Roodt and Greg Latter.
Producers:  Gillian Gorfil and Darrell Roodt.
Director:  Darrell James Roodt.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, drug use, brief nudity)
Running Time:  92 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Director Darrell James Roodt (SARAFINA!, CRY THE BELOVED COUNTRY) has
again returned to his native South Africa for the new urban crime drama
DANGEROUS GROUND...at least nominally.  Yes, the events of the story take
place in Johannesburg and Soweto and Sun City, but they might just as well
be taking place in New Jack or South Central.  I believe that is part of
the point Roodt is trying to make -- that post-apartheid South Africa has
become a dangerous ground of a different kind, much like the American
inner cities -- but he has chosen a singularly monotonous and pedantic way
of doing it.  Just beyond the nods to African culture and the wall of
homilies you will find a dreary guns-and-drugs picture that feels like the
least inspired of a hundred guns-and-drugs pictures you might have seen
before.  Only the accents have been changed to distinguish the guilty.
     Ice Cube stars in DANGEROUS GROUND as Vusi Madlazi, a South
African-born man who went into exile in the United States in 1983 to avoid
political persecution.  Now, 14 years later, Vusi returns to his homeland
for the first time to attend his father's funeral, and finds his family
facing other problems as well.  His youngest brother Stephen has not been
heard from in months, and Vusi's mother implores him as the new head of
the family to look for his brother.  Vusi ventures into Johannesburg to
find Stephen, finding a country much-changed after the fall of apartheid,
as well as finding some unpleasant truths about Stephen.  His girlfriend
Karen (Elizabeth Hurley) is a white stripper and a crack addict; Stephen
himself also apparently has a drug habit.  Worst of all, Stephen has
stolen $15,000 from an unforgiving drug lord named Muki (Ving Rhames),
putting everyone who knows Stephen in danger.  Vusi spends the next 48
hours trying to find Stephen before Muki does, dealing with a new South
Africa he understands only too well.
     The majority of DANGEROUS GROUND consists of Vusi wandering through
South Africa facing a variety of urban perils at carefully spaced
intervals:  a carjacking at the hands of sneering black youths; a racist
assault at the hands of sneering white youths; threats from a paranoid
coke dealer (co-screenwriter Greg Latter); kidnapping by Muki's henchmen.
We are left with little doubt that South Africa has become a place as full
of black self-destruction as America's inner cities, and not just because
Vusi gets to make laughably sincere speeches to force the point home.
"They got free and then they got high," Vusi says of American blacks to
his other brother Ernest (Sechaba Morojele); "don't fall asleep...the
struggle's not over."  Unfortunately, Roodt is so intent on making us see
the similarities between the current situations in South African and in
America that he doesn't seem to care about the similarities between his
movie and other movies about blacks facing a decaying environment.  Once
you acknowledge the sociological curiosity, you are left with a film
lacking anything new or interesting to say as a story.
     It doesn't help matters that Ice Cube is woefully miscast in the lead
role.  Ice Cube has proven that he can act, and he has a powerful screen
presence, but the character he is playing is supposed to be a doctoral
student in literature who has lost touch with "the struggle" while
ensconced in the Ivory Tower.  As he marches through DANGEROUS GROUND
wielding both an AK-47 and a certain four-letter epithet as though he were
writing his dissertation on those subjects, Ice looks about as much like a
bookish student as Keanu Reeves.  It is also a terribly one-dimensional
performance; it often seems that if he didn't have something to scowl at,
there wouldn't be any reason for him to have a face.  To be fair to Ice
Cube, I don't think there's much that anyone could have done with such a
ridiculous character.  If I were asked to deliver lines like "That's how
you fight a war...with education," or, "Guns are for cowards, not
warriors," I'd probably spend the entire film scowling, too.
     The main problem with DANGEROUS GROUND even as visceral entertainment
is that Roodt doesn't know how to do it.  He has written himself into a
corner by setting up a story like American urban crime stories, but he
seems wildly uncomfortable filming traditional action scenes.  The result
is perhaps the least interesting car chase in recent cinematic history, as
two cars chase each other around the spiraling levels of a parking garage,
and a climactic gunfight which is edited more with an interest in getting
it over with than making it interesting to watch.  If this same story had
been set in an American city, it would be hooted off the screen for its
derivative narrative, stupid characters and limp action.  It is certainly
depressing to think that black South Africans won a hard-fought struggle
against institutional racism only to fall to other foes; it is also
depressing to think that movies about blacks in South Africa can now be as
obsessed with drugs and violence as movies about blacks in America.
DANGEROUS GROUND, yes...and all-too-common ground, as well.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Ice Cube, Elizabeth Hurley, Ving Rhames, Sechaba Morojele, 
      Eric 'Waku' Miyeni
Director: Darrell James Roodt
Producers: Gillian Gorfil and Darrell Roodt
Screenplay: Greg Latter and Darrell Roodt
Cinematography: Paul Gilpin
Music: Stanley Clarke
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     In 1995, director Darrell Roodt was responsible for CRY, THE 
BELOVED COUNTRY, one of the most powerful films ever made about South 
Africa's Apartheid.  Adapted from the landmark novel by Alan Paton, the 
movie provided an emotional anchor for those seeking to understand the 
fear, hatred, and misunderstanding that sundered the country for 
decades.  Now, in 1997, Roodt has returned to his native South Africa 
with a contemporary story.  And, while the film gets off to a promising 
start, it eventually devolves into a typical, formula-driven revenge 
thriller whose characters become progressively less intelligent as the 
body count rises.
     Ice Cube, a rap artist-turned-actor with a forceful screen 
presence, plays Vusi Madlazi, a South Africa-born man who has been 
living in the United States for the past fourteen years.  He has come 
home to bury his father, and, setting foot on South African soil for the 
first time in over a decade, he is reminded that he "left as an African 
and came back an American."  The truth of this simple statement is borne 
out in one particularly effective scene.  At his father's funeral, Vusi, 
as the eldest son, is required to sacrifice a bull.  Horrified by the 
thought of ritual slaughter, he is unable to fulfill his part in the 
ceremony.  
     Now that Vusi is the head of his household, the duty falls to him 
to travel to Johannesburg and find his younger brother, Steven (Eric 
Miyeni), who has disappeared.  Once there, he hooks up with Steven's 
white, crack-addicted girlfriend, Karin (Elizabeth Hurley), and learns 
that his brother is $15,000 in debt to a local drug lord (Ving Rhames).  
Vusi is given an ultimatum:  come up with the money or lose his brother 
to a bullet.  
     DANGEROUS GROUND is at its best when it tracks Vusi's exploration 
of a South Africa that is foreign to him.  When he is carjacked by a 
band of young blacks, he wonders aloud why "brothers" would do this to 
him.  His only response is derisive laughter.  Later, as Vusi roams the 
streets and nightclubs of Johannesburg, we see that "racial equality" 
has not been a panacea.  Poverty is widespread and neo-Nazi groups hang 
out in alleys waiting to pounce on unsuspecting blacks.  Drug use is 
rampant among the underprivileged, and the crime lords -- black and 
white alike -- are getting rich by sucking up the profits.  
     Unfortunately, as the film progresses, these elements become 
background material for a bloody "eye for an eye" story.  Vusi, who 
begins the film espousing a doctrine that "guns are for cowards", ends 
up hefting an AK-47.  Then, as if to justify the violence, the script 
introduces several preachy lines of dialogue about Vusi's need to keep 
fighting the good fight.  "Don't fall asleep!"  he cries.  "The 
struggle's never over!"  A voiceover narrative helpfully supplies us 
with the information that "drugs had taken over where Apartheid had left 
off."
     The best thing about DANGEROUS GROUND is Ice Cube.  Over a series 
of movies from BOYZ 'N THE HOOD to THE GLASS SHIELD, Cube has carefully 
honed his acting abilities to the point where his off-screen personae no 
longer eclipses the role he's playing.  Elizabeth Hurley, on the other 
hand, is ineffective.  Watching her character -- a stripper who never 
removes her clothes on-screen -- one can't help but be reminded of the 
restrictions (one of which is a "no nudity" clause) built into her Estee 
Lauder contract.  Ving Rhames is somewhat entertaining as the drug lord 
Muki, although the actor is essentially reprising the part of Marsellus 
Wallace from PULP FICTION.  South African actors Sechaba Morojele and 
Eric Miyeni (CRY, THE BELOVED COUNTRY) play Vusi's brothers.
     For almost a full hour, DANGEROUS GROUND kept me interested, but 
the more traditional the plot became, the less involving it was.  The 
final half-hour could have taken place in almost any city around the 
globe, using stock characters.  DANGEROUS GROUND never lives up to the 
promise and potential it shows during its opening moments.  In the end, 
this is little more than a more socially aware DEATH WISH.  The payoff 
isn't about striking a blow for individual rights, it's about the bloody 
carnage that inevitably caps off films of this tired genre.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
