Title
Review for Running on Empty (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Tim Larison
     RUNNING ON EMPTY is one of the best films released this year, an excellent
family drama with strong performances by Judd Hirsh, Christine Lahti, and River
Phoenix.
     The story involves a family on the run from the law.  In the early 1970s
Art and Annie Pope (Judd Hirsch and Christine Lahti) blew up a napalm
laboratory as part of the anti-war movement.  The explosion inadvertently
blinded and paralyzed a janitor.  The FBI has been on their tracks for years,
as the  Popes frequently have to move from town to town changing their
identities wherever they go.
     The movie is not so much a chase story with the Popes running from the
law, but rather deals with the Popes' fugitive life style and the effect it has
on their two sons.  Danny Pope (River Phoenix) is a 17-year-old coming into
manhood feeling a conflict between his own desires and the protection and
safety of his parents.  Danny is a talented musician who is "discovered" by a
local high school teacher, and also falls in love with the teacher's daughter.
As Danny's musical reputation as a  young prodigy spreads through the town, a
conflict develops because of the desire of his parents to maintain their
anonymity without stunting Danny's growth.  
     The film deals with the age-old struggle of becoming your own person in
conflict with what your family would like you to be.  The actors are very 
believable in their roles, and the film has an emotional intensity that caused 
quite a few tears in the audience I was in.  
     The movie also touches on the values of the 60's generation in conflict
with the traditional views of that time, and how the 60's generation have to
deal with similar conflicts with the children of their own.  One powerful scene
where Annie Pope meets her father after 15 years of absence is worth the price
of admission to the film.
     The story starts off slow and takes some time to get going, but if you
stick with it, RUNNING ON EMPTY will really capture your attention.  I would
give it a +3 on a -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Karl Rackwitz
A film review by Karl Rackwitz (Berlin, Germany, 1997)
Copyright 1997 Karl Rackwitz
Director: Sidney Lumet
Original Screenplay: Naomi Foner
Director of Photography: Gerry Fisher
Music: Tony Mottola
Editor: Andrew Mondshein
With River Phoenix, Christine Lahti, Judd Hirsch, Martha Plimpton, Jonas Abry,
Ed Crowley, L.M. Kit Carson, Steven Hill, Augusta Dabney
Sidney Lumet is one of my favourite directors. It's not difficult to forget
that some of his films aren't great ("The Appointment", "The Last of the Mobile
Hotshots", "The Morning After", "A Stranger Among Us", "Guilty as Sin"),
because there are many superb motion pictures among his films, like "Twelve
Angry Men", "Long Day's Journey Into Night", "The Pawnbroker", "Serpico",
"Dog Day Afternoon", "Network", "Prince of the City", "The Verdict", the often
underrated "Q & A" and this excellent drama "RUNNING ON EMPTY".
In 1971, when they were radical students, Arthur and Annie Pope (Judd Hirsch,
Christine Lahti) committed a bomb attack on a napalm laboratory to stop the war
in Vietnam. Therefore they have been on the run for 15 years, chased by the
FBI. Now they have two sons, 17-year-old Danny
(River Phoenix) and 10-year-old Harry (Jonas Abry), who must share their
parents' destiny.
In the first scenes of the film the Pope family must again change home and
identities - as many times before. Now Danny falls in love
for Lorna Phillips (Martha Plimpton), the daughter of his music teacher
(Ed Crowley), who discovers Danny's musical talent and gets him to apply
for a study at Juilliard School. But that would destroy the
family. Danny gets into an inner conflict. On the one hand there are his
love to Lorna and his wish to live his own life. On the other hand he
wants to support his adored parents. When they notice that
conflict, they don't know what to do either.
With "RUNNING ON EMPTY" Sidney Lumet returns to the theme he has already
treated in his film "Daniel" (1983). Lumet and his screenwriter Naomi
Foner didn't want to make a political film in the first place. They
wanted to show how children can be affected by the activities of their
parents, and it's a film about the problems of families if the children
want to leave home. Actually it would have been imaginable to treat this
theme in front of a non-political background. But the political aspects
enrich the film and stimulate us to discuss about what's more important:
to change the world with dangerous actions or also to remember the
consequences of these actions not only for one's own life, but for the
lives of one's children too.
By his quiet and sensitive direction Sidney Lumet creates a high inner
suspense. And all the actors are - as usual in a Lumet film - excellent,
especially River Phoenix, who earned a well deserved Academy Award
nomination for his masterful performance (maybe the best in his much too
short life), and Christine Lahti. Another remarkable point is the well
considered editing with an apt use of dissolves and cuts.
This is one of the best films I've seen up to now, a movie that you
mustn't miss.
My rating: ***** out of ***** (A MASTERPIECE)

Author
Randy Parker
     Imagine moving to a new town and assuming a new identity every year
because you are on the run from the F.B.I. for a crime you did not commit.
Now imagine having these problems at 17, that difficult age of college
applications, first love, and transition from adolescence to adulthood.  In
director Sidney Lumet's RUNNING ON EMPTY, River Phoenix finds himself in
just this predicament.
     His parents are Arthur and Annie Pope, left wing radicals who blew
up a napalm factory in 1971 as part of the war protest; the explosion
blinded and paralyzed a janitor who was not scheduled to be in the building
at the time.  To avoid imprisonment, the Popes went underground with their
then two year old son and cut off all ties to family and friends.  RUNNING
ON EMPTY is set 15 years later; their son, played by Phoenix, is now a high
school senior who has lived underground for as long as he can remember.
     RUNNING ON EMPTY opens with the Pope family fleeing from their
current home because the FBI is on the verge of discovering their
whereabouts.  The Popes assume new identities and move to a new town.  As
they settle in, Phoenix's character is the focal point of the story.  The
music teacher at the local high school takes interest in Phoenix's piano
playing and encourages him to apply to Julliard.  In the mean time, Phoenix
falls in love with, and bares his soul to, his teacher's daughter--a
rebellious free spirit played by Martha Plimpton.
     RUNNING ON EMPTY examines the conflict that arises when the time
comes for the Pope family to move on once again.  Phoenix does not want to
leave his family, but staying with them means separating from Plimpton and
abandoning his plans to attend college and study music.  On the other hand,
if Phoenix does leave his family, he may never see them again.  Phoenix's
father, played by Judd Hirsch, opposes his college plans.  Arthur Pope is a
stubborn man deeply committed to his family, which he views as an
inseparable unit; he cringes at the idea of it breaking apart.  In
contrast, Phoenix's mother, Annie, sees gross injustice in making Phoenix
give up his future for the crime she and Arthur committed.  One of the most
underrated actresses in the business, Christine Lahti--who was last seen in
the unjustly neglected HOUSEKEEPING--plays Annie Pope.
     Lumet's portrayal of the Pope family packs a powerful emotional
punch.  In fact, I recommend bringing a large supply of Kleenex since
RUNNING ON EMPTY is likely to bring you to tears several times.  For
example, the scene of Lahti visiting her father for the first time since
going underground is excruciatingly painful to watch.  Under Lumet's
sensitive direction, Lahti, Hirsch, Plimpton, and the rest of the cast give
first-rate performances, but RUNNING ON EMPTY really belongs to Phoenix.
As the conflicted young pianist, Phoenix is riveting in an Oscar-calibre
performance.  It's hard to believe that this is the same actor who just two
years ago played one of the young boys in STAND BY ME.  With his
performance in RUNNING ON EMPTY, Phoenix has successfully bridged the
transition from child acting to adult roles.  This heartbreaking drama is
one of the year's best films.
