Title
Review for Force of Evil (1948)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Force of Evil" an intense crime drama that is
considered by some to be a film noir classic.
While the film is quite watchable, the characters
and their actions lack credibility and warmth.
There is nary a moment of comic relief.
John Garfield stars as a lawyer for Roy Roberts,
who runs an illegal gambling syndicate.  Garfield
is also involved in the criminal activities.
He hears about a scheme that could wipe out his
brother Thomas Gomez, who heads a small-time
gambling operation.  Garfield's attempts to
protect and promote the unwilling Gomez leads
to much grief, not just for the brothers, but
Gomez' nervous accountant Howland Chamberlain.
One of the subplots involves a romance between
Garfield and goody-goody secretary Beatrice Pearson.
Garfield seems to have no interest in seducing her,
but needs her as a friend, all the while trying
to corrupt her morality.
Many of the players in "Force of Evil" perform actions
against their better judgement.  Gomez repeatedly
tells Garfield that he won't do what Garfield asks
of him, then does it anyway.  Chamberlain's character
is nearly a mirror of Gomez, harried and despondent,
refusing then agreeing.  Innocent and ethical Pearson
is fascinated with bad-boy Garfield.  She gently rebukes
his character, but seems to be hoping that he will say
something that will add meaning to her empty life.
Garfield himself is torn between multiple loyalties,
his client, ill-gotten riches and power, and his brother.
Garfield consistently chooses to protect his brother,
risking his career, his fortune and ultimately his life.
This seems at odds with his grasping character, especially
since 1) his brother shuns him and 2) they have had
little contact for years.  It is as if Garfield's midlife
crisis is one of character, and he hopes to find it in
Gomez and Pearson, by association rather than by adopting
their ethics.
Roberts and his cronies are stereotypical gangsters,
ruthless and clever, but lacking the humor or style
found in gangster roles portrayed by Cagney, Bogart
or Edward G. Robinson.  Garfield has more life than
his associates, but his character was broader in a
supporting role in "Gentleman's Agreement".
Sometimes I think that 'noir' is just a French word
that means 'insufficient lighting'.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
