Title
Review for Batman Returns (1992)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Three angry costumed neurotics battle
     in a big, silly, lovable comic book on the screen.  Two
     lesser villains from the comic turn out to be much more
     intriguing than the Joker on the wide screen.  This is a
     terrific, surrealist film.  Rating: high +2 (-4 to +4).
     Warning: minor plot spoilers in this review, almost all taken
     from the film's publicity.
     In 1983, for the 50th anniversary of KING KONG, engineers tried to
inflate a fifty-foot gorilla balloon on the Empire State Building.  It was a
real fiasco.  It never got more than half inflated, looked absurd, and
became a real embarrassment.  When asked what he thought of it, a Japanese
tourist said, "I love it!  It's so American!  It's big, it's silly, and it
doesn't work."  BATMAN RETURNS is a film that could be made only in America.
It's big; it's silly; it doesn't work.  And above all it is lovable.  It is
a mammoth King Kong balloon of a film that is nearly as endearing for what
doesn't work as for what does.  It is one of those rare films that could end
up appealing to art film fans and to Friday-night fun-seekers.  It is
genuinely one of the most bizarre films ever made.  Its explosions of
surrealism and its warped characters make its predecessor BATMAN seem pale
and lukewarm.  Rather than one villain, this film offers three and manages
to make two of them much more interesting than Jack Nicholson was as The
Joker.  In BATMAN film the viewer knew how the Joker became the Joker.  In
this film the viewer goes the additional step of saying, "Yeah, if that
happened to me, I think I'd become like the Penguin or Catwoman."
     The film opens with a monster child being born to a rich household.
Rather than keep this horrible little creature, his parents set him adrift
in a basket in a sewer.  There he is adopted by the penguins living in the
sewer.  ("What penguins in the sewer?" you ask.  Shhh!  Let Mr. Burton tell
his story!  Just accept it that there are a lot of intelligent penguins
living in the sewer ... with the clowns.)
     Meanwhile, a big industrialist who pollutes the same sewer and is
planning to steal a giant electrical charge from the city.  (No, don't ask
about that one either.)  Max Shreck (played by Christopher Walken) is the
industrialist and he is *really* nasty to his mousey, frumpy secretary
Selina Kyle (played by Michelle Pfeiffer). Between him and her lackluster
lifestyle, she is getting ready to explode.  Selina comes home each night to
her lonely apartment, calls, "Honey, I'm home," reminds herself that she is
not married, feeds her cat, and listens to her mother's brow-beating phone
messages.  Eventually when circumstances make Shreck see Selina as a threat
he throws her out a very high window.  Miraculously she is not killed and in
some mysterious way is rescued by alley cats.  (Hey, look, if the sewer
penguins can save a monster baby....)  Selina completely makes herself over
as the super-feminist, militant Catwoman, complete with skintight vinyl cat
suit.  ("Life's a bitch; now so am I!" she says.)  Suddenly she is wreaking
havoc with a bullwhip and doing amazing athletic flips.  ("How come she can
do that now?" you asked.  Shhh!  Now I've warned you.)  VARIETY aptly calls
her "a kitten with a whip." About this time the adult version of our monster
baby emerges from the sewer with his army of clowns to make himself loved
and to find his parents.  He is nicknamed the Penguin (and played by Danny
DeVito).  Shreck decides to use the Penguin in a plan to discredit Batman
and to have the Mayor ousted and replace him with the Penguin.  He is going
to create a crime wave and make the Mayor look so bad that the people will
replace him with the Penguin.  ("If that scheme works, how come Dinkins is
still Mayor of New York?" you ask.  Shhh!  Now I'm not going to warn you
again.)  Catwoman and the Penguin team up, knowing that with the Mayor thrown
out they will be sitting in the catbird seat.  After that the plot gets
strange and a little hard to believe.
     To say there are gaps in the plotting of BATMAN RETURNS is a gross
understatement.  This is a film that somehow survives major lapses in logic.
You never know what is going to turn up in the sewer next without rhyme or
reason.  There seem to be whole rooms of furniture, troops of clowns, and
colonies of penguins.  Also in this world anyone who dons a weird suit
suddenly becomes an athlete ready for the Beijing Circus.  We see Batman,
the self-appointed vigilante, use lethal force on criminals in the street.
Then later he lectures Catwoman on the importance of letting the law punish
the bad.  In another inconsistency Batman berates Alfred for revealing his
identity to Vicki Vale, but carelessly allows Catwoman to learn who he is,
and later intentionally reveals his identity to Max Shreck.  (It is
interesting that the film does go back and explain a plot hole from the
previous film.)  Other places the plot assumes impossible capabilities for
the Batmobile (it can be wider on the inside than it is on the outside).
Then it assumes that every family in Gotham would make the same mistake of
leaving the same valuable unguarded.
     And with all these gaffes there is a lot to like in the new Batman film.
The late Anton Furst's set designs from the first film have been made more
dreamlike and often given an EDWARD SCISSORHANDS feel by the new production
designer Bo Welch.  There are numerous allusions and touches in the film.
The Batman character was initially inspired, at least in part, by the idea
of a crime-fighter as stealthy, dark, and mysterious as Dracula, the
original bat-man.  The first screen adaptation of the novel DRACULA was the
1922 German classic NOSFERATU, in which the actor who played the animal-like
vampire was Max Schreck (whose name was slightly modified for the allusion,
but is still noticeable).
     A rather nifty but probably nearly unnoticed allusion is a woman clown
dressed in 18th Century French attire who delivers her lines in a sleepy
monotone.  Could this be an allusion to Glenda Jackson playing a manic-
depressive playing Charlotte Corday in MARAT/SADE?  There are multiple
allusions to Burton's best previous film, EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.  Much of the
photography has very similar visual images.  Statues in the snow, such as
are shown at the old zoo, look a lot like Edward's topiary.  The opening
logo is over snow, not unlike the snow of the opening of EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS.  Danny Elfman, who scored all three films, in BATMAN RETURNS
has borrowed themes from BATMAN, but also style from his EDWARD SCISSORHANDS
score.  Choral voices under the snow scenes show up a lot in this film as
they did in EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.  One almost wonders, incidentally, with all
the Christmas imagery if this film was really intended for a summer release.
One nice visual touch is that what looks like a line of virile Batmen
standing in line in one scene is a closet of costumes.  The only thing
missing from the Batmen are chins.  If Batman is a dramatic-looking figure
in costume, it is the costume that looks so impressive, not him.  You could
put Rick Moranis in that costume and he would look dangerous.
     Indeed, after all the discussion prior to the first film as to whether
Michael Keaton could really play Batman, the role has once again turned out
to be surprisingly undemanding.  The suit gives Batman his stature, the
script gives him a little complexity, and Keaton steps through the role
fulfilling its demands without contributing anything extra.  While that made
him the best thing in the first installment, this time it just did not hack
it.  This is Pfeiffer's and DeVito's film.  Living secretly in the sewers,
hatching his plans, the Penguin clearly borrows heavily from THE PHANTOM OF
THE OPERA.  Yet at the same time he can turn hot and angry in seconds, like
Joe Pesci's character in GOODFELLAS.  He has not in my memory had a role
that allows him such rage or such range.
     Until now I have always considered Michelle Pfeiffer to be a
marvelously sexy woman who wears a lot of make-up and who does not have a
whole lot of talent.  Sex appeal and make-up pulled her through DANGEROUS
LIAISONS and THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS, but not for one moment of her acting
have I ever considered her impressive.  However, I can no longer imagine
anyone else being better as the Catwoman.  Her uncompromising fury makes her
a male chauvinists' worst nightmare.  One moment she is pretending to be
shocked that Batman would dare hit a woman, the next striking out at him for
so much as daring to hesitate.  Forget chivalry--this woman wants blood and
will do whatever it takes!
     As a side note: it is good to see Tim Burton taking a risk for a
friend: Paul Reubens is back working again in spite of what is now rumored
to be a rather unfair rap.
     There is a surprising richness of themes in this film.  Batman's own
story is distorted and reflected in the two colorful villains.  All three
have their origins in pain.  All three have donned their costumes to work
out their own personal neuroses.  All three characters seem to live by the
motto that in rage and solitude there is strength. Even animals are
compassionate compared to the brutal humans. The two tortured villains are
each save in their moments of weakness by animals. The Penguin, like Edward
Scissorhands, longs to be normal instead of a freak.  Does Batman wear the
animal costume to set himself apart from humanity and to make himself a
freak?
     To extent the sentiment of the Japanese tourist, BATMAN RETURNS could
have been made only in the United States.  Only in the United States could
$80M be spent bringing a comic book story to the screen, unembarrassed.  One
need only look at BARBARELLA or the Perry Rhodan film MISSION STARDUST to
see how it could have gone wrong.  I think America still leads the world in
big, brash, silly films.  That may not be much, but it still something in
which to take some pride.
     While I thought the first Batman film rated only a 0, I'd give this one
a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.  You ain't seen nothing like this film.

Author
James Brundage
Directed by Tim Burton (Mars Attacks)
Starring: Michael Keaton (Jackie Brown) as Batman/Bruce Wayne, Michelle
Pfeiffer (Prince of Egypt) as Catwoman/Selina Kyle, Danny DeVito (LA
Confidential) as The Penguin/Oswald Cobblepot, Christopher Walken (Antz) as
Max Shreck
As reviewed by James Brundage
It was the end of an era. The year was 1992 and the movie was Batman
Returns. It marked the end of the Batman franchise as a series of good
movies. It was, friends, the last great Batman.
Gotham was dark and so was the script. Darkly comic, darkly romantic, and
darkly dramatic. This tale told of Michael Keaton as Batman in a love/hate
relationship with Catwoman, of a freak raised by penguins, of a power hungry
industry giant who sought to leave the legacy of a polluting power plant.
The Penguin: a man raised by what became his namesake, seeks to discover the
identity of his parents, and then exact vengeance upon the world. Selina
Kyle was a lowly secretary who got pushed out of a window for opening her
mouth: exhausting one of nine lives, and then becoming Catwoman. And Bruce
Wayne was a man haunted by his past and compelled to fight crime at night as
Batman.
Bruce Wayne's and Selina Kyle's lives intersect twice, once as two normal
people falling in love and again as Batman and Catwoman, trying to decide
whether to sleep together or kill each other. The dark comedy that ensues by
this is only the beginning. A smartly written script care of Daniel Waters
(Demolition Man) also gives us such scenes as the Batmobile being driver
from the campaign trailer of Oswald Cobblepot/The Penguin right into every
civilian in sight.
On the action level, this film exceeds its sequels and matches its
predecessor, having good old Batman go for the gut with every punch. On the
plotline, the same occurs. The performances are the fine things we expect to
see from Tim Burton. The directing: the same darkly satiric motif we have
always known with him.
But what makes Batman Returns worth watching, aside from all of this, is the
foreknowledge of what happened after. Joel Shumaker took over the Batman
franchise and turned Gotham into a bright, sunny place. After Batman
Returns, the franchise turned to crap. So, if you're a current Batman fan,
see it for a glimpse of the better past, and, if you haven't seen it, see it
for the opportunity to show why its so much better than the modern day sunny
Jewel-on-the-soundtrack Batman.

Author
J. Marty
     Every summer, Hollywood makes like the Millennium Falcon and goes into
hyperdrive. Movies of the sci fi/fantasy/action genre come through the pike in
droves. Inevitably (and unfortunately), one of these movies is almost certainly
what I like to call an "Achilles" movie.
     Everyone with a high school diploma knows who Achilles was. In Homer's
"Iliad," he was the Greek warrior who was indestructible except for his heel.
Though formidable, he could be downed as soon as someone exploited his weak
spot (the proverbial heel).
     Tim Burton's BATMAN RETURNS is a great movie that just happens to have
multiple Achilles' heels. I saw this movie in the theater with my family on
Friday, July 10, 1992. I was eleven years old, and the movie just blew me away.
It was one of the most spectacular experiences I had ever had. I didn't know at
the time that the movie version contrasted sharply with the DC Comics slant on
Batman, and I didn't care. I thought the movie was so much fun that I was
drawing cartoons of the movie's characters and quoting the lines months after
the movie left theaters.
     Now, eight years later, my view of this masterpiece has changed. It is
still extraordinary good. But, as befits an "Achilles" movie, it has many minor
flaws that, taken collectively, tarnish the film's luster considerably.
     Let's break this movie down:
PLOT (spoiler-free): This movie takes place at Christmastime (which is bizarre,
considering that it was released at the height of the summer solstice). Unlike
in the Bruce Willis movie DIE HARD, however, Christmas actually plays an
important role in RETURNS. Batman (Michael Keaton) is back, and this time he's
gotta contend with three menacing foes: The Penguin (Danny DeVito), an aquatic
bird-man who wants to be the mayor of Gotham City (that'll be the day);
Catwoman (Michelle Pfeiffer), a whip-cracking vigilante who is Batman's first
major female opponent; and Max Shreck (the excellent Christopher Walken), a
smarmy industrialist whose 18-century hairdo makes him look just like the James
Bond villain from A VIEW TO A KILL (whom Walken also played; keep branching
out, Chris). Good ol' Max, currently enjoying his status as "Gotham's own Santa
Claus," plots to use his influence to get The Penguin elected mayor. Once that
is accomplished, Shreck will make the helpless populace of Gotham bow before
him by...no, I can't spoil it for you. It's just too campy and hilarious! Let's
just say it's something similar to what Montgomery Burns (Homer's boss on "The
Simpsons" would do). Meanwhile, Catwoman has a vendetta against Shreck because
he...nope, once again you'll just have to find out by watching the movie. So
she sets out to ruin him, only to have Batman on her tail. So she pays a visit
to The Penguin and his nefarious Red Triangle Circus Gang (yeah, I know, it
sounds cheesy, but wait 'til you see these guys!) and now The Penguin has to
juggle his two agendas: getting elected and getting Batman framed for murder
(and then murdered himself).  The entire plot is now in place, and the rest of
the movie is filled with a tangled labyrinth of loyalties and betrayals that
most people under the age of 12 won't be able to understand (though the
subplots do keep the narrative interesting!).
     No doubt about it, the plot of RETURNS is intriguing. Unfortunately, it is
burdened by too many anomalies and flaws in logic. (Now we'll get to a few of
the "heels" I was talking about) How could anyone, after being a recluse for
three decades, become a seasoned politician after "rescuing" a baby and hooking
up with some rich twit? How come the villain's henchmen always know where he is
going to be, even when he doesn't tell them? And why, at the movie's climax,
does The Penguin nearly drown and then magically arise from the water a few
minutes later? (He must've been holding his breath really long.)
     Another problem with the plot is that it's much too complex, what with the
entire cast of characters fighting amongst themselves to see who can steal the
movie. Batman and his alter ego Bruce Wayne almost become bit players in their
own movie as a cat, a bird, and an old man with white hair all upstage him. A
little more digging around inside Batman's head would have improved RETURNS
considerably. Unfortunately, Keaton just plays the character as a mindless,
Rambo-style action Jackson who lashes out at the bad guys mercilessly. He even
kills some of the members of the aforementioned circus gang along the way. This
is a hero? Burton desperately tries to soften up the Caped Crusader toward the
end, but it's a lukewarm effort. Batman ultimately seems to be only a little
more moral than the villains - which brings us to...
CHARACTERS: Danny DeVito, why did you do it? Say it ain't so! Oh wait, I can't
blame you; I can only blame the filmmakers who shoehorned you into this role.
Burton and his team took the wonderful character of The Penguin and perverted
him, changing him from a suave, handsome schemer into Jabba the Hutt in a
tuxedo. DeVito appears in whiteface and black lipstick, with seal-like flippers
for hands and a gut that is so large it's surprising he doesn't have a
coronary. Plus, our dastardly villain has a penchant for drooling, eating raw
fish, biting people in the face, and making off-color jokes. It's horrible!
Burton apparently didn't take into account the simple fact that a good villain
isn't just evil; he has to be appealing to the audience. Besides, I think it
was a mistake to cast DeVito simply because of his short frame and girth. Many
other great actors (Marlon Brando, for instance) could have played The Penguin
with just the right mixture of savagery and gloomy introspection, nailing the
frightening yet sympathetic performance DeVito was obviously aiming for. In all
fairness, DeVito's Penguin is delightfully witty and over-the-top at moments -
a pale shadow of Burgess Meredith's take on the character.    
     I cannot say enough good things about Michelle's Catwoman performance,
however. Easily the best player in the movie, she takes on a multifaceted
character eagerly and ultimately succeeds. Anger, sadness, humor, sex appeal,
raw physical power - you'll find all that and more in Pfeiffer's take on the
movie's only major female character. Yet the characterization gets murky at
times. You begin to wonder what actually drives Catwoman. Is she really out for
revenge, or does she just enjoy being bad? And, like Batman, Catwoman is not a
killer. (Watch the movie's end to see what I mean.) And did we really need to
see her drinking milk straight from the carton or eating a live canary (a stunt
obviously inspired by The Penguin's taste for raw fish)? Overall, though, she
comes out on top and is the second-best Bat-villain of all (Jack Nicholson's
Joker being number one, of course).
     Finally, we have the Shreckmeister. He's a great character, a stock
villain for the audience to boo and hiss at. Unfortunately, he comes to
dominate the movie a little too much. And that's not good, because for all his
posturing he really isn't meaty enough to be the main bad guy. He's kind of
pathetic, too. He gets kidnapped by The Penguin (twice!) and roughed up by both
The Bat and The Cat. Interestingly, in the first draft of the movie's script he
was supposed to be The Penguin's long-lost brother; that's a fascinating
concept and it should have been played up in the shooting script. Not only
would it have given Walken a "raison d'etre" for being in the film, but it
would have also fleshed out Max Shreck and made him less of a stereotype.
Still, Walken is tons of fun to watch.
     The rest of the cast is pretty much filler. Alfred Pennyworth (Michael
Gough), Bruce Wayne's amiable butler and a welcome bringer of light to all the
chaos in Gotham, sadly gets little screen time. Commissioner James Gordon (Pat
Hingle) continues to be the bumbling old fossil he was in the 1989 film. Cristi
Conaway plays a girl who dies because of Batman's incompetence, while Paul
Reubens and Diane Salinger are The Penguin's heartless parents. I must admit I
had a blast watching the antics of the Red Triangle Gang, though! Vincent
Schiavelli, John Strong, Rick Zumwalt, Travis McKenna, and other talented
performers (some of them real-life circus people) add a wickedly funny
dimension to the movie with their freakish costumes and in-your-face attitudes.
The scene where they surprise a crowd of Gothamites by boisterously leaping out
of a giant Christmas present is simply priceless, and will have you laughing
and quaking with fear at the same time.
OTHER STUFF: There were a lot of things in this movie I liked. The music was
stirring and exhilirating thanks to the master composer Danny Elfman. The sets
were impressive (wait 'til you see the smiling cat head!) and the special
effects were much better than in the 1989 original. The costumes were likewise
a joy to behold. Batman is a true dark angel in his black armor, and Catwoman's
costume is simultaneously beautiful and dangerous. The Penguin sports his
familiar top hat and monocle, though in many scenes he opts for a rather
subdued look that didn't do anything for me. And, just as in the original,
Burton fiddles around with the space-time continuum until Gotham City is a
mélange of radically different eras, folkways, and sensibilities. In what other
movie could you see people in 1940s fashions using computers and CD-ROMs?
FINAL THOUGHTS: I still enjoy BATMAN RETURNS as much as I did on that magical
day in July. I've only seen it a few times since then, but a lot of the glamor
and imagery remains ingrained in my consciousness. Sadly, though, I really
can't give the same glowing evaluation of it now as I did when I was younger.
It's a splendid work of art, but, like Achilles, a few heels keep it from being
outstanding. Still, it is an exciting action/adventure movie in its own right
and even tops its 1989 predecessor at some points. Can't wait to see it again! 

Author
George V. Reilly
     BATMAN RETURNS is a film directed by Tim Burton from a screenplay
by Daniel Waters.  It stars Michael Keaton, Michelle Pfeiffer, Danny
DeVito, and Christopher Walken.  Rated PG-13 for violence and sexual
innuendo.
     BATMAN RETURNS is the latest sequel to hit the big screen this
summer.  A followup to 1989's hit BATMAN, it again stars Michael Keaton
in the title role.
     The film opens slowly, explaining the origins of the Penguin (Danny
DeVito, unrecognizable under heavy makeup), a horribly deformed little
monster cast adrift by his parents into the sewers who ends up living in
the penguin enclosure at the Gotham City Zoo, and of Catwoman (Michelle
Pfeiffer), a harassed, timid secretary named Selina Kyle who survives a
near-fatal fall after being pushed from a high window by her boss
because she knows too much.  Selina, roused by cats, transforms herself
into the sexy, feline Catwoman.  Meanwhile, her boss, evil megalomaniac
megatycoon Max Shreck (Christopher Walken), has joined forces with the
Penguin to take over Gotham City by ousting the mayor and electing
Oswald Cobblepot (the Penguin's real name) in his place.
     Batman (Michael Keaton) and his alter ego, multimillionaire Bruce
Wayne, has several run-ins with the Penguin and Shreck, and feels
compelled to stop them.  Catwoman, after being beaten by Batman, allies
herself with the Penguin to destroy Batman.  They attempt to frame him,
by making him appear to be one of them.  In a subplot, Selina Kyle and
Bruce Wayne have become attracted to each other.  And so it proceeds, up
to the inevitable orgiastic climax of violence and destruction.
     This is a worthy successor to BATMAN.  The sets recapture the feel
of the first film, despite the suicide last year of the original
designer, Anton Furst.  Gotham City is, well, Gothic; a sombre 1940s
view of the city of the future.  The special effects, especially those
involving the Batmobile and the Batplane, are spectacular.  There is
violence aplenty, much of it gratuitous; if that's your thing, you
should be satisfied.
     The dual character of Batman/Bruce Wayne has been fleshed out and
become more interesting: Wayne is troubled by his bizarre hidden
identity and his compulsion to hide behind Batman's mask in order to
violently effect change.   Unfortunately, as with the Joker in BATMAN,
he is overshadowed by the characters of the Penguin and Catwoman.
     Michelle Pfeiffer, as Catwoman, is delightful, particularly in her
early scenes after becoming Catwoman, when she gambols and frolics like
a kitten.  Throughout the film, she moves with feline grace, she slinks
then attacks savagely; reclining langourously, she stretches sensuously.
As Selina Kyle, she is mostly scattered and harebrained, soft and
vulnerable.
     Danny DeVito is less satisfying as the Penguin; he is mad, savage,
brutal, with only the thinnest veneer of civilization.  He is humourless
and rarely funny, lacking the Joker's demented capacity for japes.
     Christopher Walken's character resembles that of the villain he
played in the Bond movie, A VIEW TO A KILL: depraved and suave.
     My main problem with the movie is the number of plotholes.  There
is a distressing number of them, some of them gaping wide, but I won't
go into them to avoid spoilers.
     In summary, I recommend it.  I'm sure it's going to be a big hit,
much to the relief of the merchandisers.


Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Tim Burton
Writer: Daniel Walters
Starring: Michael Keaton, Michelle Pfeiffer, Danny DeVito, Christopher 
Walken, Michael Gough, Michael Murphy, Pat Hingle, Vincent Schiavelli, 
Paul Reubens
"Batman Returns" is probably one of the most ballsiest moves in 
Hollywood history: They took a formula that was dark but very light and 
made the film intensely dark and brooding.  But of course, you have at 
your realm the bizarre Tim Burton who does one thing Hollywood's way 
then turns around and does what you're not supposed to do.  For example: 
he made the brilliant "Ed Wood" and turned around and made an Ed Wood 
film, "Mars Attacks!"  While this was probably his only mistake, it's 
still not a bad film and perfectly exercises what Tim's all about - 
being unique.
This is what he goes for with his sequel for the schweppervescent 
"Batman" from 1989 - a film where all the villains are sympathetic to 
some degree.  The Joker wasn't a sympathetic character - just a wildly 
fun villain to root for.  His villains are all reclusive, misunderstood 
people, some who do the wrong thing for a good cause.  Bruce Wayne 
(Micheal Keaton, again) has apparently lost Vicki (maybe why he's 
brooding again) but he falls deeply in love with a girl, Selena Kyle 
(Michelle Pfeiffer), who works for an evil industrialist, Max Schreck 
(Christopher Walken).  Little does he know that Selena found out about 
Max's evil plans to do something bad and selfish with electricity and he 
threw her out of a window.  She was a cat lover and becomes a catwoman 
after all these cats bite her wounds (I don't get it either).  She has 
nine lives, is a tad insane now and constructs a tight leather costume 
for herself and carries a whip when she goes out at night to destroy Max 
Shreck and beat up thugs.  But her real persona is in love with Bruce.  
But little does she know, he's Batman.  This is the most intriguing 
subplot in any of the Batmans and is handled magnificently.
Meanwhile, the Penguin (Danny DeVito), a deformed man who was thrown 
into the sewers by his priggish parents (one of them being Paul Reubens) 
when he was an infant, has decided to rise and woo everyone so he can go 
into office and help Max Schreck do his dastardly deeds.  He's seen as a 
sympathetic character because he's so reclusive and utterly ugly.  He 
has legions of penguins and circus freaks at his side too, so he can war 
against Batman.
Tim Burton carefully constructs the story and adds his great 
psychological depth to the film.  The fight scenes between Catwoman and 
Batman have whole new dimensions because we know that they will be 
fooling around as Selena and Bruce on a couch later on.  When they find 
out, it's one of the most intense scenes in recent action hero history, 
as they are dancing with one another.  And the action sequences are 
amazing to watch, although not as cool as the first one.
The acting is basically stolen by Michelle Pfeiffer.  Yes, Michael 
Keaton rocks once again as Batman, and Danny DeVito is a great Penguin 
and Christopher Walken is at first laughable with his Eraserhead hair, 
but he also rules.  But Michelle is just amazing.  Every move is 
unpredictable, every line is said perfectly and she makes her character 
so seductive, she could make Uma Thurman's Poison Ivy look like Mr. 
Freeze.  Her performance ranks up there with Jack Nicholson's in the 
first one.
This sequel dares to be different, dares to be dark and depressing and 
still has some of the great wit of the original.  It also dares to have 
sympathetic characters and ends with one of them still lurking around 
(hopefully to be brought back).  I highly reccomend this one for being 
fun and still very deep.

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
BATMAN RETURNS:        sequel to the box-office success BATMAN; directed again by
Tim Burton.
Plot/kick-off:        A bit messy and complicated to try to explain; a new set of
villains trying to take over Gotham City during the Christmas season,
plus the destructive Catwoman; a few subplots that are left hanging at
the end, but only if you think about them.  Despite the variety of
things going on, it all hangs together pretty well.
Characters/acting: Once again, the same mistake is made as in BATMAN:
the villains upstage Batman; at least the villains are more interesting
this time (but then, I've never been a big Nicholson fan).  I had my
doubts about Michelle Pfeiffer as Catwoman, but she was perfect*, from
the way she twitches her whip like a cat's tail, to her portrayal of
Selina's realization of her own disintegration while dancing with Bruce.
Smart, intriguing dialogue between her and Bruce/Batman, and her and the
Penguin.  Danny DeVito is okay as the Penguin.  Chris Walken was not as
over-the-edge as the psychotic he played in A VIEW TO A KILL, but the
loving father-son corporate villains angle added a fresh twist.
Cinematography/FX: Sort of a combo of BATMAN and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS;
still, a few new shots that I thought were pretty spectacular (watch the
neon letters in Selina's apartment and the pullback the first time she's
in costume).  Actually, I thought extra attention must have been placed
on good acrobatics/stunts (all those flips and kicks etc.); they
impressed me a little more than the gizmos, though they may have been
slightly overused.  The last shot was disappointingly obvious, though.
Score/Sound: Score by Danny Elfman again; pretty similar, except for a
cool closing song, "Face to Face" performed by Siouxsie and the
Banshees; no Prince this time.
Violence/Gore: Lots of flying bullets and bodies, but no buckets o'
blood; the gore  was in short intense scenes, which I thought was pretty
well calculated to make the audience start to squirm, but not
overplayed, except perhaps too many close-ups of the Penguin's
disgusting oozing-black teeth (though they don't beat out Willem Dafoe's
in WILD AT HEART).
Language: Lots of use of bi***; also some pretty overt suggestions of
and references to sex by the Penguin.
Skin/situations: Implied fondling (cut off by camera angle), some
kissing
Analysis: Despite a few continuity errors and problems with internal
logic, I found it pretty easy to suspend disbelief and enjoy the ride.
I liked it better than BATMAN, probably because I thought the first
one dragged.  I might even go back and see it again for a matinee or
when it hits the cut-rate theaters.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
121 min., PG-13, Action, 1992
Director: Tim Burton
Cast: Michael Keaton, Michelle Pfeiffer, Danny DeVito,
      Christopher Walken, Paul Reubens, Michael Gough, Pat Hingle,
      Michael Murphy, Vincent Schiavelli, Jan Hooks, Cristi Conaway
     Gotham City is being plagued with violence and Batman (Michael
Keaton) is called back for help.  This time two new criminals are
brought fourth, The Penguin (Danny DeVito), and the secretary with an
attitude problem, The Catwoman (Michelle Pfeiffer).  These two criminals
try to bring down Batman to their level to get rid of him.
     BATMAN RETURNS is an extremely good sequel to the original film,
BATMAN, which is almost as good as the original.  I feel that the
director, Tim Burton, has yet again created a wonderful film, that will
probably be loved by both children and adults.  Where BATMAN RETURNS
doesn't have all the characterization that BATMAN had, it does have more
violence.  On a scale of zero to five I give BATMAN RETURNS a five.
BATMAN RETURNS is rated PG-13 for violence, adult situations, and
explicit language.
     Like in the original, Gotham City looks like the New York City of
the future.  It is filled with towering buildings, and as far as I can
tell, has no trees.  Gotham City doesn't look like the nicest place to
live, but it is wonderfully designed.  When I was watching this movie, I
kept thinking of how much money must have gone into this city.  The are
also some stunning visual shot of the city which enhances the film more.
     Like in the original, BATMAN RETURNS has a lot of characterization,
although not as heavy as it was in the first, so creating a three
dimensional criminal, instead of the one dimensional criminal portrayed
in most movies.  The reasons for why the criminal does what he does are
explained, and overall creates a much more interesting movie.
     BATMAN RETURNS easily ranks as one of the best ten sequels that I
have seen.  I hope that when BATMAN 3, which I am sure is already being
worked on, is released that it will be as good as this one.  Tim Burton
seems to give Batman the touch that it needs, which unfortunately I
haven't found with the other films by him that I have seen.  BEETLEJUICE
wasn't that good of a movie; PEE-WEE'S BIG ADVENTURE ... well, I think
this one speaks for itself; and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS seemed to be missing
something.  I think that in Tim Burton's hands Batman has a lot of
potential and I hope to see more of him soon.
     This film will definitely lose a lot of its impact on video
cassette.  If you plan to see this movie, I highly suggest that you try
to find a theater that is still playing it to view it.  It is worth
whatever price you have to pay.

Author
Max Scheinin
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
In 1989, Tim Burton took the legendary comic book figure of Batman and
turned him into  a huge box office hit with an atmospheric little film that
created an utterly distinct feeling somewhere between film noir and The
Godfather. Was it "deep"? Nope. However it was a perfect entertainment and
the audience ate it up. It was natural that Roger Ebert trashed it writing
that it was "without the comic book uplift" of the Indiana Jones and
Superman pictures. Which was true. If what you were looking for was the
tale of a heroic man's escadapes and adventures you were looking in the
wrong place. If those films were Tom Sawyer, then Batman was Huckleberry
Finn. Some critics ( Glenn Lovell of The San Jose Mercury News and Peter
Travers of Rolling Stone ) realized that it was something special; Mr.
Lovell gave it ***1/2 and wrote that "This is Batman as Batman should be.";
Mr. Travers called it one of the ten best films of the year. The praise was
deserved - from start to finish the film was enthralling, exciting, and
superb in every respect. There was no doubt that there would be a sequel
directed by Burton.
The result was Batman Returns which forgets that it wants to be fun within
the first five minutes.  The villains ( the hideous Penguin and seductive
Catwoman ) take over, and our epectations are always left unfulfilled -
when we wanted the Penguin to bite off Batman's nose he simply gets mad, 
and when we want Catwoman to slither over Batman's body she gets pushed off
a building. I admire Mr. Burton 
for trying to do more then entertain, but the result is a mess. Nothing
works out as planned - it fails both to entertain and to enlighten. Hints
are made to the audience that this film could be a blast. Alas, these are
only hints. There are, don't misunderstand me, several moments of cinematic
genuis contained; Catwoman and Batman understand eachother perfectly
without a word on the subject being said; Christopher Lloyd is trapped, by
the Penguin, within a giant cage; a small basket is dropped into a large
river; but nothing is drawn together and Burton is unable to make the film
work on any regular basis. A weak followup, both career and sequel wise,
Batman Returns is sometimes dazzling, but to often dissapointing.

Author
Frank Maloney
     BATMAN RETURNS is a film directed by Tim Burton, from a screenplay
by Daniel Waters.  It stars Michael Keaton, Michelle Pfeiffer, Danny
DeVito, Christopher Walken, Michael Gogh, Pat Hingle, and Michael
Murphy.  Music by Danny Elfman.  Production designed by Bo Welsh.  Rated
PG-13, for violence and sexual innuendo.
     BATMAN RETURNS, I hardly need say, is the sequel to the 1989
benchmark film BATMAN.  I had thought that I would not bother adding
another review to the tsunami of critical and other reactions to what
must be the film event of the Summer of '92, and then I went to see it.
I think my reactions are different enough from the ones I've seen so far
to justify yet another review.  In sum, I loved it unstintingly, I
grinned like a maniac from beginning to end in a way I haven't since I
stopped dropping acid in the early '70s, I grinned until my face ached.
I laughed out loud.  I cheered, especially Catwoman.  I was dazzled by
the design and the cinematography.  I had a wonderful time.
     This is not to say the film could not have been better, that it
didn't have its problems, its deficiencies, but what we have is so good,
so much fun, that I really couldn't have stood it to be better.  Thanks
heavens for things like Tim Burton's well-known disregard for plot, for
Daniel Waters' crudeness, for models that looked like models, and for
Danny DeVito's makeup and costume which weigh him down like an anchor.
     Tim Burton may well be the perfect director for our MTV-soaked
sensibilities in that he is so overwhelmingly a visual artist that he
cheerfully sacrifices all other artistic considerations to the Look.
When I criticized EDWARD SCISSORHANDS in this forum for plot holes that
would have swallowed a Mack truck, people eagerly informed it was a
fairy tale and so little considerations like logic and continuity need
not apply (but where did he get that damned ice?).  I still consider ES
to be his weakest effort to date, just as I still think BEETLEJUICE is
the best of the four Burton movies I have seen.  Here in BATMAN RETURNS
the Look is everything.  "I don't know about you, Miss Kitty, but I feel
purr-fectly yummy," Catwoman says the first time she dons her new
costume; she is her outfit; in her civvies she is quite a different
person.  Bruce Wayne could never do the things Batman does; he's wearing
the wrong clothes.  Oswald Coddlepot wears Dickensian drag; Penguin rips
away human clothes with his humanity, such as it is.  Gotham City is
literally under a cloud as oppressive as its Fritz Lang architecture and
its Stalinist colossi.  And all those faces everywhere in this most
impersonal of all cities, are they masks, watchers, or tutelary deities?
The photography frames individually and beautifully composed painterly
portraits and cityscapes, all swimming in the same darkness as the
characters.  The only human part of the story that attracts Burton is
the confusion and twisted psyches of the heroes and villains, suitably
interested more in stirring up the line between them than in sorting
them out into neat categories, more interested in their "difficulty with
duality" than in spotlighting their singularity.
     Of the principals, Michael Keaton has the most difficult job.
Everyone else gets to go over the top, but he has to be strong and
masterful, a god as impersonal as his cowl can make him.  But within the
straitjacket of his persona, he gives us a man troubled by his
obsession, introspective, trapped, struggling to understand.  His Bruce
Wayne is more human this time, not incapable of jibing Alfred or of
trying to make a connection with the one woman who might be capable of
understanding him.
     Michelle Pfeiffer as Catwoman is completely captivating; of course,
the transformation from Selina Kyle makes no logical sense, but it's
wonderful and exciting to watch.  The feminist text that informs her
character gives it some meaning, some resonance in our non-comic-book
world.  Pfeiffer presents Kyle/Catwoman in several modes and degrees,
all of them fascinating to watch.  But it is as Catwoman that she
dominates this film, the way Jack Nicholson dominated the previous one.
She slinks, insinuates, and handles her whip with outrageous sexuality.
She can't quite out-fight Batman, but he never breaks her.  She's one
troubled pussycat, but you have got to appreciate her.  I do hope we see
her again.
     As for DeVito, the best thing we can say is that he never reminds
us of Burgess Meredith in a dinner suit with cigarette holder, and never
once says "quack."  In fact, there is a sly reference to the cigarette
holder in one scene, where it is explicitly and violently rejected.  The
makeup is ingenious and admirable in the technical sense, but probably a
mistake in terms of letting DeVito do his thang.  On the other hand, we
now know that Danny DeVito is not limited to the same character, that he
can act with great energy and vigor.  It must have been an exhausting
part to do.
     Christopher Walken's Max Shreck is just your average
megabusinessman with an agenda that includes vampirizing his entire
society.  The name Shreck, by the way, is a reference to the first great
movie vampire, in NOSFERATU (1922).  Walken even has the preternaturally
young/old face of a good vampire.  Like the others, Walken must struggle
with Waters's script with its plot holes and thin characterization, but
unlike the others he is not particularly interesting visually, so he
doesn't get much help from Burton either.  I did feel that the story
about Shreck putting Penguin forward for mayor was Burton's comment on
the willingness of people to find a strong man to solve their problems
for them, regardless of what they may or may not know about him and was
oddly relevant in this summer before Ross Perot opens his campaign for
President.
     I have to wonder why Waters got the script job.  His track record
is none too encouraging with credits like FORD FAIRLANE and HUDSON HAWK,
if those can be called credits.  The script is cluttered with stories,
is cluttered with the kind of sexual jokes that amuse 6th-graders, and
only vaguely motivated actions.  Cause and effect do not count for much
in Tim Burton's universe so he probably didn't notice.  But for those of
us who are still oppressed by the laws of physics and such, we have to
surrender to the moment and not mind, however much we would prefer it to
be otherwise.
     I enjoyed myself enormously and recommend BATMAN RETURNS to you,
but you might as well pay matinee prices.  This movie is going to make a
bundle anyway and you, like me, will want to go a second time to drink
in its visual density.

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Michael Keaton (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Danny DeVito (Oswald
Cobblepot/The Penguin), Michelle Pfeiffer (Selina Kyle/Catwoman),
Christopher Walken (Max Shreck), Michael Gough (Alfred Pennyworth), Pat
Hingle (Commissioner Gordon)
Directed by: Tim Burton, Written by: Daniel Waters and Wesley Strick
from a story by Sam Hamm based on characters created by Bob Kane
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, blood, strong languae, and sexual
remarks/humor
What SUPERMAN II (1980) is to SUPERMAN (1978), so is BATMAN RETURNS
(1992) to BATMAN (1989).
What does that mean?  That means it's a worthy, well-done sequel.  What
is it with these DC Comics heroes having two good entries in their film
series and then going downhill?
This time, the plot might actually need some commentary.  We see before
the eerie credits sequence that, 33 years ago, a boy was born deformed,
and, repulsed by his appearance, the parents (one of which is played by
Paul Reubens, a Tim Burton film veteran) tossed him into the sewer (or a
storm drain - hard to tell) and he floats his way to the "Arctic World"
attraction at Gotham's zoo.  There, it's implied that he's found among
the penguins and is put into the "Red Triangle Circus", where he becomes
the "aquatic bird boy."  The circus keeps him alive, but eventually he
returns to life under the streets.  All of this primarily occurs
off-screen, before the main focus of the story takes place, as we have
other matters to deal with... 
In the modern day, millionaire deparment store owner Max Shreck is
trying to build a new power plant, despite the fact that Gotham City
already has a power surplus.  Why?  Well, because his power plant is
actually a capacitor, which will suck power in and store it.  But he's
not telling the mayor (Michael Murphy) or Bruce Wayne, who are both
opposed to his plan, that.
Of course, Max also has a secretary named Selina Kyle.  Selina strikes
up a romance with Bruce Wayne, but, as you already know, she won't end
up being Selina Kyle for the whole movie, and you can find out why and
how when you watch for yourself.
Michael Keaton now seems even more comfortable in the Wayne/Batman role,
and plays it better than ever.  He even looks better in the suit here
(incidentally, this is obviously the most flexible suit that any Batman
wears in any of the films, and it looks quite cool).  Keaton is still
the definitive Batman, here more than ever - he's even made his hair
look less '80s for this film.  It's too bad that the story doesn't focus
more on him.
DeVito plays a very good tormented, umbrella-wielding Penguin, a man who
wants to return to the world above and "reclaim his birthright" by
becoming an appreciated member of Gotham society - all while secretly
plotting his own destruction schemes and revenge plots with his former
circus buddies who are now his gang.  He even gets to be funny at times.
Pheiffer is an excellent Catwoman, the first foe who is a worth physical
adversary to Batman in the series.  She's sultry, she's fun to watch,
and always chews the scenery.
And speaking of the scenery, it is, again, a beautiful thing to see. 
fills in for the late Anton Furst, and, although he doesn't reach the
same level as Furst, he does an admirable job.  Gotham is again a
beautiful and dark world.
Oh, yeah... Christopher Walken?  He's Walken.  He's pretty much always
Walken.  He's always a pretty good villian, because, hey, he's
Christopher Walken.  He can't compete with the Penguin or Catwoman, but
hey, what did you expect?
Danny Elfman's main theme returns here, and it, along with the other
music he did for this film, is much more haunting and dark this time
around, with chanting often rising up from the background.  This score
is again beautiful, and is just as strong as the one Elfman wrote for
the first film.
If the plot for this movie sounds odd... well, I suppose it is a little
weird, but Tim Burton films are usually quirky.  Still, somehow it all
seems to make sense on the screen, and works just great when you see it
for yourself.  Another Batman triumph for Burton and Keaton, BATMAN
RETURNS has all the strong performances, cool action, great direction,
gorgeous design, and powerful music of the first film.  The only flaws
would be that, this being our second trip through Gotham, maybe we
aren't as dazzled as the last time (sort of like the problem THE LOST
WORLD: JURASSIC PARK [1997] had to deal with after the origina JURASSIC
PARK [1993]), and we could've made do with more time spent with Batman,
and perhaps less villians.  With the next film, however, BATMAN FOREVER
(1995), Joel Schumacher's reign begins, and things get even more
crowded... so be prepared.  

Author
Louis Butler
     The Bat is back, and this time we get to see his nemesis, The
Penguin and the provocative Catwoman.  This movie will disappoint many
people who are hoping to see more of the same movie magic that made
BATMAN so enjoyable.  While the plot has regressed remarkably to a
cartoonish-comic-bookish level, the sexual innuendo/humor has escalated
to a purely adult level.  The movie sends mixed signals throughout and
never fails to miss even the most obvious sexual joke.  Too bad, if the
movie had stayed mostly adult as BATMAN did it would have been much
better; even if it had been purely comic-book it would have been
marginally better.  As it is it tries to straddle the fence between
pleasing the 13 year-olds and pleasing the parents with them.  I think
it misses both.
     Understand me, this is not a *poor* movie.  Not at all, but it is
not BATMAN, and it is not even a particularly worthy successor.  While
BATMAN had a undeniable forcefulness to it and a tightness to the plot
and dialog, this film slowly meanders through an ambling plotline to a
predictable end.  Much of the dialog is spend on jokes, but without the
same humor or strength of BATMAN.  BATMAN RETURNS is trying to show-off.
     Once again the focus of the movie is not Batman himself, but rather
one of the villains.  In this movie it is Michelle Pfeiffer as Catwoman
who steals center stage.  Her performance is wonderfully alive, down to
the soft throaty growl in her voice and the unassuming "Meow."  She is
everything a cat-woman should be, even slightly naughty (though she
tends to sharpen her claws on people instead of furniture).  Selina Kyle
is a perfect foil to Bruce Wayne, and as readers of the Batman comics
have know for years, Catwoman is in many ways Batman's perfect
"villain."
     Danny DeVito is quite good as the Penguin, but I felt that the
screenplay called for a character that was far too much a "freak" and
far too comical.  There is none of the sheer evil of Nicholson's Joker,
just a comical silliness that DeVito never quite manages to shed, even
when he is trying to be the bad guy.  The ridiculous costume hinders him
and reduces the character to a rather uninteresting goon.
     The plot is choppier than BATMAN.  Much of the movie is a bit
confused.  We don't really *know* who the "Red Triangle Gang" is:
children that were stolen or performers from the circus?  There is a
general feeling of slight discontinuity throughout the film.  In short
the editing was not nearly as good as BATMAN.
     But the movie is enjoyable anyway.  The sets are great, though we
never have time to really examine them, and there is no wonderful
architectural focal point like the church in BATMAN.  Instead there is a
Christmas Tree.  Oh well.
     Elfman's score is wonderful and manages to lift the movie during
some of its weaker moments.  The supporting cast is mostly very good,
though I though the actor playing Max's (Christopher Walken) son could
have done better with the three or four lines he had.
     If you are a bat-freak you will see this movie no matter what, and
there are enough bat-freaks out there that this movie will certainly be
successful, though it will play in comparison to the first.  If they
learn from their mistakes in this film and remember the first, the third
should be something wonderful.  (Anyone doubt there will be a third?)
     For the less bat-fixated among you, the movie is worth seeing for
anyone who really liked the first movie and would like to see a great
performance from Michelle Pfeiffer.
     If you disliked the first movie you will probably like this one
even less.
     Oh yes, and one more thing, there is quite a bit more gratuitous
violence and mayhem in BATMAN RETURNS than in BATMAN.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After recently having suffered through the press screening of Joel
Schumacher's BATMAN & ROBIN, we decided to check out one of Tim
Burton's originals.  BATMAN RETURNS is the second in the Batman series
and the last to be directed by Tim Burton.  Correctly criticized at the
time of its release in 1992 as being too dark, it nevertheless has more
imagination and energy than Schumacher's latest two (BATMAN FOREVER and
BATMAN & ROBIN).
     As in all the Batman films, the landscape is populated by a
cornucopia of quirky characters.  Danny DeVito plays the mistreated
Oswald Cobblepot, who comes back to Gotham City as the Penguin to wreak
havoc on Gotham City's occupants.  With the dark circles under his
eyes, his black lipstick, and his beak of a nose, the sewer living
Penguin is at once both pitiful and scary.
     Ever creepy Christopher Walken plays the evil industrialist Max
Shreck.  His moral compass does nothing but spin, and he is happy to do
whatever it takes, including pushing his bullied secretary out the
window, to achieve his financial goals.  When she comes back to life,
he casually remarks that there are always higher windows.
     Easily the best and only memorable performance in the picture is
turned in by Michelle Pfeiffer as Max's secretary, Selina Kyle.  Before
her death, Pfeiffer seems totally out of character as a ditzy and
helpless woman with hair as frazzled as her brain.  After her
resurrection by some local alley cats, she metamorphoses into Catwoman,
ever strong and out to get all of those men who have made her
downtrodden.
     Catwoman gets most of the better lines in the script by Sam Hamm
and Daniel Waters.  "Hello honey, I'm home," she announces when she
comes home.  "Oh, I forgot.  I'm not married."  It is her sly and
understated intonation that makes the show's best line: "I am Catwoman.
Hear my roar."  In print, it has no punch, but as delivered by
Pfeiffer, it has a beautiful and poetic energy.
     Although many actors have tried to wear Batman's heavy rubber suit
and ended up looking silly, none more so that George Clooney, Michael
Keaton gives the most satisfying rendition.  His Bruce Wayne and Batman
are dark and brooding like all of Burton's films.  Without the levity
of Catwoman, BATMAN RETURNS would have been too much of a downer to
take.
     The batmobile has more gadgets than any vehicle James Bond ever
drove.  Bo Welch's art deco sets look like they came from Albert
Speer's design studio.  And Danny Elfman's dramatic music is full of
symphonic power making the show resemble an elaborate and macabre
opera.
     Most of the violence is at the rock 'em, sock 'em cartoonish
level, but some can be downright gory.  In a scene that reminds one of
CHINATOWN, the Penguin is given a pair of giddily happy, image
consultants by his mentor Max.  The Penguin hates the idea so much that
he tries to bite off one of their noses.  Burton has blood flowing
everywhere and leaves it dripping down the Penguin's mouth after the
incident is over.
     BATMAN RETURNS drags frequently, and Burton has trouble
controlling his dark tendencies, but still, thanks mainly to Pfeiffer,
it remains one of the better of an overhyped and too often unwatchably
bad series.  Then again, since the series has generated a reported 4
billion dollars in Batman merchandise sales, the quality of the films
themselves are only of secondary importance.
     BATMAN RETURNS runs too long at 2:06.  It is rated PG-13 for
sometimes gory violence.  The show would be fine for kids around 8 and
up depending on how sensitive they are to gore.  My son Jeffrey, age 8,
thought the movie was "good," but he did get scared and had to cover
his eyes during several scenes.  In a somewhat marginal call, I give
the film thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
