Title
Review for Phantom, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The legend of The Phantom began in the 16th Century when off the
shores of the Island of Bangalla ("Bengalla" in the film) Singg pirates
captured a British merchantman ship and put all to the sword but for a
young boy, Kit, who dived over the side just in time to see his father
killed.  The boy swam to shore and was rescued by pygmies (not so small
in the film).  The boy swore revenge on the pirate who killed his
beloved father, but days later he found the pirate washed up on shore
dead.  His goal in life gone, he instead devoted his life to fighting
piracy, greed, cruelty, and injustice wherever it occurred.  He swore
that this would be not just his mission, but that of his sons and their
sons.  When he died they would carry on after him.  So began a long
line of Phantoms.  As there always was a Phantom around fighting evil,
even as generations and even centuries passed, the legend grew that The
Phantom could not die.  He could appear to die, but would return ever
and again looking just the same.  He was called "The Man Who Cannot
Die" and "The Ghost Who Walks."  The pygmies kept the secret that The
Phantom was a mortal and gave each Phantom the secrets of their
deadliest hunting poisons.  He made his home Skull Cave in the deep
woods of Bangalla and found other Skull Caves in other parts of the
world including the American Southwest.  From these he could fight
evil-doers everywhere.  But when one Phantom's adventures were ended a
Phantom would always return to Bangalla, his true home.  The pygmies
knew that the day would come when each Phantom would die, usually
violently, and The Phantom's son would be summoned to don the costume
and assume the role of The Phantom.
     I have to admit that even as a child I was not very interested in
The Phantom.  He was just about the least intriguing-looking super-hero
I could think of.  A black mask and a skin-tight purple suit was just
too little costume.  He looked a lot like a professional wrestler.  But
what really unsold me on The Phantom were his garish purple and black
diagonally striped shorts (missing in the film).  Because I thought the
shorts looked silly, the stories probably never got much of a chance to
impress me, though modern critics say that it was one of the better
adventure comic strips.  The Phantom was the creation of Lee Falk, who
previously had created Mandrake the Magician.  The strip began its long
run on February 17, 1936, and sixty years later it was still running.
The strip was adapted into a fifteen-chapter Columbia serial in 1943,
with Tom Tyler playing the title role.  Now, with the character a
little over sixty years old, The Phantom is back on the wide screen in
a story with a strong serial feel.
     The year is 1938 and the world is in turmoil as dictators try to
bring about a New World Order.  The United States has its own would-be
dictator, the ruthless gangster/businessman Xander Drax (played by
Treat Williams).  Drax's plan to is to get power through the use of
supernatural means.  He wants to gain possession of three mystical
jeweled skulls which when brought together will bring their owner about
the same power that the Lost Ark would.  (And this film does borrow
heavily and repeatedly from RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK, albeit lacking the
style to make it all work.)  As the film opens we see three ruthless
Indiana-Jones-like characters who have tracked the first skull to the
Island of Bengalla (ugh-oh!).  The skull is in a cave somewhere in the
deep woods (UGH-OH!).  But it is safe, you see, because one of the
mercenary explorers had actually killed The Phantom several years
before (Dead meat!!!).  Out of the forest, on a white horse and
followed by the wolf, Devil, comes riding The Phantom.  And so begins
an adventure that will carry The Phantom to New York City and later to
a meeting with the last descendants of the Singg pirates, killers of
the father of the original Phantom.
     Billy Zane is a reasonable actor, best remembered, at least by me,
as the sea-going psychopath in the taut thriller DEAD CALM.  And in the
purple suit he physically looks the part, even without the striped
shorts.  Treat Williams plays his villain with a subtle tongue-in-
cheek.  He does not interpret the role so broadly that he could be in a
Batman film, but he is not really playing it straight either.  Kristy
Swanson, known too well as BUFFY, THE VAMPIRE SLAYER, puts the most
character in her maiden-in-distress that I have seen from her in any
film, but she has a long way to go.  And veteran Patrick McGoohan is
known for underplaying his roles and so fits right in.  Some of the
most interesting faces are in bit parts: a gangster here, a cab driver
there.
     Perhaps the most intriguing part about Jeffrey Boam's script is
its unwillingness to commit to whether The Phantom is supernatural or
not.  The legend is that The Phantom is supernatural and supposedly the
truth is that he is not, but there are bits in the film that imply he
is able to do what no mortal man could.  Does he commune with the ghost
of his father or is it only a memory?  The supernatural certainly
mingles with the natural world in this film.  Some of his abilities
seem to be just on the edge of what is naturally possible, but it could
be just the writing.  Certainly Boam is willing to contrive some absurd
coincidences, particularly having villains fall a little too perfectly
into some set traps.
     One problem with the script is that while it is sort of explained
how The Phantoms find mates to extend their line, it is a little less
clear how the Singg pirates find sufficient mates considering where
they are.  Nor is it really clear why, lacking the dedication of the
Phantoms, they continue their line in the same profession.  And it is a
little hokey having everybody be descendants of originals, repeating
the same battles that have gone on for 400 years.  Many of the scenes
are not staged very well.  When someone swings on a rope, if you watch
the angle that the rope hangs you will see definite continuity errors.
One odd departure from the original suit is the addition of surface
designs.  It is like little black lines were added to accentuate muscle
definition.  One absurd scene has the wolf Devil apparently talking to
The Phantom's white horse and telling the horse where to go to pick up
his master.  The horse then outruns an airplane.  Some horse.  There is
little on-screen violence, but there is a gruesome scene of implied
violence (borrowed from the film THE HORRORS OF THE BLACK MUSEUM).
     In spite of a valiant effort to recreate a feel of the 1930s, THE
PHANTOM never really works perfectly and often not even well.  Then
again the same can be said of the old serials.  And it is good-natured
fun in the style of the old movie serials.  If you did not like THE
SHADOW which had a good deal more panache, it is a good bet you will
not like THE PHANTOM.  For the sake of that fun I give it a high 0 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Combine one quart of RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK, a dash of a Jackie
Chan movie (sans Jackie), two teaspoons of gun- and swordplay, and a dollop
of CGI. Simmer for 100 minutes. Yields: Zilch.
THE PHANTOM is a depressing and tired retread of so many earlier, better
movies that after the fifteen-minute mark I started cataloguing them out
loud. It's hard to make a good action-adventure movie that doesn't simply
recycle its predecessors, and I've seen movies that even at least did the
recycling gracefully. THE PHANTOM, allegedly based on the long-running
comic of the same name, doesn't even bother to be graceful. It's a stupid
and incompetent movie in too many ways to list, but I'll try.
The film opens up with a "prelude" sequence that looks like it was slashed
to ribbons in the editing and then given a Heavy Voice-Over to compensate
for whatever got thrown out. We go from there to a jungle sequence that, I
swear to God, recycles the truck-chase scene from RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK
note-for-note, possibly even shot-for-shot, right down to the moment where
Indy wrenched open the door and slung one of the drivers out into the brush
-- AND THEN GOES ON TO RIP OFF THE ROPE-BRIDGE SCENE FROM "SORCERER" AS
WELL! SORCERER, as you may well remember, was a remake of a French movie,
THE WAGES OF FEAR, in which a bunch of lowlifes were paid piles of money to
drive a truck loaded with nitro through horrible jungle terrain. Both
versions of that movie were far more interesting than this flick, but I've
got my job to do, so back to the salt mines we go.
Anyway, the cinematic theft doesn't stop there. Or at least the lack of
inspiration. There isn't a single thing here we haven't seen, and it's not
given to us in a way that remotely evokes our interest. We have (where's my
list?) a Bad Girl, a Tough Good Girl, a Secret Cave Hideaway (which seems
inspired more by DR. NO than anything else), a Boardroom Meeting That Drips
With Greed and Venality, Magical Artifacts of Terrible Power, and
Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa wasted in another stupid role where he gets to wear a
Fu Manchu mustache and sneer a lot and generally humiliate himself.
What else is there? The plot is a waste of time. The sets alternate between
big but hokey -- and tiny and still hokey. There are lines in the script
that are just begging to be MST3Ked -- and I'm sure once Mike and the 'Bots
get the cash, they'll stick it on their sked.
The only thing in the movie worth noting is Billy Zane -- he's a good
actor, and he tries very hard, even when the script is sending him down one
dead alley of a scene after another. All I can say is that I pray this
isn't the beginning of the end for him -- although it sure looks like the
final nail in the coffin for the comic-book super-hero movie.

Author
Michael Dequina
After the colossal box office disappointments The Rocketeer and The
Shadow, one would think that Hollywood would have given up on bringing
fairly obscure comic book characters to the big screen.  Alas, that isn't
the case, but one wishes that were after seeing The Phantom, a silly,
unexciting film treatment of Lee Falk's comic book hero of the same name.
Billy Zane plays Kit Walker, the latest in his family to assume the
mantle of the Phantom--purple-clad defender of the jungle's riches against
pirates, looters, and greed in general.  The latter is personified in one
Xander Drax (Treat Williams), a wealthy business tycoon of some sort who is
determined to find three sacred skulls which, when joined, are a source of
immense supernatural power.  Needless to say, it's up to "the ghost who
walks" to prevent Drax from gaining possession of the three skulls.
Simon Wincer's (Lonesome Dove, Free Willy) film does move very
quickly and efficiently; the film opens with a concise introduction to the
legend of the Phantom that lasts little more than a minute, and he keeps the
action moving accordingly.  However, the film, for all its effects and
stunts, is strangely unexciting and devoid of fun.  The action set pieces,
especially the fights, look and feel scripted and staged, lacking any
spontaneous energy that would make it the slightest bit convincing; it's
hard to have fun with comic book antics that are so forced and calculated.
Wincer also fails to create a distinct tone; at times he appears to be going
for a tongue-in-cheek comic book that's in on the joke and aware of its
ridiculous excesses (which would have been the best choice), but at other
times he plays it too straight, which doesn't suit a film about a guy
wearing purple tights who rides on horseback in the jungle in the 1930s.
But it's not as if Wincer had a great script to work with.  Jeffrey Boam's
script is little more than Batman meets Indiana Jones, or, more
appropriately, The Shadow meets Congo--by-the-numbers, predictable action
scenes involving a mysterious costumed hero in the wilds interspersed with
city scenes set against Art Deco architecture and vintage automobiles.
The performances also reflect this unevenness of tone.  A
dark-haired Kristy Swanson, as the love interest, Diana Palmer, goes the
straight route and comes off stiff and out of place.  On the other side of
the coin is Williams, who camps it up as Drax in an apparent attempt to
reach the entertaining, manic heights a la Alan Rickman in Robin Hood:
Prince of Thieves.  Problem is, though, while Rickman chewed the scenery, he
still came off as a menacing, formidable villain; Williams just comes off as
a laughable caricature.  Early on, Catherine Zeta Jones's Sala has the
makings of a fun femme fatale along the lines of GoldenEye's Xenia Onatopp,
but her character makes an inexplicable, abrupt change for the worse late in
the game.  The only one who achieves the appropriate balance is Zane, who
never takes himself too seriously (how could he, given that ridiculous
outfit?) while still investing a certain amount of serious conviction to the
role.  Zane has an appealing, self-effacing sense of humor; he is as
credible firing guns as he is tossing off one-liners.  If only screenwriter
Boam gave him more opportunities to do the latter.
One thing that did strike me about The Phantom were its connections
to--yes--Showgirls.  Al Ruscio, who played the owner of the Stardust in that
disastrous film, turns up as the corrupt New York police commissioner, and
Showgirls costume designer Marlene Stewart came up with the duds for this
picture; also, the end credits are printed in the same typeface as those of
Showgirls.  But that's where the connections end, for the blah The Phantom
is not nearly as much fun as that awful, awfully entertaining howlfest.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The recipe for THE PHANTOM is the result of the kind of perverse
logic which produces some of Hollywood's most spectacular flops.  There is
a super-hero in a form-fitting costume, because the people seemed to love
it in SUPERMAN and BATMAN; there is derring-do in the 1930s involving
mysterious and powerful relics, because the people seemed to love it in
the Indiana Jones films; there is a nasty industrialist and a feisty
heroine because, well, the people always seem to love that.  In short, THE
PHANTOM is an action-adventure Frankenstein's monster, cobbled together
from pieces of other much better films -- and then nobody remembered to
give it a jolt of energy.
     Based on the 60-year-old comic strip by Lee Falk, THE PHANTOM tells
of Kit Walker (Billy Zane), the latest in a line of legendary figures
carrying on a 400-year old oath handed down from father to son to fight
"piracy, cruelty and injustice in all its forms" as The Phantom.  The form
it takes in 1938 is Xander Drax (Treat Williams), a power-hungry
millionaire who has learned of the existence of three ancient skulls
which, when brought together, can generate an incredible power.  Drax's
plans have become known to a New York newspaper publisher (Bill
Smitrovich), who sends his niece Diana (Kristy Swanson) to investigate a
mysterious web symbol which appears to be connected to the plan.  When
Diana is kidnapped by Drax's operatives, The Phantom comes to the rescue,
and Diana joins him on a mission to keep the skulls out of Drax's hands.
     If THE PHANTOM resembles any other recent attempt at cinematic
super-heroism, it is 1994's bomb THE SHADOW.  It is a film which never
once carves out for itself a distinct theme -- too straight most of the
time to be camp, and too dumb to work as a rousing adventure.  Director
Simon Wincer (LONESOME DOVE, FREE WILLY) has many talents, but he is a bad
choice for an action adventure.  Wincer likes to let his stories unfold at
a leisurely pace, but there isn't much of a story to unfold in THE
PHANTOM.  That leaves him with action set pieces which are slow,
perfunctory, and lacking a unique flavor.  THE PHANTOM feels like the work
of a director who simply never had an idea about what to do with the
material.
     To be fair to Wincer, that appears to be true of the cast as well.
Billy Zane, a solid physical presence who looks frighteningly like Peter
Gallagher's younger brother, provides no personality for either The
Phantom or Kit Walker.  The best adjective for Zane's Phantom is affable
-- he goes about the business of dispatching bad guys as though he were a
neighborhood beat cop in a 1930s movie, waving his baton at a couple of
young ruffians and admonishing them to run along home, now.  Similarly,
megalomania has never seemed as charming and unthreatening as it does
coming from Treat Williams, in one of the least interesting villain
performances in recent memory.  When Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa turns up as
pirate lord Kabai Sengh nearly 90 minutes into THE PHANTOM, I found myself
utterly stumped as to why he wasn't the primary bad guy, since at least he
had charisma.  And pity poor Kristy Swanson, trying so hard to be a spunky
liberated woman that she never bothers to notice that she doesn't have a
character to play.
     Rarely have I seen a so-called adventure film in which so many
participants seemed to be going through the motions like basketball
players on the wrong side of a blow-out, wrestling with a thoroughly
synthetic script.  Jeffrey Boam (INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE,
LETHAL WEAPON 2 & 3) knows how to work with established characters in an
established formula, and that's the way he approaches THE PHANTOM:  as
though we already know the drill, he's just filling in the blanks, and The
Phantom character's status as antecedent to modern action films
shields it from charges of wholesale theft.  But it simply isn't the case
that his audience is essentially familiar with The Phantom.  He assumes
that we know Kit Walker and Diana Palmer, and that he doesn't need to
bother setting up their relationship; he assumes that we are already on
the side of his hero.  He assumes that if he takes a story which could
have been the next Indiana Jones adventure (which, incidentally, is Boam's
next project) and puts a guy in a purple suit in place of the guy with the
fedora, no one will notice.  Lee Falk's Phantom may be 60 years old, but
to movie audiences, he's just another guy in a cover band trying to pass
himself off as a rock star.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Billy Zane, Kristy Swanson, Treat Williams, James Remar, 
      Catherine Zeta Jones, Patrick McGoohan
Director: Simon Wincer
Producers: Robert Evans and Alan Ladd Jr.
Screenplay: Jeffrey Boam based on the comic book created by Lee Falk
Cinematography: David Burr
Music: David Newman
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     It's probably unfair to characterize THE PHANTOM as a BATMAN-
wannabe, since Lee Falk's comic book creation predated the Caped 
Crusader.  Nevertheless, as far as motion picture adaptations are 
concerned, Michael Keaton first stepped into his suit seven years before 
Paramount Pictures released this movie.  And, since both superheroes 
lack recognizable super powers and wear costumes, the connection is 
obvious.  It should be noted, however, that while Batman's form-fitting 
suit looks a lot more stylish than The Phantom's cheesy purple outfit, 
appearance isn't everything -- this film is more fun than Tim Burton's 
1989 atmosphere-soaked, empty-headed yarn.
     That's not to say that THE PHANTOM, directed by Simon Wincer (FREE 
WILLY), doesn't have atmosphere.  Actually, it's a nice-looking motion 
picture, with splashy colors highlighting nearly every scene.  But, 
unlike BATMAN, it doesn't hang everything on mood, and the tone isn't 
relentlessly downbeat.  Quite the opposite, in fact.  Since THE PHANTOM 
never takes anything seriously, the audience doesn't have to, either.  
This is the sort of tongue-in-cheek campiness that knows exactly what it 
is, and the irreverent tone saves this film from being another failed 
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK.
     In fact, the action sequences are among the least enjoyable parts 
of THE PHANTOM, since they're uniformly routine.  If you want action, 
see THE ROCK.  This film is for those who enjoy come-to-life comic books 
with self-consciously preposterous dialogue, over-the-top acting, silly 
plot contrivances, and a superhero who strikes all the right poses.  
It's not great cinema, but that doesn't stop it from being enjoyable in 
a B-movie way (and, unlike most films out there now, it's entirely 
suitable for children).
     For four-hundred years, the Phantom has haunted the Bengalla woods, 
known to the native inhabitants as "The Ghost Who Walks."  Kit Walker 
(Billy Zane) is the twenty-first man to take up the mantle, inheriting 
it from his late father (Patrick McGoohan), who makes occasional ghostly 
appearances to advise him.  It's the lot of the Walker family to "fight 
piracy, cruelty, and injustice in all its forms", and has been since the 
boy who became the first Phantom witnessed his father's murder.  Because 
all the Phantoms wear the same costume, the outside world believes that 
there's only one of them -- an immortal vigilante of sorts -- and Kit is 
in no hurry to dispel the illusion.
     The age-old enemy of the Phantom is the evil Sengh brotherhood, who 
are searching for the fabled Skulls of Touganda, a trio of artifacts 
that, when brought together, give the possessor great powers.  One New 
York businessman, Xander Drax (Treat Williams), wants those skulls for 
himself, so he sends his henchman, Quill (James Remar), into the jungles 
of Bengalla to retrieve one.  Quill and the Phantom have a history -- 
he's the one who stabbed Kit's father in the back.  Meanwhile, back in 
the Big Apple, a newspaper publisher and his daughter (Kristy Swanson) 
who suspect that Drax is up to no good run afoul of the megalomaniac 
when they start investigating his personal affairs.
     Billy Zane, who played the psycho in DEAD CALM, is an excellent 
choice for the lead role.  Zane adopts the right self-deprecating tone 
and has a well-toned body that fills out the skin-tight costume 
impressively.  He seems to be enjoying himself, which is important for 
this sort of part.  Kristy Swanson (BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER) slides 
into the love interest role with gusto, showing enough spunk to avoid 
fading into the background.  Catherine Zeta Jones plays an exotic, 
athletic bad girl.  The villains are Treat Williams, who has as much fun 
here as Jack Nicholson did in BATMAN, and James Remar.
     Although THE PHANTOM is more often enjoyable than not, it lacks 
that special characteristic necessary to provide it with a unique 
identity.  Arriving in the midst of so many "can't miss" offerings, I 
expect it to sink like a rock, moving quickly to "dollar theaters" then 
to video. I'd like to be able to champion this film, but the truth is 
that I'm tiring of the genre as a whole, and, while THE PHANTOM opts for 
a different tone than most of its brethren, it's still not an especially 
memorable motion picture.  This is the kind of movie that offers modest 
entertainment while you're in the theater, but is forgotten by the time 
you get home.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
Everything in The Phantom you have seen many times before   
and there is nothing new presented here. Wincer displays    
absolutely no skill in setting up an exciting action        
sequence. Billy Zane is wooden as the hero. Kristy Swanson  
is given very little to do, and does very little with it.   
Treat Williams, looking like Rhett Butler but sounding like 
Mickey Mouse, is one of the worst villains I have ever seen 
in a movie. Only Catherine Zeta Jones, as one of Williams   
cohorts turns in a good performance. She has energy and     
spunk, which the movie needed much more of. Oh yeah, the    
Phantom also has a secret identity but this is so poorly    
played out you won't even care. About the only things I can 
recommend are a good performance by Jones, and some colorful
scenery. However, if youre looking for a fun family movie,  
go watch the underrated Flipper. This is not a good movie.  
