Title
Review for For the Boys (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  James Caan and Bette Midler as a USO
     touring comedy team.  For forty-nine years they are America's
     sweethearts on-stage and constantly battling off-stage.  This
     is mostly because he has the values of his time and she has
     the values of our time.  Sobby, sentimental, and
     melodramatic.  Rating: high -1 (-4 to +4).
     Bette Midler originally built her career on being outrageous and
running counter to the culture.  These days she seems more interested in
making soft sentimental films such as BEACHES and her current FOR THE BOYS-
-what at one time were called "women's pictures."  In a sense, that is just
like Dixie Leonard, the character she plays in FOR THE BOYS.  As we see
Dixie over a forty-nine-year interval, she is at first outrageous as an
entertainer, then slowly the world catches up and Dixie has been co-opted
into the mainstream.  In fact, from World War II to the present Dixie never
fails to have and stand up for the values of a woman of the late 1980s.
     Dixie is half of the musical comedy team of Eddie Sparks and Dixie
Leonard.  Sparks and Leonard are an amalgam of several real-life people,
most notably Bob Hope with his penchant for USO tours and becoming a symbol
of support for America's military policy.  There is also something of
Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz in them as they are considered to be "America's
Sweethearts."  There is a problem with this, however.  Dixie is quick-witted
and sharp-tongued.  In the 1950s the ideal of womanhood presented by the
media was domestic and not all that bright.  (Right now the only notable
pre-1960s exception that comes to mind is Myrna Loy as Nora Charles.)  Eddie
Sparks (played by James Caan) always represents the values of the mainstream
of his time, whatever time that is.  Not too unexpectedly, the two are in
constant conflict with hot war when they are off-stage and cold war when
they are on-stage.  Sparks, however, is outclassed by this woman with a much
quicker mind for gags and who is happy to mix dirty jokes into her patter.
     Structured somewhat like SAME TIME, NEXT YEAR, this film shows us Eddie
and Dixie only at Christmas time, usually during a war and on a USO tour.
We do see them during the Red scare, with Eddie naturally enough bowing to
sponsor pressure to rid the staff of a "controversial" writer and Dixie,
just as naturally, standing up for right and truth.  Eddie always acts from
cowardice or self-interest; Dixie never fails to stand up for some ideal or
other.  And just to be sure the audience sides with Dixie--as if the deck
were not badly enough stacked as it is--Dixie has a likable, outgoing manner
and Eddie is given by Caan all the personality of a starched white shirt.
     The script of FOR THE BOYS leaves no emotional button unpushed.  The
great tragedies in Dixie's life are telegraphed for in advance.  Most of the
story is told as a flashback to an all-style-no-substance network career man
who is so inspired by Dixie's nobility that he is reformed on the spot.  And
if you cannot figure out the conclusion of the film in the first few
minutes, you really are not trying.  Dixie's attitudes are not the only
anachronisms.  In December of 1942 Dixie makes a pun on "Peenemunde."  Even
military intelligence probably did not know about Peenemunde's importance
for another eight months.  (It is a German island that was the development
and launch site for the V-1 and V-2.)
     In some respects the film is not so bad.  It functions very nicely as a
core sample of popular music from 1942 to the present.  Music from each of
the settings punctuates the film.  Special note should be made of the
makeup.  Both Caan and Midler age before our eyes and the transitions are
smooth and believable.  The makeup artist pulled no punches and Midler does
not age well.  My first reaction on seeing the makeup-aged Midler was not
that it did not look right; it was, "My gosh, look how old she's gotten!"
It is rare one can get that natural reaction from ageing makeup.
     But music and makeup do not save this film from being an overlong and
self-congratulatory swipe at the values of the past by the present.  I rate
this film a high -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
