Title
Review for In weiter Ferne, so nah! (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Lon Ponschock
Written and directed by Wim Wenders
Starring Otto Sander, Peter Falk, Nastassja Kinski, Bruno Ganz,
     Willem Dafoe, and Solveig Dommartin
146 mins.
     The signature quotation you see at the bottom of these pieces is
from another Wim Wenders film: UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD.  And his
PARIS TEXAS is another extraordinary piece of filmmaking and look at
life.  In WINGS OF DESIRE and FAR AWAY SO CLOSE Wenders explores the
lives of Angels.  Angels are quite popular these days.  There are scads
of books on the subject.
     From the first frames of FAR AWAY SO CLOSE, a film which
was the grand prize winner at Cannes in 1993, I was enthralled with its
approach.
     Cassiel (Otto Sander) becomes human when he cannot bear to see a
child die needlessly and his adventure as a human begins.  Funny thing
is that as you watch and listen to him with his fears and isolation he
actually speaks from our own hearts.  This is my take on it anyway.
     FAR AWAY features an all-star cast.  Lou Reed and Peter Falk have
cameo roles.  Solveig Dommartin I remember from UNTIL THE END OF THE
WORLD and she is wonderful once again in this work.  Nastassja Kinski
is Raphaela, a companion angel and Bruno Ganz plays Damiel. Damiel's
story is told in WINGS of DESIRE.  Willem Dafoe is ... what? a devil?
a bad angel ... something that wants to see the new 'Karl Engel'
destroyed?  Even after the film I am uncertain.
     The camera work in FAR AWAY is extraordinary in that it
accomplishes so much with so little.  This is not a big budget film.
Wenders can get away with merely suggesting all that an angel is with
the camera and a few simple props.
     There is great humor in the film as well.  And the story is a
complex one of a long search and finally a rescue.
     With its companion piece, WINGS OF DESIRE, FAR AWAY SO CLOSE
presents us with images that refresh the spirit and strengthen our
hopes in the future.  That's what the little signature file which
closes these pieces is about.

Author
Pedro Sena
I really wanted to like this film.  And like its predecessor, WINGS OF
DESIRE, it has some nice touches, which one wonders where is going to lead,
and what is the film doing.
But, alas, it seems that every film exercise has to end up in some sort of
theme, or idea, for it to have meaning, so it seems.  It is my opinion, that
this film deteriorates, as soon as it becomes a story, instead of
maintaining the idea that it had created.
That's not to say that the film isn't as good, when that happens.  To me,
the illusory part was a bit more interesting, than the eventual story about
an angel wanting to find out what it is like to be a human, and having to go
and find out what it is like.
The film starts with the usual style that made the other film so
interesting. In this one Cassiel, Rafaela spend much of their time looking
at things and making observations about people.  As before, they can hear,
and see things before they actually happen, and most often when they are
happening.  Where their attention goes, they connect
and hear that person's lament, or questions.
Cassiel, however, longs to find out what it is like to be human, and
eventually gets to try it.  And innocently enough he gets to find out that
not everyone around is honest, and has good reasons to boot.  His first
connection, is in all actuality another member of his
group ( a baker named Daniel ), and they all go about their business until
Cassiel gets involved with some not so good affairs.  And the film becomes a
bit of an over ripe fig for my tastes.  To me the wonder of the previous
half, is now becoming the symbolic path that the film has to take.  A sort
of Christian concept now has to take over, complete with sacrificial lamb,
and pointed theme.  This, to this reviewer, ate the film up.
But, it isn't all as bad as I make it sound.  I suppose, for a regular art
film go'er, we may have liked to see something stick to it, and really make
a case.  The premise was great, but since we are humans, our resources into
that space are limited, and this film is no different.  It really is not the
film's fault.  But it could have been more interesting
to me to see the stream of consciousness that it was working with instead of
a thematic story, so overly laden with symbols that do not really add
anything to the whole film.
The best part of the film, and also the oddest, is Wim Wenders use of
various musicians and their songs to highlight several things here and
there.  Right out in the open, are Lou Reed, Nick Cave, Jane Sieberry,
Laurie Anderson, House of Love and other unusual musicians, which give the
film a basic art house style.  To me, though, it is a shame that the film
departs from it too soon.  But these artists, become a sort of
inspiration for the now earth bound angel, which adds a nice touch to the
material.  While what these artists do say is interesting, it is not as good
as what is around, but the analogy is good enough. And Lou Reed is specially
interesting, as he happens not to be a vain artist, and knows very well what
he is doing.
Another of Wim Wenders' curiosity shop items, is his use, and handling of
Michael Gorbachov, of the recently broken up Soviet Union.  As he  works on
a book, he wonders about certain things, and then writes, and of course, we
already knew that these things were happening.  But the charismatic leader,
did come off, like the other characters in the film, for the most part, as
honest, and caring, something that not many of us has the feeling for in
many politicians, specially one of Gorbachov's stature.
Not a great film, but easier to watch than its predecessor Wings of Desire.
Watch the really well thought out camera angles to allow you to see a
different point of view.  The technical side of this film  is probably its
very best asset.
3 GIBLOONS
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association

Author
Daniel Nesmith
Starring Otto Sanders, Bruno Ganz, Nastassja Kinski, Solveig Dommartin,
         Willem Dafoe, Peter Falk, Ruediger Volger, Ingo Schmitz
Cameos by Mikhail Gorbachev and Lou Reed
Music by Laurent Petitgant
Wwith songs by Lou Reed, Laurie Anderson, Nick Cave and others
     They're all around us; though we think they're far away, they're
really quite close.  At least in Berlin.  "They" are the angels.  In
Wenders's WINGS OF DESIRE (DER HIMMEL UEBER BERLIN) we met them for
the first time.  They live in an abstract world of black and white,
observing us, comforting us.  They are, they emphasize, "messengers,
not the message."  Wenders's FARAWAY, SO CLOSE!, which won the special
jury prize at Cannes this year, returns once again to Berlin.
     An angel, giving up his powers in order to become human, to feel
and hear, to taste and smell for the first time, is once again
Wenders's theme.  In WINGS OF DESIRE (WOD), the angel Damiel (Bruno
Ganz) became human for the love of a woman.  His friend Cassiel (Otto
Sanders), who is the focal point of FARAWAY, SO CLOSE! (FSC), becomes
human almost accidentally when he can no longer remain just an
observer, and must intervene in our world.  Unlike Damiel, who has
become an entrepreneur in post-Wall Berlin with a family and friends,
Cassiel, though unselfish and self-sacrificing, does not know where to
begin.  He quickly finds himself in trouble, and his good intentions
only lead to tragedy.
     Willem Dafoe as Emit Flesti makes Cassiel's life difficult.  Dafoe
turns in a wonderful performance; his aggressive verbal sparring with
still-angel Raphaela (Nastassja Kinski), as well as his lecturing of
Cassiel, is a treat.
     The plot of the film is winding and not completely easy to follow,
reminding one of Wenders's UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD (UEW), and there
are many themes involved.   Once again Peter Falk (playing himself) is
in Berlin, this time for an exhibit of his drawings.  Falk's role is
here larger than in WOD, and less introspective.  The plot of the movie
which Falk was supposedly making in WOD becomes a subplot in FSC, with
the German-born American Anton Becker (Ingo Schmitz) returning to
Berlin and looking for his sister, from whom he was separated during
the war.  Unfortunately, Tony has become something of a gangster during
his years in Detroit, and Cassiel becomes his servant.
     There are funny moments in FSC, such as Tony's rescue by Cassiel
from his Mafia enemies, as well as some very touching scenes, where
Cassiel wonders "why can't I be good?"  Sanders, whose role in WOD was
secondary, does a masterful job of playing the man who wants only to do
the right thing, but who can't quite pull it off.  A man who wishes he
could go back to being an angel.
     One could call FSC something of a hybrid between WOD (very
intellectual, little action) and UEW (fast-moving, humor-filled, but
rambling and disorganized, unfocused ideas).  Ironically, FSC (as UEW
was) is a victim of one of its own themes: that time for us humans is
fleeting, that there is so much to do.  Wenders has tried to pack more
into this film (which runs just under two and a half hours) than it can
hold.  The murkiness of some plot turns is unsettling.  There is some
heavy-handed symbolism (such as Dafoe's character's name), and many
references to Germany's racial problems, past and present.  Gorbachev,
certainly a hero in Germany, makes a cameo in an appearance that could
have been written by his own public relations firm.
     Still, the film, while flawed, is well worth seeing.  Not for
those who are shy of subtitles (at least five languages are used at
times).

Author
Mark Takacs
TV-Style-One-Line-Summary 
-------------------------
     An angel experiences life on earth and finds that things are
better (and worse) than expected.
Tak Summary
-----------
     The movie starts out with our hero, and another angel, popping
about time and space to observe whatever catches their fancy.  Unable
to stand by and witness a tragedy about to happen, one of the angels is
unexpectedly cast into human form.
     Thus begins his adventures--he wanders aimlessly, becomes
homeless, joins a band of similarly "fallen" angels, works for a
gangster, and then tries to make a difference.  Throughout his
adventures, the Devil (William Dafoe) ensures he has a really hard time
and gets some of the more dubious human experiences.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     I saw this movie by accident.  Seriously.  I was at a screening of
BAD BEHAVIOR, a comedy, which started late.  By the end of the movie a
small crowd was waiting to get into the preview theatre ... so I just
stayed seated.  I had *no* idea what I was getting into.
     So picture my surprise when the movie opens in grainy black and
white with a French narration and subtitles.  Do you remember that beer
commercial?  It goes something like this:
    [bored guys and dates watching a clown speaking anguished French]
    [another night--movie w/explosions & gunfire ... now dates bored]
     Well, the first fifteen to twenty minutes mins of this film seemed
like the anguished-clown foreign film clip.  Our hero and his companion
move around space and time (within a few generations), philosophically
musing to us (in French, with subtitles) about life, death, and what it
might be like to be a human.  Ei Yi Eee.
     Okay, so I think I'm identifying more with the guys in that
commercial ... I like guns, bullets, adventure and whatnot.  Hell, I
saw CLIFFHANGER twice and *loved* it.
     But just before my patience wore uncomfortably time, our hero is
thrust into a human body, and then all sorts of fun stuff happens.
Eventually we get to see some limited gun-fu, mobsters, a hare-brained
con involving "Columbo," and some extensive acrobatics (I always
suspected those acrobatic people were a little, well, different).
     Okay, on to the subtitles. *Weird*, but neat.  The characters are
speaking French at first.  As the cast expands, they include German,
then English, dropping the subtitles only when English is spoken.
     As the film rolls on, they start mixing the languages ... French,
German, English, all kinds of things--*in the same sentence*!  And I
didn't even notice at first!  It posed absolutely no problem to my
understanding of the dialogue.  Now, admittedly I took a two years of
high school German (mainly so I could understand what the extras were
saying in the war movies I was into at the time--RAIDERS OF THE LOST
ARK is a good case), but I felt as if I could understand anyone, no
matter what language they happened to be speaking.  'Twas a neat
feeling.  If you see this movie, watch for this effect.
     The movie had lots of little subplots, almost too many. Most
everything is wrapped up at the end. But I was left with a vague sense
that something, somewhere, was skimmed over, rushed past us, or left
unfinished.  But I'll be damned if I can remember what.  This seems to
be a characteristic of Wim Wenders stuff.  I had a similar feeling with
UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD.  Apparently, he loves to explore lots of
things in long movies.
     Focus.  I guess that's the problem.  We're all over the place
here.  We get a sermon on guns, pornography, gambling, homelessness, a
sentimental attachment to an elderly Nazi chauffeur, acrobatic angels
on a stealthy ninja mission, death, precious life, and all SORTS of
things.  It leave you with a lot to think about... lots of breadth, no
depth.  The most engaging films I've seen have focused on one theme,
rather than this huge assortment.
     If I'm gonna see a serious film (as opposed to a whup-ass film) I
much prefer a film that acts as a magnifying glass, focusing the sun
into a painfully burning spot, rather than a nice diffuse tan.
Technical Comments
------------------
     They did the currently trendy switching from black-n-white for the
angels (apparently angels have dog eyes) and color for humans. It did
work well though.
     Soundtrack is pretty cool too.  Lou Reed has a cameo role as
himself.  I've heard friends say they like the soundtrack, though I
haven't heard it yet.  I tend to let the soundtrack fade into the
background ('cept for UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD, another Wim Wenders
film, which had an awesome soundtrack that jumped out at you.  Oh, and
there was DAZED AND CONFUSED, too).
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     Well the Cannes Film festival people liked it.  It got a "Grand
Jury Prize: Cannes 1993".  As for me, well, it was good, but in the way
something very beautiful, expensive and fragile in your mother's house
is.  Or a big smorgasbord that you want to savor, but you're only
allowed a pinch from each area.  So I enjoyed watching it, but I'm not
gonna rave about it.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Otto Sander, Horst Buccholz, Nastassja Kinski, Bruno
Ganz, Willem Dafoe, Peter Falk.
Screenplay:  Wim Wenders, Ulrich Zieger & Richard Reitiger.
Director:  Wim Wenders.
     Wim Wenders' WINGS OF DESIRE was one of my favorite films of
1988.  As corny as it might sound, I found it to be one of those rare
transcendental film experiences, a beautiful and poetic tale of love
and human wonder that left me feeling uplifted.  I was unsure of how to
approach the idea that Wenders was making a sequel to this singular
film, but I crossed my fingers and hoped for the best.  Unfortunately,
all the good will in the world was unable to salvage FARAWAY, SO
CLOSE!  Wenders seems to have been unclear as to what made WINGS OF
DESIRE special, weighing down a simple story with self-importance and a
ridiculously convoluted plot.
     FARAWAY, SO CLOSE! returns Otto Sander to the role of Cassiel, one
of many angels who drift through Berlin observing and listening in on
thoughts.  He is curious about the human experience, but reluctant to
take the plunge risked by his former companion Damiel (Bruno Ganz).
The decision is made for him when he becomes human to save the life of
a young girl.  Cassiel resolves to use his physical form to intervene
for good where he was unable to do so before, but that resolution
proves easier said than done.  He falls into despair and loneliness,
eventually coming to work for a suave black marketeer (Horst
Buchholz).  Cassiel struggles to redeem himself, all the while thwarted
by a mysterious figure named Emit Flesti (Willem Dafoe).
     Like WINGS OF DESIRE, FARAWAY, SO CLOSE! shows us the angels'
world in black and white, and opens with loosely connected scenes of
the angels smiling knowingly over human shoulders as they work and
worry.  But unless my memory fails me, those scenes go on far longer in
FARAWAY, and they become extremely tedious.  They include a cameo by
Mikhail Gorbachev, thinking important thoughts about world peace, and a
scene involving a dying man and an angel played by Nastassja Kinski
where the overlapping dialogue created a nightmare for the subtitler.
This prologue seemed to go on and on, and while it did provide
information necessary later in the story, it could have been done much
more efficiently.  There are too many characters, many of whom are
completely irrelevant to the story.
     The film's second act is by far its most effective.  The
reluctantly human Cassiel copes poorly with his new state, lacking the
love which motivated Damiel's transformation.  The marvelously
expressive Sander is great during these scenes, drifting into drunken
despondency with genuine pain.  Also intriguing is the relationship
between Cassiel and Tony Baker, the German-born/ American-raised
racketeer who takes him in.  Horst Buchholz has an oily charm as Baker,
and there's a lively cadence to his perpetual switching back and forth
between German and English.  Cassiel is most interesting when he's a
fallen angel, with Baker the little devil on his shoulder.
     Then, during the climax, it all falls apart again.  Willem Dafoe,
who as Emit Flesti ("time itself" backwards ... get it?) wanders
through the film making ominous but opaque statements like, "Time is
the absence of money," becomes thoroughly oppressive in the final half
hour.  FARAWAY, SO CLOSE! becomes a silly caper film involving stolen
arms and kidnapping.  Peter Falk, who was so good in WINGS OF DESIRE as
Damiel's guide to humanity, is simply comic relief here, although a
scene involving the distraction of two security guards is very funny.
WINGS OF DESIRE was whimsical, but never dopey, and FARAWAY has a real
problem finding its tone.
     Perhaps the most egregious sin in FARAWAY is a preachy epilogue
that seems only tangentially connected to the film we just spent two
and a half hours watching.  WINGS OF DESIRE was a kind of message film,
but the message was skillfully delivered; in the intervening five
years, Wenders seems to have had all the subtlety sucked out of him.
The moments that do work in FARAWAY, SO CLOSE! are mired in
overplotting, and there's never any flow to the story.  What's worse,
it has tainted my memories of WINGS OF DESIRE.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Otto Sander, Horst Buchholz, Bruno Ganz, Nastassja Kinski,
           Peter Falk, Solveig Dommartin, Willem Dafoe
Director:  Wim Wenders
Producer:  Ulrich Felsberg
Screenplay:  Wim Wenders and Richard Retinger
Music:  Laurent Petitgand
Released by Sony Pictures Classics
In German, French, and English with subtitles
     1988's WINGS OF DESIRE was an excellent example of a true "art
film," with the medium of cinema used as a canvas by a director (Wim
Wenders, in this case).  WINGS OF DESIRE was a provocative, evocative
look at life, love, and humanity that was at times spiritually
elevating and at others pretentious and silly.  At the conclusion of
the movie, we were promised a sequel, but it has taken six years for
the next chapter, FARAWAY, SO CLOSE! to begin creeping its away across
U.S. screens.
     As FARAWAY, SO CLOSE! opens, Cassiel (Otto Sander) is still an
angel, gazing down on humanity in the company of the equally celestial
Raphaela (Nastassja Kinski).  He doesn't keep his wings for long,
however, as he allows himself to become human to save the life of a
girl who has fallen from a high-rise balcony.  Cassiel is quickly
reunited with former angel Damiel (Bruno Ganz), who now has a family
and is running a pizza parlor.  But the transition from immortal to
human isn't as easy for Cassiel as it was for his friend, and he soon
becomes involved with an underworld kingpin (Horst Buchholz).
Meanwhile, a mysterious entity by the name of Emit Flesti (Willem
Dafoe--spell the character's name backwards) stalks Cassiel.
     FARAWAY, SO CLOSE! begins very much as WINGS OF DESIRE did, with a
pair of angels watching the lives of various mortals.  Whereas this
portion of the first movie made up the bulk of the running time, in the
sequel, it's merely a prologue.  Before the first half-hour is up,
Cassiel has become human and we're watching as he struggles to
comprehend what has happened to him.
     As Wings was Damiel's story, so FARAWAY is Cassiel's.  This is not
the light, mystical romance of its predecessor, but a somewhat muddled
narrative that ends up resembling an offbeat action/adventure movie.
It's still a film about issues--humanity, the soul, time, and
Nazism--but it lacks many of the "art" aspect of WINGS, relying more on
straightforward storytelling.
     There's a lot about the climactic struggle that doesn't work.
Even though we aren't given a heavy dose of Hollywood-type violence,
the sequence seems wrong not only for the film, but for the series as a
whole.  Anyone watching the beginning of Wings will find it difficult
to come to grips with this as the story's culmination.
     The cast is excellent.  It's nice to see Bruno Ganz and Solveig
Dommartin (Marion) together again, although their importance is greatly
reduced from Wings.  Obviously, Otto Sander has the most difficult
role, and he carries it out impeccably.  Peter Falk is back as a
somewhat satirized version of himself, and Lou Reed and Mikhail
Gorbachev make cameos.  Horst Buchholz plays his role as the
American-type gangster with relish, and Willem Dafoe is suitably creepy
in an ambiguous, and largely unexplained, part.
     Even though this movie is in many ways more straightforward than
the original, it is still likely to appeal only to a select audience.
Mr. Wenders has intentionally taken FARAWAY, SO CLOSE! down a
different path from WINGS OF DESIRE.  The characters are the same, but
the circumstances are often vastly different, as are the methods of
storytelling.  In some cases, the changes are right on the
mark--there's no need to re-hash what's already been done--but there
are other occasions when Mr. Wenders comes dangerously close to
self-parody.
     About the only thing I can say regarding a recommendation is that
a viewing of WINGS OF DESIRE is almost mandatory before seeing FARAWAY,
SO CLOSE!  Going into this film without the background of its
predecessor will leave a movie-goer adrift and confused.  On the other
hand, sitting through WINGS OF DESIRE doesn't guarantee enjoyment of
the sequel (in fact, many fans of the first will probably be sorely
disappointed by the turn that this script takes), but going cold into
FARAWAY, SO CLOSE! will almost certainly lead to a negative
experience.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
