Title
Review for Thursday (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael Dequina
In a recent article for the _Chicago_Sun-Times_, Roger Ebert commented,
"It's pretty hard to offend me, but a film named _Thursday_ crossed the
line at the Toronto Film Festival earlier this month. Watching it, I felt
outrage. I saw a movie so reprehensible I couldn't rationalize it using the
standard critical language about style, genre or irony. The people
associated with it should be ashamed of themselves."
I echo Ebert's sentiments, but from a different angle.  There is a lot of
violence, sex, and various other forms of bad behavior on display in first
time writer-director Skip Woods's low-budget thriller.  But the graphic
nature of _Thursday_ is not what upset me; it was the content behind the
mayhem--or, rather, the lack thereof.  There's absolutely no substance to
Woods's script beyond the setup: a "reformed" ex-drug dealer (Thomas Jane)
who has his quiet Houston household violently thrown upside down after his
still-in-the-biz ex-partner (Aaron Eckhart, who should have known better)
arrives for a stay.  What follows are random, plotless acts of violence and
nastiness, such as various bloody shooting deaths; grisly body disposals;
and, most notoriously, an Amazonian femme fatale (Paulina Porizkova)
wearing a jacket reading "CUNT" who openly masturbates and later rapes the
main character.  This criticism may sound hypocritical from someone who
completely bought into the sick sensibility of _Very_Bad_Things_, but there
writer-director Peter Berg had an actual story to work with, and the
borderline offensive shocks naturally emerged from that narrative.  Woods,
on the other hand, hails from the school of film that believes that shock
value in and of itself equals hipness.  In actuality, it only equates to
pathetic desperation.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
