Title
Review for NeverEnding Story II: The Next Chapter, The (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE NEVERENDING STORY II is a sequel to the 1985 fantasy based on
part of a children's book by Michael Ende that was very popular in
Europe, but largely unknown in the U.S.  This new installment picks up
the story pretty much where the old one left off.  And although this new
movie is different from the earlier, it is an open question whether it
is better or worse.
     For the record, I was disappointed in the first NEVERENDING STORY.
I didn't like the obvious allegory of the story, neither did I think
the special effects came up to contemporary standards.  I did rather
like the boy actor who played the central role of hero and I liked the
way the story played with the ways the reader enters into and changes
the story he or she is reading, an idea also exploited to some extent by
THE PRINCESS BRIDE.
     In NEVERENDING II, I am still bothered by the allegory, but while
the special effects are pretty obvious they are more interesting and the
sets, costumes, decor, and mattes are pretty wonderful.  However, I find
I do not much like the new boy actor, whose name I do not have in front
of me.  He is not a natural actor, but is very visibly "reacting" and
"registering".  Some of the other characters/actors seem more capable,
especially the large bird character that does a lot of fun things with
avian body language.  I also liked the evil witch/queen/stepmother
archetype and her servant Three Faces (?), he of the multiple faces and
purposes.  We meet some familiar characters from the earlier movie,
including Atreyu, the plains-Indian warrior-boy, Rock Biter (along with
a really charming infant son), and that elongated, flying Pekinese whose
name also escapes me.
     The movie is too much interested in making a point and not enough
in telling a story.  The fantasy exists simply as a frame for the moral,
rather than having any moral derive from the fantasy.  Its moral purpose
is heavy-handed and mercilessly driven home in almost every scene.  When
I think of the most perfect movie of this type, THE WIZARD OF OZ, and
compare it to THE NEVERENDING STORY II, I am grateful that the latter is
not a musical.
     Despite this, adults can take children to this movie in confidence
that neither will be neither embarrassed or bored out of their gourds.
And adults can go by themselves, as Lyndol and I did, and have a
reasonably good time, especially at a cheap matinee on a rainy Saturday.
