Title
Review for Clash of the Titans (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Whenever I revisit a film like "Clash of the Titans,"
I'm simultaneously exalted and saddened-- exalted because
the movie is a tour-de-force of gripping, powerful storytelling,
and saddened because it makes me realize how much this
style of grand filmmaking belongs to a bygone era.  When
a movie like "Armageddon" becomes the highest-grossing film
of the year, it sends a very clear message to the studios: "You
have absolutely no reason to deviate from the commercially-proven
formulas you're using in all your other movies.  Give us more of the
same, please."  This increasing cinematic trend towards mediocrity,
particularly in the action-film genre, does not bode well for the
future.
        Well, prepare for a breath of fresh air, and check out
a classic you may have missed.  Directed in a beautifully
vibrant style by Desmond Davis, "Clash of the Titans" is a
brilliant, highly-stylized re-telling of the story of Perseus,
the Greek mythological hero who faced untold dangers and
obstacles in his quest for the fair Princess Andromeda.
Astonishingly photographed with equal parts light and
shadow, "Clash of the Titans," which celebrates its 18th
birthday this year, opens a window into the imagination and
allows it to soar for 118 minutes.
        As the story opens, Acrisius (Donald Houston), the
ruler of the seaside city of Argos, has condemned his only
daugher Danae (Vida Taylor) to death for a capital crime:
giving birth to a child out of wedlock.  Imprisoned in a
large wooden coffin, Danae and her young son, Perseus, are
hurled into the sea and left for dead.  Zeus (a magnificent
performance by Sir Laurence Olivier), however, has seen all
from atop Mt. Olympus, and for reasons which eventually
become clear to us, he spares their lives.  Displeased with
Acrisius's act of attempted murder, Zeus vows justice; soon
there are disasterous ramifications for Acrisius and his people.
        Danae and Perseus drift safely to the island of
Seraphos, where they are rescued and welcomed by the kind,
simple natives.  Their new home is a beautiful place, and
Perseus grows into a strong, handsome young man (played by
Harry Hamlin of "L.A. Law").  Happy and content in this
scenic paradise, they live carefree for many years... but alas,
the bliss cannot last forever.  The goddess Thetis (Maggie
Smith), displeased with the way Zeus has punished her son
Calibos (Neil McCarthy) with deformity, decides to seek
revenge.  Knowing that Zeus cares for Perseus, she magically
transports the young man away from Seraphos while he sleeps
on the beach.
        Perseus wakes in an ampitheater on the outskirts
of Joppa, alone, confused, and defenseless.  He is soon
befriended by Ammon (Burgess Meredith), a talented, amiable
playwrite who lives beneath the theater.  Looking for
information on his surroundings, Perseus visits Joppa,
where he learns of the beautiful Princess Andromeda (Judi
Bowker), imprisoned in the highest tower of the castle
which overlooks the city.  She's the victim of a curse by
Thetis; in order for it to be lifted, a suitor must correctly
answer a riddle.  If the riddle is solved, the suitor gets
not only Andromeda's hand in marriage, but half the kingdom
as well.  Death rewards those who guess incorrectly.
        Perseus, using great creativity (and the assistance
of the winged horse Pegasus), solves the riddle and is
awarded the hand of the princess.  This enrages the
tempermental Thetis, who orders the princess's
execution-- in thirty days, Andromeda is to be fed to the
Krakken, the last of the Titans, the mythological giants
which once dominated the Earth and its seas.
        The chances of Perseus defeating the Krakken look
bleak; as the Stygian witches inform him, "A hundred men
could not fight it; an army could not kill it."  But... perhaps
there's a small chance: the head of Medusa, the fearsome
Gorgon, whose face is so grotesque that it can turn any living
creature into stone.  But a desperate gamble is better than no
gamble at all, and Perseus sets off on his grand journey to save
the woman he loves.
        All the performances in the film are note-perfect.
Olivier is a formidable Zeus, quick to anger but possessing
a sly sense of humor and an occasional twinkle of mischief.
Burgess Meredith (from the "Rocky" films) is having a
marvelous time as Ammon, and Harry Hamlin's Perseus
never missteps or rings false; his conviction and dedication
to Andromeda are evident and applaudable--he's every inch the
hero.  I do question why Andromeda has a British accent when
no one else in the film does, but never mind.
        The stop-motion effects used to create the Krakken
and Medusa are the work of Ray Harryhausen (who also
co-produced the film), the legendary animator who created
the original "King Kong" (1933) and other noteable screen
creatures, including the creepy skeleton warriors in "Jason
and the Argonauts" (1963), a sort-of spiritual cousin to
"Clash of the Titans."  His work here was the last animation
he created prior to his retirement from the film world.  It
was a spectacular final note to a distinguished career--
although many call the special effects crude and unconvincing,
I think they're part of the fun: Harryhausen was going for a
classic, "epic" tone, and rather than being intrusive, I find
that they enhance the timeless feel of the story.  They're
naturally not as good as "Titanic" or "Star Wars," but I don't
think they were ever intended to be.  Like the stirring,
triumphant music by Laurence Rosenthal (the only orchestral
score that I prefer to "Star Wars," incidentally), the visual
effects are mythic in feel and convey the exact tone required
by Beverly Cross's clever screenplay.
        "Clash of the Titans" is an all-too-often overlooked
jewel of a film which has never received either the popularity
or critical acclaim that it deserves, and currently tops my
list of the movies I most want to see on DVD.  (I'd place it
4th on my list of all-time favorite films, just behind
"Casablanca," "Star Wars," and "Chasing Amy.")  Take a
break from the mindless action movies currently dominating
your video store's "New Release" display, and give this one
a try.  You might as well, since all the copies of "Armageddon"
are probably checked out anyway.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
