Title
Review for Mr. Wrong (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Ellen DeGeneres, Bill Pullman, Ellen Cleghorne, John Livingstone, 
      Joan Cusack, Dean Stockwell, Joan Plowright, Robert Goulet
Director: Nick Castle
Producer: Marty Katz
Screenplay: Chris Matheson, Kerry Ehrin, and Craig Munson
Cinematography: John Schwartzman
Music: Craig Safan
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     There's a fundamental flaw in MR. WRONG's premise.  This is a 
romantic comedy parody, but how can you satirize something that's a 
comedy to begin with?  If this motion picture is an example, not only 
can't it be done, but the result is downright ugly.  Every year, there 
are handful of movies that aren't remotely funny, and MR. WRONG has the 
dubious distinction of falling into that category.  Try as it might with 
its sophomoric humor and dumb one-liners, this film never got so much as 
a chuckle out of me.  
     Someone must find Ellen DeGeneres appealing -- after all, she's got 
her own TV show and now has a starring role in a motion picture.  Based 
on her performance in MR. WRONG, however, it's impossible to uncover the 
source of her attraction.  She has no discernible acting ability, no 
screen presence, and she's certainly not funny (at least not in this 
context).  In fact, the best adjective to describe DeGeneres is 
irritating.  And since she's in almost every scene of MR. WRONG, that 
makes for a very long ninety-two minutes.
     The film opens by introducing us to Martha (DeGeneres), a thirty-
one year old who's getting pressure from every side to find a nice guy, 
settle down, and get married.  Alas, most of the men she dates are 
walking testimonials to the single life -- until Whitman (Bill Pullman), 
that is.  She meets him in a bar late one Valentine's Day.  They hit it 
off immediately, spending the night whispering sweet nothings to one 
another in front of a roaring fire.  Martha is in love, and, what's 
more, her parents and sister are thrilled by her new beau.  Slowly, 
however, Whitman begins to show signs of abnormal behavior:  breaking 
his finger as a sign of his undying love, shoplifting to have fun, and 
peeping into Martha's bedroom window while dressed as a clown.  Worse 
still, Whitman's ex-girlfriend (Joan Cusack) wants Martha to suffer a 
very nasty accident, like being eaten alive by ants.  It doesn't take 
long for Martha to realize that, despite his millions of dollars and 
neverending protestations of affection, Whitman isn't the kind of guy a 
woman wants to spend the rest of her life with.
     Not even a series of unusual cameos can save MR. WRONG.  Despite 
being way over the top, the normally-delightful Joan Cusack is simply 
dreary as the only character in the film more obsessed than Whitman.  
Dean Stockwell is on hand as a no-nonsense private eye who turns against 
Martha when offered a fat payoff.  And Joan Plowright gets a paycheck 
slumming as Whit's overattentive mother.
     The idea behind MR. WRONG is to set up a typical romantic comedy 
scenario, then, twisting events in the most bizarre fashion imaginable, 
lampoon the genre for all it's worth.  Even with Mr. Nice Guy, Bill 
Pullman (SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE, WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING), playing off his 
own reputation, the movie misfires in a big way.  The choppy script 
substitutes stale, unimaginative material for clever, biting wit.  In 
its failed attempt to launch an acid attack on overly sweet romances, 
MR. WRONG ends up causing heartburn.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Very wrong.  Comedienne Ellen DeGeneres makes her feature-film debut in 
this astonishingly unfunny romantic comedy about a girl who can't get rid 
of a guy.  The male in question is Bill Pullman-- or is it Jeff 
Daniels?-- a well-to-do smoothy who initially sweeps DeGeneres off her 
feet, until his increasingly bizarre behavior labels him as a 
card-carrying member of the Psycho Squad.  Director Nick Castle (DENNIS 
THE MENACE) and writers Chris Matheson, Kerry Ehrin, and Craig Munson 
botch it big-time.  The script isn't tight enough; the tone isn't right 
enough; and the comedy isn't black enough.  (Most disappointing to me: no 
references to that other stalker movie, CAPE FEAR.)  Ms. DeGeneres makes 
a bright impres-sion, sure, but the rest of the cast barely registers.  
Joan Cusack is a loss as Pullman's crazed ex-girlfriend; Dean Stockwell 
makes no impression as the P.I. that Ellen investigates.  And so on.  
Skip it. 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MR. WRONG  * 1/2 . Directed by Nick Castle. Produced by Marty 
Katz. Written by Chris Matheson, Kerry Ehrin, Craig Munson. 
Photography, John Schwartzman. Production design, Doug Kraner. 
Editing, Patrick Kennedy, Music, Craig Safan. Cast: Ellen 
DeGeneres (Martha Alston), Bill Pullman (Whitman Crawford),  
Joan Cusack (Inge), Dean Stockwell (Jack Tramonte), Joan 
Plowright (Mrs. Crawford), John Livingston (Walter), Robert 
Goulet (Dick Braxton), Ellen Cleghorne (Jane), Hope Davis 
(Annie), Brad Henke (Bob), Christine Cattell (Nancy 
Culpepper), Peter White (Mr. Alston), Polly Holliday (Mrs. 
Alston),  Maddie Corman (Missy), et al.  A Touchstone Picture. 
92 mins. PG-13. 
Today you're the toast of the town, tomorrow you're just 
toast. That's what happens to popular TV and stand-up comedian 
Ellen DeGeneres in her first feature role.
Actually, past a dumb giveaway opening scene that leads to a 
long flashback, the start of "Mr. Wrong" is at least as funny 
as the thought of certain people as US President.  Martha 
(DeGeneres), 31, a talent coordinator for a local TV talk 
show, is at her younger sister's wedding. Even when unspoken, 
the pressure by family and friends to have Martha find her own 
Mr. Right permeates the air. Martha however, professionally 
content and personally well-balanced, is acceptably happy as a 
single. She bides her time. There are good nuances in her 
portrait. 
Cut to some amusing office scenes, notably of Martha's much 
younger assistant  Walter who keeps courting her. Cut to 
lonely Martha's date with a yoyo who brags:"I can  sell ovens 
to Eskimos." Nonplussed Martha: "I think the usual expression 
is freezers." He, puzzled: "What would they need them for?" 
And on her doorstep he asks: "Give me a French kiss." Ugh.
The future suddenly materializes in the person of  Whitman 
Crawford (Pullman), met cute (but not too) around a jukebox 
playing the Hank Williams oldie "I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry" 
(performed by Chris Isaak). Before you can say Valentine's 
Day, they're having a hot affair. The morning after, at the 
office, her best friend breathlessly inquires "Did you? Did 
he? Did he?"--1990s coded language for safe sex.  
Martha is in seventh heaven with Whitman's  devotion, 
classiness and gentleness. He writes poetry (he recites some 
gibberish to her in a funny scene) and, as we learn later, 
gets from a trust $50,000 a month. 
When he takes her to see his mother (Joan Plowright)  
weirdness begins to set in. When Martha innocently tells him 
"I want you to be yourself," this turns out to be as drastic 
as pressing the red missile-launching button. Whitman drops 
what we realize was a fake persona and does become himself. 
No, he's no serial killer but a total loony who does odd and 
tasteless things, and desperately wants to marry Martha. In 
turn, she now desperately wants out.
So far, so good. But the movie takes a sudden dive past the 
first 35-40 minutes and keeps shedding ratings stars. The 
balance is devoted to Whitman's relentless pursuit and 
stalking of Martha. 
Unreasonably jealous, Whitman's previous girlfriend Inge 
(Cusack) aided by a fat, hopeless suitor, menaces Martha whom 
Whitman keeps showering with gifts and unwelcome attentions. 
"Mr. Wrong" becomes tedious though not awful (yet), given its 
small ambitions. But after a second plunge it smashes itself 
flat on the pavement.  Meandering, incoherence, confusion and 
stupidity turn fun into fiasco.
Much is wrong with "Mr. Wrong." The direction, hesitant and 
uneven from the start, worsens exponentially. The 
concocted-by-committee scenario gets even more painful. One of 
the scripters had done the "Bill & Ted" flicks. The other two 
are first-timers. Past the initial impetus, the trio grope in 
the dark, have no idea where to go next, fail to find a single 
acceptable development, gag or line.
The plot includes some name performers given either 
microscopic walk-on parts (Goulet) or a small, wasted ones 
(Plowright, Stockwell, TV "Alice"'s Holliday).  
Criminally idiotic is the role of the usually incomparable 
Joan Cusack, slated in my book for the Thelma Ritter Award.  
Criminally cruel is the way DeGeneres is photographed. The 
very fact that she is no movie beauty should have been worked 
on to show us a real person, a change from bimboids. It is 
pure technical sloppiness. Look at Robert Redford in 
newscasts, then at his younger, well made-up and shot, 
transformed face in the previews of his new film.
Coming close to being right in "Mr. Wrong" are a) the natural 
rapport between DeGeneres and Best Friend  Ellen Cleghorne, a 
black actress, and b) the perfect normalcy of older women 
having affairs with younger men. Alas, both notions are way 
underdeveloped, and the second is botched up by the asinine 
ending. 
Perhaps theaters ought to screen only the first section, for 
two thirds off tickets. 
