Title
Review for Keep the River on Your Right: A Modern Cannibal Tale (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
"I don't want to seem rude, but how do people taste?" a polite high 
school girl on a museum outing asks Tobias Schneebaum, a 76-year-old 
artist turned anthropologist whose claim to fame is that he once tasted 
human flesh.  He doesn't remember, which is symptomatic of the problem 
of the documentary KEEP THE RIVER ON YOUR RIGHT: A MODERN CANNIBAL TALE, 
an intriguing but frustrating look back at a man's life.  Told with 
interviews conducted on locations where Tobais once traveled and with 
archival footage -- he was a big hit on the television show circuit in 
1969 -- the movie tantalizes but rarely satisfies.
A man who convincingly claims to have found inner peace, Tobias proves 
to be a rather bland interviewee.  Once the shock factor of his having 
once eaten another human is over, the movie doesn't have much more to 
offer.  We learn how the big incident came about.  He was in Peru and 
heard about one tribe killing and eating another so he felt he had to 
find the cannibals.  He walked for 8 days, following the instructions he 
was given of keeping the river on his right.  He doesn't seem remorseful 
about his subsequent participation in another raid and subsequent feast, 
although he feigns some regret in one interview.  Moreover, he claims 
that cannibals were more compassionate than so-called civilized 
societies -- a curious view that is challenged on one talk show.
Besides cannibalism, the movie also dwells on Tobias's homosexuality and 
on the homosexuality of the tribes that he lived with.  What we have is 
a story about an honest man who is happy to share his thoughts with us, 
but who has remarkably little insightful to say about his one, brief 
episode of cannibalism.  The film makers, David and Laurie Shapiro, miss 
golden opportunities to pursue what it means when someone takes an 
active part in something they set out to examine.  How would we feel if 
a reporter took part in a bank robbery or a mugging in order to better 
understand the criminal mind?  We would certainly, at least, want to ask 
the reporter some very probing questions.   
KEEP THE RIVER ON YOUR RIGHT: A MODERN CANNIBAL TALE runs rather long at 
1:35.  It is rated R for depiction of mature thematic material and would 
be acceptable for older teenagers.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Robin Clifford
"Keep the River On Your Right - A Modern Cannibal Tale"
Artist, anthropologist, archaeologist and writer Tobias Schneebaum has led,
to say the very least, a colorful life. 45 years ago and funded by a
Fulbright grant, this renaissance man walked into the jungles of Peru in a
pair of canvas sneakers and the clothes on his back and spent a year living
with a cannibal tribe. But there is a lot more to tell about the man in
documentary filmmakers David Shapiro and Laurie Gwen Shapiro's thought
provoking work, "Keep the River On Your Right - A Modern Cannibal Tale."
I knew nothing, a few days ago, about Tobias Schneebaum, his fascinating
life and studies about primitive cultures. "Keep the River?" opened my eyes
to the story of this incredible man who, at age 78, is brought back to
those places he explored, alone, so many years ago. We learn, early on,
that Tobias was, at one time, an accomplished painter who gave up his art
to study anthropology. Taking his new knowledge and the Fulbright money he
cast aside the trappings of civilization to enter the primitive, cannibal
culture of the Harakambuit tribe of the Amazon.
This journey, though, is not all that "Keep the River?" is about. Tobias
made a similar trip, some years later, into the jungles of New Guinea to
live with another cannibal tribe, the Asmat. He is taken, by the Shapiros,
on a new trek that will bring him back to his past lives in those distant
places. At first, the septuagenarian is reluctant to make the arduous trip.
He's afraid that his frailty may betray him and the possibility of breaking
a hip, again, is genuine. More telling, though, is his fear of facing his
past. It has been so long since he ventured to those distant places, he is
sure that nothing and no one from that past is even left.
One of the many joys of "Keep the River On Your Right" is to see Tobias's
reluctance to take the journey replaced with a real satisfaction and
happiness for having made the enormous effort. Almost miraculously, in both
Peru and Borneo, he meets old friends from his time in the jungle decades
before. Most striking is his reunion with Aipat, an Asmat tribesman who was
Tobias's best friend and lover those many years ago. The wash of emotions
that Tobias feels are palpably depicted and both gladness and sadness come
through. Another poignant moment happens when Schneebaum returns to Peru
and meets, again, a tribesman who remembers him from 45 years ago. It's an
amazing story all around.
The Shapiros have crafted a docu work that utilizes modern footage (shot
terrifically by Jonathan Kobel), archival file film recordings, excerpts
from Tobia's files, clips from the feature film "Trader Horn" and the
anthropologist's interview on The Mike Douglas Show from 1969. The Douglas
show, in particular, is most revealing as Tobias tells the emcee and his
guests that he did, in fact, eat human flesh when living in Peru. The
reaction, universally, is one of revulsion by the host and his panel, with
the almost instantaneous follow-up question, "what did it taste like?"
showing our morbid curiosity about such things. ("It tastes like pork"
according to Tobias.)
The unbridled honesty of Tobias's telling of his story - he pulls no
punches when he talks about his homosexuality or of eating another person -
is an unexpected treat. He shares his years of experience with us as he
talks about life and its wonders, of death and aging, and about living life
to its fullest. You can't help but come out of the theater feeling the
positive vibes of this fascinating little man.
There have been some first rate documentary films making it to theaters in
recent years. "One Day in September" is a gripping document about the
Jewish hostages taken by Arab terrorists during the 1972 Munich Olympics.
"Sound and Fury" chronicles the real controversy of curing deafness in
children. "Keep the River On Your Right - A Modern Cannibal Tale" brings us
into the life and times of Tobias Schneebaum, a truly remarkable man. Even
is you don't like documentary films, this is one worth seeing. I give it an
A.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Laura Clifford
KEEP THE RIVER ON YOUR RIGHT:  A MODERN CANNIBAL TALE
In 1950's New York City, Tobias Schneebaum was an artist who became
an anthropologist, an out gay man at a time when most were closetted ('He
was our house homosexual,' recalls author Norman Mailer).  When Schneebaum
heard about the Incan ruins of Macchu Pichu, he decided he had to visit
Peru.  With an art grant, he did so, but a restlessness of spirit, an
emptiness of the soul, took him even further.  With only the clothes on his
back and only a river to guide him, Tobias walked into the jungle for
eight days, where he found the headhunting tribe of the Amarekaire and
lived among them for a year.  Directors David and Laurie Shapiro
convinced Schneebaum, at the age of 78, to make the trip once more in
"Keep the River to Your Right:  a Modern Cannibal Tale."
Tobias Schneebaum is a fascinating subject.  Artistic, intellectually curious, 
a great storyteller, he is above all, a humanist with a spiritually uplifting 
outlook on life.  The Shapiro's not only found a compelling, charismatic 
subject, but a unique way to capture it, shaping their film the way a great 
conversationalist talks, playfully following side threads that always weave 
back into the big picture.
As the film's credits roll, we follow senior citizen Schneebaum through a
grocery store, immediately bringing to mind the cannibalism of the title.
While this is the sensationalistic aspect that may draw some
viewers in, it becomes insignificant in the scheme of things (even though
Schneebaum says that the four words 'I am a cannibal,' haunt him every day).  
Amusingly, the Shapiros illustrate that as people recoil from this part of 
Tobias' experience, they inevitably follow up with 'How did it taste?'  (Like 
pork, if you're wondering.)
Today Schneebaum makes his living by lecturing on the Asmat people of Papua
New Guinea, another headhunting tribe with whom he lived.  Forty-five years
later, Tobias travels back, and is not only recognized, but finds his lover,
Aipit, whose photograph he had just shown as part of a cruise ship talk.
(Asmat men all take a male lover in addition to procreating with women.)
The gentle treatment these people show the old man speaks volumes (Schneebaum
is worried about breaking his hip a second time) and the filmmakers capture 
poetic images from such mundane occurrences as feet trudging through mud.  
It's here, in New Guinea, that we begin to here Tobias' philosophy, as he 
reflects on finding inner peace after 50.  The melancholy projected as he
takes leave of Aipit is palpable.
The filmmakers flit about present day New York City, as Tobias visits with
Mailer, recalls a childhood exposure to the Wild Man of Borneo at Coney
Island and takes a gondola ride in Central Park with a much younger lover.
The return to Peru, which Tobias clearly dreads, caps this lifelong journey 
with great drama.  Schneebaum begins to have nightmares every day.  He 
contemplates death as the camera records his profile in shadow against the 
stones of Macchu Pichu.  It was here that he went on what he thought was a 
hunting expedition with his friends that turned into the massacre of another 
village (he never witnessed headhunting in New Guinea).  Lightning strikes
twice as Tobias is again recognized after almost half a century and 
welcomed with open arms.  The old people make jokes about wearing clothes
now while the younger generation tell us that, although their people used
to headhunt, they don't like to talk about it - the same reaction we
got from the Asmat almost a half a world away!
In the end, Schneebaum professes to be glad that he returned and so are we - 
not only because we were allowed to take the journey with him, but because in
getting to know him, we've come to care about him.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Attention, all gay Jewish cannibals!  Are you tired of Hollywood's
stereotypical portrayal of your unique lifestyle?  Then David and Laurie
Shapiro have just the film for you.  It's called Keep the River on Your
Right: A Modern Cannibal Tale, and it just happens to be one of the best and
most intriguing documentaries to hit the screen in quite some time.
River, which just won the Independent Spirit "Truer Than Fiction" Award and
has taken home trophies from just about every film festival it has played,
chooses 76-year-old Tobias Schneebaum as its subject.  He seems like a
typical old man ravaged by time, hobbling around New York City with an
artificial hip and Parkinson's Disease, but Schneebaum can tell tales that
would make the toughest sailor whimper.
Schneebaum was a promising young painter who, in the '50s, received a
Fulbright scholarship to study Peruvian art.  He disappeared into the woods
and, like Michael Rockefeller, was presumed to have been killed and eaten by
one of the country's headhunting tribes.  But months later, Schneebaum
emerged from the jungle covered in paint and full of stories about taking
part in both bloody tribal battles and cannibalistic acts. Needless to say,
Schneebaum shocked the talk show circuit (clips of Charlie Rose and Mike
Douglas are included, and quite funny) with his gruesome tales about
indulging in the other other white meat, as well as his participation in
numerous homosexual acts.
Schneebaum was never quite the same since "the Peruvian experience," which
made him give up painting (he still draws) and abandon any future excursions
to the country.  But filmmakers David and Laurie Shapiro were somehow able
to talk him into returning to his old chomping grounds, where he chews the
fat with some of his old buddies, who have long since abandoned their
cannibalistic ways, human auctions and nudist lifestyle (proving there is
little difference between the words "nudist" and "nutso").  It may just be
me, but a tribe of ex-headhunters puts me at ease as much as a country full
of ex-Nazis.
It's difficult to believe, but Schneebaum's trip back to Peru isn't even the
best part of the film.  Before heading to South America, the Shapiros and
their delicate subject visit Asmat, New Guinea, where Schneebaum lived for
several years (River's title comes from a book he wrote about Asmat) and
practiced gay aboriginal polygamy.  We also get plenty of background on
Schneebaum, watching him educate rich, white cruise-ship patrons about
Indonesian art and anthropology, as well as fielding the inevitable "How do
people taste?" questions from a group of students on a field trip to a
Manhattan museum.
We also see some pretty amazing sights, too - not the pedestrian Travel
Channel stuff, but off-the-beaten-path things like mass ceremonial
circumcisions and the beautiful ruins of Machu Picchu (and the even more
magnificent view attendant thereto).  But most amazing of all is Schneebaum,
who will make you think twice about the mild-mannered old man sitting next
to you on the bus. The only thing that might have made this more interesting
is if it was directed by Errol Morris.  But the Shapiros (brother and
sister) do a strong enough job telling Schneebaum's story to make up for the
stylistic shortcomings.
1:30 - R for depiction of mature thematic material (nudity and circumcision)
