Title
Review for City of Angels (1998)
Number of Reviews
30

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
City Of Angels (1998)
Nicholas Cage, Meg Ryan, Dennis Franz, André Braugher, Colm Feore. 
Directed by Brad Silberling. 116 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
The best scene in "City Of Angels" has nothing to do with the central 
romantic storyline. It takes place on a beach, where angels gather every 
morning to hear the ethereal music that accompanies the sunrise. On this 
particular morning, the otherworldly beings are joined by a former angel 
who chose to become human. As the spirits turn towards the dawn he says, 
"Oh yes, the music. I can't hear the music anymore." Then, with a look of 
glee, he exclaims "But you can't do this!" and shucks off his clothing, 
racing into the sea to catch a wave and body surf through the blue waters.
"City Of Angels" is an ambitious work, attempting to remake a 
contemplative European art film in a way that satisfies the commercial 
demands of Hollywood while maintaining the integrity of the source 
material. The effort is less than successful, but offers ample rewards 
for those willing to overlook the gooey parts. 
The film is based on Wim Wender's cult favorite "Wings Of Desire." The 
1988 West German-French production focused on angels who wander the 
streets of West Berlin, listening to the thoughts of the humans around 
them. Bedecked in long dark overcoats, the apparitions radiate an air of 
wistful dignity as they quietly discuss all they have seen, wondering 
what it would be like to be human. Towards the end of the film, one angel,
 smitten by a lonely trapeze artist, considers taking the plunge and 
becoming mortal.
Wenders' film was a somber, reflective tone poem, and "City Of Angels" 
starts off the same way, effectively establishing a lyrical feel through 
John Seale's gorgeous cinematography. The film begins with a series of 
great shots depicting angels in Los Angeles, walking on the roofs of 
buildings, sitting atop freeway signs, and perched on billboards. Using 
aerial photography to look straight down on the vast city from above, the 
film manages the near-impossible: it actually makes Los Angeles look good.
When the spirits aren't giving unseen comfort to those in pain, or 
escorting the dying to the next level of existence, they gather at the 
library to compare notes. Seth (Nicholas Cage) tells his friend Cassiel 
(André Braugher) about an extraordinary thing that happened earlier in 
the day. While watching Dr. Maggie Rice (Meg Ryan) perform heart surgery, 
she looked up from her patient, gazed straight into Seth's eyes and said 
firmly "He's not going anywhere." This isn't supposed to happen and Seth 
is amazed. He's also in love.
Seth decides to become visible to the doctor, passing himself off as a 
friend of Nathaniel Messinger (Dennis Franz,) one of Maggie's patients. 
Over the course of time, he learns that, if possessed with enough desire 
and courage, an angel can become human, but once done, the process cannot 
be reversed. 
You know what happens next, and that's the problem. After establishing a 
lilting poetic feel, "City Of Angels" takes a fateful turn away from 
"Wings Of Desire" and towards "Ghost." In the original film, the romance 
was saved until the very end and served as a nice coda to a meditative 
piece. Here, the sparks fly way too early, and the film has nowhere to go 
except to the land of Hollywood clichés. 
It's not the fault of the cast. Nicholas Cage is fine, although his deep, 
sincere doe-eyed gaze gets a little old after a while. Meg Ryan, 
insufferably cute in many of her recent films, plays it straight here and 
gives a solid performance. The supporting players are even better. 
"Homicide's" André Braugher casts a warm presence as the angel Cassiel, 
and Dennis Franz is an absolute delight as Nathaniel Messinger, a loving 
husband and father as well as an unabashed hedonist, drinking in all of 
life's pleasures. 
The problem with the latter half of "City Of Angels" is that the romance 
itself simply isn't all that interesting. When Seth and Maggie start 
behaving like animated Hallmark cards, the film takes on an air of glossy 
familiarity that makes one wish the camera would move away from the star-
crossed lovers and refocus on Messinger and Cassiel, two far more 
intriguing characters. 
Instead, the film goes straight down the Hollywood highway, complete with 
a drippy, contrived romantic climax that's just plain annoying. After 
that extremely awkward move, the film regains its footing for a suitably 
poetic closing scene, but the earlier pathos leaves a mild, but 
unpleasant aftertaste.
While the problem areas in "City Of Angels" are difficult to ignore, they 
do not negate its many pleasures. For Hollywood to attempt a work of 
spiritual poetry is rare. That they didn't quite pull it off is a shame, 
but certainly not surprising. With this film, it's easy to enjoy the good 
stuff, suffer the bad, and appreciate the effort as a whole.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
City of Angels is the kind of love story that I enjoy the most: 
thought-provoking, moving, and completely unsentimental.  I find it
interesting that this film has been released the same day as My Giant,
which is a film that is undone completely by its wretched
sentimentality.  City of Angels is a wonderful film, enhanced by
interesting and well-rounded characters and some of the most immersive
imagery of the last couple of years.  It's a love story that takes the
familiar angel themes and makes them new and necessary to the story, and
avoids most of the cliches we're so used to seeing in films like this.  
City of Angels is an apparently loose remake of Wim Wenders' 1988 film
Wings of Desire.  I have yet to see Wings of Desire, so I am,
unfortunately, unable to make a comparison of the two.  I have heard,
however, that City of Angels is dissimilar from the original in numerous
ways, which makes me glad that this film isn't a rip-off of its source
material.  
Nicolas Cage stars as Seth, an angel who, like all of his angel
counterparts, is present to lead the dying to heaven (or somewhere just
like it).  One day, he is forced to take the life of a patient of Dr.
Maggie Rice (Meg Ryan), and his attention is called to her.  The angels
can make themselves seen to humans, but they can't experience any of the
senses (most importantly, touch).  He shows himself to Maggie, and she
falls for him, unaware that he is slightly unavailable because of his
apparition status.  
Seth wants to become human so he can feel her.  That's when he meets
Nathaniel Messinger (Dennis Franz), "former celestial messenger and
recent addition to the human race."  (As a side note, I found Messinger
to be the most fascinating character, for I can only imagine how
incredibly liberating it must be to live knowing what lies beyond
death.)  Messinger explains to Seth that it is possible for angels to
become human.  
Seth manages to convince Maggie that he is an angel (I know, it sounds
ridiculous, but the scene in which she finds out is exceptionally
well-done); after much deliberation, she tells him that she could only
be with a man who can feel.  This, of course, is when Seth decides to
take the plunge (literally) from a building; when he wakes up from the
fall, he is human, and happy to feel what it's like to have a split lip
and blood oozing from his forehead.
Since I love this film so much, I'll make a minor note that it
certainly isn't perfect.  Although it is original and mesmerizing, it
does fall prey to a few of the cliches of the genre.  The plotting of
the story by writer Dawn Steel is rather formulaic (though the details
are what make the story excellent, and Steel has done a great job with
them).  The ending, too, could have been more powerful and less
predictable.  These elements are minor, though, and barely detracted
from my overall enjoyment of City of Angels.  
The acting is superb from everyone involved.  This is perhaps my
second-favorite performance from Cage (my favorite being  The Rock). 
He's quiet and pensive, and his eyes are engaging when he speaks his
softly-toned words.  He's perfect for a role like this, and at the same
time he reassures us he's not bound by playing the psycho (though he is
good at it, as he shows in Face/Off).  Meg Ryan is a powerful, enticing,
and appealingly-chirpy actress, and her work here is some of her best. 
Dennis Franz, however, steals all of his scenes as the energetic
former-angel.
What I admire most about City of Angels is its overall presentation. 
Director Brad Silberling is a talented man, and he knows that a story
like this is driven by the characters, rather than forced
sentimentality.  His direction is steady, and he shows this in just
about every scene:  near the beginning, Maggie has to tell a mother and
her two children that their father is dead.  There is no music or
elaborate camera work; we simply see the reactions of the characters to
the information.  This is the way stories should be told, and the
strength of scenes resonates more completely when the emotions are real. 
The film also appeals to the senses in a way that few love stories do. 
Cinematographer John Seale (The English Patient) provides some of the
most stunning images I've seen on the big screen:  hundreds of
black-clad angels stand on a dim beach in the early morning hours (just
as an example).  The music, by Gabriel Yared (also of The English
Patient), is perfect for this film:  it's quiet and moody music (but not
sentimental!), and adds to the atmosphere and tone nicely.  The visual
presentation of City of Angels is easily the best of 1998 so far.  All
of this adds up to a film that is instantly set apart from other members
of this genre.  It's a film that relies on character development and
imagery to get the story across--the excellent actors and the
professional production values make City of Angels one of those rare
films that both entertains and instigates thought simultaneously.  

Author
Michael Redman
        As we approach the new Millennium, things are looking scary. There's a
possibility that everything's going to fall apart and if it doesn't, all those
frightening zeroes still loom on the horizon.
        Even now there's too much to do.  No one can get it all done. Although the
DOW keeps peaking, the man on the street's finances looks worse every day.
These are hard times. Change is accelerating and it's difficult to cope.
        That may explain the growing search for a new faith. The twin churches of
Science and Economics haven't done such a good job and even UFOs coming to
whisk us away to a better existence are starting to look good. It might also
account for the fascination with angels.
        For the past few years angels have been appearing wherever you turn. They are
in Hallmark stores, staring down at you from living room walls, in numerous
books and on television. Hollywood, not being an industry to ignore trends has
given us "Michael" and "The Preacher's Wife" among others and now we have an
entire city of the heavenly beings.
        Seth (Nicolas Cage) hangs out in Los Angeles with his fellow invisible
spirits escorting the recently departed to their just rewards. In a hospital
to gather the soul of a patient who died on the operating table, he encounters
heart surgeon Maggie Rice (Meg Ryan). Not even the saintly can resist the
heavenly charms of Ms Ryan and he is smitten.
        Eventually he allows Maggie to see him and she is drawn to the tall brooding
man in a black trench coat. They have problems besides the inter-species
dating situation. Seth can't touch or taste anything.
        Nathaniel Messinger ("NYPD Blue"'s Denis Franz), a heart patient in the
hospital, shocks Seth one day when he starts talking to him. Messinger is
himself a former heavenly spirit and tells him that he can become human. To do
so, he must give up everything that he is. For Seth, being in love is
literally taking the great fall.
        I have a major prejudice against remakes of European films for the American
audience especially reconstructions of truly phenomenal movies. This is a redo
of Wim Wenders' masterpiece "Wings Of Desire" and remarkably enough is a fine
film in its own right. There's none of the dumbing-down that usually takes
place to make the product palatable to the public. It's is different but it's moving.
        The ethereal existence of the angels is beautiful and eternal, but
oxymoronically lacks soul. Dozens of them stand on the beach at sunrise
listening to the heavenly music. They watch from on high but they can't feel. 
        Messinger on the other hand is a self-described hedonist and loving every
minute of it. He may be only human now, but he's digging every minute of it.
He loves his wife and kids, body surfing and earthly delights. The scene where
he sneaks out of the hospital for a multi-course breakfast and stuffs every
goopy syrupy thing that he can find into his mouth is a delight.
        That's what this film is about. The story of angels and their interaction
with people is engaging, but the theme is the choice between observing and
being. When Seth takes the leap of faith, he must abandon everything that he
has ever known to become real. He's leaving a safe place for a risky uncertain
future, but it's a future where he will be engaged with the energy of being.
He's risking it all to gain it all.
        Director Brad Silberling (who surprisingly also directed "Casper") pulls out
the best from the actors. Cage does fine as the somber angel aching to cut
loose. Ryan is nearly always a delight, and here she demonstrates a wide
emotional range. Her desperation when her patient dies and her elation at
being in love are both convincing. The chemistry between the two is obvious.
When they look into each other's eyes, the attraction is undeniable. Their
first touch and kiss is the stuff of memories.
        Franz steals every scene that he's in and is fascinating to watch. Sitting
back at a cook-out in his blue-collar back yard, he's having the time of his
life. He's thoroughly a human being with all the passionate sloppiness that entails.
        The star of the film is the moody cinematography. John Seale ("The English
Patient") perfectly captures the otherworldliness of the angels. The _feel_ of
this film will stay with you for quite a while.
        As many people are facing their own unpredictable futures, it might serve us
to realize that "safe" often is "sorry". The question of where to place our
faith is a puzzling one but, as Seth tells Maggie, "Some things are true
whether you believe in them or not."
(Michael Redman has written this column for well over 23 years and sometimes
he thinks his guardian angel is taking a nap. Statements of theology can go to redman@bvoice.com)
[This appeared in the 4/16/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Nicolas Cage, Meg Ryan, Denis Franz, Andre Braugher, Colm Feore
Director: Brad Silberling
Producers: Dawn Steel, Charles Roven
Screenplay: Dana Stevens based on WINGS OF DESIRE
In the midst of a city filled with the bustle of impatient drivers and
the hustle of frantic pedestrians, there exist angels that watch over
mankind with the utmost patience and care. They are there to greet you
at birth and to comfort you in death. They are well read and well versed
in every language. After all, they have existed for an eternity and
seemingly have an eternity more to do their heavenly chores.
In one of the most picturesque movies this year, starring Nicholas Cage
as the angel Seth and Meg Ryan as the human Maggie who steals his heart;
comes a bitter-sweet, melancholy story of love – the tragic kind. A love
that is genuinely passionate, but is too easily snatched away by the
cruel hand of fate. Seemingly, we can't help whom we fall in love and
have little control over destiny.
Brad Silberling has filled his picture with memorable scenes of angels
dressed in black suits standing on skyscrapers and beaches, waiting for
the resounding echoes of sunrise and sunset to fill the screen. Angels
can hear the music of light on the horizon, but sadly they have never
experienced the power of human touch. So when Maggie looks into Seth's
eyes, he longs to hold and feel her in his arms. Is Seth willing to give
up his immortality for Maggie, and is she going to fall in love with a
stranger who always appears out of nowhere wearing the same clothes?
Meg Ryan fills her scenes with a sweet grace that comes from innate
beauty. She manages to keep her role as Maggie from becoming merely
depressed, with a good balance of drama and humour. She cannot hide the
smile that has won her a legion of fans, and her tears will move you. It
is also good to see Nicholas Cage taking a break from the
butt-kicking-action-money-making movies and delving into romantic drama
for a change. He's quite sensitive as the love struck Seth. In fact both
of these roles are atypical for Ryan and Cage, but they seem to work
well together.

Author
Scott Renshaw
CITY OF ANGELS
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Nicolas Cage, Meg Ryan, Dennis Franz, Andre Braugher.
Screenplay:  Dana Stevens, based on WINGS OF DESIRE by Wim Wenders.
Producers:  Dawn Steel, Charles Roven.
Director:  Brad Silberling.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  113 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     First, this important preface:  I love WINGS OF DESIRE.  Wim Wenders'
lyrical 1988 film, positing angels roaming through Berlin and one
particular angel fascinated with the human experience, caught me
completely by surprise when I first saw it.  It was less a narrative than
a visual tone poem of division -- between heaven and earth, between
monochrome and color, between East and West Berlin -- which eventually
finds unity.  The experience, terribly un-critic-like though it may sound,
was spiritually moving.  That emotional response contributed significantly
to me distaste for Wenders' own ill-fated attempt at a sequel, FARAWAY, SO
CLOSE!; it similarly led me to dread the impending arrival of the
Americanized re-make CITY OF ANGELS.  Why re-make perfection, especially
to engage in the typical Hollywood reductionism of making it all about the
love story between the curious angel and his human object of desire?
     Perhaps it is because I expected so little that I was so improbably
delighted by CITY OF ANGELS.  ANGELS does indeed move the love story to
the forefront, following an angel named Seth (Nicolas Cage) on his
observational wanderings through contemporary Los Angeles until he meets
and falls in love with troubled surgeon Maggie Rice (Meg Ryan).  Though
the decision to play up that relationship was certainly a practical one --
WINGS OF DESIRE's stream-of-consciousness eavesdropping hardly screams
"commercial" -- it also gives CITY OF ANGELS its unique identity.  Certain
specific elements remain from the original, including the library milieu
and a former angel (Peter Falk in the original, Dennis Franz here) who
acts as the angel's human guide, but screenwriter Dana Stevens and
director Brad Silberling choose to re-imagine the story from a different
perspective rather than re-make it.  The result is sort of a strange
cousin to ROSENCRANTZ AND GUILDENSTERN ARE DEAD -- a story based on
existing characters and situations, yet thematically independent and
appealing in its own right.
     Much of that appeal springs from CITY OF ANGELS' commitment to
its tone.  Few mainstream Hollywood movies of recent years have been so
willing to adopt a reflective pace, to paint broad canvases of human
experience and allow us to watch in peace.  Cinematographer John Seale
(THE ENGLISH PATIENT) gives Los Angeles a serene, otherworldly glow, while
composer Gabriel Yared (also of THE ENGLISH PATIENT) lays an underscore of
hypnotic strings.  While never earth-shaking, Silberling's compositions
are rarely predictable and frequently memorable.  It's that rare
big-screen movie that uses the big screen, allowing its intimate story to
unfold in the grandeur of a massive city.
     Ultimately, it's that intimate story which will win over viewers.
Cage and Ryan make a superb romantic pair, each actor reaching for the
longing in their respective characters and connecting that longing to the
other.  Though Cage may not be the most obvious choice for a role based on
preternatural calm, the intensity percolating beneath his benevolent
glances heightens the anticipation of his possible "fall" to humanity.
It's a bit harder to get a handle on what Maggie wants from her
relationship with Seth, and harder still to care a whit about the
obviously superficial relationshp she is in when we first meet her.  Few
quibbles about the characters matter, however, when they share the screen;
the sheer force of their eye contact is often enough to wipe away any
doubts about their feelings.  A story about life-changing emotion is a
hard sell to cynical audiences, but Cage and Ryan sell it.
     For all its meaphysical musings, there's never any question that CITY
OF ANGELS is an old-style Hollywood love story, a multi-hanky weeper light
years removed from the dream-like WINGS OF DESIRE.  It's almost enough to
make you forget that ANGELS is based on WINGS...which, for my money, is
the best thing that possibly could have happened.

Author
Berge Garabedian
American pseudo-remake of Wim Wenders' classic film WINGS OF DESIRE,
spots Nicolas Cage as an angel, and Meg Ryan as a heart surgeon.
Director Brad Silberling's previous feature was CASPER in 1995.
PLOT:
Seth (Cage) is an angel placed on Earth to help those in need. One day,
he unwillingly "falls in love" with a heart surgeon named Maggie
(Ryan). Henceforth, he must decide whether or not he wants to remain an
angel, or "transform" himself into a human (the two are mutually
exclusive).
CRITIQUE:
Flighty angelic tale that never really gathers any steam, runs a tad
too long, and is just plain boring. This movie had no surprises
(correction, the film had one surprise...they didn't use the word
"angel" once during the entire picture...pretty neat), no visible
chemistry between the two leads, and no great insight into  Hollywood's
saturated topic of angels. On top of all that, the romance in this film
is weak, the narrative is slow and the folksy score is annoying. Other
than that...it was amazing !! (this is sarcastic, people).
Nicolas Cage is one of my favourite actors of all time, but I just
can't seem to understand his choice of roles since his incredible turn
in LEAVING LAS VEGAS (8.5/10). He's walked through a couple of
one-dimensional action roles, and now this! All he does in this flick
is walk around with a pasty face, glassy eyes, and "feel sorry for me"
look on his face. What happened to the guy we all learned to love in
RAISING ARIZONA (8/10) and VAMPIRE'S KISS (7.5/10) ? Meg Ryan is
allright, but all she has to do is smile and cry on cue, which
incidentally, she does extremely well.
Overall, this movie is quite slow, boring, and long in running time. A
couple of songs on the soundtrack are good (especially the Alanis
Morisette and GooGoo Doll tunes), but a couple of slick hits does not a
"romantic picture" make. Dennis Franz is also effective as the comic
relief, and there were a couple of nice panoramic shots, but then
again, who cares. The story never pulled me in, the drawn out scenes
never grabbed my interest, and the icky ending just stamped this movie
DOA. That's it. What can I tell you? Watch it if you're bored, and need
a rest or something. Otherwise, steer clear from this dog and go rent
Nicolas Cage's superb romantic comedy HONEYMOON IN VEGAS (8/10). You
won't regret it !!
Little Known Facts: 
Nicolas Cage's real name is Nicolas Coppola. He got Cage from Luke
Cage, the comic book character.
He's nephew to the director of the infamous GODFATHER trilogy, Francis
Ford Coppola (who incidentally once acknowledged JoBlo at the 1996
Cannes Film Festival with a wave of the right hand). 
Nic's one-time passion for method acting reached a personal limit when
he smashed a street-vendor's remote-control car to achieve the sense of
rage needed for his gangster character in THE COTTON CLUB. He also got
Johnny Depp his first acting job.
Cage proposed to Patricia Arquette on the day he met her in the early
80s. Arquette thought he was a bit strange but played along with his
antics by creating a list of things Cage would have to fulfil to win
her. When he started to work his way through the list, Arquette got
scared and avoided him. They met again many years later and later went
on to marry.
Meg Ryan's real name is Margaret Mary Emily Anne Hyra, she stands 5"8,
and is presently married to actor Dennis Quaid.


Author
Luke Buckmaster
Wim Wenders' 1988 film Wings of Desire was a brilliant and poetic
examination of the human heart - taken from the perspective of angels
who roam the earth.  It enchanted us into feeling, understanding and
almost believing these MIB look a like's through the way Wenders avoided
common cliché's and Hollywood surroundings.  Now, the 90's update
version City of Angels is based on the former film in basic themes only.
And although this new rendition has lost most of the power of Wings of
Desire, it surprising contains a lot of its emotional impact.
Amongst other angels, Seth (Nicholas Cage) roams the streets of the city
of angels, Los Angeles.  He can only see in black and white, cannot feel
pain or hunger, and has a useful skill of reading peoples thoughts.
Whilst Seth is welcoming a hospital patient to the after life, he
notices the beautiful doctor Maggie (Meg Ryan) desperately trying to
save the mans life.  He soon becomes infatuated with her, and eventually
comes to her, appearing as a clueless civilian.
Maggie's fascination with Seth grows until she begins to sense something
abnormal, something unique about him.  She consults a close friend: "I
got this jolt that... something bigger is out there. Something bigger
than me, bigger than you. Does that sound crazy?"
Just as Seth feels that he is doomed to remain at arms length to Maggie
for the rest of her life, he speaks to a former-angel hospital patient
(Dennis Franz, in a role very similar to one played by Columbo's Peter
Falk in Wings of Desire), who explains to him how to "delve" into a
human form.  So (as the film is keen for us to believe) the relationship
between this couple depends on one question: is Seth willing to
sacrifice eternal life for a mere mortal?"
The answer to that question is, naturally, no mystery.  But it doesn't
have to be - with quotes like "I would rather have had one breath of her
hair, one kiss from her mouth, one touch of her hand, than eternity
without it," City of Angels is a tear jerking "chick flick" that gives a
powerful, lasting impact.
But surprisingly, the most impressive aspect of director Brad
Silberling's (who has only Casper under his belt) creation is not its
writing nor acting, but rather the stunning cinematography by Australian
John Seale (The English Patient, Rain Man). The visual impact of City of
Angels is so dazzling that it gives the big screen an angelic, gorgeous
radiance that no amount of Mr. Sheen's could possibly deliver.
Don't get me wrong: the dialogue is sumptuously gentle to inhale, and
the sweetened performances from Nicholas Cage and Meg Ryan are a triumph
in themselves.  But boiled down, City of Angels is sometimes just
good-looking Hollywood claptrap - and that is why it doesn't
convincingly impersonate Wings of Desire.  But it does, as I mentioned
before, have an emotional depth that gets through to the viewer on
multiple levels.
I would have loved to see this film more tightly based on Wim Wenders'
and Peter Handke's original screenplay for Wings of Desire.  Although
this obviously did not happen, City of Angels is far from a slip-up, and
Wenders himself was pleased with the final result.  He was quoted in the
film's promotional material, saying: "It was moving, beautifully
crafted, there was some amazing imagery and an astonishing story.  I had
never seen anything like it, well, except for that one German film
maybe, with the subtitles.  What's its name again?"

"How ironic - my crusade against television has come to an end so
formulaic it could have spewed from the power book of the laziest
Hollywood hack."  --Sideshow Bob
Subscribe to my movie reviews mailing list!  Simply reply to this email
with the subject as "Subscribe:newsletter"

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
     'City of Angels' is from director Brad Silberling (1995's 'Casper')
and is based on the 1988 Wim Wenders film 'Wings of Desire'.  The
setting for this film is Los Angeles and the poetic tone the film
projects for its entire running time is both mystical, hypnotic and
truly gives the viewer an emotional experience that doesn't just come
from the performances of its two leads but from the overall beauty of
its story and how things develop based upon some early scenes of
tenderness and gentle kindness.  The opening scene is a little girl's
bedroom and the child is running a fever of 105 and her mother takes her
to the hospital, all the while under the observation of an angel named
Seth (Nicolas Cage).  Upon receiving treatment at the hospital, a second
image of the child is seen standing next to Seth, obviously her spirit
ready for the journey towards Heaven and Seth explains that she will see
her mother again one day.
     Seth is captivated by a beautiful doctor named Maggie Rice (Meg
Ryan) and falls in love with her.  He tries to comfort her after the
unavoidable death of a patient in her care who died on the operating
table of a serious heart condition.  Maggie blames herself but her
superiors at the hospital and her eventual encounter with Seth convince
her otherwise. It seems that Seth and other angels like him can't be
seen unless they want to be.
     Cage and Ryan are very well matched as lovers in the film and their
chemistry gives the film the leverage it needs to maintain its tone from
start to finish.  Also thrown into this already impressive cast is a
cardiac patient (Dennis Franz) at Maggie's hospital who knows of Seth's
identity and because I want to avoid this becoming a spoiler review, I
will stop here.
     There are some rather interesting scenes of beauty such as the
early morning California sunrises which a group of angels gather for
regularly to observe for its beauty and appreciated simplicity.  Seth
seems to hear music in the sunrise and takes pleasure in the fascinating
quality of the human experience and this draws him closer to Maggie as
the film moves along.  Maggie eventually falls in love with Seth and the
two of them try and embrace in the total human experience and Seth must
face a choice of continuing as one of God's messengers or joining the
human race on Earth.
     What I wanted to avoid thinking about throughout the course of this
film, were inevitable comparisons to films such as 'Ghost' and 'Heaven
Can Wait' and while 'City of Angels' is not a completely original film,
it does have the magic to make it a good film, lacking greatness because
of its somewhat muddled ending.  Cynics will trash the film for being
too nice for its own good while others will appreciate it for its
old-fashioned and mostly successful take on the oldest story in the
world, love.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
I've noticed something lately that I've never thought of before. Pseudo-
substance - Hollywood faking deep meanings in their films. Have you ever seen
a movie that you really enjoyed, then when you look back, you realize there
was something missing? More and more, filmmakers seem to be putting out well
rehearsed, melodramatic films that evoke strong connotations of being a great
film, but if you step aside and reflect on your movie going experience, you
may just discover nothing more than elegantly presented fluff.
I'm not trying to say CITY OF ANGELS is that bad. It had a lot going for it,
but somewhere along the way, it faltered. Somehow, underneath the seemingly
poetic beauty of it all, there was a gigantic hole somebody covered with
iridescent performances and glossy cinematography. The predictable ending that
shattered our hopes (even though we saw it coming) only added to the
disappointment. But for over an hour, CITY OF ANGELS is well worth the time.
Nicolas Cage is Seth, a guardian angel who, like hundreds (likely thousands or
even millions) of other angels, spends eternity watching over the citizens of
mortality; humans never aware of how much celestial intervention occurs in
their life. Meg Ryan, in her most subdued performance yet, plays Maggie, a
doctor who begins to ponder exactly who it is we're fighting against when we
fight to keep someone alive. After losing a patient on the surgery table,
these questions envelope Maggie, and Seth, the angel who was there to oversee
the patient's transition into the afterlife, is immediately captivated by the
doctor. He begins following and observing Maggie, falling more and more in
love with her everyday.
Angels, who we quickly learn are not and never were humans, can not experience
human sensations such as taste and touch, but they do have the ability to make
themselves seen to anyone they desire. Seth's adoration is too much to resist,
and eventually he does appear to Maggie, quite regularly, although such a
thing seems taboo among the angelic community. The angels are interestingly
presented, all of them dressed in black and more reminiscent of hitmen than
traditional glowing white entities, but it's a nice touch that never seems
like a mere attempt at uniqueness. Cage is a wonderfully versatile actor
(think FACE/OFF, RAISING ARIZONA, and IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU - what a combo!)
who slips into the role of a heavenly agent quite nicely but threatens
sappiness more than once. 
It's nice to see Ryan pick up roles like this and the one in COURAGE UNDER
FIRE. The two aren't very comparable to each other, but they both deviate from
her usual "intelligently ditzy" romantic comedy roles, and it's an impressive
side of Ryan movie goers rarely have the chance to enjoy. But even though the
two leads do an impressive job, it is Dennis Franz who grabs us with his
interpretation of a hospital patient who knows more than meets the eye. It's a
shame that with so much going for it, CITY OF ANGELS falters so much in its
final stages, leaving us with the realization that an emotionally incredible
movie was out there, they just didn't know quite how to get to it. They
struggle for an impacting conclusion and wind up with painful thud rather than
an exhilarating high. Filmmakers should know your final impression will be the
one you linger on, remember, and convey to others thru word of mouth, so after
telling us for 60+ minutes that this film is a glorious masterpiece, they sure
leave us with a disheartening taste of mediocrity in our mouths.
Based on the German film WINGS OF DESIRE (that being the English title, of
course), CITY OF ANGELS is ninety percent success, enough to make most people
forgive its shortcomings, even the devastatingly disappointing ending. Most
movie goers, the non-cynics anyway, will be too wrapped up in the surreal
atmosphere to give criticism to that which needs to be criticized.
Nonetheless, CITY OF ANGELS is beautifully captivating, which is probably
enough to satisfy those poetic viewers who will appreciate a delve into rich
emotional territories.

Author
Steve Kong
How many days have you watched the sun rise and fall?  What does a pear
taste like?  How does a kiss feel from the one you love?  What does the
touch of a hand on your hand feel like?  What is it like to love?  When you
die, what will be the best thing about your life?
Seth, the angel from City of Angels, wonders all of these things.  Angels
are fearless, can't feel pain, are not afraid of heights and live for
eternity.  But what good is eternity if you can't be with the one you love?
 Or as Seth puts it, "What good would wings be if you couldn't feel the
wind on your face?"
One day a heart surgeon, Maggie Rice (Meg Ryan), is working on a patient.
She's almost finished when the patient suddenly dies.  Watching over this
event is the benevolent angel, Seth (Nicolas Cage).  Seth is so emotionally
thrown by this event that he suddenly becomes visible to Maggie.
Seth wonders why she saw him.  He also finds himself in love with Maggie,
and returns to the hospital to follow her around, watching Maggie in
distress. Seth finds himself increasingly attracted to Maggie.  Then one
day he makes himself visible to Maggie and tries to ease her pain.  Just
how well could a relationship between an angel and a human work?  Seth
finds out from a former angel that he has a choice to be human.  But, in
order to be human Seth needs to take a fall from Heaven and give up his
eternal life.
City of Angels is not a spiritual film nor does it have any deep insights
into the "life" of angels.  It is a near-formulaic tearjerker and works for
only one reason:  Meg Ryan, who is radiant in her part as Maggie.  This has
to be her best work since Courage Under Fire.  It is Ryan that makes the
story wonderful.  Ryan brings us into the love story and we do start to
care for her Maggie much more than we do for Cage's Seth.
Nicolas Cage, who has been toting guns lately (The Rock, Con Air,
Face/Off), takes a break from the macho side of celluloid to return to some
familiar ground.  His portrayal of Seth the angel is not as good as it
should have been. Cage spends too much time with puppy dog eyes and a soft
voice.  He seems just too mellow as the angel Seth. 
There are many things worth mentioning about City of Angels.  First off is
the ethereal and stylish cinematography by John Seale (The English
Patient).  Seale films Los Angeles in such a fashion that what could look
stale and flat now looks dynamic and large.  The shots of solitary angels
standing in high places are just wondrous.  Kudos to John Seale for
bringing such a different look to Los Angeles.  Please look for the scenes
in which angels congregate at the beach for sunrise and sunset.  These are
the most inspiring images that the film contains. 
Worth mentioning is Andre Braugher from TVs "Homicide."  Braugher, as the
angel Cassiel, puts in a better angel performance than Cage.  Dennis Franz
from TVs "NYPD Blue" makes an appearance in City of Angels and, next to Meg
Ryan, his is the best performance in the whole film.  
The score by Gabriel Yared is haunting and memorable.  In addition, the
music by other artists fits the film well.  Listen for Alanis Morissette's
"Uninvited."
I didn't care for one flaw.  It's not a huge flaw, but it is noticeable.
The "twist" at the end is set up mechanically from the beginning of the
film and I continued to wonder when it would happen.  This renders the
ending unclimactic, and I would have liked the film to end a few minutes
earlier.  However, as Cassiel reminds Seth, "That's living."
The script, written by Dana Stevens, is based on Wings of Desire, a 1988
film by Wim Wenders.  I have not seen Wings of Desire so I can't comment on
how these two films differ.
City of Angels is one of the best angel movies to be released lately.  I
admit that the film tugged a few tears from me.  See City of Angels for the
wondrous imagery and for Meg Ryan.  Don't Miss City of Angels on the big
screen and bring a loved one to see it with you; this is definitely a date
film.  Now, if you'll excuse me, I'm going to watch the sun go down.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
I went with low expectations and thoughts of a hokey Ghost rip-off, but
instead was treated to a stunningly beautiful picture.  Even as I sat
and watched it, I cringed and waited for the bottom to fall out, but it
didn't happen (at least until the last ten minutes).  There was no
`pottery-wheel' type scene, no cheesy promises about eternal love and
not one crappy Righteous Brothers warble.  Thank fucking Christ.
Since City of Angels is about a tall dark seraph (Nicolas Cage) that
falls in love with an attractive cardiovascular surgeon (Meg Ryan), you
can't really blame a guy for being weary of suffering through Ghost II.
What elevated Angels above the filth I expected was not only terrific
acting performances from the entire cast, but also top-notch technical
work as well.
Cage (ConAir) plays Seth, a worker angel responsible for helping the
newly departed move on to bigger and better places.  Like his
co-workers, Seth dresses in a long black coat (ala Face/Off's Caster
Troy), hangs out at the library (which oddly resembles the building
where Troy hides his Doomsday machine) and watches the sun rise and set
while standing on the beach.
After watching over a dying young girl in the County Hospital, Seth
finds his next assignment under the knife of the lovely Doctor Maggie
Smith (Ryan, Addicted to Love).  As the guy dies, the invisible Seth
stares deep into Maggie's pretty blue eyes (to match her O.R. scrubs)
and is shocked when she stares back and announces that she's not ready
for her patient to be taken yet.  Seth isn't sure if she really saw him,
but he is sure that Maggie is definitely worth a return visit.  Or two.
Hey, the guy does a lot of hospital work.
While Maggie wallows in self- doubt after losing the patient, Seth falls
head over heels.  He eventually makes himself visible to Maggie and the
two seemed headed toward everlasting bliss.  But, Seth is still an angel
– lacking in senses and incapable of emotion.  D'OH!
Seth struggles to decide whether to cast aside his eternal life to
become a real boy.  He gets help and advice from co-worker Cassiel
(Andre Braugher, Homicide) and another heart patient named Nathan
Messinger (Dennis Franz, NYPD Blue).  Meanwhile, Maggie tries to decide
which boy to chase – the mysterious unblinking Seth, or her live-in
doctor boyfriend.  A typical film would have made the boyfriend a
drunken lout, but this guy's only bad traits are being both boring and a
smoker.
Things proceed predictably toward the last reel, when Angels transforms
from a great film to a B movie.  The ending is so awfully written that
it's hard to actually feel anything for the characters.  Earlier scenes
were more successful in playing with my emotions.  In fact, there were
about three decent `cry' spots in the first fifteen minutes, but the
ending just made me want to get up and leave.  It wasn't fair to stick
it on the end of an otherwise flawless picture.
Ryan transcends her pixie-ish cuteness with one of her best performance
ever and Cage is perfectly cast as the confused angel.  Braugher seems
under used in his supporting role, while Franz shines as a spunky
scene-stealer.  Director Brad Silberling (Casper) has made an incredible
transformation from his previous effort and is undoubtedly aided by The
English Patient's Oscar winning team of Cinematographer John Seale and
Composer Gabriel Yared, as well was Production Designer Lilly Kilvert
(Strange Days).  Angels has a strikingly rich and stylish look and, like
most films today, vaunts a hip modern rock soundtrack.  But you should
still see it.  Did I mention that there was a vomiting scene?  Jesus,
what are you waiting for?

Author
Homer Yen
Stephen, please post if appropriate.  Thanks.
Tender and light-hearted, "City of Angels" is a romantic comedy about
angelic Seth (Nicholas Cage) who develops an earthly interest in an
amazingly aware and vibrant doctor (Meg Ryan).  As it turns out, angels
have always been among us but choose not to be seen.  Depicted in the
film as human-looking, black full-length coat wearing men and women,
angels follow us, perch themselves atop high structures to solemnly
reflect humanity, and can read everyone's thoughts.  They can provide a
dose of calmness when we are in despair or are our escorts to heaven
when we pass away.  However, most angels lack ambition and curiosity,
and they spend their existence watching over others in a trance-like
state.  Seth, however, is curious and wonders if there is more to his
existence.
His curiosity is further fueled when he meets the doctor, Maggie Rice.
During a tricky operation, she begins to lose her patient.  After
failing to resuscitate him, she becomes distraught, and questions her
ability to save lives.  Turning to her colleague and pseudo-boyfriend,
she wonders, "who are we fighting against?"  Is there more to her
existence?  
The setting is now ripe for the two to meet.  Making himself visible, he
takes the time to explore Maggie's world and the wonders of life as seen
through her eyes.  Poetic and stately, he impresses her with his sense
of curiosity.   As Maggie relishes every bite of her favorite fruit,
Seth quietly says, "I don't know what that pear tastes like to you.
Describe it as Hemmingway would."  Meanwhile, he is taken aback by her
effervescence and lust for life.  They begin to grow close, but as an
angel, he knows nothing about matters of the heart because he can not
feel.  He confides his confusion to fellow angel Cassiel (Andre
Braugher), and also learns more about what love is from a hospital
patient (Dennis Franz) who has an uncanny understanding of his
situation.  But with love comes sacrifice.  What can Seth do?
The real treat of this movie is Ryan's sunny disposition and radiance.
As she falls in love with Seth, all sorts of questions begin to arise
for her.  Are you married?  Are you homeless?  Are you a drummer?  Why
do you always where the same clothes?  She knows how to convey her
doe-eyed confusion, especially in a scene where she begins to learn his
true nature, which is bittersweet and funny.  In the kitchen, Seth
seemingly slices off his finger, but Maggie notices that there is no
blood.  She is about to be thrust into the unknown...much like any new
relationship.
The script and presentation works in allowing us to connect with our own
questions of mortality and reminds us to appreciate the things that we
take for granted.  Remember to savor each bite and to let the sun bask
your face in its warmth.  Remember to appreciate the touch of someone
you love and to let the cool ocean waves stimulate your body.  City of
Angels is a purposeful and touching story that looks at two people who
represent two elements that frequently remains a mystery to many...that
of life and love.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: April 10, 1998
Starring: Nicolas Cage, Meg Ryan, Andre Braugher, Dennis Franz, Colm
Feore
Directed by: Brad Silberling
Distributed by: Warner Brothers
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (sexuality including language, some nudity)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/city.htm
It wasn't quite clear, as Director Brad Silberling opened his nearly
two-hour love story CITY OF ANGELS, what image he wanted to give the
elite corps of men and women that trod the Earth as God's messengers.
The image, although not strictly important on an internal basis,
unintentionally becomes important because of the American public's
fascination with angelic beings. As Scott Adams, the creator of
'Dilbert,' writes: "It's statistically proven that a ninety-pound woman
can lift a Chrysler minivan off of her trapped husband with enough
adrenalin"; and usually when she does, the tabloids and talk shows are
run amok with stories of angels coming to the rescue. And what about the
all-too-familiar story of someone retrieving their developed film from
Walgreens or K-mart to see superimposed images of the risen Jesus or the
Virgin Mary? There's no denying the attachment to angels, so Silberling
has to be very careful with what he does. Whatever he did, though, it
turned out all right. 
Silberling, whose last feature film was about another less-than-human
being (CASPER), sets up a solid romance between Nicolas Cage and Meg
Ryan. Cage, who had previously starred in two senseless but enjoyable
action films (CON AIR and FACE/OFF), gets to show a loveable innocence
that helps his character into the audiences' hearts. Ryan, last heard as
the voice of Anastasia in the movie of the same title, is present in the
same spunky manner. Her curly mop of frosted blond hair and willingness
to break into ear-to-ear smiles gives her a seat with the audience as
well. Even though the characters are hard to deny, they end up taking a
while to get together. This displeases the audience, especially after
one or two surprising plot turns, and it slows down a movie that was
otherwise moving at a comfortable speed. 
The movie has a great narrative hook, and through it we learn of Seth
(Cage). An angel, Seth can only be seen by the dying, delirious, and of
course, his fellow angels, of whom there are quite many. The rather
spooky group inhabits (no surprise) the city of angels, Los Angeles,
sitting on skyscrapers, the Hollywood sign, Dodger Stadium, and other
civic landmarks. They cannot taste, smell, or touch, but they know no
fear, no hunger, no pain, and they hear music in the sunrise (a
particularly poetic twist). Seth, unlike many other angels, longs to be
human, and his desire is urged onward when he falls in love with Maggie
(Ryan), a beautiful heart surgeon. With the consoling words of his best
friend Cassiel (Andre Braugher) and the help of a patient at her
hospital (Dennis Franz), Seth comes to the threshold of his decision
between remaining an angel forever, or being with Maggie as a human
forever. 
Along with that thought-provoking decision, CITY OF ANGELS also displays
some interesting themes, of which some are laughable and others are very
intense. Although there's nothing deep about the movie - it's bread and
butter romance between man and woman - the level of intelligence is
elevated by the plot intricacies that develop as a result of Seth's
angelic state. The movie frequently shows us that Seth can hear a
human's thoughts as he passes by them, and it's surprising just how real
the scripted thoughts are. Following Seth in and out of the city also
allows the spectacular cinematography: the angels are almost always
accompanied by grand, sweeping views of Los Angeles. It takes skilled
postproduction efforts to pull all of that down into a meaningful movie,
and it's been done here. Granted, it gets windy in parts, but there's
nothing too mushy or too corny about this romantic drama for anyone not
to like it.
FINAL AWARD FOR "CITY OF ANGELS": 3.0 stars - a good movie.

Author
Andy Wright
Capsule Review:
A Memo to Hollywood; if you must persist in cranking out big-budget retreads
of classic foreign films, then this is the way to do it - as a subtle and
intelligent reimagining of the source material (in this case Wim Wenders'
ethereally lovely 1987 Wings of Desire) rather than a slavish frame-by-frame
duplication. It's hard to believe that Nicolas Cage hasn't used up all of
his different facets as an actor by now, but he delivers another inspired
performance here, comparable in its fumbling otherness to Jeff Bridges'
sublime work in Starman, as an Angel who falls in love with Meg Ryan. The
plot does come awfully close at times to shifting into Touched by an Angel
style hokum (the spirits interact with humanity much more here than in the
original film), but director Brad Silberling, displaying a talent that was
difficult to spot amid all the ILM effects of his debut Casper, does a
superb job of keeping the narrative grounded. (He also makes his L.A.
locations look almost as gorgeously fresh and new as Wenders' Berlin.) On
its own terms, City of Angels is an unusually resonant romantic drama; as a
remake that doesn't insult the original, it's borderline miraculous.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1998. Director - Brad Silberling, Screenplay - Dana Stevens, Based 
on the film `Wings of Desire' written by Peter Handke & Wim Wenders, 
Producers - Charles Roven & Dawn Steel, Photography - John Seale, Music 
- Gabriel Yared, Visual Effects - Sony Pictures Imageworks (Supervisor - 
John Nelson), Special Effects Supervisor - David Blitstein, Makeup 
Effects - The Burman Studio, Production Design - Lilly Kilvert. 
Production Company - Regency Enterprises/Atlas Entertainment.
Nicolas Cage (Seth), Meg Ryan (Dr Maggie Rice), Dennis Franz (Nathaniel 
Messinger), Colm Feore (Dr Jordan Ferris), Andre Braugher (Cassiel), 
Robin Bartlett (Annie)
Plot: Angels hover invisibly over LA, listening in on people's thoughts. 
One angel, Seth, aches to touch and feel the things that ordinary people 
do. He is drawn to Maggie Rice, a heart surgeon whose life starts 
falling apart after a patient she cared about died, and appears to her, 
offering comfort and solace. Gradually the two fall in love and Seth 
faces the choice of whether or not to to elect to fall from being an 
angel and become an ordinary mortal so he can be with her.
Wim Wenders' `Wings of Desire' (1987) was one of the great fantasy films 
of the 1980s. It lacked anything appreciable in the way of trite moral 
epiphanies like any traditional Hollywood angel fantasy, but instead 
used angels as an extraordinary and beautiful poetic meditation on the 
human condition. Now of course comes `City of Angels', the Hollywood 
remake of `Wings of Desire', which is sadly exactly the banalizing that 
one would expect when a European arthouse film having been passed 
through the studio grinder. In `Wings' the romance was one of, but not 
necessarily the primary, subplot, but in `City' it is propelled to the 
forefront and told in the most shameless Hollywood romantic sentiments 
conceivable. At which, one must admit, it conducts itself passably. 
There are some passages which come with a tenderly written feeling - 
most especially the opening scene where Cage takes the soul of a child 
from a hospital operating theatre ("Will Mummy understand ?" "She 
will"). It is just that when you compare it to `Wings' it cannot help 
but seem an inferior effort. Director Silberling ably imitates Wenders' 
camera moves serenely circling through the air as though operated by 
angels. And there are even moments when the film seems to play with the 
double meaninged title and the visual iconography that one might 
associate with it in a very Wenders-esque way - angels casually holding 
conversations atop downtown street signs or sitting atop the Hollywood 
sign. And indeed it even takes the ending to further places than `Wings' 
ever went to by opting for a tragic ending to the romance to add the 
comment that the joy of life entails pain as well (a corollary that 
Wenders left it to his sequel `Faraway! So Close' before getting around 
to making). 
But where Wenders achieved a kind of numinously divine poetry about the 
aching fragility and beauty of the human condition, `City' is left 
straining at romantic cliche. Silberling just cannot help but overplay 
his hand. One of the most haunting images in `Wings' was one beautiful 
tracking shot showing angels invisibly sitting amongst the people in a 
library. Silberling repeats it in `City' but overplays it to the point 
of absurdity - it becomes a focal location in the story and gets tricked 
out with absurdly heavy-handed shots like having all the angels 
sinisterly looking down from the balconies. And where the film really 
loses it altogether is in the disastrous casting. Nicolas Cage is 
appallingly miscast as an angel - where he should radiate a beatific 
divine grace and drift through listening to human thoughts with a 
boundless empathy, Cage comes across as rather dopey. And most laughably 
when it comes to the film's celebration of the joy of life, his attempts 
at running about animated by the ecstasy of sensation make him look like 
a total lunatic. Equally Meg Ryan is completely miscast in the part of a 
heart surgeon. Ryan is a light comedy actress and is almost impossible 
to believe as a surgeon on the emotional brink. (And she is not exactly 
helped by poorly motivated script - it is hard to believe an experienced 
surgeon would just suddenly go to pieces for no well-defined reason 
after the medically inexplicable death of a child she never knew). 
Between this absurd box-office oriented miscasting and Silberling's 
heavy-handed mishandling of the story, the serene, almost divine poetry 
of Wenders's original topples into risibility.


Author
Mark O'Hara
My wife said it best as we left the theater, It was uneven.
What's charming about the film are its engaging takes on life -- city, 
human, celestial.  When we first look upon the angels Seth (Nicolas 
Cage) and Cassiel (Andre Braugher) sitting atop superhighway signs, we 
know the narrative will be pleasantly slanted and watchable.  Their 
wings and halos replaced by black overcoats, these messengers from God 
patrol streets, construction sites, and especially libraries.  It is in 
the library that Seth and mortal Dr. Maggie Rice (Meg Ryan) meet in two 
emotional scenes, one beginning their relationship and the other 
determining if it will end.
I found the angels' ability to read humans' thoughts not so much 
original as fascinating.  As the camera moves among the cars in a 
traffic jam or among carrels in the library,  we are permitted to 
mind-surf, catching glimpses of what life is like in this very human, 
"naked city."  It is gritty yet beautiful, from the scenes in the 
hospital in which Meg tries to prolong life, to the scenes in which the 
angels – seen only by us and by those they choose – give humans small 
embraces of protection.  John Seale's cinematography paints Los Angeles 
in colors Maxfield Parrish would use:  glowing and clean;  even shots of 
seaminess are uncluttered and objectified.  
The major roles are indeed well-acted.  Cage, his hair meticulously in 
place, even his eyebrows handsomely trimmed, casts his big, 
compassionate eyes upon human suffering.  Unlike most of his fellow 
celestials (who at times look alarmingly remote and agent-like), Seth 
pursues a human.  (Isn't it a breach of the ethics of invisibility to 
watch a woman as she bathes, or kisses her boyfriend?)  On her part, Meg 
Ryan is appropriately tentative in dealing with Seth.  Where another 
might think him an odd preacher or even a stalker, Maggie eventually 
realizes his gentleness, and soon harbors amorous thoughts that Seth 
intercepts.  Her performance is most riveting when she discovers Seth's 
corporeal form is bloodless;  her mix of fear, bafflement and anger 
alerts us to the crux of her emotional predicament.
The minor roles in this picture function like confidants in a good play, 
enabling the leading roles to succeed.  Dennis Franz does a most 
convincing job as Nathaniel Messinger, a gluttonous, life-loving patient 
of Maggie's.  It's not far-fetched that Franz will get a nod as Best 
Supporting Actor nominee.  One of the hard-to-believe sequences has 
Nathaniel leaving the hospital to chow down at a diner (while Seth, who 
has manifested himself to another mortal, eats nothing).  But 
Nathaniel's gusto, along with Maggie's mutual feelings, causes Seth to 
take a fall into the grimy pleasures of humanity.  In his role as 
Cassiel, Andre Braugher (say it ain't so, Andre, that you're leaving 
Homicide!) is underused.  Further, some of his banter with Seth is not 
transparent enough.
Just as Braugher does a masterful job with average lines, Cage admirably 
juggles a handful of clichés.  Are we to believe that Seth, formerly an 
immortal who for ages has observed humans, is not cagey enough to avoid 
hitch-hiking, in the rain, outside a nude-dancing palace, and then 
benevolently greeting a carload of scumbags who mug him?  Would he 
really act so child-like at the strong scent from a bottle of perfume?  
And possibly the most unforgivable piece of writing has Seth making no 
direct communication with his Maker.  It is stated in the film that "No 
one believes in us (angels) anymore";  a big problem is that the movie 
contradicts this claim by further popularizing all things angel.  What 
we wind up with is another New-Agey, secular treatment of religious 
themes.  
Let me end by commending the sequence in which Seth falls to earthiness.  
Director Silberling's black-and-white montage is dramatically brilliant, 
evoking the precious and intimate side of humanity remembered by the 
deceased characters in Our Town.  I also liked that the ending of City 
of Angels would not please followers of Disney.  I only wish the ending 
sustained the emotional power of what comes just before it.  And I'm an 
easier critic than my wife.


Author
Bob Bloom
 City of Angels (1998) 1 star out of 4. Starring Nicolas Cage, Meg Ryan,
Dennis Franz and Andre Braugher.
 A wise person once admonished that every film should be judged on its own
merits, whether it's an original or a rip-off of an excellent foreign film.
 So, this is how City of Angels will be assessed.
 There is not much good to say about this sappy, manipulative,
Hollywoodized, cliché-ridden love story. To sum it up: angel meets girl,
angel and girl fall in love, angel yearns to become human to get girl, and
so on and so on.
 This is a movie done by the numbers. It has some wonderful cinematography,
but overall, the City of Angels feels hollow and cold.
 The performances are adequate, except that the stars, Nicolas Cage and Meg
Ryan, are really given nothing to do but mope around Los Angeles. And while
they look good, it's hard to sustain a movie for almost two hours on looks
alone.
 Screenwriter Dana Stevens fails to evoke any true emotions. In a movie
that begs for intimacy, her script is joyless and distant. It is more a
romance novel transferred to screen than a fairy-tale-like story of
yearning for the experience of being mortal.
 Basically, what is on screen is a story about a guy who happens to be an
angel who develops the hots for a good-looking woman and will do anything
to get close to her.
 The story's conceit, that angels are all around us, watching us and aiding
us through the trial and tribulations of life, is fine, though not
original.
 But Stevens cheats. She allows humans and angels to interact at will. In
movies of this sort, the rules by which the divine and the mortal behave
usually are rigid and unbroken. To break them at will is lazy
screenwriting.
 Cage and Ryan make a wistful couple. The script doesn't allow them to be
more than two glamorous movie stars playing roles.
 The movie is saved by Dennis Franz as Nathan Messenger, a person who
understands all too well the worlds of Cage's Seth and Ryan's Dr. Maggie
Rice.
 However, his screen time is limited, and it is left to Cage and Ryan to
carry this story. But, unfortunately, the load is too heavy, and they are
weighed down by a heavy-handed and ill-conceived storyline.
 City of Angels requires a deft, poetic hand. It's a fragile story that
needs to unfold slowly without sledgehammering its audience.
 Unfortunately, those behind the enterprise haven't the required skill.
 If you want to see it done correctly, go to your video store and rent Wim
Wenders' 1988 classic, Wings of Desire. Or wait a couple of months. City of
Angels will probably be joining it on the shelves by then.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
You can e-mail him at bloom@journal-courier.com or at cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Jason Overbeck
City Of Angels has a few problems that left me feeling very mad.  I was
mad because the rest of the film is very well done, and well acted.  The
story is light, and so well told thgat you almost forgive these errors. 
I didn't.
The story has Nic Cage, an angel, falling in love with Meg Ryan, a
doctor, and when he appears to her she falls for him.  Along the way
Cage meets a guy named Mesenger, played by NYPD's Dennis Franz, who
tells him that he can fall to earth and become human.  Will he give up
his wings?
The story also has a complication in Ryans boyfriend, who seems to show
up to create a conflict than disappear.  This is what I couldn't forgive
in City Of Angels, the big, fatal plot manipulation.  It left m dangling
to upset by its disregard for us to finish its stream of thought.  It
seems to end in midstream, with little complication and lots of glowing
acting.

Author
Michael Rich
        I didn't come into City of Angels expecting greatness. I've
never seen Wim Wenders' Wings of Desire, the classic movie upon which
City is loosely based. Then again, I have seen enough stories which are
based upon a similar plot device, with The Little Mermaid (both the
Disney version and the original folktale) being among them, that I had
some high expectations about the possible power such a story of
impossible love can hold. Unfortunately, City of Angels ended up
fulfilling few of them.
        The plot, for those that couldn't tell from the previews,
revolves around the angel Seth, played with an almost creepy intensity
by Nicolas Cage, who, in the midst of his angelic duties, falls in love
with a heart surgeon named Maggie (Meg Ryan in her most endearing
performance since When Harry Met Sally). Of course, his being an angel
prevents him from doing much about his love except appearing at random
times to talk to her, watch her buy groceries, only to disappear in the
blink of an eye. Their love must remain unrequited unless Seth decides
to make the ultimate sacrifice and become human. Using this framework as
a jumping-off point, the movie attempts to veer through some heavy
philosophical ruminations on the nature of desire, the joys of being
human, and the definition of perfection.
        The first half of the movie succeeds on most points. Cage
excellently plays the eminently difficult role of an angel who doesn't
know feelings so can't really express, preventing the character of Seth
from getting boring despite his limited repertoire of intent looks and
hang-dog expressions. Unfortunately, Cage takes the intensity too far
sometimes, and then Seth comes across as more creepy than sensitive. As
Maggie, Ryan manages to be convincing as a heart surgeon who has trouble
coming to terms with her having lost a patient on the operating table
despite having done everything right. Her beauty, unlike her unbearable
cuteness in French Kiss, is mature, intelligent, and winning.
        Likewise, some interesting ideas float around at the beginning
of the film. When the camera pans through traffic jams and libraries and
we get to hear the thoughts of the random people who flash across the
screen, the audience experiences a little of what it must be like to be
an angel. The beautiful camera work, shooting down onto the hectic world
of Los Angeles from the improbable perches of the angels, also gives us
a sense of the unique wonder angels feel.
        The film begins to lose its way, though, when the focus tightens
more and more on Seth and Maggie. The grand, angelic perspective gets
lost, except for some idly tossed lines about the incredible beauty of
the world through an angel's eyes. The movie devolves into an
examination of how Seth can't feel the world or, more importantly, he
can't feel Maggie: he can't smell her hair, feel her touch, or taste the
pears she eats.
        This change in focus attempts to capture the audience in Seth's
intense longing, but in doing so, the conflict disappears. If he wants
Maggie so badly, then why doesn't her just make the leap and become
human? After all, what's so great about being an angel? Sure, you get to
sit on Marlboro signs, but what's that compared to getting to be with
Meg Ryan?
        And from there, once the yearning has been established and the
romantic denouement must occur, it's all downhill. The philosophy
becomes heavy-handed, the dialogue pedestrian when it tries to be deep,
and the plot twists simply attempt to yank a few more tears into the
audience's hankie. It's the last thirty minutes of the movie, then, that
wrecks the film. I feel like the writer, by pulling out all the
melodramatic stops, has robbed me of what could have been a genuinely
powerful movie experience on both the romantic and the philosophical
level. I came out feeling robbed, seeing so much possibility in a film
becoming nothing. I could go on longer, but I don't want to "ruin" the
end by revealing any of the cheap plot devices the film relies on.
        City of Angels, then, is a paradox. It's a well-acted
(particularly look for Dennis Franz cutting against type-casting as a
happy-go-lucky fallen angel), well-filmed, and based on a wonderful
idea. All these possibilities, though, are what make the film so
unredeemable when the closing credits come up.

Author
Ben Hoffman
  In 1988, director Wim Wenders gave us WINGS OF DESIRE, a film in
French and German.   Based on that film, Brad Silberling has made
his own English version.   When that happens, the newer attempt is
almost always a disaster BUT in this case, despite the original
being excellent, the current film is a bit superior. For one thing,
it comes across as more understandable than the subtitled one.
  It is the story, a romantic fantasy, of a fine surgeon, Dr. Maggie
Rice (Meg Ryan) who oddly and despite herself, falls in love with
Seth (Nicolas Cage) an angel who makes his presence known to her.
Angels are normally invisible.  In this film there are many angels
in the city, their job being to help those in need.  So when Dr.
Rice inexplicably loses a patient and is very despondent about the
loss Seth decides to show himself to her and comfort her.
  Seth learns there are many things he does not know about real
humans, that there is much  he has never experienced.
  Why would a down-to Earth woman surgeon allow herself to fall in
love with a non-human, an angel?   What must the angel give up to
experience that of which he has never before been aware?   For one
thing, his immortality.   Not exactly an easy choice.
  A patient, Nathaniel Messinger, (Dennis Franz) lying ill in a
hospital bed  reveals that he once was an angel.   Now he is happily
married and the father of two. From the first time arriving on Earth
as an angel, Messinger felt at once that there was more of life to
be savored.     Would the same hold true for Seth?  I liked Franz's
performance very much; he is a consummate actor.
  Unlike Messinger, the angel, Cassiel (Andre Braugher), has the
role of an angel who is satisfied with his lot.   He is not one to
give up his immortality to become a human.     Nevertheless, he
cannot help but wonder about what it must be like to be in love.
  The film, then, is about love and its power to sway even angels .
. . or at the very least make them restless pondering the pros and
cons of giving up their endless life and become mere mortals . . .
and for what?
  Very solid performances by both Cage and Ryan and, in fact, by all
in the cast, make the film  most entertaining and thought-provoking.
Highly recommended.
  Visit my web site  or 
  send your comments to my">href="mailto:bhoffman@ix.netcom.com">my 
  email address.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I've said it before and I'll probably have to say it again -- I just 
don't buy the Hollywood theory that the biggest desire of angels is to 
be human. There's no bigger proponent of this idea than CITY OF 
ANGELS, which has a climactic, humanist speech from Nicolas Cage 
along the lines of, "I would rather have had one breath of her hair, one 
kiss from her mouth, than eternity without it. One." Meanwhile, I'm 
thinking, "Yeah, Meg Ryan is cute, but come on, no one would give up 
an eternity in heaven for her."
        Obviously, this Less is More philosophy carried over to the 
script, written by Dana Stevens. The idea seems to be that a moviegoer 
would rather see one rehashed plot, one oversentimentalized method of 
acting, than a fresh, unconventional movie. One, which is also the 
number of scenes in CITY OF ANGELS that really engaged me. Shame, 
because the early pieces of Brad Silberling's direction, which show 
lengthy aerial shots of black trenchcoated angels perched on Los 
Angeles architecture, suggested an artistic movie that would actually 
explore the life of the angel.
        Instead, we get a love story. The human protagonist is a 
doctor (Ryan) who loses one of her patients at the beginning of the 
film. We already know, from one overly melodramatic child death 
scene, that angel Cage just hangs around, waiting for people to die. 
Then he walks them to The Other Side, after they've told him what 
they enjoyed most about life. After that, he compares responses with 
his closest angel friend, played by Andre Braugher, in his most 
subdued role ever.
        So Cage catches a glimpse of Ryan at work, then stares her 
down as she cries over the dead patient. That's more or less what these 
movie angels do, just stare at humans, with a creepy demeanor that 
suggests some kind of stalker-pervert. That they all wear trenchcoats 
doesn't help their credibility. Anyway, Cage finds himself smitten with 
Meg and decides to let him get a look at her because, as Braugher 
says, "people can see you if you want them to."
        They flirt for awhile, Ryan thinking he's a friend of the heart 
patient (Dennis Franz) she's going to operate on tomorrow. Then Cage 
disappears mysteriously, reappears, disappears, and so on, until we 
find out Meg is in love with him. It's when she starts coming up with 
questions like, "Why does he wear the same clothes all the time?" that 
things get tedious. At the same time, Cage starts wanting to forsake 
his angelic existence to be with Meg.
        He gets the idea from Franz, whose character's name is 
Nathaniel Messinger. It's about the most obvious name for an ex-
angel, although I'd hate to think my guardian angel looks like Denniz 
Franz. Hell, it's hard enough to swallow the idea of Cage as an angel. 
Rest assured, though, that since this is a movie, Cage will let his lusts 
dictate a fall from heaven. I just didn't think the filmmakers would do 
something so laughable as having Cage dive off a high building. 
Here's a hint, you guys: it's supposed to be a figurative fall, not a literal 
one. But the good news is Cage's black trenchcoat DOES fall with him.
        I won't give away the ending, except to say it's the most 
cheesy, formulaic, pseudo-ironic ending possible in a movie like this, 
and one that would inspire Nicolas Cage to say, "I would rather have 
had one breath of her hair, one kiss from her mouth, than eternity 
without it." Personally, I would rather have had a good script, genuine 
acting and direction that didn't rely on lingering shots and sappy 
orchestration. A movie like this sure isn't going to make a real angel 
fall from heaven, unless he falls over laughing.
Visit the Movie Critic at Large homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Close to 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair...

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Although one cannot be sure what angels look like, Nicolas Cage,
dressed from head to toe in somber shades of black, makes a most
impressive one.  And unlike John Travolta's jocular version, Cage's has
all the seriousness of an undertaker.
     With a tremendous sense of the visual but without much
storytelling ability, director Brad Silberling attempts a remake of Wim
Wenders's German film WINGS OF DESIRE.  Although Wenders's film is only
ten years, it is already being referred to as a classic.  Why
Silberling, whose only other film was the mediocre CASPER, thought this
was the right time and he was the right person to redo so recent a
movie remains unclear.
     Set in Los Angeles, the new film, called CITY OF ANGELS, stars
Cage as the angel Seth and Meg Ryan as a heart surgeon named Maggie
Rice.  With his long black coat and constant five-o'clock shadow, Cage,
using small variations on his basic melancholic expression, rethinks
the whole concept of the angelic.
     Angels, we learn, are not humans and never were.  They can be seen
by mortals only if they want to be, which they rarely do.  More
surprising, we find out that they hang out at the beach at sunrise and
sunset so they can hear the celestial choirs and at the library the
rest of the day.  (Although you might expect to find them only among
the religious tomes, they frequent all the sections.)
     One day in the operating room as he waits to take a dying man's
soul, Seth looks Maggie in the eye and becomes instantly smitten.  He
dreams of doing the unthinkable, touching Maggie.  The picture is at
its most magical during the eventual first touch and first kiss
sequences.  Think way back to the excitement and rapture of the first
time that you ever held a lover's hand and of your first romantic kiss.
Rising above even these experiences, the scenes exist on a higher plane
that may make goose pimples crawl up and down your arms.
     The film works best when it reduces the story to a tableau.  The
tall, darkly dressed angles, dotting the beach for their morning music
by Gabriel Yared, provide the impact that the script by Dana Stevens
rarely delivers.  (Wim Wenders is also listed on the writing credits
since he did the screenplay for the original movie.)  The audience at
our screening was squirming in their seats since the movie seemed as
though it was going on for an eternity.  As good as some of the visuals
are, they are highly repetitive and done excruciatingly slowly.
     Maggie tells Seth that she doesn't believe in the hereafter.
"Some things are true whether you believe in them or not," he explains
with his usual gravity.  The chemistry between them lacks the emotional
punch that the story requires.  Although they both claim to be in love
with each other, only Seth is at all convincing.
     Along the way they get to know the film's best minor character, a
heart patient of Maggie's named Nathan Messinger and played with gusto
by Dennis Franz.  Nathan has a secret that drives the second half of
the film.  Franz steals most of his scenes with an energy sadly lacking
in the rest of the movie.
     The monotonic and glacially paced story eventually comes to its
completely predictable and highly manipulative ending.  The CITY OF
ANGELS could easily be remade as a short film with music but no words.
Now that's a remake worth seeing.
     CITY OF ANGELS runs 2:00.  It is rated PG-13 for sexuality and
brief male nudity and would be fine for kids around ten and up.

Author
Liz Rizzo
Starring Meg Ryan, Nicolas Cage, Andre Braugher and Dennis Franz
Written by Dana Stevens and Wim Wenders
Directed by Brad Silberling
Produced by Atlas Entertainment and distributed by Warner Bros. [US]
`She didn't believe in angels until she fell in love with one.'
I really wanted to like this film.  And for the first few scenes, I was
there, ready to be swept away.  Unfortunately, `City of Angels' doesn't
quite come together and really gets weak toward the end.
First we meet Seth, who we know is an angel because it's Nicolas Cage
and we saw the previews.  He seems to be trying a little too hard to
appear angelic.  Then we meet other angels who seem quite vampiric as
the movie progresses (I have to admit I loved this).  There are shades
of Anne Rice novels all over this film - unfortunately the mythology
created is incomplete, at times weak and left me wanting more.  However,
what was presented was interesting and, for the most part, effective. 
Now for the obvious comparison:  Cage's Seth is the complete antithesis
of Travolta's Michael, and after the first few scenes his performance
becomes so flat (and this is purposeful) that I found myself wondering
who could have played this role better.  I almost wished they had gone
with Denzel Washington!  Almost.
Next, we meet heart surgeon Maggie Rice (coincidence on the Rice?), and
Meg Ryan is excellent, as usual, as is Dennis Franz when he emerges as
one of her patients, Nathan Messinger.  For those who missed the famous
NYPD Blue shower scene, `City of Angels' provides you yet another chance
to view Dennis Franz's famous back side.  Somebody just loves this man's
butt!  The character of Nathan is fun, and Franz appears to enjoy
playing him.  Andre Braugher gives a good performance as Seth's friend
in the angel world.  Sadly, this only makes Cage's performance appear
flatter.
To the film's credit, we do care about Maggie, we believe and enjoy the
development of her relationship with Seth, and we are fascinated by the
angels and the world which is created.  But towards the end, which is so
often the case, the film falls apart.  For all the careful pacing and
build up, the last third goes too quickly, we lose our belief in the
story line, and we simply are not allowed to feel long enough.  Just as
`The Lost World' did not capture the wonder of `Jurassic Park,' `City of
Angels' simply does not attain the emotional, mystical power of say,
`Ghost' (another obvious comparison).
And most annoyingly, and I hope I'm not giving anything away here,
someone's probably patting themselves on the back for (skip to the next
paragraph if you're afraid I'll ruin it for you) not going with the
Hollywood ending, when this is exactly the film that should have gone
there.  The end of this film is actually trite, although there is a
flash (albeit brief) of brilliance in the final development of Seth's
character.  Thankfully, and it's actually a relief, Cage is allowed to
act during the final scenes, and he does it well.
Another kudo:  `City of Angels' stays away from excessive use of special
effects, which would have seemed tired.  But in the final analysis, I
was left feeling like this was a film based on a book that must be
better (another Jurassic Park/Lost World reference would fit here).  I
wish it existed so I could read it.  There's a lot of interesting stuff
here.  What I am going to do is rent `Wings of Desire,' the 1987 German
film that `City of Angels' is a remake of.  And if that doesn't satisfy
me, maybe I'll just reread the Anne Rice vampire series.  

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Nicolas Cage, Meg Ryan, Denis Franz, Andre Braugher, Colm Feore
Director: Brad Silberling
Producers: Dawn Steel, Charles Roven
Screenplay: Dana Stevens based on WINGS OF DESIRE 
Cinematography: John Seale
Music: Gabriel Yared
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     As the world hurtles towards the end of the second millennium, 
there seems to be an increased awareness of mysticism and things 
spiritual.  Suddenly, it's hip to believe in God (not necessarily a 
specific god -- an amorphous, non-denominational deity will do), an 
afterlife, and, of course, angels.  The entertainment industry, never 
one to be left out on any trend, has thrown itself headlong into this 
one.  On TV, the cloying "Touched by an Angel" is a hit -- a mainstay of 
many people's Sunday night viewing plans.  And the movies have jumped on 
the bandwagon, too, giving us enough celestial beings in the last few 
years to crowd the head of a pin -- MICHAEL, THE PREACHER'S WIFE, WIDE 
AWAKE, and now CITY OF ANGELS.  Add films that feature Satan and his 
minions (like DEVIL'S ADVOCATE and FALLEN) or less well-defined issues 
of mortality (i.e., CONTACT and THE SWEET HEREAFTER), and this list of 
titles explodes.
     Most American-made motion pictures based on foreign originals tend 
to be huge disappointments.  I could probably name 15 or 20 examples, 
but I'll confine myself to two obvious ones:  THE VANISHING and 
DIABOLIQUE, both of which were so bad that they were insulting.  There 
have been exceptions, of course.  THE BIRDCAGE was an enjoyable 
Americanization of LA CAGE AUX FOLLES.  SOMMERSBY did some interesting 
things with THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE.  And now CITY OF ANGELS has 
effectively re-worked (rather than re-made) Wim Wenders' 1988 art-house 
classic, WINGS OF DESIRE, by taking away some of the earlier film's more 
meditative elements and deepening the romantic aspect.  The ending is 
completely, and surprisingly, different.
     CITY OF ANGELS is based, not unexpectedly, in Los Angeles, which 
here is a literal "City of Angels," with the invisible celestial agents 
sitting high atop billboards and skyscrapers.  Dressed like Heaven's Men 
in Black, the angels are an odd bunch.  They spend their days and nights 
observing and occasionally offering comfort to select humans.  They 
cannot touch, taste, or smell.  They are immortal and ethereal.  They 
live in a library and spend time at the beach in a kind of wordless 
communion.
     Seth (Nicolas Cage) is just one of many angels assigned to Los 
Angeles.  But, unlike most of his brethren, he has a strong desire to 
experience what it's like to be human.  He seems to share the sentiment 
of a comment that he relates to fellow angel Cassiel (Andre Braugher):  
"What good would wings be if you couldn't feel the wind on your face?"  
One day, Seth is in a hospital to guide a dying man to the next life.  
His attention is captured by the determination of a doctor, Maggie Rice 
(Meg Ryan), to save the patient's life.  Later, he returns with the 
intention of soothing Maggie's distress, but it proves to be a difficult 
task.  Soon, he is spending hours on end watching her, eventually 
revealing himself as a benevolent stranger.  Seth has fallen in love 
with Maggie, but he thinks it's a doomed proposition until a angel-
turned-human (Denis Franz) reveals that God gives all of his creations 
free will, and, if Seth wants it enough, he can shed his wings for a 
human body.  But, just because Seth loves Maggie, there's no guarantee 
that she will reciprocate his feelings, and if he gives up his 
immortality for a romantic illusion, what then?
     When it comes to heavenly matters, CITY OF ANGELS doesn't offer any 
particular insights.  The movie does not ponder the meaning of life; 
rather, it shamelessly celebrates the human experience by demonstrating 
the monotony of endless voyeurism.  On a somewhat less-intellectual 
level, it's also about sacrifice.  But the film doesn't thrive on ideas 
alone (if it tried, it would be in trouble, since it's not that deep).  
Solid acting and positive chemistry are critical to CITY OF ANGELS' 
success.
     Nicolas Cage is fine as Seth, although there are times when he 
doesn't quite fit into the angel's shoes.  Cage is good as the detached 
observer, watching and waiting, but there's a quality of childlike 
innocence to Seth that he doesn't quite pull off.  There's a scene in 
CITY OF ANGELS that is pretty much lifted from IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE, 
and it illustrates how much more convincing James Stewart was.  Meg 
Ryan, as always, is delightful and ebullient as Maggie.  This is a case 
of perfect casting -- I can only think of a few other actresses who are 
as good as Ryan in this kind of role.  Her range -- despair and hope, 
pain and rapture -- places her work in CITY OF ANGELS alongside that in 
PRELUDE TO A KISS and COURAGE UNDER FIRE as proof that she is a capable, 
well-rounded dramatic talent.  Meanwhile, in a supporting role (the one 
essayed by Peter Falk in WINGS OF DESIRE and its sequel, FARAWAY SO 
CLOSE), scene-stealing Denis Franz is delightful as the king of 
hedonism.
     I suspect CITY OF ANGELS is going to remind many viewers of GHOST, 
but there's a big difference:  this film is more true and less 
manipulative.  (In tone, although not necessarily in content, it 
reminded me of TRULY MADLY DEEPLY.)  Ultimately, it is a tear-jerker, 
but there's more to it than that.  While the movie isn't as effective as 
WINGS OF DESIRE in developing the angels' culture and presenting a 
meditation upon spirituality, it gives us a pair of well-developed 
protagonists worth caring about and establishes a complex dynamic 
between them.  CITY OF ANGELS is more romantic than profound, but Dana 
Stevens' script is thoughtful and intelligent, and I never felt insulted 
by what the characters say, do, or think.  Director Brad Silberling, who 
previously made another supernatural tale, the live-action CASPER, 
effectively suggests the spiritual/material duality of the world.  It's 
a subdued motion picture, but the lack of overt melodrama makes for a 
moving and involving story.  Even for those enraptured by WINGS OF 
DESIRE, CITY OF ANGELS is strong enough to cast its own quietly romantic 
spell.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Brad Silberling || Screenplay: Dana Stevens (based on
an original screenplay by Wim Wenders and Peter Handke) || Stars:
Nicolas Cage (Seth), Meg Ryan (Maggie), André Braugher (Cassiel),
Dennis Franz (Messinger), Colm Feore (Jordan), Robin Bartlett
(Anne), Joanna Merlin (Teresa) || MPAA Rating: PG-13
There is a striking scene early in "City of Angels," where all
the angels who live unseen in our midst, gather at the beach to
watch the sun rise. The camera moves above them, showing the
endless rows of ethereal men and women, all garbed in black. Then
the camera moves in on the face of Seth, an angel played by
Nicolas Cage, and as the sun rises, he smiles and his entire face
lights up. You see, the angels can hear music in sunrises and
sunsets, but they cannot feel a human touch.
It is an important scene for several reasons. First of all, it is
one of many instances in the film that make angels seem
thoroughly plausible. The film presents these fantastic beings as
normal-looking people who drift amongst the inhabitants of earth,
watching what goes on with little interference. There are none of
the standard, hokey angel references used in recent films like
"Angels in the Outfield" (1994) or "Michael" (1996). The angels
here are stark and believable.
This early scene on the beach is also an important scene of
juxtaposition, for its shows how God's angels can enjoy aspects
of the earth that human cannot, and yet they are denied so many
simple human pleasures, like feeling the sand on their feet or
the waves lapping at their legs, or the smell of the salt in the
air. There is an inherent tragedy in being an angel, although
there is much beauty in it as well. They eternally walk the
earth, listening to our thoughts, touching us in our pain, and
leading the dying to heaven. Like human existence, being an angel
is often confused and unsure.
"City of Angels" is essentially a love story, between Seth and a
human, a beautiful but sad heart surgeon named Maggie (Meg Ryan).
He first sees her when he is in her operating room, waiting to
lead the soul of her dying patient to heaven. Maggie is
distraught, doing everything in her power to stop the man from
dying on her table, and Seth is moved by her efforts and, more
importantly, her overwhelming sadness when the patient dies.
Angels have the limited power to soothe humans in time of misery
and pain, and Seth does what he can with his invisible touch, but
it's not enough. He wants to be with her and share her pain, not
just stand back at a distance.
He learns that the only way to fulfill his desire for human love
and touch is for him to "fall" and become human. He learns this
from another fallen angel, played by Dennis Franz ("N.Y.P.D.
Blue") in a touching and humorous performance. Sitting at a diner
together, Franz tells Cage's character about how wonderful it is
to be human - to be able to taste food, feel another person's
skin, smell the air, and most importantly, have a loving wife and
children. Of course, there is pain to go along with all this, but
for Seth, it will be worth it.
"City of Angels" is something of a reinterpretation of Wim
Wender's haunting 1988 film "Wings of Desire." Wenders' film was
more like a poem - it was the feeling, the emotion that truly
mattered over what actually happened. The Americanized version
moves the location from divided Berlin to broken Los Angeles, and
the emphasis shifts onto the relationship between the immortal
angel and the mortal human. And, unlike most foreign films that
are re-made into Hollywood fare, it doesn't suffer extensive
damage. This may be because director Brad Silberling ("Casper")
and screenwriter Dana Stevens ("Blink") wanted to make "City of
Angels" its own movie - inspired by "Wings of Desire," but not an
attempt to copy it.
And yet, "City of Angels" is not a typical Hollywood movie. It is
beautifully filmed in lush colors by cinematographer John Seale
("The English Patient"), whose sweeping aerial shots and golden
lighting make Los Angeles into an almost unrecognizable new
world.  Seale creates many striking visuals: in addition to the
beach scene, there is a wonderful sequence in a circular library
where all the angels appear at banisters all around, looking down
at Seth as he watches Maggie walk by.
While the film travels along a charted plot, it takes time to
develop its characters and situations; it sheds light on the
boundaries between what is earthly and what is heavenly, and
shows just how thin those boundaries are. Both Cage and Ryan give
soulful, soft-spoken performances. Ryan, who is usually so bouncy
and energetic, truly embodies a sadness that can only be
alleviated by a heavenly touch. Cage projects all his desire and
longing to be human in simple, heartfelt gazes, and speaks with
the comforting, knowing voice that only an angel could have.
What is most striking about "City of Angels" is that Stevens has
added a new ending to the screenplay, which is both unexpected
and challenging. It's not a formulaic Hollywood ending, because
it is both sad and uplifting at the same time.  It doesn't give
the audience what it thinks it wants at the end of a romance.
Instead, it offers something much better, something that speaks
to the depths of what it means to be human and alive.
           ____________________________________________
                   Visit "Charlie Don't Surf!"
     an eclectic collection of film reviews by James Kendrick
          http://www.bigfoot.com/~jimkendrick || E-mail:
                     jimkendrick@bigfoot.com

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
Seth the angel (Nicholas Cage) and Maggie the surgeon (Meg Ryan) are
discussing tears.  Seth, who has never cried or wiped away a tear, wants
to know why people cry.  Maggie tries to explain it in medical terms:
the tear ducts overact for some reason, nobody knows why.  Seth knows
the real reason and says so -- there's too much emotion, and the body
just can't handle it and weeps.
Well, it could be that the review format just can't handle all the
emotion I feel about City of Angels.  This movie is too big for a
standard review, too majestic for the limits of this column.  In a
Hollywood that celebrates action and explosion and glamor, this is a
movie that's not afraid to embrace the important issues of love, faith,
loss and devotion that we face everyday. It is, superficially, about the
romance between the angel and the surgeon, but it reaches out past the
barriers of the love story to awaken the hearts and spirits of the
audience.
One of the many things that makes this movie so special is its treatment
of angels.  The movie is chock-full of angels, who appear wearing their
long black trench coats (in Los Angeles?!?), watching the world from
their perches on tall buildings, reading over people's shoulders at the
library, hanging around the beach at sunset, silently reassuring
skittish air traffic controllers, comforting the dying.  But instead of
introducing us to Seth standing atop one of the massive Los Angeles
skyscrapers, City of Angels opens at a very human level.  A mother takes
care of her sick daughter, unaware that Seth lurks invisibly, waiting to
take the child home.  It's a touching and wrenching moment, amplified by
Cage's soulful expression -- and it allows us to see the angels as more
than just icons or symbols of something else.  We feel Seth's pain, even
as he is not able to himself -- and we feel it because of Cage's
wonderful acting job.
And if Cage is wonderful, Cage and Ryan together are electric.  Their
early scenes are almost heartstopping -- actually heartstopping at
first, as their eyes meet over an operating room table after a heart
surgery gone awry.  The scenes where Seth is invisibly comforting Maggie
are silently eloquent, and when they finally talk, Cage speaks with such
understated passion and sincerity that it's hard to believe that this is
the same guy who said, "Put the bunny down!" in Con Air.  As an angel,
Cage is pensive and somewhat lacking in effect, but his rare smiles
light up the screen.  And as he falls to earth and becomes human, the
contrast between his previous reserved demeanor and his joyful
exuberance at being able to feel is intoxicating.
Ryan has a much less showy part, but is equally as effective.  Her
opening scene is similar to Seth's:  after a surgery scene straight out
of ER, she has to comfort the family but isn't able to do it.
Unfortunately, she's not given much opportunity to stretch her acting
muscles -- it's as if she's spending the whole movie reacting instead of
acting.  Nonetheless, she's got amazing chemistry with Cage, and there's
an image where golden light floods the hospital's dank locker room that
deserves to be put on a stained-glass window.  Ryan's main task is to
convince Seth of the charms of being human, and she succeeds
marvelously.
I haven't told you everything about this movie, and I'm afraid that I
can't.  I haven't even mentioned the stellar supporting work from Andre
Braugher and Dennis Frantz.  I haven't mentioned a thing about the great
work of the director and cinematographer.  This is a stellar movie,
worthy of much higher praise and analysis than I feel capable of, and I
encourage you to experience City of Angels for yourself.
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
Your Guide to the Hollywood Stock Exchange
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"Are you kidding?  No jury in the world would
convict a baby for murder.  Well, maybe Texas."

Author
Matt Williams
Angels are a hot pop-culture item right now.  So it was only a matter of
time before someone got around to making an adaptation of Wim Wenders'
film Wings of Desire, about an angel who falls in love with a mortal.
Although not a perfect film, City of Angels is perhaps the best
Hollywood could do with the story.
Seth (Nicholas Cage) is an angel.  He spends his days wandering the
earth, with his other angelic kin (including Cassiel, played by Andre
Braugher), observing humanity unseen, and helping to comfort mankind.
One of the duties of the angels is to accompany the recently deceased to
heaven.  Obviously, a popular haunt for the angels then are hospitals,
and it is there where Seth meets Maggie.
Maggie (Meg Ryan) is a heart surgeon, struggling with the concept of
mortality.  Even if she does everything right...sometimes she still
loses her patients.  She begins to lose hope...
But then Seth decides to make himself seen to Maggie.  He finds himself
falling in love with her, and must decide whether or not to make the
ultimate sacrifice:  give up being an angel for the brief passion of
being human.
Only loosely based on Wings of Desire, City of Angels has a stronger
emotional core, but can't hope to match the former film's superb visual
style.  Still, though, City of Angels does create some interesting
visuals, but some of them are unintentionally creepy. The legions of
black clad angels can't help but to recall the strangers of Dark City.
But perhaps the biggest difference between the film is the
schlock-factor. The film's new age attitudes range from cute to cuter.
Towards the end, the film struggles to grasp some important topics...but
the film has never attained the weight needed to deal with anything of
substance.
City of Angels also suffers from occasional bouts of misdirection (from
director Brad Silberling).  The most notable example occurs in its final
act, where a critical error treats the audience contemptibly. A crucial
twist is grossly mishandled and becomes ridiculous.  As a result the
emotional climax of the film is muted and loses its depth of meaning.
Still, the point of the movie is made, if a bit heavy-handedly.
Nicolas Cage plays most of the film with blinkless moist eyes, but is
given a chance to stretch near the end of the film.  Meg Ryan's role is
very familiar.  Her Maggie is a minor variation on her staple "romantic
comedy character", seen in everything from When Harry Met Sally to
Sleepless in Seattle.  But the film never quite explains a central
question:  Why does Maggie fall for Seth?  His initial appearances seem
rather eerie and disturbing...perhaps a little more development would
have been able to explain things.
The supporting cast does a good job here.  Andre Braugher does a good
job as Seth's angelic partner.  But the true scene stealer here is
Dennis Franz as Nathaniel Messenger, one of Maggie's patients who has
keen insights into how the world really works.
City of Angels is far from subtle, hitting you over the head with
everything from passion to pathos.  You may not respond as strongly as
the film intends you to, but it does have its moments.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Americans have a habit of prettifying movies which are
taken from classics and from European-made films.  Not all,
mind you, but think of what Hollywood Pictures did to
Hawthorne's "The Scarlet Letter"--gave it a happy ending and
then some. And remember the remake of the Dutch movie
"The Vanishing," in which the studios erased an ending (a
man and wife are buried alive, the villain getting away) and
substituted one that has the hero saving the woman just
before she suffocates.  "City of Angels," which insists that it is
not a remake of Wim Wenders' wonderful "Wings of Desire,"
changes the German picture somewhat, keeping the lines of
the original story but failing to capture its ambiance.  And
atmosphere is what you most want in a movie which is at
heart a meditation on love, death, and the meaning of being
human.  
   The film which inspired this one, "Wings of Desire," deals
with an angel (Bruno Ganz) who is transformed into a human
being to satisfy his curiosity and to chase a female acrobat. 
Where the European art work is as rambling as its angel is
rumpled, "City of Angels" exchanges a meandering narrative
for a more tightly structured line.  Out with the weaving of
black-and-white with color, out with the refusal of the German
to find a simple, conventional conclusion to his search for
human love.  In with easy sentiment, kitsch, and two
performers--well, maybe one--who has endeared herself to
the American public by being the all-American woman she is.
   The same philosophy that informed "Wings of Desire"
instructs us in the American version.  As Win Wenders wrote
after directing "Wings," "To live for an eternity and to be
present all the time.  To live with the essence of things but
not to be able to raise a cup of coffee and drink it, or really
touch somebody...that would be terrible."  In "City of Angels"
which takes place, of course, in L.A., Nicolas Cage plays the
part of an angel in a pickle.  Sure he has stuff going for him. 
He will live forever.  He cannot get sick; if he cuts himself he
loses no blood; he can fly, can sit on steel girders high above
the city, and he can look at women undressing from two
inches away without their noticing him.  Ah, so, you like the
last option?  Unfortunately voyeurism does him no good. He
feels...nothing.  He cannot taste a rich blend of cappuccino,
make love to anyone, smell the roses.  It's no wonder that
when he runs into an angelic human being, Maggie Rice
(Meg Ryan), he wants to experience all the joys and sorrows
of the human condition.  
   Maggie is a cardiologist who feels guilty each time she
loses a patient, a remorse that makes her wonder whether
she should even continue in a profession in which she holds
people's hearts in her hand and sometimes let them down
and must face the sufferings of their families.  Each time the
hospital loses a patient, the sufferer's soul is conveniently
escorted away by an angel, as Seth (Nicolas Cage's
character), obliges a very young girl who dies of a strange
fever.  Though Seth is able to transform himself to a corporeal
shape which can be seen by others, he still cannot feel. 
Transmuting into a physical presence, he flirts with Maggie
who falls almost instantly in love with him, despite his scruffy
appearance and her near-engagement to a handsome fellow
surgeon.  Seth is advised by a fellow angel that he can, by
the use of free will, renounce his status and become a mortal
person, subject to pleasure, pain and death.  Wildly in love
with Maggie, he makes the ultimate choice, literally falling
head over heels for her.
    The film has comic scenes particularly those involving
Nathaniel Messenger (Dennis Franz), who, we later learn, had
also been an angel and made the choice of spending some
years raising a real family.  As we watch the band of cherubs
standing like pod people from Dark City in black garb on the
beaches of L.A. or gathering cheerlessly around the hospital
lobby, we have little doubt that Seth has made the correct
choice.  No matter that a host of unpleasant circumstances
befall him from the moment he becomes a person: love
conquers all.
   Unfortunately, "City of Angels" cannot match its
predecessor for the reasons stated above, nor does it break
away from the most typical features of its type such as "The
Preacher's Wife."  Cage, with droopy face and dejected
demeanor, is meant to project either a sticky sympathy for the
newly dead he is to escort to heaven or an existential
sadness for his own plight.  In either case he is miscast in a
film which, despite the spiritual nature of its theme, is a by-
the-numbers bit of commerce.  Rated PG-13.  Running time:
112 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
One of the multitude of angels that looks over Los Angeles (Cage) 
falls in love with a surgeon (Ryan) who is facing personal and career 
turning points.
"City of Angels" is not a bad film, but it is a poor remake of Wim 
Wenders' "Wings of Desire".  For those who came in late, the central 
conceit is that angels walk amongst unseen amongst us.  They do not 
interfere, just witness, eavesdropping on thoughts, marvelling at the 
travails of humans, silently offering solace.  Given the growing 
popularity of angels as (strangely secular) icons of optimism and 
spirituality, it was perhaps inevitable that the aloof, (largely) 
monochrome and very European "Wings" be remade in the Hollywood mode.  
This apparently involved the use of a Waring blender to edit the 
script into an appropriately dumb form.  Where "Wings" was ponderous, 
"City" is frothy.  Where "Wings" is remote and oblique, "City" is 
superficial.  Where "Wings" is romantic, "City" is a romance.  In 
short, where "City" diverges from "Wings", it mostly does so for the 
worst.  But the result is not all bad.
It is a trifle ludicrous though.  Instead of Bruno Ganz struck with 
wonder at the dissolute acrobat Solveig Dommartin, we have Nicholas 
Cage lust-struck with idealistic heart-surgeon Meg Ryan.  (Hey, it's a 
romance.  It needs - nay, requires - Meg Ryan.)  Subtlety has quietly 
been thrown out the window.  When the angelic Cage reveals himself to 
Ryan, she gasps "You're beautiful!".  This is not - repeat, not - a 
great moment in cinema.  Cage's male pattern baldness and (ahem) 
excess of chest hair are distracting, to say the least.  A celestial 
chest wax and toupee would go a long way.  Slap in some trite 
aphorisms about the wonder of the world and love (which could only be 
uttered in a wealthy city like Los Angeles, and not one like Berlin 
wedged between two warring military powers), add an intrusive 
soundtrack, and there is every reason to expect "City of Angels" to be 
irritating.
But, for the sentimental viewer (which I confess to be), there is 
worth even in something as potentially trite as "City of Angels".  
Much like "Faraway, So Close", the somewhat mundane sequel to "Wings 
of Desire", there are moments when it beautifully flares to life.  
Angels crowd the beach, in rapture at the sunset and dawn.  A dead 
girl nostalgically remembers pyjamas.  A robber is agitated by self-doubt 
and guilt during a holdup.  A fallen angel rejoices in the mundane 
sensations of life.  Despite its lumbering gait, these ideas shine 
through and save a simple movie from becoming simple minded, and 
admitting both the wonder of complexity of life.  This mission is 
aided by the competence of some its components.  There is some 
genuinely beautiful photography in this film.  Cage and Ryan, who have 
both at times turned in cliched performances, here give two 
restrained and humane portrayals.  "City of Angels" may not be high 
art, but it is worthwhile.
"Is this God punishing me?"  whimpers a character.  "You know better
than that," his colleague answers.  And that's not a bad thought to 
take away from a movie.  [**/ok] and "Everything I Needed To Know, I
Learnt In Kindergarten" on the Sid and Nancy scale.
------
Paul-Michael Agapow (agapow@computer.org), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."

Author
Michael Dequina
Brad Silberling directed the 1995 live-action version of Casper; Dana
Stevens wrote the 1994 Madeleine Stowe thriller Blink.  Both of those films
are competent entertainments, but it takes something more than mere
competence to successfully pull off a redo of Wim Wenders's 1988 German
classic Wings of Desire.  In translating Wings into the film known as City
of Angels, Silberling and Stevens have turned a fresh, unique cinematic
work into a standard-issue Hollywood romantic fantasy.
Although Wings told the story of Damiel, an angel who decides becomes
human after falling in love with trapeze artist Marion, Wenders was more
interested with the day-to-day work of these celestial beings.  His angels
were unseen, trenchcoated observers of the human race, wandering about,
listening to unsuspecting people's thoughts, but mostly just watching the
earth from above, below, and beyond.  These angels did not perform
miracles, become visible to people in need, or engage in any of the actions
that one typically associates with them; the angels simply watched and took
notes.
In the dismaying opening scene of City of Angels, it becomes clear that
Stevens and Silberling's vision is far more ordinary than Wenders's.  When
we first meet this version's Damiel, Seth (Nicolas Cage), he is on the
job--he's by the side of a dying child to lead her spirit into the great
beyond.  No more simple observation; in this City dwell Americanized angels
that act upon the human world, collect spirits, sometimes shape events, and
somehow make themselves visible to people dying or in despair, such as
surgeon Maggie Rice (Meg Ryan), City's Marion.  Seth falls in love with her
at first sight, and he is further drawn to her after she loses a patient on
the operating table.  One night, without any explanation (reasonable or
otherwise), the distraught Maggie is able to see Seth, and she falls
instantly in love.  All this _before_ Seth makes his big fall into
humanity's ranks.  Long live Hollywood.
Even though Stevens and Silberling maintain a few of Wenders's touches
(the black trenchcoats, the angels' library hangout, the cacophony of human
"thought voices") and touchstone lines (such as "I can't see you, but I
know you're there"), City eventually veers from the source material and
settles into familiar Tinseltown convention.  Observation and
thought-reading, which took up a lot of Wings's running time, falls by the
wayside in favor of a more prominent romance.  Not necessarily a bad move,
but Stevens inexplicably shoehorns the love story into the Meg Ryan
romantic comedy formula.  As usual, Ryan's character has a boring,
barely-exists-as-a-character boyfriend (Colm Feore) from whom the more
exciting love interest (in this case, Seth) must "rescue" her.  Shouldn't
the celestial divide between Seth and Maggie create enough dramatic tension
in itself?   Dennis Franz has the Peter Falk role as an angel-turned-human
(Franz doesn't play himself, however), but unlike the original, Franz's
heavenly past is explicitly spelled out rather than implied, and his
character becomes nothing more than a walking vessel of angelic exposition.
Cage and Ryan turn in admirable performances that are matched by the rest
of the cast, which includes an effective Andre Braugher playing the only
character to survive the translation with his name intact, Seth's angel pal
Cassiel.  But Cage and Ryan's chemistry, while not completely frigid, does
not ignite as it should, making the finale oddly lacking in emotional
punch.  But that is not quite as odd as the general direction of the film's
final act, which is entirely different from that of the original.  In
taking such a radical turn, City goes against the very spirit of its poetic
source material; the true magic and profound inspirational uplift of Wings
is sacrificed in favor of sap and weepy manipulation.  To be fair, on
stand-alone terms, City of Angels is watchable, but even from this
standpoint, it is still just a conventional and only moderately involving
love story wearing angel's wings.
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997
