Title
Review for Flatliners (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Horror films tend to be very derivative.  They take many of the same
themes and rework them over and over.  How different is FRIGHT NIGHT from
DRACULA really?  It is very rare for me to come out of a horror film feeling
I had seen something really new for the horror film.  And, be warned,
usually when I feel have seen something new, most audiences do not like the
films.  In the last ten years there have been five horror films I have liked
in this way.  They are SOMETHING WICKED THIS WAY COMES, LIFEFORCE, PRINCE OF
DARKNESS, LADY IN WHITE, and now FLATLINERS.  FLATLINERS is a mesmerizing
horror thriller about life and death and redemption.  From about two minutes
into the film I was constantly anxious to find out what happens next.  And
when it did happen, I was never disappointed but still never appeased.
     A group of medical students are fascinated by the  brink-of-death
experience that some of their patients have had.  But their curiosity
certainly goes beyond just collecting other peoples' accounts second-hand.
As long as they have the ability to induce death and to bring people back,
why wait for it to happen by chance and to other people.  Why not go off
exploring the undiscovered country for themselves.  As one student says of
the quest to know what is beyond death, "Philosophy failed.  Religion
failed.  Now it's time for medical science to try."  So one tries it and is
brought back  But now things seem different to him and reality is not quite
the same.
     At least in theme FLATLINERS is reminiscent of some of the classic old
Karloff films like Michael Curtiz's THE WALKING DEAD, and where that film
was a little pat in its description of life after death (Karloff just had
time to describe it as "peace" before dying a second time, and more
permanently), this film is only a little less pat in other ways in its
"meaning of death."  However, it is not concentrating so much on what the
other side looks like as on what it is like to have been there and be back.
     This is a movie to see in a theater; it will lose a lot of its visual
impact on the small screen.  Almost the entire film is shot in either
twilight half-tones or at night.  The medical school has got to be the most
baroque in the world.  It would have done credit to any 1930s
expressionistic horror film.  Its architecture is almost gothic with immense
vaulting rooms; dark, dismal corridors; labs with immense statue heads as if
gods were looking on.  Director Joel Schumacher's previous THE LOST BOYS had
little to recommend it but atmosphere.  This time he has better atmosphere
and a far more compelling story to tell.
     Kiefer Sutherland (of LOST BOYS) plays Nelson, who is exploring death
partially for curiosity and partially for glory.  Julia Roberts is Rachel,
who has her own private demons to face.  Roberts has the best developed
character.  Keith Bacon is Davis, who is just a little too good to be true.
Alec Baldwin's younger brother William plays Joe, whose story is somewhat
less interesting than the others and could by itself have been an episode of
"The Hitchhiker."
     FLATLINERS is intelligently filmed and written.  It has irony but
happily not apparently tongue-in-cheek.  In short, it deserves to be a
classic horror film and may well make it.  I rate it a high +2 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        In medical slang, a "flatline" is when a person suffers 
clinical and mental death. Ironically, the film FLATLINERS does 
the same thing about halfway through. It starts out a fascinating 
drama about a group of medical students who have found a way 
to induce death and bring themselves back to life, experiencing the 
mystery of the afterlife and living to tell abotu it. It ends up 
becoming a supernatural thriller reminiscent of the most 
mediocre Stephen King TV-movie adaptations.
        At the outset, Keifer Sutherland convinces a few of of his 
fellow students to help him with his death-cheatin' experiment, 
which calls for them to lower his body temperature and inject 
various chemicals into his blood stream until he flatlines. Kiefer 
flies over a giant field of flowers and trees for awhile. Then, thirty 
seconds later, they begin to raise his temperature and electroshock 
him back to life. Here, as with every other part of the movie where 
one of the flatliners is being brought back to life, director Joel 
Schumacher milks every drop of suspense he can get by making 
us think the students won't be able to bring their colleague back 
from the great beyond.
        Sutherland comes back blathering about the tunnel, the 
shining light and all that crap, and suddenly the other students want 
to experience it as well. Next comes Billy Baldwin, the stud of the 
bunch, whose personal afterlife involves quick cuts of beautiful 
women in various stages of undress, once again reinforcing my belief 
that heaven is an Aerosmith video. Finally, Kevin Bacon and Julia 
Roberts experience a few fleeting moments of death.
        But the movie's only halfway over, so we now some kind 
of complications will come along with these four manipulating the 
forces of nature. I just didn't think it would be a cross between BILL 
AND TED'S BOGUS JOURNEY and the ending of GHOSTBUSTERS. 
Suddenly everyone's worst memory of regret comes back to haunt 
them, Keifer's being an eight-year-old boy he inadertently killed 
when he was a child, Joe's in the form of all the women he's lied to 
for cheap sex (which he also secretly videotaped and sent to Bob 
Saget), Kevin's nightmare a ten-year-old girl he used to torment at 
school and Julia's her dead father.
        It's at this point the movie crashes and burns, becoming 
a second-rate horror/thriller. The topic of death is one that either 
interests or frightens everyone, and FLATLINERS could have taken 
more time to explore the theme instead of making it a plot device 
that brings the characters' worst feelings of guilt to life. In reality, 
the only guilt these people should feel is standing by and letting 
this movie die instead of doing something to save it.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
The Phantom (The Phantom)
     It's been a long, tedious, and violence-prone summer for the
Phantom, and he's been getting a little edgy.  Reviewing's in his blood
now, and it's been nearly three months since his last reviews (for CLASS
OF 1999 and BRAIN DEAD).
     Since then, he's been subjected to more violence thinly disguised
as pop entertainment than even Steven King, in his wildest dreams,
possibly could have imagined.  The combined body counts of TOTAL RECALL,
ROBOCOP 2, DIE HARD 2, and PRESUMED INNOCENT (well, to be fair, PRESUMED
INNOCENT's body count *was* on the low side) exceeded even the Phantom's
threshold for violence sometime in mid-July; for him, the cold, dark
days of autumn and winter, and the dozens of horror films they'll bring,
will seem like welcome relief indeed.
     Which brings us, in a rather roundabout way, to the subject of this
review.  For a film that is ostensibly about dying, it's curious that no
one dies in FLATLINERS -- at least not for long.  Although the film is
as much of a horror film as was THE OMEN and THE EXORCIST, FLATLINERS
ties PRESUMED INNOCENT as the summer's film with the lowest body count.
     (Before the Phantom even gets started reviewing the film, he would
like to say that he finds this both remarkable and quite refreshing; it
wasn't too long ago that filmmakers knew how to make films, both horror
and legitimate, in ways that didn't involve killing more people on
screen than they disappointed in the auditorium.)
     FLATLINERS starts with the tired old notion of "near death"
experiences, takes a detour somewhere around ELM STREET, and winds up as
a visual homage to one of the most stylish horror films of all time: THE
HUNGER.  Along the way, the director, Joel Schumacher, reminds us of
just what made 1987's THE LOST BOYS so enjoyable, and why he is one of
the best and most stylish directors making B-grade movies today.
     The film itself is best described as a rollercoaster ride -- a lot
of fun while you're speeding around turns and checking your seat
restraints, but not very memorable afterward.  To its credit, the film
makes believable the shaky notion that a bunch of photogenic medical
students with no homework, labwork, and just the occasional round to
make, can repeatedly induce brain death in each other for periods of
time greater even than the length of the commercials preceding the film,
and then unfailingly resuscitate each other, bringing each other back to
life and suffering no more brain damage than has the script.
     Having established that, which is no mean feat, Schumacher uses the
near death experiences to fashion a film that blends the best of the ELM
STREET series with the sensibility of a 90-minute MTV longform video.
Yet regardless of what you think of the subject matter, or even of the
film itself, there is no denying that Schumacher's cinematography, his
ability to set a scene and generate suspense, and his ability to use
sound effects and lighting techniques effectively is virtually unequaled
in the world of the horror film.  Sam Raimi and the Coen brothers have
shown the same skill with the EVIL DEAD series, BLOOD SIMPLE and RAISING
ARIZONA, and of course Ridley Scott's films define the genre of
techno-style, but Schumacher's talents have improved in the years since
THE LOST BOYS, and at this point the Phantom has to rank him right up
there with Sam, Joel, and Ethan.
     Schumacher keeps the film moving along, and it's good that he does,
since otherwise the audience would have time to consider just how trite
and obvious the plot is.  The Phantom is not going to drop any spoilers,
but if there is a single phan out there who can't guess both where the
film is going and how it ends by the time Kevin Bacon goes under, the
Phantom will be most surprised.  THE LOST BOYS suffered from similar
problems, of course; as modern-day vampire stories go, it doesn't hold a
silver bullet to NEAR DARK.  But at least THE LOST BOYS had interesting
characters, generally witty dialogue, and a script that doesn't sound as
if the closest it ever came to a second draft was when the writer left
some of the windows in his apartment open.  To say that the characters
in FLATLINERS are two-dimensional would be to insult the Cartesian
coordinate system; they each have one dimension, and they each stick to
that dimension throughout the film.  Kiefer Sutherland is the driven,
slightly bad guy; Kevin Bacon is the brilliant, unstable yet reliable
guy, Julia Roberts keeps us all waiting for the scene where they perform
CPR on her and in general never allows the word "collagen" to leave our
thoughts, etc., etc.
     But we don't go to horror films expecting great originality, do we
phans?  Although the occasional diamond in the rough like the EVIL DEAD
series or last spring's BRAIN DEAD helps us recall that it is possible
to be both creative and stylish, all too frequently we are forced to
settle for films that are neither.  That FLATLINERS is so very stylish
is a distinct plus, and Schumacher handles the film so well that the
Phantom was more than willing to overlook the bumpy plot and the less
than surprising surprises.
     The film is set in Chicago, but only barely.  As he did with THE
LOST BOYS, Schumacher has used various unrelated sets and city backdrops
in a way that creates a private world for the film; FLATLINERS is not
set in any recognizable part or suburb of Chicago, though alumni of
Loyola may recognize some of the more striking buildings in the film.
But for the most part, the characters in FLATLINERS exist in their own
world, a world of colored lights, fog, and the night (it's almost always
night during the film, and when it isn't night it's dark or cloudy).
Phans of THE LOST BOYS will recognize some of Schumacher's signature
elements of style, but FLATLINERS has many of its own; it is obviously
related to THE LOST BOYS, but it doesn't look like a clone.  One
interesting new affectation is having large sheets of clear plastic
draped over almost everything in sight; this was done to such excess
that the Phantom thought that all of Chicago was undergoing massive
asbestos removal procedures.  And Schumacher's swooping and diving
camera is back, but his technique has improved in the years since THE
LOST BOYS.  In FLATLINERS, he makes use of all the tricks of the music
video trade, including black & white photography, purposely grainy or
flat photography, washed out or oversaturated color, etc.  There are
also a good number of monitors of various kinds scattered throughout the
film, and Schumacher even cribs a bit from SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE.  For
better or worse (and the in the Phantom's opinion, better), FLATLINERS
plays more like a longform video than like a film.
     By the film's end, the Phantom was reminded of Tony Scott's 1983
film, THE HUNGER, a vampire film that was exquisitely bad, though very,
very stylish.  Schumacher is not a talentless hack like Scott;
FLATLINERS is nothing if not entertaining.  Whereas THE HUNGER was a
feast for the eyes and a famine for the mind, FLATLINERS keeps us
entertained and happy as long as we don't spend too much time trying to
predict the outcome of the next scene (or even what the next scene will
be) -- for alas, all too often we are correct and left to wonder why
someone didn't put as much effort into the story as Schumacher had
obviously put into filming it.
     And it's at the end, when things start winding down and heading
toward their all-too-predictable conclusion, that the Phantom found his
interest in the film flatlining (or at least faultering).  FLATLINERS is
a good 10 minutes too long, and the ending is so disappointing that it
stands a good chance of ruining what is otherwise a very entertaining,
if brainless, film for those phans who expected to see a horror film
that had the courage of its convictions.
     The ending, phans, is an ending only a studio executive or a parent
could love; it is a near-perfect mass-market movie-of-the-week ending.
The Phantom even felt that it gave THE ABYSS a run for its money as the
world's most abysmal ending, but in the end his conclusion is that THE
ABYSS is still reigning champion.  Things start going astray once it
becomes obvious that the film has a GHOST-like heart to it; all the
malevolence, chills and thrills of the first half start to disappear
like a vampire exposed to daylight, and the audience is left with 20
minutes of pointless exposition that leads inexorably to a conclusion
worthy only of our strongest excoriation.  (All right, perhaps that was
reaching a bit, but the Phantom hasn't visited his old friend Roget in
quite a while.)  In a word, phans, the ending is execrable.  (Now *that*
was reaching...)
     But don't let the lousy ending keep you from seeing FLATLINERS;
after all, if the Phantom avoided every film that ended badly, he'd be
able to get his library books back on time and he'd rarely have to clean
the heads on his VCR.  Like THE LOST BOYS, FLATLINERS is wonderful fun
while you're in the theater, and though you will most likely be groaning
along with the rest of the audience by the film's end, you won't be
bored for the 90 minutes preceding it.
