Title
Review for Something to Talk About (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT is a story full of cheating Southern men, and
their sad, angry, but ultimately loyal Southern women.  As a Southerner, I
had trouble identifying with the reality of the story, but the stereotypes
were as familiar as the latest television soap opera.
     In SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT, Grace Bichon (Julia Roberts) was going to
be a vet, but got pregnant and married Eddie Bichon (Dennis Quaid) instead.
They had a lovely daughter, Caroline Bichon (Haley Aull) who appears to be
about 10 as the story opens.  Grace is part of the old money South.  Her
father, Wyly King (Robert Duvall), and mother, Georgia King (Gena Rowlands),
live in a mansion and raise jumping horses.  Wyly has just spent $150,000 on
a horse, and Grace is angry at his wasting money since he already has a
champion caliber horse.  Caroline is angry because she wants to ride a real
horse rather than just a pony in the big race.  Eddie's family is also
loaded and is in a lucrative real estate deal with Wyly.  Gosh, sounds just
like back home - all Southerners live like that as everyone who owns a TV
knows.
     Into this tableaux, tragedy strikes immediately.  Grace sees Eddie
kissing another woman and soon after that she finds that he has been
sleeping around like all of the other men in town.  She leaves him to live
with her parents who lecture her constantly on keeping her troubles to
herself and how she should forgive and forget.  Her sister, Emma Rae King
(Kyra Sedgwick), wants her to leave Eddie and Emma Rae kicks him in the
groin for good measure.
     The script by Callie Khouri is full of incredulity's.  How many grown
daughters would use the F word while talking to their fathers?  Do we really
believe that Grace would stand up at a meeting with all of the local society
women and announce everyone whom she thinks is sleeping with someone else?
After Grace leaves Eddie, Khouri has Eddie for the most of the rest of the
movie spending only brief seconds with his daughter, whom he calls his
doodlebug and whom he loves so much.  He just accepts that Grace can take
his doodlebug away forever, and he has no rights.  I don't buy him being
that naive.
     Khouri does come up with a few good one liners.  The best one that is
printable is Wyly's when he says, "I may have fooled around a little bit,
but I have never cheated." The biggest problem with the script is that we
get images and cliches, but no real story that engages the viewer, makes any
of the characters more than stick figures, or makes you care about any of
them.
     Director Lasse Hallstroem who did the wonderful MY LIFE AS A DOG and
the terrible WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE encourages all of his cast to
overact.  The worst is Gena Rowlands.  Her performance was totally
unbelievable and off the wall.  Dennis Quaid who has done a few good movies
like D.O.A. and GREAT BALLS OF FIRE!, but many more stinkers like UNDERCOVER
BLUES (the bottom on my list in 1993), comes through with another
embarrassing performance.  Imagine a hurt puppy.  Now cast the puppy as
Eddie and give him a million dollars for acting.  You get the idea.  Duvall,
who is usually good, was given a poorly written part and did nothing
interesting with it.
     The only acceptable acting was by Roberts who did a passable job as a
sad woman who says she views herself as a failure.  Sedgwick looked like her
sister, but other than similar looks I found her performance of no value.
The girl, Haley Aull, showed a lot of promise.  Her acting would have been
easier to listen to if they had not decided that she was going to have some
missing teeth in the back of her mouth that gave her a strong lisp.  Too
cutesy for my taste.
     There was a single good scene in the show - the dance scene between
Eddie and Grace.  Granted than given the characters, the scene at that point
in the picture was not believable; nevertheless, it was a small delight in
an otherwise dismal movie.  They should have made a different movie and used
that scene in it.
     The movie was filmed on location in the horse country of Georgia and
South Carolina.  Nevertheless, the cinematography (Sven Nykvist) and the
sets (Mel Bourne) were pretty blah.  Only the close up scenes before the
race had any imagination.  The sound had major problems in the mixing and
reminded me of some of the rough cuts you hear at a preview.
     SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT meanders along at 1:45 because of loose editing
by Mia Goldman.  It is rated R solely for bad language.  There is no sex,
nudity, violence, or drugs.  I do not even remember any smoking.  Like all
good Southern cliches, however, the characters all drank enough to have
cirrhosis of the liver.  Teenagers used to bad language would be not be
harmed by seeing the show.  On the other hand, I recommend everyone pass on
this turkey and see any other movie instead.  I award it a half star since
it was not totally unbearable.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Julia Roberts, Robert Duvall, Dennis Quaid, Gena Rowlands, 
      Kyra Sedgewick, Brett Cullen, Haley Hull 
Director: Lasse Hallstrom 
Producers: Anthea Sylbert and Paula Weinstein 
Screenplay: Callie Khouri 
Cinematography: Sven Nykvist 
Music: Hans Zimmer and Graham Preskett 
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers 
     Even though it's being marketed as a romantic comedy, SOMETHING TO 
TALK ABOUT is really concerned with the relationships of two generations 
of fathers and daughters.  This ordinary motion picture doesn't break 
any new ground as it compares and contrasts the interactions between 
Grace (Julia Roberts) and her domineering father, Wyle (Robert Duvall), 
with those of her daughter, Caroline (Hayle Hull), and her husband, 
Eddie (Dennis Quaid).  To add something of a little more interest, 
marital infidelity is thrown into the mix.  This forms the basis for a 
romance by presenting an excuse for Eddie to focus his efforts on 
winning Grace back. 
     All this action takes place against the backdrop of a grand prix 
horse jumping contest, the inclusion of which doesn't generate the same 
kind of audience interest that a more glamorous sporting event (like 
figure skating) might.  Most of the horse-related stuff is either 
superfluous, boring, or both.  Equestrians might disagree, but they're 
likely to be in the minority. 
     One of the more obvious drawbacks to SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT is 
that lead actress Roberts has lost the sparkle she exhibited in such 
hits as PRETTY WOMAN and SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY.  Here, she's flat, 
frequently eclipsed by the fiery, feisty performance of Kyra Sedgewick, 
who plays Grace's sharp-tongued sister, Emma Rae.  Roberts' scenes with 
Quaid sputter when they should sizzle.  There's only one sequence -- an 
inspired dance number -- when these two generate any sparks, and it 
doesn't last nearly long enough. 
     The film tries to develop a three-dimensional Grace by exploring 
her relationships with her mother (Gena Rowlands), father, sister, 
daughter, and philandering husband.  The problem is that none of these 
interactions turn out to be particularly interesting.  Dramatically, 
they are tired retreads of similar things done better in other movies.  
At least there are a few funny-to-hilarious moments that save this film 
from being a complete waste of time.   
     Robert Duvall does far from his best job here.  His is basically a 
"mail it in" performance, but, considering the script he's working from, 
it's no wonder.  SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT is weary -- every ounce of 
energy and originality has long since been wrung out of this formula, 
and the "twist" of having the leads already married doesn't do much to 
spice up things.  Ultimately, this "something" turns out to be nothing 
much at all. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Christopher Null
     This is one of those reviews that's going to garner plenty of
nasty mail from disgruntled readers, but I feel it's my obligation to
let *you* know exactly what you're getting into with SOMETHING TO TALK
ABOUT.
     If you are a female, preferably married, preferably Southern,
preferably jilted by your husband, and preferably interested in horses,
you'll love this film.  If not, you're screwed.  SOMETHING TO TALK
ABOUT is the story of a married, Southern, jilted female, Grace (Julia
Roberts), who works for her father (Robert Duvall) at his
horse-breeding ranch.  When she finds husband Eddie (Dennis Quaid) with
another woman, she dumps him like week-old halibut and heads off into
the land of reckless self-indulgence, revenge, and wacky hijinks with
her dysfunctional family.
     Well, it ain't quite that simple.  I was expecting a romantic
comedy, judging from the marketing campaign.  Unfortunately, this is
*not* a humor-filled film.  It's a drama with some funny bits tacked
on.  Although Kyra Sedgwick (as Grace's sister Emma Rae) is the only
comic relief and a God-sent saving grace to the picture, SOMETHING TO
TALK ABOUT does exactly what its title says:  talk ... at length ...
for what feels like hours ... mainly about what scum the men in the
female characters' lives are.
     SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT soon becomes the movie that will not die,
which I started praying for after the first half hour.  Absolutely
nothing interesting happens to these characters.  They are almost
universally unlikable and underdeveloped--which is difficult to pull
off, considering the sheer mass of personal interactions in the
picture.  Everyone just moans a lot along the lines of "Whatever
happened to what we used to have?" and "How could you do this to me?"
The whole film comes off as a sad experiment in marketing--to see how
many women the movie could pack in the theater.  Sadly, it's a lot.
Let me tell you:  a knee to the crotch goes a long way for this crowd.
     And when it's finally over ... just when you think they aren't
going to slap on a Hollywood Ending and make a nice statement ...
*wrong!*  SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT sells out like tickets to a Streisand
concert.  I left the theater depressed.
     SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT is an especially painful letdown,
considering its cast and creators.  Director Lasse Hallstrom (MY LIFE
AS A DOG, WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE?) and screenwriter Callie Khouri
(THELMA AND LOUISE) have really taken a wrong turn here.  It looks like
everyone had the best of intentions, but the results were less than
stellar.
     Gentlemen reading these words, just remember to say this to your
girlfriend or wife after she drags you to the film:  "I thought it was
good!"  It'll be a lot less painful that way.  I promise.
