Title
Review for Last Resort (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Laura Clifford
When Eastern European Tanya (Dina Korzun) leaves home with her 10-year-old 
son Artiom (Artoim Strelnikov) to meet her English fiance Mark, she instead 
finds herself a refugee with no money, no prospects and no passport in "Last 
Resort."
Artiom realizes that Mark is as neurotic as his mom and knows her hopes
will be dashed before she does.  Forced by circumstances to declare herself
and her son refugees, Tanya and Artiom are trucked off to Stonehaven, a former
honky tonk beachside amusement park, where refugees are housed in a cold,
dismal, forbidding apartment building behind barbed wire fences policed by
guard dogs.  Without money, there's no escape - 12 to 16 months before being
let out into English freedom, 4-6 months to be officially deported.  The
only money to be made is by selling goods, blood or yourself, if you happen
to be an attractive young woman.
Tanya meets Alfie (Paddy Considine, "A Room for Romeo Brass"), the manager
of the local arcade, in search for a phone card to attempt to reach Mark.
Shaggy, hangdog Alfie, initially a suspicious character who appears to 
leech his living off the unfortunates of Stonehaven, changes our opinion
of him in a nanosecond with the smile he flashes at Tanya.  Once
Tanya finally accepts the truth about Mark and sees the friendship that's
developed between Artiom and Alfie, a tentative romance begins.  However
the self realization the whole humiliating experience has brought to Tanya 
means she won't allow herself to slip back into her old dependencies.
Polish writer/director Pawel Pawlikowski has created a small gem of a movie.
His and cowriter Rowan Joffe's creative blending of an almost Kafkaesque 
political situation with both a gentle love story and a mother's journey to 
maturity is rivetting storytelling.  Visually, he and director of photography 
Ryszard Lenczewski combines jarringly close hand held camerawork with 
gorgeously framed, pastel character palletted landscapes.  Original music by 
Max de Wardener adds melancholy with the ghost-like refrains of the shuttered 
amusement park.
Pawlikowski is also blessed with an outstanding, natural cast.  Dina Korzun
allows a gamut of emotion to play across her open, innocent face.  She's
resigned when she goes to pornographer Les (Lindsey Honey, the real life
'most famous pornographer in Britain'), then girlishly amused by the skit he
pantomimes for her before ultimately breaking down with the shame of it when 
finally being broadcast over the internet.  She works marvelously well with 
Considine,whose shaggy charm and reigned in hope make the viewer root for him.
Considine makes the combination of a tough realist and a romantic work.
Strelnikov is astonishingly confident in his screen debut as the ten year
old street smart kid who adapts to a bad situation not of his making.
Thank goodness for the Shooting Gallery - while Hollywood continues
to churn out very little of interest, they rescue great little films like
"Last Resort" from obscurity.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Tanya (Dina Korzun) is a pretty Russian émigré who came to England with her
10-year old son, Artiom (Artiom Strelnikov) on the promise of marriage to a
British citizen. She is shocked to learn that her would be fiancé has
stranded her and the boy and a happy life in London is nothing but a
vanished dream. She and Artiom find themselves stuck in a desolate holding
center for refugees with no passport, no money and no rights in "Last
Resort."
Documentary filmmaker Pawel Pawlikowski makes his first inroad into feature
length fiction with a tale (co-written by Rowan Joffe) about a naďve young
mother who digs up her Moscow roots with the hope of planting them in
prosperous London. Tanya's plans are dashed at the outset, when stranded by
the unseen fiancé, and she and Artiom are left in the hands of the
immigration authorities. She seeks asylum in England, not knowing it means
internment in the rundown, former resort town of Stonehaven - for 12 to 16
months!
Alfie (Paddy Considine), an ex-con who runs the local video arcade, takes a
liking to Tanya and Artiom and helps them out with food, a TV and
friendship. He even fixes up their dreary flat with a lick of paint here
and there. But, it is obvious to Alfie that the penniless woman is
desperate to break out of her prison and escape her humiliation. When Tanya
agrees to take a job with a cyberspace pornographer named Les (Britain's
most famous real life porno king, Lindsay Honey), Alfie realizes this as a
frantic cry for help. He makes it his mission to help Tanya and Artiom
escape, even as he falls in love with the pretty Russian.
"Last Resort" is a little gem of a movie that captures a world not known to
most - a refugee-inhabited land without hope of escape from its daily,
desolate grind. But, this setting is a backdrop for the real tale about
Tanya and Artiom and the misguided naivete that lands them in the bleak
gray hell of Stonehaven. When Alfie comes into their life, things change
for the better, but a prison is still a prison and escape is her only hope.
Dina Korzun, who looks like a Slavic Emily Watson, is perfect as Tanya. She
is protective of her son, but is at the mercy of the authorities that
interned her. Her one failed escape attempt is met with the threat of real
incarceration, driving Tanya to even deeper frustration. Korzun gives a
subtle performance as she realizes that her choices have put her and Artiom
in such dire straits. Complementing Korzun is a truly likable performance
by Paddy Considine as Alfie. The affection he feels for Tanya and Artiom is
palpable and naturally rendered. Young Artiom Strelnikov makes an
impressive debut as the savvy son with his own share of problems coping
with the situation.
Helmer Pawlikowski, using a combination of static and hand held camera (by
lenser Ryszard Lenczewski), creates a vision that is both cold and
intimate. The backdrop of Stonehaven depicts a bleak, unforgiving world
where security surveillance camera monitor every corner of the confined
world, making escape near impossible. This changes when the film
concentrates on the three principles and takes on a warmth that reflects
the trio's respective feelings and mood. All in all, "Last Resort" is a
little treat of a quality film at a time when Hollywood is releasing mostly
dreck.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
It's hard to imagine a more horrific modern-day nightmare.  A young and
wide-eyed Russian lass named Tanya (Dina Korzun) flies to Britain with
her young son Artiom (Artiom Strelnikov) on the promise that her British
fiancée will pick them up from the airport and whisk them off to a new
and happy life together in the West.
When hubby-to-be doesn't show up, Tanya declares herself a refugee to
avoid being immediately sent back to Moscow, then finds herself
imprisoned in an urban gulag -- actually an abandoned seaside resort
with roller coasters and video arcades that's been converted to a
refugee camp.
Everything is difficult in the "resort."  Simply making a telephone call
involves long waits and convoluted instructions, gangs and duplicity
lurk around every corner, and the local fried fish turns out to be just
batter.  With no money and nowhere to go to earn any, Tanya gets
involved with the local pornographer (Lindsey Honey -- a real-life king
of British porn), and we feel she's pretty much scraping bottom.
Luckily, Tanya is befriended by Alfie (the very entertaining Paddy
Considine, A Room for Romeo Brass), the local arcade manager, who takes
the Russian duo under his wing.  What results is a tiny romance, held
together with a story about compassion and perseverance.
Written and directed by the Polish Pawel Pawlikowski, the film is
somewhat autobiographical and is extremely apt in its storytelling
ability.  While the resort itself is relatively benign, Pawlikowski
imbues it with a subtle horror through creepy set designs that connote a
carnival funhouse and washed-out lighting that turns everything
greenish.  Korzun lets us truly feel her struggle, emoting with a
brilliance rarely seen in Hollywood.
Altogether, Last Resort is a small movie, with simple themes and a
running time slightly longer than your typical episode of ER.  However,
it carries far more power than any old TV show -- and most other movies,
to boot.
Director: Paul Pavlikovsky
Producer: Ruth Caleb
Writer: Rowan Joffe, Paul Pavlikovsky
Starring: Dina Korzun, Artiom Strelnikov, Paddy Considine, Lindsey
Honey, Dave Bean, Perry Benson, Adrian Scarborough, Bruce Byron
http://216.167.20.103/main.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Ever get claustrophobic even though you have an entire city in which to
roam?  That's just how Tanya and Artyom feel when they try to move from
Moscow to London in Last Resort, the first film from Shooting Gallery's 2001
Film Series.  The film, which could possibly redefine the word "bleak," has
won awards at a number of festivals and garnered director Pawel Pavlikovsky
the Most Promising Newcomer Award at the British version of the Oscars.
Upon arrival in the UK, young mother Tanya (Dina Korzun) and her
ten-year-old son Artyom (Artyom Strelnikov) are given the third degree by a
customs officer.  Tanya, who doesn't have a firm grasp of the English
language, explains she and her son are heading to London to meet her fiancé.
Because she has little money and no work permit, Tanya tells the customs
officer she's a refugee in the hopes they'll leave the pretty children's
book illustrator alone long enough to contact her beau.
They don't, though.  Tanya and Artyom are taken to coastal Stonehaven, which
is, essentially, a holding area for immigrants that England doesn't want
wandering around London.  They get a free flat (in a building called
Dreamland," of all things) and vouchers for food, but as political asylum
applicants, they must stay in Stonehaven for at least a year.  Withdrawing
the application can take up to six months.  So Tanya is stuck with no work
permit (and no jobs even if she had one) and a fiancé who won't return her
calls (shades of Felicia's Journey) while she tries to get by in a drab town
full of security cameras and fish dinners that contain no fish at all.
While the street-smart Artyom (think a Growing Pains-era Leonardo DiCaprio)
begins to associate with a seedy crowd, two men offer to give Tanya (think a
Russian Emily Watson) a hand - one is a successful businessman and the other
is an ex-con.  The entrepreneur is an Internet porn guru (Lindsey Honey -
he's the Al Goldstein of the U.K.) who wants Tanya to drop her knickers for
a live video stream that could net her big bucks.  The ex-con (Paddy
Considine, Born Romantic), a kindly arcade manager and part-time bingo
caller (making Resort the second Brit film of the year to feature a bingo
caller - the other is House!), is a sweetie who falls for Tanya, befriends
her boy and helps them out with furnishing and decorating their tiny
apartment.
Resort, which has an ending that's just about as un-Hollywood as they come,
is reminiscent of Jim Jarmusch's Down By Law, which featured characters
spending the entire film trying to escape from a dreary place only to end up
in a place just as dreary.  Pavlikovsky, who has made a career of filming
documentaries for the BBC (they financed Resort, too), does a great job
wielding his handheld camera to make this film feel like a documentary, as
well.  He and cinematographer Ryszard Lenczewski also add a few startlingly
well-composed shots that are beautiful, yet add to Resort's overall
dreariness.
1:17 - Not Rated but contains adult language, brief nudity and strong sexual
content
