Title
Review for Airheads (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Lon Ponschock
Directed by Michael Lehman
Stars Brendan Frazer, Steve Buscemi, Adam Sandler, Joe Montegna
     I really enjoyed this.  I kind of suspected I would enjoy it since
it is about radio and rock and roll but the real treat was the
*language*.
     AIRHEADS has more in the writing of it than the usual round of
expletives: it's a compendium of slang of the eighties and nineties.
Where else are you going to hear a words like 'queve' or 'dufuss'?  And
all woven into a story that is ideal to display this usage: a metal
trio invades a radio station to get their demo played.
     Michael Lehman is a new name to me, can't tell you much about him,
but Brendan Frazer (SCHOOL TIES, ENCINO MAN) Steve Buscemi (RESERVOIR
DOGS, IN THE SOUP) and Adam Sandler (Sat.  Night Live and SHAKES THE
CLOWN) plus Joe Montegna (HOUSE OF GAMES, BODY OF EVIDENCE, and many
more)  are all well known and talented performers.
     This film has a solid soundtrack, and interesting idea which
succeeds in execution more often than it fails and a passable but
unintrusive directing style which lets the story sort of tell itself
without being too arty.
     This film is about rock and roll and radio.  This idea has been
done before on television and in films, always or nearly always to good
effect.  It wasn't really until I did radio myself that I appreciated
the interaction of the two so much.  Radio, more than any other, is
people's media:  something everyone can enjoy and potentially *do* as
well.  And there are enough "holes in the system" to still be able to
get out and do THE WORK if you really want to.  My time for doing that
is pretty much over  but I still appreciate it when someone is out
there with that DIY spirit keeping the independence and the joy of
radio alive.  It's not easy but it can be done.
     AIRHEADS is a feast of language--street language--and has
enough hooks and turns to provide you with some major laughs.  Well, it
did for *me* anyway.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Brendan Fraser, Steve Buscemi, Adam Sandler, Joe
Mantegna, Michael McKean, Michael Richards, Chris Farley.
Screenplay:  Rich Wilkes.
Director:  Michael Lehmann.
     It can now be considered official: HEATHERS was a fluke.
Director Michael Lehmann's 1989 debut has become a cult classic, an
acidic satire of contemporary teen culture with a surreal edge, perhaps
most famous for launching Winona Ryder and Christian Slater on the road
to stardom.  But since then, Lehmann has helmed the
practically-straight-to-video clunker MEET THE APPLEGATES and the
nigh-legendary bomb HUDSON HAWK.  After a couple of years licking his
wounds and doing TV work (including THE LARRY SANDERS SHOW), Lehmann
has returned to the big screen with an inept would-be rock and roll
comedy, AIRHEADS.  Only a loopy performance by Adam Sandler and a
slightly more energetic final twenty minutes save it from complete
disaster.
     AIRHEADS stars Brendan Fraser as Chazz, a struggling musician who
undergoes a daily ritual of being thrown out of record company offices
for trying to smuggle in the demo tape for his band The Lone Rangers.
One day, he comes up with a more creative way to get noticed, and he
and fellow Lone Rangers Rex (Steve Buscemi) and Pip (Adam Sandler)
sneak into a radio station to get the demo on the air.  When reason
fails, the band takes the station hostage with water guns, including a
sarcastic d.j. (Joe Mantegna) and the obnoxious program director
(Michael McKean).  The attempt to get the demo played becomes a comedy
of errors, all played out live over the airwaves to a growing army of
fans.
     In its appealing trailers, AIRHEADS looked like it was going to be
a smart comedy about stupid people.  Consider yourself warned: this is
another case where every funny line is in the trailer.  The main
problem with AIRHEADS turns out to be that it's a stupid comedy about
people who aren't stupid enough.  Adam Sandler is perfect; his
thick-as-a-brick reading of Pip is far and away the best thing about
AIRHEADS, good for some genuinely inspired comedy.  Fraser, however, is
playing a basically average guy, and Buscemi comes off as flat-out
intellectual.  AIRHEADS had the potential for a lot of laughs coming
from the reaction of reasonably normal hostages and police to
impossibly stupid band members.  Unfortunately, some of the hostages
and most of the police officers are more idiotic than The Lone
Rangers.  The result is a bunch of jokes based on lame confrontations
between the band members and a militant black d.j., McKean's fatuous
corporate type and each other, consisting almost entirely of
third-grade insults focusing on bodily functions and sexual
preference.  The characters in AIRHEADS simply never interact in a way
that's remotely interesting or funny.  Even the strange supporting cast
(including "Seinfeld's" Michael Richards as an accountant sneaking
through the radio station's ventilation system) and a few creative
cameos (including a voice-only spot by a pair of well-known rock
critics) land with a thud.
     While the character-based comedy fails, AIRHEADS might have had a
chance if it had actually been about something, if it had had a point
of view or and attitude about *anything*.  It's not a parody of
corporate music, or corporate radio, or heavy metal youth culture, or
even other hostage-based movies like DOG DAY AFTERNOON.  There are a
few clever moments near the end which take shots at the cult of
personality surrounding crimes-in-progress (all too familiar in the
wake of the roadside cheering section in the O. J. Simpson chase), but
they come so late that they seem almost incidental.  Actually, AIRHEADS
might be viewed cynically as about one very specific thing:  selling a
tie-in soundtrack album.
     In a crowd scene near the film's conclusion, there is a glimpse of
the Michael Lehmann of HEATHERS.  After Chazz is forced to make an
embarrassing confession, a number of kids in the crowd outside the
radio station make their own embarrassing confessions in a show of
solidarity.  It's the kind of whacked-out moment that made HEATHERS
unique, and there are a couple more like it that briefly give AIRHEADS
a bit of juice.  Sadly, they are stretched out over a 90 minute movie.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by     Michael Lehmann
Written by      Rich Wilkes
Cast Brendan Fraiser, Steve Buscemi, Adam Sandler, Joe Mantegna,
     Michael McKean, Michael Richards, Judd Nelson, Chris Farley
MPAA Rating     PG-13
Running Time    90 minutes
     Heavy-metal humor ain't easy as proven by the air-headed AIRHEADS,
a good-to-bad-to-almost-unwatchable comedy about an unsigned band
(Brendan Fraiser, Steve Buscemi, and Adam Sandler) that raids a radio
station to get their demo played.
     Hip helmer Michael Lehmann and writer Rich Wilkes target the MTV
metal crowd and, if nothing else, get the costumes and dialogue right.
Best exchange:
     What's missing, though, are any *real* references to the genre.
Oh, sure, there's a cameo from Mr. Kilmister and a couple cracks about
both Vince Neil and Ozzy.  As well as a call-in in from Beavis and
Butthead.  But the real *meat*--the tunes, man, the tunes--is
missing.  Come on, a cover of Van Halen's "I'm the One" by Four Non
Blondes?
     Three stooges Fraiser, Buscemi, and Sandler are all
extra-appealing.  And co-stars Joe Mantegna (jock) and Michael McKean
(PD) both emerge unscathed from the plot-from-hell.  But steer clear of
Michael Richards, Judd Nelson, and Chris Farley.  They're not worthy.

Author
Lon Ponschock
Directed by Michael Lehman
Starring: Brendan Frazer, Steve Buscemi, Adam Sandler, Joe Montegna
     I really enjoyed this.  I kind of suspected I would enjoy it since
it is about radio and rock and roll but the real treat was the
*language*.
     AIRHEADS has more in the writing of it than the usual round of
expletives: it's a compendium of slang of the eighties and nineties.
Where else are you going to hear a words like 'queve' or 'dufuss'?  And
all woven into a story that is ideal to display this usage: a metal
trio invades a radio station to get their demo played.
     Michael Lehman is a new name to me, can't tell you much about him,
but Brendan Frazer (SCHOOL TIES, ENCINO MAN) Steve Buscemi (RESERVOIR
DOGS, IN THE SOUP) and Adam Sandler ("Saturday Night Live" and SHAKES THE
CLOWN) plus Joe Montegna (HOUSE OF GAMES, BODY OF EVIDENCE, and many
more) are all well known and talented performers.
     This film has a solid soundtrack, and interesting idea which
succeeds in execution more often than it fails and a passable but
unintrusive directing style which lets the story sort of tell itself
without being too arty.
     This film is about rock and roll and radio: an idea has been done
before on television and in films, always or nearly always to good
effect.  It wasn't really until I did radio myself that I appreciated
the interaction of the two so much.  Radio, more than any other, is
people's media: something everyone can enjoy and potentially *do* as
well.  And there are enough 'holes in the system' to still be able to
get out and do THE WORK if you really want to.  My time for doing that
is pretty much over  but I still appreciate it when someone is out
there with that DIY spirit keeping the independence and the joy of
radio alive.  It's not easy but it can be done.
     AIRHEADS is a feast of language-- street language and has enough
hooks and turns to provide you with some major laughs.  Well, it did
for *me* anyway.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Brendan Fraser, Steve Buscemi, Adam Sandler,
           Joe Mantegna, Michael McKean, Chris Farley, Ernie Hudson, 
           Amy Locane, Nina Siemaszko 
Director: Michael Lehmann 
Producers:  Robert Simonds and Mark Burg 
Screenplay:  Rich Wilkes 
Cinematography:  John Schwartzman 
Music:  Carter Burwell 
Released by 20th Century Fox 
     When considering this movie, a word analogy comes to mind.  FEAR
OF A BLACK HAT is to CB4 as THIS IS SPINAL TAP is to AIRHEADS.  Having
said that, I can assure you that two of those films (BLACK HAT and
SPINAL TAP) won't be mentioned again in this review.  AIRHEADS isn't
worth the comparison.
     Observing how fertile the field of heavy metal music is for
satire, it's disappointing to watch AIRHEADS bumble around, desperately
trying to find something funny to say.  Even sadder is the continuing
nosedive of director Michael Lehmann's once-promising career.  It's
hard to believe that this is the same man who brought us the delicious
black comedy HEATHERS (then again, he was also responsible for HUDSON
HAWK).
     The premise of AIRHEADS sounds promising.  Three musicians of
limited intelligence (Brendan Fraser, Steve Buscemi, and Adam Sandler)
break into a radio station and hold the DJ (Joe Mantegna) and manager
(Michael McKean) at gunpoint to get their demo played.  Things go
wrong, however, and when the police show up, the "Lone Rangers" have to
take hostages.  One problem, though.  Their real-looking weapons are
actually water pistols.
     Despite a chuckle here and there, most of AIRHEADS isn't worth the
film it was processed on.  It requires an effort to avoid gritting
one's teeth as obvious comic opportunities are allowed to pass by
untouched.  On the other hand, most of the jokes actually offered up by
the script are either unfunny, obvious, or both.  The overt stupidity
of the three leads is amusing for a little while, but it doesn't take
long for this trait to become tiresome.
     AIRHEADS is not a good parody.  Its comedy has no real edge, and
consistently avoids risks.  On those rare occasions when the film takes
a stab at being outlandish, it is funny, but that doesn't happen too
often.  Most of the time, AIRHEADS flounders around trying--and
failing--to be humorous.  In that way, it's a lot like 1993's CB4, a
rap parody that was more dumb than witty.
     The cast contains some surprisingly good performers.  Joe Mantegna
is a respected name, but this is his second low-brow film in a row
(BABY'S DAY OUT being the other).  Steve Buscemi (of RESERVOIR DOGS)
and Ernie Hudson also have roles.  Brendan Fraser, the film's resident
heartthrob, displays little comic timing.
     It's hard to determine how much heavy-metal fanatics will enjoy
this film, since the music isn't really the point.  Then again,
considering the confused nature of AIRHEADS, it's a little difficult to
determine whether or not this film has a point.  Anyway, regardless of
who the target audience is, the filmmakers appear to have missed it.
Considering the poor quality of the production in general, and the
screenplay in particular, AIRHEADS appears to be an apt title.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
