Title
Review for Mr. Wonderful (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     Date Released:  10/15/93
     Running Length:  1:39
     Rated:  PG-13 (Mature themes, language, sexual situations)
It's very difficult to do a romantic comedy right.  Because the outcome 
is almost never in doubt, the plot becomes little more than a conveyance 
- a means to an end.  As a result, no matter how strong the storyline is, 
there are limits to its effectiveness.  Successful romantic comedies work 
because of solid performances by the actors; well-rounded, developing 
characters for them to play; and that certain je ne sais quoi (often 
referred to as "chemistry") which allows the audience to believe, however 
momentarily, that these two people are actually in love.  Happily for 
those who enjoy these sorts of movies, MR. WONDERFUL meets the criteria.
Once upon a time, Gus (Matt Dillon) and Lee (Anabella Sciorra) were 
happily married, but that was before a separation, a court settlement, 
and alimony.  Now, Gus wants to enter a business venture with four close 
friends, but he can't find the funds because the terms of the divorce 
stipulates that he has to put his ex-wife through college.  The only 
solution he can see (and even he acknowledges it to be a long-shot) is to 
get her married again so he no longer has to pay the alimony.  Lee, 
however, is involved with a married professor (William Hurt), and that 
makes Gus' job all the more difficult.  Adding to his problems is a 
certain instability in his own life - his girlfriend Rita (Mary Louise 
Parker) wants to move in with him, but Gus is experiencing difficulty 
making a commitment.  Of course, what's obvious to the audience from the 
beginning, but takes the characters much longer to figure out, is that 
the pair who split up still love each other.
MR. WONDERFUL is a generally well-written, mostly intelligent romance 
that's more of a light drama than a comedy.  Most of the silly cliches 
and ridiculous plot elements that clutter up most entries of the genre 
are absent.  Instead of the story forcing the characters into silly 
situations created solely to spark laughter, this movie tries hard to 
place Gus and Lee in believable circumstances that allow their 
personalities to come out.  Because, as the writers and director Anthony 
Minghella (who made TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY) obviously realize, for this 
type of movie to work, it's necessary for the audience to care about the 
people on screen.
And we do care.  Not only about the principals, but about some of the 
minor characters as well.  While the script clearly shortchanges William 
Hurt's Tom, reducing him to a philandering husband having an affair with 
a student, Mary Louise Parker's Rita is developed more fully.  The 
actress is excellent in tragic roles (she played much the same sort of 
person in GRAND CANYON), and many of her scenes contain an element of 
pathos.  There are times when the viewer sympathizes far more with Rita 
than with either Gus or Lee.  Throughout much of MR. WONDERFUL, she seems 
the victim.
Manipulation, another staple of the genre, is kept to a minimum.  It's 
present, as is requisite with this type of movie, but Minghella keeps 
things low-key.  There are several opportunities left unused that another 
script might have shamelessly plundered to tweak the viewer's emotions.  
At first, the choice of Matt Dillon and Anabella Sciorra might seem an 
odd one, but the two work well together.  Their chemistry is not 
sexually-charged, and it's clear that there's something beyond the 
physical between them.  They connect, which is not the case for Gus and 
Rita , and Lee and Tom.  
MR. WONDERFUL does the little things right, which is also important.  
Although highly symbolic, when electricity is used in a literal sense 
(Gus works for New York City's Con Edison power company), the technical 
details are in order.  There are also a number of small scenes that, 
taken on their own merit, work very well (the meeting between "Funny 
Face" and "Mr. Wonderful", the charity auction, Gus' breaking his wedding 
dishes to prove his love for Rita).  
The things that are wrong with MR. WONDERFUL are the same things that are 
wrong with just about every other movie of its kind - it's sentimental 
and occasionally silly, but as a romance, it's rock solid.  MR. WONDERFUL 
doesn't aspire to anything more than it is, and such a simple, 
uncomplicated presentation, coupled with generally-likable and believable 
characters, makes this film a fine piece of entertainment.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Matt Dillon, Annabella Sciorra, Mary-Louise Parker,
           William Hurt.
Screenplay:  Amy Schor & Vicki Polon.
Director:  Anthony Minghella.
     Sometimes, it's all about state of mind.  Either you're ready to
enjoy a certain kind of movie, or you're not.  I can envision a
different set of circumstances under which I might have walked away
from MR. WONDERFUL with eyes rolling and a groan of "Puh-leez."  But I
didn't.  Instead, I found it to be a warm and charming lightweight
romance, full of appealing performances and well-directed moments of
tiny heartbreak.
     MR. WONDERFUL is the story of divorced couple New York couple Gus
and Lee DiMarco.  Gus (Matt Dillon) is a nice-but-simple Con Edison
worker; Lee (Annabella Sciorra) has left him in an attempt to break
free of "the neighborhood" and get a college education.  Gus has since
hooked up with Rita (Mary-Louise Parker), a nurse who wants to move in
with Gus, while Lee is seeing Tom (William Hurt), her married English
professor.  Gus wants to go in with his buddies on reopening a local
bowling alley, but can't afford it thanks to the cost of his alimony
payments.  The buddies suggest that Gus try to find Lee a husband so
that he can be freed of his financial obligations.  A reluctant Gus
than sets Lee up with a series of acquaintances, all the while
wondering whether or not he might really be her Mr. Wonderful.
     Nothing about that premise screams originality.  Feuding exes who
still carry a torch have been fodder for most daytime and nighttime
soaps for ever.  The relative success of MR. WONDERFUL is attributable
almost entirely to the cast.  Dillon is an extremely likable lug;
Sciorra has the tense charm of a woman just discovering herself.  Their
scenes together work to perfection because they manage to be thoroughly
convincing as two people who have know each other, as Lee notes,
"practically since I was born."  They shift naturally between civil
conversation and petty bickering, creating a genuine sense of history
between them, and it's extremely entertaining to watch.  Particularly
affecting is a scene where Gus and Lee prepare to go out to dinner by
lowering the roof on Gus's convertible, performing a multi-step ritual
without thinking until Lee bigins to cry with the memory of better
times.  It was the frequency of moments like that one which ultimately
won me over to caring about these characters.  Equally delightful is
Mary-Louise Parker, who gives her underdeveloped role as Gus's nervous
girlfriend a beautiful soul.  Parker has one of the most expressive
mouths in films, and she uses it to show more different shades of
emotion than she has lines.  I also enjoyed David Barry Gray, who has
an endearing puppy-dog energy about him as Gus's best friend Pope.
     This is not to say that all of the characters worked all the
time.  I was quickly distracted by William Hurt's twitchy professor,
who doesn't seem to have an identifiable personality.  Vincent
D'Onofrio only gets three scenes to develop what ends up being a rather
important character, and consequently seems to try a bit too hard to
make Dominic angelic.  And yes, Dillon does have some overplayed
moments, making Gus's "hidden emotions" far too obvious for anyone with
half a brain, or even a notochord.  Compare his reactions to Parker's
at a hospital fundraiser where Lee appears with another man, just as an
example of what not to do.
     Director Anthony Minghella, who gave us the low-key supernatural
romance TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY, seems to have a knack for finding slices
of real emotion without resorting to schmaltz.  I was genuinely touched
by a small moment involving a woman waiting for a blind date from a
personals ad, as well as a brief conversation between Rita and Lee.
However, these same moments also made me wonder whether MR. WONDERFUL
had missed an opportunity to be a more wide-ranging examination of
everyone's search for a Mr. or Mr.  Wonderful, and what people are
willing to do or give up for that chance.  As it stands, the focus on
the specific still held my attention.  MR. WONDERFUL is no work of art,
but it's gentle and affirming and it caught me on a good day.  Kindly
check in your cynicism at the door.
