Title
Review for Assignment, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
James Brundage
Written by Dan Gordon and Sabi H. Shabtai
Starring Adian Quinn, Donald Sutherland, Ben Kingsley, and Claudia Ferri
 This is either a new high or a new low. Never before have I seen a movie
one night at 2:10 and reviewed it the next night at 11:49, albeit aided by a
massive overdose of caffeine. This could be viewed as one of two things: a
new level of obsessive behavior putting me right up there with Glenn Close
in Fatal Attraction for a textbook example of crazy, or, the more pleasant
alternative, a new level of commitment to my job combined with a chronic
case of insomnia.
 The movie I watched from 2:10 AM to 4:05 AM was The Assignment, one of two
movies that dealt with "The Jackal" in one way or another that came out in
1997. Although I don't especially think that I would have slept anyway, The
Assignment is not worth losing sleep over.
 Yes, it is enjoyable, and yes, it is intelligent, but, for all of us who
have grown up with James Bond movies and Tom Clancy novels bringing in
millions (not to mention the endgame of the Cold War, in which intelligence
was the only thing actively fighting), it is the same old same old.
 The plot of The Assignment is that you have a terrorist for hire named
Carlos (Aidan Quinn) who is on the run from every government in the world
except the Russians and the Libyans. Among the people who have an especially
good reason to kill him are Henry Fields (aka Jack Shaw) (Donald
Sutherland), who was there at one of his attacks in Paris and a Mosad agent
named Amos (Ben Kingsley) who has absolutely no character motivation
whatsoever.
 Tricked into helping them is Lt. Cmd. Ramirez (Aidan Quinn), an exact look
alike of Carlos with a nuclear family living in Virginia. Ramirez is such a
very memorable character that someone told the imdb that his first name is
Annibal, which is, in fact, the first name of his wife (Claudia Ferri). As
for correcting it, I don't remember his name, either. The characters seem to
be pulled out of a damp storage room from back when espionage films were
chic.
    The plot is basically idiotic. The cinematography is impressive for an
espionage film, and we have a lot of fun watching Ramirez be trained to
become a super-spy.
     But the whole thing reeks of the stingy old films of the Cold War. I
was under the impression -and perhaps I am mistaken in this aspect - that
the Cold War was over and that we didn't have to put up with a punch of
stock-character enemies in parkas and fur hats being shot perfectly by
American idiots.
     The thing about The Assignment that you must understand, however, is
that, despite all of the above detriments to its cinematic value, it still
ends up being fun. Nowadays James Bond does nothing by cavort and crack
jokes, and the plots are all hackneyed and stupid.
    They may have all been that way, but ever since Pierce Brosnan got in on
the game, they stopped being so much damn fun. Tom Clancy, in his effort to
stay up to date, has become terribly essayistic in his novels and in their
adaptations. I mean, come on, how came out of Clear and Present Danger
wanting to purchase drugs just to spit in their face? Well, me neither, but
you get the point.
     The espionage genre took a massive turn for the worse after the Cold
War ended, and, despite the fact that we're back to square one where a super
agent man is slipping past customs in perfect disguises and getting the
Russians angry, it is still much better than the very unenjoyable modern day
espionage films.
     I'm in a quandary. On one hand, I try to recommend good films to you.
The Assignment is not a good film. On the other hand, I try to recommend
enjoyable films to you. The Assignment is enjoyable. It is up to you where
to go from here.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Based, very loosely I would assume, on the exploits of a mid-East
terrorist dubbed THE JACKAL because of his cold blooded heinous crimes
against civilians.  For the past 20+ years he has bombed and shot
indiscriminately at the helpless while he was in the employ of various
Mid-East and European countries.   Women and children were not spared
by The Jackal whose real name was Carlos Sanchez.    Despite all-out
efforts by our CIA, by Moussad, (the Israeli Secret Service) and other
European countries to capture him, the Jackal managed to elude them .
. . until one fine day.   Imprisoned and given harsh treatment by the
Moussad whose chief, Amos (Ben Kingsley) is fiercely delighted at this
success, it then turns out that the man they are holding only looks
like Sanchez (Aidan Quinn) but is in fact Annibal Ramirez (also played
by Quinn) an officer in the U.S. Navy.    He is awarded little more
than a "Sorry about that" and released.
Shortly thereafter he is approached by Jack Shaw (Donald Sutherland) a
high-ranking CIA operative.   Ramirez is told in detail about the
Jackal, shown horrifying photos of maimed children; brought into a
hospital for first-hand viewing of victims.   He is further told that
the Jackal can be caught  only with his cooperation.    Because he
looks exactly like the terrorist, he is being asked to pretend he is
the Jackal while the Israeli and U.S. governments lay a trap.
Ramirez offers all kinds of objections but in the end is talked into
accepting the role.  Thus begins a new life, in its own way a
terrorist life.  He is even asked to be unfaithful to the wife he
loves by persuading the Jackal's girlfriend that he is the Jackal.
Before the Russians (the enemy) can be gulled into the trap, they must
be sure it is indeed the Jackal.
By concentrating on Annibal Ramirez rather than on the terrorist, the
film takes a giant step in the right direction.    Adding to the
believability of the story are the fine performances by the three
leads.   Kingsley, tense and determined; Sutherland with a kind of
smirk; and Quinn doing double duty (but very little as the terrorist)
mostly as the clean-cut Naval officer who almost loses himself in the
terrorist role in order to be believable to the enemy.
Others in the cast include Liliana Komorowska, Celine Bonnier, Claudia
Ferri,  Vlasta Vrana, Von Flores and Al Waxman.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
    In his New York Times op ed piece which appeared two
days after Princess Diana's death, A.M. Rosenthal compares
the paparazzi to an animal.  ""The paparazzi pursued the
couple as a jackal his prey.  They knew that a good picture
like a kiss or hug seen through a car window would bring
scores of thousands of dollars and that any picture would
bring a price handsome enough for their gas and waiting time
until the next gathering of the jackals."
   The label "jackal," unfortunately, might be looked on by
some human beings so named as a badge of honor.  The
master-terrorist Carlos Sanchez, who allegedly took pleasure
in killing and maiming innocent men, women and children in
the service of Middle Eastern and European clients, could
scarcely object.  Though chased for twenty years by the CIA
and the Israeli secret service known as Mossad, Carlos, like
the wily beast whose nickname he probably cherished, was
able to slip through their grip time and time again.
   "The Assignment," a movie inspired by the Jackal's wicked
acts, could have been just another action-adventure picture:
good guy searches for bad guy, good guy caught, bad guy
ultimately nailed. But director Christian Duguay, employing a
tense screenplay by Dan Gordon and Sabi H. Shabtai,
focuses not on the terrorist himself but on the psychology of a
man who resembles him strikingly.  Duguay aspires to
show us that there is a dark corner inside the souls of all
people, an intersection which we avoid under normal
circumstances but one which can be crossed given the right
instruction.  "The Assignment" deals with a rather ordinary
man, a family-loving Naval officer who is deeply patriotic, who
is seduced into taking on a dangerous mission and suffers a
dramatic change of his very character as a result.  Featuring
intense action and psychological probing, "The Assignment" is
like a James Bond adventure played with total seriousness,
which has been filmed with technical expertise in Budapest,
Israel and Montreal as stand-ins for Moscow, Norfolk, East
Berlin, and Tripoli.
   When Annibal Ramirez (Aidan Quinn) is touring Israel after
his ship has docked at Haifa,  he is picked up by the Mossad
and brutally questioned until the intelligence agents realize
that he is merely a lookalike for Carlos.  Realizing that they
had found a gold mine, they press him into their service. 
Mossad agent Amos (Ben Kingsley) and C.I.A. operative Jack
Shaw (Donald Sutherland) have a plan to rid the world of its
most notorious assassin by having Ramirez impersonate him.
In effect, they make him recap the motif of summer action
movie "Face/Off": To find him, he must become him." 
Rigorously trained like the Bridget Fonda character in "Point
of No Return," Ramirez is not only able to fulfill the requisites
of the job--to kill, to survive isolation, even to make love like
Carlos--he actually internalizes the terrorist.  More than any
other human being outside of the man himself, Ramirez feels
Carlos's anger and must ultimately struggle to pull back to his
own, far gentler, identity.  
   While the shootouts ostensibly taking place in Libya are
tense, they feature the usual cliches of the action-adventure
mold rather than the intricacies of good spy movies--car
chases, jumps from rooftops, hot pursuits by bands of generic
thugs, sinister-looking Communists, beautiful women.  The
most notable part of the film, however, is the training program
which the agents have designed, a program of the sort that
only G.I. Jane and James Bond would be expected to pass. 
He must above all be observant: able to count the cups,
saucers and plates in a kitchen cabinet in four seconds; to
know the name and location of every gravestone he passes
so that if a name is called, he can draw his weapon and shoot
the ghostly figure which emerges behind the stone.  Most
difficult of all, he must eat porridge day and night, sometimes
eight bowls at a time, to reach the depths of anger which
Carlos feels.  (The terrorist as a child was forced to down the
sludge by his atypical family.)  He must even survive a trip on
L.S.D. which the agents have secretly administered to spice
up the breakfast cereal, a trip which--captured by a motion
control camera to replicate the demons he appears to face-- 
represents an excursion into the very soul of the serial killer.
   With his classical Irish good looks, Aidan Quinn has been
typically cast as a romantic lead.  Not this time.  His
performance in a double role as a man who turns from gentle,
family man to utterly amoral and immoral murderer is a
riveting one, one which allows him successfully to extend his
range.  With Donald Sutherland's ironically smiling face as
C.I.A. operative repeatedly egging Ramirez on and Ben
Kingsley's less histrionic but equally passionate fervor driving
the stakes forward, Christian Duguay has helmed a thriller
with superior performances from the key figures, adding to the
insight gained from such movies as "Donnie Brasco" into the
scope of our passions.  While Carlos himself is safely in a
maximum security cell in France, a country which had seen
the terrorist mastermind the deaths of many women and
children, we sense that the real work which went into his
capture has not been shown.  The movie is, however, an
intelligent, imaginative bit a fiction about suggesting one way
the killer may have been captured. Rated R.  Running Time:
110 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Tim Voon
Director:  Christian Duguay
Writer:  Dan Gordon, Sabi H. Shabtai
Cast: Aidan Quinn, Ben Kingsley, Donald Sutherland, Claudia Terri,
Lilliana Duguay
Ever noticed how some Hollywood ideas are always released in pairs i.e.
last years DANTE'S PEAK and VOLCANO, this years upcoming ARMEGADDON and
DEEP IMPACT. So it is with THE ASSIGNEMENT and THE JACKAL. Both stories
are about the same man, but each takes a very different approach.
Needless to say, I detested the one starring Bruce Willis and Richard
Gere, for more reasons than can possibly fill this review. As for THE
ASSIGNMENT starring Aidan Quinn, Ben Kingsley and Donald Sutherland –
well it's marginally better. The subtle difference is that one actually
bored me to tears and the other was much better than I had expected.
Much of the thrill of this movie, comes from the fact that the villain
and hero are played by the same actor (Quinn). In general, I don't fancy
the idea off look-a-likes confusing the elements of plot, but the final
twist towards the end is reliant on this fact alone.
So who is this man they call ‘The Jackal' anyway? From daily news we
know he was a ruthless assassin, now serving time in a French prison.
This movie postulates how the most illusive terrorist of the twentieth
century came to be captured.
An American naval captain, Annabel Ramirez (Quinn), carries an uncanny
resemblance to this criminal. He is convinced by the CIA (Sutherland)
and the Israelis (Kingsley) to embark on a most convoluted plot to bring
down ‘The Jackal'. This involves a series of gruelling training
exercises and sexual reprogramming to recreate the personality of the
man he is hunting. It gets to a stage where the pleasant Ramirez begins
detesting himself for becoming the Jackal.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
THE ASSIGNMENT
Cast: Aidan Quinn, Donald Sutherland, Ben Kingsley, Claudia Ferri,
Celine Bonnier, Vlasta Vrana, Liliana Komorowska
Director: Christian Duguay
Screenplay: Dan Gordon, Sabi H. Shabtai
Running time: 119 minutes
Australian distributor: Columbia Tristar
Australian theatrical release: May 14, 1998
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 stars
In this smart and stylish action thriller, the life and meaning of
Carlos "The Jackal" Sanchez is given new depth.  Of the many gratifying
qualities that The Assignment has to offer, none are more dazzling than
the film's editing and direction.  Christian Duguay (Screamers) shapes
its screenplay with appropriate complexity, giving his material more
than just charm and intrigue.  Clash of cultures, moving emotional
elements and investigations of political espionage wrap themselves
around B grade action, making an A grade experience.
For twenty years, CIA operative Jack Shaw (Donald Sutherland, who has
been in a somewhat disturbing amount of films - eighty or so in the last
thirty years) has chased Sanchez, a master terrorist who enjoys
killing/maiming innocent civilians.  After countless failed attempts to
capture the ingenious killer, Shaw and his Israeli counterpart Amos (Ben
Kingsley) stumble across an effective weapon against him - a man who has
nothing in common with Sanchez except a splitting image.  He is Annibal
Ramirez (Adrian Quinn), an honorable American naval officer who is
ultimately used as bait.
There are two main parts of The Assignment.  Part A chronicles an
extensive two month training which Ramirez endures, in order to make
sure that he thinks and reacts like the man he is impersonating.  Shaw
and Amos devise a set of physically and mentally challenging tests,
including drugging Ramirez with LSD and watching his nightmarish trip.
Part B centers on the dangerous environment that Ramirez encounters as
he attempts to imitate one of the world's most hunted criminals.
Much to his credit, Adrian Quinn plays both the Jackal and the story's
hero with realism and morality.  As Ramirez undergoes his training,
Quinn transforms his character subtly and brilliantly.  The distressing
scenarios he encounters reminded me of Michael Douglas' performance in
The Game; both actors make their characters paranoia hit viewers hard.
In most of his movies, Donald Sutherland is often seen but not noticed.
His part in The Assignment is imperative to the story, which is
surprising because Sutherland is rarely powerful - but is thoroughly
engaging and interesting in this role.  Kingsley, as always, is solid.
Fashioned with striking set pieces and gorgeous cinematography, The
Assignment is a joy to watch.  With a film as smart as this one, we are
reassured that good-looking movies are not necessarily dumb ones (for
further evidence consult Enemy of the State or Kundun). Solid
performances and crisp editing compliment The Assignment's firm
direction and beautifully laced screenplay. There are not many films
that work on as many levels as this one does, and even fewer that can
implement charm alongside terror.  Ordinarily this might appear to be a
contradiction of terms, but The Assignment has enough substance and
energy to pull it off with flair.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my movie reviews newsletter
(unless, of course, you already have) or for any inquiries or feedback

Author
Berge Garabedian
The second Jackal-based film to come out in 1997 (the other starring
Bruce Willis was simply entitled THE JACKAL), this one stars Aidan
Quinn and Donald Sutherland, and is directed by a man who hailed from
JoBlo's own alma matter, Concordia University in Montreal, Canada. The
story is based on the exploits of the real terrorist known as the
Jackal, but does not pretend to be 100% factual.
PLOT:
Naval Officer Ramirez (Quinn) gets called upon by the CIA to
impersonate the international terrorist known as the Jackal, in order
to put an end to the actual militant's radical activities. He is chosen
for this role because he physically resembles the real terrorist to a
tee. Ramirez reluctantly agrees to take part in this "assignment", and
soon finds himself wrapped up in a true web of international terrorism,
intrigue and double-personality syndrome (which does not sit well with
his uninformed wife and kids back in the States.)
CRITIQUE:
Great premise is executed with enough style and thrills to keep the
piece interesting throughout its close to two-hour runtime. Admittedly,
I wasn't a huge fan of any of the main actors in this film, and didn't
expect much from this movie beforehand, but surprisingly it did have
its thrilling moments, as well as a mostly plausible and absorbing
story line. The first hour is mostly just a build-up of things to come,
and does offer a great characterization of the Jackal, but the second
hour is the one that really cranks in the cool scenes and a sweet
ending.
Quinn was adequate in both roles as Naval Officer Ramirez and the real
Jackal, but didn't offer anything extraordinary, in my opinion.
Sutherland and Kingsley seem to be playing the same role that they've
played in both of their respective careers of late, but nonetheless,
appeared to relish the cold-heartedness of their chosen characters. I
didn't like performance put forth from Quinn's wife in this flick, but
then again, she doesn't show up in most of the film, so that wasn't so
bad.
I did however enjoy director Duguay's interesting style and cinematic
vision. This thriller could easily have been boring during many
sequences, but Duguay always seemed to find something interesting to
show the viewer. I thought that was neat. Having said that, I didn't
think the first hour needed to be as long as it was, and the film did
have me tinkering on the bridge of believability when the "fake" Jackal
met with the "real" Jackal's girlfriend without much retrospection on
her part, but all in all, not too many complaints in a movie that could
easily be enjoyed by all those who take pleasure in the spy and
terrorist thriller genre.   
Little Known Facts: 
Ben Kingsley's real name is Krishna Banji, he stands 5"8, was born in
Scarborough, England, and won the Best Actor honor in 1982's Academy
Awards presentation for the title role he portrayed in GHANDI.
Many scenes from this film were actually shot in Montreal, Canada
(JoBlo's haven of restfulness).
Donald Sutherland has fathered actor Kiefer Sutherland, is Canadian,
and apparently still owns a place in the North of Montreal.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Smart and compulsively watchable, if fanciful, thriller that employs
the story of the Jackal to good psychological effect. Aidan Quinn is worth
admission.
Before the terrible Bruce Willis thriller THE JACKAL hit theaters, a
modestly-budgeted and far superior treatment of the same basic material came
and went, with nary a whisper of promotion or even acclaim. Too bad. THE
ASSIGNMENT is a far better movie -- not a classic, but it entertains and
engrosses aptly -- which were two things the other movie couldn't do.
The facts behind the story are now history: The Jackal was the moniker used by
a man named Carlos, who apparently masterminded or at least spearheaded many
of the most (in)famous terrorist actions in recent history. He, among others,
ransomed the members of OPEC at gunpoint -- an incident which is recapped in
the early minutes of this film. One of the CIA men, Henry Fields (Donald
Sutherland), tries to get close enough to Carlos to liquidate him with a "lead
handshake" (a gun in the sleeve), but his advisors collar him before he can
pull it off. Carlos vanishes with his captives.
Flash-forward. An American soldier, Annibal Ramirez (Aidan Quinn), is yanked
into custody by a Mossad agent, Amos (Ben Kingsley). Ramirez is a ringer for
Carlos; there is some mountingly funny byplay when we realize that it's not
Carlos playing dumb, or even Carlos playing the hotheaded American bit. This
guy really is an American soldier, and he really is gonna sue Amos into next
Wednesday when he gets home.
Fields introduces himself to Annibal and ingratiates himself with him. They
want Carlos, and Annibal is a great way for them to trap him. Annibal wants
nothing to do with any spy games, but after some unpleasant manipulation, they
take him under their wing and begin remaking him into a) a spy and b) a
psychological twin for Carlos. They do a frighteningly good job. This is one
of the best parts of the movie, where we see Annibal's straight-arrow military
persona being strip-mined and replaced with a grasping, selfish and amoral
one -- all the better for him to pass for Carlos.
The movie has a smartness to it that I don't see much of in American
thrillers -- more of a feel for the way spy games really are conducted,
complete with double-crosses and screw-ups the way they probably do go down.
Maybe that has something to do with this being a Canadian/French
co-production, rather than a wholly American one, and it's reflected in the
way the story plays out. We don't get an ending where everything is settled
with the right guy getting shot, although we do get an extra,
tacked-on epilogue that's a bit more gratuitous than we really needed.
What is best here is the acting. Here we have three actors doing a great job
-- Sutherland, Quinn, and Kingsley, all in a three-way psychic fencing match.
One of them is trying to trap a monster; one is trying to create one. And one
is becoming more of one than he ever dreamed. It's neat to watch.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading
