Title
Review for Godfather: Part III, The (1990)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In these days of making popular films into series, by far the most
respected series is the now three-part "Godfather" saga.  Both THE GODFATHER
and THE GODFATHER PART II won the Best Picture Academy Award and it is very
likely we will be seeing a campaign to get THE GODFATHER PART III the same
award.  No sequel other than THE GODFATHER PART II has ever won Best
Picture.  The series has even outlived the accuracy of the title, since
Michael Corleone was certainly not the Godfather in PART I, and seems only
rarely to use the title of "Godfather."  In many ways this is also the most
deserving of being a series since the stories really do build on each other
and lose a great deal if viewed out of order.  There is now authenticity
from the fact that when a character remembers an event from years earlier,
the audience also remembers it from a point in time that is genuinely years
earlier for them.  If Michael remembers the death of his first wife many
years ago, I also remember it from eighteen years ago.
     It is not that there is really such original writing.  In many ways we
are repeatedly seeing the same story.  (For fear of spoilers I can list only
some superficial parallels here and will say more in the afterward.)  Each
film starts with a long sequence that is a celebration of an important
family event: a wedding, a confirmation, an award from the Pope.  Each also
concludes with a family event.  One thinks of the films as being about the
family business but, in fact, the subject is very rarely even mentioned.
There is very little about how the Corleones acquire their money.  Instead,
these films are almost exclusively about meta-business issues such as the
politics of dealing with the competition; the issue arises in each film.
Perhaps the reason for the chosen concentration is that the Corleones would
be much less sympathetic if the films were about their day-to-day business.
Even visual touches are repeated.  There is always a scene in the Corleone
kitchen with a big pot on the stove.
     As the film opens Michael Corleone--do I really have to say he is
played by Al Pacino?--is still trying to whitewash the family name and to
live up to the nobility of the name Corleone (Lionheart).  He has
contributed vast sums of money to charitable works.  At one point we see a
hospital named for Vito Corleone and probably not because Vito provided them
with patients.  At the opening Michael is contributing $100,000,000 for
poverty relief for Sicily and receiving the order of San Sebastian from the
Pope.  Of note is that there is far less of the ethnic Italian feel to this
event than there was at Connie's wedding.  The Corleones are apparently
assimilating American styles.  Michael feels that he is finally achieving
legitimacy and respectability.
     But there is a problem with Vincent Mancini (played by Andy Garcia)
who, despite the surname, is the son of Sonny Corleone (played by James Caan
in Parts I and II).  Vincent is the most likely heir to the family business,
but he is also something of a loose cannon.  He is as temperamental and
power-hungry as his father was.  Vincent has a feud with his current boss, a
hood named Joey Zasa (played by Joe Mantegna).
     Vincent is attracted to Michael's daughter, Mary.  In fact, the choice
of the plain-looking Sofia Coppola, the director's daughter, for Mary
instead of the originally cast attractive Winona Ryder may actually work for
the film.  Coppola is not a great actress but putting a less attractive
woman in the role creates interesting speculation as to Vincent's motives.
There is no great mystery as to why Vincent would be interested in a woman
as attractive as Winona Ryder.  But Vincent has an eye for good-looking
women and the power-hungry nephew's interest in Mary could well be power
rather than physical attraction.  In any case, Michael is dead set against a
relationship between these two grandchildren of Vito Corleone.  It is
Vincent's feud and Michael's relation with the Vatican that are the
springboard for this third story.
     Michael's other child is Anthony who, like the young Michael, wants no
part of the family business and wants instead to sing grand opera.  In fact,
his debut performance at La Scala, in the lead no less, becomes an important
event in the film.  The choice of opera, Pietro Mascagni's "Cavalleria
Rusticana," is of course highly appropriate.  The title literally translates
to "Rustic Chivalry" and refers to the code of honor of the poor Sicilians
of the story.  The concept of this Sicilian code of honor pervades the
"Godfather" films as well as the opera.  The emphasis on this-favor-for-
that-favor, how one treats the Don, and symbolic gestures such as "the Kiss
of Death" are equally  important in the series and in this opera of the
hatred of Turridu and Alfio.  In the time-honored Sicilian custom, Alfio
challenges Turridu by embracing him and Turridu signifies he accepts the
challenge by biting Alfio's ear.  Naturally, the opera ends in bloodshed.
The sweetly melancholic Intermezzo from "Cavalleria Rusticana" may already
be familiar to filmgoers from its use in RAGING BULL.  Coppola uses it in
THE GODFATHER PART III to underscore the final scenes of the film.
     So does this new film live up to its predecessors?  It is flawed, of
course, but then PART II diluted its effect by jumping around in time to
pick up pieces of storyline both before and after the first film.  That was
the flaw that television thought it could correct when it re-edited the
first two parts into one chronological story.  (Comments on that effort will
appear in my afterword.)  The third film is no more flawed and probably in a
league with the first two.  I would rate it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
(In case you're curious, I would rate THE GODFATHER a +3 and THE GODFATHER
PART II a high +2.)
[Spoiler follows]
     Spoiler-afterword: Earlier in this review I talked about a repeating
structure in the "Godfather" films.  Let me be more detailed.  The films
always start with a major family event and they always end with a bloodbath
that coincides with another major family event: baptism, marriage-
separation, son's operatic debut at La Scala.  In each case Michael is
trying to make himself or his whole family legitimate, but he is stymied.
There is some unspeakable act committed by an apparent enemy: the Tataglias,
the Rosatos, Joey Zasa.  Michael decides his honor and the general safety of
the family demand revenge.  However, the perpetrator is only the apparent
enemy.  The real enemy pulling the strings does not show his face except as
an apparent peacemaker: Barzini, Roth, Altobello.  In the end the ersatz
peacemaker and all his co-conspirators are dispatched in the bloodbath that
spans only hours or minutes.  This strikes me as being too strong a parallel
in structure to be just coincidence.  It, in fact, goes beyond formula.
Each film is a repetition of the same melodrama.  Michael is trying to be
good.  Someone interprets this as weakness and moves against him.  The urge
for revenge with Sicilian anger takes over.  Vito's mother, too, promised
Don Cicci that she and Vito would not take action against him and asked for
peace.  He murdered her in cold blood.  Vito's Sicilian revenge must wait
for the proper time but honor demands it.  Vito's son Michael replays this
melodrama in each film.
     I did not see the television re-editing in which the first two parts
were edited so they told one story in chronological order.  I have been told
it is an improvement.  I find it hard to believe, however, since each story
is a re-telling of an instance of Michael repeating his father's tragedy.
Re-editing would violate the internal structure.  The "improved" version
sounds too much like taking Shakespeare's HENRY IV Parts I and II and HENRY
V, editing them together to make one long play, then showing it over five
nights with commercials.

Author
Peter Reiher
     I finally got around to seeing THE GODFATHER PART III, and I'm not
happy.  It's is much, much worse than the first two films.  And "worse"
is the term, not "not as good."  I thought the first two films were
brilliant, while the third is easily the worst film Coppola has ever
made, even counting that trivial little segment of NEW YORK STORIES.
The only good points of this film, in my opinion, were Andy Garcia's
dynamic performance, good production design, and an acceptable
performance from Pacino.
     The flaws, on the other hand, are legion, starting, as bad films
invariably do, with the script.  THE GODFATHER PART III is not nearly as
well written as the first two films.  The dialog is weaker, the story is
not well integrated into the world built in the first two films, some of
the characters are inconsistently written, few of them are very
interesting.  Some characters only seem present because they were in the
other films, notably Kay, Diane Keaton's character.  
     One very serious problem in the script is that we do not get enough
explanation of why Michael isn't the man he was at the end of the last
film.  Hints, yes, but not a real explanation.  Since the whole series
is more about him than anyone else, that's a major flaw.  More or less
the last thing we see in THE GODFATHER PART II is Michael contemplating
the murder of his brother, and coming to terms with it by banishing all
his feelings.  In this film, his son tells him that he is leaving law
school to become a singer, and Michael gives the same song and dance
that a stockbroker would give his son in the same circumstances.  There
is no trace of the powerful, amoral man who would do anything to get his
way in this scene.  Where'd he go?  Either Michael should continue to
behave in the same way, or we must be told what caused him to change.
In this film, Kay tells Michael that she thinks he's more  dangerous
than ever now that he's respectable.  Why?  He seems far less dangerous
in this film.  Is Kay supposed to be wrong?  Is it supposed to be a
foreshadowing of an explosion of violence and evil from Michael?  There
is no support for either of these possibilities, or any other that I can
see, except, perhaps, that Coppola and Puzo thought it was a good line.
     The script is also lacking in the atmosphere and strongly written
scenes that were so much a part of the earlier films.  The opera
sequence at the end of the film is an inferior retread of the climax to
THE COTTON CLUB.  There is no scene in this film equal (in its writing)
to the scene in THE GODFATHER PART II where Hagen explains to one of the
family's betrayers why he must commit suicide, or the scene where
Michael tells his brother that he knows of his betrayal, or the scene in
Part I where the Godfather dispenses favors at his daughter's wedding.
The script also provided too little material for us to get any feel for
the world of the Mafia, as the first two scripts did so  well.  It
didn't substitute any feel for the world of high finance, or the
Vatican, either.
     Talia Shire's character is especially harmed by this failure of
background.  She is forever going on about "saving the family."  What
family?  There's Pacino, Garcia, Pacino's two children, herself, and
about three underlings.  Pacino's kids don't want to have anything to do
with the Mafia, so who are they saving the family for?  Contrast this to
the first film, in which Brando was surrounded by sons, cousins, and
retainers -- in a true, if perverse, sense, he was a feudal lord who
watched out for all of the peasants in his barony.  In this film, Pacino
is a businessman with only a shell of a company.
     The acting is surprisingly poor.  As mentioned, Andy Garcia is
dynamic and alive, and Pacino is fine, given the scripted limitations.
But the rest of the cast contains hardly a decent performance, much less
a brilliant one.  Eli Wallach left tooth marks all over the scenery.
Joe Mantegna gave the first bad performance I've ever seen from him.
(He was, admittedly, hampered by some of the script's poorest lines.)
George Hamilton had nothing to do and did it drably.  Talia Shire
careened between different interpretations of her character which mostly
didn't fit in with what we already know of her from the  earlier films.
There isn't a single bad performance in either of the first two films,
and there are several in this one.  Disturbingly, the minor characters,
who seemed so flavorful in the first two films, dissolve into
indistinguishable mush in this film -- a combined flaw in writing and
casting.  As far as Sofia Coppola goes, well, let's just say I
considered the climax of the opera scene to be a happy ending.
     In addition to problems of script and acting, THE GODFATHER PART
III is perhaps the worst edited major film I've seen in many years,
probably a result of the rush job necessary to meet the December 25th
deadline.  THE GODFATHER PART III is choppy.  Scenes do not flow
naturally together.  Coppola intercuts between simultaneous action
without rhyme or reason.  A notable example -- the scene in which Andy
Garcia is playing pool and is interrupted by Talia Shire.  This scene is
unnecessarily cut in half by a sequence in which Michael Corleone 
masquerades as Kay's driver so he can show her Sicily.  Why the cut?
Well, Garcia has a reaction to the car starting up and driving away,
and, unless the other scene is interposed, the reaction makes no sense.
However, the interruption robs Garcia's scene of the power it needs.
With sufficient time, I'm sure the editors could have worked around the
problem, possibly cutting Garcia's reaction and placing the scene
between Michael and Kay elsewhere.  That's the sort of thing that
happens when you have a rush job.  There are other examples, as well.
     A more serious flaw is the frequent use of fades to black.  At
least four or five times, a scene ends, we fade to black, and we are
somewhere else dealing with entirely different thematic material.  These
fades cause the rhythm of the film to stop dead.  Using a fade to black
as a period at the end of a cinematic sentence is a perfectly valid
technique, if you really do want to pause and indicate that a major
change is about to take place, but that isn't what the makers of this
film seem to have in mind.  Rather, they need to end one scene and start
another, and they didn't have time to do anything good, so they faded to
black.  Whenever they do, any momentum the film has built disappears,
and they do it quite a lot.
     The music for this film, another strong point in the earlier films,
is terrible.  Coppola's hiring his father to do the score was an even
worse idea than hiring his daughter to play a leading role.  The only
decent parts of the score are those written by Nino Rota for the first
film.  Much of the rest of the music is banal, and sometimes
inappropriate.
     And even the direction is poor.  I mean, really, a spinning
newspaper stopping to reveal a headline?  Followed by a shot of
newspapers coming off the presses so we could see another headline?
These were cliches in the 1940's.  Relying on them to provide us with
information is almost cynically lazy.  I never thought Coppola would try
to use this kind of technique seriously.  This one is so old that it
isn't even any use for a joke.
     Coppola also seems to have lost his eye for shots.  I liked very
much a shot showing Raf Vallone and Pacino separated by an urn, during
Pacino's confession.  It nicely commented on the content of the scene,
with the physical separation between the calm, peaceful cardinal and the
suffering, troubled Mafioso.  But that is the only memorable scene,
other than, possible, dropping one of the murder victims down a
stairwell and the opening sequence in which the camera travels over the
wreckage of the Corleone's vacation house by the lake.  That very
promising opening suggests that we will see the corresponding moral ruin
of the man who owns the house.  But we don't.  Instead, we get a kinder,
gentler Michael Corleone who, for reasons unclear from anything we've
seen in the earlier films, decides he wants to get out of the crime
business.  
     The laziness of the direction is also clear in all of the film's
other flaws, including the acting and the editing.  Particularly
ludicrous is the scene at the very end, in which the aged Michael dies
in his chair in a long shot.  He drops the orange, slumps over, he's
dead -- so far, so good.  Then he falls out of the chair.  I was
reminded of the guy on LAUGH IN who used to ride around on a tricycle
and then fall over sideways.  Not very subtle, Coppola.
     The photography isn't bad, but lacks the rich texture of the first
two films.  Shadows played a much more important role in those films.
Here, not very much happens in shadow.  The light isn't as golden,
perhaps appropriate for a film with a more modern setting, but
definitely not as pretty.
     The production design is as luxurious as ever, and cannot be
faulted.  It's nice, I guess, that someone in the production is doing
his job.
     Overall, I'm not sure whether I regard THE GODFATHER PART III as a
major disappointment or not.  I was always somewhat dubious about the
promise of the film, particularly since Coppola did it for the money,
not because he really wanted to show us more.  The mixed reviews led me
to believe that the film might contain something of value, but I was
wrong.  If you feel that you must be a completist about this series, I
guess you should see THE GODFATHER PART III.  But if you are looking for
entertainment in a film, or artistic quality, look somewhere else.
There's actually some justice to the fact that HOME ALONE will probably
gross two to three times as much as this film.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Al Pacino, Andy Garcia, Diane Keaton, Talia Shire,
          Eli Wallach, Joe Mantegna, Sofia Coppola, George Hamilton,
          Bridget Fonda 
Director: Francis Ford Coppola 
Producer: Francis Ford Coppola 
Screenplay: Francis Ford Coppola and Mario Puzo 
Cinematography:  Gordon Willis 
Music: Carmine Coppola including themes by Nino Rota 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     Eighteen years after the first screenings of THE GODFATHER, the
long-awaited third and final chapter reached theaters.  That it proved
unable to fulfill expectations was a predictable--if somewhat
disheartening--result, given the sixteen year buildup.  THE GODFATHER
PART III is a good movie, with moments of rare power, but it is not a
great one--a reason why many fans of the series have voiced their
disappointment.
     Oscar nominations for this film were probably based more on THE
GODFATHER name and reputation than on the particular merits of this
production.  PART III became the first GODFATHER not to take best
picture and, despite a deserving performance, Al Pacino's efforts were
not acknowledged.  The lack of awards enthusiasm perhaps reflected a
general opinion.
     The story opens in 1979 New York, some twenty years after Michael
Corleone (Pacino) gave the order to have his older brother killed.  His
children Mary (Sofia Coppola) and Anthony (Franc D'Ambrosio) are now
grown.  Mary is devoted to her father; Anthony is more wary.  He loves
Michael, but wants nothing to do with "the business", even though all
illegal investments have been divested.  The Corleone family is
legitimate.
     As with the other two movies, this one begins with a family
gathering.  The occasion is the presentation to Michael of the Order of
St. Sebastian--the highest honor the Catholic Church can bestow upon a
layman.  For a Corleone to receive it is the ultimate mark of
respectability.
     Michael is not so easily free of his former underworld allies,
however.  When he makes a $600 million play for the international
conglomerate Immobiliare, they want a piece of the cake, seeing an
opportunity to launder their money.  Michael's refusal at a meeting of
dons stings more than a few of his old friends, and brings down a
bloody retribution.
     The next Don Corleone--Vincent Mancini (Andy Garcia), Sonny
Corleone's boy--is awaiting his opportunity.  He possesses a
ruthlessness and taste for violence that Michael has long since lost,
and as the Immobiliare stakes escalate, the old head of the family
recognizes the need for youth and strength.  The passing of the baton,
however, carries with it a tragic price.
     One of the most obvious problems with THE GODFATHER PART III is
that it covers little new territory.  The plot is highly derivative of
the original.  This time, Michael fills Vito's role, and Vincent stands
in for Michael.  This method of too-obvious parallelism might have been
more effective had Vincent's character been better developed.  That
isn't the case, however, because Michael is still the focal point.
     As always, Pacino is a delight to watch.  The third time around,
he brings a mournful weariness to Michael Corleone.  This is a man who
has paid for all the wrong choices.  Memories haunt him like ghosts
that can never be exorcised.  The emotional toll is shown in the stoop
of his shoulders and the thickness of his voice.
     Family, as has ever been the case, is crucial to Michael.  His
children are his reason for living.  In his words, "The only wealth in
this world is children.  More than all the money and power on Earth,
[they] are my treasure."  He says to Mary that he would burn in hell to
keep her safe.  It is a prophetic statement.
     Robert Duvall is missed.  It's impossible not to feel the vacuum
created by his absence.  George Hamilton's B. J. Barrison is a one-
dimensional necessity of plot, not a "real" character.  At least the
decision was made not to replicate Tom Hagen in Barrison.  Hamilton is
given little more to do than stand in the background and speak a few
lines.
     Another unfortunate casting decision was the choice of Sofia
(daughter of Francis) Coppola as Mary (Winona Ryder, the director's
preference, was prevented by fatigue from appearing).  Coppola is
pleasant enough to look at, but her range is limited, and that lack of
ability diminishes several emotionally-charged scenes.  This is the
first GODFATHER to have a major role defined by a poor performance.
     One thing that is not inferior, however, is Francis Ford Coppola's
directorial flair.  The final half-hour, with its interweaving of
diverse-yet-related plot lines, is choreographed with the skill of a
master.  There are moments of THE GODFATHER PART III that shine with
the brilliance of the previous two films.
     Despite its missteps, THE GODFATHER PART III packs enough of a
punch to deserve a place alongside its predecessors.  This is no
poorly- conceived curiosity.  Not only does the film bring Michael
Corleone's story to a conclusion, but it remains faithful to the form
and style of parts I and II.  Taken as one grand epic, with this
chapter included, the GODFATHER movies represent one of the most solid,
emotionally-rich tales ever committed to film.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Member of the 'Online Film Critics Society'
http://smart.sbay.com/ofcs/
Francis Ford Coppola knew that if a third installment in his 'Godfather'
series was going to be made,
he would have to offer audiences and critics alike a new perspective.
His story of power within an organized crime family had propelled 'The
Godfather' (1972) and 'The Godfather Part II' (1974) to the top of many
"all time greatest films" lists.  Those who expected 'The Godfather Part
III' to be as good as those films were, frankly, fools.  Coppola's
intention in the third film was clearly aimed at offering a story of
redemption.  Sixteen years had passed and 1990 brought a whole new
decade of film making that so far by 1998, would look a great deal
better than the 80's.
Returning for the third time would be Al Pacino, referred to by Coppola
as America's greatest actor.  Pacino would reprise his role of Michael
Corleone, a man who destroyed his life by bowing to the trappings of
wealth through ill gotten means which he inherited from his father.
Michael, as a more ruthless ruler and killer than his father had been,
is now looking to redeem his immortal soul by going straight.  All
illegitimate investments made by the Corleone family have now been sold
off and their money has been invested into real estate.
As part two left off, it was 1959.  As "The Godfather Part III' opens,
we see the decaying former Corleone estate in Lake Tahoe, Nevada.  It is
now deserted.  Michael begins narrating a letter he is writing to his
children, asking them to come to a religious ceremony where he will
receive a special award by his church for his charitable contributions.
As the letter is being narrated, the film shifts to a shot of New York
City.  It is 1979.  In the church, as Michael is receiving his honour,
he has a flashback to the murder of his brother, Fredo.  A murder which
Michael engineered and gave the go ahead to.  As fans of the series
know, Fredo betrayed Michael, which led to this ghastly fate.  As
Michael grew older, he regretted this action and had been haunted by it
ever since.  Fredo's murder and Michael as the perpetrator of it, would
be the central theme of the film and the most admirable thing about 'The
Godfather III' is the under lying Shakespearean overtones express.  Not
just in the last scenario I described, but throughout the film as many
tragedies are showcased.
Also returning for a third time would be Diane Keaton as Michael's
former wife Kay and Talia Shire as Michael's loyal sister Connie.  Some
other minor characters reprise their roles and it's fun to watch for
them and say "I remember that guy.  Is he still around?"
A vibrant new character named Vincent Mancini (Andy Garcia) would be
introduced to audiences as Michael's illegitimate nephew.  Vincent is
the son of Michael's brother Sonny, portrayed by James Caan in the first
film and seen in a cameo in the second.  Garcia would be the only cast
member nominated for an Oscar.  He was nominated for Best Supporting
Actor and the Academy's failure to nominate Pacino as Best Actor was a
travesty as Pacino brought a fresh angle to his character with total
believability.  Pacino got nominated for as Oscar the same year he made
'The Godfather Part III'.  He was nominated as Best Supporting Actor
(against Garcia) for 'Dick Tracy' as he played an over the top villain
under heavy make-up.
Michael takes Vincent under his wing and shares his experiences in what
is now the legitimate family business.  Vincent's desire for a life of
crime is driven by his greater desire to destroy a vile and under handed
thug named Joey Zaza, played very well by Joe Mantegna.  Zaza controls
all the things the Corleone family used to be involved in.  Drugs,
gambling, prostitution and other vices are Zaza's specialty and he aims
to kill Michael later in the film with help from some powerful forces
who are also out to swindle and destroy Michael.  Michael is drawn back
in to a life of crime by sheer destiny.  A destiny set in motion when
Michael was a young man, not thinking that once you're in, it's for
life.
Pivotal to the film's outcome is the character of Mary Corleone,
Michael's daughter.  As portrayed by Sofia Coppola (Francis' daughter),
the character is nearly ruined.  Her acting is just downright bad and if
her part had been any bigger, the film would have failed miserably.
Coppola had to replace Winona Ryder who had started in the role of Mary
but had to withdraw after suffering from exhaustion by coming directly
off a couple of other films she worked on.  Julia Roberts and Madonna
had also been considered at one point for the role of Mary.  Michael's
other grown-up offspring, Anthony (Franc D'Ambrosio) is a complete throw
away as his character is never examined or given any real focus.
Other notable actors in the film are George Hamilton as Michael's
attorney and Eli Wallach as an old friend of the Corleone's who double
crosses Michael for his own selfish gains.  Robert Duvall, who played
Tom Hagen, Michael's step brother and family attorney in the first two
films, didn't appear in part three, reportedly because they wouldn't pay
him enough.
Technically, the film moves well.  Gordon Willis' 'prince of darkness'
photography has an uncanny depth of focus and sizzles with many darkened
indoor scenes and one scene involving a helicopter attack upon a group
of crime bosses through the skylight of a hotel banquet room, is
brilliantly photographed.
'The Godfather Part III' is an overall excellent film that offers a new
story while it combines memories of the past through its reoccurring
characters and Andy Garcia's performance of what Michael was in the
second film.  Part three was nominated for seven Oscars including Best
Picture and Best Director for Francis Ford Coppola.  Coppola wrote the
script with Mario Puzo and they failed to receive an Oscar nomination
for their writing this time around.  The two of them won Oscars for
their screenplays of the first two films.  There is no need or desire on
my part for a fourth film.  Coppola didn't get lucky by having his third
film accepted by critics, audiences and his peers.  He constructed the
film sharply and didn't repeat himself.  He re-invented himself.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Jim Pellmann
SUMMARY:  A grand-slam finale to the Michael Corleone saga.  Not for all
tastes, and requires some homework, but those who expend the effort will
be well rewarded.  The best of the trilogy, easily one of the year's
best films, and with some actors' best-ever performances.  
     With all the hoopla surround the Christmas release of G3, I took
advantage of HBO's two-night back-to-back showings on G1 and G2 in
December.  (Not surprisingly, all video stores have been out of both for
the last several weeks.)
     Having never seen either, I was looking forward to catching up on
two Best Picture Oscar winners.  Perhaps it was because I'm not big on
gangster/Mafia movies (I absolutely hated GOODFELLAS) or perhaps they
lose something when viewed on TV, but my opinion of G1 and G2 was that
they were good, but not great.  So I was not terribly excited about
another two hours and forty minutes more of G3.  But I was greatly
surprised and concurred with the Chronicle:
     "If GODFATHER III were simply a worthy sequel, that would have
     been enough.  But this lushly photographed, brilliantly acted and
     wonderfully entertaining movie has its own claims to uniqueness.
     It's the most thoughtful of the three films, and its climax
     brings the entire series into sharper focus."
- Go rent G1 and G2 before seeing G3:  One of my friends who saw it
  with me had not seen G1 or G2 since they were released in '72 and '74
  and was terribly lost keeping track of who was doing what to whom.  G2
  has many passing references to characters and events from G1 and G2
  (see below for a brief summary).
- Don't expect an action-packed, shoot-out type movie:  Coppola
  deliberately develops the story at a slower pace, as we study each
  character's motivations.  It gradually builds to an edge-of-the-seat
  climax.
- Find a theater showing G3 in 70mm with surround sound.  I can't
  recall any other movie where the improved sound system enhanced the
  movie as much.  The movie's climax, which takes place at an opera
  house, is especially effective because of it.  
(WARNING: If you plan on renting G1 and G2 and don't want the plots spoiled 
 for you, don't read any further!)
Part 1:  During the mid-1940s, we meet Vito Corleone (Marlon Brando) and
         his four children: Sonny (James Caan), Fredo (John Cazale),
         Michael (Al Pacino), and Connie (Talia Shire).  Attorney Tom
         Hagen (Robert Duvall) protects the family's legal interests.
Part 3:  It is now 1979, and as Michael approaches retirement, he wants
         nothing more than to make the family completely legitimate.
         He divests his gambling business to other families and donates
         millions of dollars to Catholic charities.
     Al Pacino (Michael) shines and will undoubtedly be nominated for a
Best Actor Oscar.  You can feel his frustration when he says, "Just when
I think I'm out, they *pull* me back in."  He even takes on the gravelly
voice of Brando's Vito.  There are two particular scenes that are
brilliant: one where he confesses his sins for the first time in years
and another where he has a diabetic stroke.
     Andy Garcia (Vincent) is great--he is the very embodiment of Sonny
Corleone, hot-headed temperament and mannerisms.  This could well be the
turning point in his career.  If there should be any future Godfather
movies, they will no doubt revolve around his character.
     Talia Shire is deliciously evil as the conniving Connie, always
counseling Vincent on how to get in Michael's good graces.  In the end,
she even gets to dispatch one of the family enemies in her own special
way.  
     Sofia Coppola (Francis Coppola's daughter) does just fine as Mary,
despite many critics' caustic comments.  Not an outstanding performance,
but solid and believable.  
     Eli Wallach almost steals the whole movie as an old friend of the
family, Don Altobello, who is always trying to keep the peace.  Great
fun.
     Diane Keaton (Kay) is one of the movie's major disappointments, in
my mind.  It almost seems as if she is overacting to justify her top
billing for what is a pretty small role.  
     George Hamilton is merely passable, replacing Robert Duvall as the
family attorney.  Duvall reportedly wanted twice what Paramount offered
and wanted a larger role, so his Tom Hagen character was killed off
between G2 and G3.   
     John Savage has a throwaway role as Tom Hagen's son, and has
nothing to do with the plot, as far as I could tell.
     Likewise Bridget Fonda has a brief scene playing a reporter seduced
by Vincent, and is not seen again.
     Don Novello (better known as Father Guido Sarducci) plays it
straight as the family's PR man, attempting to convince a disbelieving
press of the family's respectability.

Author
David Alba Jr.
     It is here.  Yes, after sixteen years Francis Ford Coppola has
decided to complete the epic story of the Corleone family.  For those
who can remember back to THE GODFATHER PART II, we last left Michael
Corleone sitting alone contemplating the fact that he had ordered the
execution of his own brother, Fredo.
     The third installment of the Godfather trilogy takes place twenty
years after THE GODFATHER PART II.  Aging Michael Corleone is trying to
turn his dream into a reality.  His dream has been to make the Corleone
family completely legitimate.  Michael has been attempting to do this
ever since he took over control of the family at the end of the first
film, THE GODFATHER.
     The film opens with Michael Corleone receiving a humanitarian award
from the Archbishop.  Michael is later approached by the Archbishop,
who has been placed in financial charge of the Vatican.  In an effort to
help the Vatican overcome their financial trouble Michael offers to
donate 600  million dollars in exchange for the Vatican's controlling
interest in a company called Imobilare.  It is Michael's belief that if
he can gain control of the financially strong company he would finally
be able to make the Corleone family legitimate.  Michael encounters
problems when several members of The Vatican council refuse to give
controlling interest of Imobilare to Michael because his family is
involved in organized crime.
     Al Pacino returns to his familiar role as Michael Corleone, along
with Diane Keaton who reprises her role as Michael's estranged wife Kay.
Also returning, as Connie Corleone, is Talia Shire.  The film also stars
newcomers Andy Garcia as Sonny Corleone's illegitimate son, and Sophia
Coppola as Michael's daughter.  The fine cast is also joined by veteran
actors Eli Wallach, George Hamilton and Joe Mantegna.  There is also a
small role played by Don Novello who is best remembered as Father Guido
Sarducci on "Saturday Night Live."
     This film is beautifully filmed with splendid cinematography of New
York and Sicily, but it also contains the violence that has become a
trademark of the Godfather films.  The performance of Pacino was
adequate--he portrayed an aging and sick Michael who couldn't overcome
the guilt of having his brother killed--but it is the performances of
Andy Garcia and Talia Shire that really stand out in this movie.
     This film is unarguably not as good as its two predecessors, but I
believe this film is good enough to stand on its own as a continuation
of the Corleone saga.  See this film before someone makes you an offer
you can't refuse.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
After sixteen years Francis Ford Copolla has again returned to his favorite
project, making the third installment in the Godfather-trilogy. This new
film has been underrated for no reason. It is as intellectual and
majestically made as Copolla's pervious films. It is also more
psychological, pessimistic and more tragic than the first two. The only
regret is the unconvincing performance by the newcomer Sofia Copolla and
some "unfinished" developments of some characters.
The film elegantly begins with Nino Rota's recognizable musical score, the
beautiful skyscrapers of New York and Michael's voice as he is writing a
letter to his children: "The only wealth in this world is children. More
than all money and power on earth, you are my treasure" . The year is 1979
and Michael Corleone has used the time since the ending of "Part II" to make
his father's dream come true - making the Corleone family legitimate.
Michael sold all his casinos and invests only in gambling. Constantly
haunted by the past, his only reason to live is his children.
The family has amassed unimaginable wealth, and as the film opens Michael
Corleone (Al Pacino) is being invested with a great honor by the church.
Later that day, at a reception, his daughter announces a Corleone family
gift to the church and the charities of Sicily, "a check in the amount of
$100 million." But the Corleones are about to find, as others have
throughout history, that you cannot buy forgiveness. Sure, you can do
business with evil men inside the church, for all men are fallible and
capable of sin. But God does not take payoffs.
The plot of the movie, concocted by Coppola and Mario Puzo in a screenplay
inspired by headlines, brings the Corleone family into the inner circles of
corruption in the Vatican. There is a moment in "Godfather III" where
Michael says: "All my life I have been trying to go up in society, where
everything was legal. But the higher I go, the crookier it becomes.." .
Visually this film is as spectacular as the first two. Gordon Willis' rich
cinematography, Carmine Copolla's beautiful composition and Alex Tavoularis'
wonderful art direction could not be better. But Copolla's first two
Godfather-films were more famous for their deep, intellectual plots, tree
dimensional characters and incredible acting, than for their visual
perfection. The third installment has only the plot and visuals. Some
characters could be much more developed and the acting, although good, never
accomplishes to reach the same height of the first two films. The biggest
miscasting is Sofia Copolla , who is so unconvincing and unemotional that
she manages to ruin several scenes throughout the movie, that could have
been grander and more emotional. The best performance comes unsurprisingly
from Al Pacino, who should have got a nomination for best actor at the
Oscars. Andy Garcia  is powerful as Sonny's son, strong, focused and loyal.
Violence is natural to him. He suffers no pangs of conscience when he takes
revenge on his family's behalf, and in this he is supposed to be strong in
the uncomplicated way Don Vito Corleone was. However both Kay (Diane Keaton)
and Connie (Talia Shire) are useless. And characters like Vito Corleone and
Tom Hagen are really missed. The good part is that Michael is again reunited
with old friends, that you remember from the first and second films.
In the third film Michael has become almost like his father, Vito in the
first film and Vincenzo resembles Michael when he was much younger. This
parallel could be more interesting if Vincenzo's character was more
developed.
Many have pointed out that making the third film, was unnecessary. I
disagree. It is a beautiful film of great importance, completing the tragic
saga of the Corleone family.
The first film showed some horrible results of Corleone's life. It showed
Michael making a choice; the second showed a man damning himself for his
choices and feeling the impact of changing times. A man desperately trying
to keep his balance, focus, family and sanity, while everything is crashing
all around him. The third film is a terrifying conclusion - a result of
Michael's life. The life he chose for himself is like quicksand - one wrong
step and you are doomed. There is no turning back. And no matter how hard
you try to get out of it, to free yourself, no matter how powerful and
wealthy you are, you are helpless - sinking deeper and deeper till it
swallows you completely. The beautifully directed last sequence is also the
powerful climax of the film, when Michael is sitting alone in his chair,
left by everyone, surrounded by emptiness and memories of his friends and
family members long dead. Here he dies - alone, miserable and unforgiven

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     It's Christmas night and I'm eating frozen lasagna for dinner.
     That probably expresses my emotions about THE GODFATHER III more
than any formal review I could write.
     But that's a cheat.  Maybe some people out there prefer frozen
lasagna the real thing, and may think I'm praising the movie, so I'd
better be explicit.
     I'm a real fan of both THE GODFATHER I & II, and looked forward to
GIII for a long time.  While Coppola's had a long run of bad luck,
APOCALYPSE NOW, the "Godfather" movies, and PEGGY SUE GOT MARRIED are
some of my favorite movies.  I thought he could pull a third "Godfather"
movie off.
     The third "Godfather" movie is a triumph of style over substance.
The set decorations are wonderful.  But the direction, acting and
scripting of this movie are pitiful.  The direction is particularly
poor.  Combine this with the ragged editing and you have a real mess.
People who didn't see the first movie might be lost.  On the other hand,
it might help to not be familiar with those earlier fine films.
     The basic problem with this movie is that it is stupidly written.  The plot
is pretty unbelievable to begin with, and it includes elements that are
ludicrous.  One of the strengths of the first two movies was that it was
believable.  GIII is as close to reality as PEGGY SUE GOT MARRIED was.
     My complaints with this movie are many and varied, but they center
around the scripting for and acting of the character of Michael
Corleone.  In the first two movies, Puzo, Coppola and Pacino created a
tragic figure.  In the third movie, he's just an old man in decline.  In
the first two movies, you could both sympathize with and be afraid of
Michael.  In the third, it's hard to do either.  Pacino has the same
dour, frozen expression for about two-thirds of this movie.  When he
finally smiles, you expect his face to break.
     I'd hoped initial rumors about the acting ability of Sofia Coppola
might have been off base.  They weren't.  In the words of another
reviewer about another actress, "She runs the gamut of emotion from A to
B."  I like that she didn't look like an actress, but, other than that,
an exhausted Winona Ryder still would have acted circles around this
young woman.  Maybe Coppola will grow into being a fine actress---women
like Sally Field, Jessica Lange and Farrah Fawcett didn't act in their
first few movies either, and they've improved dramatically.  
     Other than the sets, what can I praise about this movie?  Not much.
Andy Garcia and Talia Shire turn in the best performances of the movie.
Diane Keaton was better than she was in GII.
     GI moved from being about Don Vito to being about Michael.  It was
subtle at times about the way power corrupts people, and sometimes it
hit you over the head with it.  Part of the power in GI and GII was
watching the payoff at the end of each movie.  In GI, Michael becomes
the Godfather, literary and figuratively.  In GII, Michael has become
hollow and corrupt.  In GIII, Michael strives for redemption, and it's
clear he doesn't get it, even though he long outlives his enemies.
     The opera scene, and the shoot-out on the steps afterwards were
both way too long.  It would have been a stronger movie to find out what
happened to Vinnie after the shoot-out.  During the last third of the
film, it's hinted that Vinnie is double-crossing Michael.  We don't know
if this is the case or not.  This was too important a point to drop.
     I'd guess about a third of the audience (and the theater was
pretty full) was moved by the ending, but most of us got out of our
seats and left in a hurry.  No one applauded.  Arrgghhh...I haven't been
this disappointed by a movie in a very long time.  Coppola should have
stopped while he was ahead (yes, I know he made the movie in return for
a picture deal from Paramount...).
