Title
Review for Rosewood (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Steve Rhodes
     There is a scene in ROSEWOOD that captures the film's essence.
One dark night, Mr. Mann is hiding in the lush green Florida brush.
He stares in horror at the lynching in front of him.  Not content with
mere lynching, the perpetrators light up the sky and Mr. Mann's face
with their shotgun blasts.  They are celebrating their triumphs and
mutilating the body.  Mr. Mann's facial expressions alone say more than
the entirety of many lesser movies.
     BOYZ N THE HOOD director John Singleton brings a true story to
life with such immediacy that it grabs your heart and your mind.
I think of him as a talky, action director, but the brilliance of
ROSEWOOD happens in the silence.
     The casting of the film is perfect.  Ving Rhames, in the lead role
of Mr. Mann, delivers a performance worthy of Oscar consideration.  His
Mr. Mann is an heroic figure of almost mythic proportions, and yet he
is both quite vulnerable and totally believable.  Mr. Mann reminds me
of a statuesque and powerful hero from a Wagnerian opera.  Lohengrin
comes to mind.
     The incident dramatized in ROSEWOOD started on New Year's Eve in
1922.  As the picture opens, a mysterious but powerful looking stranger
(Mr. Mann) comes to a fork in the road.  He has to choose between two
small Florida towns.  One sign points to the almost all black hamlet of
Rosewood, where the land and houses are owned by the blacks.  The other
sign points to Sumner, where the whites live and many of the blacks
work.  He chooses Rosewood.
     The only white resident of Rosewood is John Wright (Jon Voight),
who owns the general store.  Voight gives a moving performance as
someone caught in the middle.  The anguish on his face and, again, his
silent moments are almost as strong as those of Rhames.  Wright and his
family are also the only sympathetic white people in the story.  Even
the names of the two leads, which in the movie sound like "Mr. Man" and
"Mr. Right", have a force of their own.
     (The whole Rosewood tragedy came to light in 1993 with sworn
depositions from the residents of the time.  More documentation on the
event can be found on the Web.  I will assume that the film is
accurate, but I know most filmmakers take varying degrees of license
with purportedly true stories.  Nevertheless, based on what I have
read, I believe most of it is true.)
     I am inclined to keep the facts of the incident to a minimum so
that you can be as affected and moved by the film as was I.  Suffice it
to say that people are lynched and murdered.  Overall the feeling left
with this critic is that I had just seen a small version of an American
Krystalnacht.  Unlike the German Krystalnacht, this one had been
covered up for years.  I don't believe this was due to any conspiracy.
Rather I attribute this lack of publicity on the Rosewood incident to
the reticence of the people at the time to admit to what had happened,
the whites for fear of prosecution and the blacks for fear of reprisal.
     Gregory Poirier's richly textured script is incredible.  It
manages to populate the film with as many people as a Tolstoy novel and
still develop them enough so that you know and care about a myriad of
characters.  His script engulfs the audience in a wide range of
emotions from fear to anger to pity.  I will never forget the father
teaching his young son the proper way to make a rope for lynching.
     An easy mistake to make would have been for Singleton to craft an
ultra-violent diatribe against racism, thus making a statement and
little more.  Instead he created a beautiful film that takes the time
to introduce us to the black families and culture of that era.  Another
result of the film then has to be respect and appreciation for the good
aspects of a period in black history rarely seen in the cinema.  The
residents of Rosewood formed a tightly knit community that owned their
own land and generally were model citizens.
     If there is a single part of the picture that stands out more than
any other, it has to be Johnny E. Jensen's cinematography.  Using a
palette of warm browns and oranges he magnifies the story's hope and
misery.  Best are the scenes in which figures are backlit, but all of
the images of Mr. Mann are worth mounting and framing.
     When I tell you that STAR WARS composer John Williams did the
score, what do you think it sounds like?  Well, you are wrong.  It is
more intimate than overpowering and quite delicate.
     The supporting cast is so talented that I have trouble deciding
whom to mention.  Let me just say that it includes: Don Cheadle, Loren
Dean, Catherine Kellner, Bruce McGill, Elise Neal, Esther Rolle, and
Michael Rooker.
     After many surprises, the show finally ends on a hopeful note.
I left feeling privileged to have seen this film.  Mr. Mann and the
residents of Rosewood are people I will forever respect.  And the
horrors inflicted upon them are something I will not forget.
     ROSEWOOD runs too long at 2:19.  Trimming it some would have made
the film more focused and effective.  ROSEWOOD is rated R for violence
and sex.  There are some pretty intensely violent scenes, but none are
sensationalized.  The show is important so it is my fond hope that most
parents will take their teenagers to see it.  There not that many
graphic scenes -- just tell them to shut their eyes if they need to.
I strongly recommend the picture to you and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Jon Voight, Ving Rhames, Don Cheadle, Bruce McGill, Esther
Rolle, Loren Dean, Elise Neal, Michael Rooker, Cahterine Kellner.
Screenplay:  Gregory Poirier.
Producer:  Jon Peters.
Director:  John Singleton.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  139 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In October 1994, a South Carolina woman named Susan Smith claimed
that she was assaulted by a black man who then stole her car with her two
young sons inside.  Eventually, Smith herself confessed to, and was found
guilty of, murdering her own children, but for a while people were on the
lookout for a non-existent black assailant.  This not-so-anecdotal aside
is offered for anyone who might think of ROSEWOOD simply as a sad footnote
in American history.  Even if that were the case, John Singleton's
ROSEWOOD would still be a powerful drama, but it is something more.  It is
a chilling study of the culture of racism which challenges us to consider
whether we still live in a country where, as one character in ROSEWOOD
describes it, "nigger is just another word for guilty."
     ROSEWOOD begins on December 31, 1922 in a rural Florida county,
focusing on two neighboring communities:  the all-white town of Sumner,
and the nearly all-black town of Rosewood.  As the year prepares to turn,
unusual events occur in both towns.  In Rosewood, a stranger named Mann
(Ving Rhames) rides into town and considers settling down there; in
Sumner, a white woman named Fannie Taylor (Catherine Kellner) is beaten by
her white lover, but accuses an unknown black man of the crime.  Though
the sheriff of Sumner (Michael Rooker) urges restraint, it doesn't take
long for the citizens to band together in a lynch mob to search for an
escaped convict rumored to be in the area.  Soon ROSEWOOD erupts in flames
and chaos, with every inhabitant a suspected collaborator and every home a
suspected hiding place.  Only two people have a chance to lead some of the
residents of Rosewood to safety:  Mann, and white shopkeeper John Wright
(Jon Voight).
     After two films in which John Singleton let his urge to lecture
interfere in the storytelling (POETIC JUSTICE and HIGHER LEARNING), he has
returned to the masterful composition and dramatic power of BOYZ N THE
HOOD.  In ROSEWOOD, we have the opportunity to get to know the inhabitants
of both Sumner and Rosewood as individuals, compounding the tragedy even
as it makes the triumphs more affecting.  Even the towns themselves
develop distinct personalities:  while Rosewood is a thriving town where
the residents take pride in the fact that they own almost all the land,
Sumner is a town of less picturesque wooden homes where the white
residents actually envy their black counterparts in Rosewood.  The 
situation recalls similar reactions against successful minorities in more
contemporary times, and focuses the double-edged "logic" of racism:  an
unsuccessful minority is shiftless, while a successful minority is uppity,
or taking what "rightfully" belongs to whites.
     The great success of ROSEWOOD is that it turns its story into broader
commentary on how racism functions without sacrificing that story.  Many
of the individual images in ROSEWOOD are riveting, portraying
unromanticized violence and pastoral beauty with equal effectiveness
thanks to the impressive cinematography of Johnny E. Jensen.  The
performances are also uniformly strong, led by Don Cheadle as strong,
defiant Sylvester Carrier and Jon Voight (in his best role in a decade) as
the reluctant hero Wright.  Then, beyond the events of the principal
narrative, you begin to notice that ROSEWOOD is presenting one of the most
complex examinations of racism ever committed to film.  Characters are not
presented in black-and-white in their views of black and white.  There is
a continuum of culpability, from Wright's opportunistic treatment of his
black neighbors to the sheriff's crimes of omission to the matter-of-fact
brutality of Duke (Bruce McGill), a Sumner resident determined to teach
his son "how the world is."  It is one of the film's most chilling moments
when the mob acknowledges with a chuckle that no one really believes a
black man assaulted the notably promiscuous Fannie.  For them, a lynch mob
isn't even about some perverted notion of justice.  It's just how the
world is.
     The only stumbles in ROSEWOOD occur when screenwriter Gregory Poirier
bows to convention.  A romance between Mann and a young schoolteacher
(Elise Neal) adds little to the story but a reason for a climactic
embrace; a few scenes near the end, including a big resolution within
Wright's family, seem designed simply to garner audience applause.  A two
hours and twenty minutes, ROSEWOOD does start to drag once the lengthy
pursuit of the survivors through the swamps begins, but you continue to
care because Singleton has taken the time to make those lives matter.
It's worth sticking through to the ending because in ROSEWOOD, the ending
is actually a sort of beginning.  Though we only need to look at headlines
to understand that ROSEWOOD sometimes is about the way the world still is,
it is also about the way the world could be.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I suppose for me the low point of ROSEWOOD was when at the end of
the opening credit sequence it says the film is based on a true story
and then immediately sets the date as Thursday,  December 31, 1922.  It
damages the credibility of a film when a screenwriter seemingly could
not be bothered to pick up a World Almanac to check a day of the week.
(A quick calculation told me it was a Sunday.)  Indeed, the story that
is told is admitted to be still very controversial in its facts and a
filmmaker generally has no good way of distinguishing, scene-by-scene,
fact from conjecture.  This is one version of the events and one that
still may be closer to the truth than the Florida state's official
version.  ROSEWOOD gives us a harrowing depiction of the race massacre
as it has not been shown on film before and one that some people will
be reluctant to believe could happen in this country.
     In the early 1920s the town of Rosewood is a prosperous black
community in what should have been a pleasant natural setting in
Florida.  However, there are long simmering resentments by local
whites, many of whom were not so successful but who felt a natural
superiority because of their skin color.  The film opens the day before
the historic events to give a view of life in and around Rosewood.
Whites with some money use the blacks for menial tasks and generally
seem more interested in fooling around than in actual work, most of
which seems to be being done by blacks.  We focus particularly on two
men.  The first is John Wright (played by Jon Voight) who runs a
grocery and general store in Rosewood.  He deals with blacks every day
but still thinks there is something not quite right about blacks being
allowed to join the army and kill white Germans.  He is not above
taking sexual advantage of his seventeen-year-old black clerk.  Today
he would be classed as a bigot, but for 1922 he almost passes as a
reasonable and enlightened man.  We see riding into town a tall, dark,
handsome stranger, in the tradition of Westerns, who is just visiting
the area looking for a place to settle down.  He is Mann (Ving Rhames),
an erudite army veteran.  One more or less expects his dramatic arrival
to be part of the chain of events that starts the riot that is to come,
but that story is told fairly accurately and he and Wright are purely
fictional characters created for the purpose of the story.  The actual
historic incident begins New Year's Day when white Fannie Taylor
(Catherine Kellner) is beaten by her white lover.  In order avoid the
wrath of her jealous husband and to explain the bruises to the
community she claims that a black man came to her door and started
beating her.  The person who really beat her was seen by her hired
help, Sarah Carrier (Esther Rolle), but Sarah is afraid to speak out
and risk vengeance on herself.  "'Nigger' is another word for guilty,"
she laments.  Fannie carefully added to her story that she was not
raped, but the local low-class white population, chaffing at the mere
presence, not to mention prosperity, of some of the blacks, forms a
lynch mob to find victims.  And so the events start rolling.  Before
they are over the very landscape will look like a war zone of
lynchings, burnings, and shootings.
     Chief among the mob is Duke (Bruce McGill), local white trash who
in the course of the film glories over his good work of killing blacks
and tries carefully to pass on to his son the finer points of how to
tie a noose and the best ways to lynch a black in some of the most
chilling scenes of the film.  Still Gregory Poirier's script, which may
at times be overstated, shies away from showing the events in their
full grimness.  At the height of the killing the script brings in Mann,
a larger than life hero to protect the young.  Sadly his heroics are
just a wishful fantasy of the script, though some exciting action
sequences toward the end of the film really are based on fact.  One of
the strengths of the script is the ambiguity of some of the characters.
Is grocer Wright a bigot who will side with the lynch mob or will he
side with the blacks that he has known.  How do we place Mrs. Wright
the quiet and ineffectual churchwoman.  Is Mann ultimately a coward or
a hero?  Is Sheriff Walker, who walks with the mob, restraining the
killers or supporting them?
     It is odd that in a film by and about black people the most
interesting character is white, but Jon , ambiguous tradesman really
remains just about the best thing in a very good film.  In stark
contrast to his muted character, Ving Rhames is magnetic and powerful,
but somehow seems to have stepped into the wrong film.  He is the one
flaw in the otherwise very good period feel of this film.  This is a
man who would have fit much better into a brash Western--in fact his
character seems as if he could have been based on the Danny Glover part
in SILVERADO.  There must have been some sort need felt to have a black
hero.  In fact historically the real heroes, and we do see a little of
this in the film, are the white people who risked bringing the wrath of
the mob onto themselves to give shelter to blacks.
     At 140 minutes, this film qualifies as a genuine film epic, and
one of the few we have seen in a while.  It has the feel, however, of a
film that used a low-budget wisely rather than being a big-budget film.
In that regard it is very similar to MATEWAN.  I have not cared for
what I have seen from director John Singleton to this point, including
the highly-touted BOYZ N THE HOOD, but ROSEWOOD is quite another
matter.  This is a film that deserves multiple viewings.  I give it a
+3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     The following is an account of the Rosewood Incident as described
in a Florida State document submitted on March 24, 1994 in
investigation of the incident.
RE:  HB 591 by Representatives De Grandy and Lawson
Claim of Arnett Goins, Minnie Lee Langley, et al. v. State of Florida
FINDINGS OF FACT:   THIS IS AN EQUITABLE CLAIM SEEKING $7.2 MILLION
FOR DAMAGES RESULTING FROM THE 1923 DESTRUCTION OF ROSEWOOD, FLORIDA.
     Upon review of the record presented, and consideration of the
sworn testimony, the following description of the events which occurred
in Rosewood in 1923 emerges. In January of 1923 Rosewood was a small,
mostly African-American community of approximately 120 residents
located on the Seaboard Air Line Railroad in western Levy County, nine
miles east of Cedar Key.  Today the site of Rosewood is marked on State
Road 24. At one time the community had a timber mill, a post office,
several stores, a depot and hotel; however, by 1923 the cedar wood had
been harvested, and the sawmill operations moved to Sumner, a somewhat
larger community, three miles west of Rosewood.  The black residents
remaining at Rosewood earned a living by working at the Cummer sawmill
in Sumner, trapping and hunting, and vegetable farming.  In addition,
several of the black women of Rosewood worked in domestic capacities
for the white residents of Sumner. The main store of Rosewood was owned
and operated by a white man named John Wright.  In 1923 the black
community of Rosewood consisted of approximately twenty families, many
of whom were closely related through marriages. Some of the black
families owned their homes as well as other property in the area. The
community had a one-room school, at least two churches, and a masonic
lodge.  The railroad depot remained, but it does not appear that there
was a regularly scheduled stop at Rosewood at that time. There was no
history of racial tension at Rosewood, and the record indicates that
prior to 1923 the black and white communities had a generally amiable
relationship.
     On Monday, January 1, 1923, in Sumner, Florida,  Mrs. Frances
Taylor, a twenty-two year old white housewife, alleged that a black man
had entered her home and assaulted her. Mrs. Taylor, who was visibly
bruised, told her neighbors that while her husband James Taylor was at
work at the sawmill, an unidentified black man had assaulted and robbed
her. The specific nature of the assault is not apparent from the
record; however, the white community believed there had been a sexual
assault, although it does not appear that Mrs. Taylor was ever examined
by a physician. After repeating her allegations, Mrs.  Taylor then
collapsed and was taken to a neighbor's home.
     A contradictory account of this event circulated in the black
community. According to Mrs. Sarah Carrier, a black woman from Rosewood
who did laundry for Mrs. Taylor, and Mrs.  Carrier's granddaughter,
Philomena Goins, who accompanied Mrs. Carrier to the Taylor home on the
morning of January 1, 1923, a white man had visited Mrs. Taylor that
day, and left shortly before Mrs. Taylor made her allegations. The
black community believed that Mrs. Taylor had a romantic relationship
with this unidentified white man, that they had quarrelled, and that
this white man was actually responsible for Mrs. Taylor's injuries.  In
response to Mrs. Taylor's allegations, a group of white men, mainly
residents of Sumner or workers at the Cummer sawmill, came together to
search for the perpetrator. At about this  time word reached Sumner
from Levy County Sheriff Robert Elias Walker that a black convict named
Jesse Hunter had escaped from a work crew doing road construction near
Otter Creek.  Jesse Hunter became the focus of the search. Later that
day, Sheriff Walker sent for bloodhounds, and the trail of the fugitive
was followed from behind the Taylor house in Sumner, leading the party
of men toward Rosewood.
     The group first came across Aaron Carrier, a black man from
Rosewood who apparently was coerced into implicating Sam Carter, a
forty-five year old black man who did some blacksmith work. Sheriff
Walker intervened during the interrogation of Aaron Carrier and
apparently sent him to the jail in Bronson for safekeeping. The dogs
followed the trail to Sam Carter's house, and the search party became
convinced that Sam Carter had placed the fugitive in his wagon and
assisted the fugitive in an escape. The men seized Sam Carter and
strung him up over a tree limb in an effort to make Carter  reveal the
place where he had taken the fugitive.
     The role of the law enforcement officers in the search is unclear.
The record indicates that Sheriff Walker was informed and probably sent
for the bloodhounds from Ft. White. There is also testimony that the
deputy sheriff assigned to western Levy County, Clarence Williams, who
also served as a quarterboss at the Cummer sawmill, was involved in
searching for the fugitive; however, it does not appear that either the
sheriff or the deputy were actually members of the search party that
seized Sam Carter.
     Of particular interest in this regard is the testimony of Ernest
Parham, who at that time was a nineteen year old resident of Sumner,
working at the general store. Mr. Parham testified that after the news
of Mrs.  Taylor's assault on January 1, 1923 spread, tension was very
high in Sumner. At the general store where he worked, they sold so much
ammunition that the store's owner decided to hide his supplies and tell
customers that they were sold out. Later that evening, Mr. Parham
closed the store and noticed that deputy sheriff Williams, who had
walked to Rosewood, had left his car  parked outside. Mr. Parham drove
the Williams' car by a back road from Sumner to Rosewood and located
the deputy near Rosewood. At that time noise from a crowd could be
heard from down the road. Mr. Parham left the deputy and walked down to
where the crowd was gathered, and observed that a group of white men,
many of whom he knew, had strung Sam Carter up on a tree limb in an
attempt to force him to reveal information about the fugitive. Mr.
Parham intervened in the situation, and the crowd of men let Carter
down. Carter then took them to a place down the road where he said he
let the fugitive off; however, when the dogs failed to pick up the
scent, one of the men in the crowd shot and killed Sam Carter. The
crowd then dispersed, and Mr. Parham returned to Sumner.
     The body of Sam Carter was left on the road that night and
apparently law enforcement officials did not discover the body until
the following morning of Tuesday, January 2, 1923. Later that same day
a coroner's jury inquest verdict signed by L.L. Johns as Justice of the
Peace determined:  "We the Jury after the examination of the said Sam
Carter who being found lying Dead, find that the said Sam Carter came
to his Death by being shot by Unknown Party so say we all."
     It does not appear that any further criminal investigation was
conducted into the circumstances of the death of Sam Carter.
     The search for Mrs. Taylor's assailant continued. On Thursday,
January 4, 1923, word reached Sumner that the man they sought was being
protected by Sylvester Carrier in Rosewood. A group of white men went
to the Carrier home that evening. Minnie Lee Langley and Arnett Goins,
claimants in this case, were children present at the Carrier home the
night of January 4, 1923, and testified to the events of that evening.
The children had been told that trouble was expected and they were
gathered together with other relatives at the Carrier home for their
protection.  They were taken to an upstairs bedroom. A group of white
men approached the house and called for Sarah Carrier to come out.  She
did not respond. The white men then came to the porch.
     The white men shot and killed a dog tied in front of the house.
According to the testimony, one of the white men, C.P. "Poly"
Wilkerson, a former quarterboss from Sumner, kicked in the door, and
was immediately shot and killed by Sylvester Carrier.  A second white
man Henry Andrews tried to enter the house and was also shot and killed
by Sylvester Carrier. The remaining white men retreated, and gunfire
was exchanged.  During the ensuing gunfire Sarah Carrier was shot and
killed. The white men apparently ran out of ammunition, and during the
respite the children were taken out of the house by older relatives,
and escaped into the woods of Gulf Hammock.
     It does not appear that any law enforcement officials were among
the group at the Carrier home on the night of January 4, 1923. Ernest
Parham testified that deputy Williams was at the hotel in Sumner that
evening.  Mr. Parham specifically remembered that deputy Williams was
discussing the ongoing events and stated that "All hell's breaking out
in Rosewood." There is nothing in the record to indicate the
whereabouts of Sheriff Walker on that night.
     In the morning of January 5, 1923 the bodies of Poly Wilkerson,
Henry Andrews, Sarah Carrier, and another black man, reported to be
Sylvester Carrier were found at the house. There is some dispute as to
whether Sylvester Carrier was actually killed at Rosewood. His family
believes that he escaped and members received Christmas greetings from
him for many years after the shootings at Rosewood.  After the killing
of Poly Wilkerson and Henry Andrews, the violence escalated. Groups of
white men from the surrounding areas, and some reportedly from other
states, came to Rosewood. During the following days every black
residence was burned. The black community fled to the woods. Two more
deaths of residents of Rosewood were reported. Lexie Gordon, a woman of
mixed color, was sick with typhoid fever and unable to leave Rosewood.
When her home was set on fire she went out the back door and was shot
and killed.  James Carrier, the grandfather of Minnie Lee Langley, was
reported to have been forced to dig his own grave and was then shot and
killed.  Another black man, Mingo Williams, was reportedly shot while
chopping down a tree twenty miles away by a group of the white men
going to Rosewood.
     Many of the white residents of the area came to the assistance of
the black community. John Wright, the white owner of the general store
in Rosewood, hid some of the children at his house, and arranged for a
railroad car to pick up the women and children who had escaped into
Gulf Hammock. Margaret Cannon testified that her father, Morris Cannon,
a deputy sheriff in Levy County at the time, went into the woods and
found the black woman and children and brought them to the train. They
were taken to Gainesville. The black residents of Rosewood did not
return.
     Several years later the Cummer sawmill in Sumner burned. The
company opened a new mill in Lacoochee, Florida, in Pasco County, and
many of the Rosewood families moved to that area.  Others dispersed to
Jacksonville and Miami, and a few others moved out of state. Some of
the property of the Rosewood residents apparently was lost to taxes,
but there are a few records that indicate some property was later sold.
At this time it is difficult to determine the role of law enforcement
officers, and other local and state officials, regarding their conduct
during the Rosewood violence. Media accounts state that the Governor,
Cary Hardee, was aware of the events, but had gone hunting on the
afternoon of January 4, 1923. It also appears that Sheriff Walker had
informed the Governor that there was no need to call in National Guard
troops. Although the record indicates that the National Guard had been
mobilized in preceding years to keep the peace during civil
disturbances, the Guard was not called to Rosewood. It further appears
that the Sheriff of Alachua County organized a posse to come to Levy
County to assist in keeping order, but the role of the Alachua Sheriff
in these events is not clear from the record. Sheriff Walker resigned
July 8, 1924 after the Rosewood incident, and was replaced by L.L.
Johns, the former Justice of the Peace, who signed the coroner's
verdict regarding the death of Sam Carter.
     On January 29, 1923 the Governor ordered that a special grand jury
investigate the violence at Rosewood.  The grand jury was presided over
by Judge A.V. Long of the Eighth Judicial Circuit.  George DeCottes,
the state attorney for the Seventh Circuit in Deland was appointed as
prosecutor. On February 12, 1923 the grand jury convened in Bronson.
There are no records of the grand jury. The newspaper accounts state
that thirteen witnesses testified on February 13, 1923, and more
witnesses were scheduled for the following day.  Examination of
witnesses ended on February 14, 1923, and on February 16, 1923 the
grand jury stated that they were unable to find any evidence upon which
to base indictments.
     No charges were ever brought by the State of Florida against any
person for the assault on Frances Taylor, for the killing of Sam
Carter, for the deaths occurring at the Carrier home on the night of
January 4, 1923, for the deaths of Lexie Gordon, James Carrier, or
Mingo Williams, or for any acts of arson and theft which occurred at
Rosewood, Florida.
As AMENDED, I recommend HB 591 be reported FAVORABLY.
Respectfully submitted,

Author
Walter Frith
     'Rosewood' is based on a true story of a black town in Florida that was
burned to the ground after a white woman falsely accused a black man of rape.
 The tragedy happened in 1923 and was relatively unknown until the incident
was brought to life again seventy years later.
     Director John Singleton ('Boyz N the Hood', 'Poetic Justice', 'Higher
Learning') has made a searing, emotional and harrowing motion picture filled
with a nightmarish theme of mob justice that plays out as a slice of American
life that many will find hard to believe.
     A white shopkeeper (Jon Voight) is conscience stricken by what he sees
and helps the town's black citizens escape persecution and death.  A black
World War I veteran (Ving Rhames) passes through the area and becomes part of
the rescue effort, assisting Voight. Another intriguing member of the cast
(Don Cheadle) is compelling as a strong willed member of the town who refuses
to give in to prejudice.
     The flaws in 'Rosewood' are few and far between as Singleton directs
this movie as an absorbing and meticulously refined drama of detailed
proportions.  His recreation of a time and place in history is as vivid and
convincing as the most researched documentary there is.
     This motion picture is an early contender as one of 1997's best films
and could become Singleton's masterpiece although 'Boyz N the Hood' (1991)
will rank as quite an achievement for the young director who received two
Oscar nominations for that film as director and as the film's writer.  At the
time, he was the youngest director nominated in the history of the Academy,
making 'Boyz N the Hood' when he was 23.  He is a promising and creative mind
for the future of American cinema and his talent is derived largely from
choosing socially powerful subjects and bringing their aspects to the
public's attention and 'Rosewood' is perhaps the best film dealing with
racism since 'Do the Right Thing' (1989) and the best film about mob justice
since 'The Ox-Bow Incident' (1943).  
     The first half of 'Rosewood' is an introduction and visual structure of
a story whose message of violence leading to cause and effect explodes in the
second half with unforgettable results.

Author
Michael Dequina
In 1923, the predominantly black town of Rosewood, Florida was
burned to ground, its population almost entirely decimated, by white men
from the neighboring town of Sumner... all because of a lie.  This subject
matter provides the basis of director John Singleton's latest film, the
absorbing and potent historical drama Rosewood.
The event that triggers the massacre does not come until about a
half hour or so in, when one Fannie Taylor (Catherine Kellner), a white
housewife, claims that she was assaulted by a black stranger (in actuality,
she was assaulted by her lover, who was also white).  The exposition that
precedes this incident, which establishes everyday life in Rosewood, is slow
going; while it can easily be dismissed as a failure on the part of
Singleton and screenwriter Gregory Poirer, but it's actually a smart move,
for it eventually serves to highlight the human toll of the ensuing massacre
and serves as a counterpoint to all the brutality that follows.  Poirer's
script believably shows how this single claim sets off the whole horrific
chain of events, how a search for one man snowballs into an all-out hunt
against an entire race.  There is also a great understanding of the mob
mentality, as we see the town's white sheriff (Michael Rooker) join take
part in all the killing even though he's never completely convinced by
Fannie's story.
Recently another Hollywood studio production, Ghosts of Mississippi,
documented an actual historical event and attempted to address its impact on
race relations in this country--only to come off as glossy, self-important,
uninvolving, and, most of all, synthetic.  Rosewood, on the other hand, does
feel authentic because it simply doesn't try too hard.  Everything on the
film is done on a smaller scale--there are no superstars on board to
distract from the story, and Singleton, often criticized for being overly
preachy (a criticism that is not entirely undeserved), lets the film's
message be gleaned from the story itself instead of bludgeoning the audience
with it (which he did in his last film, Higher Learning).  He also doesn't
smooth over the material's rough edges; the killings aren't graphic to the
point of being exploitative, but they are graphic enough to convey the sheer
brutality and animal nature of the massacre.
 Similarly subdued to equal effect are the actors.  It goes without
saying that Ving Rhames, who plays Mann, the noble stranger to town--who,
with white shopkeeper John Wright (Jon Voight), helps a number of women and
children flee to safety--is a physically commanding presence onscreen, and
his brawn is well-suited to the role.  But there's real vulnerability and
soul behind the bulk, evident in his expressive eyes and in his warm scenes
with the charming Elise Neal, who plays Scrappie, a teen who falls for Mann.
Don Cheadle, as the vengeful Sylvester Carrier, smartly doesn't overplay his
character's rage--the controlled fury he brings to the role is much more
effective than any histrionics would have been.  The only actor who does
resort to broad histrionics is Kellner; while the woman who causes all the
madness should be shrill, she's shrill to the point of inducing a headache.
Singleton, who made such a memorable debut with 1991's
Oscar-nominated Boyz N the Hood, followed that effort with the disappointing
Poetic Justice and the mostly effective but underachieving Higher Learning,
leading some people to doubt his ability.  However, with his triumphant
return to form with Rosewood, his talent as a filmmaker should no longer be
called into question.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jon Voight, Ving Rhames, Don Cheadle, Bruce McGill, Loren Dean, 
      Ester Rolle, Michael Rooker, Elise Neal, Robert Patrick, 
      Catherine Kellner
Director: John Singleton
Producer:  Jon Peters
Screenplay: Gregory Poirier
Cinematography: Johnny E. Jensen
Music: John Williams
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Rosewood, central Florida, 1923.  The town's population numbered 
about 120, mostly black.  It was a prosperous, happy community until a 
January day when one woman's lie set off a chain of events that would 
have devastating results.  That woman was Fanny Taylor, and her false 
claim to have been assaulted by a black man resulted in the formation of 
a lynch mob that headed for Rosewood with arson and murder on their 
minds.  Before the week was over, blood was shed and the town was in 
ashes.  
     The quote that was foremost in my mind as I sat down to watch the 
fact-based ROSEWOOD came from director John Singleton:  "I am concerned 
about absolute historical accuracy to an extent, but I am really more 
worried about being truthful to the essence of what happened at 
Rosewood... I am making a movie that people will respond to."  Indeed, 
this motion picture, which combines the flavor of a John Ford western 
with Singleton's uniquely visceral power, is an epic that stands alone 
in the latter weeks of a dismal movie winter.
     Following his dramatic debut in 1991 with BOYZ 'N THE HOOD, 
Singleton attempted two other contemporary tales -- one was a love story 
(POETIC JUSTICE) and the other was an ensemble piece set on a college 
campus (HIGHER LEARNING).  Neither came close to the impact of the 
director's first feature.  With ROSEWOOD, however, Singleton has once 
again fulfilled the promise he exhibited when the Academy honored him 
with a Best Director nomination.  Despite an occasional narrative 
hiccup, this is a rich and moving motion picture.
     If Singleton takes liberties with the historical account of what 
happened at Rosewood (and that account is murky at best -- the death 
count differs greatly depending on which source is being consulted), 
it's in the name of dramatic license, and it works.  This is a deeply 
affecting tale about the naked emotional and physical devastation that 
can be wrought by racial hatred.  But it is also a story of hope that 
highlights the indomitable nature of the human spirit and the fraternity 
that can bind together two apparently different people.  ROSEWOOD does 
not glamorize evil, but neither does it demonize those who practice it.  
Singleton is careful to present a balanced and believable picture of the 
participants on both sides.  The result presents a forceful message 
without ever preaching.
     Jon Voight and Ving Rhames, both of whom appeared in last summer's 
blockbuster, MISSION IMPOSSIBLE, lead an impressive cast.  Voight is 
John Wright, the head of the only white household in Rosewood.  Wright 
is a store owner who finds himself torn between cultures.  The blacks 
view him with suspicion and distrust; the whites see him as a traitor to 
his race.  One aspect of ROSEWOOD focuses on his attempts to find solace 
for his tormented soul.  Meanwhile, Rhames plays Mann, the only entirely 
fictional character in the film.  A wandering World War I veteran, he 
comes to Rosewood seeking peace.  What he finds instead is another war.  
And, after being decorated for saving the lives of men on the 
battlefield in Europe, here he finds himself fighting to rescue women 
and children from an equally implacable enemy.
     While both Voight and Rhames are exemplary, they are ably 
supported.  Don Cheadle (DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS) is Sylvester Carrier, an 
outspoken citizen who refuses to let the white man walk all over him.  
Esther Rolle brings dignity and a quiet sadness to the role of Sarah 
Carrier, Sylvester's mother.  Michael Rooker plays a sheriff torn 
between his own distaste for black people and his growing horror at what 
is transpiring.  And Bruce McGill portrays one of the most chillingly 
realistic crackers ever to appear on screen.  His is a startling 
performance because he defies tradition by not going over-the-top.
     While ROSEWOOD must be seen as a cohesive whole to be fully 
appreciated, there are isolated moments that stand out because of their 
haunting power.  One of the most startling depicts white folk picnicking 
and frolicking while Rosewood burns in the background.  In another 
scene, McGill's character carefully teaches his son how to make a noose 
for a lynching -- one of the essential lessons he must learn to become a 
man.  There are, in fact, times when ROSEWOOD is reminiscent of 
SCHINDLER'S LIST.  There's a kernel of truth that both films have in 
common -- the theme of the duality of human nature:  the capacity for 
great good and great evil, boundless love and infinite hatred.  And, 
while this film is not as well-paced or tightly-structured as 
Spielberg's Holocaust drama, it evokes many of the same feelings and 
emotions.  It is an important film that should not be missed.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John Singelton
Writer: Gregory Poirier
Starring: Ving Rhames, Jon Voigt, Don Cheadle, Michael Rooker, Bruce
McGill, Loren Dean, Esther Rolle, Elise Neal, Robert Patrick, Catherine
Kellnar, Katherine Meisle, Robert Patrick
"Rosewood" tells the story of one of the most embarassing instances in
American history: in a black and white Florida town in 1922, a lie
turned most of the white folks to riot against all the blacks, causing
tons of lynching, and a lot of murders, mostly towards the black side. 
"Boyz N the Hood" director John Singleton tells the tale, and luckily
isn't either preachy or one-sided about the whole thing.
"Rosewood" is presented in the beginning as a relatively peaceful town,
with blacks and white living together, although not in any kind of
happiness.  Sure, they're free, but that doesn't mean they're liked. 
Even in the earlier 20th century, a total redneck bigot (Bruce McGill)
is telling his son how awful the black men are, just 'cause they're
black.  But at least store owner Jon Voigt is nice enough to have sex
with his young black store assistant.
Into town comes Mann (Ving Rhames), kind of like the Man With No Name in
"Fistful of Dollars."  A veteran of World War I, and still riding a
horse, Mann makes some friends with the black piano-player Sylvester
(Don Cheadle) and a 17-year old member of his family, Scrappy (Elsie
Neal), the latter who has a crush on him.  There's also the maternal,
everyone-loves-her -- (Esther Rolle, from "Good Times"), who's like that
one slave woman in "Gone With the Wind."
One day, an adulterous woman (Catherine Kellnar) is beaten by her lover
(Robert Patrick), and to cover up her adultery, tells everyone that she
was beaten by a black man (although word of mouth spreads that she was
also raped).  So every white boy in town goes out, and begins beating up
any black men they see, and before everyone knows it, an innocent black
man is lynched.
But this is merely the beginning.  Soon every night for a couple days, a
huge group of bigot jerks is going out and lynching any black man they
can find.  And soon Sylvester's house is burned down, -- is shot by some
schmuck, and all the women and children have escaped into the Florida
swamps.
But they have some help.  For one thing, Jon Voigt becomes the big
sympathizer, and is soon hiding black runaways in his house, which would
get his house burned down if they found it.  And Mann comes back into
town after leaving, and is shooting white boys, and basically helping
them escape.  The sheriff (Michael Rooker, at his most unintelligable)
claims to want everyone to stop it, but is almost as rascist as the
others, even if he did tell Sylvester to hop town the day his house was
burned down.
"Rosewood" is, to put it briefly, difficult to watch, be you black or
white.  For blacks, it's horrific to see such bigotry.  For
whites...well, the same, really.  I mean, it's horrible to see people so
narrow-minded that they'd judge people by the color of their skin.  And
even if this is a story of history, it's still disturbing that there are
still people like this in our world.
Thankfully, Singleton isn't a jerk about this, and creates a good white
man in the form of Jon Voigt.  Sure, he's scared for his and his
family's safety, but he still puts his neck out to save everyone who's
being wrongly persecuted.  His character prevented me from feeling
totally ashamed of my white ancestors.
The film is totally engrossing, from start to finish, which is a good
thing for a two and a half hour long film.  In a lesser more preachy
film, I would have been looking at my non-existent watch every couple
minutes, but the time flew.  Singleton keeps the pace constantly moving,
and never stops for anything stupid once the film is in its full and
constant speed.
There are some bad parts, though.  This is "based on a true story,"
which means we have some hokey melodrama, like a really forced
relationship between Mann and Scrappy (the latter who looks like she's a
mere 13 years old, while Ving looks like he's in his late 30s).  And the
ending, where Mann is shooting white boys right and left is
just...dumb.  The film contains so much intelligence up to that point,
but when you have him turning into some giant hypocrite at the end, it
kinda hurts the film.  I mean, people were clapping!  As my one friend
said, it's like clapping when the Nazis are getting killed in
"Schindler's List," or in more analytical terms, if someone claps when a
black man is lynched.  Perhaps Singleton put it in as a test or maybe to
please some people.  But it doesn't work out.  There's a bit at the end
where the one jerk suffers something he's going to have to live with for
the rest of his life: that's more satisfying than seeing them all shot
in some overly-produced action sequence.
The acting's very good, with Ving Rhames performing at his usual awesome
height.  He creates a mysterious figure who's as fascinating as Eastwood
in those Leone spag westerns.  Jon Voigt is also predictably awesome,
proving that his career is indeed back on track, the way it should be. 
Don Cheadle rocks, as usual, Esther Rolle is a great all-loving maternal
force in the film, and Bruce McGill is awesome as the most hateful
bigot.
Nevertheless, the film is well-written (with the exception of a couple
lines, like: "Are you gonna be lonely?" "No, I have JESUS!"),
well-acted, as well as excellently directed.  It tells a very
frightening story, and it does it masterfully.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        ROSEWOOD is the kind of movie that makes me ashamed 
to be white. That might be too strong a statement, but a movie like 
this does remind me that, yes, we honkies have traditionally done a 
lot of wrong to minority races. ROSEWOOD is based on the true 
story of the massacre of scores of blacks in a Florida town in 1922, 
told by director John Singleton in the same guilt-inducing but fair 
way that made his last film, HIGHER LEARNING, so powerful.
        At 142 minutes, ROSEWOOD seems to be Singleton's 
MALCOLM X, a detailed, large budget period piece that documents 
an important (and, in this case, embarrassing) part of black history 
with clear cut characters, real emotion and a lack of sermonizing. 
It's a hard movie to film and market because this kind of movie is 
uncomfortable for both black and white viewers, but in two 
characters, on both sides of the racial spectrum, Singleton 
provides appeal.
        On the white side, there's John Wright (Jon Voight), a 
Rosewood store owner. He's one of the few white residents in the 
black-owned town but gets along with everyone, kind of like Sal in 
DO THE RIGHT THING. Wright is the only white man who tries to 
stop the lynch mob's attacks on the black residents once the episode 
begins. It starts with a rich white woman claiming she was beaten by 
a black man to cover up her affair with violent Robert "T-1000" 
Patrick. This is just what the white folks want to hear; they booze up, 
grab their shotguns and mobilize to dispense justice, which seems 
like an inhuman game more than anything else.
        On the black side, we have Mr. Mann (Ving Rhames), the 
stranger-comes-to-town archetype. He's a drifter and WWI veteran 
who wanders into town the day before the fun begins and is embraced 
by the townfolk. ROSEWOOD is based on life, but Mann isn't. His 
character is to serve as the superhuman leader of his people and, 
although it diminishes the power of the "true" images, it makes the 
movie more audience-friendly to have someone to root for. I can only 
imagine how many audiences burst into spontaneous applause at the 
end of his hanging scene.
        The other black characters seem more human than Mann. 
There's Sylvester (Don Cheadle), the piano instructor who refuses to 
leave town when the white sheriff (Michael Rooker) warns him of the 
approaching redneck mob, and instead stays to fight. His mom is 
played by Esther Rolle of "Good Times," although her times in 
ROSEWOOD seem anything but. As the maid of the white woman 
who starts the mess, she knows it was Patrick who beat her, but also 
knows she will be lynched if she says anything.
        The cast does a good job -- it's one thing to play a 
sympathetic character, but it takes a lot more work to portray a truly 
ignorant, racist character everyone will hate. I have to hand it to the 
bearded guy in the lynch mob because, by the end of the movie, I 
really hated him. If I see him on the street, I will beat him. _That's_ 
good acting.
        And, as always, Ving Rhames is the man. Entertainment 
Weekly's review of ROSEWOOD was negative because of Rhames, 
saying his character goes against the riviting drama of the narrative 
by providing an unrealistic action hero. That's probably right, but I've 
never thought anything but "Ving's the man" when I've seen him in a 
movie. I think he adds a lot to the movie, but what I could have done 
without are the last two or three scenes, which add sentimental anti-
climax after everything is said and done. If there's anything 
ROSEWOOD doesn't need, it's anti-climax.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Ugh.  Director John Singleton's dramatization of a little-known
piece of Florida history-- when a black town was burned to the ground by
whites in 1923-- is this month's longest sit.  The padded (and often
predictable) plot is punctuated by increasing acts of violence and
racial hatred.  No, no punches are pulled, which makes for a history
lesson as unpleasant as it is important.  The technical credits are
strong, though, and there's a well-acted cast of non-compelling char-
acters.  (But what the Hell is mush-mouthed Michael Rooker doing here?
Here's barely intelligible as the local law.) Regrettably, the drama is
further diminished by the effect that this story is likely to have on
the more-reactive members of the audience.  Folks get worked-up in the
movie, folks get worked-up in their seats, and everyone ends up talking
back to the screen.  So, when the camera passes a young woman's corpse,
and someone behind you invariably yaps "she's dead!," be prepared to
turn around and shout "gee, do you think so?"
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/
