Title
Review for One (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Robert Strohmeyer
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/a46c7fd38f94c1c0882569660003758e?OpenDocument
The story of two friends drifting apart in a world of increasingly
conflicting interests, One is the directorial debut of former fashion
photographer's assistant and college ballplayer Tony Barbieri.
Meet Nick Razca (Kane Picoy), a twenty-something San Francisco trash
collector who coulda been a contender in Major League Baseball if he
hadn't started his career by socking his coach in the face.  Now meet
Charlie O'Connell, fresh out of the Big House after apparently assisting
in his grandfather's suicide.  Nick and Charlie are lifelong friends.
Now that Charlie's out of prison, Nick and his family (he still lives
with his parents) have opened their doors to him indefinitely.  Soon
Charlie will be working the trash truck with Nick, but first he has some
community service to do, under the management of a moderately plausible
love interest named Sarah (Autumn Macintosh).  Meanwhile, some bad guys
are out to kill poor Charlie because he pissed some people off in
prison.
Due to its horrendously amateurish scripting and direction, it took
yours truly about 60 of this film's 88 minutes to learn all the
background presented above; converting what seems at face value like an
interesting story into little more than a tangle of bad editing and
ambient noise.
And let's talk about the noise for a moment.  While it's perfectly
understandable that filmmakers on a budget might not produce the best
possible audio tracks, Barbieri's insistence on having his actors talk
with their mouths full for two-thirds of the movie is absolutely
senseless.  Coupled with the slow, pathetic dialogue, conversation
between the characters serves little purpose beyond breaking up long
periods of slurping spaghetti and shuffling feet.
So, based on observations from this film's failures, here are a few tips
for you budding filmmakers out there: 1) When characters are speaking,
it's a good idea to show them on camera -- at least some of the time. 
About a third of Macintosh's lines are spoken off-camera, sometimes
showing just her hands so we know she's still there.  It's a real
tension killer.  2) Lay out your story up front.  There's nothing wrong
with plot twists and surprises, but it's a good idea to let your
audience know right from the beginning that your movie is actually about
something.  3) Keep it moving.  Long, pointless silences may be common
in real-life conversations, but should be kept to a minimum in
movie-life, unless they convey some kind of meaning, which wasn't the
case in any of One's innumerable long, pointless silences.
On the bright side, actors Jason Cairns and Autumn Macintosh show a lot
of potential, and they might even have saved the film had Barbieri's
direction not bungled the job so completely.  Sadly. Kane Picoy's
portrayal of Nick is one-dimensional and bland, but the highlight of the
cast is Paul Herman as Nick's hot-headed father, Ted.
In the end, this flick has all the trimmings of a fourth-year film
school final project and just isn't ready for the big screen. 
Barbieri's One probably could have pulled a B+ at UCLA, but at
filmcritic.com it gets a D-.
http://film.sgfilmseries.com/one.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
