Title
Review for Get Bruce (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Get Bruce!
75 minutes
a documentary on comedic writer Bruce Vilanch
With Robin Williams, Whoopi Goldberg, Billy Crystal, Paul Reiser Lily
Tomlin and Bette Midler
Directed by Andrew J. Kuehn
website: http://www.miramax.com
The funniest man in Hollywood that you've never heard of is named Bruce
Vilanch. Cranky has actually seen this guy on stage, in Los Angeles in
August '98 at a Hadassah benefit of some kind. Vilanch's opening line
was something about being the only Queen on a stage filled with Jewish
Princesses (ba-DUM-bah) and the rest of his act wasn't nearly as funny.
Which is why I ducked most of the press screenings of Get Bruce! Cranky
remembers watching some of the great pop songwriters of the 40s, 50s and
60s take the stage of The Ed Sullivan Show and proving to the world that
while they could write the hits, they couldn't sing worth a damn.
Writers are not necessarily good performers and even the best performers
need good writers to supplement any idea. Frankly, the star parade of
well wishers and other endorsements that fill the first ten minutes of
what looked to be an ego puff piece of a flick are enough for the
reg'lar folk to give thanks to God for the Second Amendment. Not that
you'll want to kill yourself -- that's the one thing that all of us that
have had the Near Death Experience can tell you will keep you away from
the pearly gates -- but you might feel like taking out documentary film
maker Andrew J. Kuehn for puffery above and beyond.
But then . . . when you get to hear what Vilanch has cooked up over the
past 20 years . . . Get Bruce! gets funny. So wait until the lights go
down before you head out for popcorn. Get on the longest line you can
find and, by the time you get back to your seat, this painful stuff
should have passed like whatever. What isn't painful is the simple fact
that just about anything funny that's come out of the mouths of Bette
Midler, Whoopi Goldberg, Billy Crystal, Robin Williams and Paul Reiser
at almost any awards show you've seen on television has been manhandled
in some way by Bruce Vilanch.
90 minutes of stars telling a camera that a guy is great is tiring after
about two minutes. Watching Vilanch and any of the aforementioned stars
build their material, or recall how they put it together and what was
left on the proverbial cutting room floor is very funny. Clips from
various Oscar, Emmy, Grammy or Comic Relief broadcasts, amateur video of
Bette Midler's early act are great places to start. Watching ABC
Broadcast Standards rep Susan Futterman fumph about the appropriateness
of some of the material brought a giggle to this ex-broadcaster's
throat.
But Robin Williams ad-libbing on camera alone nails the recommendation
which, as most of Vilanch's work seen here was made for the small
screen, is rental level.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Get Bruce!, he would have paid...
Vilanch has made a ton of bucks in the biz and has paid it back with a
tremendous amount of charity work. It was at these charity benefits
where most of the stars seen were corralled for their interviews.
Vilanch has written for the Williams-Goldberg-Crystal "Comic Relief"
conglomeration. Call 800-323-5275.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
After a dramatic production number of "The Color of the Wind," an Oscar
nominee for best song, Academy Awards host Whoopi Goldberg steps back up
to the podium.  The moment is too solemn for her so she decides to go
for one of the lines that she wasn't expected to actually use.
"Question I've always wanted to ask," she muses aloud, "what color is my
wind?"
If you laughed at that joke or any of the other Oscar jokes in the past
decade, you probably have comedy writer Bruce Vilanch to thank.  The
word in Hollywood is that no Oscar or other celebration can happen these
days unless they GET BRUCE, hence the title of Andrew J. Kuehn's
hilarious documentary.  As fast paced as the best monologue, the movie
flies by as laughter fills the theater.
Kuehn has just the right touch with the movie's mixture, helped
enormously by Vilanch who even looks and acts as funny as his classic
comedy lines.  Looking like a Muppet version of the Pillsbury Doughboy,
his large economy-sized head holds two mops full of scraggly hair and
fluffy beard.  Dressed in one of his thousands of sarcastic T-shirts
("My Other Body's In The Shop" being one of his favorites) and
bright-colored shoes and glasses, he's a guy that would stand out in any
crowd, even a Halloween one.
The director takes interviews in which stars like Goldberg, Billy
Crystal and Robin Williams ham it up as they reminisce with Vilanch and
mixes them with live examples of the routines he has crafted for them.
Interspersed with all of this is the telling of Vilanch's life.  An
obese, Jewish guy, Vilanch says that he suffered at an early age by
being moved from New York to New Jersey.
Part of the film concerns the preparation of the material.  Vilanch
subscribes to 65 newspapers and magazines and is a voracious reader,
always trolling for possible material.  In town for a day in New Mexico
to do a show, he finds the report of a gas leak that caused an explosion
the day before.  He's immediately on the phone trying to figure out
who's the most famous fat person in town.  This day he's in luck.  He'll
be able to roast the mayor herself as being the source of the killer
gas.
"Actually everything gets revised 4,000 times," Vilanch says of all the
hard work that goes into each production.  "There is no writing, only
rewriting."   He shows us some of the script versions for one telecast
with each printed on different colored paper.
Watching Vilanch at work, you get a glimpse of true genius.  A
prodigious worker and writer, he started as a cub writer for the Chicago
Tribune.  He reviewed a Bette Midler routine and ended up having dinner
with her.  He told her she needed more dialog in her shows, and he came
to be the one to supply many of her lines.
Soon, he was off to Hollywood where his big break came when he landed
the job as the head writer for "The Brady Bunch Comedy Hour."  He says
he hit bottom when he found himself writing jokes for Donny and Marie
Osmond.
These days he creates comedy sketches for everyone.  "He's given more
great lines to celebrities than any coke dealer," Nathan Lane says with
a grin.
Vilanch carefully tailors his approach to each of his star clients.  For
Robin Williams, he throws ideas at him and then stands back and watches.
One of the clips in the documentary shows one such collaboration.  After
some obscure inspiration, Williams starts fashioning an ad hoc routine
that mixes "The Jack Benny Show," "Amos n' Andy" and "The X-Files."
Although normally behind the scenes, Vilanch does surface on occasion as
when he won an Emmy.  His one-line acceptance speech was hysterically
funny and typically Vilanch: "I'm very sorry I didn't have to sleep
around to win this award."
GET BRUCE runs a blisteringly fast 1:12.  It is not rated but might be
an R for language and sexual innuendo.  It would be fine for kids 12 and
up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
GET BRUCE! (1999)*** Produced and directed by Andrew J. Kuehn. 
Photography, Jose Luis Mignone. Editing, Maureen Nolan. Music, 
Michael Feinstein. Appearing : Bruce Vilanch, Bette Midler, Billy 
Crystal , Robin Williams, Whoopi Goldberg, Lily Tomlin,  Nathan Lane, 
Roseanne, Carol Burnett, Florence Henderson, Rosie O'Donnell, 
Shirley MacLaine, Paul Reiser,  George Schlatter, Raquel Welch, 
Sigourney Weaver, and others. A Miramax release. 93 min. R (raunchy 
talk and jokes)
Of the films starting with the word "get" the three most interesting 
have been the British "Get Carter" (1971), a tough action item with 
Michael Caine;  "Get Out Your Handkerchiefs" (1978) the irreverent 
French movie with Gerard  Depardieu; and "Get Shorty" (1995), the 
humorous, hoodlum story from Elmore Leonard, with John Travolta.
The ""get" in Get Bruce, unlike the other titles, refers to the 
hirings of real-life Bruce Vilanch by practitioners of film, TV and 
other events, that is, "celebrities" --which is one of the most 
irritating and overworked words in American pop culture.
A small,  improvised poll turns out this fact: almost no one among 
ordinary folks has any idea who Bruce Vilanch is. But (a very big 
but) everyone in showbiz knows that this Bruce is a joke and gag 
writer who is in huge demand among actors, stand-up comics, sit-down 
comics, leaders or organizers of such public events as roasts, 
homages, the Academy Awards ceremonies and so on ad infinitum.
Which explains why this light-hearted documentary is studded with 
laugh-getting stars, clients, collaborators, admirers and --in the 
best showbiz tradition --"best friends" of Bruce's. Look at the 
credits above and you get merely a whiff of Vilanchites.
The voluminous, hirsute Bruce, ever-looking unkempt, ever wearing one 
of his funny t-shirts from his colossal collection, is a very funny 
fellow. In interviews which, like good jokes, never overstay their 
welcome, in amusing conversations, discussions, appearances and the 
like, in cinema-verite scenes, one learns a great deal not only about 
Vilanch but also about several of his performer-friends. There are 
tidbits that inform you about those persons, as well as Bruce, and 
that make them all  more understandable. They also reveal the 
mechanisms behind the funny stuff.
In a few cases this gets a bit tiresome, notably when Robin Williams 
keeps appearing and being funny, or so he thinks. But by and large -- 
as in the case of the parceled out interview of Bruce's vivacious, 
scene-stealing adoptive Jewish mother --there is lively light shed on 
the speaker as well as on Vilanch. Or take the sessions in which 
frequent Oscar-host Billy Crystal sits down with Bruce and both get 
into the technicalities of what was done, changed or eliminated in 
the Motion Picture Academy's annual event -- which is discussed as 
the "nec plus ultra", as something like the Olympic Games of live 
appearances.
Vilanch does not merely provide jokes. He tailor-makes, very 
cleverly, to the style and the personality of personalities, so that 
we, the public, easily believe that the one-liners and others 
originate with the performers. In addition, Vilanch also coaches the 
performers with precision, skill and a vast knowledge of what works 
and what does not, from gestures to looks, from hair to toes, from 
dressing to walking, and much more.
In addition to the above addition, Bruce himself is a first-rate 
performer. We see him doing his shticks more than once in this 
not-flagging, fast-paced, even frantic assemblage of scenes and 
sequences. The man is a joke factory, which, if listed on the stock 
market, would keep paying high dividends to shareholders.
Vilanch, a gay man, has done a great deal of good work for the cause 
of Gay Liberation and AIDS.
Just about the only non-comic moment in this documentary is when he 
becomes lachrymose during an AIDS benefit.
Among the miscellaneous revelations in the documentary is that Bruce 
originated the famous appearance of then Whoopi's paramour Ted 
Danson, in an affair where Danson was in blackface. This created a 
controversy. My position is that the event was in bad taste, but what 
really shocked me was to hear Whoopi say that something  or other was 
"about Ted and I." So much for the literacy and grammar of 
"celebrities."
"Get Bruce" is a most entertaining ninety minutes . You laugh a lot 
and learn a lot. But do bear in mind that this work is neither about 
humor (both in its narrow and wide definitions) nor about wit. Oscar 
Wilde or even Noel Coward are light-years away. Gags, jokes  and 
ephemeral one-liners are its mainstay and reign supreme.

Author
Ross Anthony
Bruce is a real life comedy writer, aggressively sought and found by hit
performers like Billy Crystal, Robin Williams, Whoopi Goldberg and Better
Middler especially for award and event performances like the Oscars. "Get
Bruce" is a documentary/biography on Bruce sporting lengthy interviews with
the four stars mentioned above and briefer spots with others.
It's fairly interesting and at times very funny, but it doesn't really tell
a story. It's more like a definition of the current state of one interesting
guy and how useful he is to others. There's no drama, no climax; but as I
said -- it is quite amusing. I'm just not sure why it's released on film. It
seems to me it would naturally play well for TV audiences.
Get Bruce. Copyright Š 1999.
Interviewed: Billy Crystal, Robin Williams, Whoopi Goldberg, Bette Midler
and more.
Produced and Directed by Andrew J. Kuehn at AJK/Miramax.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
