Title
Review for Celebrity (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:   Woody Allen
Cast:  Hank Azaria, Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, Leonardo DiCaprio,
Melanie Griffith, Famke Janssen, Michael Lerner, Joe Mantegna, Winona
Ryder, Charlize Theron, Dylan Baker, 
Screenplay:  Woody Allen
Producer:  Jean Doumanian
Runtime:   113 min.
US Distribution: Miramax
Rated R:  language, sex, drug use
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
If you're going to make a two-hour Hollywood in-joke, why bother
releasing it to the general public?  If you're going to create a film
that will appeal primarily to big-name actors and People Who Know Woody
Allen, then why waste the time of the rest of us peons by playing it in
theaters?  While watching Celebrity, I realized that Allen had only
marginal interest in creating a story about real people.  What he really
wanted to do was continue on his recent kick of conceited
self-deprecation.  Celebrity is yet another film in which Allen tells a
story about himself, living in a world that he's familiar with, dealing
with people like the ones he actually knows.
Allen recruited poor Kenneth Branagh to bumble through this picture, in
an imitation of Allen so perfect that it almost made me like the film
more.  Branagh plays Lee Simon, a journalist-turned-screenwriter who
divorces his wife, Robin (Judy Davis), shacks up with some hot women
(Famke Janssen, Charlize Theron, Winona Ryder), and goes about trying to
get big stars (Melanie Griffith, Leonardo DiCaprio) to read his script
about an armored car robbery.  The usual elements of recent Allen films
are all here, including the sexual insecurity of the main character,
lots of self-loathing women, and a tiring continuum of episodes that are
only loosely related to one another.  
Unless you work in the film industry or know Woody Allen personally,
it's not likely that you'll find a whole lot of interest in Celebrity. 
Aside from all the in-jokes, the story falls far short of compelling,
and the characters are all empty and lifeless.  Branagh proves once
again that he's a superb performer, nailing his imitation of Allen
flawlessly.  The problem is that he's the same character Allen always
plays, a character who's getting more than a little dull to watch.  I
mean, come on, how many times have you seen this guy? -- he hates his
work, and he can't be satisfied by any one woman, and, at the end of the
movie, nothing has been solved.  He brings all of his problems upon
himself (crashing his car because he's receiving fellatio, and other
such stunts), so it's pretty hard to care about him.  In addition, isn't
Allen capable of creating characters who aren't just like him?  I know
he is, but he didn't do it in Celebrity.
The vacant emotional attachment with the main character is not
recaptured in the supporting performances.  Davis, playing the same
woman with low self-esteem that she played in Deconstructing Harry, has
a few touching moments, but ends up the same despicable celebrity-type
that fills the rest of the movie.  Some of the actresses are saved
because of their beauty -- Theron and Ryder, especially -- but they're
not likable people.  Only Famke Janssen, as a book editor interested in
Simon's new novel, has any life.  The men in the picture don't do much
better -- Joe Mantegna is pretty dull as the man who remarries Robin,
while DiCaprio, as a Christian Slater/Johnny Depp-type spoiled young
actor, is funny but disengaging.
What's really insulting about Celebrity is how dull and standard its
"themes" are.  Allen seems to think that he's making an insightful movie
about the way "normal" people look at celebrities.  The main problem
with this is that the character with whom we're supposed to identify,
Simon, is not a "normal" guy -- he's just as entrenched in the Hollywood
image as the rest of the characters.  The other problem is that the
image we get of these celebrities is no more enlightening than the view
the media gives us -- none of them register as realistic, interesting
characters; they mostly just function as set pieces for boring
dialogue.  In addition, Allen decides he needs a scene in which the
theme is expressed explicitly (Robin, in this scene, says something
like, "It's interesting to see the way we all look at the people we
celebrate!").  
Celebrity is arguably Allen's biggest misfire to date.  It does have a
few good scenes -- Theron's super-orgasmic model character is kind of
funny, and the last scene might have been moving had the rest of the
film shown us a character or two.  But Celebrity is a failure at the
core, unless Allen's point was to make a self-indulgent movie about
himself and his friends.  If he wanted to make his audience feel like
they were on the outside of a big joke, then he succeeded in that.  I,
for one, don't enjoy feeling like an outsider.  

Author
Alex Ioshpe

DIRECTED BY: Woody Allen
WRITTEN BY: Woody Allen
CAST: Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, Winona Ryder, Charlize Theron, Leonardo DiCaprio, Melanie Griffith
For most of us the life of a celebrity and its glamour is synonymous
with romances, love and happiness. Woody Allen takes us behind the set
to a world of movie stars, famous writers, supermodels and
TV-celebrities.
Whether he has succeeded in presenting a film about the concept of
celebrity is debatable though because this film throws itself in
probably a dozen directions, not really leaving familiar Allen
territory. Lee, a disillusioned journalist decides to abandon his
shallow marriage with a neurotic school teacher Robin (Judy Davies),
in pursuit for excitement and light, which is missing in his gray,
monotonous life. This sudden decision leaves Robin crushed and
confused, on the verge of a complete breakdown. Strange coincidences
guide them both on an unknown path and their lives will never be the
same.
Woody Allen is certainly a celebrity if attention from the tabloids is
any judge and well qualified to write a film about wanting to be
famous and being famous. He seamlessly builds a world of pretentious
chatter and unctuous flattery, of TV priests, celebrity plastic
surgeons and their entourages, where backstage at a tabloid talk show
the hit men have agents and the skinheads have eaten all the
bagels. There are only two concerns: ordinary people desperately want
to gain fame and the famous ones are desperately trying to keep
it. Nothing of what is shown in this film is shocking or
revolutionary. Lee has mistaken fame for happiness and commercial
success for fulfillment. He bitterly discovers that the lives of the
famous and adored are soulless and shallow, with relationships as
random and uncertain as their business deals. The world behind the
stage is structured of endless flaws, limitations and illusions. Of
course most of the "reevaluations" concerning the true lives of
celebrities we already know. But everything is presented with such
grace and realism that it is impossible to refuse. The drama is moving
and realistic. The wit is often sharp and very funny with solid stabs
being made at Catholic idolatry, the media, supercilious film
directors and spoilt brat stars. There's a fine moment of two some,
hilarious, some touching.
The film is actually two parallel stories where one is Lee's quest for
happiness in the celebrities' world, and the other is Robin's life and
its radical change. "Celebrity" is about much more than the couple's
failed love life, although that string of dismal disappointments does
give shape to the larger narrative. Beginning with his divorce from
wife Robin (Judy Davis), "Celebrity" charts Simon's disaster course
through his fling with a starlet (Melanie Griffith), his flirtation
with a supermodel (Charlize Theron), his hotel foursome with a hot
young stud (Leonardo DiCaprio), his relationship with a live-in lover
(Famke Janssen), to his affair with an age-inappropriate waitress and
theater hopeful (Winona Ryder). More than anything else, this is (at
least to me) a story about the twists and turns of life and the power
of coincidences that somehow control our destiny.
This is certainly not the best of Allen's work, but absolutely not a
bad effort. Though the theme in his films is always different, there
are certain "trademarks" that brand all his work: a clever story that
is mostly driven by a neurotic character with deep emotional problems
and of course a cast that is more spectacular than most. "Celebrity"
is no exception. It is very well written, with many multidimensional
characters that inhabit its world. But the most important element is
that there is no catharsis, no climax. The film is simply candid
fragments of different lives. It is visually compelling with brilliant
black & white photography by Sven Nykvist, that uses the shadowy
ambiguity to create a granular and viscous monochrome of astonishing
clarity. As in most of Allen's films you'll find great actors, such as
Wiona Ryder, Charlize Theron, Melanie Grifith and Leonardo Di Caprio
appear in tiny, episodic parts. Though I always found that
unnecessary, I have come to terms with the fact that a cast like that
simply can't disappoint no matter what. And no one does. Ryder and Di
Caprio have some great moments; and Davies is truly spectacular,
almost repeating her role in Allen's "Husbands and Wives", portraying
the classic Woody Allen female break down but then haltingly blossoms
when famous TV producer Tony (Joe Mantegna) falls unreservedly in love
with her. But can she cope even with this? The main character that
basically carries the film on his shoulder is played by Kenneth
Brannagh that looks great in any role. Here it seems as if Woody
Allen's spirit has taken complete control of his body, since he acts
completely as Allen himself, with a kind of neurotic sweetness that
mark every moment of his screen time. Although Brannagh is an
incredibly talented actor and his performance is very entertaining, I
find it bizarre that Allen would hire a serious actor that could do
his own interpretation of this character and instead force him to copy
his work. I truly believe that Brannagh could actually do more with
his c h wish to see his spirit on screen.
In a way, Allen comes to a rather stereotypical conclusion that fame
is a beast and not worthy of worship, but he inserts so much more in
his film that it will take more than one review to find reasons to
recommend this picture.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Woody Allen's "Celebrity" reminded me a little too much of his soporific
"Stardust Memories," which was also filmed in black-and-white and concentrated
on the nature of celebrities. This film is superior but suffers from the same
lack of comic energy and enthusiasm. For the first time since his overrated
comic segment in "New York Stories," I felt Woody's heart was not in the right
place for this material. 
"Celebrity" stars Kenneth Branagh as celebrity hound and interviewer Lee Simon,
who drives an Astor Martin to attract and have sex with all the female
celebrities, while getting the scoop on their precious moments of fame and
recognition. He gets oral pleasure from a famous actress (Melanie Griffith -
less annoying than usual), and he gives a brief moment of orgasmic pleasure to
a model (thrillingly played by Charlize Theron). What he really wants to do is
write a novel about celebrities, but he lacks the self-confidence to finish it,
even with the help of a sexy book editor (Famke Janssen). 
Lee is not a happy person, though, and lacks self-control. He regretfully
divorced the shrilly Robin (Judy Davis), a schoolteacher who is afraid to deal
with life after divorce. She resorts to religious retreats and superstar
plastic surgeons, yet the answer may lie with a TV producer, Tony Gardella (Joe
Mantegna). Robin decides to work for him at a busy TV station where she meets
an assortment of talk show guests, including skinheads, overweight people,
Hasidic jews, and a prostitute (Bebe Newirth). The latter shows her how to
perform oral sex by using a banana (a witty take-off on Madonna's famously
similar oral display in "Truth or Dare"). In the process, Robin becomes a TV
celebrity host. 
There are many good jokes in Woody's latest opus. My favorite is Charlize
Theron's sleepy, sexually polymorphous model (a bit cribbed from "Annie Hall")
who brings everythingto a halt when she appears- she could be the next Sharon
Stone (who appeared in "Stardust Memories"). I also loved the gala movie
opening where Lee sees a famous director (Andre Gregory) who makes "arty,
pretentious movies in black-and-white". There's also a vivid sequence involving
Leonardo DiCaprio as a superstar actor who trashes hotel rooms and beats up his
girlfriend (Gretchen Mol) - he makes such a startlingly violent 10-minute
entrance that it is a real shame when he exits. And there are several quips
about novelists, particularly one moment where Lee sleeps with one of
DiCaprio's escorts, who insists that she writes `like Chekov'. 
The central figure in "Celebrity" is the nervous chatterer Robin Simon, played
with pitch-perfect precision by the indomitable Judy Davis. Her character is a
wounded soul searching for meaning in her universe, and she has her
reservations about getting married again. Her character is so real, so vivid,
so humane that it is a shame Woody didn't invest the same interest in the other
characters. 
For example, there is the crucial Lee Simon role (played by Kenneth Branagh),
who is miscast and obviously uncomfortable with mimicking Woody's famous tics
and neurotic stutters. His role is severely underwritten, lacking any of the
pathos or charm that Woody would have brought to it. Branagh is better off in
Shakespeare country, or when he commands an American accent in his own work,
such as "Dead Again." The aforementioned Charlize Theron disappears too soon,
as well as the comic fury of DiCaprio. 
Still, there's an element of bewitching attitude and class to Winona Ryder as
Lee's girlfriend, a promiscuous actress who can't commit to one man. The
virtually unrecognizable Bebe Newirth is also exceedingly good as the
soft-spoken prostitute. Joe Mantegna brings back the suave coolness that he
brought to Allen's thoughtful Alice, which also starred Judy Davis. 
"Celebrity" is a good film, but it doesn't have the manic, furious energy of
"Deconstructing Harry" or "Husbands and Wives," one of his greatest films. It
is surprisingly chaste and unscrupulous in its attack and commentary on
modern-day celebrities. With its abrupt ending and uneven characterizations,
"Celebrity" is simply filler until the next great Woody Allen film. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns or comments at jerry@movieluver.com or at
Faust667@aol.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Celebrity (1998) 
Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, Joe Mantegna, Winona Ryder, Leonardo 
DiCaprio, Charlize Theron, Melanie Griffith, Famke Janssen, Bebe Neuwirth,
 Michael Lerner, Hank Azaria, Greg Mottola, Dylan Baker, Isaac Mizrahi, 
Kate Burton, Andre Gregory, Patti D'Arbanville, Gretchen Mol, Mary Jo 
Buttafuoco, Joey Buttafuoco, Allison Janney, Donald Trump, Aida Turturro, 
Jeffrey Wright. Produced by Jean Doumanian. Written and directed by Woody 
Allen. 113 minutes
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
"Celebrity" opens and closes with a shot of the word "Help!" spelled out 
by a skywriter above Manhattan. After this ramshackle film and last 
year's uncomfortably self-referential "Deconstructing Harry," I wonder if 
Woody Allen has reflected on the very public mess he has made of his life 
and is at last crying out for assistance. 
"You can tell a lot about a society by who it chooses to celebrate," says 
Judy Davis, providing a handy Cliffs Notes summation of the film's 
message for those viewers who may have nodded off. Thirty years ago, the 
statement might have been profound, but after countless examinations of 
the Western world's obsession with celebrity, the line merely serves as 
an indicator of just how clueless Allen has become.
"Celebrity" follows the lives of a pair of neurotic New Yorkers (what a 
surprise!); struggling writer Lee Simon (Kenneth Branagh) and his ex-wife,
 former schoolteacher Robin (Judy Davis). As Woody's surrogate, Branagh 
does an adept, and often irritating, impression of Allen, reproducing 
every gesture, stammer and tic. In standard Allen fashion, Lee is a whiny 
womanizer seemingly incapable of maintaining an honest, monogamous 
relationship. When not occupied with skirt-chasing, he plays sycophant to 
various big shots, peddling a screenplay about an armored-car heist.
Meanwhile, the high-strung Robin makes tentative stabs at changing her 
life, traveling from a religious retreat (the priest is a television 
celebrity) to a high-profile plastic surgeon (he's followed by a TV crew 
after being christened "the Michelangelo of Manhattan" by Newsweek). 
Eventually, she hooks up with a television producer (Joe Mantegna) and 
becomes an on-air reporter, achieving her own celebrity status.
Lee and Robin's mid-life crises serve as the framework for a series of 
sketches; some quite funny, some very flat and none particularly 
insightful. There's a hilarious backstage scene at a daytime talk show, 
where gangsters, religious figures and neo-Nazis comfortably mingle, 
complaining about their agents while hovering around the buffet table. 
"What is this," says a rabbi in mock chiding tones to a group of jack-
booted thugs, "did the skinheads eat all the bagels?"  
One of the film's best sequences involves Leonardo DiCaprio, playing a 
pampered young superstar given to hard-partying and violent outbursts. 
Even as the police are arresting him for trashing a hotel room and 
terrorizing his date, Lee pitches his script to the glib bad-boy. Thanks 
to the kid's celebrity status, the charges are hastily dropped and Lee is 
swept away to Atlantic City with Leo and his entourage, where he 
continues trying to insinuate himself even as Leo urges him to join in a 
drugged-out orgy. DiCaprio is excellent as the self-absorbed hedonist, by 
the way, using a non-stop stream of compliments and commands to manage 
those around him. 
Unfortunately, for every vignette that works, there are two that don't. 
One of the worst comes when Robin, believing that her Catholic guilt has 
made her less than satisfactory in bed, asks an upscale hooker (Bebe 
Neuwirth) for lessons. After a extremely funny exchange ("What do you 
think about during oral sex?," asks Neuwirth. "The Crucifixion," answers 
Robin), the scene degenerates into a tired let's-use-bananas-to-practice-
blow-jobs routine. Apparently, Woody Allen missed "Fast Times At 
Ridgemont High" and all the other comedies that have used the same bit.
A high-school reunion scene with Lee falls just as flat, with the writer 
making contemptuous observations about his fellow classmates before 
declaring, "Ask not for whom the bell tolls -- or more accurately, for 
whom the toilet flushes." It's hard to imagine those words coming from 
the pen of the man who wrote "Annie Hall."
Beyond the hit or miss nature of the comedy and the discomfort of 
watching Kenneth Branagh do a two hour Woody Allen impression, the 
biggest problem with "Celebrity" is that the concept, as well as Allen's 
shtick, are so very tiresome. After a while, the quips and tart exchanges 
degenerate into mere chatter as the film drags on for what seems like 
forever. Even the impressive mega-cast (stand-outs include DiCaprio, 
Neuwirth, Winona Ryder, Charlize Theron, Melanie Griffith, Famke Janssen, 
Bebe Neuwirth, and Michael Lerner) can't compensate for the lazy writing, 
haphazard style and wearying been-there-done-that nature of the black and 
white movie. "Celebrity" is Woody Allen's 27th feature. Hopefully, he'll 
wait until he has something new to say before doing his 28th.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CELEBRITY (director/writer:Woody Allen; cinematographer: Sven Nykvist;
cast: Kenneth Branagh (Lee Simon), Judy Davis (Robin Simon), Joe
Mantegna (Tony Gardella), Winona Ryder (Nola), Charlize Theron
(Supermodel ), Leonardo DiCaprio (Brandon Darrow), Melanie Griffith
(Nicole Oliver), Famke Janssen (Bonnie), Bebe Neuwirth (Hooker), Michael
Lerner (Dr. Lupus), Gretchen Mol (Leonardo's girlfriend), Isaac Mizrahi
(painter), 1998)
Celebrity is like an amalgam of old Woody Allen materials, which has
always given him an opening to concentrate on being witty and ignoring
such filmmaking details as editing and plot. He seems to work well in
chaos and in hyperboles. This fluff film (no pretense at Ingmar Bergman
depths here) could have been funny but it isn't, except in brief spots.
As far as being insightful about the "horses arses" who are into being
celebrities without any other accomplishments to their credit, there's
not really too much to be said that could be profound about that subject
matter, it is obvious how shallow a fate just being a celebrity is.
Woody makes a stronger statement in the film's subplot that deals with
love, as he believes that meeting the right mate is mostly a matter of
luck.
Here Kenneth Branagh is not Woody Allen, but he plays Woody and it
doesn't work out that well. He's just not funny, all he's got down pat
are Woody's voice inflections and neurotic gestures. It's as if he is a
robot who looks the part but can't really be the part because he is
isn't humanly programed that way. In this rambling celebrity hunt of a
movie, where he plays a celebrity journalist working on a novel and on a
film script, roaming the environs of NYC's Tribeca, Elaine's Restaurant,
and the places of high fashion, he becomes the loser who keeps making
bad decisions about his personal and career life.
Branagh is shown via flashbacks divorcing his nervous Catholic teacher
wife (Judy Davis), without explaining why, as he stutters out his
inarticulate response. As the film moves on we see that Branagh is a
phony, using woman only to get ahead in his career. We first see this as
he conducts an interview profiling the life of a famous actress (Melanie
Griffith) in the house she lived in as a child. He romances her in the
same bedroom she slept in as a child and audaciously tries to get her
interested in his screenplay while he is in her arms romantically,
saying he needs a star to be in the film for him to get his screenplay
backed.
He is going out of his sexual mind when he meets the supermodel Charlize
Theron, who shows him how she has orgasms when touched on any part of
her body. She sexually dances with NBA basketball player Anthony Mason,
and gives him her number in front of him. If Woody played that scene, it
most probably would have been funny, but with Branaugh, it seemed
pathetically flat and unfunny.
The only scene in the film that had a bit of spice in it that lasted for
more than 15 seconds, was the Leonardo DiCaprio bit, where he's a famous
bad-boy actor who Branagh tries to pitch his screenplay to in a hotel
room, as he is beating up his girlfriend (Gretchen Mol) and trashing the
room, all-the-while Branagh continues pushing his screenplay on him.
They end up going to see a fight in Atlantic City, him borrowing $6,000
from Leonardo and losing that same money at the casino craps table, then
going back to the hotel to party on some coke and participate in an orgy
with a groupie who tells him she writes like Chekhov, all the time
pitching unsuccessfully for his screenplay.
He steals Famke Janssen, who is a book editor, away from another, and
has her move in with him as she helps him with his screenplay. But he
meets again the very attractive and ambitious waitress/actress Winona
Ryder that he was supposed to date in an earlier scene, and dumps Famke
on the day she alters her entire life to move in with him. Meanwhile his
ex-wife finds Mr. Perfect, a television producer, Joe Mantegna; she
marries him, gets to be a popular TV host of a celebrity interview show,
and has one hilarious scene where she goes privately to see a hooker
(Bebe) guest on the celebrity TV show to learn the art of giving good
head. The hooker asks her, "What she thinks about when she is giving a
blow job?" and, she responds, "The Crucifixion." A banana is used as a
prop for the sexual demonstration in self-improvement, until the expert
chokes on it, and the demonstration comes to a halt.
Another funny bit took place in the green room of Famke's TV show, where
waiting Klansman, an ACLU attorney, skinheads, a rabbi and a Mafia don
discuss who is representing them from the William Morris Agency, as the
rabbi's biggest concern is if there are any bagels left.
The film was reel-to-reel with celebrities, as they made their cameo and
disappeared. Donald Trump is buying St. Patrick's Cathedral and
tearing-it-down for a skyscraper. A producer says he is re-making Birth
of a Nation with an all black cast. Famous for being in a coma, Sonny,
Klaus Von Bulow's wife, lays in a coma but is wheeled out to appear on
the celebrity TV show. Celebrities give trite comments to banal
questions, such as, "What do you think of the rain?" Answer. "It's
really something!"
The beautifully shot b/w film ends as it begins, as a plane passes
overhead with the skywriting word "HELP!" This was a film that had no
idea how to put this story together, it seemed so lifeless and flat,
indeed, in need of HELP. For starters, none of the main characters were
cast right, and especially Branaugh: there's no way, no matter how exact
his mimicry of Woody is, that he can be thought of as a neurotic,
nebbish, NYC Jew. What was needed was some originality and some energy
into making the characters appear absurdly funny and not carbon copy
imitations of how celebrities are. The few jokes in the film were far
and few between, and could not overcome the tired feeling emanating from
the rambling story. Woody is slipping, his last few films have been
heading on a steady downward path.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients: Washed up writer, divorce, chasing women
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, Famke Janssen
Synopsis: 
Lee Simon (Kenneth Branagh) and his wife Robin (Judy Davis) get a
divorce. From that moment, Lee goes chasing around after beautiful young
women in the entertainment business. Meanwhile Lee's wife Robin doesn't
chase anyone at all, but nonetheless captures the heart of a wonderful
man. Leonardo DiCaprio has a small part as a decadent celebrity who
examines one of Lee's writing projects. 
Opinion:
CELEBRITY could have been interesting as a vivacious comedy, but
director Woody Allen plays this one serious and instead gives us a black
and white film about a shallow divorcee who doesn't seem to go anywhere
as he fails one relationship after another.
Woody Allen films are easily recognizable because the characters talk in
self-confessions, as if each dialogue partner is a part-time
psychoanalyst. In CELEBRITY not only do we get the trademark dialogue,
but Kenneth Branagh, playing Lee Simon, is a dead ringer for Woody Allen
himself. Branagh does a masterful job imitating Woody Allen's speech,
mannerisms, and facial ticks. Unfortunately, all this good acting goes
to waste on CELEBRITY's canned script which presents us with nothing we
haven't seen before.
In movies we hope to be uplifted, or at least to be entertained by
something new, something exciting, or something deep - -  as characters
grow, win battles, or come to profound realizations. But in CELEBRITY no
such goals or realizations occur, and filming in black and white doesn't
make the shallow skirt-chasing seem any more insightful. Give us
something more profound.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Christopher Null
     Another fall, another movie from the Woodman.
     Shot in black and white and filled with about 30 big-name stars,
CELEBRITY is a welcome return to old-school Allen, his first really good
film since 1994's BULLETS OVER BROADWAY.
     It's about time.  Without the stupid camera tricks/dream sequences
(DECONSTRUCTING HARRY), singing cast members (EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU),
and Greek choruses (MIGHTY APHRODITE), it's easy to rediscover everyone
- and myself - likes Woody so much.
     Here's a bright, witty, funny, and topical story that could happen
to anyone (unlike the aforementioned pictures).  While Allen is
noticeably absent from the cast, Kenneth Branagh does a surprisingly
authentic imitation as a reporter assigned to the celebrity beat for a
travel magazine.  Branagh quickly finds himself caught up in the
mystique and romanticism of the celebrity lifestyle and does his best to
worm his way in.  Meanwhile, his frumpy, schoolteacher wife (Judy Davis)
is cast along the wayside.
     That neither of them ends up getting what they bargained for is a
given, but how Allen pulls it off is sheer mastery.  In some ways this
is an updating of both MANHATTAN and CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS, and its
cautionary message about what's wrong with society is curiously
appropriate for a millenium audience.
     Still, trademark Allen problems like questionable editing and jerky
camerawork make this film a bit less than perfect.  The cinematic layout
of the scenes is not up to Allen's usual perfectionism, either.  Worst
of all, many jokes fall flat, and others just miss on their timing.
     No matter, because on the whole, CELEBRITY is quite funny and is
simply an amazing send-up of the stars it frames.
Director: Woody Allen
Producer: Jean Doumanian
Writer: Woody Allen
Starring: Hank Azaria, Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, Leonardo DiCaprio,
Melanie Griffith, Nicole Oliver, Famke Janssen, Michael Lerner, Joe
Mantegna, Bebe Neuwirth, Winona Ryder, Charlize Theron
http://www.miramax.com:8888/ows-doc/celebrity/index.html
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  /
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 21 November 1998 with Laura and Peter at the SONY 19th Street for
$8.75
More than 30 movies into the game, Woody Allen finally puts his plea into
the air, in skywriting: H-E-L-P. Big white letters in the sky for all to
see. At least all of New York to see, as it sometimes seems we are his
only intended audience.
In an entertaining but not-so-deep effort, Woody takes on the perils of
being popular in our media-soaked culture. The attitudes we have of the
rich and famous, many of whom are beautiful and consequently, rich and
famous, are somewhat examined here. Only somewhat. If nothing else, Allen
shows us that our celebrities are just as screwy as the rest of us. They
just get an tremendously larger share of attention than the rest of us
ever see.
Here, the "Woody Allen character"--the character that the audience clearly
sees as the character we think Woody Allen is like in real life, and the
one we see in movie after movie--is Lee Simon. He is an "entertainment
reporter" who moves among the beautiful people. As Lee, Kenneth Branagh
does an incredible acting job, as he takes on not just Allen's mannerisms,
but a lot of his vocal affects. If you'd never seen Branagh before you'd
think he was New York's famous stammering director and not a well-spoken
Brit.
As ever, Allen provides flashbacks to Lee's breakup with his wife Robin
(Judy Davis), and follows their parallel journeys. We follow Lee through
several sojourns--an interview turned interlude with an actress (Melanie
Griffith), a crazed evening on the town with a Supermodel (Charlize
Theron, of Devil's Advocate), and debauchery with teen idol Brandon Darrow
(Leonardo DeCaprio). Meanwhile, he also has relationships with a book
editor (Famke Janssen) and a waitress (Nola, played by Winona Ryder).
The much more interesting character and story is that of Robin, who goes
from feeling like a nothing as an English teacher to working for her next
boyfriend, Tony Gardella (Joe Mantegna), a TV producer. Faced with "having
it all" she is disbelieving and underconfident. Alternating from frantic
to aggravated to elated, Judy Davis shows yet another intense performance
for a Woody Allen movie that makes you wonder why he kept casting Mia
Farrow. My God! Imagine how much more spectacular Broadway Danny Rose
would have been with Judy Davis. Robin's growth and development are
the most interesting parts of the movie, making Lee's adventures seems
like so many red herrings. If you know of a bad Judy Davis performance,
let me know. It seems inconceivable.
Also, Woody's preoccupation with oral sex and hookers (this time it's Bebe
Neuwirth) is still going strong. If I really thought that they were back
for shock value and irony, I wouldn't mind, but it seems more adolescent
and self-serving. I suppose the President's antics have given him further
license.
Sometimes, watching Celebrity, you think that perhaps it's just an excuse
for Woody to string together some scenes that have nothing to do with each
other. It's more an exposition of celebrity than an exploration or
explanation. Celebrity is entertaining, but any comparisons to Hannah and
Her Sisters and Crimes and Misdemeanors would be undesering.
Making cameo appearances are Donald Trump, Isaac Mizrahi, and the
Buttafuocos--both Mary Jo and Joey.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Mac VerStandig
"He's one of those ass-holes who makes all his movies in black and 
white." So is proclaimed about 1/3 the way through Woody Allen's latest 
film, Celebrity, in a movie theatre scene. As in many of his films, this 
is remark that will make audiences erupt laughter. And yet, this punch 
line is not a line at all, but rather a humorous presentation of a 
statement that can be interpreted in so many different ways. In this 
case, you would need to be already watching Celebrity to figure out that 
the entire movie is in black and white and that this is presented in a 
sarcastic fashion. Here you have a classic Woody Allen move of making a 
great "inside joke" at the expense of his film. That is what has made 
Woody Allen a giant, and that is what Celebrity is made up of.
Celebrity's "plot" is little more than a tribute to Andy Warhole's 
famous theory that everyone will enjoy 15 minute of fame at one time or 
another. Although this is only mentioned once in the 2-hour film, it is 
implied throughout. Lee Simon (Kenneth Branagh) is a reporter for a 
travel magazine, and constantly finds himself surrounded by the stars 
that he hopes to be among someday. It is made clear very early that this 
has lead him to be slightly less than faithful to his wife Robin (Judy 
Davis). So it is that he asks for a divorce after 16 years of marriage.
Lee and Robin are now in the scenario of dating for the first time in 16 
years, and the film explores the people that they come in contact with. 
The common thread is that almost everybody is either seeking or enjoying 
their 15 minutes in the spotlight. Included in this bunch of people, are 
a movie star, a model, a television producer and several "ordinary 
folks".
In what has almost become a trademark of Woody Allen films, Celebrity 
features a cast full of big names. Although none of Allen's "regulars," 
like
Mariel Hemingway, are in this film, and Allen has also chosen to remain 
behind the camera, those who are shown are great. Celebrity features 
hank Azaria, Dylan Baker, Melanie Griffith, and Winona Ryder in 
supporting roles; not to mention Leonardo DiCaprio in a wonderfully 
eccentric role. There are also cameos by Isaac Mizrahi, Joey Buttafuaco 
and Donald Trump as himself.
In their lead roles, Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, and Ray Montegna, as 
Robin's boyfriend, are spectacular. Branagh has the task of portraying 
Woody Allen, and seems to have mastered his best characteristics. He 
even has the incoherent mumbling, and rambling speech down to a science. 
The only real downside to Celebrity is the actual filmmaking. Although I 
give Woody Allen the benefit of the doubt with some of the edgy edits 
and odd camera movement, certain things are just unacceptable in a major 
film like this. Among these is the issue of continuity. In the beginning 
of one scene, Hank Azaria is cleanly shaved. Less than a minute later he 
is sporting scrappy facial hair. And there are other continuity problems 
with costume, hairstyle, and time of day.
When all is said and done, Celebrity is a far cry from Annie Hall or 
Manhattan, but certainly can hold it's own. Woody Allen is still very 
strong, and makes his statement with great effect. The cast makes this 
film a wonderful comic experience and well worth the while.

Author
Greg King
CELEBRITY (M).  
(Sweetland Films/Village Roadshow)
Director: Woody Allen
Stars: Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, Joe Mantegna, Melanie Griffith,
Famke Janssen, Winona Ryder, Leonardo DiCaprio, Charlize Theron, Hank
Azaria, Michael Lerner, Gretchen Mol, Bebe Neuwirth, Greg Mottola,
Monique Fowler, Isaac Mizrahi, Dylan Baker, Patti D'Arbanville, Sam
Rockwell, Ned Eisenberg, Aida Turturro
Running time: 113 minutes.
In his 28th film as director, Woody Allen gives us his own
cynical take on Andy Warhol's famous line that everyone will find
their fifteen minutes of fame.  For him, fame is a double edged sword.
While some people desperately crave fame and are prepared to do
virtually anything to achieve it, there are others who are content to
worship celebrities from afar.  Celebrity proves to be Allen's most
satisfying and entertaining film for quite some time.
Although full of his usual trade mark quips, self-effacing
one-liners, and familiar neurotic characters, it also marks something
of a minor departure.  He seems to be moving away from increasingly
bland, introspective examinations of his own troubled private life to
tackle broader, more mainstream subject matter.  However, many within
the audience will still try to read between the lines and identify
which characters are drawn from Allen's own life.  He has also
returned to filming in black and white, which somehow suits the film's
melancholic mood.
The film follows the parallel fortunes of frustrated,
egotistical writer Lee Simon (Kenneth Branagh) and Robin (Judy Davis),
his ex-wife.  Their relationship is explored through a series of
flashbacks, and accidental encounters at various social gatherings in
Manhattan.  A journalist who is attracted by the allure of the rich
and famous, Simon seems destined to always remain on the periphery of
the world he so desperately craves.  His conquests (including Charlize
Theron, former Bond girl Famke Janssen, and Winona Ryder) all end
badly.
Robin however has grown disillusioned at his womanising and
lack of success and divorced him.  We first meet her at a religious
retreat where she has gone, reluctantly looking for spiritual
guidance.  She later meets television producer Tony Gardella (Joe
Mantegna), and finds love and happiness all over again.  However,
while Robin is confidently building a new life and a new career, the
shallow, womanising Simon seems to be standing still, repeating his
mistakes all over again.
As usual, Allen crams the film full of famous faces, many
wasted in fleeting cameos and small roles that really don't allow them
to do much.
Playing Allen's alter-ego here, Branagh does an uncanny job of
channelling his usual persona through his superbly realised
performance.  He brilliantly assumes his mannerisms, his inflections
and his nervous speech rhythms to a tee.  Allen always seems to draw
the best out of Davis, and she is superb here.  Her wonderfully comic
performance brings some fire and passion to the material.
Leonardo DiCaprio is also good in a smaller role as the brash,
hot young actor who abuses his status, while Melanie Griffith brings a
certain style to her role as a famous film actress.

Author
ram@csb.stanford.edu
You can learn a lot about society by seeing who it celebrates. That's
the message in /Celebrity/, a funny typically-neurotic Woody Allen
film.
/Celebrity/ follows the life of an estranged journalist Lee Simon
(Kenneth Branagh) who appears to be blessed with some of the best and
worst luck a human being could have.  On the one hand, he attracts
gorgeous women who are willing to do almost anything for him (though
one claims her body is owned by her husband but her head isn't?!?).
On the other hand, he invariably screws things up such that in the end
he is left alone, as his dreams and ambitions drift away with the
waves.
The movie is also about the lives of the rich and the famous and the
power they wield over others. Brandon Darrow (Leonardo DiCaprio, in a
non-typical bad boy role), for example, is a famous actor sought after
by Simon to star in the script he's hawking. Simon does everything to
please Darrow but that only lands him in trouble (and a $6000 debt!).
Likewise, people currying favours from Simon (given his journalist
status) are left in the cold.  The lesson: like with everywhere else,
there are few nice people in the industry.  There is some commentary
about celebrating and glorifying people, but it gets lost in the
shuffle that is Simon's woes.
/Celebrity/ remains interesting because of the famous actors playing
the characters that Simon flirts with, including Wynona Ryder, Melanie
Lee Griffith, Famke Janssen, and Charlize Theron.  As is typical with
many Woody Allen films, the movie is extremely hilarious at times and
manages to keep you amused through-out.  The film is done entirely in
pretentious artsy-fartsy black and white.  
Lee Simon as a character is reminiscent of Sherman McCoy from /The
Bonfire of the Vanities/.  It's tempting to look at the character of
Simon as a portrayal of Woody Allen (particularly given Branagh's
excellent mimicry), and perhaps this is what the Director intended. If
this is the case, Allen either has a confused view of himself or
enjoys taking us all for a ride.


Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Woody Allen.
Cast: Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, Joe Mantegna, Winona Ryder, Famke 
Janssen, Charlize Theron, Melanie Griffith, Leonardo DiCaprio, Bebe 
Neuwirth, Michael Lerner, Hank Azaria, Gretchen Mol, Kate Burton, 
Allison Janney, Karen Duffy, Sam Rockwell, Andre Gregory, Heather Marni, 
Donald Trump.
1998 - 113 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, drug use, and sexual situations).
Reviewed December 5, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
Woody Allen, one of the most celebrated and acclaimed modern-day 
directors, has, in recent years, experimented with different types of 
films, straying from his regular New York comedy-dramas. 1994's "Bullets 
Over Broadway," was a period piece set in the 1940's; 1995's "Mighty 
Aphrodite," was a modern day Greek interpretation; 1996's "Everyone Says 
I Love You," was a magical return to the musical genre; and 1997's 
"Deconstructing Harry," was a deliberately graphic and offensive comedy. 
Woody Allen's new film, "Celebrity," is perhaps his strongest picture 
since 1992's "Husbands and Wives," a winning and often hilarious comedy 
that delves into the lives of the rich, the famous, and the struggling.
The film follows its main character, Lee Simon (Kenneth Branagh), a 
journalist, around throughout one year, as he has interesting run-ins 
with some of Hollywood's most powerful celebrities, all the while 
searching for true love. He recently has gotten a divorce from his wife 
of sixteen years, Robin (Judy Davis), who was devastated to find out he 
had been having an affair. Many of the people he encounters include a 
blonde bombshell actress (Melanie Griffith), who gives him a tour of her 
small childhood home; a supermodel (Charlize Theron), who is 
multi-orgasmic and gets off on simply being touched anywhere on her 
body; a popular teen hunk (Leonardo DiCaprio), who trashes a hotel room 
and beats his girlfriend (Gretchen Mol), all the while telling her that 
he loves her; and a kind live-in lover (Famke Janssen). While all of 
these people come and go through Lee's life, the woman he seems most 
right for is Nola (Winona Ryder), a waitress and struggling actress, 
despite their age difference. Meanwhile, the unhappy Robin, to her 
astonishment, meets a man (Joe Mantegna) in the talk show arena whom 
falls in love with her and gives her her first big break in showbiz, a 
profession she had never expected to go into. 
One of the problems that last year's "Deconstructing Harry," ran into 
was that it had such a large cast that everyone ultimately felt 
criminally wasted. I was fearing the same fate for, "Celebrity," but all 
of the characters are infinitely more well-handled, and the story and 
screenplay feel far more assured and satisfying. 
One of the qualities of, "Celebrity," which is very appropriate, is the 
dream-like black & white cinematography that constantly reminded me of 
films from the 1930's and 40's. The way that the story drifts from one 
character vignette to the next was entertaining to watch because I was 
enthralled by every single one of the characters, and couldn't wait to 
see who Lee would meet next.
As in all of Allen's films, he has recruited a wonderful, large cast. 
Kenneth Branagh, obviously doing an Allen impersonation, is convincing 
as the central character, and Judy Davis gives a touching performance as 
Robin, a woman who has been so unhappy for so long that she can't really 
believe the happiness she feels when she meets Mantegna. Charlize Theron 
is, to say the least, bewitching as an uninhibited supermodel; Bebe 
Neuwirth, as a hooker, has a hilarious scene with Davis where she 
teaches her how to have oral sex with a banana; and Leonardo DiCaprio is 
annoying, but plays the rebellious, out-of-control teen superstar to a 
T. Finally, and perhaps giving the best performance is Winona Ryder, who 
brings so much life and spark to her scenes that I feared the film might 
burn up in the projector. One particular sequence set at a party where 
Branagh and Ryder are trying to talk amidst the various conversations 
around them is fabulously developed and shot.
Although set amidst the glitz and glamour of Hollywood, what, 
"Celebrity," is really about is the things that people desperately long 
for in order to be happy. Lee only wants to find love, but has several 
character flaws that he needs to get over first, and Robin is so used to 
not being appreciated that when she finally feels wanted, she doesn't 
know how to react to it. The final sequence of the film, in which Lee 
and Robin meet up at a film premiere and are able to talk rationally for 
the first time since their divorce, is especially powerful, and the last 
shot, which circles around to the opening shot, is an alternately clever 
and thought-provoking image that I think says quite a lot.

Author
Steve Rhodes
The famous Shakespearean actor, Kenneth Branagh, plays the Woody Allen
part in Woody's latest film, CELEBRITY.  Kenneth Branagh plays the
story's protagonist, a magazine reporter and celebrity groupie named Lee
Simon.
Branagh has carefully trained himself to sound exactly like Woody, right
down to Woody's fast-paced, rambling cadence.  It's an eerie performance
that makes one yearn for the real McCoy.  Still, Branagh makes a
commendable attempt in a miscast part.
The story about a group of vain, amoral celebrities is a breezy comedy
that provides several nice laughs even if it never amounts to much of
anything.  Basically, the characters play a two-hour game of musical
beds.  The movie could have used some of those opera supertitles giving
the current pairings, as it is frequently hard to keep straight who is
currently sleeping with whom.
Filmed in a handsome black and white by Sven Nykvist and overlaid with
one of Woody's typical jazz scores full of bittersweet melodies, the
relaxed picture doesn't have the pretensions of many Allen films and is
even fairly angst-free.
The film contains such a cornucopia of acting talent that it begins to
get in the way of the storyline.  Trimmed of many of the minor
characters and cameos, the story could have had more punch.  Did we have
to have the scene of Donald Trump bragging that he just purchased St.
Patrick's Cathedral and was going to replace it with a beautiful
skyscraper?  And wouldn't a half-dozen characters being really funny
trump 3 dozen performing hit-and-run comedy?
Melanie Griffith plays a famous and married actress who has very
physical relations with Lee within an hour after meeting him.  She
explains that the form of sex they are having doesn't break her marriage
vows.  (I think we've heard that one before.)  Lee, who is one of the
movie's most fidelity-challenged characters, enjoys every minute of it.
And then he's off on his next pursuit.
As soon as Lee lays eyes on the gorgeous supermodel played by Charlize
Theron, he knows he has to have her.  She explains to him at a party
that she has "a weakness, not a flaw," that causes her to go orgasmic
when she is touched anywhere on her body.
A middle-aged couple at the party asks the supermodel for her autograph.
"I use your exercise tape," the woman says to her.  "So do I!" her
husband pops up, almost slobbering.  "But I exercise to it," the wife
tells her husband with a look of disgust.
During the movie, Lee gets divorced from his wife, Robin, played by Judy
Davis.  After the divorce he runs into her and her boyfriend (Joe
Mantegna) at a press screening of a new movie.  The screening is
complete with fresh flowers and champagne in the lobby.  (Real press
screenings are not quite like that, although we do sometimes get free
soda.)
The screening is of a black-and-white, arty movie by a "pretentious"
director.  There is a famous critic there who, we are told, used to hate
every movie, but, since he got a young, big-bosomed wife, he likes them
all.
Robin, who suspects that her first marriage was destroyed partly through
her lack of sexual skills, goes to a professional to learn better sexual
techniques.  The resulting banana scene contains some delicious physical
comedy.
Leonardo DiCaprio plays a horribly unsympathetic character.  A star
whose fame has gone to his head, he is first seen while screaming
obscenities as he abuses his girlfriend in their fancy hotel room.
A never cuter Winona Ryder plays Lee's last conquest.  She warns him
early on that she has a wandering eye, but he's still in shock when she
follows through on her proclivities.
The film has very abrupt ending.  It is almost as if Woody said, "whoops
we've gone on too long.  Cut.  It's a wrap."  It's too bad that before
he wrapped it, he didn't give it more focus and trim it some.  Still,
even if it is just a piece of fluff, it is entertaining.
CELEBRITY runs 1:53.  It is rated R for sex, profanity, and drug usage
and would be acceptable for older and mature teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Woody Allen's 29th cinematic feature celebrates the blinded attention
that people pay celebrities in contemporary society. Another jam-packed
cast of celebs ironically pepper this picture, with Woody, the actor,
sitting this one out himself. The film is shot in black & white, of
which Allen self-deprecates himself in the film via one of the
characters when he notes a famous, pretentious director to be the "type
of asshole that shoots all of his movies in black and white!"
PLOT:
This film follows the parallel lives of Lee (Branagh) and his wife
Robin (Davis), after their 16-year marriage ends in divorce. Lee the
writer, covers the celebrity beat, and meets various types of famous
people from the really important to the wannabee importants, while
Robin, attempts to seriously reconstruct her confidence, and her
ability to love again. Some vignettes behind the closed doors of
celebrity ensues. 
CRITIQUE:
Mediocre, mostly unfunny, sometimes interesting piece of cinema that
doesn't really blow you away in any sense or proportion, offers very
little real insight into the lives of celebrities, but does present an
excellent sequence with Leonardo DiCaprio, playing the role of the
unbridled, young movie actor. Over the years, I've noticed that most
Woody Allen movies are predeterminedly enjoyed by those in the Woody
Allen fan club or not. I mean, most people I know either hate the guy,
or love the guy. I personally love the guy and his films, but his most
recent crop has been less than original or interesting. Most recently,
he seems to be writing his scripts in his sleep, with only the
exhaustive Hollywood cast list lingering at the top of his priority
template.
This film was much like DECONSTRUCTING HARRY (6/10) in that it had some
really funny lines, but it mostly played out like a drama, and didn't
succeed exceptionally well in either forum. I was expecting a lot of
behind the scenes insight into celebrities and the public's fascination
thereof, but this film just presented me with a bunch of scenes of
Kenneth Branagh (doing his best Woody Allen impressions) trying to get
it on with different celebrity types. Not that interesting or funny, to
tell you the truth. The rest of the cast was also pretty fair, but for
the exceptionally well-written and well-played scenario with Leo
DiCaprio venting out on his girlfriend and an innocent hotel room,
which proudly stood out like a sore thumb. The whole scene was quite
funny, extremely well-written, and played out very naturally by the
Cap-man himself.
All in all, the film never sold me on any insight into celebrity,
barely worked on a relationship level with Branagh and Judy Davis
trying to get over their divorce, but did offer several very funny
lines and a pretty slick Leo DiCaprio scene. Unlike MANHATTAN, this
movie also had very little in cinematography to get excited about, and
even less in originality, as Allen's New York-style-humor well seems to
be drying up in the 90's. I loved 1994's BULLETS OVER BROADWAY (8/10),
but since then, the Woodman has done very little to impress this
life-long fan. Oh well, I won't give up on you just yet, Woodrow, but I
would not recommend this mediocre entry into someone else's weekend
movie plans, that's for sure. For those interested, go rent BULLETS
OVER BROADWAY, BANANAS (8/10) or ANNIE HALL (8.5/10) and enjoy the
Woody of young, and hope that his next few films revive his creativity,
and rejuvenate his capacity to wow us all over again! 
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Leonardo DiCaprio's full name is Leonardo Wilhelm DiCaprio. He was born
in Hollywood, California. Leo received $2,500,000 for his role in
TITANIC (7/10). To this day, that film has domestically grossed over
$600,000,000. Leo once turned down the role of Robin in BATMAN FOREVER
(6/10), and also considered starring in a movie about actor James Dean
but turned down the role because he felt he wasn't experienced enough
to do the film (1996). When Leo was 5 years old he was in an
educational kids program called "Romper Room". He was nearly kicked off
for uncontrollable behavior. His father George was a comic book dealer.
In 1991-92, he played the homeless boy Luke in the TV sitcom "Growing
Pains".
Winona Ryder was born Winona Laura Horowitz and named after the town in
which she was born, Winona Minnesota. Director David Seltzer spotted
her and cast her in 1986's LUCAS (Her first film.) When telephoned to
ask how she'd like to have her name appear on the credits, she
suggested Ryder as her father's Mitch Ryder album was playing in the
background. Winona was selected for the part of Mary Corleone in THE
GODFATHER: PART III (7/10), but had to drop out of the role after
catching the flu from the strain of doing the films WELCOME HOME, ROXY
CARMICHAEL and MERMAIDS back to back. She said she didn't want to let
everyone down by doing a substandard performance. Others have suggested
that she pulled out from the part because of problems with boyfriend
Johnny Depp, with whom she had been going out since she was 17. The
part eventually went to director Coppola's own daughter Sophia.
This is Judy Davis' fourth presence in a Woody Allen film, with
previous appearances in ALICE (6/10), DECONSTRUCTING HARRY (6/10) and
HUSBANDS & WIVES (7.5/10). She attended drama school with Mel Gibson.
They played Romeo and Juliet together.
Kenneth Branagh was born in Northern Ireland. He was originally cast as
the lead in AMADEUS before the production company decided on an
American cast. The role eventually went to Tom Hulce. Ken was married
to actress Emma Thompson from 1989 to 1996.
Producer Jean Doumanian plays Leonardo DiCaprio's agent in the
limousine scene.

Author
Matt Prigge
Writer/Director: Woody Allen
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, Joe Mantegna, Charlize Theron,
Leonardo DiCaprio, Famke Janssen, Winona Ryder, Melanie Griffith, Bebe
Neuwirth, Michael Lerner, Hank Azaria, Gretchen Mol, Dylan Baker,
Jeffrey Wright, Greg Mottola, Andre Gregory, Saffron Burrows, Alfred
Molina, Vanessa Redgrave, Joey Buttafuoco, Mary Jo Buttafuoco, Donald
Trump
After hearing reviews for Woody Allen's upteenth movie in history,
"Celebrity," range from terribly boring to just so-so, my heart lept
when the opening images of the film closely resembled that of
"Manhattan," my personal favorite from my personal favorite director of
all time.  Woody Allen's films almost never rely on visual flair over
textual flair, so when one of his films closely resembles the one time
that these two entities fit hand-in-hand ("Manhattan" really is one of
the best-looking films I've ever seen, beautiful black and white
photography of the city's best areas, etc.), a fan can't help but feel
visibly moved.  The film opens up, with the usual credits with plain
white font over black backgrounds, and an old ironic standard playing on
the soundtrack, but then the screen fills with a gorgeous dull gray sky,
with the word "Help" being spelled with an airplane.  Beethoven's 5th
blasts on the soundtrack.  The city seems to stop to take notice of this
moment, and it's all rather lovely to look at.
And then we cut to a film crew, shooting this as the film's hilariously
banal key moment in the film, where the lead actress in the film
(Melanie Griffith, looking as buxom and beautiful as ever) has to
realize something's wrong with her life or whatever.  It's a terribly
stale scene for a Woody Allen film, with the great opening shots or
without, and my heart sank and I soon got used to the fact that once
again, a new film of his was not going to be as great as his past works
(though, for the record, last year's "Deconstructing Harry" came awfully
close).
What the hell has happened to him?  The man who once could be relied on
for neurotic freshness in cinema has not become less funny, but his
films have become less insightful and more like he tossed them together
out of unfinished ideas.  "Bullets Over Broadway," though wonderful,
relies on irony to pull a farce that just never totally takes off.
"Mighty Aphrodite" is more full of great moments and lines than a really
great story.  "Everyone Says I Love You" was more of a great idea than a
great film.  Even "Deconstructing Harry" is admittingly cheap in a way,
even if it does top as one of his most truly hilarious films.
If anything, the reception of "Celebrity" by everyone should tip Allen
off to the fact that this time, it's not the audience and critics who
are wrong about how wonderful his film is: it's him.  "Celebrity" is,
yes, a good film, but it's only marginally satisfying as a Woody Allen
film.  Instead of creating the great Woody Allen world, he's created a
world out of a subject he knows only a bit about.  And he's fashioned a
film that is based almost entirely on his uninformed philosophy of
celebrities, so that it plays like a series of skits with minor
connections.  It's like "La Dolce Vita" without the accuracy, the right
amount of wit, and the correct personal crisis.
Woody, becoming more insecure in his old age, choses to drop the Woody
Allen character in on the world of celebrities, and then hang him and
all his flaws up for scrutiny, and does this by casting not himself but
Brit actor Kenneth Branagh in the lead.  Much has been said about his
performance - dead on but irritating, makes one yearn for the real
thing, blah blah blah - but to anyone who actually knows the Woody Allen
character knows that Branagh's performance, though featuring some of the
same mannerisms (stuttering, whining, lots o' hand gestures), is hardly
a warts-and-all impersonation.  Branagh brings along with him little of
the Woody Allen charm, which actually allows for his character's flaws
to be more apparent.  Woody's a flawed guy, and we know it, but we love
him anyway, because he's really funny and really witty and really
intelligent.  Branagh's Allen is a bit more flat-out bad, but with the
same charm so that, yes, we like him, but we're still not sure if he's
really a good person or not.
His character, Lee Simon, is first seen on the set of the aforementioned
movie, hits on extra actress Winona Ryder, then goes off to interview
Griffith, who takes him to her childhood home where he makes a pass at
her, and she denies him...sorta.  We then learn, through flashbacks,
that Lee has been sucked into trying to be a celebrity thanks to a
mid-life crisis and an appearance at his high school reunion.  He has
since quit his job as a travel journalist and become a gossip journalist
of sorts, covering movie sets and places where celebrities congregate,
so that he can meet them, and maybe sell his script (a bank robbery
movie "but with a deep personal crisis").  As such, he has divorced his
wife of several years (Allen regular Judy Davis), and continues on a
quest for sexual happiness, boucing from girlfriend to girlfriend and
fling to fling over the course of the film.
After Griffith comes his escapades with a model (Charlize Theron) who is
"polymorphously perverse" (glad to see Allen is using new jokes, ha ha),
who takes him for a wild ride not different from that of the Anita
Ekberg segment of "La Dolce Vita."  Following are his safe relationship
with smart working woman Famke Janssen, a relationship that almost
assures him success, and his continued escapades with Ryder, whom he
fancies most of all.  His story is juxtaposed with that of Davis, who
flips out, but stumbles onto happiness when she runs into a handsome,
friendly TV exec (Joe Mantegna) who lands her a job that furthers her
career to national status.  While Lee is fumbling about, selfishly
trying to ensure his own happiness, Davis becomes happy ("I've become
the kind of woman I've always hated...and I'm loving it.") without doing
a thing.
The result is a film of highs and mediums.  The mediums are what take up
most of the film, with sitations and scenes which don't exactly work but
you can't help but pat Allen on the back for trying.  But other places
are really great scenes.  The opening.  The sequence with Theron, which
is so good that I wished it hadn't ended.  A banana scene with Bebe
Neuwirth (droll as ever).  And, perhaps the best sequence: a romp with
hot-as-hell teen idol, Brandon Darrow, played by none other than Leo
DiCaprio, who is so un-DiCaprio-esque that if any of this fans could sit
through this film, they'd never look at him the same way.  He ignites
the screen with intensity, and spares nothing in showing his character
as narcissistically tyrannical, and totally heartbreaking for Lee, who
comes to him to talk about his script that he has read, and finds
himself on a wild all-day ride with him.  They go to Atlantic City to
watch a fight, they gamble, and they wind up in his hotel room, where
Darrow gets it on with his flame (Gretchen Mol) and he lends him one of
the leftover groupies.  Allen's writing in these scenes are so good that
just for them, I'd almost recommend the film.  Almost.
But what I really liked about this film is despite the fact that it's a
mess, despite the fact that what this film really needs is a good old
fashioned rewrite by Allen himself, it's still a smart and insightful
film.  Though some of the jokes are either stale or misplaced (some seem
too cartoonish, even for this environment), Allen still manages to get
across that this film is not exactly about celebrities, as it may seem
to be (if it were, it'd be extremely out-of-touch), but about those who
want to be celebrities, and how they equate celebrity-hood with
happiness.  We never get close enough to the actual celebrities to see
if they're really happy (they may appear to be on the surface...), but
we do get close enough to Lee and Davis' character.  Lee is obsessed
with the phenomenon, while Davis takes is at arm's length, and never
gets too involved in what it is, and soon becomes one herself.
Besides, it's witty, and it does have the one thing that no other film
has but Allen's: that great Woody Allen feel.  It may be not exactly
fresh and lively or totally brilliant in its depiction of its subject,
and yes, as a part of Woody Allen's oeuvre, it's merely a blip (no
"Annie Hall" but it's no "Shadows and Fog" either), but it goes to prove
that no one can make a film like him, and only he and maybe Godard could
possibly take a totally horrible metaphor, like the one in the
beginning, and make it work not once but twice.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Scott Renshaw
CELEBRITY
(Miramax)
Starring:  Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, Joe Mantegna, Winona Ryder,
Leonardo DiCaprio, Charlize Theron, Melanie Griffith, Famke Janssen.
Screenplay:  Woody Allen.
Producer:  Jean Doumanian.
Director:  Woody Allen.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  113 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Woody Allen's detractors have had a laundry list of gripes about his
films for many years now.  His neurotic screen persona had grown
increasingly shrill and annoying, they said; his cinematic world of white
Upper-Manhattanites had grown ever more insular.  As the lines between his
convoluted personal life and his baldly autobiographical films grew
blurrier by the year, the anti-Woody contingent began to consider him a
vaguely pathetic has-been, the film-making equivalent of Frank Sinatra --
more famous in the later stages of his career for who he used to be than
for who he still was.
     It took watching Kenneth Branagh's grating gloss on Allen's
mannerisms in CELEBRITY for me to sympathize with that side of the Great
Woody Debate.  Branagh plays Lee Simon, a writer who has dabbled in
novels, travel pieces and screenplays before hitting his current
assignment as an entertainment writer.  His work brings him into contact
with a number of ostensibly colorful characters, including a sexy film
actress (Melanie Griffith), a supermodel (Charlize Theron) and a volatile
teen heartthrob (Leonardo DiCaprio).  Occasionally it even brings him into
contact with his ex-wife Robin (Judy Davis), who leaves a job as an
English teacher to work for her new significant other (Joe Mantegna) in
television.
     It's easy to see the potential in CELEBRITY for exploring the foibles
of fame and the absurdity of a culture that bestows fame for all the wrong
reasons.  It's also easy to see that Allen intends Lee as a John Q.
Star-Struck American who casts off a 16-year marriage and plunges into
writing screenplays because he's convinced he's missing something the
world of movies can bring him.  Unfortunately, Lee is never a remotely
sympathetic character, primarily because Branagh is too preoccupied with
mimicking the Woodman to find anything true in the character.  Judy Davis
is more effective as the emotionally fragile Robin, but her character arc
is only slightly more compelling.  The film's two central characters are
contrivances; worse, they're often annoying contrivances, twisted knots of
self-doubt and self-loathing whose happiness couldn't matter less to us.
     Without any emotional center, CELEBRITY becomes a series of 
stand-alone vignettes about the strange and self-absorbed things famous
people do.  Allen can still manage to pull out a few one-line zingers
(including self-deprecating takes on "pretentious film-makers who shoot
everything in black-and-white"), but they're few and far between in this
film.  Sequences that should build to a great comic payoff, like Lee's
wild night with DiCaprio's bad boy actor, just seem to drag on until it's
time to start the next scene.  For a film-maker who has spent most of his
career obsessing over beautiful people, he can't seem to come up with
anything particularly clever to say about them.
     The lack of invention in CELEBRITY gives you plenty of time to notice
how stale Allen's act has become.  The constant references to
psychotherapy feel twenty years past their prime; his pokes at Catholic
iconography, Nazis, unstable relationships and sexual timidity have liver
spots on them by now.  For every decent gag (a film producer referring to
his next project, "an all-black version of 'Birth of a Nation'"), there
are half a dozen that turned up in a previous Woody Allen film.  
CELEBRITY, a film which should have been wonderfully timely in the daytime
talk show era, shows little cutting-edge satiric bite.  Allen doesn't even
seem to find it ironic that Robin finds her bliss by abandoning teaching
for fame as a television personality.  Perhaps it's even more ironic that
he's showing himself to be one of those famous people so far removed from
ordinary life that he doesn't know what we might find absurd, or that he
himself may now be one of those people famous for all the wrong reasons.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "CELEBRITY" (Miramax Films)
Woody Allen examines the phenomenon of "celebrity" in some of
its most ridiculous incarnations in this thoroughly entertaining,
black-and-white, contemporary comedy set in New York City. Kenneth
Branagh plays his alter ego, a free-lance writer whose neurotic
ambitions lead him to divorce his high-strung wife, a school teacher
(Judy Davis), and into the wobbly orbit of superstars like prancing
movie queen Melanie Griffith, imperious model Charlize Theron, and
teen idol Leonardo DiCaprio, who was cast even before he made such a
big hit in "Titanic."  "All you writers are so sensitive," DiCaprio
whines when Branagh hedges about joining him in some drug-laden
debauchery. Famke Janssen is a svelte book editor, and Winona Ryder
does a turn as an ambitious waitress/actress. While Branagh blathers
about the current "Age of Psychiatry," where people have become so
civilized that a new barbarity has developed from their
pseudo-sophistication, his ex-wife flees to a religious retreat where
a TV-star priest signs autographs, learns about oral sex from a
prostitute (Bebe Newirth), and visits a plastic surgeon (Michael
Lerner) known as "the Michaelangelo of Manhattan."  And she delivers
Allen's signature line for the film: "You can tell a lot about a
society by who it chooses to celebrate." Obviously, Woody Allen is
satirizing Andy Warhol's "15 minutes of fame" which is now accorded to
hostages, criminals, and the unlikely oddballs who catch our fancy,
revealing a society with no firm guideposts, either moral or
traditional. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Celebrity" is an
acerbic, cynical 7, ridiculing the "discreet charm" of the auteurs and
poseurs, the so-called cultural elite.

Author
Michael Dequina
This fall's entry into the Woody Allen filmography is this scattershot
episodic black-and-white comedy, more or less following the opposing life
trajectories of a divorced New York couple: downwardly mobile philandering
celebrity journalist/aspiring screenwriter Lee Simon (Kenneth Branagh) and
his fast-rising ex, Robin (Judy Davis).  In theory, the point of the entire
film is to provide insight into the nature of fame and fortune, mostly
through Lee's encounters with luminaries such as a supermodel (Charlize
Theron), a ditzy starlet (Melanie Griffith), and a wild young movie
heartthrob (Leonardo DiCaprio).
However, I didn't see or hear anything particularly insightful except for
the line of dialogue, "You can learn a lot about a society by who it
chooses to celebrate."  And what exactly do we learn about _our_ society
from _Celebrity_?  That it is one where just about every celebrity is
willing to appear in a Woody Allen film--hence another star-studded
ensemble, which also includes Joe Mantegna, Famke Janssen, Bebe Neuwirth,
and Winona Ryder, who displays nice chemistry with Branagh (whose dead-on
Allen impression _didn't_ annoy me).  Without any clear ideas or a strong
story, _Celebrity_ ends up as a showcase of fine character work by stars--a
celebration of celebrity that I don't think Allen intended.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
This was the most grievous loss, the most heartfelt tragedy, I
encountered on my weekend quest to see the Star Wars Episode 1 preview
in a movie theater.  Granted, it doesn't rate up there with, say,
having to face a ticked off dragon guarding the castle with the damsel
in distress, but every quest has its hazards and horrors, or you'd just
be able to pick up the, uh, quested object down at the Kwik-E-Mart.
Basically, in a mild fit of mania on Friday, I wandered to some
neighborhood movie theaters, asking whether they were showing the
Preview, and, if so, with what movie.  Most of the answers were
disappointing.  The first place I went to said they were showing it
with "Celebrity."  At that point in the day, I actually wanted to see
that movie, but the show wouldn't start for three hours.  Subsequent
theaters had it with that Brad Pitt in a tux movie, or with "Enemy of
the State", which I'd seen in an earlier Preview sighting attempt.  One
theater said they were showing it, but they weren't sure with which
movie.  At the end of this long, arduous road, one theater's ticket
taker said, yeah, we're showing it, try "Celebrity" at 3:30.  This
smarmy ticket taker, looking a lot like Jon Lovitz with a goatee and
less hair, lied to me.  In this age of the Net, with free-floating
campaigns and vendettas to cause material and psychological damage to
any number of random entities, from the deserving Circuit City/Divx to
Bob, the convenience store clerk who ticked off an 3l33t3 d00d because
the Slurpee just didn't have enough syrup, I'm going to show restraint
and not -- repeat, not -- call down a fatwa against this movie theater
in the East Village that's not the one next to Webster Hall, but a
couple of blocks away.  Except for this incident, I've had good
movie-going experiences there.
Digression aside, "Celebrity" was awful.  Well, it's not as bad as
"Shadows and Fog", so it doesn't qualify as the Worst Woody Allen Movie
Of All Time, but it's up there.  This is basically supposed to be
Woody's meditation on the idea of celebrity.  It plays somewhat more
like a cross between "Annie Hall" and "Husbands and Wives" with a
number of celebrity cameos, but with all the old-fashioned
movie-goodness leached out along with the color.
The main characters are Woody Allen, played by Kenneth Branaugh, and
his ex-wife, played by Judy Davis.  The movie has a self-referencing
moment in it, when there's a film premiere from a pretentious director
who always shoots in black and white, but a more interesting
self-reference may be to have Branaugh give his Woody Allen character
some sort of Hamlet spin, but that'd hark too much back to those early,
funny films.  Branaugh does such a shockingly good job being Woody
Allen, there's really no need for Woody to step in front of the camera
again.  
In any case, there was this divorce that takes place before the movie
starts, with the Woody Allen character wanting to sow his oats and the
Judy Davis character trying to recover.  Various hijinks ensue, as the
Woody Allen character, in this incarnation, is a movie industry
reporter, chasing after various starlets and aspiring starlets.  The
exploration of celebrity is touched on briefly in his various
encounters with actors and actresses, perhaps most prominently when he
meets Leonardo DiCaprio playing, uh, Leonardo DiCaprio.  There's also
Charlize Theron as a supermodel, which made me realize that either
Branaugh is really short or Theron is really tall.  Oh, and Winona
Ryder is using a Wonderbra nowadays.  You can learn more about
celebrity by reading the back cover of the historian Daniel Boorstin's
book, "The Image" (which is where celebrity is first defined as being
famous for being famous).
Anyway, the fates of the Woody Allen and Judy Davis characters take
their expected trajectories, with one expected happiness on the road to
loneliness, and vice versa.  There's nothing much to see here.  The
story of divergent was better told in "Annie Hall", the one about
separation in "Husbands and Wives".
Oh, I finally did see the Star Wars preview the next day, unfortunately
not in a movie theater, but as an mpeg.  And, you know, this little
window showing two minutes of grainy video was far more worthwhile than
"Celebrity."
