Title
Review for Emma (1996)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Steve Rhodes
     EMMA is a delightful film about manners, marrying, letters, and
gentility.  It is the most inconsequential of all of the recent Jane
Austin books to reach the big screen (PERSUASION and SENSE AND
SENSIBILITY) or the little screen ("Pride and Prejudice").  I am not
sure if its lightweight stems from the novel itself or the adaptation,
but it is nevertheless a sweet little film and well worth seeing.  For
the record, my favorite Jane Austin movie remains PERSUASION which was
also my favorite of all the 118 films I saw last year.  Finally, I
should note that last year's CLUELESS was a modernized and loose
adaptation of "Emma."
     Gwyneth Paltrow (THE PALLBEARER and SEVEN) plays Emma Woodhouse.
She is a young, rich and single woman who spends most of her time being
a matchmaker and an anti-matchmaker for her friends.  Most of her
energies are devoted to her close friend Harriet Smith (played by Toni
Collette from MURIEL'S WEDDING and THE PALLBEARER), but she helps
others as well.  As Miss Woodhouse explains to Mrs. Weston (Greta
Scacchi from JEFFERSON IN PARIS and A MAN IN LOVE), "The most beautiful
thing in the world is a match well made."
     Miss Woodhouse has a close male friend, Mr. Knightley (played by
Jeremy Northam from CARRINGTON and WUTHERING HEIGHTS), whom she
sometimes refers to as her brother.  He is troubled that she imposes
her will on her friends, saying, "vanity working on a weak mind
produces all kinds of mischief."  He admonishes her, "better to be
without sense than misapply it as you do."  He feels he has a right to
give her unsolicited advice since, "is it not a brother's job to find
fault with his sister?"
     A key aspect of the show is the reverence that is shown to
letters.  Upon receiving a letter, they pass them around with comments
on everything from the words to the handwriting.  When Miss Smith gets
a letter proposing marriage she inquires of Miss Woodhouse, "Is it a
good letter or too short?"
     At the core of the show is the early nineteenth century obsession
with excessive manners.  When Rev. Elton (Alan Cumming) annoys Miss
Woodhouse at a party by fawning over her wondering if she is too cold
or too hot, she tells him without meaning it, "thank you for being so
thoughtful."  To which he retorts in a cloying sweet voice, "thank you
for thinking I was being so thoughtful."  It is amazing that the whole
country did not die from a massive diabetic attach given the level of
excessive sweetness in the land.
     The pretense of affection is frequently used as a shield as when
Miss Woodhouse decides to throw a party from Mrs. Elton (Juliet
Stevenson).  Miss Woodhouse declares, "I must throw a party otherwise
everyone will see clearly how much I despise her."  By the way, you may
remember Juliet Stevenson.  She was wonderful as Flora Matlock in the
British TV show "The Politician's Wife" shown earlier this year on PBS.
     The sets (Totty Whately) are sumptuous, and the cinematography
(Ian Wilson) is warm and radiant.  The gowns and the headbands (Ruth
Myers) are elegant but so repetitive that the women look like they all
go to some parochial school where gowns are the uniforms.  A little
more variety would have been welcome.  The music (Rachel Portman) is
dreamy, and the sound (Chris Munro) is full of happily chirping birds.
     The acting is all pleasant enough, but there is no depth to any of
it.  Since other Austin novels have had more dramatically drawn
characters, my guess is that director Douglas McGrath was trying to
keep the show at an ethereal level.  He also did the novel adaptation
for the screen which I liked better than his directing.  A thoroughly
enjoyable show, but it could have been better.
     I did have a problem with Toni Collete's performance.  She was
playing a ditzy woman, but she let her intelligence come through and
made her characterization somewhat unbelievable.  She was much more
successful in MURIEL'S WEDDING, where she was brilliant.
     EMMA runs a well paced 1:58.  It was not yet rated when I saw it
at the press screening, but my guess is that it will be rated PG.
There is no nudity, violence, or bad language.  There is not sex unless
you want to count the three brief kisses at the end.  It is a show that
deserves a G rating, but I bet they put in a single bad word somewhere
that I missed so they would avoid the less bankable G rating.  The show
would be fine for any kids old enough to be interested in a show about
manners and marrying.  My guess is that they would have to be 8 or 9 to
be interested, but if you want your 2 year old to see it, there is
nothing to offend.  I recommend EMMA to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Desiree Sy
First, a general caveat; this isn't actually a review of EMMA,
per se.  I have a strong interest in Jane Austen, and a strong
interest in film adaptations, and this is an examination of how I
think the adaptation of EMMA works, and where it fails.  In terms
of the film itself -- I think it's about a 7 out of 10, and had a
great time.
As a self-professed fanatic Janite, I must meekly confess that
not only do I care for this novel the least of the set (yes, even 
less than MANSFIELD PARK!), but that I actually dislike both Emma 
and Mr. Knightley (actually, the latter fact probably accounts for 
the former).  Of all the little self-deprecatory remarks we've 
glimpsed from Austen's correspondence abt her writing, the only one 
I agree with personally is her assessment of Emma Woodhouse as a 
character that no one will much like but her -- I find Emma
spoilt, snobbish, interfering, and worst of all not living up to
her potential.  In turn, I think Mr. Knightley condescending in his
admonitions to Emma -- however well-deserved they are.
I have to compliment Gwenyth Paltrow for accomplishing what I
thought wdn't be possible; for making me like Emma.  This feat is
only outstripped by Juliet Stevenson's Nora in the TV adaption of
A DOLL'S HOUSE.  Jeremy Northam also entirely alleviated my
feelings abt Mr. Knightley.
On the whole, I think people who like movies based on English
classics with a lot of anglothespians acting in it shd get out
and see EMMA, and I think such people will have a good time.  I
certainly did -- it's funny, and the performances are wonderful.
Having said that, I like the film less than many critics do.
As I cannot really discuss why I feel this way without talking
about what happens in film and book, I add the obligatory spoiler
warning here.
EMMA is about the uncovering of truth, and about the restoration
of equilibrium through change -- and again, in perfect Austen
fashion, there are two levels to watch; the novel comments on the
societal discovery of truth, social imbalance and large changes
*using* personal misunderstandings, inequalities and changes of
heart.
In Douglas McGrath's film, unlike Emma Thompson's brilliant
rendering of SENSE & SENSIBILITY, the larger framework is
entirely absent -- he has essentially stripped the film down to a
comedy on the personal level.  I had been hoping for more when
the opening credits look down on Hartfield through a metaphorical
telescope which includes the scope of the whole world (like when
you were six and you wrote in your exercise books "Desiree Sy,
Street Name, City, Province, Country, Continent, The World").
But frankly, like much of the movie, this is just a glib and
clever one-off effect.
All the characters have, in a sense, three sets of values:  their
societal place, their monetary worth, and their truest worth, as
humans.  The uncovering of truth in EMMA is the gradual
revelation of what these values are for each of the characters,
as the first two values can obscure the most important value of
self worth.  The restoration of equilibrium in EMMA is depicted
as the central characters achieve the place in society that they
should through their self worth; in Emma this can only happen
through change.
For example, there are Emma and Mr. Knightley -- both
gentlepersons, but Emma very rich and Mr. K  rich, but not *very*
rich.  (It's this fact as well as the age disparity which
confuses Highbury -- and Emma! -- abt the sometimes too obvious
perfectness of the one for the other.)  Emma herself believes she
will never marry because there is no one who is her match in
pos'n or wealth -- this subtext is missing from her witty
explanation of wealthy old maids in the film. Of course, the
biggest disparity between Emma and Mr. K is that he's genuinely
considerate and can see true worth in others (even eventually
discerning the goodness in Harriet after his initial dismissal of
her qualities), whereas she often acts for the appearance of
kindness -- at least they punched her realization of this in the
film, but the film doesn't often enough depict her acting in a
way that *she* sees as kind, but is just interfering.
Mr. and Mrs. Weston -- The film briefly alludes to the fact that
Miss Taylor "married up" in class (though not in terms of her
worth).
Miss Bates -- A "decayed gentlewoman", but poor and silly
Harriet -- Illegitimate, poor, ignorant but kind (and beautiful)
Robert Martin -- Above Harriet and below everyone else, a farmer,
and on terms of friendship with Mr. K and worthy
Elton -- As the vicar, above Martin, but below Mr. K and
Churchill; of course, a total cad in terms of personal merit.
Mrs. E -- The comic masterpiece of this tableau:  from trade,
married into gentility, rich -- and fantastically vulgar.
Jane Fairfax -- An orphan, dependent on the Bates and thus even
poorer than they, but raised by a friend of her father's --
gifted in intellect, elegance and beauty (more gifted, in fact,
through application, than Emma, which accounts for E's dislike of
J) but reserved.  Jane's is the greatest disparity between true
and perceived worth -- in a Bronte novel, *she* would have been
the heroine, not Emma.  Since it's not, Austen manages to make
her so pallid we don't care for her much.
Frank Churchill -- The most complicated situation of all: raised
above his station through upbringing, as was Jane, but through
adoption able to maintain his higher status of position and
wealth.  However, though charming and merry and witty, he lacks
integrity and consideration; he's a more harmless incarnation of
Willoughby, Wickham, and Henry Crawford.
The full range of knowledge about all these situations has to be
made absolutely clear for the impact of the misunderstandings and
changes to register, and in the film, they are *not* made clear.
In particular, the positions of Jane and Frank -- key to part of
Emma's self revelation -- are not explained in a way so that
people who don't already know the story will understand them.
This not only dilutes the "larger picture" effect, but leaves
some pretty big holes in the personal plots.
In the group I saw the film with, there was a clear division
between those who had read the novel and who hadn't, because
those who hadn't read the novel didn't understood the entire
Fairfax/Churchill subplot -- why was their engagement a secret?
One person went a step further -- he couldn't understand at all
why Emma suddenly falls out of love with Churchill and why
everyone is criticizing him -- what did he do wrong?  (In
CLUELESS, Amy Heckerling's recent updating of EMMA, as this
person pointed out, the Frank analogue is depicted as gay, so it
makes sense.  I think this viewer was half expecting Frank to
turn out to be gay. :) )
Churchill's delight in fooling everyone, and his ongoing
flirtation with Emma is only depicted in the piano scene -- he's
almost immediately shown as running after Jane Fairfax.  [Aside:
In this film, not only do we hear modern piano noises coming out
of a small pianoforte, but Paltrow plays the piano with elbow
length gloves on!  You try it sometime; I have.]  Also, we aren't
given nearly as many clues in the novel about the true sit'n with
Jane and Frank -- in the book, we don't clue in until Mr. K does
-- about three quarters through the book.  He only suspects Frank
of trifling with Jane, figuring that Emma is his matrimonial
object; our suspicion of Frank grows through his eyes -- and so
it should have in the film, too!
The film also missed a superb way to illustrate the social
pos'n/worth dichotomy by omitting the scene where Mrs. E must
proceed Emma in leading the ball, through her increased status as
the new bride.  "Emma must submit to stand second to Mrs. Elton,
through she had always considered the ball as peculiarly for her.
It was almost enough to make her think of marrying."
Also, to bring off Emma's transformation with panache, she *has*
to be shown as more of a snob -- recognizing only a person's
first two values, except in those situations where she already
likes the person, in which case she *ignores* the values (in the
novel, Emma is clearly shown as having fabricated in her head a
noble bastardy for Harriet -- "the stain of illegitimacy,
unbleached by nobility and wealth, would have been a stain
indeed!" -- the film actually reverses this for a comic effect,
having Emma guess that Harriet's parents "might well be pirates!"
after hearing of H's love for Mr. K).  Near the beginning of the
story, even when confronted with clear evidence of Martin's true
worth -- his letter of proposal to Harriet -- she chooses to
ignore it.  In the Elton proposal scene, she rejects him not only
because she thinks that he has no integrity, but because she
considers *herself* above him in class and wealth.
In fact, Emma's gradual realization that she isn't in love with
Frank is linked in the novel to her inability to discover any
tangible evidence of his true worth.  When she asks herself the
question of whether she's in love with him or not (which occurs
over a much longer period in the book -- sort of like a daily
temperature reading), all she comes up with is the general
expectation of Highbury, and particularly of the Westons that she
*should* be in love with him -- he's rich, he's a gentleman;
there's never any measure of the man himself.  Should have left
the haircut scene in the film -- it's a lovely realization in
Emma of his surface qualities.  The climax of this should have
been at the revelation of his engagement with Jane Fairfax --
when Emma realizes that he's been using her as a shield. Except
of course, in the film, he *hasn't* been -- the degree of
overfamiliarity and flirting is not marked or extended enough.
E's second major self revelation is at the picnic when she
unworthily guns down Miss Bates. Here, Mr. K delineates exactly
why she did wrong (if Miss Bates were Emma's social and monetary
equal, then she could tease her, but as a true gentlewoman, she
should not have with those disparities in place -- Mr. K sees
this as he influence of Churchill), and unlike the other
disagreement that they have over Harriet and Robert, Emma
realizes the truth in what he is saying.
One thing the film gets absolutely right, through Paltrow's
performance, is
Emma's essentially transparent nature.  Unlike any of the other
Austen heroines (well, possibly Catherine Morland, too), Emma is
not reserved -- she doesn't reflect in her bedroom, she doesn't
think, and she certainly hasn't mastered the social lie (the lie
for personal gain, sure).  She's limpid and witty and a very
surfacey person -- but gradually, towards the end, she must reach
down deep.  And it's here that the film fails.
First, after the Miss Bates incident.  This is the first instance
in the novel where Emma is shown as "reflecting".  Unfortunately,
in *time* terms, there's not enough weight given to this
reflection in the film -- even if the editing had been slowed
during the scenes of self realization it would have been better.
Still, this isn't the biggest problem.
The film doesn't depict Emma's gradual understanding of
Churchill's lack of true qualities, and fails to capitalize on 
her attempts at self improvement after the picnic.  But worst 
of all, it entirely misses the climax of Emma's journey to self 
awareness, her most truly heroic act.
This is during the crucial, linchpin scene when she first hears
of Harriet's admission of love for Mr. K, and hears Harriet's
belief that he loves her back.  This is the moment when Emma, lit
with her own personal understanding, finally reaches the moment
of eclairissement about the dichotomy of class, money, and true
worth:
This leads, naturally to her self understanding:
The point is that it's the one realization that *leads* to the
other -- this is the exact opposite of her approach to trying to
understand whether or not she's in love with Frank Churchill.
She finally understands that she and Mr. K must match, because
their true selves match.
And then she does the most amazing thing in the whole novel:  she
sits and listens:
She has reached the height of her own growth.  Like all good
Austenian heroines, she learns to think of others, and suffer in
silence -- and our hearts ache.
It's absolutely wrong that the most poignant part of the film
should be the Miss Bates incident -- it must be *this* moment,
where love is revealed by truth, and then honour follows.
McGrath, in a fashion typical to the whole film, throws away the
emotion in favour of burlesque.  We cut immediately to an
improbable conversation with Mrs Weston where Emma is
*explaining* that she realized her love for Mr. Knightley -- we
don't see her listening to why Harriet thinks that he loves her
-- and McGrath immediately plonks in some funny lines.  We laugh,
but this isn't the right moment -- this is the point where we
should feel like crying for Emma, except that we know that K does
love her.
This isn't the only scene where we get emotions and impressions
once removed; there's altogether *too much* expository -- it's
exactly because Frank Churchill's situation is explained at
dinner before we ever see him that the information doesn't
register.  Then we never understand that Mrs. Weston always
wanted Frank to marry Emma, and planted that romantic notion in
her head -- while the *reader* has "met" the imaginary Frank
before he appears in the novel, the *viewer* does not.  (The
chance to do this -- the letter Emma is trying to hear from Frank
-- is instead used as a comic device to depict Elton's att'ns;
this is funny, but misses the larger point.)  To this we add the
chaser of Mr. K improbably saying *during his proposal*, "Why do
you think I never liked Frank Churchill?"
How much better it would have been to have *shown* his dislike of
Churchill *before* Frank arrived, and then his growing suspicions
as he noticed Frank's attentions to Jane.  The perfect vehicle
for the former is the converstaion he and E have before Frank
arrives, where he criticizes F for not coming to pay his respects
to his new stepmother; for the latter, the letter that F and E
use to tease Jane, as they are observed by Mr. K at the picnic.
And how *infinitely* better it would have been to simply *see*
Emma's realization of her love for Mr. K -- Paltrow's expression
is luminous and clear enough to make that perfectly obvious to us
without her having to tell us.  What that conversation with Mrs.
W should have been used for was to show us that she understood
the *other* point -- that Churchill and Mr. K were equally
available to Harriet using E's old, flawed measure of worthiness,
but that obviously Mr. K's true worth did not match Harriet's.
And the scene, if inserted, should have been a flash-forward, so
we could cut back to Emma w/Harriet.
Another problem is that by not staying, we never *hear* any
reasons why Emma thinks Harriet may be right.  One peculiar
consequence of this is that the double edged tone of the walk
with Mr. K before his proposal is lost. My brother said he
thought that when Mr. K said that he had "one reason to envy
Frank Churchill", he thought that Emma thought Mr. K was
referring to *Jane* -- at no point did my brother ever think that
Emma truly believed that Mr. K might love *Harriet*.
It also makes the balance of the film seem wrong that there's all
that stuff after Mr. K and Emma get together -- in the novel, of
course, it's further evidence of E's progress that she accept
Harriet and Robert's marriage.  The film that McGrath was making
-- without the social context -- shd have collapsed this incident
quickly -- it would have been better even if Mr. K mentioned it
immediately after his proposal ("Oh, by the way, you'll be sorry
to hear that....")
Okay.  You know what *else* I didn't like about the film?  I
thought the cinematography was *atrocious*!  First, the lighting
was weird through the whole film.  Obviously they were trying for
tricky window lighting, but the overall effect was distracting
and obscuring.  At many points, there are noticable lighting
imbalances between shots, and weird stuff:
- In a dinner scene, the candles seem to give off warm tungsten
balanced light, then from the reverse angle, bluer light
- At one point during the dance, it looks as if daylight through
a window, not candlelight, is shining on Harriet.
- During the tea scene (after the archery), the lighting levels
on (1) Emma shots, (2) Emma and Mr. K shots, and (3) the medium
of Mr. K are not the same!
- That weird choice at the door when people are moving out of
light into darkness, then speaking, and then moving back into the
light (why?).
And God -- those cheesy, cheesy pan and dolly shots!  The two
worst were the overhead through the bower shot swinging down to a
front medium -- and Paltrow obviously instructed to pause her
speech to wait for the swing -- when E first learns of Robert
Martin; and then that swing around to a two-shot of E and Mr. K,
with the hall in the background.  Ptui!  Right up there with the
worst shots in FRANKENSTEIN!  (Actually, I begin to get a taste
of what horrors Branagh might have inflicted on us for S&S had he
and Emma Thompson not mercifully come to outs first.)  And that
thunderclap at that crucial moment -- please, someone call the
taste police!
Having said all this -- it was still a damn funny film.  It
manages to get away with itself because all the performances are
so fine.  It will undoubtedly launch Paltrow's career -- she
looks so much like Blythe Danner in some shots; I think she has
the most beautiful neck since Audrey Hepburn's.
Go catch it, but it's not even close to being in the same class
as S&S, or PERSUASION.

Author
Magus
Starring Gwyneth Paltrow, Jeremy Northam, Toni Collette. 
Produced by : Patrick Cassavetti, and Steve Haft.
Based On The Jane Austen Novel By : Douglas McGrath.
My Recommended Ages : 10 and up (Don't worry, your kids won't want to
go see this one.)
        As I watched Alicia Silverstone walking around Beverly Hills
acting flirtatious and coy in the movie CLUELESS, I was stunned
that about 4 months later I had learned that CLUELESS had been based on
a novel by Jane Austen called EMMA. I later read EMMA to see if they
had any relation whatsoever. My final conclusion : Yes. EMMA(Miramax,
PG) is basically FRIENDS is corsets. The movie CLUELESS was just way
out and trendy, where the movie EMMA is surprisingly touching and
romanceful.
        As in most Jane Austen novels, women, specifically sisters, are
the main characters, and their soon to be husbands are the targets.
Usually there is one nice guy turned bad guy, and one bad guy turned
nice guy i.e. Hugh Grant and Greg Wise. The reason EMMA works is that,
unlike its 1800-esque predeccessors, SENSE AND SENSIBILY and
PERSUASION, is that it doesn't mind being sexy and sensual. The
writer-director Douglas McGrath, famous for helping Woody Allen riff
off in BULLETS OVER BROADWAY, has gone into unexplored waters here, and
unexplored waters oft mean unexpected things, such as holes in the
coral reefs. The characters, and for that matter, the plot in EMMA can
go too far joyous, and then the next moment down in the ditches. But
still, with wonderful writing from McGrath, whose script doubles Emma
Thompson's SENSE AND..., pulls this movie away a winner.
        SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, one of the Austen adaptations, and by
far the most successful at the awards of golden naked men. It's first
time writer, Thompson, had acted before in such horrifically
sentimental movies as HOWARD'S END, and REMAINS OF THE DAY. She here
puts all she has into a very well done screenplay. The directing
however, done by Ang Lee, is pushed off and not well done. He never
creates any sort of contact between Hugh Grant and Emma Thompson ; they
seem so much alike that it's a marvel Lee couldn't put anything between
them. The best performances come from the couple of Kate Winslet and
Alan Rickman, although there is not romance there, either.

Author
Christopher Null
     O!  The plight of wealthy twentysomethings in England at the beginning
of the 19th century.
     Such is the rather large pill you are supposed to swallow if you truly
want to enjoy EMMA, the latest in the incessant parade of increasingly bad
adaptations of so-called "classic" novels.
     EMMA is the second time in about a year that Jane Austen's book of the
same name has been adapted.  The last time was the clueless CLUELESS, and
it'd be hard for me to decide which one is worse.  At least CLUELESS was
supposed to be a joke.  EMMA has all the misplaced seriousness of a
documentary on genital warts.
     Emma (Gwyneth Paltrow) is a flighty little matchmaker, never seeking
her own marital happiness, but delighting in that of others.  The first
half hour of EMMA shows us her matchmaking attempts with friend Miss Smith
(Toni Collette).  As no other plot lines are developed in 30 minutes, I
thought it safe to assume this was what the movie was going to be about.
No such luck, because in the second half hour, a parade of 15 or 20 or 8
billion supporting characters waltzes through the scenes.  Each is called
Mister or Miss or Mrs. Something, and each of them looks and acts *exactly*
the same (obnoxious).  (I defy you to tell the difference at all between
Polly Walker's character and Greta Scacchi's.)  It's a shame that great
acting talents like the above, Ewan McGregor, Alan Cummings, Jeremy
Northam, and Juliet Stevenson are all pretty much wasted.
     Anyway, Emma finds herself in quite the predicament when she finds her
matchmaking blowing up in her face and realizes she herself is falling for
various supporting characters.  (Oh, my!)  The problem with all of this is
that, to a one, all of the characters are loathsome.  Combined with the
overacting that generally comes along with period flicks like this, you
come up with a long-as-sin, pointless film.
     Then again, EMMA has a couple of charms, notably some nice scenery,
upon which are placed hordes of actresses in those horrid Coke
bottle-shaped dresses that made fashion victims out of a generation of
Britons.  And the credits aren't too bad.
     Final note:  Why is it called EMMA when everyone refers to her as Miss
Woodhouse?  Discuss amongst yourselves.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
antpage@aol.com
Directed by..........Diarmuid Lawrence
Kate Beckinsale......Emma Woodhouse
Guy Henry............John Knightley
Raymond Coulthard....Frank Churchill
Sarah Morton.........Harriet Smith
Dominic Rowan........Mr. Elton
Emma the Movie:
Directed by..........Douglas McGrath
Gwyneth Paltrow......Emma Woodhouse
Jeremy Northam.......Mr. Knightley
Ewan McGregor........Frank Churchill
Toni Collette........Harriet Smith
Alan Cumming.........Mr. Elton
     For anyone who saw the TV A&E's prodcution of "Emma" or is thinking
of it, please wait for the movie "Emma" on video, this is a great story
and cannot be missed! The A&E version was not directed by the same person
who did Pride and Prejudice and was not nearly as good I feel. And
certainly didn't come close to the big screen version of Emma staring
Gwyneth Paltrow and directed by Douglas McGrath.
     Emma is the story of a rich and influential young women in 18th
century England who has set her heart on everybody else's love affairs but
her own. She plans to marry off a young women new in her part of the
country to a young man by the name of Mr. Elton. When this blows up in her
face she doesn't learn her lesson and continues to cause all kinds of
havoc to her friend and herself. She later begins to suspect she's falling
in love with a man from out of town, the son of a dear friend of hers. But
while this is going on is there jealousy in the eyes of her brother-in-law
Mr. Knightley? This is what you would call a romantic comedy from the
novelist Jane Austen that was copied in the movie "Clueless".
     As I said earlier the A&E version was vastly inferior to the movie
version, especially the character Mr. Knightley, played by Guy Henry, In
comparison to the movie version of Emma with Jeremy Northam playing Mr.
Knightley.  Guy Henry's chatacter seemed very untrue to the character from
the novel. This is kind of curious, were they trying to create another
Fitzwilliam Darcy from Pride and Prejudice here? I remember the interview
of Guy Henry, he was comparing his character to Darcy's character, I
remember wondering why they ran that question in the interview because the
two characters are very different. I Also remember seeing the video
release for Pride and Prejudice advertised and they only mentioned Colin
Firth, who played Darcy, as staring in the movie, which I thought was odd
because they should have listed Jennifer Ehle as Elizabeth Bennet before
him, but her name wasn't mentioned. I wonder if Colin Firth as Fitzwilliam
Darcy was very popular among women. So popular that they wanted another
for Emma on A&E. Guy Henry as John Knightley was very one dimensional,
like a characterization.
     All in all I was very dissatisfied with A&E's production of Emma, and
it seems to me that the fault lies with the director Diarmuid Lawrence. To
quote Mr. Knightly "Badly done Mr Lawrence, Badly done". What were they
thinking? After the excellent movie of Emma from McGrath they should have
done some other novel from Jane Austin like Northanger Abby or Mansfield
Park. Their version was bland, flat and not worth my time. Especially
after the humor and style of McGrath's Emma. Douglas McGrath who directed
Emma for the big screen did a great job , I'm going to keep my eye on his
work in the future, he made this a very funny and charming movie.
Beautiful sets too. Also Paltrow did a far better job than Beckensale too,
and of course we know the difference between Northam's and Henry's
Mr. Knightly. Northam was great, and true to the role. I still remember
Northam's character Knightly when faced with going to a party held by the
Elton's saying he'd rather just stay home were it was cozy. And what was
the point of the chicken thieves? I hope everyone who hasn't seen Emma
will not let the story be spoiled by this A&E production, they should wait
for the movie starring Gwyneth Paltrow to come out for rent, which will be
out this March.
     And so A&E's Emma gets two stars from me, and Emma the movie
starring Gwyneth Paltrow gets four stars ( 1 being avoid it, 4 being
excellent and 5 being classic ).
--
 E-mail: antpage@aol.com
 Web Page at: http://members.aol.com/antpage
 Simple Minds Page at: http://members.aol.com/antpage/antswebpg/antsmpg.htm
 E-Music pages at: http://members.aol.com/antpage/antswebpg/emusic.htm

Author
Kristian Lin
        It's great fun finding out that a dramatic actress (which
Gwyneth Paltrow has been heretofore known to us) has an unsuspected
comic talent.  As a con artist and grave robber in FLESH AND BONE, she
gave a dose of self-assurance in a meandering film filled with aimless
characters.  As Brad Pitt's wife in SE7EN, she was a welcome source of
light amid the gloom of a pseudohip SILENCE OF THE LAMBS knockoff.  Now,
her richly funny performance in EMMA promises to be the first in a long
career as a leading lady.
Adapted from Jane Austen's novel, EMMA is set in Regency
England.  Emma Woodhouse (Paltrow), the daughter of a member of the
landed gentry, plays matchmaker for her younger adoring friend, Harriet
Smith (Toni Collette).  When Emma isn't busy believing that the wrong
man has fallen for her, she's busy believing that the wrong man has
fallen for Harriet.  She tries to pair off Harriet with the vicar, Mr.
Elton (Alan Cumming), only to find that he's more interested in her.
Meanwhile, she flirts with Frank Churchill (Ewan McGregor), the dashing
stepson of her best friend, but doesn't see that her lifelong friend Mr.
Knightley (Jeremy Northam) is in love with her.
Paltrow has been criticized for being too transparent an actress
to project the schemer in Emma Woodhouse, which is true.  Emma's
plotting is motivated by an innocent desire to do good, a quality that
Alicia Silverstone nailed in CLUELESS, the updated version of EMMA.
Paltrow's inability to convey this does mar her performance and the
film, though not as much as others have claimed.  It robs Emma of an
extremely appealing character flaw, leaving us with her more unpleasant
ones. However, it doesn't severely drag down the whole film, which
testifies to her strength as an actress.
She has a pretty sure grip on everything else about the
character: Emma's quickness of mind growing into complacent superiority
at the beginning, then the ensuing confusion followed by her spiritual
growth (of all Jane Austen heroines, Emma Woodhouse is the best role for
a comic actress because Austen subjects her to so many unpleasant
surprises).  When Silverstone tries to look puzzled by her mistakes, she
essentially squints.  By contrast, Paltrow's eyes register everything.
It leads to hilarious scenes like Mr. Elton's proposal to her in the
carriage, where her brain simply locks up, leaving her only enough
composure to fend him off.  It also leads to affecting moments such as
her realization of how she's insulted Miss Bates (Sophie Thompson).
Paltrow's a smart actress with a sense of fun and a way with a joke,
but she's also capable of expressing deep emotions.  This is a born
romantic comedienne.
It's too bad, though, that she completely swamps Jeremy Northam.
Mr. Knightley does come off as rather drab in the novel, and Northam has
a raffish appeal to compensate for it.  He also catches fire when he
becomes jealous of Frank Churchill.  Compare, though, Alan Rickman's
similar role in SENSE AND SENSIBILITY (that performance looks better and
better over time) and you'll find Northam lacking in the gravitas that
perhaps only age could provide.
If Jane Austen hadn't been English, the British theater might
well have had to invent her, as the last three films of her novels,
PERSUASION, SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, and now EMMA have all been
distinguished by great supporting casts.  No other country's actors
could match Austen's detailed portraits of minor characters with the
Brits' technical exactitude.  Chief among the role players here is
Thompson, who has done excellent work before, particularly as the
hypochondriacal Mary Musgrove in PERSUASION.  Here she creates a
compelling and wholly realized personality.  Her tiny, bespectacled
Miss Bates gradually pulls all your attention toward her as her nervous,
self-effacing manner continually apologizes for whatever it is that
compels her to talk so much.  And then, when Emma makes fun of her and
her satirical wit cuts too deep, Miss Bates's chatter dies into a
bewildered silence that's devastatingly effective.
McGregor is an immensely likable Frank Churchill and has a
glorious moment when he joins in a song.  Cumming and Juliet Stevenson
are a well-matched pair of Eltons, while Greta Scacchi's Mrs. Weston
strikes the right attitude of benevolent wisdom.  Less well off are
Collette and Denys Hawthorne as Mr. Woodhouse; perhaps because of the
writing or the direction, they fall into caricature.  I wish Polly
Walker hadn't been such a drab Jane Fairfax.  Jane's virtues are meant
to come off as dull next to Emma's brilliant wrongheadedness, but even
so, the character should have some luster of her own to give Emma
something to dislike.
This film is the directing debut of screenwriter Douglas
McGrath, whose previous scripts include a co-writing credit with Woody
Allen on his marvelous BULLETS OVER BROADWAY.  Jane Austen is so subtle
a writer, you hate to fault anyone else for falling short of her
standards, but McGrath stretches her finely nuanced humor into some
unAustenlike broad gags - Emma misses an archery target and sends
Knightley's dogs scattering, while Mr. Elton compliments Emma's sketch
of Harriet when she's only finished the outline of Harriet's head.  The
filmmaker seems afraid that Austen's humor is too delicate for modern
audiences.  It isn't necessarily inappropriate to have Mrs. Elton talk
with her mouth full of cake, but Jane Austen conveyed the character's
vulgarity without resorting to this unimaginative touch, and we feel
McGrath could have done it, too.
Tonally, EMMA most closely resembles the 1940 MGM film of PRIDE
AND PREJUDICE, though it doesn't commit any sin as egregious as the
latter film's sympathetic portrayal of Lady Catherine de Bourgh.  It's
still fun, but we devotees of the novelist's dry, incisive social
commentary will find the bright-hued farce a poor substitute (in this
regard, Roger Michell's PERSUASION, the least amiable of the recent
Austen adaptations, is also the most faithful to her spirit).
Nevertheless, EMMA has much to recommend it, not the least of which is
seeing a major actress in the making.

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Directed by: Douglas McGrath
Written by: Douglas McGrath (novel by Jane Austen)
Cast: Gwyneth Paltrow (Emma Woodhouse),  Toni Collette  (Harriet
Smith),     Alan Cumming (Rev. Elton), Jeremy Northam (Mr. Knightley),
Ewan McGregor         (Frank Churchill), Greta Scacchi (Mrs. Weston),
Juliet Stevenson (Mrs. Elton), Polly Walker (II) (Jane Fairfax), Sophie
Thompson (Miss Bates)
Produced by : Haft Entertainment / Matchmaker Films / Miramax Films
Rating : ***
Run Time: Approx. 120 Minutes
"Clueless" Emma is Back With A Motley Cast of Fallible Characters One
Cannot Help But Like
In EMMA, yet another romantic comedy based on Jane Austen's satiric
novel, we are transported back to nineteenth-century provincial England.
however, we are never once allowed to delude ourselves into thinking
that we escape Austen's parodic pen, for self-delusion, gossip and
social inadaptablity continue to be relevant to our modern-day
sensibilities. No wonder Jane Austen is "Hollywood's Hottest Writer."
Austen's opening lines of her novel of the same name, 
could well be a description of actres Gwyneth Paltrow, who portrays the
delinquent Emma in the film, and this gives the role an added subtext.
Hailed as one of the most beguiling and talented actresses of her
generation, and continuing to lead a charmed life with Brad Pitt, she
fits perfectly into the role of the self-satisfied and presumptuous
Emma. As she weaves her match-making web and speaks her wry epigrams,
the smile she brandishes is often a shade too pleased with itself,
capturing the essence of a character whose comic flaws are self-delusion
and a desire to play God. Paltrow's combination of golden beauty, grace
and intelligence makes her quite literally shine in this role.
Unfortunately, delightful as her performance may be, her limited range
of expressions is unlikely to garner her any Oscars.
The object of Emma's blundering excursions is Harriet Smith, played by
Toni Collette, who played the lead role in MURIEL'S WEDDING. Collette
scarely looks the part of a naive seventeen-year-old, but her portrayal
convincingly captures Harriet's insecurity, self-doubt and desire for
approval. So influenced is she by Emma's opinions of her grandeur, her
marital sights rise from local farmer Robert Martin, a genteel farmer to
Mr Elton the parish priest, to Mr Knightley, an established member of
the gentry. The unweaving of Harriet's matrimonial web brings scene
after scene of humourous insight into human nature, and of the
difficulty of finding one's perfect match.
Emma herself is caught between the charming Frank Churchill (Ewan
McGregor) and Mr Knightley (Jeremy Northam), who is her special friend,
confidaante, and the gentleman who exudes a wisdom, understanding and
sensuality that Emma is blind to. The turning point in Emma's path to
self-discovery is perhaps the picnic scene where she mocks the endlessly
chattering but kind-hearted spinster, Miss Bates. 
The latter is portrayed sympathetically by Sophie Thompson (sister to
the famed Emma), who almost steals the show each time she appears,
managing to variously convey insecurity and pain through her comic
monologues. She forms part of an impressive cast of supporting actors,
which also includes Alan Cumming and Juliet Stevenson, who portray the
odiously pompous Eltons with a taunting gaiety that *dares* the viewer
to dislike them. As caricatures of snobbery, they are irrepressibly
funny.
This lively and entertaining adaptation marks the commendable
directorial debut of America writer Douglas McGrath, who also wrote the
screenplay. However, when compared with Amy Heckerling's script for
CLUELESS, which saw a radical change to a Beverly Hills setting and the
invention of a MTV vocabulary, this adaptation of "Emma" becomes too
safe, predicatable, and audience-friendly. It is a "sunny garden party,"
where you catch occasional glimpses of yourself that amuse, but do not
disturb. Ultimately, it is satire without bite, wit without derision,
critique without affront, and adaptation without imagination.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Gwyneth Paltrow, Toni Collette, Jeremy Northam, Alan Cumming,
Ewan McGregor, Greta Scacchi, Juliet Stevenson, Polly Walker, Sophie
Thompson.
Screenplay:  Douglas McGrath.
Director:  Douglas McGrath.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     When last we left Miss Emma Woodhouse, she was living in Beverly
Hills, happily in love with her step-brother...oh, and her name was Cher.
She was the lead character in a smart and utterly charming 1994 film
called CLUELESS, although she was never expressly named, and that makes
EMMA an experience of intense deja vu, even more so given the spate of
recent adaptations of other Jane Austen novels.  That places everyone
involved with EMMA in positions of uncomfortable but inevitable immediate
comparison -- director Douglas McGrath trying to portray upper class life
in 19th century England as artfully as SENSE AND SENSIBILITY's Ang Lee,
Gwyneth Paltrow competing with Alicia Silverstone for brattish
adorability, and so on.  Given these challenges, EMMA becomes almost more
entertaining than it already is on its own merits, another witty and
winning addition to the Austen canon, in which Paltrow becomes a bona fide
leading lady.
     Paltrow's Emma is a young woman living in the Surrey town of
Highbury, where her recent successful pairing of her former governess
(Greta Scacchi) and landowner Mr. Weston (James Cosmo) has her eager to
play matchmaker again.  Her target is the recently arrived Harriet Smith
(Toni Collette), whom Emma sees as an ideal match for the minister Mr.
Elton (Alan Cumming); Mr. Elton, however, has designs on someone else
entirely.  Mr. Frank Churchill (Ewan McGregor) is another possible suitor,
though Emma isn't sure that she doesn't want him for herself.  All this is
observed by Emma's brother-in-law Mr. Knightley (Jeremy Northam), who
tries to discourage her interference with honest counsel, then finds
himself caught up in Emma's complicated romantic world.
     As I considered Gwyneth Paltrow's performance in EMMA, I recalled an
old George Carlin routine in which he concluded that the reason dogs were
more expressive than cats was that dogs had eyebrows.  This observation in
no way means to compare Paltrow to a dog (far from it, though that is
another kettle of hormones entirely), but to describe why I think Paltrow
may be the most expressive young actress working:  in short, she has
phenomenal eyebrows.  If it seems I am doing an injustice to her ability
to interpret a line, or to her impressive British accent, I do not mean to
do so.  It is simply that there are moments in EMMA where Paltrow adopts a
facial expression so utterly perfect that her infuriating ability to make
you care about her despite her pettiness and manipulation seems drawn from
the soul of Austen's novel.  There are actors in films today that it is
distressingly clear will never know how to act with a degree of subtlety
which allows a shift of the eye or a hint of a frown to advance their
character.  At the ripe old age of 22, Gwyneth Paltrow gives a clinic on
acting for the screen in EMMA.
     It is a blessing that she is able to do so, since she has to carry
much of the first half of the film.  McGrath's rookie direction is
somewhat static, and the Harriet-Emma-Mr. Elton triangle is hampered by a
surprisingly stuffy performance by Toni Collette.  It is the late
introduction of Frank Churchill and Mr. Elton's new wife (Juliet
Stevenson) which kick-starts EMMA into enough energy to match its
cleverness.  Ewan McGregor (the heroin-addicted Renton in the current
TRAINSPOTTING) infuses Churchill with a charisma which proves a match for
Emma's nonchalance about her own love life; a scene in which he seizes her
fancy by proving men can gossip as well as women is an utter joy.  Emma
finds a match of another kind in Mrs. Elton, a self-obsessed busybody whom
Emma comes to dislike intensely, perhaps because they are too much alike,
and Juliet Stevenson plays the part of the shrew with a casual good humor
which undercuts the stereotype.  And I would be remiss in not pointing out
the delightful performances by Sophie Thompson as the garrulous spinster
Miss Bates and Jeremy Northam as the dashing Mr. Knightley.
     It is more than a bit distracting at times to be only 12 months
removed from the release of CLUELESS; duplicated details like Harriet
burning silly little mementos of Mr. Elton lose some of their snap in
their familiarity.  But McGrath's screenplay is a gem of humor and
sparkling characterizations, and is more than faithful to the spirit of
his source material.  Most importantly, he has cast his lead role with a
keen sense of its challenges -- he needed an actor with a willingness to
play a vain, foolish and snobbish young woman without winking at us to
make sure we don't dislike her.  She trusts her ability to make Emma's
good heart shine through her youthful conviction in her own infallibility,
and McGrath is wise to trust her as well.  Both prove far from clueless in
that respect.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Gwyneth Paltrow, Toni Collette, Jeremy Northam, Alan Cumming, 
      Ewan McGregor, Greta Scacchi, Juliet Stevenson, Polly Walker, 
      Sophie Thompson, Phyllida Law, James Cosmo
Director: Douglas McGrath
Producers: Patrick Cassavetti and Steven Haft
Screenplay: Douglas McGrath based on the novel by Jane Austen
Cinematography: Ian Wilson
Music: Rachel Portman
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     It's the romantic buried inside each of us that responds to movies 
like EMMA.  Sure, the film, like the Jane Austen novel upon which it is 
based, is laced with wit and sophistication.  And, although it contains 
enough social commentary and character development to lift it well above 
the plane of genre romances, EMMA is still primarily about lovers 
finding each other during a simpler age (Austen published her novels in 
the early 19th century).
     With EMMA, we're certainly not investigating virgin territory.  In 
the wake of PERSUASION, SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, and A&E's stupendous 
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE, there's not a great deal of mystery about the 
audience to which EMMA will appeal.  Although the plot differs slightly 
from the other Austen books-to-movies, many of the themes and riffs are 
the same.  More than one marriage is arranged (five, to be precise), the 
heroine is a strong-willed woman with a disdain for social conventions, 
the "principal" couple doesn't find love until the closing moments, and 
there's at least one scene of ballroom dancing.
     EMMA details the matchmaking attempts of twenty-one year old Emma 
Woodhouse (Gwyneth Paltrow), an incorrigible meddler who believes that 
"there is nothing more beautiful than a match well made."  After 
successfully marrying her governess (Greta Scacchi) to a widower (James 
Cosmo), Emma sets her sights on pairing her plain, uncultured friend, 
Harriet Smith (Toni Collette), with the local vicar, Reverend Elton 
(Alan Cumming).  Elton, however, has other ideas, as does Emma's closest 
male friend, Knightley (Jeremy Northam), who describes her activities as 
"vanity working on a weak mind [that] produces every kind of mischief."  
Emma herself is unattached, but, since this is a Jane Austen story, it's 
obvious that won't last for long.  Indeed, before the two hours are up, 
the title character has become enmeshed in a number of romantic 
entanglements, and it doesn't take a genius to uncover the identity of 
Emma's true soul-mate.
     It's possible that the storyline for EMMA may seem curiously 
familiar to movie-goers, even those who haven't seen the previous Austen 
adaptations.  The reason dates back to last year's CLUELESS.  Alicia 
Silverstone's star-making vehicle was a modern take on EMMA, translating 
the characters and circumstances from England in the early 1800s to 
Beverly Hills in the 1990s.  This straight adaptation works better, but 
CLUELESS is not without its charms.
     Speaking of star-making turns, EMMA is likely to open eyes to the 
talent of its leading lady, Gwyneth Paltrow, who gives face, form, and 
expression to Emma.  Paltrow, who was excellent in 1993's FLESH AND BONE 
(before moving on to films like SEVEN and THE PALLBEARER), displays the 
essential characteristic of an actress wishing to play a Jane Austen 
heroine -- the ability to shift quickly and effectively from comedy to 
drama.  She can cry, look wistful, and deliver a biting line with equal 
believability. 
     Paltrow is supported by a fine cast.  Toni Collette (MURIEL'S 
WEDDING), who also appeared with her in THE PALLBEARER, makes an 
effectively frumpy Harriet Smith.  Jeremy Northam, who harassed Sandra 
Bullock in THE NET, is an excellent choice for the dashing Knightley.  
Alan Cumming is suitably smarmy as Reverend Elton.  Greta Scacchi and 
Polly Walker are underused in small roles.  Sophie Thompson, in her 
second Austen film (she also appeared in PERSUASION), plays the 
irritating Miss Bates a little too perfectly.  Only Ewan McGregor 
(TRAINSPOTTING) appears miscast, although he gives the part of Frank 
Churchill a game try.
     EMMA lacks the depth of passion present in the other Austen films, 
but, in large part because it's trying for something lighter and 
breezier, it's still fun.  The film runs a little longer than seems 
necessary, and gets off to a slow, fitful start (Douglas McGrath's 
screenplay is not the equal of the other Austen adaptations), but 
Paltrow keeps us interested until the story's inherent romantic magic 
begins to weave its spell.  
     Is the movie-going population (especially those who frequent art 
houses) growing weary of Jane Austen?  It's hard to give a definitive 
answer at this time, but, judging from the lines at the box office, that 
seems unlikely.  There's something about the writer's view of life that 
appeals to modern audiences, and, if EMMA proves to be a financial 
success, it's almost a certainty that we'll be seeing a new, feature 
adaptation of either NORTHANGER ABBEY or MANSFIELD PARK in the near 
future.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     EMMA is an exquisite recreation of early 19th century country
life.  Seeing one scene after another is like looking in on historical
rooms recreated in a museum.  It is not that every scene is ornate, but
each has a feel of authenticity.  One almost feels that a guide taking
the viewer around the room and telling the viewer what each of the
items is might have been nearly as interesting as having the actors
play out the scene.  And at the end of the film one almost feels that
might have been a better use of time.  I am afraid that it will take
some effort to convince me that this is really a better story than even
INDEPENDENCE DAY has, as boorish as that might sound.
     As is frequently the case in a Jane Austen story, EMMA is
concerned with the vitally important issue of which of Ms. Austen's
generally shallow characters will marry which others.  Especially of
interest is how will Austen's main heroine get together, after some
tribulation of course, with the man who it is so obvious from the
beginning is the perfect choice for a husband.  At least in SENSE AND
SENSIBILITY the main character was in some ways admirable.  The self-
satisfied Emma Woodhouse (played by the elegant Gwyneth Paltrow) is
merely attractive and rich.  I rather hoped through the film that there
might be some semblance of a morality tale here and Emma's meddling
would lead to her not getting her Mr. Right.  Of course, that is not
Austen's style and in the end Austen arranges that there is no
permanent damage done by Emma.
     Mr. Right in this case is Mr. Knightly (played by Jeremy Northam),
Emma's sister's brother-in-law.  And Knightly really is knightly.  He
is the voice of conscience and the advocate of restraint ("Better to be
without sense than misapply it as you do.") as Emma goes madly running
about trying to run the lives of all her friends.  Her best friend is
Harriet Smith (Toni Collette), afflicted with just average looks.  And
worse, she is afflicted with a friend like Emma.  The persuasive Emma
has decided that a local farmer who is interested in Harriet is not
good enough to marry Harriet.  Emma decides to quash that match and to
instead set up a marriage with Reverend Elton, the local rector.  Soon
two eligible unmarrieds come on the scene.  One is the callow Frank
Churchill (Ewan McGregor of TRAINSPOTTING), stepson of Emma's governess
and confidant.  The other is Jane Fairfax (Polly Walker, who had far
more engaging roles in ENCHANTED APRIL and RESTORATION), niece of the
region's second ranking busybody.  Soon all the wrong people are
attracted to all the wrong people from Emma's point of view.
     The novel was adapted to the screen and then directed by Douglas
McGrath and some of the film has some undeniably witty moments.  The
acting is all sufficiently convincing.  Gwyneth Paltrow looks
extraordinarily long-necked and elegant.  Jeremy Northam would look
very good except for the fashions of the day that seemed to go in for
extraordinarily large hats and other exaggerated clothing features.  It
is something of a surprise to see Greta Scacchi in a smaller role as
the ex-governess.  Also a familiar face is Juliet Stevenson of TRULY
MADLY DEEPLY in a small role.  More than once I found the sets
upstaging the action with apple-filled harvest scenes, Christmas party
scenes, crocheting rings, and views of odd decorations on yard
furniture.  In fact, there is little in this film that is not top-notch
but the story itself.  (I have to admit, I did like the film better
than the recent CLUELESS, loosely based on the same novel.  But at
least there it was easier to like the main character in CLUELESS
because the results of her actions would have been less permanent.)
The only thing really wrong with EMMA is Emma herself.  With a main
character that there was some reason to care about, this could have
been a much better film.  I give it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
