Title
Review for Henry V (1944)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the examples of Shakespeare's universal appeal is the
fact that even his earliest plays, historical dramas, happen
to be popular and that their audience includes people who
actually don't care that much about English medieval
history. Compared with Bard's later masterpieces like
HAMLET, MACBETH or TEMPEST those plays might look crude and
simplistic, but they still have that Shakespearean appeal
and represent the challenge for future generations of stage
and movie artists. In 1944 Britain, one of such plays proved
to be rather useful for wartime propaganda purposes, and
Laurence Olivier, famous stage and movie actor, producer and
director, was asked by British government to adapt HENRY V.
The result was a film that later earned Olivier a honorary
"Oscar".
The play HENRY V deals with the King Henry V of England and
his military campaign in France during the Hundred Year War
between those two countries. In 1415, fresh on the throne
and with the reputation of careless, hedonistic and
irresponsible youth, Henry waged the campaign in order to
strengthen both his own domestic authority and English hold
on vast territories in France. His campaign was partially
successful, mostly because of the illness. Forced to retreat
towards friendly port of Calais, Henry and his tired and
dwindling army encountered superior French force near the
castle of Agincourt on October 25th. Using the good
defensive position and superior longbow tactics against
arrogant French knights, Henry carried the day and turned
himself into one of the greatest national heroes of England.
Ironically, that triumph proved to be the last major victory
for the English in Hundred Year War. Only a generation
later, Joan of Arc would turn the tide and begin to finally
drive English out of France.
Battle of Agincourt perhaps didn't have major historical or
military significance for the outcome of Hundred Years War,
but it provided future English historians and artists with a
great inspiration for uplifting, patriotic works of art.
Same thing that had inspired Shakespeare, inspired Olivier
too, and he dedicated his film to British commando and
airborne troops. However, despite being created mostly for
morale boosting purposes, HENRY V was more than a piece of
simplistic propaganda.
First of all, Olivier was rather ingenious in his
adaptation. Equipped with relatively high budget and first
Technicolor cameras, he decided to use talents of Dalas
Bower, Alan Dent and his own to adapt Shakespeare's language
and make it closer to the common man. Another decision was
to make this play realistic by shooting it as a stage play
being performed in Globe Theatre 1600 AD. That provided few
amusing, almost humorous behind-the-scenes segments about
stage actors' life in Shakespearean times. Production sets
by Carmen Dillon and Paul Sheriff, transcended their
artificiality by being modelled after illustration in
medieval chronicles, giving this film somewhat fairytale,
surreal atmosphere. That effect is somewhat diminished when
Olivier uses locations of Ireland (neutral in WW2) and
thousands of Irish regular army as extras in order to
reconstruct the battle. The battle scene is most
spectacular, but it lacks the emotional impact and
excitement usually associated with similar scenes in
historical spectacles. Apart from that, this film suffers a
lot from Olivier trying to be faithful towards Shakespeare
on the wrong places, especially when dealing with rather
boring segments about common soldiers in Henry's army.
Olivier's scene of royal seduction, on the other hand, still
possesses certain surreal and charming quality.
Despite its flaws, HENRY V held a good reputation through
decades, but, unfortunately, newer generations would almost
certainly compare it to more modern and artistically
ambitious 1989 version by Kenneth Branagh. Those comparisons
are very bad for Olivier's work, since they reveal the fact
that 1944 version had text drastically changed and trimmed
for propaganda purposes, making Henry in Olivier's version
much nicer person from Henrys in Branagh's version and real
history. Anyway, even with the later work that diminished
its reputation, HENRY V is a film to be seen and appreciated
by both lovers of classic cinema and those who like
Shakespeare.
