Title
Review for Kicked in the Head (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kevin Corrigan, Michael Rapaport, Linda Fiorentino, James Woods, 
      Lili Taylor, Burt Young 
Director: Matthew Harrison
Producer: Barbara DeFina
Screenplay: Matthew Harrison, Kevin Corrigan
Cinematography: John Thomas, Howard Krupa
Music: Stephen Endelman
U.S. Distributor: October Films
     Take a little Quentin Tarantino, a little Martin Scorsese, and a 
little Richard Linklater, add a $4 million budget, then dilute it all 
with a derivative script, and you get KICKED IN THE HEAD, director 
Matthew Harrison's third feature (the other two were SPARE ME and RHYTHM 
THIEF).  Harrison, who has been making movies since he was a kid, 
apparently has yet to develop a unique film making voice.  KICKED IN THE 
HEAD has a tired, unoriginal feel, as if it was put together using the 
spare parts from numerous better entries.
     KICKED IN THE HEAD is about losers and lowlifes in the Generation X 
world.  The main character, Redmond (Kevin Corrigan), is a 
twentysomething slacker who is just about the most irksome individual I 
can imagine having as a motion picture lead.  Redmond is a shiftless, 
self-pitying whiner who spends the entire film coming up with reasons to 
feel sorry for himself.  He doesn't have job (and doesn't want one), 
pines for a stewardess (Linda Fiorentino) who won't give him the time of 
day, and ignores the one person (Lili Taylor) who appears to truly care 
for him.  
     Redmond's Uncle Sam (James Woods) is a two-bit crook who has gotten 
his hands on a nice stash of dope.  Using Redmond as his delivery boy, 
he hopes to extricate himself from the "deep doo-doo" that he's in.  
Unfortunately for both Sam and Redmond, things don't go down as planned, 
and Redmond finds himself stuck with a package of cocaine while a local 
crime boss named Wacky Jack (Burt Young) breaths down his neck.
     During the course of its 90 minute running time, KICKED IN THE HEAD 
offers very little that's new or innovative, and the storyline fails to 
rise above the level of "passably interesting."  Harrison tries too hard 
to give his film the quirky, darkly comic tone that's in vogue today, 
and the result feels forced and artificial.  Redmond is the kind of 
character who might be at home in a Linklater film (particularly 
SUBURBIA).  The New York streets that he wanders are the territory of 
Martin Scorsese (who executive produced this movie).  And some of the 
pop-culture, pseudo-intellectual banter recalls that of Tarantino or 
Kevin Smith (there's a bit about the PLANET OF THE APES movies and an 
exchange about the difference between a "flight attendant" and a 
"stewardess").  The problem with Harrison isn't that he borrows from 
these directors, but that he fails to take it further.  And, since he's 
not as adept as any of them, KICKED IN THE HEAD comes across as a pale 
attempt to pilfer from their work.
     As generally uninvolving as KICKED IN THE HEAD is, it does boast a 
few innovative moments.  The film features several gunfights which are 
highlighted by the complete ineptitude of the participants.  Men fire 
off round after round after round, and, even at close range, they never 
manage to hit anyone.  Then there's the way Harrison gives one character 
his comeuppance.  Not only is the actual method deliciously ironic 
("hoist by his own petard" is the expression), but the matter-of-fact 
manner in which Harrison films it is noteworthy.  
     Although the director managed to snag some fairly well-known names 
for this film, we aren't inundated by top-notch performances.  Kevin 
Corrigan, who was in RHYTHM THIEF and WALKING AND TALKING, plays Redmond 
as if the character is a half-wit (maybe that's the point).  Michael 
Rapaport is his usual grating self.  Linda Fiorentino is absolutely 
wasted.  Only James Woods and Lili Taylor (who is trying to recapture 
the "Queen of the Independent Films" title from Parker Posey), playing 
against type as a sweet, innocent girl, turn in respectable work.
     As seemingly must be true of any Generation X character, Redmond is 
filled with self-doubt and unfulfilled longings.  His life, as revealed 
through this film, is a mass of questions and unresolved issues.  Does 
he find real love?  Does he uncover the elusive "truth" that he's always 
talking about?  Does his "attendant godling" re-discover her way?  Sad 
to say, I didn't really care one way or the other.  Somehow, Harrison 
managed to create a protagonist whom I was apathetic towards and place 
him in situations that I wasn't interested in.  And that's one aspect of 
movie-making that he didn't lift from Scorsese, Linklater, or Tarantino.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Dennis Schwartz

KICKED IN THE HEAD (director/writer: Matthew Harrison; screenwriter:
Kevin Corrigan; cinematographer: John Thomas/Howard Krupa; editor:
Michael Berenbaum; cast: Kevin Corrigan (Redmond), Linda Fiorentino
(Megan), Michael Rapaport (Stretch), James Woods (Uncle Sam), Lili
Taylor (Happy) Burt Young (Jack), Olek Krupa (Borko); Runtime: 97; 1997)
Matthew Harrison's "Kicked in the Head" has its offbeat comical moments
but in the end dies from self-indulgence and too much cuteness. Kevin
Corrigan wrote a juicy part for himself, but his part never caught fire,
in fact, he was the film's weakness. The supporting characters were at
least funny when they did their shticks in this rambling, derivative NYC
movie, that tried too hard to be offbeat and in the process forgot it
would be nice to have a story that made some sense to go with the film.
Kevin is a confused young man named Redmond, whose aimless life we will
follow for a few days, as he is in the process of writing the poetical
truth in a book about the meaning of life. From time to time, he spews
out the childish doggerel he writes in his notebook, which he keeps in
his backpack. He has just lost his job and has been evicted from his
apartment, which also just happened to burn down, when he meets Uncle
Sam (James Woods) in the street. His loser uncle just stole a car and
threw a pooch out of it-with one of the running gags throughout, the
sightings made of the lost pooch wandering the streets. Another running
theme throughout, is the newsreel from Pathe, of the Hindenburg disaster
being played, which Corrigan seems to connect with his life and his
earnest pursuit of romance.
Sam asks Redmond to deliver a package for him at a subway station, makes
fun of  Redmond when he tells him he is on a spiritual quest, and tells
him to call home -- and to make sure he delivers the package. At the
station when he tries to deliver the package, a shootout occurs between
the one who steps up for the package and another man, but the gunplay
seems more comical than in earnest, and no one gets hit. As a result,
Redmond now has the package of cocaine.
The film then goes off on another tangent, as Redmond goes to his best
friend's house, Stretch (Michael Rapaport) to crash. He is a beer
distributor, "The King of Piss," as he likes to call himself. Stretch is
an excitable character, just as easily pulling out a gun to ward off
competitors as improvising with a full mouth, offering up his view on
life.
Redmond, while he was on the subway delivering the package for his
con-man uncle, is attracted to the pretty legs or is it the tears coming
from a stewardess on the train, whose name tag says Megan (Linda
Fiorentino). When he approaches her she calls him an asshole and brushes
him off, but these two are destined to meet again. Their romance becomes
a key part of the story, except it can't connect with the story.
There is also the other girl, Happy (Lili Taylor), who is Redmond's ex
but he now rejects her. The gag here is, that he once told her if he
says no to her, that means he has become temporarily crazy and that she
should ignore his denials and continue to pursue him. When she does
that, it is good for a few laughs.
Uncle Sam comes back into the picture to take Redmond to his mob boss,
Whacky Jack (Burt Young), to explain the missing package. The Russian
enforcer for Jack, Borko (Krupa), sits in on the meeting and later on
has his few moments of comedy, as he translates threats from an English
dictionary what he is going to do to Redmond if he doesn't get the drugs
back.
The film gets trapped in too many scenes that don't work. An assinine
scene of friends getting high and quibbling about the nuances of "The
Planet of the Apes," was one such abhorent scene. Another is the
unlikely romance taking place between Corrigan and Fiorentino, which
seemed out of context, and added nothing to the story, except it was
more pleasant watching Fiorentino perform than it was in watching
Corrigan. She was so much better than him, that it made me scratch my
head and wonder what he was doing there. Her character was all the more
compelling than his, even though she had such a small part. Nothing
seemed to really work well here, yet all the supporting characters
seemed to be pleasant and trying their best to make things work. But the
film was too much of a childish fantasy on the part of Corrigan, and the
dialogue was too flip. It was one of those films that you might find
enjoyable if you are in the right frame of mind for watching actors
improvise their way out of a bad script, or if you are stoned like the
connoisseur participants in "Ape" film conversation were.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
