Title
Review for Last of the Dogmen (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Two absolute top-rated films, DANCES WITH WOLVES and THE FUGITIVE
have been fused together by first time writer and director Tab Murphy
to create the derivative LAST OF THE DOGMEN.  This is a serious show
that has quotes in its advertising that claim it is the movie that
DANCES WITH WOLVES should have been.
     As the icing on the cake in this show, the narrator (Wilford
Brimley) is given language by the writer that is either poetic language
that is brilliantly evocative of an earlier age or total, pompous
balderdash.  You can choose.  At first, I liked the flowery language,
but soon I got sugar overload and found his cute little sayings
sickeningly sweet.  I suspect the viewers of this show will dichotomize
into the lovers and the loathers.  I found the show not to be a bad
one, but merely one that rarely lived up to its potential.  Read the
review with an open mind for you may be less cynical than I and may be
awe struck by its beauty.
     Remember the start of THE FUGITIVE where the bus of convicts goes
down the side of the road and the show is about the cop trying to
locate the escapee?  Well, this is the exact opening scene for LAST OF
THE DOGMEN.  Here it is tracker Lewis Gates (Tom Berenger) who is
called back from an alcoholic stupor a la any of the DIE HARD movies to
find someone only he has the skills to find.  The sheriff played by
Kurtwood Smith has a long running feud with ex-son-in-law Gates since
the sheriff believes that Gates did not do all he could to save the
sheriff's daughter in a drowning accident.
     The movie is full of one cliche after another.  For example, Gates
believes, while tracking down the convicts, he may have come across a
long lost Indian tribe in the remote Oxbow region of Montana.  He then
goes to "Blue Sky University" looking for a world famous professor, Dr.
Lillian Stone (Barbara Hershey), of Indian history.  He has trouble
finding her because he assumes that the professor must be a man.  Later
he assumes that she can not ride a horse.  And so on.  To give you a
flavor of the cliched dialog you have to endure, Gates tells the
professor that she can not come along with him into the wilderness
because: "I've seen this place reduce grown men to tears.  It ain't no
place for a woman."
     The movie is extremely predictable.  With a title like LAST OF THE
DOGMEN, do you think they will find a lost Indian tribe?  Nevertheless,
when Gates asks the professor about the possible of finding a lost
tribe she replies, "Look, Elvis is dead, the government is not hiding
UFOs, and there are no Indians in the Oxbow." Well, that sure settled
that.
     There are some wonderful parts of the show.  First, the dog Zip
who is played by Zip is the sort of a friendly mongrel that every kid
would love to have.  He steals every scene he is in.  Too bad he is not
in all of them.
     The mystery part of trying to figure out whether there was a tribe
of fierce dogmen fighters left is the best part of the movie.  I loved
it as Gates pours over the old newspaper clippings and talked to old
town residents.  This part shows how strong this show could have been.
     The movie is set in the Big Sky area of Montana.  It spends a lot
of time explaining the history of the place and of the Indian tribes
there.  As you watch the gorgeous waterfalls and snow capped mountains
all filmed in lovely, slightly hazy and overcast images by Karl Walter
Lindenlaub, you want to leave this mediocre show and go immediately and
book a flight to Montana.  Well, if you did, please call your travel
agent back.  You want your reservations switched to go to Alberta,
Canada and to Mexico because none of the film was shot in the good ole
U.  S.  of A., rather it was all filmed north or south of us.  Oh well,
maybe the Rockies were booked that summer.
     Beside the great cinematography and nice sets (Trevor Williams),
the music (David Arnold) is quite dramatic.  I wish the actors had
gotten a chance to hear the music so they would have been more
inspired.  Smith believes in the let's-frown-a-lot school of acting.
Berenger and Hershey are mediocre at best.  The Indian actors are never
challenged and so show us little in the way of acting.
     Overall, the problem in the movie is that it takes itself way too
seriously.  I kept waiting for Murphy to lighten things up a bit.
There is a great opportunity for a real romance between the leads, but
not in this serious show.  A little more realism and humanity would
have helped.
     The Indians (Steve Reevis, Eugene Blackbear, et. al.) were of the
purely good types who spent most of their time staring with great
solemnity at the white folks they had captured.  There is a single,
token scene thrown in where the Indians are having a comedy fest, but
that scene came out of left field and did not fit with the tone of the
rest of the film.
     Not surprising, the end is overly dramatic and the least
interesting and most predicable part of the plot.  Among many of its
implausibility's, why when disaster is eminent would people set around
and slowly converse about alternatives.  They looked not like a tribe
of warriors, but a bunch of octogenarian professors sitting around
debating what to do while the building they are in is being set on
fire.  Give these warriors some energy, please!
     The narrator admonishes the audience that "Sometimes you have to
put your faith in what you can't see.  In what you wish." I guess my
body was low on faith when I went to see LAST OF THE DOGMEN since its
1:59 was way too long for me.  It is rated PG for 2 kisses, some arrow
in the back type of violence, and adult themes.  It has no nudity or
partial nudity, and no sex.  It would be fine for kids over say 9, and
there were a couple of kids that age with their parents behind me.
Although there is a great dog, a nice mystery, beautiful scenery, and
impressive music, I can not recommend this movie to you.  It rates
* 1/2 in my book.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: Septmeber 15, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Take the mentality of an old-fashioned Hollywood Western, bleed in
elements from Kevin Costner's DANCES WITH WOLVES, and start it out with
a sequence culled from THE FUGITIVE, and you get THE LAST OF THE
DOGMEN--a surprisingly entertaining, somewhat corny adventure film.
And, while there's an obviously politically-correct slant to the story,
that does nothing to dilute THE LAST OF THE DOGMEN's enjoyability.  The
movie isn't as accomplished as DANCES WITH WOLVES, but it doesn't have
either the length or quite the same aspirations.
     Lewis Gates (Tom Berenger) is an old-time, macho cowboy who loves
the rugged outdoors, carries a knife and a gun, and would rather not
take a woman into "the roughest country God's ever put on a map." As
the story opens, the local sheriff (Kurtwood Smith) has recruited
Lewis, the best tracker in the area, to go into the Oxbow Quadrangle in
search of three convicts.  After some convincing, Lewis agrees, and it
doesn't take him long to pick up his quarry's trail.  But, by the time
he catches up to them, all that's left are ripped clothes and a lot of
blood.  The bounty hunter returns to town empty-handed and full of
questions.
     For the answers, he goes to a leading Indian expert, Dr. Lillian
Sloan (Barbara Hershey), telling her he believes there are lost
warriors in the Oxbow.  At first, she thinks he's deluded, but as he
presents evidence accumulated from old newspaper clippings, her
interest is piqued.  Lewis wants one of her male associates to
accompnay him into the mountains--he needs someone who speaks
Cheyenne.  Much to his distress, however, she chooses to come herself,
and together they go in search of the last of the Cheyenne dogmen--the
possible descendants of survivors from 1864's Sand Creek Massacre.
     It's not really all that complicated a story, but someone from
Savoy Pictures disagreed, and the result is an extremely irritating
voiceover read by an uncredited Wilford Brimley.  I'm not fond of this
method of storytelling in the best of circumstances, but this is easily
the most intrusive and redundant narration in years.  THE LAST OF THE
DOGMEN would have been vastly improved without it.  Just as you're
really getting into the story, Brimley's voice pops up to interrupt the
flow.
     Nevertheless, occasional plot contrivances aside, THE LAST OF THE
DOGMEN succeeds on several levels.  Despite a two-hour running length,
the movie keeps the audience's attention.  Berenger and Hershey work
well together, and their budding romance remains low-key.  The
cinematography is gorgeous, with effective use of the exhilarating
mountain scenery.  It's almost possible to believe that a lost tribe
could exist undetected out in that wilderness.  And a shot of a
high-flying airplane, reminding us that this is 1995, is a nice touch.
     Writer/director Tab Murphy pokes occasional fun at the macho
cowboy image while simultaneously embracing it through Berenger's
scruffy Lewis.  But the main point of the movie is that when people
finally find something they've spent their entire life searching for,
they'll risk anything to protect it.  The Cheyenne are Lewis'
redemption, and his interaction with them saves a guilt-ravaged
spirit.  This simple theme lies at the core of an adventure that, while
not original, is nevertheless satisfying.  THE LAST OF THE DOGMEN may
recall DANCES WITH WOLVES, but it seems less a copy than a different
story taking a similar path.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
