Title
Review for Illuminata (1998)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
ILLUMINATA, directed by John Turturro, would appear to have it all:
lavish sets, intimate cinematography, nostalgic atmosphere, captivating
music and a large and accomplished cast.  And yet
With acting talent that includes John Turturro, Katherine Borowitz,
Christopher Walken, Susan Sarandon, Beverly D'Angelo, Bill Irwin, Rufus
Sewell, Georgina Cates, Matthew Sussman and Ben Gazzara, how could it go
wrong?
Like a guest conductor who steps up to the podium of a famous orchestra
and decides to make the most of the opportunity by waving the baton
frantically until he falls over in exhaustion, Turturro overdirects his
players with an athletic intensity.  The result is some cute bits that
fly by, leaving a laugh here and a memorable line there, but never
adding up to anything.  The picture simply never comes close to jelling.
Set in the Italian section of turn-of-the-century New York, the story
concerns the production of a play by a young playwright named Tuccio
(Turturro).  The play, also called "Illuminata," stars Tuccio's
girlfriend Rachel (Katherine Borowitz, Turturro's real-life wife) and
Dominique (Sewell).
The movie's script by Brandon Cole and John Turturro relies heavily on
sight gags for the slapstick comedy.  Typical bits include a pot-bellied
man who rubs spaghetti on his stomach to prove his lack of vanity and an
obese woman who flaunts her naked breasts.  Like the rest of the movie,
these scenes form little more than curiosity pieces.
The best humor comes from the way the movie pokes fun at the flamboyant
theater critic, Bevalaqua (Walken).  Bevalaqua, an obvious take-off on
Oscar Wilde, is so wealthy that he has an assistant to take his notes
for him during the performances.
People don't know whether they really like a play until they've read his
opinion.  "Of course, one never knows what is good," one theatergoer
explains.  "That's what critics are for, to tell us."
One woman in a crowd runs up to Bevalaqua's lavish carriage in an
attempt to put him in his place.  "You criticize everyone," she
complains, "You criticize God."  "That's because he makes mistakes,"
Bevalaqua points out.
Like the woman's license plate that reads, "So many men, so little
time," the movie parades a host of characters in front of us.  But it
never takes the time to develop any of them.
Although the movie has its faults, Turturro's love of the theater is
palpably shown.  Too bad he couldn't have slowed down some and thought
more about the needs of his audience.  Eliminating many of the
characters and fleshing out the ones left would have been a start.
ILLUMINATA runs 1:59.  It is rated R for sex, nudity and language and
would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
119 minutes
Artisan Entertainment
starring John Turturro, Katherine Borowitz, Christopher Walken, Susan
Sarandon, Beverly D'Angelo, Bill Irwin, Rufus Sewell, Georgina Cates,
Matthew Sussman, Ben Gazzara, Leo Bassi, Donal McCann, Aida Turturro
written by Brandon Cole and John Turturro
directed by John Turturro
The shadow of "Shakespeare In Love" looms over John Turturro'
sophomore directorial effort, "Illuminata". However, the latter film
has an ingenuity and flavor all its own. Turturro stars as Tuccio, a
struggling playwright in turn-of-the-century New York. Tuccio wants to
stage his controversial new play, "Illuminata", but many are convinced
that the work isn't yet finished. However, using his lover,
Rachel(Katherine Borowitz) as his muse, he crafts a work about
imperfect love. Among Turturro's eclectic cast is Susan Sarandon as an
aging actress and Christopher Walken(in the film's breakaway
performance) as a powerful, cynical theater critic. "Illuminata" moves
at a slow pace, and is not as lighthearted or flamboyant as
"Shakespeare In Love", but it is a fine film nonetheless. John
Turturro, having worked with visionaries such as the Coen brothers,
Spike Lee, Martin Scorsese, Robert Redford and John Dahl, knows how to
make a film, and it is evident that he knows how to work with
actors. No performance here is too overdone, and everyone seems to be
having a lot of fun.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Artisan Entertainment
 Director: John Turturro
 Writer:   John Turturro, Brandon Cole
 Cast: John Turturro, Katherine Borowitz, Christopher
Walken, Susan Sarandon, Beverly D'Angelo, Bill Irwin, Rufus
Sewell, Georgina Cates, Matthew Sussman, Ben Gazzara,
Leo Bassi, Donal McCann, Aida Turturro, Jeremy Knaster,
David Thornton
   Theater people are not like you and me.  Many live their
lives as though they are always "on," always performing, and
like the character Mima in the new anime movie "Perfect
Blue" and Dr. Bill Harford in "Eyes Wide Shut" may have
trouble distinguishing between illusion and reality.  Some
folks are born to be accountants while others are created to
be on the stage. The genetic difference between CPA's and
thespians could be staggering.  
   We're not talking about the big successes of the Broadway
and West End stages, who appreciate the commercial nature
of their job, but of those who in New York would likely be
seen in small, remote, off-off Broadway platforms and in
London somewhere out on the fringe.  These dedicated
performers are fulfilling a labor of love and are perhaps so
accustomed to taking on roles of idiosyncratic and archetypal
characters that they comport themselves like their fictional
doubles even when away from the glare of the bright lights
and the now worshipping, now condemning audience.
   John Turturro, a creative force on both stage and screen, is
one of the people best able lovingly to portray the often zany
lives of people who live for the joy of performing.  A director
as well as actor, he helmed the crowd-pleasing,
autobiographical "Mac" some seven years ago, a solid tale of
three Italian-American brothers in Queens, New York during
the mid-fifties.  The movie, which was dedicated to Turturro's
carpenter father whose life inspired the film, portrays a man
whose penny-pinching boss frustrates him and makes him
determined to realize the American Dream by starting his own
construction company.  If "Mac" is crammed with offbeat
humor, authentically recreating the lives of blue-collar
people,"Illuminata" is likewise packaged as a droll portrait of
the eccentric folks who work inside the auditoriums
constructed by those builders.
   Again casting his real-life wife, Katherine Borowitz, in a
major guise, Turturro unfolds a tale in which he plays a role
not unlike his capacity as a haunted playwright in "Barton
Fink."  In "Illuminata"--which takes its name from the
designation of the play that Tuccio (Turturro) has written for a
New York company at about the year 1900--the playwright
struggles to have a theater owner put on his latest unfinished
work.  Truly a labor of love, his drama is written specifically
as a gift for his beloved Rachel (Katherine Borowitz), the
company's acclaimed actress and enterprise manager, but
theater owners Astergourd (Beverly D'Angelo) and Pallenchio
(Donal McCann) feel that the work is not ready.  An
opportunity suddenly arises to stage the work, but the
renowned and effete drama critic Umberto Bevalaqua
(Christopher Walken) pans the production.  Insisting that with
the proper re-writes "Illuminata" can be reconceived and win
plaudits, the company seeks to win a reversal from the critic
by setting up reluctant cast member Marco (Bill Irwin) on a
"date" with Bevalaqua--which provides this movie with its
principal scene of pure farce.  While Tuccio continues to re-
write scenes, rehearsing the lines diligently with his
sweetheart, the company as a whole becomes enmeshed in
a roundelay of seductions that could have come from the quill
pen of a farceur like Feydeau.  Celemine (Susan Sarandon)
seeks to entice Tuccio, the lovely Simone (Georgina Cates)
has eyes for the handsome young Dominique (Rufus Sewell),
the rotund Martha (Aida Turturro) sets her clutches on
Pallenchio (Donal McCann).
   Turturro, who co-wrote the screenplay with Brandon Cole,
fills the two-hour comedy with bon mots that could bring a
smile to Oscar Wilde's face.  One member of the audience,
clueless about his own feeling toward an evening's
entertainment, insists, "Who knows what's good?  That's what
critics are for."  We in the audience, all know that we can turn
out better dramas than playwrights, hence the passing
remark by one such fellow to the writer after seeing the play,
"It would have been better if the wife killed herself."  
   Some of the liaisons seem highly improbable, but then
these are actors and Turturro is pushing the farce envelope. 
"Illuminata" is not overlong but suffers from too many
individual scenes, as couples pair off to carry out their trysts
only to have editor Michael Berenbaum cut to the next duo
just as we get to care about one pair.  The film therefore fails
to gel, to hold together, becoming more a series of Saturday-
Night-Live style sketches, however effective the vignettes.  
  Christopher Walken walks away with the story each time he
is on the screen--his hair twisted helter-skelter like the
distracted and lovelorn critic that he is, his machinations on
the handsome Marco providing much of the vitality of the
story. The most captivating scene arrives at the very end as
Simone and Dominique act out a tender love scene set
against a fanciful sylvan background under a full moon, a
woodland creature parting the screen at the moment Simone
ascends a stairwell to the clouds.  The hush that comes over
the audience at the drama is paralleled by the stillness of the
crowd in the movie theater as we perceive anew what live
theater at its best is all about.  "Illuminata" is backed up by
William Bolcom's potent operatic music (the audience at the
screening I attended remained throughout the final credits to
enjoy the strains) and Donna Zakowska's capricious
costumes.

Author
Joy Wyse
Illuminata is especially fun if you've ever spent any time around actors.
 The ones portrayed here are almost as crazy as most of the real
performers that I know.  
John Turturro portrays the playwright, Tuccio, who will go to any
extremes to see his `Illuminata' performed on stage.  He has written it
for the love of his life, Rachel (Borowitz), a `dedicated' actress.  Ben
Gazzara is wasted as her father, the aging actor who plays all of the
`old' roles.
When an actor collapses onstage Tuccio takes the opportunity to announce
that his play will be performed the following night, much to the chagrin
of Beverly D'Angelo and her husband, the theater owners who allow the
little-rehearsed play to take place. This enables Rufus Sewell, a
self-proclaimed `star' to finally get his chance to prove it.
But, resident critic Bevalaqua (Walken) doesn't like the play and pans
everyone in it, except for Marco (Irwin) whom he desires.  The play is
cancelled.  As we follow the sexual escapades of almost everyone in the
cast it becomes quite bawdy.  Whether they are using sex to try and get
the play resumed, or if they simply have uncontrollable urges, all of them
partake in various affairs of the heart, the funniest of which is the
Walken-Irwin encounter.  
Susan Sarandon perfectly portrays a self-centered star.  When Tuccio
accuses her of putting on an act, she replies that her entire life is an
act.  When she wakes in the morning and looks in the mirror, she acts, etc.
Strange as it may seem, Beverly D'Angelo is the only female that I recall
who didn't do a topless scene, although she did do her share of romping. 
Even ro-bust Aida Turturro has a great time of presenting her huge breasts
to her willing partner.
For the most part, this movie simply shows a self-indulgent Turturro and
some of his friends getting together for a little fun.  It's not that
offensive, and it's a fairly true look at back stage life.  I might watch
it again.  I give it a C+.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ILLUMINATA" (Artisan Entertainment)
         After "Shakespeare in Love," this sumptuously presented but
overly long story of behind-the-scenes actors pales in comparison. But
you have to credit it as a labor of love by John Turturro, who
co-wrote, directed, and acted in it. Set amid a flamboyant
turn-of-the-century New York repertory company, it revolves around a
failing resident playwright, John Turturro, whose claim to fame is his
marriage to the troupe's leading lady, played by Katherine Borowitz,
Turturro's real-life wife. The playwright yearns to shelve the
heavy-handed melodramas of the period as he aspires to a more
naturalistic style of theater, but no one believes in
him. "Illuminata" is both the title of a play-within-the-movie and
what he eventually calls his wife after they survive treachery,
back-biting, and intrigue - not to mention the on-stage death of the
leading man mid-performance on opening night. Susan Sarandon is
glorious as the promiscuous, aging diva who glances at a young actress
and murmurs, "That is how I shall look years from now. I'm beginning
to be able to play ingenues." But Christopher Walken steals the
picture as a smug, gay critic - think Oscar Wilde - who relishes the
cruelty he liberally dishes out, and Bill Irwin is amusing as the
wretchedly reluctant object of his affections. Their characterizations
are particularly bawdy. Beverly D'Angelo, Ben Gazzara, and the late
Donal McCann complete the supporting cast, along with Turturro's son
and cousin. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Illuminata" is an
art-house 6, exploring the durability of love with enough dramatic
lulls to catch a quick snooze.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ILLUMINATA (1998) *** Directed by John Turturro. Written by Brandon
Cole and Turturro, from Cole's play. Photography, Harris Savides. 
Editing, Michael Berenbaum. Production design, Robin Standefer. 
Music, William Bolcom with Arnold Black ans others.  Produced by John 
Penotti and Turturro.  Cast: Katherine Borowitz (Rachel, the star and 
manager), Beverly D'Angelo (Astergourd, theater owner), John Turturro 
(Tuccio), Christopher Walken (Bevalaqua, the critic), Ben Gazzara 
(Old Flavio, actor), Bill Irwin (Marco, actor), Donal McCann 
(Pallenchio, theater owner), Susan Sarandon (Celimene, aging diva), 
Rufus Sewell (Dominique) and Georgina Cates (Simone)  (juvenile 
leads), Leo Bassi (Beppo, the clown), Aida Turturro (Marta), David 
Thornton (Orlandini) (supporting players), et al. An Artisan 
Entertainment release. 112 minutes. R (language, sex)
Pirandello might have called it A Dozen Thespians in Search of Love. 
You could also call it Post-Modern Commedia dell'arte, what with 
improvisations, marionettes, and physical comedy. It is also a 
part-time descendant of the Theatre of the Absurd.  Whatever the 
labels, it is most certainly Turturro and Company's love song to the 
theater.
Actor Turturro  had previously directed one movie, also written by 
him and his friend Brandon Cole. That was Mac (1992) which is very 
good, heartfelt but was not circulated widely enough. For sundry 
reasons the 1998 Illuminata was released only recently.
IIlluminata is set in New York City, in 1905. Its multiple focus is a 
single, struggling, probably talented repertory troupe. As they are 
ending their Cavalleria Rusticana -- not the Mascagni opera but the 
1884 play by Giovanni Verga -- they are manoeuvered by their 
playwright-in-residence Tuccio (Turturro) into performing next his 
latest, yet unfinished opus, Illuminata.
What goes on on that stage, behind and around it, defies description 
because of its zig-zags. Brandon Cole's original play was entitled 
Imperfect Love, which sums up matters, more or less. Life and theater 
are juxtaposed, contrasted, equated, complemented. No one is immune 
from stage worship or love in various forms.
The main thread is the love of Tuccio for lead actress Rachel, who in 
real life is Turturro's wife. Young, middle-aged, older people are in 
a constant hubbub which melds (or tries to) the realities of life and 
those of the theater. An extreme case is Christopher Walken as 
despised, feared critic. He is a fop, has hair like a bad version of 
an Oscar Wilde cut, and pursues a younger actor. Everything he does 
or says is funny. Example: "They say I like nothing. It's not true. I 
like chocolate and Caravaggio." Walken's ever-odd appearance, with 
his ambiguous, hairless face, reaches a peak here.
Most of the players are mature, a wonderful relief from teens, babes 
and twenty-somethings. It is wonderful to see older, experienced and 
fine actors like Walken, the great Ben Gazzara, the charming Susan 
Sarandon. She is oddly named Celimene, after the character in 
Moliere's The Misanthrope. (I don't know what is the point of this 
conceit). Their roles are quite unlike their past portrayals. I wish 
Rip Torn were also in the cast.
The women, from ingenue Georgina Cates to Turturro's plump cousin 
Aida Turturro, the lovely Beverly D'Angelo, and of course the 
enchanting Katherine Borowitz, are, each in a special way, "real 
women" and most  appealing. Various situations also bring about a 
celebration of exposed breasts, from A to D cup -- and also give rise 
to some fine farcical scenes.
Turturro, in what we wish were a sign of the times, but is only 
mildly so, marks again the pleasurable notion of cinema not being 
exclusively limited to pretty-boys. Abroad, this happens with actors 
like France's Daniel Auteuil. Not that John T. is ugly here. His 
beard is a flattering argument for not using razors. And his 
intensity shows in his acting, writing and directing.
Too much intensity tends to overwhelm and obscure the plot. I quote 
Turturro: "For me, Katherine's (Borowitz) face and sensibility, 
delicate but strong, intelligent and grateful, and her modesty were 
the inspiration, the soul of the piece. I tried to build everything 
around her."
What a Valentine to a spouse! Let us pray that unlike almost all 
actors, those two will not ever divorce. On the other hand the 
"building of everything" could have used more mortar and 
architecture. Turturro continues: " I looked at Rules of the Game, 
Jean Renoir's masterpiece, read the script of it, and was struck by 
the fact that he was inspired by Georges Feydeau's farces and then 
took that structure to explore serious themes."
As a specialist and admirer of both Feydeau and Renoir, I believe 
that the film does not succeed in this respect. Renoir's very French 
film is a mordant but tolerant satire of French society, from 
celebrities to the idle rich, from old soldiers to new lovers, from 
the ruling classes to their copy-cat servants in an Upstairs, 
Downstairs fashion.. It is all directed with clarity and cool, even 
when agitation reigns.
Feydeau's hilarious comedies spare no one but they are built like 
clockwork so fine-tuned that his plays' extravagant complications can 
be followed without a single "what? who? why? where?."
By contrast, this movie is a maze, a non-stop pile-up of people, 
dialogue --which can drag a bit,-- actions and tributaries to the 
main stream that could, and probably will, confuse you, especially 
since within the limited space of the settings there's no limit to 
the number of scenes.
The settings are very good. So are the photography, the costumes, the 
music and its use. Note that the main music credits go to William 
Bolcom, a major American composer who just wrote the score for the 
opera version of A View From the Bridge.
An oddity of this work is that its entire ambience and context are so 
overwhelmingly Italian or Italianate that some absent-minded viewers 
might miss the references to New York and think it all takes place in 
Italy.
Many scenes  or parts thereof ought to delight spectators. Other 
viewers may have mixed feelings because of the construction. They 
probably wish that Illuminata would illuminate us more than it does.
  One thing is clear to me: Never start an affair with a thespian. You 
will never know (nor will she or he) what is performance and what is 
reality.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ILLUMINATA (director/writer: John Turturro; screenplay: based on the
play by Brandon Cole; cinematographer: Harris Savides; cast: Katherine
Borowitz (Rachel), Beverly D'Angelo (Astergourd, theater owner), John
Turturro (Tuccio), Christopher Walken (Bevalaqua, the critic), Ben
Gazzara (Old Flavio, actor), Matthew Sussman (Piero), Bill Irwin (Marco,
actor), Donal McCann (Pallenchio, theater owner), Susan Sarandon
(Celimene, aging diva), Rufus Sewell (Dominique), Georgina Cates
(Simone), Leo Bassi (Beppo, the clown), Aida Turturro (Marta), David
Thornton (Orlandini), 1998)
Illuminata is set in New York City, at the turn of the twentieth
century. A talented but struggling repertory troupe is doing a play by
Giovanni Verga "Cavalleria Rusticana." The resident-playwright Tuccio
(Turturro) finds an opening to get his play on stage, as one of the
actors, Piero (Sussman), in that play, faints while in the middle of his
performance. Tuccio immediately gets the troupe to perform his latest,
but unfinished work, Illuminata. It is Turturro's love message to the
theater.
This play-within-a-film, much like Bullets Over Broadway or Shakespeare
in Love, but not up to both of those film's achievements, nevertheless
it manages to develop a somewhat pleasing storyline and some amusing
comic moments. It is flawed by its uneven drama and how easy it is to
lose track of what is going on because of all the characters the story
tries to portray.
But there were two memorable performances, one by Katherine Borowitz and
the other by Christopher Walken: Rachel (Katherine Borowitz-in real-life
she is Mrs. Turturro) is the star of the show and the girlfriend of
Tuccio. She is caught by her real love for the playwright and for the
theater, trying to figure out which love comes first. The second
memorable performer is Umberto Bevalaqua (Walken), the detested theater
critic, who plays the part of a fop, excessively showing his outrageous
mannerisms. He sports a  frizzled hairstyle, and to keep others at bay,
he uses an acerbic wit, sparing no one from his vanity and arrogance. A
bad review from him, could destroy a play. He, thusly, roasts Tuccio's
unfinished opus, telling him to rewrite the ending. It turns out that he
is interested in one of the minor performers, Marco (Irwin), who is
encouraged by the other performers for the good of the play to see him
and try to hold off his sexual advances by saying that he took a vow of
chastity. The scene works as farce, and it gives the story some needed
life. Umberto is regally courted by the theater owners, Astergourd
(Beverly) and Pallenchio (Donal), who cater to his odd whims. When
Walken is onscreen the film has movement and excitement, when he's not,
the film just doesn't hold up as well.
Life in the theater gets juxtaposed within the film; its story going
back and forth with contrasting details, such as the latest gossip or
romance, the vanity of the players, and the strange love they have for
the theater. The love affairs of the actors, on stage and off, become
the whole purpose of the film. The main story is about the love affair
between Rachel and Tuccio, who are constantly rehearsing this difficult
play he wrote as they waver in their devotion for each other. Their
romance outside the play mirrors their romance in the film, and one can
therefore imply that it mirrors their real life romance.
Susan Sarandon as Celimene, is in a stereotypical role as an aging diva,
always acting, looking for romance, as she tries to lure Tuccio. She
easily handles this charming but not too difficult role. Georgina Cates
is the ingenue, who has eyes for the attractive Dominique (Rufus
Sewell). Aida Turturro, the real-life cousin of the director, plays a
part that makes good use of her huge breasts. Her desires are for
Pallenchio.
The play and the film was overloaded with a flavor of Italian, it only
seemed odd that the film was staged in New York and not in Milan.
I can't see a general audience taking to this strictly for the theater
crowd film; it is made mostly for those who love to know what goes on
behind the scenes and those who are theater buffs. I applaud the effort
and the originality of the film; but, as for what resulted, I was not
overjoyed with this overstuffed production.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
