Title
Review for Hercules Returns (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark Takacs
Directed by David Parker
ScreenWriter Des Mangan
35mm / color / 82 mins / Australia 1993
Rated: M+ (15 years and over - medium level course language)
Tak rating: see it once, pay full price
TV-Guide(tm)-Review
-------------------
     When an *unsubtitled* Italian version of a hideously campy Italian
muscle-man movie arrives at the Gala Opening of a new theatre, the
three person crew redubs the movie *live* from the projection booth, with
hilarious results.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     I've done it.  You've probably done it.  You're sitting up late
one night watching an incredibly *bad* movie of some sort, and you start
throwing in your own versions of the lines -- "Don't shoot me yet, I
neeed to flex first!", things like that.
     Well, the team "Double Take" (Des Mangan & Sally Patience) has
turned this concept into a hilarious and profitable business.  It
started March 1986 at an underground cinema in Sydney, Australia when
they rescripted and redubbed ASTRO ZOMBIES live to a forty-person
audience.  A few months later they were playing in Sydney's arthouse
theatre, sold out five hours before the show, and turned away 600
people.
     Now director David Parker and producer Philip Jaroslow brings the
"Double Take" team to the movies with HERCULES RETURNS.  There's
really only maybe fifteen or twenty minutes of "wrapper" -- the rest of
the film is the old Italian movie with Double Take's redubs and
occasional shots of the chaos going on in the projection booth as the
characters bustle to provide the live dialogue.
     The movie was quite a hit at the `93 Seattle Film Festival, and
the audience I saw it with was laughing out loud throughout the movie.
The general style makes me want to use adjectives like "madcap" and
"zany"; it's certainly not a dark or intellectual comedy.  The humor is
definitely adult: Hercules grabs the queen's daughter, Labia, which
prompts the queen to say "Get your hands off my Labia!"  The original
incredibly bad Italian sets (really fake looking leftover stuff) also
adds to the fun.
     The provides a good laugh, and does so in a refreshing and
original style (I have a low tolerance for stupid/bumbling idiot and
slapstick comedy).  It's well worth your $6.50. (or whatever)
Press Summary Synopsis
----------------------
     Frustrated by the uncaring style of his megalith employer, the
Kent Cinema Corporation, film buff Brad McBain decides to take on the
big boys by opening his own old style cinema.  Cartoon shorts,
usherettes with trays and much nostalgic razamatazz will accompany the
Gala Charity Opening Night of the very same Sword'n'Sandal
Italo-Spanish miniature epic which last graced the screen of the now
revamped Picture Palace 30 years ago.
     But super-egotistical Kent Corporation boss Sir Michael Kent will
stop at nothing to crush opposition in "his" town. He sabotages
McBain's big night by ensuring on all-Italian, *non*-subtitled versions
of the 1964 sub-classic HERCULES, SAMSON, MACHISMO AND URSUS ARE
INVINCIBLE is delivered, forcing McBain, his weird projectionist
Sprocket and hard-hitting publicist Lisa to come up with entirely new
dialogue and sound effects -- improvised on the spot from the
projection booth.
     In their new version, Hercules becomes a frustrated cabaret
artiste from ancient Greece, desperate for a gig.  Sent by Zeus to the
Pink Parthenon nightclub in Climidia, he is forced to take on fellow
iron pumper Samson (now a wimp who cries at the thought of violence).
If victorious, Hercules will marry the nightclub owner's daughter,
Labia -- and thus clench a permanent booking at the club.
Problematically, Labia seems more romantically entangled with
Testiculi.  Ursus is now a drunken Scottish bouncer at a local bar.
Multiple punch-ups ensue, along with much damage to paper mache
columns, and poor Hercules' sexuality is deeply challenged along the
way....
     Brad's ex-employer and would-be nemesis Kent, on seeing the
audience in an uproar of approval, is now even more determined to undo
his upstart competitor.  The insanity soon spreads from the projection
booth into the cinema, and then onto the foyer for the big final
showdown.
