Title
Review for Borrowers, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: John Goodman, Jim Broadbent, Mark Williams, Hugh Laurie, Bradley
Pierce, Celia Imire, Flora Newbigin, Tom Felton, Raymond Pickard
Director: Peter Hewitt
Screenplay: Gavin Scott and John Kamps based on the books by Mary Norton
Having seen the Mary Norton books in the library as a child, I had
always thought they were called ‘The Burrowers' - as in people who
tunnel holes in the ground and not THE BORROWERS - as in I would like to
borrow your pen. So I was pleasantly surprised (forgive my ignorance),
that this movie was more than just about little people living like
rabbits underground, but about little people surviving in a world of
giants (humans).
Numerous comparisons can be made with this movie. One of which would be
MOUSE HUNT, in which there is almost an identical scene of a pest
control freak trying to exterminate, in this instance, tiny children. I
absolutely detested MOUSE HUNT for its mindless, commercialism. However,
I feel that THE BURROWERS has a little more to offer than, ‘This is a
mouse, this is a house, and this is about the level of my IQ.' In this
instance we have more than mere running about, blowing things up and
brainless tomfoolery. Ocious P. Potter (John Goodman) is trying to tear
down the house belonging to the Lenders, in which the Borrower Clock
family live. Unless the family will is found they will be made homeless.
Other comparisons can also be made to THE LAND OF THE GIANTS. There is a
wonderful opening scene, where the Borrowers are exploring the Lender's
kitchen, using tiny mountain climbing equipment made of paper clips,
thread etc. The initial feel of the two shows is much the same, except
the sets and special effects are far superior here and this is a comedy,
not a drama. The final scene is reminiscent of GULLIVER'S TRAVELS. If
you think that these little people can be easily squished under your
boot, then think again when they bring a giant down.
I think this is quite a fun movie for the family. Adults who have read
the Mary Norton books will probably relive memories of their childhood,
whilst a new generation be introduced to THE BORROWERS. However, sadly,
I believe these books are no longer in print.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Homer Yen
Did you ever misplace a comb, only never to find it again?  Did you ever
wonder why you keep losing your keys?  Why is there always one sock
missing when you take your laundry out of the dryer?  Maybe it's because
you're not the only tenants living in your house.  If you look under the
floorboards or behind the cracks of the walls, you may indeed learn that
you have housemates called "The Borrowers".
Borrowers are little people standing no more than several inches high.
Because they scurry around like mice, are extremely intelligent, and
have never been seen, they are something of a myth.  When the 'Beings'
of the house are away, they come out to pilfer batteries, food, and
other supplies.  Credit cards are used as doors, dental floss is used
for rope and thimbles are used as pots. 
The central story focuses on the family of the house, named the Lenders.
Supposedly, the house belongs to them, which was stipulated in a will,
but the scheming lawyer, played by John Goodman complete with oily hair
and villainy mustache, claims that a will was never made, and by
default, the house belongs to him.  He plans to level the house and then
to turn it into a deluxe condominium complex.  Of course, this would not
only force the Lenders to move out but would also force the Borrowers to
leave as well.  Ah...but there's no surprise that there is indeed a will
and when the Borrower children take back the will, the ogrish Goodman
comes after them with an exterminator.
But there is more to this movie than just an entertaining story and
watching the little people achieve escapes that would impress any
magician.  The humor is physical and very funny at times thanks to
Goodman's abilities.  He gets a face full of insecticide, electrocuted
and tremendously tormented.  Meanwhile, the visual aspect of the film is
a joy.  With a fairy-tale look right out of Mary Poppins or Wallace and
Gromit videos, the movie achieves a whimsical adventure that allows you
to sit back and enjoy the ride.  A climatic scene takes place in a milk
bottling plant.  Watch as the littlest one gets trapped inside a bottle
filled with milk as everyone tries to save him as the evil lawyer closes
in on them.
This 83 minute offering makes a terrific matinee and a great antidote if
you're suffering the blues.  Of course, be mindful that this is a film
based on a children's story, so if you don't go at night, prepare for an
audience full of kids.  Clever, cute, inventive, and fantastical, this
movie will bring out the inner child in all of us.

Author
Richard Scheib
UK/USA. 1997. Director - Peter Hewitt, Screenplay - John Kamps & Gavin 
Scott, Based on the Novels by Mary Norton, Producers - Tim Bevan, Eric 
Fellner & Rachel Talaly, Photography - Trevor Brooker & John Fenner, 
Music - Harry Gregson-Williams, Score Producer - Hans Zimmer, Visual 
Effects Supervisor - Peter Chiang, Digital Visual Effects - The Digital 
Film Co & The Magic Camera Co (Supervisor - Alan Marques), Special 
Effects Supervisor - Digby Milner, Production Design - Gemma Jackson, 
Supervising Art Director - Jim Morahan. Production Company - Working 
Title Films.
John Goodman (Ocious P. Potter), Flora Newbigin (Arrietty Clock), Jim 
Broadbent (Pod Clock), Bradley Pierce (Pete Lender), Mark Williams 
(Exterminator Jeff), Tom Felton (Peagreen Clock), Raymond Pickard 
(Spiller), Celia Imrie (Homily Clock), Hugh Laurie (Officer Steady), 
Aden Gillett (Joe Lender), Doon Mackichan (Victoria Lender)
Plot: The Clock family are Borrowers, tiny people who live hidden inside 
the walls of a human house and secretly sneak out to borrow objects for 
their own use. Teenage Arrietty is found by and befriends a human boy, 
Pete Lender, just in time to learn the human owners are being evicted 
and the house to be demolished by lawyer Ocious P. Potter. Pete's 
attempt to move them goes wrong and Arrietty and her brother are left 
behind where they witness Potter obtaining the deed that rightfully 
belongs to the Lenders. Grabbing it, they are then frenetically pursued 
by Potter who brings in an exterminator to put them down at all costs.
This is the third adaption of Mary Norton's popular series of children's 
books about the adventures of a family of tiny people who live in the 
wainscotting of a human house. The first book was first published in 
1952 and led to four sequels between then and 1982. The first film 
adaption was a little seen production made in 1973 about which I can 
find next to no information. The second and best was two sets of 
six-part half-hour British-made tv serials which aired in 1993 and 1994 
respectively, adapting the first four books under the umbrella title 
`The Borrowers'. The British serials and this 1997 Anglo-American 
co-production make for interesting comparisons. The tv serials had a 
quiet sense of wondrous adventure that was balanced with a droll 
understatement in a way that was quite sublime. On the other hand this 
film, while retaining the basic idea and the same principal characters, 
has thrown out most other semblances to turn the books into a big-screen 
special effects extravaganza. Case in point being the scene where 
Arrietty befriends the human boy and introduces him to her parents - the 
first serial took several episodes to develop the friendship before it 
was found out by her parents; the film doesn't even bother with the 
scene of taking him to meet her parents but simply cuts from Pod saying 
he will never accept the idea to the boy placing them in a box to be 
moved. Here the books have been reworked to turn them into a take on 
`Home Alone', with John Goodman having been written in as an odious 
lawyer whose sole purpose is to act as a slapstick butt of the ingenuity 
of the little people.
But if one is prepared to take the film on this level, it does such with 
a considerable degree of energy and visual invention. The balance of big 
and small sets and special effects is amazingly good and there are some 
delightful set-pieces with characters trapped on lit lightbulbs; 
pole-vaulting across sinks, skidding along pieces of soap and 
trampolining off appliance handles to get across a kitchen; becoming 
trapped inside the fridge in an attempt to steal ice-cream; and 
enthralling scenes racing to avoid the villain as he smashes a hammer 
through the wall and so forth. But the film is only really constructed 
around these effects set-pieces and, while it entertains a good deal, 
one wishes it had slowed a little to allow the story more time.
There is a rather bizarre design scheme to the whole film which tries to 
create a fantastacized 1950s Midlands industrial city landscape - sort 
of like a combination of `Coronation Street' (if one can imagine 
`Coronation Street''s brick backstreets with airships moored above them) 
and the Gothic industrial nightmare city out of the first `Batman' film 
(but with the lights turned up). And in a gag that has been stolen 
directly from Peter Jackson's `Meet the Feebles' all the vehicles in the 
film are Morris Minors, including the joke of having the villain of the 
piece ride in a black stretch Morris Minor.


Author
Matt Williams
Mary Norton's children's book series, The Borrowers, has been made into
several below-average television movies.  So, I wasn't too enthused as I
entered the theater for the big-screen debut of the minute clan.  But I
was in for a shock, The Borrowers is actually a thoroughly delightful
movie with plenty of good laughs and even some decent special effects.
The Lender family is being thrown out of their longtime home.  Their
aunt, who owned the property, never left a will.  Now, an unscrupulous
lawyer, Ocious Potter (John Goodman) plans to demolish the house and
replace it with an ultra-modern housing development.
But the Lenders are not alone in their house.  Living under the
floorboards is a family of Borrowers, 4 inch tall people who make their
living as scavengers from the human "beans" above.  The Clock family of
borrowers is as distressed as the Lenders, especially once they discover
the evil Potter actually has a copy of the will which leaves the home to
the Lenders.
So it is up to the Clocks (Pod (Jim Broadbent) and Homily (Celia Imrie),
along with their kids, Arrietty (Flora Newbigin) and Peagreen (Tom
Felton)) to recover the will and save the household.  But when Potter
learns of the tiny people, he enlists the skills of Exterminator Jeff
(Mark Williams) to kill off the clan.
There's plenty of attention to detail in The Borrowers, especially in
the furnishings of The Clock family house, made out of lost board game
parts and credit cards. The background details are nearly as rich as the
entertaining story.
The various predicaments of the Clock family are clever and thrilling.
Based on an original story, the screenwriters did a good job at
imagining all the potential and unusual perils that could exist for a
4-inch tall person.
As the villain, John Goodman's performance veers on the edge of being
over-the-top. But his performance suits the role well, and he does very
well in the film's many slapstick moments.
With a nearly seamless mix of oversized sets, bluescreen shots and CGI,
the special effects in The Borrowers are very well done.  There are a
few times when you can spot the effects at work, but none of them are so
jarring that you lose the suspension of disbelief.
Hopefully The Borrowers will surpass the curse of being labeled a
children-only movie, for it is surprisingly entertaining and fun to
watch.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Andrew Cunningham
**** out of *****
The problem with kids films is that so many parents haven't taught their
kids not to talk during the movie.  The other problem is that you have to
sit though previews for movies starring Barney.  The last problem is that
most of them are terrible, most of them are from Disney, only ones from
Disney make money, and only ones that AREN'T from Disney are any good.  The
Borrowers (for once) takes an English book and keeps most of the actors
English, including all the Borrowers.  Some of the Beans are American, but
the whole setting is ambiguous and the cityscapes are surreal, they'd fit
in in a German expressionist film.  This film has been advertised as a
blatant Home Alone meets Honey I Shrunk the Kids pile of crap, but it
isn't.  It does tend to focus more on the danger aspect of Borrowing,
nearly getting caught, being seen and chased, etc., but that's a good
thing.  It's more cinematic, less stagy, and more interesting.  The sets,
costumes, and effects are all great.  They start with the illustrations
from the book, and get more creative -- a lot of the Borrowers wear clothes
made from rubber gloves.  The story line is tons of fun, and, though it
doesn't bear any relation to the books, it brings in all the best elements
from them, and creates some new ones.  A Borrower movie without Spiller is
not a Borrower movie, and he's also the best actor among the kids.  He's
the only one who can act against a blue screen.  This is the main problem
with the film -- it mainly focuses on the children, Arrietty (Flora
Newbigin), her brother Peagreen (Tom Felton), Spiller (Raymond Pickard),
and a child Bean (Bradley Pierce, Jumanji), all of whom are reasonably good
actors, but when seen in an effects shot, big things and small things at
once, go really bad really fast.  The scenes in which the Bean talks to
Arrietty are painful.  A pile of great comic actors play the adults, Celia
Imrie (In the Bleak Midwinter, and in Star Wars Episode 1) as Homily and
Jim Broadbent (Bullets Over Broadway) talking too slowly as Pod, John
Goodman as the villain, Mark Williams as an exterminator, and Hugh Laurie
as a policeman.  Jim Broadbent is normally a very good actor, but I have no
idea what he was trying for here -- at times it seems he's talking slowly
and clearly to ensure he's understood by the Beans, but he talks that way
to his family as well -- sometimes.  He looks exactly right -- everyone
does.  The cast seems to have been assembled more by look than skill, but
it works out somehow.  Probably because The Borrowers isn't a performance
driven film.  It's pure entertainment, with a good script that never allows
itself to be buried in stupidity like The Indian in the Cupboard did.  I
was really pleased with the film, it captured the spirit of the books, and
was lots of fun to watch.
-- 
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Academy/8034/
Remove no spam to reply. 
"Drive carefully but recklessly", Mama,  Child's Toy
"The only excercise I take is walking behind the coffins of friends who
took exercise." Peter O'Toole

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Peter Hewitt
Written By: John Kamps, Gavin Scott
Produced By:  Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Rachel Talalay
Cast: John Goodman, Jim Broadbent, Mark Williams, Hugh Laurie, Bradley
Pierce, Flora Newbigin, Tom Felton
Runtime:  83 min.
Production Company: Polygram
Rated PG: mild peril, crude humor
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        I remember that when I saw Honey, I Shrunk the Kids at a much younger
age, I was less impressed with that film than I am with The Borrowers
now, in my twenties.  I never go into a kid-oriented film expecting
something as crafty and entertaining as this.  The special effects and
sets are all extremely good, and the characters played by couple of
great actors (John Goodman and Jim Broadbent) make this an all-around
pleasant experience.  
        The film is essentially about a family of small people, called
Borrowers.  At the head of the family is Pod Clock (Broadbent) and his
wife, Homily Clock (Celia Imrie).   They have two children, Arrietty
(Flora Newbigin) and Peagreen (Tom Felton).   They live in the nooks and
crannies of a house that belongs to the Lenders--a family of big, silly
beings (that's what the Borrowers call humans).  The Lenders have a son,
Pete (Bradley Pierce), who discovers the Borrowers and befriends them.  
When the Lenders are forced to move out of their house by the evil
businessman Oscious P. Potter (Goodman), the Borrowers learn that Potter
has actually stolen a will that will declare the Lenders as the rightful
owners of the house.  It is then up to little Arrietty and Peagreen to
get ahold of the will.  Potter, of course, finds out about the little
people and brings in an exterminator (Mark Williams), but they are no
match for the Borrowers.
        I suppose the success of this film owes a lot to the presence of John
Goodman.   Goodman, in all of his jolly hugeness, proves that he can
both be evil and funny at the same time.  He never goes into the
unwanted realm of overacting, either, so there aren't really any moments
in The Borrowers that are painful to watch.  And the great Jim Broadbent
is wonderfully entertaining as Pod Clock (I love that name), the British
ringleader of his family of small people.
        The film is filled with great sets and special effects.  Director Peter
Hewitt does a professional job of making everyday places--like the
kitchen, for instance--seem threateningly large.  The sets are extremely
detailed and authentic, and the film is surprisingly atmospheric.  The
special-effects, as well, are some of the best in recent memory:  the
integration of small and large people has never been done as smoothly as
this.  There are also some truly funny moments, most of them including
Goodman and a very strange police officer (played by Hugh Laurie).  
        The Borrowers is a fun, imaginative little film.  It's the kind of
movie that parents can enjoy at the same time as their kids.  It's also
that rare kind of film that will keep kids' attention despite the lack
of gratuitous violence and gore.   And, despite the fact that it is
intended for kids, I can recommend this film to anyone--I imagine it
will hold the attention of even the most skeptical teenagers.  

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A bottling plant can be a dangerous place if you're only a few
inches tall.  Stuck in a milk bottle on its way down the assembly line
to be filled, you are naturally consumed with terror.  And it doesn't
help if you're a little boy who hates milk anyway.
     For less enlightened readers, who've never read Mary Norton's
novels, a word of explanation is in order.  The world is divided in
(human) beans, that's us, and Borrowers.  Borrowers are actually
further divided into innies and outies, much like bellybuttons.  Innies
are those Borrowers that live inside your walls and under your
floorboards.  Outies make their way in the more treacherous outside
world.  You've never seen them, of course, but when a sock seems to
have disappeared from your drawer, it was probably a Borrower who took
it.
     THE BORROWERS tells the story of the Clock family -- father Pod
(Jim Broadbent), mother Homily, (Celia Imrie), daughter Arietty (Flora
Newbigin) and son Peagreen (Tom Felton) -- who live in the walls of the
Lender family's house.  A perfectly cast John Goodman plays an odious,
real estate developer named Ocious P. Potter, who takes possession of
the Lender family's house through nefarious means.  To keep possession
Potter has to find and destroy the Lender aunt's will that is hidden in
the walls of their house.  This pits the Borrowers and the Lender's son
Pete (Bradley Pierce) against the evil Potter and a good-spirited
exterminator named Jeff (Mark Williams), who calls himself "the pest's
pest."
     Among the film's many delights are Gemma Jackson's sets and Marie
France's costumes, both worthy of Oscar consideration.  The world as
viewed from four inches high has never been more interesting and
realistic, thanks to special effects that seem so natural.
     Among the many little worlds created, the refrigerator is one of
the best.  What are those magnets on the front for?  Why, to make
climbing up easier.  After Arietty and Peagreen scale the Lender's
refrigerator, they use a Popsicle stick to pry open the door of the
freezer, and, once inside, the Arctic-style landscape is amazing.  Even
better is when they fall down the shaft carrying the ice cubes and
almost get caught when the Lenders push the ice button.  Think of the
horrors of having ice boulders being flung at your head.
     The outside world looks like an English industrial town of the
1930s, but the sets have a Dickensian look.  To further enrich the
complicated time placement, Potter makes calls on his solid-gold cell
phone.  All of this is filmed by John Fenner and Trevor Brooker with a
rust colored cinematography that gives the picture a dreamy, nostalgic
look.
     The screenplay by Gavin Scott and John Kamps never makes the
mistake so common today in kids' movies of setting the tone too dark.
This is an imaginative environment where the Borrowers creativity
constantly saves the day.
     The movie teaches many a good lesson along the way.  The serious
father, who like all of the Borrowers has a whimsically fun hairstyle,
lectures his children on exactly what a Borrower is.  "A Borrower is
quiet, conscientious, and inconspicuous," he explains.  "We don't
steal; we borrow."
     For those of you who liked the idea of tiny creatures living in
walls battling a villain and an exterminator but hated MOUSE HUNT, THE
BORROWERS is just picture for you.
     The ending, straight out of a Brueghel painting, has a mass of
Borrowers so sweet that it may bring tears of joy to your eyes.
     "We're not vermin," the Borrower father tells us.  "We're not
creeps.  And we're not pests.  We're Borrowers."  With the courage of a
noble race, he explains that, "We may be small but heaven help anyone
who thinks he might squish us."
     THE BORROWERS runs a fast 1:23.  It is rated PG for cartoonish
violence and would be fine for kids four or five and up as well as
adults with or without any kids.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, highly recommends the movie.  His
favorite scenes are of the army of Borrowers and of the powered skate.
His friend Steven, age 9, thought the movie was really funny.  His
favorite scenes were of the rocket-like skate and of the bad guy
getting tied up.  Steven's twin John, obviously also 9, thought it was
a wonderful movie.  He liked the way the tiny Borrowers were able to
outsmart the beans.

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE BORROWERS
(Polygram)
Starring:  John Goodman, Flora Newbigin, Tom Felton, Bradley Pierce, Mark
Williams, Jim Broadbent, Celia Imrie, Raymond Pickard.
Screenplay:  Gavin Scott and John Kamps, based on the novels by Mary
Norton.
Producers:  Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner and Rachel Talalay.
Director:  Peter Hewitt.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild vulgarity)
Running Time:  83 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     THE BORROWERS is the kind of goofy charmer of a family adventure film
Hollywood should be able to make it its sleep, if only it would bother.
Instead, it took British Working Title Films to bring Mary Norton's
popular children's novels to life.  The premise posits the existence of
4-inch-tall beings called Borrowers who live beneath the floorboards and
in the walls of human homes, making their living off the bits and pieces
we always seem to be misplacing -- a loose button for a plate here, a sock
for a bed there.  In THE BORROWERS, a Borrower family called the Clocks --
papa Pod (Jim Broadbent), mama Homily (Celia Imrie) and children Arietty
(Flora Newbigin) and Peagreen (Tom Felton) -- faces homelessness when
nasty real estate developer Ocious P. Potter (John Goodman) schemes
unscrupulously to nab the home of their human hosts, the Lenders.
     The Clock family's quest to thwart Potter's plans, aided by young
Pete Lender (Bradley Pierce), anchors an energetic story which begs a
couple of very important questions.  First:  why can't more films employ
special effects with THE BORROWERS' unobtrusive whimsy?  Visual effects
supervisor Peter Chiang, production designer Gemma Jackson and
cinematographers John Fenner and Trevor Brooker have joined forces to
fashion a warm, visually enthralling world for the film's characters, in
which the oversized props and camera trickery serve a purpose besides
calling attention to themselves.  Humans and Borrowers interact
convincingly, creating wild and thoroughly entertaining set pieces.  It's
a great-looking, lively piece of work with neat bits of throwaway business
-- a Monopoly card hung on the Clocks' wall like a Pop Art showpiece --
and a crisp pace.
     The second, more disspiriting question:  when and why did it become
obligatory for every children's film to aim for cheap chuckles from bodily
functions?  For most of its running time, THE BORROWERS' slapstick comedy
is disarming in its cartoonish innocence -- foam in the face, cheese on
the head, exaggerated electrocutions and pratfalls.  Why, then, do we need
to see Peagreen immersed in a massive pile of dog droppings?  Why the
running gag about a flatulent hound?  Why an off-hand comment from Pete to
his parents that he "has to pee?"  Is it really so difficult to fill 83
minutes with entertainment a parent can share with a child sans
embarassment?  There's so much immagination throughout THE BORROWERS that
it's even more disappointing to find it swinging so typically below the
belt.
     There's nothing particularly ground-breaking about the basic
story-line of THE BORROWERS, which melds the recent MOUSE HUNT with a teen
alienation sub-plot as Arietty longs to find other Borrowers.  The appeal
of the film comes not from narrative wackiness, but from the complementary
pairing of John Goodman's snarling villainy with the storybook delights of
the film's overall look and feel.  Sure, it stumbles occasionally in the
ways its most like most ostensibly "family films" of recent years.  It's
the ways in which THE BORROWERS is least like its genre cousins which
should make it satisfying matinee viewing.  This is fantasy escapism which
doesn't make you feel stupid for escaping.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
If youre reading this review, the chances are youve seen the posters and
perhaps even trailers for The Borrowers.  So Ill address the question that
everyone wants answered: what exactly are they?  Do they bear close similarities
to the mouse in Mouse Hunt, or are they perhaps a Home Alone Macaulay Culkin
type being?  Well theyre a little bit of both.
The Borrowers like to consider themselves as cautious, alert, inconspicuous and
good at climbing.  But if this is the case, why do they end up being chased
across the town by a greedy lawyer, a clumsy exterminator, a smelly hound and a
big-eyed kid on a bike?
Pod (Jim Broadbent), Homily (Celia Imrie) and their kids, Peagreen (Tom Felton)
and Arrietty (Flora Newbigin) are our Borrowers.  They live under the
floorboards of a big house and borrow items from the residents living there.
But when the human being familys Aunt dies (who previously owned the house),
the greedy and self righteous lawyer Ocious Potter (John Goodman), tells the
family that a will was never found and the house was now officially his.  As
they begin to move out, the confused Borrowers get tangled up in these human
matters and stumble into danger when Peagreen and Arrietty get up to mischief
and attempt to foil the evil Potters plans.
It came as no surprise to me to find The Borrowers a fairly ordinary collection
of thrills and spills for kids, with a few exceptions.  One of my obvious
highlights was a tense scene involving a couple of borrowers, John Goodman, a
light bulb and ruler.  Sound exciting?  Probably not, but is a treat to see
simple everyday household items turned into life saving objects for these tiny
little people.
Although The Borrowers may seem at first to be a delightfully different kids
flick, but really its very similar to what weve seen many times before.  The
bad guy, John Goodman, will chase the little critters all over the place  but
when he finally catches them, rather than simply stepping on them hell conjure
up some evil and deranged death plan. Of course, as he turns his back on them
they will miraculously escape to freedom just to be caught again later on.
But poor John  the first time he gets caught out by these tiny beings is his
last  thats kids flicks for you, eh?


Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: John Goodman, Jim Broadbent, Mark Williams, Hugh Laurie, 
      Bradley Pierce, Celia Imire, Flora Newbigin, Tom Felton, 
      Raymond Pickard
Director: Peter Hewitt
Producers: Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Rachel Telalay
Screenplay: Gavin Scott and John Kamps based on the books by Mary Norton
Cinematography: John Fenner, Trevor Brooker
Music: Harry Gregson-Williams
U.S. Distributor: Polygram Films
     A missing cufflink.  A misplaced watch.  A lost set of keys.  In 
general, we attribute these absences to a faulty memory, but could there 
be another explanation?  What if there are little people, half 
Lilliputian and half leprechaun, who delight in filching such items out 
from under our noses?  They live under the floorboards of our houses, 
and only emerge when the coast is clear to do their "borrowing," then 
are gone before any human can see them.  That's the premise of THE 
BORROWERS, a new family film from director Peter Hewitt based on the 
series of children's books by Mary Norton.
     Loosely speaking, THE BORROWERS belongs to the HOME ALONE genre 
(clever, little underdogs defeat big, bulky bad guys while inflicting 
enormous physical discomfort upon the villains), which might be 
something of a surprise to those who hold the Norton books in high 
esteem.  This movie comes across very much like the aforementioned HOME 
ALONE meets GULLIVER'S TRAVELS, and bears more than a passing 
resemblance to last year's MOUSEHUNT, which was also about something 
hiding behind the walls and under the floors (although there it was a 
mouse; here, it's tiny people).
     THE BORROWERS presents its tale from two perspectives:  that of the 
normal-sized humans and that of the 4-inch high borrowers.  The fact 
that there's solid characterizations on both ends of the size spectrum 
is what makes this film more successful than many features with similar 
skeletal plotlines.  In THE BORROWERS, the viewer isn't forced to 
identify with an animatronic rodent or an irritating child actor.  
Instead, the film makers offer Pod Clock (Jim Broadbent); his wife, 
Homily (Celia Imire); and their children, teenager Arrietty (Flora 
Newbigin), and nine-year old Peagreen (Tom Felton).  All four, despite 
their diminutive size, are solidly-developed and likable.  Meanwhile, on 
the larger scale, there's Pete Lender (Bradley Pierce), the human boy 
who befriends the borrower family.  The villain is the nefarious Ocious 
P. Potter (John Goodman).
     The story goes something like this:  Pete's family is being forced 
to move out of their house because the unscrupulous Potter has stolen 
the will that leaves the property to them.  The house is to be torn down 
to make way for apartment buildings (the first dwellings in a proposed 
development called "Pottersville" -- I wonder if someone saw IT'S A 
WONDERFUL LIFE?), so Pete, who recently discovered that a family of 
borrowers live under the floorboards, informs his new friends that they 
have to depart.  However, in transit to the new house, the borrower 
children become separated from their parents.  Arrietty and Peagreen 
return to the old dwelling in time to learn that Potter has cheated 
Pete's family out of their rightful property.  So the two young 
borrowers set out to rectify matters.
     Much of the violence found in THE BORROWERS is of the live-action 
cartoon variety -- that is to say, it's wildly exaggerated and no one 
really gets hurt.  Overall, it's not as mean-spirited as we've come to 
expect from this sort of movie.  Aside from a massive electrical shock, 
nothing horrible happens to anyone.  No irons fall on people's heads, no 
one tumbles out of a third-story window, and no one gets tarred and 
feathered.  "Tame" might be the best word to describe scenes in which 
the villain is spraypainted in the face, has a needle stuck in his 
posterior, and gets a vat of liquid cheese dumped on his head.  
     In bringing this comedic fantasy-adventure to life, director Peter 
Hewitt (BILL AND TED'S BOGUS JOURNEY) is ably assisted by a fine troupe 
of actors who hail from both sides of the Atlantic.  John Goodman, who 
seems to be omnipresent these days (this is the third movie in four days 
that I've seen him in -- the other two are BLUES BROTHERS 2000 and THE 
BIG LEBOWSKI), enjoys himself immensely as the larger-than-life Potter, 
who doesn't have a kind bone in his body.  Jim Broadbent, the fine 
British thespian, brings life and character to Pod.  Newcomer Flora 
Newbigin is incandescent as Arrietty.  Amusing supporting roles are 
filled by Mark Williams (as Potter's henchman, Jeff, the "Pest Control 
Operative") and Hugh Laurie (as an ultra-helpful policeman).
     One of the nicest surprises about THE BORROWERS is that it's not 
only charming, but genuinely funny.  Granted, there aren't many belly 
laughs, but the screenplay offers plenty of opportunities for smiles and 
chuckles, and there's nothing here that kids need to be shielded from.  
Likewise, THE BORROWERS stays at a high enough level to involve adults.  
Aside from the solid cast and the entertaining script, the movie also 
boasts an impressive look.  The city where THE BORROWERS takes place 
resembles a generic 1950s American metropolis with a slightly gothic 
appearance -- sort of a lighter version of BATMAN's Gotham City.  From 
time-to-time, some offbeat bit of humor coupled with the creative set 
design generates a distant echo of Terry Gilliam's brilliant BRAZIL.  
Best of all, however, is that THE BORROWERS doesn't limit its capacity 
for pleasure to any particular age group.  It's the most delightful 
family film thus far in 1998.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"
