Title
Review for Metropolis (1927)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Fritz Lang
Writer: Fritz Lang (from the novel by Thea von Harbou)
Starring: Alfred Abel, Brigitte Helm, Gustav Fröhlich, Rudolf
Klein-Rogge
Before Orwell wrote "1984," before Aldous Huxley wrote "Brave New
World," and way before Ridley Scott directed "Blade Runner," German
director created "Metropolis," one of the oldest films to deal with the
future as bleak, if not the first.  "Metropolis" is one of the few films
that is deemed a classic, and is also brilliant besides that.  And even
if it was silent, and extremely old, I was never bored.
"Metropolis" is a world in the far future (maybe 21st century) where the
rich and elite live above ground, while the workers slave underneath the
city with horrible conditions.  The king of Metropolis is the fascist
and selfish John Frederson (Alfred Abel), who has no love for the
workers, even if they are basically running his life.  He's so feared
and respected that when he fires a worker, the worker tries to shoot
himself.
One day, his son, Freder (Gustav Fröhlich), is hanging around in his
Pleasure Garden with some people, and a mysterious woman enters - Maria
(Brigitte Helm) - with a bunch of kids, who are the children of the
workers.  She causes him to actually take a peak at the workers and
their environment, and he unfortunately witnesses a horrific accident,
which claims the lives of some of the workers.  From that point on, he
has total sympathy for the workers, and will try his best to be their
futuristic Moses.
Meanwhile, John has met with the twisted scientist/inventor Rotwang
(Rudolf Klein-Rogge), who lives and works in a bizarre little wooden
house in the midst of the giant city.  It turns out Rotwang has invented
a robot who can do everything the workers do, only better, thus
rendering the workers obsolete and expendable.  But as the two learn
about the rebellious workers, John decides to try and make the robot
look just like that of Maria, who is the rebel's official or unofficial
leader and philosopher.
Thus begins a masterpiece of a film which satirizes the class system,
slavery, and even unions.  Besides that, it's also just one hip little
flick.  The world that it creates is totally memorble, even if it has
been ripped off in hundreds of films.  One of the many amazing things
about this flick is how innovative it is.  The special effects are
surprisingly good for a film made in 1926, with a couple
realistic-looking explosions, a robot that moves believably, and a set
which looks absolutely stunning (with buildings reaching up as far as
the eye can see, although the flying cars are just usual planes).
I was going to rent this once, but found it was only available in video
stores under the 1984 re-release.  Let me explain why you shouldn't rent
this (even though I haven't): it includes some extra scenes not put
together by the director (Fritz Lang, who would go on to direct that
serial killer classic, "M"), a tinted frame and some coloring instead of
the gorgeous black and white photography, and a musical score by...Pat
Benatar, Loverboy, and Queen, among others.  I don't know about you, but
this just causes me to cringe up, and even though I could just turn the
volume down, it would still be tinted and all messed up.  So I settled
for paying 5 bucks for a pre-recorded crap copy by "Hollywood Gold,"
which distributes old films in "highest quality EP mode," which is
pretty much an oxymoron, but sometimes it's the only way one can see
classic pictures without seeing them all screwed up.  This is the only
acceptable way to see this film, until a better non-Queen version comes
out.
At the end, we are left with just pure satisfaction.  We've gotten a
wonderfully crafted satire, all wrapped around with awesome visuals and
great effects.  Some stuff that sticks in one's mind is: the workers
being ferried off to work; the first big explosion; Rotwang showing off
his robot invention for the first time; the giant riot towards the end;
and the witch-burning scene; among several others.  Even if this weren't
a powerful narrative, it'd still be cool to watch.
"Metropolis" is one of the most innovative and amazing films I've really
ever seen, and shows that old sci-fi doesn't have to include a dumb
story and bad special effects.  "Metropolis" is a film about ideas, and
it incorporates the cool special effects not only without taking from
the story, but actually adding to it.  If you're a fan of anything
futuristic, I would recommend you check out this absolutely brilliant
masterpiece.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Gary Jones
I suppose like many people, I knew Metropolis less as a movie than as
the source of some iconic images, so it was interesting to see the whole
film, even if it was the hour-and-a-half international release version
which was crudely cobbled together from Lang's original cut.
Metropolis was first released in 1927 and depicts a futuristic city in
which armies of oppressed workers slave in huge underground power plants
to support the easy lifestyle  of the surface dwellers. The owner of the
power plant incites revolt among his own workers to provide a pretext
for further repression. He does this with the help of a crazed inventor
and his robot-woman creation (played by Brigitte Helm).
Silent films were never silent, and this showing featured an original
score performed live by Bristol band Angel Tech. This versatile three-
piece filled the small Arnolfini stage with keyboards and electronics
but also used guitar, bass and drums to provide an accompaniment
reminiscent of Orbital, Pink Floyd and Nine Inch Nails. The music
properly treated the film as a serious piece telling a serious story,
and never sought to trivialise the film as a quaint relic. 
It is impossible now to see the film as its original audience did,
regardless of which version is available. The political ideas in the
film now seem hopelessly naive and what prompted audiences to gasp in
amazement seventy years ago now often seems tacky and wildly
unconvincing, but there is plenty of cinematic invention to enjoy and
some of the power of the film remains - the depiction of the mechanical
underworld in particular is still very impressive.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
David M. Arnold
One of the real tragedies of film history is that there is no 
longer an original, authoritive print of Fritz Lang's seminal
film "Metropolis".  This review offers some observations on 
this very important silent film, and includes comments on the
various versions currently available on video.  
The closest to a truly authoritive film version today is probably 
the recent Filmmuseum Munich version, restored by Enno Patalas; 
unfortunately, that version is not yet available on video.  
"Metropolis" has been released under a number of video labels.  
Videos released by Third Coast and by Allied Artists are out of
print, and the author would appreciate any information about these
releases.  Currently, the following versions are available:
The Kino Video version, available from Kino[1] and a number of other
suppliers; Giorgio Moroder's version, out of print but still fairly
easy to come by from used video dealers[2]; and a new DVD release 
by Classic Media Holdings, available from the XOOM Website[3].
Fritz Lang produced "Metropolis" in 1927 at the German UFA studios.
This was a hugely ambitious project, involving the proverbial
cast of thousands.  The expense of this project nearly bankrupted
UFA.  
The film suffers from a rather disjointed story, which is 
complicated by the fact that different versions with different 
intertitles exist.  These different versions change details of the
story, although the framework of the narrative is the same.  The
whole point of "Metropolis" isn't about the story, anyway, it's
about visual style.  Like "Star Wars" or "Blade Runner", "Metropolis"
defined a visual style.  Many of the shots in "Metropolis" are 
still jaw-droppingly beautiful.  In 1927 they must have been nothing
short of amazing.
The story, in a nutshell, is about a city in the future with two 
populations:  A ruling class who live above ground in splendor, 
and a working class who live below ground in squalor.  By accident, 
Freder (Gustav Froehlich), the son of John Fredersen (Alfred Abel), 
the Master of the City, pursues Maria (Brigitte Helm), the daughter 
of a worker, into the depths.  Here, Freder becomes allied with the 
working class, and takes the place of an worker who drops from 
exhaustion at his machine.  Freder attends an assembly presided 
by Maria in which she preaches to the workers that they should 
exercise patience and wait for a Mediator, a Messiah who will 
forge a link between the ruling and working classes.
Meanwhile John discovers strange drawings in the possession of 
workers and requests that the mysterious scientist Rotwang (Rudolf 
Klein-Rogge) decipher them.  In his lab, Rotwang reveals to John 
his latest invention: A robot (in the form of a woman).  Rotwang 
determines that the drawings are plans of ancient catacombs beneath 
the city.  John and Rotwang descend into the depths and witness 
Maria's meeting.  John instructs Rotwang to kidnap Maria and give
her likeness to the robot (which Rotwang does in an absolutely 
brilliant sequence of silent-film acting and special effects); 
then, to send the robot to the workers to disrupt their organization.
John's motives for this are not really made clear, and differ from
version to version.
The robot, in Maria's form, incites a riot.  The workers destroy
the city's generator room, causing their underground residences to be
flooded.  Meanwhile, Freder rescues the real Maria and the workers'
children, saving them from being drowned.  Once the workers realize
there homes have been destroyed, the turn on the robot, and burn it
at the stake; this action reveals the robot for what it is.  Freder
pursues Rotwang to the roof of the cathedral, they fight and Rotwang
falls to his death.  Freder becomes the Mediator who bridges the
gulf between the rulers and the ruled as they both realize neither 
can function without the other.
"Metropolis" is a silent film, and Silent Film is a separate art form
from Modern Film.  The acting is closer to mime than in sound films, 
and is, by necessity, more melodramatic than to what modern audiences 
are accustomed.  Nonetheless, Klein-Rogge, playing the part of Rotwang, 
gives a brilliantly subtle performance.  For example, in one scene, 
Rotwang is about to lead John into the Catacombs.  In one gesture, 
Rotwang nods toward the door.  This gesture speaks volumes:  Rotwang
is contemptuous of John but must obey his master.  He doesn't really
want to go into the depths, but he must and he will.  
Brigitte Helm brilliantly plays the dual role of the true and false
Marias.  As Maria, the worker's daughter and the workers' teacher-
preacher, she is the demure girl-next-door.  As the false Maria,
the evil Maria, she looks more lascivious, more voluptuous, less 
virginal.
The real stars of the film are Lang's sets, the special effects,
and Lang's incredible sense of visual composition.  Lang was trained 
as an architect, and he designed a future city that was as organic 
as any real city.    His special effects director (Eugen Schuefftan) 
invented new techniques for integrating models with live action, and 
produced magical results.  Interiors, such as John's office, are 
marvelous interpretations of the future, overlaid with Art Deco 
elements, and they foreshadow developments such as computer displays 
and two-way video conferencing.  The climatic flood scenes as the 
workers' riot destroys their residences remain powerful today.
The film is usually considered an example of the German Expressionist
sub-genre.  Expressionist artists endeavored to invoke a mood or
emotion at the expense of realistic representations, and no one did
it better than the post-W.W.I Germans.  "Metropolis" definitely has 
Expressionist elements, although Lang kept the sets and the characters 
more realistic than in highly stylized Expressionist films like "The 
Cabinet of Dr. Caligari".  The only strongly Expressionist character
in "Metropolis" is Rotwang.  Expressionist films carry their own set 
of codes and symbols.  Some of the stilted acting style in "Metropolis" 
is simply a realization of the Expressionist codes.
"Metropolis", as originally released ran nearly three hours.  The studio
immediately demanded that it be cut, and cut again.  The result
is that many original scenes are lost forever, and that no authoritive
print remains.  A complete discussion of the various versions, and
of the somewhat conflicting plot interpretations between the film's
screenwriter (Thea von Harbou) and Fritz Lang, can be found elsewhere 
on the Web[4].
Today (early 1998), the most widely available version of "Metropolis" 
on video is from Kino Video.  It is probably the closest to an 
authoritive print as is currently available on VHS tape.  The film 
runs for 90 minutes, and looks like it was mastered from a back and 
white print that includes a jazz orchestral score on an optical 
sound track.  The film appears to have been mastered at 24fps.  
Since the original film was intended to be shown at somewhere 
between 18fps and 20fps, the action in the film is 20% to 30% too 
fast.  
The intertitles in the Kino version establish that John assigned 
Rotwang the task of creating the robot in order to create a race of 
mechanical workers that would never tire, would never need pay raises, 
and would never revolt; and, that John also commanded the robot to 
incite the insurrection that destroyed the workers' subterranean city.
The soundtrack is monaural and contains gaps and breaks that 
appear to be the result of splices in the film master.  The sound
quality is roughly equivalent to AM radio.  The video quality is 
good, if not excellent.
I strongly dislike the musical score included in the Kino print:
It is a dark, lugubrious, ugly-sounding jazz score that casts 
an overall gloomy tone to the entire film.  The score is punctuated 
with dark electronic tonalities that, in my opinion, add little 
to the enjoyment or understanding of the film.  
In the early '80's, Oscar-winning composer (for "Flashdance")
Giorgio Moroder came across a negative for "Metropolis" in the 
archives of the Museum of Modern Art in New York City.  He 
funded the preservation of this negative by having it copied
from nitrate to safety stock.  He then proceeded to adapt the 
film, to add a modern, pop score, and to give his version a brief
theatrical run.  The video of this version is now out of print,
but it is still fairly easy to come by from used video dealers, 
and it also can be found (rarely) as a laserdisc under the Vestron
label.
Moroder's version creates strong feelings in the film's fans.
They either love it or hate it, there seems to be no middle 
ground.  The film's advocates believe that Moroder resurrected
a gem and made it accessible by updating the film and adding
a score that the modern audience can relate to.  The film's
detractors believe that Moroder is guilty of crass commercialism,
and that he butchered a piece of Art.
1)  Color.  Moroder claims to have restored Lang's original
tinting schemes.  By the time "Metropolis" was made, common
practice was to add an element of color to otherwise black and
white films through the use of tinted filmstocks[5].  It's clear
that Moroder could not resist the temptation to go beyond
merely restoring the tints:  He added a number of visual
effects (such as moving clouds, and the robot's gleaming eyes) 
that aren't found in other prints; these additions cast doubt 
on the authenticity of his tinting efforts.
2)  Score.  Moroder commissioned a number of tunes by
well-known and less-well-known pop and rock artists of the 
early '80's.  These artists include Pat Benatar, Adam Ant, 
Freddie Mercury (from Queen), and others.  The result is a score
of rock vocals, heavy with synthesizer and drum machine beats.  
To some viewers, this makes "Metropolis" play like a long music
video, and I have been told by a practitioner of the art of 
silent film accompaniment that Moroder's score violates every 
rule of that craft[6].  This may be true, but Moroder's score 
appeals to me in a way I can't quite explain.  And, trust me, 
I'm no fan of any of the featured artists.
3)  Story.  In Moroder's version, John (called "Joh" in this
version) and Rotwang were once rivals for the same woman, Hel.  
Hel wed Joh, and then died giving birth to Freder.  Rotwang, 
in his madness over losing Hel, created the robot in an effort 
to recreate his love.  Joh then takes the robot from Rotwang 
(who has now lost his love twice).  The robot runs amok, eventually 
(if indirectly) destroying its creator:  This is the Frankenstien 
plot. Moroder's story more or less follows an East German 
reconstruction of the film done in 1969[7], and Moroder recreates 
some lost scenes, including a clumsily-done still of a monument 
Rotwang built to Hel.
Moroder's version clocks in at 80 minutes, and is also mastered 
at 24fps.  Moroder added animated intertitles (which WERE common
in silent films).  He also converted many intertitles into 
subtitles, and re-edited many of the scenes.  His version includes
the sports arena scene at the beginning of film, which is missing 
from the Kino version.  Since the film master is so close to the
original negatives, the video quality is excellent.  Enno Patalas, 
responsible for the newly restored Munich version, served as a 
consultant for Moroder's efforts.  It is obvious that much of 
Moroder's print shares a pedigree with the Kino print as the two 
films contain many of the same blemishes.
The audio quality in this version is excellent.  The sound
track is recorded in high-fidelity stereo and includes some
sound effects.  Viewed on high-end home theatre equipment that 
includes a big screen, this video is really quite striking.
Although I agree with Moroder's critics on an intellectual 
level, on a visceral level I enjoy his version very much.  
Moroder's version reaches me in a way the Kino version doesn't.
I discovered visual details that I had missed in viewing the 
Kino version, and I felt more involved and engaged in the film.  
I can only attribute this to Moroder's use of color and to 
his score.  The Kino score kept me distant from the visuals, 
while Moroder's score drew me in.  It's a phenomenon that 
I'm at a loss to explain.  
Had there been an intact, original version of the film, then 
I agree that Moroder would be damnably guilty of Desecration of 
Art.  The bottom line is, that lacking that authoritive version, 
Moroder's reconstruction is as valid (or, as invalid) as 
anyone else's, and that someone outside the Ivory Tower of 
Academia would be audacious enough to attempt this is really 
guilty of nothing worse than causing a bad case of sour grapes.
Classic Media Holdings, Ltd[8] is offering Metropolis on a new
DVD.  This disc is an example of how the new, digital video
technology is a sword that cuts in two directions.
The good news is that DVD technology is indeed ready for
Prime Time.  It is also a technology that lowers the entry
barrier for video producers and distributors to create 
videophile-quality recordings that are very reasonably priced.
A glance at the LaserViews[9] newsletters reveals many more
DVD labels producing product than there are Laserdisc labels.
Eventually, DVD technology will be available to nearly anyone,
even in small production runs, much as Compact Disc technology
is today.
The bad news is that DVD technology is accessible to producers
with little or no real experience addressing the videophile 
market.  Contrast this with Laserdisc manufacturers:  There 
are only a handful of plants in the world capable of producing
laserdiscs.  The expense and difficulty of making a laserdisc 
that must retail for $40.00 or more per copy has meant that
laserdisc producers have sought out the highest quality
original material for mastering purposes.
CMH's DVD of "Metropolis" was mastered from what looks like
a 16mm black and white print that is many generations removed 
from the original negative.  It is a very badly worn print 
at that.  The high quality video reproduction that DVD is 
capable of ends up reproducing all the scratches and gouges 
in the film with extremely high resolution.  Unfortunately,
the resolution of the image itself was lost long ago during 
many generations through the optical printer and many trips 
through the projector.  The result is the video equivalent
of releasing old, worn, scratched 78RPM phonograph discs on
CDs without bothering to clean up the sound.  It may be 
that CHM's DVD is intended not for the videophile but for
computer multi-media applications utilizing DVD-ROM drives 
on PC's.
This version of "Metropolis" includes a mono orchestral score
that sounds like it is from a soundtrack on the film.  I like
this score better than the one on the Kino version.  The 
intertitles are animated and have an old-time look that is 
more authentic than the static titles in the Kino version.  
The film runs for 95 minutes, is probably derived from the 
original US release cut, and does include the sports arena 
scene missing from the Kino version.
Film enthusiasts looking for a high-quality, definitive version 
of "Metropolis" on video are out of luck, at least until someone 
ponies up the big bucks that the holders of the video rights to 
the Munich version want.  The video versions that are available 
all leave something to be desired, but they all do give the viewer 
a glimpse of this great film.
[1]  Kino Video, 333 West 39th Street, New York, NY 10018.
     http://www.kino.com
[2]  I purchased my copy from http://www.bodawg.com
[3]  http://orders.xoom.com/dvd/metro/metro.html
[4]  http://www.paulist.org/doug/metro/about.html
[5]  Monaco, James, "How To Read A Film", Oxford University
     Press (1981), pp 91-92.
[6]  http://search.dejanews.com/getdoc.xp?AN=320462992
[7]  http://www.paulist.org/doug/metro/versions.html
[8]  Classic Media Holdings, Ltd.  930 Tahoe Blvd, 
     Suite 802-336,  Incline Village, Nevada   89451
[9]  http://www.laserviews.com/dvd-news.html
To reply  via  EMail,  replace  "Xexecpc" with "execpc" in the
address above.
