Title
Review for Young Guns (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Young guys with guns, that's what you get in YOUNG 
GUNS , the 1988 western starring "six of today's hottest stars." 
Today, the magnificent six -- Emilio Estevez, Kiefer Sutherland, 
Charlie Sheen, Lou Diamond Phillips, Casey Siemasko (?) and 
Dermot Mulroney -- are nowhere to be seen, with the exception 
of Mulroney, who co-starred in last year's thriller COPYCAT. In 
YOUNG GUNS, they play a bunch of renegade cowboys who are 
hired to protect a British guy's property as "regulators." Any 
gangsta rap fans out there will recognize the multiple lines of 
dialogue that were eventually sampled in Warren G.'s 1994 hit 
"Regulate." Yes, this movie has left behind quite a legacy, hasn't 
it?
        Estevez plays the charasmatic leader of the group, Billy 
the Kid (ever heard of him?), who vows to wage war against Jack 
"Yummy" Palance's crime ring, who outnumber them by about a 
hundred. The movie works in several gunfights amid the laughable 
dramatic scenes, as Emilio the Kid faces dissent from Sheen the 
Preacher, Kiefer the Mature Lover and Lou the Mestizo Heathen. 
Eventually, they all become outlaws and are stalked by Palance's 
boys and American cavalry troops, leading to the final showdown, 
a gunfight that seems to last almost twenty minutes.
        If you like movies that function merely as excuses for 
people to shoot off guns for long periods at a time, YOUNG GUNS 
is probably the movie for you. You'll also have to overlook some 
seriously boring dramatic scenes, the most inadvertently hilarious 
of which is a dramatic speech by Lou the Mestizo Heathen, who 
recounts the injustices of Americans to his "people," all of whom 
except for him are dead. "I had to watch them bash in the heads of 
my little sisters with their bootheels because they didn't want to 
waste bullets!" At least you didn't have to watch YOUNG GUNS 
and waste two hours of your life.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
