Title
Review for Ridicule (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Froilan Vispo
RIDICULE does very admirably with such a dangerous premise: being a
film about a world where wit is the most-prized talent, and the absence
of a skillful comeuppance condemns one to the outskirts.  Indeed, the
film opens with a man who has returned to France to exact revenge upon
the now-helpless wit whose one wisecrack had caused him to flee, and
although his revenge is wordless, it is certainly a base one and a
fitting beginning to this film, underscoring the importance of the game
to its players and the lengths they will go to in order to have the
final word.
The setting is the court of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette, and the air
strains with the expectation of daggers with each utterance.  Here,
adept repartee, or lack thereof, passed on through the ranks of the
courtiers, fashions one's reputation, so regret is expressed for days
on end for those witty remarks thought of too late and notes are made
of witticisms which are then classified into categories for later
reference and practice.
Baron Ponceludon de Malavoy (Charles Berling) rides off to this royal
court with his sincere hope that his king will hear him and dispense
funds for the baron's project to drain the swamps of his homeland in
the outskirts and hence save his subjects from disease.  Ponceludon is
oblivious to the rules, however, and finds himself under the care of
the Marquis de Bellegarde (Jean Rochefort) who mistakes his sincerity
for pointed humour, and is soon advising the baron on how he may devise
his rise through the ranks.  The upwardly-mobile Ponceludon soon finds
himself between the woman he loves, Mathilde (Judith Godreche), the
marquis's daughter, who, like the baron, sacrifices something of
herself when she chooses to marry for money to finance her studies in
underwater diving, and the woman who will most advance his own cause,
the Madame de Blayac (Fanny Ardant), who is well-connected to the king
and well-rehearsed in the machinations of the court.
RIDICULE's script is certainly the first among its many strengths:
well-honed, intelligent and engaging - comeuppances come aplenty and
unexpectedly.  The character's aspirations and successes become our
own, we become glad that the failures of others are not ours, and with
their stumbles of those who have gained our sympathy recognize the
cruelty of the game.
The game is a double-edged sword, however.  When deaf and mute students
learning sign language are presented to an audience of courtiers, the
latter's initial agreement to ridicule the students' gestures and
inability to use words becomes an awareness of their own exclusion from
the richness of signs and from this exclusive community, and the
revelation of the transparency of words.  In this world where words are
mightier than swords and many are willing to dance along the sharp edge
of the blade, this recognition of the emptiness of what they value is
sharp rebuke indeed.  Too few films dare to assume an intelligent
audience, and RIDICULE is one of these too infrequent pleasures.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When I got my invitation to come to the press screening of
RIDICULE, I had heard nothing about the film.  I immediately assumed I
was off to another dumb college flick like the disaster GLORY DAZE.  I
had the image of a bunch of Neanderthal youngsters insulting each other
with bathroom humor.  How wrong I was.
     RIDICULE is a French satire and costume drama set in the late
eighteenth century in last days of French monarchy before the
revolution.  It is a fairly inaccessible film, but ultimately a
rewarding one.  Once you realize the obtuse story is inconsequential
and that the film is strictly a comedy of manners, you can relax and
enjoy its subtleties.  It is a beautifully filmed show (Thierry
Arbogast) that is easy on the eyes.
     The movie opens with a truly shocking scene that includes male
frontal nudity.  It is not the nudity itself that is shocking, but what
happens.  Curiously enough, the movie could probably get a PG or PG-13
rating without this scene, but with it in, it is certainly destined for
an R if the producers end up submitting it to the MPAA for a rating.
At the time of the press screening, it appeared to be as yet unrated.
     After this surprising scene, the opening credits begin to roll and
the audience is already shocked and confused.  The confusion stays, but
the shock subsides.
     The show has a simple story, but it is presented with enough
subplots and characters to leave the audience baffled for quite some
time.  As I said earlier, ignore this and wait for the heart of the
picture when the show becomes a condemnation of and a ridicule of the
aristocracy's obsession with ridicule as a form of witty conversation.
The show even concludes with a lavish and totally ridiculous costume
ball where the gowns ridicule their wearers.  The title RIDICULE has
many meanings and nuance in the show.
     The plot is that Gregoire Ponceludon de Malavoy (Charles Berling -
the couch potato husband from this year's excellent NELLY & MONSIEUR
ARNAUD) goes from his country home to Versailles.  He makes the journey
so he can get an audience with King Louis XVI (Urbain Cancelier) to ask
for funds for a drainage project for some fever infested swamps.  To
see the King he has to get in the good graces of the others at court,
and to do that he has to prove his wit.  Wit during that period
consisted entirely of cleverly worded put-downs, i. e., ridicule.
     When Ponceludon enters the hallowed halls of the court, Abbe de
Vilecourt (Bernard Giraudeau) greets him with, "fresh from the country,
you must find our courtly ways ridiculous."  The dialog by screenwriter
Remi Waterhouse is masterful.  Ponceludon attempts his mockery of
Vilecourt by retorting, "peasants feed aristocrats as well as
mosquitoes."
     He gets a mentor at the court, Monsieur Bellegarde (Jean
Rochefort).  Bellegarde likes the young man, proclaiming of him,
"honesty and wit are so rarely combined."  Bellegarde has a beautiful
daughter Mathilde (Judith Godreche) who is about to enter into a
marriage of convenience with a rich old man, Monsieur Montalieri
(Bernard Dheran), so she can use the income from the marriage to
finance her scientific experiments.  This is one of many unnecessary
complications in the plot.  Attempt to ignore it.
     Bellegarde guides his young pupil in the fine art of disparagement
warning him, don't laugh at your own jokes and "don't laugh with your
mouth open.  It's too rustic."
     Fanny Ardant (from 1994's great COLONEL CHABERT) appears as
Countess Madame de Blayac.  She is one of the mistresses of the King
and known to be the best conduit for gaining the ear of the King.
     When Ponceludon finally gets to see the King, the King is with a
Sioux warrior when perplexities the nobility.  Vilecourt disgustedly
reflects that the warrior is "half naked and with the name of Stinking
Bear, and he almost makes us look ridiculous" for standing around to
greet him.  When later the courtiers cast aspersion based on
association, Ponceludon reminds them that "Judas kept excellent
company."
     The acting is remote and frequently too shallow.  Perhaps one
could argue that it is a good match for the characters, but I found the
effect of the direction by Patrice Leconte to lack involvement.  The
characters are unsympathetic, and although I found their repartee
intriguing, I did not care about any of the characters as real humans.
     RIDICULE has three unusual scenes of special merit that are worth
mentioning.  I do not think I have ever heard the sound of a pistol in
slow motion as effectively done as in RIDICULE.  It has a power that
overwhelms that of a normal explosion.  Second, the close-up of a knee
rubbing that focused on the goose bumps produced on the woman's skin is
one of the most erotic scenes I have witnessed this year.  Finally, if
you ever wondered how the female aristocracy got on all of that pancake
make-up back then, this show reveals the secret.
     RIDICULE runs 1:42.  It is in French with English subtitles.  It
was not yet rated when I saw it, but it would be an R for the one male
nude scene.  There is very brief female nudity, a little violence, mild
language, and no sex.  The show would be fine for any teenager, but the
opening is too strong for younger kids.  Although I found it needlessly
confusing, ridicule as an art form was fascinating so I do give the
film a thumbs up and award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
RIDICULE *** 1/2  Directed by Patrice Leconte.Written by Remi Waterhouse
with the collaboration of Michel Fessler and Eric Vicaut. Photography,
Thierry Arbogast. Production design, Ivan Maussion . Editing, Joelle Hache.
Music, Antoine Duhamel. Cast: Charles Berling (Baron Gregoire Ponceludon de
Malavoy), Jean Rochefort (Marquis de Bellegarde), Fanny Ardant (Madame de
Blayac), Judith Godreche (Mathilde de Bellegarde), Bernard Giraudeau (Abbot
de Vilecourt), Urbain Cancelier (Louis XVI) et al. A Miramax Zoe release.
In French with subtitles. 102 min. Rated R (sexual situations)
See this delightful movie and you'll be miles ahead in understanding the
French people.
Before an American lady of my acquaintance left for Paris, a French friend
in the USA gave her this advice: "In France you can say what you want, if
you say it cleverly."
This has not changed much in that land, although it has no longer the
sometimes paroxystic levels found in the chic salons during the second half
of the 17th century and all of the 18th.
In 1783 Baron Ponceludon de Malavoy lives in a southern area of swamplands
that breed mosquitoes that  have been killing hordes of people. He is an
engineer with a grand plan of draining the swamps. Lacking the wherewithal
, he gets on his horse and rides up to Versailles where the court lives its
dolce vita. The French Revolution is only six years away, but no aristocrat
shown seems conscious of its coming or of anything except entertainment and
being noticed by the King.
The King is Louis XVI, who will be guillotined in a few years, as will his
wife Marie-Antoinette and many of the courtiers. Ponceludon  naively hopes
to gain access to His Majesty and ask him for life-saving funds. He is
rapidly taken in hand by a protector, the Marquis de Bellegarde, who is
also a doctor (his talents are gently mocked by the movie) and a scientist.
His experiments have impoverished him, but he is nonetheless in good
standing at Versailles.
The Marquis opens the idealist visitor's eyes to the facts of life at the
court. One needs not only sponsors but wit in a high society where people
constantly play games and are deadly bored by anything approaching serious
issues. They only take seriously unseriousness, "legerete" (lightness)
superficiality. They practice  "esprit" (wit), "mots" (bons mots),  puns,
paradoxes, cutting remarks, rapier repartees, quotable quips or amusing
verse. The Marquis himself is strong along those lines. Nothing upsets him
more than when after a gathering he thinks of a witticism he could have
made earlier.
A clever quip and your fortune may be made. A bad one or one at your
expense, and you are covered with ridicule and disgraced. Luckily,
Ponceludon is not a titled bumpkin from the provinces, but is well read and
has a great gift for words. The Marquis introduces him to the nobility,
especially to a beautiful Countess, Madame de Blayac, one of many passing
mistresses of the king. She sleeps with her household clergyman, the Abbe
de Vilecourt.
Both the Countess and her Abbe have a fearful talent for "esprit." This
goes beyond games. Wit can be --and often is-- used cruelly, to put down
people and insult them, to exact private vengeance, sometimes to reduce
them to a form of dishonor through verbal dueling. Words are like swords
dipped in honey or perfume, but still lethal. It's all done with exquisite
elegance that never includes the use of vulgar epithets or even ordinary
insults. "Imbecile" and "idiot" are reserved for social  inferiors.
All this goes hand in hand with promiscuity, amorality and immorality --and
with highly amusing situations, among them a blase nobleman returning from
England where he has discovered "humour." A pity the film does not dig
deeper in comparisons between wit and  humour.
Ponceludon is a hit at Versailles, but must conform to the rules. In just
days he spends on clothes his income for a year. He starts using foppish
powder and lipstick. His mentor advises him not to laugh at his own jokes
and, whenever he laughs, not to do it with his mouth open. Yet if
Ponceludon meets with success, the King is still hard to reach. Among other
stumbling blocks is the necessity to prove to the court  genealogist that
his
nobility does go back to the year 1199!
Meanwhile back at the Marquis's country home the Baron has met, argued with
and predictably fallen in love with Mathilde, the daughter of the Marquis,
a scientist herself (she works on diving suits), a pure young woman who is
the opposite of the corrupt courtiers, a daughter whom her father brought
up by the precepts of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, with naturalness and freedom.
(She's really an anachronistic, late 20th Century young lady).
Matters get complicated. Mathilde, needing funds for her experiments, has
almost accepted to marry a rich old man who is looking forward to becoming
a widower. The scene of a cynical prenuptial contract is a howl. Ponceludon
is tempted by his new milieu, but he holds steady in his plans to rescue
his people back home. Finally, he does get into the King's good grace...
There's a surprising amount of plot, but it is subservient to the
minute-by-minute details. The developments include the main figures, a
duel, a touching sequence around the Abbe de l'Epee (a real figure) and his
school for deaf-mutes, in which the court's snobs get their comeuppance,
and more...
The movie was the opener at the 1996 Cannes Festival. It is beautifully
photographed and scored, with a profusion of beautiful interiors,
exteriors, costumes and artifacts. The casting is perfect, as are all the
delicious performances. Remarkably, the film has three newcomers to the
screen: Berling
(Ponceludon), Godreche (Mathilde) and scriptwriter Waterhouse.
Director Leconte, known in France for comedies not exported to the USA, has
a sense of humot that he sneaks  even into such films as the thriller
"Monsieur Hire," and the very offbeat love story "The  Hairdresser's Wife."
He has stated that he did not attempt to catch with total authenticity the
looks, moods, sounds or lifestyles of the period. Or to draw parallels
between that society and ours. No matter. His quirky recreation is
convincing, his subject is original and the film drips with Frenchness as
much as any I can think of.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

RIDICULE (director: Patrice Leconte; screenwriters: Remi Waterhouse/Eric
Vicaut/Michel Fessler; cinematographer: Thierry Arbogast; cast: Charles
Berling (Baron Gregoire Ponceludon de Malavoy), Jean Rochefort (Marquis
de Bellegarde), Fanny Ardant (Madame de Blayac), Judith Godreche
(Mathilde de Bellegarde), Bernard Giraudeau (Abbot de Vilecourt), Urbain
Cancelier (Louis XVI), 1996-Fr.)
For a film that prides itself on its use of wit to show what the
nobility and their King Louis XV1 were like during 1783, just before the
infamous French Revolution, I would have expected to be more than
dazzled by these nobles with their silver-tongued wit, cutting each
other to bits and pieces with their razor-sharpened retorts. Instead, I
found myself more taken with the history aspect of this good looking
costume spectacle and was not especially amused by the barbs. In fact, I
found the film rather anti-septic, not a particularly moving dramatic
experience. Overrated by some of the critics, who seemed to fall for
this French film's farcical intentions, deeming it intellectual in the
broadest sense of what is intellectual, while failing to construe how
ordinary and dispassionate the characters were.
The art of ridicule was the sword used by those who expected to gain
favor with the king and his court, with the hopes of having enough wit
so that they won't have their life ruined by failing to respond to
someone else's comments in a suitable manner. It was their way of
fighting for their position in life.
The plot of the movie centers around the serious-minded Baron
Ponceludon's (Berling) attempt to get royal backing on a needed drainage
project, which would help cultivate the swamp land he owns by getting
rid of the mosquitoes breeding there and help the peasants who work for
him have a better life. He is a French lord, trained as an engineer but
a noble of modest means, who must now ride by horse to Versailles and
learn to play the delicate games of wit at a place where the aristocrats
show an indifference to social concerns other than the ones that please
their own vanity. He comes here solely to raise the money he needs for
his life's work.
Part fiction and part history, this satire, as directed by Patrice
Leconte (Monsieur Hire/The Hairdresser's Wife), is not completely
absorbing in its romantic tale or as drama. The history part seemed to
be accurate enough, depicting the corruption of the king's court and his
placement of more importance on vacuous wit than genuine ideas. The
honest engineer from the country is quickly disheartened by what he sees
in Versailles, where you get the king's ear by trickery, or sleeping in
the right bed, or by deception. To meet the evasive king, you have to
make a name for yourself in Versailles through one of those methods.
The idealistic Ponceludon finds a local nobleman, who treats his wounds
when he is robbed on the road to Versailles, Bellegarde (Jean
Rochefort). He thinks Ponceludon might have some chance of succeeding in
being witty and offers him lessons of how to survive in Versailles, such
as, "Don't laugh at your own jokes and never laugh with your mouth
open", "Call puns the death of wit"; and remember,"The soul of wit is to
know one's place." This nobleman who will sponsor him, something needed
to get into the right circles at Versailles, also has a beautiful and
intelligent daughter, Mathilde (Judith), but who is prepared to marry an
older noble, whose plan is to gain access to her wealth. Now you know
she's going to fall in love with our hero; but, in between, Ponceludon
courts the seductively attractive and treacherous Countess de Blayac
(Fanny), as he is committed to get help for his swamp project anyway he
could. His problem with winning her over, is that her main man is the
arrogant and nasty master of wit himself, the clergyman Abbot de
Vilecourt (Giraudeau); and, of course, the rivalry between these two
wits will culminate in a gentleman's pistol duel, that is, after a
series of dueling witticisms are hurled back and forth. After his
battles with the nobles, it is still challenging to meet the insulated
king, busy living the "good life," who is just as indifferent as the
nobles are to the plight of the common man.
What elevates this film above merely showing how obviously stupid and
petty the nobles were, is that it stresses how the nobles had to use
language to survive in that atmosphere. Language therefore became a
source of power for them if used in conjunction with wit, as their class
status only gave them a ticket into the arena of power, so to speak.
This film is also about a moral dilemma for our good-hearted hero. He
must choose either what is morally correct or to sell himself out for
his project, which he considers as something that is more important than
how he might be perceived.
The acting or the story did not excite me enough to think that this
clever film was anything special, except as a mildly diverting farce,
which could be, at best, considered only as a film that had its moments
of being a clever satire. But mostly, it is a predictable French farce,
with enough one-dimensional characters in it to fill the court of
Versailles with retorts that would pale next to those heard in an
average schoolyard in urban America on a daily basis.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Charles Berling, Jean Rochefort, Fanny Ardant, Judith Godreche, 
      Bernard Giraudeau, Bernard Dheran, Urbain Cancelier
Director: Patrice Leconte
Producer: Frederic Brillion, Philippe Carcassonne, Gilles Legrand
Screenplay: Remi Waterhouse
Cinematography: Thierry Arbogast
Music: Antoine Duhamel
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
In French with subtitles
     In Patrice Leconte's (THE HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND) RIDICULE, the pen 
-- or rather the word -- is truly mightier than the sword.  In late 18th 
century France, before the advent of the guillotine, wit was used as 
often for pain and humiliation as it was for pleasure.  Those who had 
mastered the art of ridicule could, with one turn of phrase, strip a 
less adept opponent of pride and position, hurling him from the pampered 
confines of Louis XVI's court into the hostile world beyond, where 
indignities and possibly death awaited.
     RIDICULE is not meant to be taken as a rigorous historical account, 
but, as with all French movies, the period detail is impeccable.  The 
general atmosphere, if not the specifics, reflects 1783 Versailles, 
where a witty conversationalist was greatly prized as a source of 
entertainment, and where those with a gift for bon mots could attain a 
position of importance at the king's court (especially if their lineage 
connected them to a respected bloodline).
     Gregoire Ponceludon de Malavoy (Charles Berling), a baron from the 
rural province of Dombes, comes to Versailles to obtain money for an 
ambitious engineering scheme that would drain southwest France's swamps 
to reduce disease and pestilence.  Ponceludon entertains a hope that the 
king, known to be intrigued by science, might take an interest in the 
project and offer to fund it.  However, what he discovers at Versailles 
disheartens him -- a corrupt rulership that prizes wit and pedigree over 
all other qualifications.  Gaining an audience with the king has more to 
do with one's ancestors, bedpartners, and verbal agility than with the 
merits of one's proposal.
     Undeterred, Ponceludon finds a local sponsor, Bellegarde (Jean 
Rochefort), who sees promise in the idealistic newcomer and offers 
lessons of how to survive in Versailles ("Don't laugh with your mouth 
open", "We call puns the death of wit", "The soul of wit is to know 
one's place").  While the young nobleman is learning the rules of 
acceptable court behavior, he falls for Bellegarde's beautiful, young 
daughter, Mathilde (Judith Godreche).  But, when Ponceludon's would-be 
romance with Mathilde flounders because of her impending marriage of 
convenience to a much older man, he seeks the sexual (and political) 
favors of Madame de Blayac (Fanny Ardant), a fixture at court who 
consorts with all the finest wits.  Ponceludon then becomes involved in 
a series of contests with the appropriately-named Vilecourt (Bernard 
Giraudeau) to see whose wit is the most corrosive.
     The humor in RIDICULE, such as it is, is exceptionally savage.  
Leconte and screenwriter Remi Waterhouse have not designed this film to 
offer inconsequential laughs.  As in DANGEROUS LIAISONS, there's 
calculated malice behind each barbed riposte.  But, while nearly every 
comic aspect of RIDICULE is mean-spirited, it's difficult not to 
appreciate the intelligence behind the most vicious strikes. 
     RIDICULE is not just the tale of a decaying, degraded empire of 
favoritism, although that is certainly an element of the plot.  In 
addition, this film illustrates the power of language both to build and 
to tear down.  It is also about choices.  Ponceludon's own moral dilemma 
-- to retain his purity and reject court or to embrace the place by the 
king's side that his skill for ridicule can gain him -- is personified 
by the two women who want him:  the sweet, independent Mathilde and the 
seductive, manipulative Madame de Blayac.  
     The cast is superlative, with Charles Berling (NELLY AND M. 
ARNAUD), Fanny Ardant (COLONEL CHABERT), and Jean Rochefort (THE 
HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND) turning in impressive performances.  As 
RIDICULE's chief villain, Bernard Giraudeau (PASSION D'AMORE) savors all 
his nastiest lines, delivering them with relish.  And, even though many 
aspects of Mathilde's character are anachronistic (she's a bit too 
modern to fit seamlessly into the time period), Judith Godreche is a 
beguiling asset.
     Clocking in at about one-hundred minutes, Leconte's film is 
tightly-plotted and well-paced, with few wasted or unnecessary scenes.  
The script does have lapses, such as a sequence that uses a conventional 
duel to generate unnecessary tension and uncertainty, but, on the whole, 
the writing is RIDICULE's greatest asset.  The carefully-rendered 
French-to-English subtitles do justice to the sparkling dialogue, making 
the verbal matches between Ponceludon, Madame de Blayac, and Vilecourt 
one of RIDICULE's highlights.  For those who appreciate movies with a 
bite, RIDICULE shows its teeth early and keeps them razor-sharp 
throughout.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
Director Patrice Leconte's ("Monsieur Hire") "Ridicule" is France's
submission to the Academy for this year's Best Foreign Language Film.
It stars stage actor Charles Berling as Gregoire Poncludon de Malavoy,
a country engineer who travels to Versailles to get funding to save
the local peasants from fatal fevers by draining swampy mosquito
infested land.  He's taken under the wing of the Marquis de Bellegarde
(Jean Rochefort) and given instruction on how to play the
evil-intentioned wits who make up the court of Louis XVI.  Ponceludon
is also torn between the Mathilde, the ravishing daughter of
Bellegarde (Judith Godreche), who's engaged to a much older man in
order to fund her research, and the worldly Madame de Blayac (Fanny
Ardant), who pulls puppet strings and manipulates favor at court.
"Ricidule" is a lush costume drama where the main character must
navigate through the shark-infested waters of Louis XVI's court 6
years before the inevitable revolution.  This is a very smart drama
with a great central conflict (the lure and dazzle of the court and
its denizens vs. the simplicity and beauty of Mathilde and the
country) and an unfortunately unsatisfying conclusion.  Ponceludon
eventually 'wins', although not in the manner he had been striving
for, I wondered what took him so long to make his final point that
"children will die tomorrow because you ridiculed me today."  Of
course then we wouldn't have been able to enjoy all the nefarious
scheming along the way!
Jean Rochefort is marvelous as the Marquis who's not able to keep his
wits about him as he had in his youth.  In fact, he keeps a notebook
where he writes down the great barbs and comments that make their
utterer the talk of the court until the next great one comes along.
Bernard Giraudeau is gleefully wicked as 'wit of the moment' Abbot de
Vilecourt and lover of Madame de Blayac - he's like a malicious child
whose actions cause tragedy.  Charles Berling, in his screen debut, is
sympathetic as the simple man who gets in over his head but manages to
remain uncorrupted. Urbain Cancelier is wonderfully cast as a Louis
XVI who constantly seeks entertainment but provides none.  He reminded
me of Jon Lovitz' emperor in "Mom and Dad Save the World."
"Ricidule" is solid, intelligent adult entertainment, a good, but not
great, film.

Author
Pedro Sena
It's a terrible shame that this film can never be appreciated by larger
audiences. This "talkie" extraordinaire, is a magnificent example of how
words can kill, in exchanges of "wit", in a film that shows a historical
tale about a time, when impressions in court were centered on the vanity and
depth of one's words, rather than content. Indeed, what cuts through, and
eventually eats into the story is the content, and also shows why the French
revolution came about in a slight lesser reason, but no less valid. The
court, and its people were insipid, vague, vain, and not there for
"government" but for their own agendas and influence. The court was not
there for the people or governing anyone.
It's still the same today, isn't it? That ought to put your mind at rest,
and make you want to see this film. It is excellent.
"Wit" was a style of conversation that was pretty much around the time of
Shakespeare and Moliere, and mainly involved the use of clever words, used
to gain one's advantage. Shakespeare made fun of it, by using the
"gentleman's game" and also having the girls fluent in this area, and use it
to gain their own wants. Later the Restoration theatre, would make this a
world of affectations, and later still, France ( and others I'm sure ) would
engage itself in these things, as a way to avoid dealing with anything that
government is supposed to do. But royals and royalty are not government, and
their function is not service ...
It is the story of a gentleman, who finds himself in the court, trying to
get funding for a project in Versailles, which should help take care that
area and its need for some form of irrigation and funneling systems, so that
the water that it gets from the rivers does not sit still, which has now
been polluted and diseased, and is killing people left and right. But trying
to get to the court, and getting nobles to pay attention to Gregoire is
something that he is prepared to do, although it forces him to do some
unsavory things. But the girl that falls in love with him, can find the
forgiveness in her eyes, when she sees that this man means well, and intends
to see through his foremost convictions, and that unlike most of the
courtiers', his are important.
This is the basis of the story. The content and wit with which it is carried
out is another altogether, and makes this film stand out. The lines, the
deliveries, are "delicious" and totally phenomenal. It's just sad that not
enough people will get to see this, because the exchanges are so dynamic and
enjoyable that this film stands out, even with a throwaway ending of sorts
.... typical of comedies that depend on their stuff to get through.
Of excellent appeal here, and shown to its fullest, is how the church really
conducted its business in France, something that Cardinal Richelieu himself
was most famous for, but never really displayed in many films. The "wit" is
supposed to show that the person has some intelligence and knowledge behind
his/her words. But affectations had grown and most people were using the
words to gain movement in their own areas of interest, and the depth of
their words degenerates into a fancy word game for the rich. As long as they
do not take themselves seriously they will do very well ... warning, the
best part of the moment is the cardinal falling on his face.
With some magnificently directed acting, and well designed exchanges of
words, this is a very entertaining film, that deserves much more than it has
received. It got a slew of Cezar's in France, and well it should, since the
wording in this film is bombastic, to say the least. Well directed, and
thought out, in the courts the camera becomes another voyeur. Away from it,
it is personal and takes on, and stays, with Gregoire, the real hero in this
story.
Worth seeing. Superb dialogue direction. Outstanding acting work.
