Title
Review for Carry On Camping (1969)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Graeme Huggan
   Carry on Camping is probably the most memorable Carry on film due to 
some unforgettable scenes and some classic double-entendres.
   Sid Boggle and his mate Bernie (Sid James and Bernard Bresslaw) lure 
their girlfriends Joan Fussey and her friend Anthea (Joan Sims and Dilys 
Laye) to what they believe to be a nudist camp. When they get there, they 
find a half-empty campsite, a campsite owner Mr. Fiddler (Peter 
Butterworth) who is only interested in making money and looking after his 
chickens, and Joan and Anthea insist they sleep in separate tents.
   Meanwhile, Dr.Soaper (Kenneth Williams) and the girls from Chayste 
Finishing School are on a school trip via Stonehenge to the campsite. 
When they arrive at the campsite, Sid and Bernie take a fancy to two of 
the girls, Barbara (Barbara Windsor) and Fanny, but are thwarted in their 
attempts to get to know them by Joan and Anthea, Dr. Soaper and his 
companion, the Matron (Hattie Jacques). 
   Other holiday-makers include a businessman Peter Potter (Terry Scott) 
and his 'laughing like a hyena' wife Harriet Potter, and their new-found 
companion, the impossible Charlie Muggins (Charles Hawtrey).
   The main storyline is about Sid and Bernie's attempts to arrange a 
rendezvous with Barbara and Fanny, but other story threads include the 
undeliberate attempt by Charlie Muggins to split up Peter and Harriet, 
the example of Mr.Fiddler living up to his name, and the continuation of 
the long-running on/off romance between Kenneth Williams' character and 
Hattie Jacques' 'Matron'. 
   There are many memorable scenes, such as, of course, the famous scene 
where Babs "loses" her bra, the opening scene with Charlie Muggins in a 
tent with the shop assistant, and the various scenes between Matron and 
Dr.Soaper. Memorable quotes include:-
  Dr.Soaper- "No, no, Barbara. Tent up first, bunk up later!"
             "Its getting it to stay up, that's what counts!"
   Acting and comical honours go to Kenneth Williams and Hattie Jacques 
who make a perfect double-act, Charles Hawtrey who continues to harass 
the other cast members with his innocent and ignorant portayal of 
Muggins, and Barbara Windsor who shines as Babs! The major parts played 
by Sid, Bernie, Joan and Dilys are well-performed but are 
undistinguished, as is Terry Scott's portayal of Peter. The minor part of 
 Mr.Fiddler is a 'tour-de-force' for Peter Butterworth.
   Even though the film suffers from a wafer-thin plot and seems to have 
no ending, it is still a great piece of British comedy entertainment. The 
actors are in very high spirits (even though it was filmed in November on 
a green-painted muddy field), the double-entendres come thick and fast, 
and the numerous memorable scenes make this movie a classic of the Carry 
On's. Well-worth watching.
