Title
Review for Age of Innocence, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Jerry Saravia
Martin Scorsese's "The Age of Innocence" did not sweep at the Oscars
back in 1994 as I had expected. "Schindler's List" and "The Piano"
stole some of its thunder, not to mention the similar tale of
repression, "The Remains of the Day." This film was also a major
departure for Scorsese, who is known mostly for the whirling intensity
of "Mean Streets" and "GoodFellas." What the hell is this raging bull
doing making a film about the social class structure of the 1870's by
way of Edith Wharton? Good question, yet Scorsese has proven to be
diverse in the past, from filming concert footage of the Band to
dealing with a feminist heroine like Alice from "Alice Doesn't Live
Here Anymore." "The Age of Innocence" is ironically among Scorsese's
greatest films, a sumptuous, delicate tale of repression and repressed
emotional violence.
Daniel Day-Lewis stars as a New York lawyer, Newland Archer, who
romantically yearns for the sexy, open-hearted Countess Olenska
(Michelle Pfeiffer) despite his plans to marry her cousin, the
childlike, innocent May Welland (Winona Ryder). But problems arise
such as Olenska's unsettled scandalous divorce, and Newland's
inability to cope with his deep feelings because of the strict class
order of practically all of New York. People seem to repress their
feelings because of fear of being ousted from family and friends -
Olenska comes dangerously close to being one of these people. As a
tearful Olenska says in one scene, "Does nobody want to hear the truth
Mr. Archer? Everyone asks you to pretend." She then follows that line
with: "Does nobody cry in New York? I suppose there is no need to."
I wasn't sure how Scorsese would direct this tale, or why he wanted to
do it. This is a director who seems to deal with characters that let
go of their emotions rather than keeping them bottled up. A tale of
this kind is often handled by the Merchant Ivory production team or
David Lean. I think it is finally the elements of tragic love,
repressed feelings, and internal emotional violence that attracted
Scorsese to the project, and he fuses these elements flawlessly. There
are the minute, carefully chosen details such as the three-course
dinners, manners of etiquette, and paintings that illustrate the
bravado of certain characters, such as Beaufort (Stuart Wilson), a
playboy that shames the family - his selection of nude paintings
directly reflects his character. Not to mention the grandly
ostentatious gossip-mongerer Mrs. Mingott (Miriam Margoyles), and her
plethora of paintings of dogs and a savage "Last of the Mohicans"
painting.
Scorsese brings this world alive as he did with the world of gangsters
in "GoodFellas" - you almost feel as if you went back in time to a
more innocent era. The cinematography by Michael Ballahaus captures
every single nuance and is particularly attentive to subtle details,
even in human behavior. There are throwaway moments that capture
glimpses of character, such as May Welland making a quick glance at
Newland when he says his goodbyes to Countess Olenska at
Mrs. Mingott's house. There is also the tender, touching, underplayed
scene where Newland is told by his son that May knew all along about
his love for the Countess. Any other director might have played up the
symphonic score or used distracting close-ups, but instead Scorsese
films it in one long take and as a two-shot. Less is definitely more
in terms of finding the right visual cues for this story.
The actors are all perfect and understated, probably more than they
ever will be. Daniel Day-Lewis astutely captures Newland's longing and
growing sense of desperation for what he cannot have. Michelle
Pfeiffer is both sensual and far more pragmatic than at the onset -
she magnificently captures Olenska's frail side and her need to be
accepted, though her behavior is unconventional. But the biggest
surprise is Winona Ryder, capturing the innocence of the title - the
seemingly naive May Welland who provides the emotional center. Her
frozen smile of recognition is haunting in the film, suggesting that
she is far more knowledgeable of her surroundings than she lets
on. There are also colorful supporting turns by the aforementioned
Miriam Margoyles, Richard E. Grant as the sarcastic Larry Lefferts,
Alec McGowen as the expert on gossip regarding all the families, and
Michael Gough as the important head of the van der Luyden family, who
orchestrate a formal dinner to matriculate Ole!  nska into society.
There is so much to love and take in from this film that you have to
see it more than once. See it once for the beautiful settings and the
extraordinary camerawork, and the second time for the finely tuned
acting and the emotions that threaten to explode in every one of the
characters. A brilliant tragedy in the style of Orson Welles's "The
Magnificent Ambersons," "Age of Innocence" will sweep you off your
feet and it will stay with you.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Daniel Day-Lewis, Winona Ryder, Michelle Pfeiffer, 
           Miriam Margoyles, Richard E. Grant, Geraldine Chaplin
Director:  Martin Scorsese
Producer:  Barbara De Fina
Screenplay:  Martin Scorsese and Jay Cocks, based on the novel by 
             Edith Wharton
Music:  Elmer Bernstein
Released by Columbia Pictures
     It's New York City in the 1870s, a society ruled by expectations
and propriety, where a hint of immorality can bring scandal and ruin.
This is an America every bit as Victorian as her contemporary England.
Into this world arrives Countess Ellen Olenska (Michelle Pfeiffer), a
woman who has spent much of her life in Europe and is now escaping from
a disastrous marriage.  Her initial adult meeting with Newland Archer
(Daniel Day-Lewis) is sedate--he is engaged to her cousin May (Winona
Ryder)--but there is a subtle fire smouldering from the first glance.
From that point on, Archer's dilemma becomes painfully clear--proceed
with what society deems proper and marry the rather vapid May, or allow
his heart and passions to carry him far from the realm of what is
conventionally acceptable.
     I rarely discuss the Oscar potential of a film, the Academy being
notably fickle, but THE AGE OF INNOCENCE is ripe for not only a best
picture nomination, but perhaps the award itself.  It's difficult to
say, considering the possible contenders (REMAINS OF THE DAY, for
example, isn't out yet, and MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING shouldn't lightly be
ignored), but this movie certainly has to be in the running.
     Martin Scorsese has made a reputation out of making movies that
show a profound perceptiveness of human nature through their images of
toughness and violence.  On the surface, one would be hard-pressed to
find a story more unlike RAGING BULL and GOODFELLAS than THE AGE OF
INNOCENCE, which seems better suited to a Merchant-Ivory production.
However, Scorsese has placed his indelible stamp on this picture, not
only through the camerawork, but in the potent tension that builds
between the three complex main characters.  For while blood has often
been Scorsese's method, the characters, and what exists between and
within them, have always been his ends.
     THE AGE OF INNOCENCE is a sumptuous motion picture, a feast for
the senses.  The colors are vivid, from the red and yellow of roses to
the flashes of crimson and white that transition scenes.  The powerful
score moves along with the story, in perfect counterpoint to the
visuals--never intrusive, but always effective.  The scenes of
artfully-prepared meals are enough to make mouths water, and it's
almost possible to smell the pungent aroma of cigars.  In these
elements of the film, Scorsese was ably assisted by contributions from
composer Elmer Bernstein and cinematographer Michael Ballhaus.
     Even had the story been a throw-away, this movie would have been
worth seeing simply for its splendor.  The set design and costumes are
flawless, and the audience is legitimately transported to the
nineteenth- century (through the help of Troy, NY, where the principal
filming was done, and the Philadelphia Academy of Music, which doubled
as a New York opera house).  This is not some mere token attempt to
conjure up images of times past; Scorsese has put so much effort into
the illusion that those who didn't know better would be willing to
swear that he had discovered a time capsule.
     There are so many memorable images in this film that it's tough to
pick out a few, but three stood out most prominently for me:  the Saul
Bass opening credits with their unfolding flowers; a panoramic view of
a snowy New York in the 1870s; and a long, lingering shot of a
lighthouse, a sailboat, and Michelle Pfeiffer in silhouette.
     Of course, there is a story, and an impressive one at that.  All
the action is character-driven, and there's very little to satisfy
those who demand a fast-paced picture, but the currents of THE AGE OF
INNOCENCE run deep and dangerous.  The movie eschews the formulas of
Hollywood and succeeds brilliantly on its own merits.
     Adapting from the 1921 Pulitzer Prize-winning novel by Edith
Wharton (who also wrote ETHAN FROME, a similar story of love and loss,
which reached American screens earlier this year), Martin Scorsese and
Jay Cocks have managed to successfully incorporate the complex conflict
of emotion against societal pressures which lies at the heart of THE
AGE OF INNOCENCE.  Those watching the movie will understand that it is
no easy task to resurrect a code of behavior long dead and buried.
     Each of the actors, whether their parts are major or minor,
deserves praise aplenty.  There isn't a single instance of overacting
in this film, every role being carried out with unrivaled aplomb.  Even
those with decidedly limited screen time, such as Jonathan Pryce and
Robert Sean Leonard, manage to make an impact--and that's not an easy
task considering the puissance of the main three performances.
     Daniel Day-Lewis never fails to impress, even when he appears in a
poor film.  For the most part, however, he has chosen good roles, and
his presence in a movie often lifts the production to another level.
Would LAST OF THE MOHICANS have been as stunning without him?  Would MY
LEFT FOOT have been as poignant?
     Day-Lewis immerses himself in the character of Newland Archer, and
it's no great stretch for the audience to accept him.  This is not
merely a good performance--it's an unforgettable one.  Yet even
considering what Day-Lewis has done, he does not upstage either of his
leading ladies--at least not too often.
     I have never subscribed to the widely-held belief that Michelle
Pfeiffer is a ravishing beauty.  In fact, in THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, she
looks rather plain (an impression that, in my opinion, heightened the
impact of the story).  Ellen is exotic, certainly, but beautiful?
Nevertheless, there is no denying the stirring, heartfelt passion of
Ms. Pfeiffer's performance.  Outstripping anything she has done in the
past, the role of Ellen can truly be considered a pinnacle.
     Winona Ryder isn't as good, but that's nothing to be ashamed of.
This is a far better actress than the one we saw in DRACULA.  There's
no wringing of hands, no tears, and--most thankfully of all--no
instances of going over-the-top.  Ms. Ryder's May is quiet, demure, and
easily relegated to the background--just as she should be.
     Often, voiceovers detract mightily from a motion picture, but
Joanne Woodward's narration of THE AGE OF INNOCENCE serves only to
increase the viewer's enjoyment of the film.  It's appropriately
placed, perfectly worded, and reveals subtleties that the visual
medium cannot easily convey.  Instead of standing out, Ms. Woodward's
speeches blend seamlessly in.
     There are few films this year that I recommend as heartily as THE
AGE OF INNOCENCE, which has the rare distinction of being more of a
cinematic experience than a simple movie.  Something that transcends
the medium like this shouldn't be set aside for viewing on the small
screen.  For those who expect more from their films that a lot of bangs
and flashes, THE AGE OF INNOCENCE is not to be missed.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Sridhar Prasad
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE
A film by Martin Scorsese
Starring: Daniel Day-Lewis, Winona Ryder, and Michelle Pfeiffer
Written by Jay Cocks and Martin Scorsese
Based on the novel by Edith Wharton
    Martin Scorsese's triumphant adaptation of Edith Wharton's THE AGE 
OF INNOCENCE is a stunning film for the quintessential New York 
filmmaker, the man who brought the streets of TAXI DRIVER and MEAN 
STREETS to life.  It seems like an odd choice for Scorsese to do a 
period piece in the early 1900's, but the fact that he pulls it off so 
brilliantly is a wonder, and a testament to the greatness of Scorsese as 
a filmmaker.  This is a gorgeous visual experience that it surely one of 
Scorsese's finest.
Newland Archer (Day-Lewis) is a prestigious lawyer who is engaged to 
May Welland (Ryder), a somewhat empty and shallow New Yorker, who 
belongs to a prestigious family and is quite beautiful.  The marriage is 
one which will unite two very prestigious families, in a society where 
nothing is more important than the opinions of others.  On the day that 
Archer is to announce his engagement to May, Countess Ellen Olenska 
(Pfeiffer), cousin of May, walks into Archer's life.  Archer is 
immediately captivated, and finds himself in love with Ellen.  Archer is 
also bound by the limits of New York society, which is an intrusive as 
any other in the world.  Archer finds himself having a secret love 
affair in his mind with Countess Olenska, attempting to keep her in his 
mind while trying not to lose his social status. 
The film's subject matter may seem alien to Scorsese, but the theme 
is definitely not.  It is a theme of forbidden romance, guilty 
pleasures, and the consequences causes because of those actions.  There 
is a painstakingly flawed hero, and his choice between the life he 
wants, and the life he is destined for.  In truth, it is a film about a 
society the audience doesn't know about, but wants to find out more, 
much like the society of GOODFELLAS or even KUNDUN. 
The performances are absolutely breathtaking.  Day-Lewis portrays 
more mental anguish in his face than one man should be forced to take.  
Pfeiffer is marvelous as Countess Olenska, a mix of passion and beauty 
that the audience would die for as well.  Ryder is probably the gem of 
the group, for it is her quiet presence that overwhelms the plot, and 
slowly pushes Day-Lewis closer and closer to his eventual ending.  The 
supporting cast is also wonderful, with several characters so singular 
that they are indelible in one's memory.
Scorsese definitely has a passion for filmmaking.  His lavish and 
sumptuous set design and marvelous recreation of New York is a wondrous 
sight.  He literally transports the viewer to another world with 
incredible imagery.  His script is also excellent, slow in buildup, with 
a rapid conclusion and a fantastic ending that has to be seen to be 
believed.  It is difficult to make a period piece gripping: Scorsese, 
however, does it beautifully.  The famous cameras of the legendary 
director are also everywhere.  He is patient, but he films everything 
and anything remotely important.  The cameras sweep, pan, track, and do 
more than they've ever done, but they are so subtle, one doesn't realize 
he's watching all the Scorsese hallmarks until a 2nd viewing.  The 
central tracking shot is probably longer and more complex than the 
famous GOODFELLAS shot, but the viewer doesn't notice it, because we 
want to see more of this gorgeous world.  There are a few deft touches 
of filmmaking that are simply outstanding, and Joanne Woodward' 
narration is exquisite.  Not a fast film like GOODFELLAS, this shares 
more in common with KUNDUN than anything else.  And like KUNDUN, this is 
a slow-starting film that truly shines, when given the chance to fully 
breathe and bloom in the end.  A beautiful film by a director continuing 
to challenge himself year after year. 

Author
Long Che Chan
The Age of Innocence is a romantic Taxi Driver.  Martin Scorsese, the
master of the furious film, still maintains the fury that lived in Taxi
Driver and Raging Bull and Mean Streets.  The Age of Innocence is about
the anger at society that those that do not wish to conform feel.  It is
about passion- for life, love, and passion itself.  Set in New York in
the late 1800s, it is based on Edith Wharton's Pulitzer Prize-winning
classic.  The film is one of supreme visual elegance and deep, intense
inner-emotion, one of mores and crookedness and repression.
Newland Archer (Daniel Day-Lewis) is the equivalent of Taxi Driver's
Travis Bickle character.  He has no anger at the social rules of this
era, he doesn't quite notice or acknowledge their narrowness at the
beginning of the film.  He is engaged to be married to a sweet, young
girl named May Welland (Winona Ryder): the two are from major, prominent
New York families; their being betrothed has very little to do with
love, but has everything to do with class and tradition.  Newland is
content to lead a little, frigid life with May because he has been
taught to feel this way.  People in this twisted world never get married
for affection- that simply isn't the way they think or maneuver.
When Newland meets Countess Ellen Olenska (Michelle Pfeiffer), May's
cousin who has just come from her ruined marriage in Europe, he
immediately knows this is what he has secretly aspired for all his
life.  Ellen is not a very "moral" person by social standards.  She
married outside the New York rules, to a foreigner, and she has the
audacity to return to America with the news of divorce.  Ellen is a
fiery, radiant symbol of Newland's desires, which he has just begun to
fully realize.  Yes, he has affection for the petite socialite May
Welland, though it is on the mild side.  But he yearns for passion, and
that is against every one of the unspoken commandments of this New York
circle.  He decides to aid Ellen in her divorce issues; he is a
well-to-do lawyer who can give insight into the matter.
Meanwhile, gossip is floating about the many banquets and parties being
held in New York.  Newland finds all this gossip irritating; it is so
uninformed, so silly and infantile, so undignified in a society that
demands "dignity".  He occasionally argues with the men and women who
condemn Ellen for her pursuit of her marriage's end and her getting
married in the first place.  Newland inserts a comment here and there;
none are especially radical, but we know he is bottling up his annoyance
at these social gatherings held to bash Ellen Olenska- the very
annoyance that Taxi Driver's protagonist rid himself of through
violence.  Newland is kind to Ellen and visits her often.  He makes
plans to have his wedding hurried, at an earlier date, a plan meant to
suffocate his passionate thoughts for the Countess.
There are parts of the film that are crafted just like a play.  When
Newland asks May for an earlier wedding, she comes up, out of the blue,
with an accusation.  She wonders if his demands for an earlier wedding
date have been spawned from the love of another.  She rambles for a
while on the situation, and then, the scene fades out her talking and
focuses on Newland and the changes in his facial expressions.  Elmer
Bernstein's amazing score raps itself around his emotions and carries
them to us.  May's words fade back in as Newland catches himself
daydreaming about Ellen Olenska, and brings himself back to reality.  He
attacks May's accusation, saying he has never loved anyone else but
her.  "Oh Newland, you really do love me, I'm so happy!" May responds.
Ellen finally realizes Newland's lust for her.  He doesn't seem, at
first, to be coveting her so much as coveting her aura, her danger.
There is a violent hunger in him, but unlike what the Travis Bickle
character did with his hunger, Newland does not fully carry his desires
through.  There is angst in him, as there was in Travis, but it is shown
only in complete secrecy.  Ellen, we learn, has come to share Newland's
feelings of love and passion and their love scenes are some of the most
sensual I have ever seen.  The two are fully clothed, but even the
simple touching of hands (which are usually gloved) is stirring, more so
than most gratuitous nudity in films.  It is almost like Elizabeth
Taylor and Montgomery Clift's love for each other in A Place in the Sun-
both have a strong desire to be with each other but there is a river
between them, a river between classes.  Archer and Olenska must cross a
river of unfeeling mores, one both are reluctant to cross.
But, eventually, there comes a time when Newland cannot continue to have
Ellen as his mistress.  He is married to May, who realizes the growing
distance between them, and the maze and game of secrecy Newland and
Ellen are playing is becoming too tangled.  May is pregnant and Ellen's
husband continues to call for her from Europe.  As much as they want
each other, neither is extremely willing to further disrupt New York
society's social balance (or imbalance.)  This is the struggle that is
the core of the film.
There is another scene that uses the play-like qualities effectively.
Newland and Ellen meet at the same opera they met for the first time
at.  This opera is the same one people go to every year, one followed by
the same party, one that holds memories.  At the conclusion of an act,
the noise of the opera house is quieted, and all is dark except for
Newland and Ellen.  Scorsese uses this technique to focus on their
conversation.  It's really rather interesting, even if it isn't entirely
original.
The Age of Innocence is a film of great visual beauty.  Dante Ferretti,
the great production designer, creates a world so different from ours-
the world of Merchant-Ivory films, New York in the 19th century.  Every
set is lovingly made and perfection to the very last detail.  Gabriella
Pescucci's Academy Award-winning costumes have yet to be matched by a
period piece (Elizabeth is a good contender for surpassing Pescucci's
costumes' elegance, though.)  They, like Ferretti's sets, are extremely
detailed.  Michael Ballhaus's photography is simply gorgeous.  The man
doesn't make a wrong turn or lighting decision, as far as I can see.
Thelma Schoonmaker, who has edited Scorsese pictures since the early
years of his career, is a miraculous editor, and her work with The Age
of Innocence can be compared to her work in Raging Bull.  Also notable
is the title sequence, one fashioned by the great Saul Bass.  It is the
first great title sequence I have seen this decade, a visit to the long,
interesting title sequences of the 50s.
The Age of Innocence is a film of extreme pathos and the evils of
society conformity, themes that have been touched on in hundreds of
movies, but have rarely been crafted so eloquently. Some people may be
put off by its complicated narration (by Joanne Woodward) which
discusses almost everything and the goings-on of the characters and the
society.  I urge all to see it, however.  Its complexity may be a bit
too much for some to decipher, but the basic emotions of the principle
characters are not In the end, the film leads to Newland's remembrance,
that is filled with a silent sadness.  He prays for the knowledge of a
coming era, hopefully one that leaves behind the unwritten social rules
that held him back from being with the woman he truly loved.

Author
Vijay Ramanujan
Plot: Newland Archer is torn between a promise to marry Mary Welland,
and a love for her more worldly and passionate (but also married)
cousin, Countess Olenska.
     By now, I'm sure all have heard of the lush settings, beautiful
dinners, and of the directorial genius of Martin Scorsese.  It seems
that little praise is left to write, but here goes.
     This is not a ground-breaking film in the conventional sense.
Scorsese doesn't take large chances, nor many chances at all.  What he
has done is to perfect film-making.  He has raised the level of the art
instead of redefining its boundaries, the way Francis Ford Coppola or
Tim Burton try to do.  But his attention to detail and his feel for the
material make this one of the most seemless and timeless movies ever.
He is helped, in no small part, by a superlative cast.
     Miriam Margolyes is wonderfully eccentric as Welland's Grandmother
Mingot, a character oddly reminiscent of Brando in THE GODFATHER.
Stuart Wilson is equally engaging as the scandal prone businessman,
Julius Beauforte.  But the stage really belongs to the three main
actors.
     Daniel Day-Lewis is solid in his performance here.  He is in prime
form, playing the exact opposite of his character in THE UNBEARABLE
LIGHTNESS OF BEING.  Here he is torn by the love of two women, not
spurred on by it.  He is constrained by societal norms, not oblivious
to them.  It is hard not to feel the pain of his predicament.  However,
I still found myself feeling that Archer was a hopelessly, if
unknowingly, selfish individual, and Lewis came just short of convincing
me otherwise.
     Michelle Pfeiffer, on the other hand, was magnificent.  She
alternated pained selflessness with manipulative gamesmanship so easily
that they seemed one and the same.  She has a myriad of voiceds, from
engaging to pained, to hypnotic, and rotates swiftly between them,
bringing out every facet of Olenska's personality.  Her eyes showed a
vitality behind her broken spirit, letting us know that however
horrible the count might have been, he hadn't managed to crush her.
When she dismisses Archer's complaints of the pains he can't endure, by
calmly saying "I've endured it," you can see she has.  She is is total
control, not only of herself, but of Newland, her family, and the
entire movie.  This is as much her story as the story of Newland
Archer.
     And Ryder?  With May billed as a docile bore, nothing more than a
pretty mantelpiece, I was pleasantly surprised by the depth of her
performance.  "If looks could kill they probably will."  The look, as
she questions Archer's reason for postponing a business trip, shatters
the misconception of ignorace.  And she reveals a certain nobility and
insight when she questions why Archer wants to hasten their marriage,
and then warns him that she cannot find happiness as the cost of
another--the lover all were sure she was unaware of.  She effortlessly
lulls both characters and audience into a false confidence, then snaps
them awake with a subtle look or an unexpected insight.
     The only complaint I had was with the narration, provided by
Joanne Woodward.  She brings Wharton's words to the screen with a touch
of class and a good pace.  It was crucial at times, even humorous.  It
was at its best in a scene introducing guests at a dinner party, each
with their peculiarities and weaknesses.  But at other times, it
intruded on the characters, telling us what they were thinking and how
they had changed since we saw them last.  The actors in this movie were
good enough to convey such subtleties of spirit without the help of
narration.  It often seemed to interfere with the flow of the movie.
     Overall, a nearly perfect movie.  Humble in breadth, but deep
enough and strong enough to make it the must-see movie of the nineties
so far.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Martin Scorsese's adaptation of the
     Edith Wharton novel is like a beautiful, detailed painting of
     an entire period, yet it remains static and uninvolving.  The
     characters seem to be all bland and mostly convention-bound.
     By the time we can work up any pathos for the principals, it
     is too late.  Rating: low +1 (-4 to +4).
     Somehow one of the last things we would have expected from Martin
Scorsese is is a foray into the Merchant-Ivory territory of adapting the
early-20th Century social novel.  That is exactly the field he is entering
with THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, but his results are of mixed quality.  He has
created a beautiful recreation of 1870s New York City high society and the
bloodlessness that it required from its denizens, but in doing that so well,
he has created characters that it is hard to care very much for and their
story is considerably less engaging as a result.
     The story is of a love triangle that flies in the face of he
conventions of society.  Daniel Day-Lewis plays Newland Archer, a handsome
and intelligent young lawyer engaged to May Welland, a lovely childlike
woman played by Winona Ryder.  Newland meets and is struck by May's cousin,
Countess Ellen Olenska (played by Michelle Pfeiffer).  The Countess is
rebounding from the scandal of having left her husband, a Polish Count, but
upper-class society will not let her forget her past.  Newland slowly
realizes that he really loves the countess and that she loves him, but he
cannot decide if he is willing to fly in the face of convention.  And for
roughly two hours of screentime this latter-day Hamlet remains indecisive.
Certainly things happen in that time, but this heart of the story does not
advance until it is over.
     What we get in that static two hours is a beautiful depiction of
society in that time and place.  Lavish detail shows us what parties were
like, what food was eaten at lavish social dinners, what table arrangement
there was, what the streets looked like (though many of the exteriors had
unconvincing matte paintings that called attention to themselves).  Watching
this film reminded me a lot of my visit to the Victoria and Albert Museum in
London.  A segment of society is perfectly preserved in this film.
     The visuals, however, are almost unused in telling the story.  This
story is almost literally a novel on film.  The story is told in words in
dialog and narration.  The narration is by Joanne Woodward, and is said to
be a late enhancement to clarify the plotline after editing the film down to
136 minutes.  In any case this is a film that genuinely requires
concentration on the dialog and a good memory for character names.  There
are a lot of characters in the book and Jay Cocks and Martin Scorsese did
not pare them down by many in the screenplay.  The film boasts an impressive
cast including Richard E. Grant, Alec McCowan, Geraldine Chaplin (could this
be a sly nod to plot similarities in DR. ZHIVAGO?), Mary Beth Hurt, Sian
Phillips, Michael Gough, Alexis Smith, Jonathan Pryce, and Robert Sean
Leonard.
     Notable also is another great opening credit sequence by the master
photographer of such sequences, Saul Bass (and Elaine Bass).  Saul Bass is
the Michelangelo of film credit sequences.
     There is a lot that works in THE AGE OF INNOCENCE and a few very basic
and important aspects that fail.  This is an accurate adaptation of a
classic novel not well suited to film adaptation.  My rating would be a low
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Joan Ellis
     THE AGE OF INNOCENCE will be one movie for those who loved the
book, and another for those who haven't read it.  Since it is a book
one stumbles over by accident these days, it's a fair assumption that
most people will come to it without demands or expectations.  They will
be rewarded.
     Edith Wharton's New York of the 1870s was an age of manners, codes
and secrets.  It was a world, in her words, whose "harmony could be
shattered by a whisper."  Those who broke the code weren't snubbed, one
character said, they were eradicated.
     Men learned enough law and finance to steer the family ship.  They
married within the branches of New York's family tree and led lives
that were infused by the politics of bloodlines.  It was into this
rigid structure that Wharton dropped Newland Archer, May Welland, and
Countess Ellen Olenska.
     At the moment that Newland announces his engagement to May, Ellen
returns to town from her failed marriage to a Polish Count.  Trying to
shield Ellen from the gossip she has generated, the honorable Newland
immediately falls in love with her.  Ellen, in turn, protects Newland
from himself.  Of May, his innocent wife, Newland remarks "There was no
use trying to emancipate a wife who had no notion that she was not
free."
     The core strength of Wharton's novel is the decency of each of her
protagonists.  Not a villain among them, each responds
characteristically to the suffocating propriety of the society that
controls them.  Martin Scorsese has made an extravagantly beautiful
movie of this world, paying loving attention to the smallest detail,
even when he gets it wrong.  Neither he nor his cast can be faulted,
except, perhaps, by those who love the book.
     Readers, undoubtedly, will wish Scorsese had chosen one of them to
look over his shoulder.  The pace is wrong.  In a world where men "read
law" and women strolled, where gossip was the currency of intimacy, the
pace was studied, movement measured.  A languorous camera might have
evoked the feel of that world, but Scorsese films it in the fast,
clipped rhythms of today.
     It's okay for Winona Ryder's May to be innocent, but surely  she
must be knowing, not naive  She had, after all, been trained for the
job.  Michelle Pfeiffer's Ellen is as honorable as she is written, but
lacks the mystery that made her the one chance Newland had to touch the
things that danced in his imagination.
     Daniel Day-Lewis conveys with great subtlety the gentle
resignation that is Newland Archer's fate.  His suppression of all the
passions forbidden by his culture is unbearably poignant.
     Day-Lewis, Pfeiffer, Ryder and Scorsese make a powerful team that
would be triumphant if Edith Wharton's skill and subtlety weren't so
elusive.  It's a valiant effort that just may introduce a whole new
generation to the book.


Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Daniel Day-Lewis, Michelle Pfeiffer, Winona Ryder.
Screenplay:  Jay Cocks and Martin Scorsese.
Director:  Martin Scorsese.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Viewers of THE AGE OF INNOCENCE will likely fall into one of two
camps: those who consider it a minor masterpiece, and those who
consider it a huge bore.  There is something to be said for both
sides.  Director Martin Scorsese has crafted a sumptuous and dazzling
visual feast from Edith Wharton's novel of social propriety and
repressed desire, but one that suffers from an overlong second act and
a lack of character depth.  While still an exceptional film experience,
it is ultimately one which I found much more engaging intellectually
than emotionally.
     THE AGE OF INNOCENCE is the story of Newland Archer (Daniel
Day-Lewis), a lawyer in 1870s New York and a member of the privileged
class.  He is engaged to May Welland (Winona Ryder), a pleasant but
oblivious girl from another prominent family.  On the day of their
engagement announcement, Archer is re-introduced to May's cousin Ellen
Olenska (Michelle Pfeiffer), an unhappily married countess who has left
her European husband for the support of her family in New York.  Ellen
wants a divorce, but the family fears a scandal and entreats Archer to
persuade her to drop the suit.  As Archer becomes Ellen's confidante,
he realizes that she is one of the few people who shares his distaste
for the shallowness of their world.  He falls in love with Ellen, and
finds himself forced to choose between what he most desires and what is
demanded of him by his society.
     THE AGE OF INNOCENCE is a tale of surfaces, of a society concerned
with the appearance of things rather than the reality.  It is a world
where male infidelity is tacitly accepted, provided the man does not
flaunt his indiscretion, a world where a declined dinner invitation is
a social snubbing understood by both parties but never expressly
stated.  Scorsese captures this obsession with surfaces by letting his
camera dwell on things rather than people; calling cards, watch fobs,
earrings and table settings all become icons of status and civility.
Meanwhile, a running narration by Joanne Woodward calls attention to
the coded meanings and ironies in every word and gesture.  It's a
fascinating anthropological study, highlighted by typically bravura
Scorsese moments, including a piercingly insightful tour through one
house during a formal ball.  Yet for all its virtuosity, I found THE
AGE OF INNOCENCE working essentially as a documentary, not the
forbidden love story which is at its core.  Scorsese is so good at
establishing the framework, that he has little time left for the
characters.  They are kept at a distance, which may in part be the
point but left me a bit cold.
     The performers are not to be held responsible for these
shortcomings.  Day-Lewis is quite good as Archer, particularly in a
scene with Pfeiffer where he desperately struggles to find the polite
vocabulary to tell her people will think she's a whore if she gets a
divorce.  He carries himself as though he is constantly on the brink of
exploding but knows that it is impossible to do so.  I had feared that
Pfeiffer would end up repeating her Madame du Tourveil from DANGEROUS
LIAISONS, but she is too canny an actress for that.  She invests Ellen
with as much as the script will allow her, and then some, making her a
sad and slightly embittered woman who knows that being a woman means
never being able to find your own happiness.  Ryder has a thankless
part as May, and seems almost as uncomfortable as she was in BRAM
STOKER'S DRACULA; it appears to be time for her to forego period
drama.  Miriam Margolyes is delightful as May's eccentric and knowing
Granny Mingott, but the rest of the cast is forced to do what it can
with roles which essentially function as Archer's obstacles; they are
not really characters in their own right.
     However, the film's technical credits alone make it required
viewing.  Longtime Scorsese collaborator Thelma Schoonmaker does a
glorious editing job, and even gets her name on a billboard in the
film.  Cinematographer Michael Ballhaus takes some stunning and
instantly memorable shots, including an ocean panorama which looks like
a painting.  Elmer Bernstein's score is lush and evocative, and the
costume and production design are certain Oscar nominees.
     THE AGE OF INNOCENCE demonstrates yet again that Martin Scorsese
could direct "Dick and Jane" into a visual spectacle.  It's a
fascinating examination of lifeless and soulless time, and my attention
never waned.  But I kept finding myself oddly detached, wanting to care
more about whether or not Archer and Ellen would find happiness
together but never quite able to do so.  There is so much to admire
about THE AGE OF INNOCENCE that it seems like nitpicking, but I'm funny
that way: I want to be caught up in love stories.

Author
David Rind
     THE AGE OF INNOCENCE is Martin Scorcese's new movie based on Edith
Wharton's story of the same name.
     It is set in late 19th Century New York City among the upper crust
of New York high society with scenes also taking place in Boston and
Newport.
     This is a complex and powerful drama.  The plot focuses on three
characters: Daniel Day-Lewis as a young lawyer, Winona Ryder as his
new fiancee, and Michelle Pfeiffer as Winona Ryder's cousin, who has
returned from Europe to escape a bad marriage.  Early in the movie it
becomes clear that the characters played by Day-Lewis and Pfeiffer are
falling in love, but societal constraints make such a match
impossible.  The story follows these characters as they try to
reconcile responsibilities with desires amid the hypocrisies of their
surrounding society.
     The performances are impeccable.  Winona Ryder seems somewhat cast
against type as the less intellectually interesting of the two women --
an odd role for an actress who has played some very intriguing female
characters in recent years -- but plays it skillfully.  Daniel
Day-Lewis is excellent as a decent man torn between love and
responsibility.  Michelle Pfeiffer is superb as ever.  Her character is
played with depth and complexity.  It must have been an extremely
challenging role, but she carries it off with ease.  Her appearance in
this picture could not help but conjure up images of her role in
DANGEROUS LIASONS where she played a very different sort of character
but where again, societal roles were of utmost importance.
     Scorcese lets the audience know that he is the director.  There
are some odd cuts, camera angles, and close-ups that seem to be
intended more to remind the audience of his existence than out of any
real benefit to the feel of the picture.  He does use recurring shots
of logs burning in a fireplace to very good effect.
     Supporting performances are also excellent, as is the use of music
and costumes.  Some of the settings shown are a fascinating glimpse of
how the east coast cities looked a century ago.
     The characterizations are intricate, and at the end of the movie
the group I saw this movie with disagreed about some of the possible
interpretations of motivations.  The characters all seemed remarkably
real and palpable, and behaved in ways that felt comprehensible to a
modern audience despite the setting in a society so superficially
different.  This is a story with something complex to say about romance
and responsibilities and made for a striking contrast with the story
told in the current bestseller "The Bridges of Madison County" which I
had recently read.
     This movie is also quite long, running for about two and a half
hours.  Before going into the film, I was warned by a friend who had
seen it the day before that it might be hard to stay awake.  I had no
problem with this, and was in no rush for the film to end.  It was
textured and complex and produced some interesting conversations
afterwards among the group that had seen it.  I strongly recommend this
movie.

Author
Jon A Webb
     Daniel Day-Lewis plays the favored son of a prominent New York
family, who is engaged to marry the favored daughter of another family,
played by Winona Ryder.  Michelle Pfeiffer plays the black sheep cousin
of Winona, who has disgraced the family by marrying a European cad,
then leaving him and returning to New York.  Naturally, Day-Lewis's
character falls in love with her.
     So far, a standard and obvious story.  But this all takes place in
a very strange time for America.  Apparently, at this time in New York,
manners were as important as, say, in Japan at the time of
Sei-Shonagon.  I.e., form was all, a precise set of signs were used to
signal any unpleasant statement, and certain things were simply
impossible; for example, Pfeiffer's character cannot get divorced.
     So you have the passion between Day-Lewis and Pfeiffer, which has
to be played out in an extremely careful and mannered way.  Even in
private, they cannot signal to each other how they really feel, but
only give the most obscure signs (except in one or two scenes).  This
tension is the driving force behind the film; it seems almost as if the
film stock would tear itself apart, with the tremendous contradiction
between the way the characters feel and the way they act.
     I thought the direction of Pfeiffer and Ryder to be, perhaps, a
little too subtle.  Pfeiffer is filled with this passion, but not
allowed to express it; Ryder plays a superficial airhead, who acts
completely automatically in the correct mannered way.  They are total
opposites underneath, but Scorsese forces them to act almost
identically, on the surface.  But as a result, both seem very remote
and it is hard to appreciate the emotions underneath.  I think to
properly appreciate this, you have to see the movie more than once; it
seems worth it.
     Day-Lewis does not seem as torn.  The movie is told from his point
of view, and he seems to be feeling the tensions we would all feel at
being trapped in such a society.  He protests against it, weakly, but
allows things to happen to him, which mostly lead to his benefit,
though not of course to the fulfillment of the passion driving the
film.  I thought Day-Lewis was given his head a little too much in this
film; he should have been subjected a little bit to the same tensions
driving Ryder and Pfeiffer.
     There are some delicious small parts in this film.  Miriam
Margolyes plays Ryder and Pfeiffer's grandmother, and provides comic
relief as well as a sense of stability.  Michael Gough is fun as the
sort of judge of this society.  Richard E. Grant is great as a devious
schemer.
     The film is strikingly beautiful.  Every scene, even the largest,
seems to be set up with incredible precision.  Certain scenes linger in
the mind:  the conservatory, the external view of the grandmother's
house before New York was New York, the scene where Ryder traps
Day-Lewis, with her dress arrayed like a spider's web behind her.

Author
Ralph Benner
     From the very start, with the Victorian calligraphy as the
background for the blooming flowers during the credits, to the first
scenes inside an opera house, with Gounod's "Faust" being performed, to
the next set of views touring a splendidly highbrow 1870s New York
mansion overflowing with a decor of velvet, art and stuffed mannequins
as people, viewers are gasping at the implausibility: Can this really
be a Martin Scorsese picture?  Based on Edith Wharton's 1921 Pulitzer
prize-winning novel about ill-conceived and hypocritical American
upper-class adoption of European sophistication, THE AGE OF INNOCENCE
at first glances might seem the atmospheric product of James Ivory and
Ismail Merchant.  Hard to believe, but Scorsese equals them: made in
honor of one of his favorite movies THE HEIRESS, and designed by Dante
Ferretti, THE AGE OF INNOCENCE looks like a gilded age vision by
Luchino Visconti, John De Cuir or John Box, and there's an undeniable
resemblance to Ingmar Bergman's FANNY AND ALEXANDER.  Like Bergman's
feast, Scorsese's is so fancy and rich in detail--everything's splashed
as layouts from Architectural Digest and Gourmet magazines--that you
could get woozy and may have to hit the smelling salts.  (Because
Bergman packed in so much demonstrative warmth, some of us regretted
not taking along the Vivirin.)  But in perhaps the only touch of
modernity that Scorsese risks in this his most audacious movie is that
he allows the unrequited love between Wharton's soon-to-be-married
Newland Archer and the rumored-to-be-loose Countess Ellen Olenska to
not only sadden but also anger us.  This isn't just a story or picture
about stifling customs of denial or high society values; it's a story
and picture about our hypocrisy over values--relinquishing ourselves
to others' demands of imperatives we don't believe in.
     Though David Lean was first in bringing E. M. Forster to the
screen, with the pumped-up nothingness of A PASSAGE TO INDIA, most
viewers rightly believe that Ivory and Merchant have more successfully
brought the genteel sage to film in A ROOM WITH A VIEW, MAURICE and
HOWARDS END.  I've read in some national magazines that Scorsese's
among the first to bring Wharton to viewing audiences, but this isn't
so: the honorable ETHAN FROME was delivered three months prior, and
came and went in a flash.  (Maybe because Liam Neeson needed a co-star
with at least as much of passion.)  Wharton's THE OLD MAID was a 1935
award-winning play adapted by Zoe Atkins,and later a 1939 soaper
starring Bette Davis.  And deep into forgotten movie trivia is
Wharton's 1922 THE GLIMPSES OF THE MOON, made into a film that featured
dialogue titles by F.  Scott Fitzgerald, and there was a forgettable
stage version of AGE starring Katharine Cornell and Franchet Tone.  But
Scorsese picked the right Wharton material as his first foray into the
genre of American period piece: his two lovers are ruled by a snobbery
of class not too much unlike the sociopaths and goons who rule over
their victims in his charged-up modern Americana.  The central
difference, of course, is that there are no bloody corpses as
pornography, though one could argue the lavish spreads of settings and
food in AGE are rather porno-ish in their arbitrariness.  Yet that's
part of the appeal of Wharton: as much as she's criticizing the social
dictums by which her characters are forced to live, she's trapped them
in orgies of addicting lushness.  And Wharton herself more than most:
she was born into and lived the exceedingly pampered life of high
social class New York.  (Like Mark Twain before her and F.  Scott
Fitzgerald after, she did much of her writing in the comfort of her
bed.  Once, when she discovered that a hotel room bed did not face the
light, she flew into a "fit of hysterics.") She was both protege of and
 travelling companion to Henry James, who is the most obvious influence
on her as a writer: she picked up the exactitude of James's prose
style, as well as interlacing her narratives with biting commentary,
just as James did, especially in his THE BOSTONIANS, the seminal work
out of which THE AGE OF INNOCENCE might have sprung.  (Ironically,
James Ivory directed the movie version of the pungently observed
BOSTONIANS, and turned it into an undertaker's adaptation--all laid out
and ready for burial.)  Wharton, who was actually born in France and
was the first woman win a Pulitizer Prise and receive an honorary
degree from Yale, would perform readings, often at her chateau in
Hyeres, of her works-in-progress in front of James and French novelist
Paul Bourget, both of whom specialized in the psychological.
     The gamble for Scorsese is that he didn't give in to what the
movie audience is longing for--the coming together of Countess Olenska
and Newland Archer.  (Newbold is, by the way, Wharton's middle name.)
Had he done so, only the purists would have howled, because our
feelings of distrust for the dictates of others are blood-raw right
now.  That's why the conclusion gets to us in ways we're not prepared
for: we can feel the pain in what the two doomed lovers are forced not
to do--that there would be no real shame in flaunting disregard,
especially in that divorce was already legally sanctioned by the state
at the time.  Wharton's caution, one that Scorsese is surprisingly
subtle in delivering, is that the waste is even more hurting because
these lovers are conspired against to prevent what the conspirators
realize is much more than a flirtation.  Olenska and Archer become
victims to false propriety; they suspect it, the conspirators
definitely know it, and we are left to suffer it.  THE AGE OF INNOCENCE
is a march to folly, and in his only truly fine scenes, coming at a bon
voyage dinner and at the end, Daniel Day-Lewis, as Newland, forces us
to grieve for his loss, his own lack of courage.  The audience in the
theatre fell dead-silent as Newland, bracing himself with his cane as
if it's his only fortitude, makes his decision, and for seconds
afterwards no one moved.
     When casting was announced, no one assumed Daniel Day-Lewis was
wrong for the part of Archer, but there were rumblings about Michelle
Pfeiffer as Olenska and Winona Ryder as Archer's soon-to-be-wife May
Welland.  It's the snot in those who bitched: somehow the prestigious
Day-Lewis belongs in period costume, and Pfeiffer, despite being in
DANGEROUS LIAISONS, and Ryder, despite being in BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA
and LITTLE WOMEN, might not.  But the tables turned and it's Day-Lewis
who isn't quite suited for this story.  No one can call him bad, but
he's mostly unaffecting--until, of course, the ending.  He seems
disassembled--parts of him are there in a corner, weak and prissy and
always it seems on the verge of tears; parts of him seem disbelievingly
mansion-sized self-assured; parts of him simply don't make sense--like
defending Countess Olenska in the first third of the story and then
later denying himself the pleasures of his conquest.  (We're talking
about a 1870s New York City, which even then was a thriving metropolis,
so did no snob ever utilize the city's largeness as a cloak of
privacy?)  Some of his scenes with Pfeiffer bring to mind Jeremy Irons'
Charles Smithson in THE FRENCH LIEUTENANT'S WOMAN.  Day-Lewis can be
all of many things, and all at once, because he's one of the few very
physically thin actors who imparts evolutionary credence; his frame has
the uncanny ability to transmogrify itself.  (In close-up, he's got a
jutting jaw that we can sometimes get lost in.)  Not yet the equivalent
of Olivier, he is the other side of the Atlantic's version of our
Dustin Hoffman.  But since MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE, wherein he's
indescribably right as a gay punker, he's become an icon of fakery.
The smart set's still raving about his Tomas in Philip Kaufman's THE
UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING, in which he plays, of all things, a
sex-obsessed brain surgeon-turned-window washer.  He pours on the
illicit naughty boy charm so thickly that it would be understand ably
easy to assume he's sexy.  Not quite; he's a vacuum--using his brows
and the whites of his eyes and a day or two's growth of beard against
his dark skin and his slinkiness to project the image of sexuality.
Behind the facade is something limp: he's like a young Bradford
Dillman, with just a hint of a satyric Rip Torn--only beautified.  That
women peel off their clothes for him as soon as he bats his moody eyes
is fantasy, and it's charming in a feathery way, but what's missing is
the heat of his seductions--they're as cold as UNBEARABLE's
atmosphere.  (He confirms the maxim that sometimes sex is best when
it's confined to our imagination.)  Wearing a top hat and heavily
starched collars with more comic aplomb than any actor since Fred
Astaire, he was a scream in an unexpected take-off as E.M. in Forster's
own A ROOM WITH A VIEW.  (A minority view--no one I kno w agrees.)
While recognizing the torture in his greatness as Christy Brown in MY
LEFT FOOT, I'm simply not a good enough human being to have been able
to sit through its entirety.  Yet what I derived out of what I saw is
what has come to fore in Day-Lewis in THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS and now
here in AGE.  He's endlessly posing, alternately a still life of agony
or an insufferable smoothie, dangerously self-satisfied with his own
reflection.  Though only the meteorologists earned their pay for
MOHICANS (and 1492: CONQUEST OF PARADISE: when have two movies in the
same year ever been so misty, foggy, cloudy, rainy, hazy?), Day-Lewis,
in long hair and plentiful goodness, reminds us of Jeffrey Hunter's
emblematic Christ in KING OF KINGS; he even resembles Hunter throughout
the picture.  It was during MOHICANS that I started to feel unsettled
about Day-Lewis, and the way in which Scorsese and cinematographer
Michael Ballhaus defer to him here in AGE--and it starts with the very
first shot of him--I don't think it's at all too early to consider
that, in what may be his "artistry," he's becoming the movies' most
accomplished con.  David Strathairn would have been my choice for
Newland.
     Scorsese admitted in interviews that he in fact did defer a bit to
Day-Lewis and Michelle Pfeiffer.  He mentioned that in the time between
leaving their dress rooms and arriving on set, a transformation had
occurred, that he began to believe his actors were the very parts they
were playing, that he began to speak to them in hushed Whartonian
tones.  If Day-Lewis wallows in it too much, Pfeiffer keeps her wits
about her and does to us what she didn't quite succeed in doing in
DANGEROUS LIAISONS--get us to believe she belongs in antique
melodrama.  Her voice is the key, I think: it has that slightly pitched
quality that happens to women of leisure, women who resign, though
maybe not privately accept, that they're chattel to be displayed as
pretty possessions.  Ten years ago, Meryl Streep would have played this
part but her voice, so theatrically calibrated, would have betrayed the
novelist.  (Even if unintentional, Pfeiffer honors Streep by pirating
Sarah Woodruff's curly do.)  Olenska has a bit of Wharton in her, in
that the novelist was likewise strapped by a loveless marriage, and in
Olenska is a homage to one of James' leading ladies in THE
BOSTONIANS--Verena, the young, red-haired feminist spitfire.  But
Pfeiffer borrows from neither: this is her own portrait of a woman
accepting defeat by convention and patronage.  It's a performance built
by mystery; there's no way for us to gauge her inner-feelings about the
events by which she's stoically forced into acquiescence.  (Only once
does the performance lose focus: in a living room, she's smoking but
the cigarette doesn't appear to be lit and when she exhales, no smoke
comes out.)  In DANGEROUS LIAISONS, as the sickly pale-faced Mme. de
Tourvel, enduring medicinal therapies rented from Ken Russell's THE
DEVILS, she seemed nearly out of her league against Glenn Close's
venomous Marquise.  Sublimely controlled as she dons her war paint,
Close out-Sondergaards Gale Sondergaard and not even John Malkovich's
devilishly puffed-up, wantonly vain Vicomte can altogether match her
merciless glaze.  (Wouldn't Close make a fab Madame Ming?)  Next to
John Gielgud, no performer has stolen scenes with more graceful
arrogance and confidence.  As a result, save for a scene or two,
Pfeiffer is just about thrown right out of the picture.  You begin to
feel a strange, unwarranted sympathy for her; you tend to want to
forget she's even in the picture.  She didn't have to do anything in
TEQUILA SUNRISE except look beautiful, and she does, and she gives her
lines a crisp, singular reading.  She did the same in MARRIED TO THE
MOB, aided by the funny Mercedes Ruehl.  Looking sensationally sexy in
THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS she does a terrific "My Funny Valentine," and
she sure knows how to rummage through her purse for and light up her
Parisian Opals and she does a great slip off her feet into Jeff
Bridges's arms as they're dancing to "Moonglow" on a hotel room
balcony.  (The semi-downer ending, though, makes us ask, "Why
bother?")  I had some sympathy for her in BATMAN RETURNS: in spite of
the trash the costumers put her in, and acknowledging that she has a
wicked whiplash, she's stuck in the horror of one unplayable scene
after another.  How she managed to keep her self-respect is beyond me.
(The most clever thing about that bumme r is the Queen's Coat that the
Penguin wears; when he's walking around the cemetery where his parents
are buried, he looks like something out of a novel by Dickens.)
     Out of Dickens as well, and crossed with Aunt Pittypat from GWTW,
Miriam Margolyes gives the audience its best laugh as moneybags Mrs.
Manson Mingott.  Unfortunately looking none too well, the late Alexis
Smith is New York's numero uno grand dame.  Had she been aided by the
right kind of and more sensitive makeup artist, she'd have passed for
Wharton.  (This small part quite a contrast to Miss Smith's last TV
role--as Rebecca's former school teacher who still has enough sexual
power to charge Sam's batteries in CHEERS.)  Chubby in the face, Mary
Beth Hurt is nearly unrecognizable as Mrs. Beaufort.  As her
philandering cad of a husband, Stuart Wilson could be doing a tribute
to Rod Steiger's Komarovsky from DOCTOR ZHIVAGO And it takes a while to
get our bearings and recognize him and remember when last we might have
seen him: as Major Clark, who impregnates Sarah Layton, in THE JEWEL IN
THE CROWN.  Last, but not least (because of the rest of the supporting
cast is very good), there's Winona Ryder.  The breathless May will only
succeed if Ryder can pull off the coup de theatre.  If we hate the
character for doing it, whether we know it's coming or not, then Ryder
can only be applauded.  The act is not only one of desperation, but the
pinnacle of despised entrapment.
     In MAUGHAM, biographer Ted Morgan writes that W. Somerset "was
exasperated by the rightness and exactness of everything Edith Wharton
said." He was particularly out of joint by her usage of the word "no,"
for he "had never heard a more frigid syllable of disapproval." Maugham
snarled, "Her manner was that of a woman to whom a man has made
proposals offensive to her modesty, but which good breeding tells her
it will be more dignified to ignore than to make a scene about."
Indeed, the very essence of Wharton as social prisoner and writer: she
was on the side of the expression of love and sex but never had much
guts to engage in either.  Perhaps Wharton was poisoned by her mother's
frigidity, which might also have helped make her the anti-feminist she
appeared to be, in that she opposed education of women for high
professions, didn't exercise her right to vote, nor bothered to invite
other women to social parties she threw.  Maybe she was further
poisoned by her supposed love affair with bisexual Morton Fullerton.
(A recent biographer suggests Wharton was both homophobic and
anti-Semitic, an d disapproved of such writers as Joyce and Lawrence;
one wonders if she was truly aware of Henry James' predilections.) It's
this Victorian vengeance in her writing that's regretful and sad--and
painful for audiences watching AGE:  she's compulsive about punishing
her fictional lovers.  (She punished them in ETHAN FROME, too.)
Scorsese caught this, but he didn't do it alone: TIME critic Jay Cocks
ferreted out the Wharton upbraidings and helped shape them into a
screenplay that not only envenoms denied passions but also exalts the
power of words.  This is what's surprisingly wonderful about the
movie:  in the past we've come to expect that we're going to get
short-changed when moviemakers bring the classics to screen--images
over words or vice versa, debatable truncation.  It's thrilling to not
only hear the text captured with this much respect, but to see the
images come close to matching the era is almost unnerving: included are
reel life versions of Georges Seurat's "A Sunday Afternoon on the
Island of La Grande Jatte" and winter scenes by Richard Hartmann and
Childe Hassam.  And there's a happy marriage of editing and text:
Thelma Schoonmaker (who gets her name plastered as an advertisement
within the movie) lays on montages of messages and invitations that
enhance the art of personal writing.  (Experts in communication
believed that on-line services might resurrect this art form; it turns
out that e-mail & uploads have degenerated into "it sucks" brevity.)
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE is so respectful of Wharton that her running
commentary is voiced over by Joanne Woodward, caught as if
parenthetical privacies whispered for our ears only.  The only damn
thing wrong with this feast is that after it ended, I felt like
sneaking into a Weight Watchers meeting.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     It has been over a year now since I last gave a movie a full four
stars, but I saw one this weekend that got my **** rating.  I can only
describe THE AGE OF INNOCENCE as devastating.  Martin Scorsese
described it as his "most violent film".  This is from a director who
brought you TAXI DRIVER and RAGING BULL.  The violence in the film is
strictly mental.  There is no physical violence or even threats of any.
The "violence" is strictly mental because the film, set in the late
1800s, is about repression and entrapment in an age of carefully
prescribed moral actions.
     The sex in the film is mainly some great handholding although
there are a few kisses.  The cinematography by Michael Ballhaus is
spectacular and deserves an Oscar.  The images of New York in that age
are unforgettable.
     The casting was excellent (Daniel Day-Lewis as Newland Archer,
Michelle Pfeiffer as Ellen Olenska, and Winona Ryder as May Welland),
and the acting and directing near perfect.  Numerous Oscar
possibilities in this film.  You could feel the repression of a society
where you must act in a certain way and where most rules were extremely
strict and yet most were implicit and unspoken.  Depending on your sex
it would be hard not to identify with one of the key actor or
actresses.  You feel repressed when you left the theater.
     When the movie was over, I could hardly move.  It was the same
feeling I got when I first saw ALIENS.  I just set there staring at a
blank screen.  The movie left such a strong impression on me that words
seem inadequate to describe it.
     THE AGE OF INNOCENCE runs 2:19.  I thought the editing (Thelma
Schoonmaker) perfect and would not want to see a single frame removed.
The movie is rated PG although what it did to keep it from being rated
G is not clear.  Anyone older than 8 could see it, but you probably
need to be at least 15 to begin to truly understand it.  This is a gem
of a movie; a near perfect movie.  I award it **** and recommend this
movie strongly.  Don't miss it!
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 27, 1993
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
