Title
Review for Cruel Intentions (1999)
Number of Reviews
32

Author
Matt Williams
Coderelos De Laclos' novel Les Liasons Dangereuses has been adapted
several times before, and into better movies than Cruel Intentions.
However, this latest adaptation is perhaps the most inventive, and
certainly holds its own against the current glut of teen-centric films.
Rich teens are apparently jaded at an early age.  Just take a look at
the step-siblings, Kathryn Merteuil (Sarah Michelle Gellar) and
Sebastian Valmont (Ryan Phillippe). Though still in high school, both
are manipulative sexual predators, each taking a different tack.
Sebastian wears his roguish cruelty like a badge of honor, taking
delight in causing misery to those foolish enough to fall in love with
him.  Kathryn, on the other hand, while equally devoted to causing
misery, hides her schemes behind the veil of being the perfect student
at her ultra-rich private academy.
Sebastian has his sights set on his greatest conquest yet:  to deflower
the new headmaster's daughter, Annette Hargrove (Reese Witherspoon), a
teen with morals (gasp!), who has actually proclaimed her celibacy in a
feature in Seventeen magazine.  Sebastian is so confident that he can
bed her that he engages a wager with his sister:  if he loses, she gets
his classic car...but if he wins, the two siblings get to engage in a
session of wild sex.
Kathryn, however, spends her summer seeking revenge.  Her ex-boyfriend
dumped her for a naive twit, Cecile Caldwell (Selma Blair).  Kathryn
decides to seek her revenge by poisoning the mind of Cecile.  It's an
intricate plot involving both Sebastian, and Cecile's overly-friendly
cello teacher, Ronald Clifford (Sean Patrick Thomas).
Though it is never able to surpass its cinematic precursors, Dangerous
Liasons and Valmont, Cruel Intentions survives the transition from a
romantic costume drama to a teen sex film surprisingly intact. Where
else but in the world of teen politics could you find a realm to rival
the cruelties of the French aristocracy?
However, the shadow of the earlier films haunts Cruel Intentions
mercilessly.  Ryan Phillippe, for example, seems to be doing his best to
channel John Malkovich for his role.  It may be a performance worth
emulating, but it hardly wins Phillippe any points for originality. At
least Sarah Michelle Gellar doesn't try to emulate Glenn Close. However,
her character is saddled with such over-the-top idiosyncrasies, such as
a coke spoon hidden in a crucifix, that it is difficult to see her as
much more than a comical villain.
Selma Blair seems pathetically out of place as the innocent Cecile, a
fact not helped by her incessant overacting.  She's nearly matched by
the odd histrionics of Sean Patrick Thomas.  However, at least his
forced indignation can be mostly attributed to a faltering script.
But, those imperfections aside, Cruel Intentions has a head start on the
run-of-the-mill teen sex romp:  a good story.  There's actually a plot
at work here!  Sure, at times the complex machinations seem to be far
above the capacities of the teens in the cast, but, if you're willing to
give it a chance, there's a good bet you'll be entertained.
The film stumbles a bit at its conclusion, modified (only a slight bit)
from the book, but in a way that seems jarringly false.  Still, you
could certainly do worse than Cruel Intentions, which, though clumsy at
times, at least is not brain-suckingly vapid.  However, after watching
Cruel Intentions, rent Dangerous Liasons, to see how the story should
really be done.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Jamie Peck
CRUEL INTENTIONS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
A contempo update of the malicious goings-on in Choderlos De Laclos' 
1782 novel "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," also the basis of the 1987 Glenn 
Close-John Malkovich dazzler "Dangerous Liaisons," "Cruel Intentions" 
substitutes the aristocratic France setting with a posh New York 
boarding school on summer break. It retains the deliciously 
agenda-minded characters, however, because the teens of today can 
presumably be as vicious as the patricians of yesteryear. Buying this is 
a bit of a stretch, if somewhat vital to immerse yourself in the film's 
warped atmosphere - exaggeration has never been so enjoyable. 
Gellar's Kathryn and stepbrother Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe, her co-star 
previously in "I Know What You Did Last Summer") are so bored with their 
very blue-blooded existence that they've taken it upon themselves to 
bring down everyone who crosses them - and even a few who haven't. 
Kathryn's current project concerns sexually soiling the naive new 
girlfriend (Selma Blair, from TV's "Zoe, Duncan, Jack & Jane") of her 
ex-squeeze, a task Sebastian isn't up to because it's far too easy for 
his extensive debauching talents. Oh, well. Guess she'll just have to 
initiate the corruption herself. 
He, meanwhile, is far more taken with the headmaster's daughter 
("Pleasantville"'s Reese Witherspoon), mostly because she wrote an 
article for "Seventeen" about her bold (well, for this day and age) 
decision to stay abstinent until marriage. Sebastian and Kathryn, then, 
see this as an opportunity for a little pseudo-incestuous wager over 
whether or not he can rip her of her innocence: If Kathryn wins, she 
gets his hot 1956 Jag. If he wins, he gets her - in the Biblical sense. 
"I'll let you put it _anywhere_," Kathryn not-quite-demurely purrs, 
which pretty much cements the deal for Sebastian. 
"Cruel Intentions" eventually covers some iffy terrain when real-life 
couple Phillippe and Witherspoon actually warm to each other after 
initially rocky introductions; his charismatic but necessarily 
stone-cold portrayal makes their rushed courtship a little hard to 
totally buy, while it's difficult to comprehend why someone so smart and 
determined as she could ever fall for a smooth operator like him. If 
this were the only storyline, "Intentions" would be in trouble. But it's 
not - the subplots have subplots, which, in turn, have subplots still 
(some of them iffy as well). It's a complex tale, but one in which even 
the corners are dressed with delicious trappings. 
Gellar's icy hauteur is chief among them, but she's got some serious 
competition from WB network co-actress Blair. The latter steals the 
movie with her giddily self-depreciating demeanor, and gets to share a 
racy scene with Gellar destined to go down as an audience favorite - at 
least for the males. Witherspoon is fine, too, wisely making her part's 
lifestyle choice neither sanctimonious nor self-congratulatory. And 
director/writer Roger Kumble hardly misses a beat as far as the smirky 
tone is concerned, from the opening sequences of one-upmanship to the 
guaranteed closing comeuppance. 
Kumble is also successful with style and locale. The sumptuous 
production design - posh bedrooms, blush poolsides - is as sensual as 
any of the lead performers, the cinematography crisp and darkly 
colorful, and the subdued rock soundtrack - available, ironically, on 
Virgin Records - only furthers "Cruel Intentions" satiny ambience. (The 
score, however, just isn't on par, with some annoying techno loop 
constantly in the background.) Nothing, however, overpowers the games 
these people play, nasty and naughty though they may be. For a movie 
with its intentions mostly in the right place, "Intentions" is cruel but 
cool.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Writer/director Roger Kumble has transposed Choderlos de
Laclos's 18th century French novel "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," which
became a movie called "Dangerous Liaisons" (1988), into Manhattan's
teenage uppercrust, where two wealthy, manipulative step-siblings
(Sarah Michelle Gellar and Ryan Phillippe) specialize in emotional
cruelty and betrayal within their prep school. When Gellar's dumped by
her beau for a naive girl (Selma Blair), Phillippe wickedly seduces
the awkward interloper, deliberately ruining her reputation. But that
conquest was easy, so, in a nasal, whining voice, Gellar challenges
the strutting Phillippe to a diabolical wager.  Can he seduce the new
headmaster's virginal daughter (Reese Witherspoon) who has written an
article for "Seventeen" magazine about how she intends to stay pure
until marriage? If he wins, Gellar agrees to have sex with him. If he
loses, he must give her his vintage 1956 Jaguar convertible.  How
vindictive, perverse and callow can you get? In Christopher Hampton's
"Dangerous Liaisons," Glenn Close and John Malkovich were, at least,
sophisticated adults, even though their behavior was sinister and
vicious at a time when a woman's "reputation" was crucial to her very
existence.  In this exploitative film, which is peppered with
profanity, snide, silly, spoiled brats are behaving like...well,
snide, silly, spoiled brats, and the parlor game plot unfolds more
like the recent "She's All That," in which a guy bets he can get a
girl, gets her, and then realizes he loves her after all. And, as if
that weren't enough, here there are self-consciously incongruous
subplots involving homosexuality and inter-racial sex.  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Cruel Intentions" is a ridiculous, fumbling
4. It's a lame, trashy teenage soap opera.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: March 5, 1999
Starring: Ryan Phillippe, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Reese Witherspoon,
Selma Blair, Joshua Jackson, Sean Patrick Thomas, Tara Reid
Directed by: Roger Kumble
Distributed by: Columbia Pictures / Sony Pictures Entertainment
MPAA Rating: R (strong sexual dialogue, sexual situations involving
teens, language, drug use) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/cruel.htm
Like most teen dramas or comedies, CRUEL INTENTIONS follows an annoying
pattern of oversimplification. Reality is suspended indefinitely and
imperitively, and all sorts of assumptions are necessary for the movie
to make sense. Although this movie fills its time with a plethora of
edgy sexual situations and dialogue so as to establish its context
firmly in the minds of its adolescent target audience, the latest from
director Roger Kumble is all smoke and mirrors. CRUEL INTENTIONS does
not deliver on any of its promises, and has little to offer other than
an occasionally witty script and some steamy content. 
The plot is a bet: step-siblings Kathryn (Sarah Michelle Gellar) and
Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe) are idle and rich (as in the Upper East Side
of Manhattan rich) and without parental supervision over the summer.
Upon news that their exclusive prep school is getting a new headmaster
and more importantly, a new headmaster's daughter, the foundation for
the bet is laid. Then we learn that the daughter in question, Annette
(Reese Witherspoon), is a firm believer in abstinence until true love.
So Kathryn bets Sebastian, a suave young womanizer, that he can't
devirginize Annette; if he succeeds, Sebastian has his way with Kathryn,
the only girl he can't seduce, and if he fails Kathryn gets Sebastian's
classic Jaguar sportster. 
There follows 95 minutes of sexcapades among an elite clique of
teenagers in New York City. The movie plays heavily to anticipation,
saturating the script with heavily lustful dialogue and providing
unlimited footage of foreplay. Kudos to a director that can keep a
premise such as this nudity-free, but the lack of skin means this film
was far less erotic than it could have been. Instead, the direction
comes off as inadaquate. 
The acting corps *is* adaquate, but that's not much of a complement
considering the limited nature of the roles involved. Sarah Michelle
Gellar, best known from TV's "Buffy the Vampire Slayer," does not play
the temptress to its fullest potential, and often has seemingly mixed
motivations -- ruining the possibilities of the character. Phillippe
does the job of chief romancer well enough, even managing to evoke some
sympathy in the movie's twist of an ending. But he's stoic throughout,
giving little reason to feel anything for him. Witherspoon evokes the
most emotion as the pretty-in-pink heroine, but the role is too overdone
for her to be noteworthy in it. No one has a chance here. 
About the only thing that does have a chance is the script, which is
unfailingly witty in a straight-faced sense. Although it's almost
pathetically dumb when it counts, trite insults fly across the screen
with humorous abandon. This allows the audience to achieve some foothold
in the lives of the characters. But by and large CRUEL INTENTIONS is an
ignorant movie, promising things that cannot be delivered and taking
large steps in all the wrong directions. 

Author
Michael Dequina
_Cruel_Intentions_ (R) *** (out of ****)
Before she found widespread recognition as TV's vampire-slaying heroine
Buffy Summers, Sarah Michelle Gellar first made quite a different name for
herself on the ABC's _All_My_Children_.  In her two-and-a-half year,
1993-1995 stint on the daytime drama, the then-teenage Gellar made a
striking impression as Kendall Hart Lang, a conniving hellraiser in her
mid-20s.  Kendall did everything she could to make her mother's (Susan
Lucci's Erica Kane)--and just about everyone else's--life miserable: she
made numerous attempts to seduce her stepfather; bedded his son, then cried
rape at his father's hands; perjured herself on the witness stand and
served a jail sentence--and this was all in her _first_ year.  In the
process, Gellar earned two Emmy nominations, one Emmy win, and a legion of
loyal fans--including myself (though not Lucci, whose working relationship
with Gellar reportedly mirrored their characters').
_Cruel_Intentions_ marks Gellar's big return to the type of role us
original fans know and love the best--the no-holds-barred bitch--and the
act has only gotten better with age.  Now in her 20s herself (though now,
ironically, playing a teen), Gellar exudes a captivatingly carniverous
carnality as Kathryn Merteuil, a bored, insanely wealthy NY prep school
student for whom selfish psychosexual mindgames provide the ultimate
thrill.  The film is at its tawdry best during her erotically-charged
scenes with Ryan Phillippe, who stars as Sebastian Valmont, Kathryn's
stepbrother and comrade in sin.
If the characters' surnames sound familiar, they should--writer-director
Roger Kumble's film is a high-gloss, ultracontemporary, youth-infused
revamp of Choderlo de Laclos's 1782 novel _Les_Liasons_Dangereuses_, whose
most notable film adaptation was Stephen Frears's powerful 1988
_Dangerous_Liaisons_.  Despite the '90s setting and adolescent characters,
Kumble hews fairly close to his source material in telling the story of how
Merteuil and Valmont wager on whether or not he can bed a virtuous girl
(here, Reese Witherspoon's Annette Hargrove).  Of course, with the change
in time and age demographic come new wrinkles: while Sebastian's prize is
indeed an encounter with Kathryn, hers is his vintage Jaguar car; and
Annette initially catches the attention of Sebastian by writing a virginity
manifesto in an issue of none other than _Seventeen_ magazine.
The latter touch is somewhat tongue-in-cheek, as is a lot of
_Cruel_Intentions_.  The film's first hour fits Sony's description of the
film as a "wicked comedy," offering some gleefully mean-spirited laughs as
Kathryn and Sebastian not only plot Annette's ruin, but that of the
innocent and naive (to put it mildly) Cecile (an effectively over-the-top
Selma Blair, Zoe of the sitcom _Zoe,_Duncan,_Jack_&_Jane_), whose boyfriend
rejected Kathryn.  Kumble gives Gellar some choice catty lines, and one
bold scene between her and Blair is bound to make viewers see the two WB
stars in a whole new light.
But Kumble ultimately remains faithful to his tragic source material, and
as the tale becomes more and more serious, the casting of the dramatically
limited Phillippe becomes increasingly problematic.  His natural woodenness
is an adequate fit for Sebastian's cold detachment, but when the script
inevitably has Sebastian fall for Annette, the pathetic Phillippe can't
follow.  No convincing expression, let alone emotion, registers on his
blank face, making Sebastian's purported change wholly unbelievable.  With
this latest colorless performance (following _Playing_by_Heart_ and the
disastrous _54_), former _One_Life_to_Live_ star Phillippe--unlike the
ever-impressive Gellar--reinforces the stereotype that actors with a soap
pedigree have no discernible acting talent.  On the other hand, Witherspoon
(Phillippe's real-life fiancee, as it is) holds up her end of the romance,
radiating purity, vulnerability, and a crucial underlying strength.  But
without an at least equally involving match, her efforts are for naught,
and the outcome of the story fails to make any profound impression.
Even if the dramatic pretensions of literary fidelity get the better of
him in the end, it is Kumble's sense of humor that makes _Cruel_Intentions_
a step above recent then-to-now translations such as
_William_Shakespeare's_Romeo_+_Juliet_ and _Great_Expectations_.  While
those two films got bogged down with the self-importance of their "radical"
artistic ambitions, Kumble has the keen sense to not take himself too
seriously, making _Cruel_Intentions_ something that those films never
were--entertaining.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Roger Kumble.
Cast: Ryan Phillippe, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Reese Witherspoon, Selma 
Blair, Sean Patrick Thomas, Eric Mabius, Joshua Jackson, Christine 
Baranski, Swoosie Kurtz, Louise Fletcher, Tara Reid.
1999 - 97 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, sex, brief nudity, and mild violence).
Reviewed March 7, 1999.
Note: For anyone who read my essay, "The Cruel Intentions of Teenage 
Audiences," this review is based on my second viewing, with an audience, 
thankfully, that acted much more mature.
What an ingenious concept: Take a famed 18th-century novel, in this case 
Choderlos de Laclos's Les Liaisons Dangereuses, which has subsequently 
been adapted to film three times (in 1959, 1988, and 1989, 
respectively), and update it to modern-day New York City with wealthy 
teenage characters. Walking such a fine line with the classic source 
material could have easily turned out disasterously, or even laughably, 
but screenwriter Roger Kumble (also making his auspicious directing 
debut) has wisely stuck surprisingly closely to the book, as well as the 
1988 film version by Stephen Frears, "Dangerous Liasons," and has 
unexpectedly captured the tricky tone, as well, between absolute 
wickedness and ultimate redemption.
Sebastian Valmont (Ryan Phillippe) and Kathryn Merteuil (Sarah Michelle 
Gellar) are two devious step-sibling Manhattan socialites on their 
summer break before their senior year in an exclusive private school, 
who amuse themselves by playfully flirting with each other and bragging 
about their various sexual conquests. They are quickly growing bored, 
however, by the growing air of predictability in the games they play 
with potential love interests whom they care nothing for. When Kathryn 
is dumped by one of her boyfriends for the clumsy, childish 15-year-old 
virgin Cecile Caldwell (Selma Blair, star of "Zoe, Duncan, Jack and 
Jane"), she is outraged, and asks Sebastian for a favor: seduce Cecile 
and then spread rumors about her promiscuity, even though she has her 
eyes set on her black music teacher, Ronald (Sean Patrick Thomas). The 
stakes grow even higher between Sebastian and Kathryn when she makes a 
wager with him concerning if he can seduce Annette Hargrove (Reese 
Witherspoon), a young woman whose father is going to be the new 
headmaster of their school, and whom has recently written an article in 
"Seventeen" magazine where she professes her plans to wait until 
marriage to lose her virginity, before school starts. If he loses, she 
gets his vintage Porsche. And if he wins, he can enjoy Kathryn in any 
way he wants. "I'm the one person you can't have," Kathryn tells 
Sebastian, "and it kills you." Sebastian accepts, but while spend time 
with Annette, the unthinkable happens: he actually begins to form real, 
human feelings for her, despite initially only using her.
"Cruel Intentions" is a sleek and stylish comedy-drama that makes no 
compromises with its title: the two main characters in the film, and 
even some of the supporting ones, are extremely cruel and emotionally 
sick people who get their kicks out of using people. Because of this, 
the film is also certainly not your normal so-called "teenager" movie, 
and I could easily imagine adults also getting involved in the 
characters' plight, just like many have with "Dangerous Liasons." 
Even if the characters aren't all likable, they are written with a 
richness you don't often see, and the dialogue between Sebastian and 
Kathryn is truly fetching and enjoyable, as they don't always say what 
they mean, or slyly use double entendres to stand for what they are 
saying. And as played by Phillippe and especially Gellar, the two actor 
are certainly up to the challenge. Gellar finally has proven with this 
film that she can very well be a wildly versatile actress that can play 
sweet with one role and be deceptive and hateful with the next, as she 
does here. Even if Phillippe isn't always up to her level, he is still 
well-cast in the role and plays several scenes with a brutal honesty 
(even if, in the film, he is supposed to be deceiving someone).
As the innocent, beautiful Annette, Witherspoon turns in yet another 
fine performance to add to her impressive resume (which includes 
outstanding turns in such films as 1991's "The Man in the Moon," 1996's 
"Freeway," and 1996's "Fear"), and in one vital dramatic sequence, she 
is able to transform a potentially cliched scene into something that is 
thoroughly poignant. Witherspoon also works very well with Phillippe, 
even if there aren't quite enough scenes between them to believe that 
they have fallen in love, and they make a quite charismatic pair 
(perhaps because they are a couple in real life, just recently engaged).
In the fourth and final central role is Blair (in her first starring 
film), who is a standout as the juvenile Cecile. That Blair is 
26-years-old (about two to five years older than the other cast members, 
even though she plays someone two or three years younger) and is able to 
believably play a high school freshman only goes to show that she is 
also very talented, as well as has a firm comic sensibility, since many 
of her scenes rely on humor. All other actors in the film have 
relatively small roles who are used as pawns in Sebastian and Kathryn's 
scheme, including Thomas, as the music teacher; Eric Mabius, as a 
teenage football player and closeted homosexual; Joshua Jackson, as 
Sebastian's gay friend; and Christine Baranski as Cecile's aristocratic 
mother.
Although the story at hand is ultimately a tragic one, and includes a 
masterfully-done conclusion involving Gellar that rivals the one in 
"Dangerous Liasons" with Glenn Close, "Cruel Intentions" is also an 
often very funny comedy, particularly when dealing with small 
blink-and-you'll-miss details involving the characters, the 
always-amusing dialogue, and the infantile antics of Cecile. People can 
criticize "Cruel Intentions" all they want, but when it comes down to 
it, it is so very similar to 1988's Oscar-nominated "Dangerous Liasons" 
that it really is hard to nit-pick. The only major difference I can 
actually detect between the two, except for the obvious (such as the 
present-day time period and teenage characters), is that the characters 
in "Cruel Intentions" seem to jump more vibrantly to life. In 
retrospect, while watching "Dangerous Liasons" not long ago for the 
first time, despite the brilliant performances by Close, John Malcovich, 
and Michelle Pfeiffer, all I could really think about was telling the 
characters, "lighten up already!"

Author
A. Estey
        I never understood what the cliché "Hell on Earth" truly meant
until very recently. I've just never experienced anything in my life
which was so terrifying, so horrible, so monstrously deplorable that
it justified being termed as "Hell on Earth". After all, I've never
been to war, I've never been the victim of any violent crime, I've
never really been broken hearted, and I've never been audited; so I
really had no frame of reference as to people meant when they said
that something was "Hell on Earth"  
        In a perfect world, I would be in charge of all the movie
studios. The very first thing I'd do in this perfect world, would be
to take every Hollywood producer who thinks that setting any story in
contemporary America with a 20-something cast playing teenagers and
featuring a soundtrack ripped directly from MTV, and throw them in
jail. But it wouldn't just be your average jail, not even a maximum
security installation. I'd have these producers (and everyone else
involved in the production of these films) put in front of a war
crimes tribunal and forced to beg for mercy for their crimes against
humanity.
        Now you're probably thinking to yourself: "Is this really how
bad Cruel Intentions is?"
        The answer is no. It's actually much worse. Watching the cast
of this motion picture atrocity try to act their way through Roger
Kumble's awfully written script is probably a lot like stabbing
yourself in the arm with a chainsaw and then pouring salt on the open
wound. And then pouring acid on the salt. I don't know if Kumble was
trying to evoke comedy or tragedy out of his opening scene where Marci
Greenbaum (Tara Reid) whines about having nude photos of her posted on
the internet, but the only emotion I felt was sheer boredom.
        From that opening scene, where boring actor Ryan Phillippe
tries to seduce TV actress Swoosie Kurtz, to the conclusion which I
don't remember because I had practically fallen asleep; Cruel
Intentions is truly "Hell on Earth," right up there with war and tax
audits.
Reviewed by: A. Estey
Copyright 1999, by A. Estey (gbv_adam@hotmail.com)

Author
SaiTiau
"I hate it when things don't go my way.  It makes me so horny."
I'll admit that I'm pleasantly surprised by the completely wicked movie
that is "Cruel Intentions." I expected it to have a lot more sex, money, and
corruption.   A lewd, "Wild Things"-ish movie that knows its place. 
Unexpectedly, the movie actually had some *family values*, epitomized by
Reese Witherspoon's Annette Hargrove.  Admittedly, what confused me
was the film's schizophrenia.  First the first half it's this tongue-in-
cheek, deliciously evil farce about the lives of spoiled rich kids; for the
second half it turns into a sort of bittersweet romance intertwined with
lessons about life.  Thankfully, this discrepancy wasn't too distracting
because the movie cleverly held on to all its essential characters without
dropping them off suddenly like some movies are too apt to do; and Sarah
Michelle's Gellar bitch-from-hell character Kathryn remained
determinedly evil until the very end.  No conversion crap.  
The movie's got a lot of spunk: this is evident a couple of minutes into the
film, when Kathryn, with an angelic smile, tells Christine Baranski's
character that whenever she's in trouble, she turns to God in the form of a
cross worn around her neck.  As soon as she's alone, we see her snuffing
the cocaine that's hidden inside the cross.   The character in large part
contribute to the film's charisma.  Ryan Philippe plays a character similar
to his role in "Playing by Heart," but he surprised me with his ability to
portray the inherently cruel.  Kudos to Gellar this time for actually
belonging in a movie she deserves.  It's amazing that she can play the
innocent, down-to-earth girl in the disastrous "Simply Irresistible" and
become the manipulative ice queen here.  She made the skin of movie-
goers crawl with hatred.  I will give credit to the film though for giving
Kathryn and edge of vulnerability and some ambiguity.  Who knows if she's
really in love with Sebastian and just has a, ahem, drastic way of
expressing her feelings?  Tired of being trapped in the confines of the
upper-class?  After all, she is one *messed up* girl.  I also liked how
Sebastian and Kathryn are able to transform from perfect private school
students into immoral sexaholics.  I'd have been fooled.  Their relationship
is one-of-a-kind, of course, and it was a treat being able to muse on what
direction it might take.  Of course, hatred gained the upperhand.  Reese
Witherspoon does a good job, just a little weaker than the others, as Miss
Morals; and whoever-it-was that played Cecile is gonna give Molly
Shannon a run for her money.   The only character that lacked much
dimension was Ronald.  
At first glance "Cruel Intentions" is just another made-for-teenagers
sexy tale of betrayal, seduction, and irresponsible behavior.  However, I do
believe it has more depth to it that only adds to the enjoyment of the
sometimes juvenile sexual innuendo and delightfully enticing characters,
characters who manage to earn pity despite their behavior.  The death of
Sebastian was an unexpected and much-welcomed twist that elevates the
film out of the "guilty indulgence" category.  The ultimate
("bittersweet") triumph belongs to Annette, who forced Kathryn to
contradict her own words: "People *do* change." The lesson?  Maybe nice
girls do finish first.  
Silver-Screen List Administrator and PVPHS Class of '99
http://members.aol.com/saitiau/welcome.html

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
        When I first saw the preview for Cruel Intentions, I turned to my
friend and said, "Dangerous Liaisons for Kids!"  It was clear to me that
the film would be an obvious chunk of plagiarized nonsense, owing
everything it is to Stephen Frears' 1988 masterpiece.  Imagine my
surprise to see that writer/director Roger Kumble has given credit to
his source material:  Choderlos de Laclos is recognized for his novel
Les Liaisons Dangereuses in the opening credits.  And I was impressed.
        In fact, I was much more impressed with this recognition than with the
actual film, which is an appalling excuse for a movie.  It's kiddie-porn
hackwork, complete with earthy sex-talk and fully-clothed hand-jobs.  I
suppose this kind of movie was inevitable; with all the teen high-school
angst movies coming out, there was certainly room for a pretentious and
laughable movie about a bunch of teenagers who think they're smarter and
more beautiful than all the other people on earth combined.  Cruel
Intentions is a mess in every possible way, and it fails primarily in
the way I expected it to:  I hated all the characters, and I hate
everything they do.  
        I also hate Ryan Phillippe, so perhaps my opinion is not as objective
as it could be.  Phillippe plays (check out this name) Sebastian
Valmont.  Wow.  Isn't that a memorable name?  I could just say it over
and over again.  Sebastian Valmont.  It kind of rolls off the tongue, in
the spirit of phrases like Sanguine Vapors and Velvet Sandwich. 
Sebastian Valmont is the coolest guy who ever walked the earth; there is
no woman he can't have, no material object out of his reach.  He has all
the money, all the sex -- all at his fingertips.  And, luckily, his
parents never enter into his life -- no, in the world of Cruel
Intentions, adults don't really exist.  The ones who do are irritating.
        Sebastian Valmont lives with his stepsister, Kathryn Merteuil (Sarah
Michelle Gellar), the bitch-queen of the universe, and also the woman
every man wants.  Since these two rich kids are so bored, they only
thing they can do is challenge each other with meaningless sexual
liaisons.  Kathryn wants Sebastian Valmont to de-virginize Cecile
Caldwell (Selma Blair), a naive dork-chick who has somehow wronged
Kathryn.  But it's too easy for Sebastian Valmont -- he wants to nail
Annette Hargrove (Reese Witherspoon), the "paradigm of chastity and
beauty."  So, Sebastian Valmont and Kathryn make a deal (which is too
explicit to state here).  But -- dear God! -- Sebastian Valmont actually
begins to fall for poor Annette Hargrove.  
        Dangerous Liaisons is a great movie because the characters are all
believable, and because of its masterful acting.  Cruel Intentions is
bad for many reasons, but it lacks both believable characters and
masterful acting.  Kathryn Merteuil is simply a hateful witch, a girl so
loathsome that I would probably enjoy pouring hot lead on her.  She is
supposed to be mean, but Glenn Close gave the character some depth in
Dangerous Liaisons.  Gellar, while aesthetically pleasing, is
one-dimensional and utterly repulsive.  Witherspoon has a truly
beautiful face, but her character isn't the moral staple she's supposed
to be:  sure, she won't have sex until she's in love (is this really a
*moral* issue?), but she does some things in the last few scenes that
are more than a little reprehensible.
        But I can't forget Mr. Phillippe, who continues to exceed my
expectations with his impenetrable, invulnerable blandness.  I have to
give him credit and say that he did, in fact, manage to change his
facial expression about three times during the course of Cruel
Intentions.  And there's one point in the film in which he shouts,
thereby defeating my hypothesis that he is vocally monotone.  True, he
is bad, but it doesn't help that he has no character to work with. 
Kumble has drained all the interesting aspects from this character,
leaving us with a sex-crazed lunatic who is supposed to be sympathetic
because he falls in love with a moral flower and shuns the wicked bitch. 
        The film fails in every other way, too.  First of all, nobody talks
like this.  Even the "intellectuals" I know don't bother with this kind
of pointless and pretentious yammering.  For a while, the movie looks
like it might play itself for laughs, but it ends up taking itself so
seriously that there's no way we can join it.  Cruel Intentions also
manages to come off as soft-porn in more than one scene.  Earlier I
mentioned a fully-clothed hand-job; this occurs between Kathryn and
Sebastian Valmont, both of whom are intended to be hateful at this point
in the movie.  So, if we hate them, then what's the point of an extended
sex scene?  Titillation, of course.  It can't even work under the
pretense of "meaningful love scene," because we hate the characters.
        It's interesting to note some of the parallels between Cruel Intentions
and Dangerous Liaisons.  Kumble is clearly familiar with the earlier
film; many of the scenes have a similar tone, and there are moments in
Frears' film that Kumble imitates almost completely (such as the last
scene, in which [spoiler warning!] the antagonist is humiliated in front
of her peers).  But kids don't act like this.  Nobody acts like this. 
In his translation, Roger Kumble forgot character development and
sympathy -- some pretty crucial elements.  The result is a picture of
confounding badness, a kiddie-porn mess that thinks it's really deep and
profound.  I'll give Cruel Intentions credit for realizing its
influences, but that doesn't change the fact that it's awful.  

Author
Luke Buckmaster
CRUEL INTENTIONS
Cast: Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, Reese Witherspoon, Selma
Blair, Christine Baranski, Joshua Jackson
Director: Roger Kumble
Screenplay: Roger Kumble, suggested by "Les Liaisons Dangereuses" by
Choderlos de Laclos
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 stars
Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe) and Kathryn (Sarah Michelle Gellar) are two
manipulating upper class Manhattan teenagers, who agree to partake in a
wager of sexual contest.  Kathryn challenges Sebastian - who is known
for his sexual sleaziness - to seduce a pristine student named Annette
(Reese Witherspoon), who is incidentally a headmaster's daughter.  If
Sebastian loses, he has to hand over his 1956 Jaguar to Kathryn.  If he
wins, he gets to do Kathryn in the position of his choice.  But
Sebastian begins to fall in love with the gentle spirited Annette,
whilst Kathryn immerses herself in cocaine and meaningless
relationships.
Cruel Intentions has so many plot twists and turns that it is easy to
feel as manipulated as the film's characters, but for few of the right
reasons.  Although this film has a distinctly 90's touch - with
homosexuals, lesbian references, drug use, you name it - it rarely feels
fresh or original.  The central romance between Sebastian and Annette is
uninspired, with not even one scene portraying their emotions in an
insightful or mature manner.
The script has its ups and downs; the film's first half is considerably
better than its second, or at least a little more intriguing.  The
acting here does not contribute much to the production.  Sarah Michelle
Gellar quickly becomes little more than a passing joke - whilst there is
nothing particularly wrong with her performance, her dialogue is
ridiculously egotistical and cold.  Reese Witherspoon, however, gives a
sensuous and exciting presence.
Cruel Intentions is directed and edited with precision, and shifts
through its various subplots seamlessly.  The filmmakers have produced a
sharp and shifty piece, but one that fails to entice audiences or bring
them into the picture.  It has a lot of bickering, biting and
slandering, but little intrigue.   Furthermore, squeezing in a happy
ending is not just a bad choice - given the subject matter, it's also
painfully ironic.


Author
Greg King
CRUEL INTENTIONS (M).  
(Columbia Tristar)
Director: Roger Kumble
Stars: Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, Reese Witherspoon, Selma 
Blair, Louise Fletcher, Sean 
Patrick Thomas, Joshua Jackson, Eric Mabius, Christine Baranski, Swoosie 
Kurtz, Alaina Reed Hall, Hiep 
Thi Le, Deborah Offner, Drew Snyder, Herta Ware
Running time: 97 minutes. 
This contemporary, steamy and hip version of Dangerous
Liaisons is aimed at the cinema literate, adolescent audience of the
'90's.
In updating Choderlos De Laclos' 1782 novel of debauchery,
deception and sexual betrayal to the 20th century, first time director
Roger Kumble reaffirms the timelessness of the story and its themes.
He maintains the essential ideas of the original novel, but brings a
hip, street wise sensibility to the plot and breathes new life into
the self absorbed, ruthless characters.  Kumble still sets this modern
version amidst a world of wealth and immense privilege, in which the
beautiful people arrogantly believe that the normal rules of society
do not apply to them.
          Sebastian Valmont (the hunky Ryan Phillippe) and his beautiful
step sister Kathryn (Sarah Michelle Gellar, from I Know What You Did
Last Summer, and tv's Buffy The Vampire Slayer, etc) desperately lust
after each other.  Left alone in their plush Manhattan apartment while
their parents holiday, they direct their energies into seducing many
of their contemporaries and then casually destroying their
reputations.
But the stakes are dramatically upped when Sebastian sets out
to seduce Annette (Reese Witherspoon, recently seen in Pleasantville,
etc), the daughter of his school's new headmaster.  In a recent
magazine interview Annette publicly avowed to maintain her virginity
until she marries the man she loves.  Meanwhile, Kathryn sets out to
tarnish the reputation of Cecile (newcomer Selma Blair), the new girl
friend of an ex-lover who dumped her in humiliating circumstances.  At
stake is Sebastian's prized 1956 vintage Jaguar.  But Sebastian has
underestimated the cunning of his manipulative sister, who is willing
to play people off against one another, especially when the stakes are
so high and personal.
Neither the contemporary setting, the hunky young cast, nor
the cutting edge soundtrack detract from the savage nature of the
amoral games that the pair play for their own sense of personal
gratification.  There is more than a whiff of sex here, although some
fans may be disappointed to learn they don't get to see Buffy in the
buff.
The charismatic and handsome Phillipe (the best thing in the
recent 54) continues to impress with another superb performance.  He
conveys Sebastian's transformation from cynical, shallow cad, and
gives the flashy character some unexpected depth.  Gellar relishes
this opportunity to play against type, and is superb as the bitchy and
manipulative Kathryn, who is prepared to use anyone to achieve her
aims.  Witherspoon is also good as the vulnerable and naive Annette,
the intended victim of these dangerous games who unexpectedly
triumphs.  Oscar winner Louise Fletcher, Swoosie Kurtz and Christine
Baranski round out the cast in smaller roles as some of the adult
characters caught up in the cruel machinations.
Cruel Intentions has a sophisticated style that will also
strongly appeal to an adult audience not normally drawn towards
shallow teen dramas.

Author
Bob Bloom
 Cruel Intentions (1999) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Sarah Michelle Gellar,
Ryan Phillippe, Reese Witherspoon and Selma Blair. Written and directed by
Roger Kumble.
 Kathryn and Sebastian are bored, manipulative, mean-spirited children of
privilege.
 The stepsibling tandem use people, playing games with their lives merely
to satisfy their own whims.
 The latest venture of the high society Manhattan dastardly duo is a wager.
Can Sebastian seduce a young woman who, in a magazine article, claims that
she will remain a virgin until marriage.
 The stakes? Sebastian's vintage auto vs., to put it delicately, fulfilling
his erotic fantasies concerning his stepsister. As Kathryn bluntly tells
him, "You can put it anywhere you like."
 If all this sounds a bit sick, well, it is. But deliciously so. For "Cruel
Intentions" is a modern-dress adaptation of the classic novel "Les Liaisons
Dangereuses," which was adapted into a play by Christopher Hampton and
later filmed in 1988 as "Dangerous Liaisons" with Glenn Close, John
Malkovich, Michelle Pfeiffer and Uma Thurman. Another, lesser seen 1989
French-British production called "Valmont", starred Annette Benning, Colin
Firth and Meg Tilly.
 And this contemporary version, written and directed by Roger Kumble, is
just as wickedly sardonic, witty and cruel as its predecessors.
 Kathryn and Sebastian are as hedonistic as their earlier counterparts,
except they use more foul language.
 What is interesting that despite the distasteful subject matter Cruel
Intentions is such a well-crafted, sarcastically humorous vehicle that you
can't help by admire it and Kumble's chutzpah.
 And Kumble has done the unthinkable. He has transformed TV's "Buffy, the
Vampire Slayer" into a self-absorbed, manipulative, evil, first-class
bitch.
 Yep, Sarah Michelle Gellar stars as the patrician Kathryn, the evil spider
who so skillfully weaves her webs of deceptions that no one can escape her
machinations.
 Gellar is no girl next door. She is hot, sexual, downright dirty and
loving it. And she gives a strong performance, whether teasingly leading on
her stepbrother, or teaching a naive young girl how to French kiss.
 Geller's Kathryn is despicable and like all fine movie villains totally
enthralling.
 Ryan Phillippe as Sebastian easily makes the jump from an amoral predator
who enjoys deflowering young girls to sincere lover who is ensnared by the
charms of the innocent Annette (Pleasantville's Reese Witherspoon).
 This could be Phillippe's break out role. It is a difficult transformation
from heel to hero, but Phillippe manages the task.
 In a supporting role as the naive young girl used by Kathryn and
Sebastian, Selma Blair holds her own. She could be considered the comic
relief as the awkward young woman taught to grow up too quickly.
 "Cruel Intentions" is not a pleasant movie, but it is a fun one. When
nastiness on the screen is done correctly, it can be entertaining. And
Kumble has delivered a fine combination. You may not like what you see, but
you will enjoy it.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or a
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The plot of this film was apparently "suggested by" the French novel, Les
Liaisons Dangereuses, but unlike its three previous cinematic predecessors,
this one decides to stick some beautiful young men and women into its
presentation, with plenty of degrading and reprehensible behavior to go
around. Sexual innuendoes and actual teen promiscuity abound in this film
that takes all of the best elements from the latest teen flick craze, and
mixes in some good ol' fashioned back-stabbing, incest and of course, love.
PLOT:
Rich spoiled stepsister bets rich spoiled stepbrother that he will not be
able to seduce an angelic, self-proclaimed "virgin till she falls in love"
peach from Kansas. With manipulation methods in full-gear, our boy takes on
the task, knowing full well that a victory will prize him a shot at his
stepsister's own honey. A miss however, will mean the relinquishing of his
favorite car to said sibling.
CRITIQUE:
I hate to say it but I actually had a fun time at this movie. It was never
boring, always nice to look at, didn't take itself too seriously, and
actually managed to convey an interesting, if not over-the-top yet amusing,
story line. If you're between the ages of 15 and 21, I am willing to bet my
monkey that you will truly enjoy this movie to the max! Most of the audience
with whom I saw it this picture were of that age, and seemed quite
rambunctious and favorable about their appreciation of this film.
More than anything, I thought that the movie was a beauty to behold, with
its beautiful people leading the way to beautiful clothes, leading to
beautiful homes, leading to beautiful cars, and well, you get the picture.
The actors were catty and enjoyable to watch, if only for their grandiose
manners, and their capacity to remind me of an ill-fated, but a guilty
pleasure nonetheless, dramatic TV series from the 1980s called "Dynasty".
Think of this movie as a better-looking version of that show called Dynasty
Jr., with a whole lot more emphasis on raw sexuality. Meanwhile, actor Ryan
Phillippe continues to score points as the young, innocent looking boy with
the big, puffy lips. His real-life sweetum, Reese Witherspoon is also very
effective in her role as the cuddly-as-can-be virgin, but more than anyone,
it is Sarah Michelle Gellar that takes the proverbial cake as the baddest
bitch from hell! She must've had a blast making this movie, cause her role
goes all out!! All in all, I recognize the fact that this film is not gonna
change the world or anything, but it was nice to look during its quick
runtime, had a decent soundtrack, and offered quite a few laughs with a cool
ending. Tight-asses beware, this one's not for you! This film is not to be
taken seriously. Laugh along, and you might just enjoy it :)
Note: The film is strung with sexual situations, with attempts at
feather-ruffling coming the way of a clear shot of Phillippe's hard apple
behind, some under-the-cover male homosexual activity, and an extreme
close-up of Sarah Michelle and co-star Selma Blair french-kissing.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Ironically, Swoosie Kurtz actually repeats her role as Madame De Volanges
(Cecil's mother) in this current version.
Reese Witherspoon was truly discovered when her parents took her in for an
extra role in a film that was passing through town. Once seen by the
producers, she was moved into a role with actual lines, and eventually
garnered the lead role in that film. The movie was called THE MAN IN THE
MOON.

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Roger Krumble
Writer: Roger Krumble (based on the novel "Les Liasons Dangereuses" by
Cholderos de Laclos)
Starring: Ryan Phillippe, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Reese Witherspoon,
Selma Blair, Joshua Jackson, Sean Patrick Thomas, Eric Mabius, Louise
Fletcher, Christine Baranski, Tara Reid, Swoosie Kurtz
We've been overly munundated with many things, but most recently, it's
been teen movies, which fall into either updates of 80s slasher movies
or 80s John Hughes movies.  Neither of them have actually spawned
anything even remotely good (the worst case, so far, being the dreaded
'I Know What You Did Last Summer'), but last year a film came out that
was intensely enjoyable all without being actually good.  That was 'Wild
Things,' the trashy, B-movie with a vengeance John MacNaughton flick
that came out last year that was, yes, a pretty terrible movie, but was
so gleefully nonchalant in its trashiness that it took on a thumbs-up
worthy guilty pleasure facade.  I'm, however, not going to compare that
film to this one; the only thing these two films have in common is an
air of sexual openness that actually goes to help the film rather than
detract from.  'Wild Things,' after all, was trash; it had a
silly story that would have made its way to either a soft core direct to
video release or a less-steamy made-for-TV USA movie.  'Cruel
Intentions,' on the other hand, boasts not only strong, but incredible
source material: freakin' 'Les Liasons Dangereuses,' for Christ's sake
-- the same story that has inspired at least one opera, a play, and a
couple of film adaptations (the most notable being the terrific 1988
Stephen Frears' flick, 'Dangerous Liasons,' a favorite of mine).  So
y'all should basically know the story - that of two mischievous
aristocrats who plot to devirginize a virgin while also plotting
Machiavellian humiliations for others who have humiliated them.
It should come as no shock to you that this is a modernized story,
taking place in the upper crust of Manhattan society, with the main
characters being spoiled teenagers who live in a world devoid of adult
supervision (could this be a satire?).  The two main characters are
basically the same: one Sebastian Valmont (Ryan Philippe) and the
obscure object of his desire, Kathryn Merteuil-Valmont (Sarah Michelle
Gellar), his attractive, sex-kitten stepsister.  The two love to
humiliate others as they plot revenge on others, and even as the film
begins, Sebastian has gotten back at his over-charging shrink (Swoosie
Kurtz - an in-joke; she was in 'Dangerous Liasons'), and Kathryn has
already figured out her chief goal: to deflower the girl who has stolen
the heart of her most recent boyfriend, the ignorant and overall stupid
Cecille (Selma Blair).  She calls on Sebastian to seduce her, but he's
already up for destroying the credibility of another: Annette Hargrove
(Reese Witherspoon), a perpendicular teen who has gone so far as to
write a column in 'Seventeen' about how she'll resist the, uh, urge
until after marriage, and, as it just so happens, is spending a month or
two at their aunt's estate.  The two make a bet: if he can't seduce
Annette and succeed within a certain amount of time, she wins his
beloved car; if he does, he can have her ('You can put it wherever you
want' is her deal-closer).
Refreshingly enough, the story follows the same basic plot elements, and
even provides many of the same characters of the original, including
Cecille's music teacher/love interest (Sean Patrick Thomas) and
Sebastian's friend (Joshua Jackson) who's sleeping with a pawn in the
story (Eric Mabius).  And it has the same basic plot structure: as
Sebastian successfully woos Annette, he accidentally falls in love with
her, as a so-called ironic twist.  Big difference, though: in the
original story (and '88 film), this is handled to near perfection.  No
big theatrics, no cornball emotions; its subtlety seems real, and it
never felt like the character was being betrayed at all.  That has been
replaced here by, well, cornball emotions and spell-out-the-theme scenes
which stand out as annoyingly preachy and mechanical.  Whenever a scene
comes up where Sebastian is either around Annette when he realizes he
loves her or is dealing with it, it's head-nodding time, and by the end,
it has reached a climax that feels horribly contrived and fake, not to
mention hilariously condescending.  The big confrontation between
Sebastian and Cecille's lover, in fact, is awfully executed: all three
characters involved just seem to stumble upon eachother at the same time
in a city the size of New York, and its conclusion is atrociously rote.
Following it is the worst part of all: a sequence so horribly preachy
and moralistic that I couldn't believe they seriously used a) slow
motion photography at those key moments, or b) that darned song, which
just spells out the theme (for the record, it's the Verve's otherwise
nifty 'Bittersweet Symphony').  I hate to keep up with the comparisons,
but just watch the ending of 'Dangerous Liaisons' - the booing and the
tear destroying the touted face - and you'll see how hackneyed and,
well, terrible this one is (just one annoying side comment: did they
actually have to title the memoirs?).
But other than the downhill escalation the film takes at around the hour
mark, 'Cruel Intentions' isn't all that bad.  Its blunt portrayal of
wicked, egotistical teens is mighty refreshing, and its crude sexual
humor is downright hilarious (Sebastian and Kathryn's sexual repartee is
quite giggle-inducing).  Even its otherwise-considered offensive
elements - its handling of interracial relationships, two flat-out gay
characters, and a lengthy, controversial lesbian kiss between Gellar and
Blair (the camera just closes right in on it and holds for, oh, 30
seconds, showing tongue and all) - aren't so offensive as they are neat
90s twists on the story, just to give it some extra umph along the way.
Even the acting's not bad.  We all know the Witherspoon's a talented
actress, but here she's the best thing about the movie: she gives her
character a surprising amount of depth - after you hear about her and
first meet her, she's hardly what you'd expect.  Gellar...well, she's
since grown on me from those days when my female friend made me watch
episodes of 'Swan's Crossing' with her, thus destroying any intense
likeability I may have ever had for her.  But here, she's nice and icy,
hardly to the point Glenn Close was once upon a time, but at least she
gives it the old college try (and nearly succeeds - maybe some work
towards the end would have helped her a bit, but go ahead and blame the
writer on this one).  Philippe is also slowly growing on me, what since
'Last Summer' and '54,' but he's still not there.  His giddy detachment
in the opening hour are nice, but his attempt at a transformation is
astoundingly inept and little more than a descent into soap opera
acting, terrible delivery of terrible lines and all.
The rest of the cast is merely fine, with kudos going to Joshua Jackson
for his now trademark nonchalantness of line delivery and defames going
to Selma Blair who overacts her goofy part so much that I nearly dreaded
every time her character appeared on screen.  And the direction is
nicely sleek and even a bit on the sexy side now and then.  Do I think
this was a successful adaptation of a great piece of literature?  Well,
maybe.  Is it a good film, though?  Yeah, I'd say so.  I'd even go as
far as to give it a recommendation, basically because this film knows
that it's basically trashy, romance novel stuff and not the deeper stuff
of a great French novel.  As it was fun to watch Malkovich and Close toy
with people in 'Dangeous Liasons' (I'll forever have the image of
Malkovich writing to his beloved Pfieffer on the posterior of a
courtesan embroidered on my membrane), it's fun to watch Philippe and
Gellar do the same to the characters in this film.  But what made
'Dangeous Liasons' worth it all was the third act, where Malkovich
really fell in love, really blew it, and Close was finally exposed
(again, great final shot - I can't mention that enough).  Here, it's not
unlike watching, well, teenagers do the same material: you don't feel
anywhere near the same about the ending; you're too busy going 'aw,
aren't they cute as they try their darndest at tough source material.'
Well, they gave it the old high school try, but this will always be a
teen adaptation and never just an adaptation.  Sorry, guys.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
Columbia Pictures, in their infinite wisdom, probably think they have
found just the right high concept movie with CRUEL INTENTIONS to bring
in those plentiful teen dollars.  They have made another film adaptation
of the French novel, "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," for what seems like the
millionth time, but with a highly marketable twist.  They have cast it
with young heartthrobs, which will undoubtedly fill the theaters with
teenagers looking for guilty pleasures, not that they will find many.
That the movie is actually one big tease shouldn't be a problem.  They
hope to bluff the young target audiences by having the actors do little
more than talk incessantly and foully about sex.
The setup for the movie has Kathryn Merteuil-Valmont making a bet with
her evil half-brother, Sebastian Valmont, who has never met a virgin he
couldn't deflower.  She says he will never be able to have sex with
Annette Hargrove, the daughter of their school's new headmaster, since
Annette wrote a famous article in a national teen magazine, vowing to
remain chaste until married.  Kathryn offers unlimited sexual access to
her own body if Sebastian succeeds in his conquest of Annette.  If he
fails, Kathryn gets his prized antique sports car.
The casting sounds better than it turns out thanks to Roger Kumble's
lackluster writing and directing.  Kumble, an ex-video store clerk,
reportedly learned directing by listening to directors giving advice on
laser disks.  (It's a good thing that there aren't laser disks with 747
pilots giving how-to lessons.  There aren't, are there?)  Who would have
ever guessed it possible to make this story as flat as Sebastian's bed
and as lifeless as the stone figurines that stand stoically outside the
lavish Valmont mansion?
The only character that sporadically works is that of Kathryn, played by
Sarah Michelle Gellar, last seen delightfully in SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE.
When she tempts her brother with hot incestuous sex, she undulates evil.
And when she "rubs" it in later that he isn't making much headway in his
seduction of Annette, she introduces the only genuinely erotic scenes in
a movie that should be bursting with them.  Mainly however, she just
looks trashy and crude as she snorts cocaine out of her crucifix and
slinks around on beds.  "Practice makes perfect," she advises the young
and innocent Cecile Caldwell (Selma Blair).  "My advice is to sleep with
as many men as possible."
As Sebastian, Ryan Phillippe looks the part but never acts it.  Instead,
he postures a lot as he reads his line, with cocky sexual pouting.
Never convincingly evil, he should have been replaced by someone who
could be nasty enough for us to hate.  He comes closer to boring us to
death than enraging us, no matter how many kinky sexual acts he gets to
discuss.  Even when given juicy lines -- "I'm tired of sleeping with
these insipid Manhattan debutantes.  There's nothing that can shock them
anymore."  -- his heart never seems in it.  When Sebastian should be
coldly calculating, Ryan reduces him to merely being cold.
After her wonderful performance in PLEASANTVILLE as the girl who brought
sex to the town, Reese Witherspoon is an emotional zero as Annette, the
girl who boasts to the world that she wants nothing to do with sex.
Typical of the movie is its music.  Rather than forming images of evil
seduction in our minds, the jarring, staccato sounds are rather like a
form of water torture.  Drip, drip, drip, the music pulses to the same
excruciatingly slow pace as the film.  Relief finally comes in the form
of ending credits.
CRUEL INTENTIONS mercifully runs just 1:30.  It is rated R for strong
sexual dialogue and sexual situations involving teens, profanity and
drug use.  The film would be acceptable only for the oldest and most
mature teens.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Sam Sloan
Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe) and his stepsister, Kathryn (Sarah Michelle
Gellar), are teenage step-brother and sister, whose parents are
married to each other, although, we are told, their father is diddling
the Vietnamese maid. They are filthy rich and live in a mansion on
Central Park West in New York City, while their parents, who are never
seen, are elsewhere.
Sebastian's mission in life is to deflower virgins. He wants a serious
challenge, because he is bored with plucking the easy ones. He is not
content merely to take a girl's virginity. To complete his mission, he
must humiliate her by dumping her the next day. Thus, the title:
"Cruel Intentions".
His step-sister is equally if not more diabolical. Pretending to be
squeaky clean and virtually a virgin, she publicly wears a cross,
which has a secret vial of cocaine inside, and plots with her
step-brother the deflowering of the various available incoming
freshman virgins in their high school.
She says that she does this because every time she goes to bed with a
man, he immediately dumps her for a younger girl, an innocent virgin.
This is a problem which all women have or at least fear, but it is
noteworthy that a beautiful 18-year-old is jealous of the competition
from younger more virginal women.
Kathryn therefore wants to get revenge against virgins, by assisting
her step-brother in their deflowering and subsequent humiliation.
This theme, in a different context, is in another new movie: "The
Rage: Carrie 2". In "The Rage", the high school athletes keep a
scorebook where scores are awarded for their conquests. However,
things get out of hand when one innocent girl gives her virginity to
an athlete and then kills herself the next day when he dumps her.
There seems to be a trend here: In the films of yesteryear, the female
lead successfully fended off suitors and almost never went to bed.
Early on, you could tell which girl was going to turn out to be the
star of the movie, because she was the one who did not do it.
However, in the new movies, every significant female has sex with a
man, including even Queen Elizabeth I, the most famous virgin in
history, in "Elizabeth".
Of course, in real life, almost all women do have sex with men and
almost all women do eventuality give up their virginity to a man who
often turns out to be a cad. Probably, there are few women in the
world who have never had the experience at least once in their life of
giving sex to a man, with high hopes for the future, only never to be
contacted by him again. This is why mothers properly advise their
daughters to keep their virginity until marriage, even though they did
not so themselves. Thus, we can say that the new movies probably more
accurately depict real life than the old, in spite of their extreme
references to sexuality.
My main complaint with "Cruel Intentions" is that although it is
supposed to depict teenage high school sex, all of the actors and
actresses are too old, in their early twenties. One supposedly
16-year-old virgin must be at least 22 in real life.
Of course, one reason for this may be fear of the so-called "child
pornography laws", even though there is no actual nudity, only
simulated nudity, in Cruel Intentions.
My other complaint is the obligatory moral lesson at the end. Of
course, this movie about the deflowering of the endless supply of
virgins must somehow end. Here it ends with the death of Sebastian,
who is hit by a New York City taxi driver (we all do that), followed
by the humiliation of his step-sister, who is publicly exposed to the
school for what she really is.
When I saw this I realized that I had seen this movie before. The
former name of this movie was "Dangerous Liaisons". The plot is the
same. The only difference is that "Dangerous Liaisons" is about the
corrupt upper class in18th Century France, whereas "Cruel Intentions"
is about the equally rich but contemporary Americans.
One good thing about sex and about the relations, fears, loves and
rivalries between men and women is that, throughout history, they have
never changed.
Finally, in one other way I find this movie to be unrealistic.
Although the seduction skills of Sebastian are much touted, in reality
he is put in slam dunk situations. For example, his supposedly major
triumph is the deflowering of a transfer student, Annette (Reese
Witherspoon). Yet, he has the perfect set-up. He is lodged with her
virtually alone in a huge mansion on Long Island. He has access to her
day and night, goes swimming in the pool alone with her, sits on the
lawn with her, holds her hand, drives her in his car, and yet it takes
him two whole weeks to relieve her of her virginity. If I or just
about any non-gay man were put in his situation, her virginity would
not survive more than a few hours, or a day or two at the very most.
I drive a taxi in New York City and what I found refreshing about this
movie is that I go to all the places and do all the things that these
rich kids do, and for free. Like them, I too drive across the
toll-free Queensboro Bridge. I too sit on the steps of the New York
Public Library or next to a lake in Central Park. Every street, every
block and every building in this movie is familiar to me. One of the
advantages of New York City is that even the poorest can enjoy the
pleasures of the super-rich.
The above has been posted at http://www.ishius.com/cruel-in.htm
http://www.cruelintentions.com "Cruel Intentions" official web site
http://us.imdb.com/Title?Cruel+Intentions+(1999) International Movie
Database: Cruel Intentions
http://www.reel.com/cgi-bin/nph-session.exe?COBRAND=129Q&OBJECT=moviepage.asp?MMID=44914"
"Cruel Intentions"

Author
Christopher Null
     From a raw material standpoint, you can't get much better than
DANGEROUS LIAISONS.  Wisely, this 90's updating of LIAISONS, CRUEL
INTENTIONS, is quite faithful to the original.  And woe be unto those
who enter INTENTIONS thinking this is a date movie.
     The story so far: Kathryn (Gellar) and Sebastian (Phillippe) are
spoiled, ultra-rich, rival half-siblings living in posh Upper East Side
Manhattan.  How does such a child while away the day?  Well, sexual
conquests of unsuspecting lesser-thans is a damn good start.  On a whim,
Kathryn challenges Sebastian to the ultimate test: deflower puritanical
virgin Annette (Witherspoon) and he can have Kathryn as a prize.
     Numerous side plots detract Sebastian from his goal, most notably
the similar deflowering of the dim Cecile (Blair), and, of course,
Sebastian falling in genuine love with Annette, for the first time in
his life.  Do things go badly?  Well, we're talking about some very,
very mean kids here.  What do you think!?
     Aside from a slightly happified ending, INTENTIONS is an impressive
movie.  Solid dialogue, luscious characters, great comic relief, and an
admittedly classic story give it wings above the standard teen-oriented
dreck on the market.  Placing the story 200 years ahead of its origin
adds surprisingly little, though, besides an automobile, cell phones,
and a reference to e-mail.  Oh, and lest you be depressed by the film,
you can sleep well tonight, comfy in the knowledge that--in real
life--Witherspoon is pregnant with Phillippe's child.  How's that for
irony?
     A final note for people who feel CRUEL INTENTIONS may not reflect
the reality of what modern American teens are really like.  If the
chatty, giggling pre-teens (who had faked being 17 to get into the
theater and were sitting behind me) are any indication of the reality,
we should all be very, *very* afraid.
Director: Roger Kumble
Producer: Neal H. Moritz
Writer: Roger Kumble
Starring: Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, Reese Witherspoon,
Selma Blair, Christine Baranski, Joshua Jackson
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jamey Hughton
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:  http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
As a remake of the French play Les Liasons Dangereuses, Cruel Intentions
is a re-decorated and distinctly teen-orientated update that introduces
younger viewers to a familiar story. The lead roles, inhabited by Glenn
Close and John Malkovich in 1988's Dangerous Liasons, have been taken
over by good-looking representatives of the Gen-X acting crowd. And
despite the fact that Cruel Intentions may appear as a hackneyed and
laughably pretentious piece of work, it only exists to be good, trashy
fun. And that it is.
Judging by the amount of sarcasm displayed by one character, this film
could easily be labeled a dark comedy. It has shades of romance, but the
overall vibe a viewer would get from watching this is not necessarily a
pleasant one. This film is about revenge, deceit, and making people
miserable. Most of the treachery is committed by Katherine (Sarah
Michelle Gellar), a prep school president and (*ahem*) bitch
extraordinare. Katherine and her step-brother Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe)
have this sick game they play, in which they bet on which new and
unexpecting virgin they can seduce. But things get too easy for
Sebastian. He gets bored with the job rather quickly.
And so, he attempts to raise his standards. His new subject is a pretty
rich girl named Annette (Reese Witherspoon), who has vowed to remain a
virgin until she first experiences genuine love. Sebastian has high
optimism that he can sucker her in, and with a hot bet proposed that
puts his car against something even more desirable, he just can't afford
to lose. But on a second inspection, Annette turns out to be more
strong-willed than Sebastian anticipated. While trying desperately to
win her over, he begins to actually fall in love with the girl. His once
fool-proof plan has back-fired on him.
The first hour of Cruel Intentions is pure, devilish fun. Well-deserving
people are stabbed in the back, and we revel in all the mockery. It also
introduces a new, naive student named Cecile (Selma Blair), whom
director Roger Kumble uses for much of the comic relief. In one of the
film's more enlightening scenes, Katherine shows Cecile what it feels
like to `get to first base'. She then becomes an object of Sebastian's
desire, but with all her incessant whining and her immature attitude,
she just annoys him to death.
There is quite a bit of sexual content in this film, but most of it is
implied in very detailed conversations. Little is shown on-screen. In
the two lead roles, Phillippe and Gellar perform past our expectations,
each displaying a whimsical sense of self-confidence and sarcastic bite.
Gellar does such an impressive job with the malicious Katherine that I
began wishing she'd get hit by a semi, or some other large moving
vehicle that would kill her instantly. Reese Witherspoon shows us how
her undisputed charm can lighten up a movie even of this dark caliber.
Sooner or later, Cruel Intentions becomes drowned out in seriousness,
but the transition is well-staged. Phillippe and Witherspoon have
believable chemistry, mostly based on his frustration, and the romance
is harsh but believable. But, I did enjoy the first half with greater
viewing pleasure, because it was dastardly good fun. Bearing some
resemblance to Wild Things, Cruel Intentions has some obvious trashy
elements that are swept under the carpet in favor of plotting. Director
Kumble has successfully revised an old story to fit the demanding
standards of the 90's, but he has maintained the basic plot structure in
doing so. This film is cheap and offensive, but if it happens to catch
you in the right mood, you should indulge in this mindless garbage.
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:  http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
.......................

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Cruel Intentions (1999)
Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, Reese Witherspoon, Selma Blair, 
Louise Fletcher, Joshua Jackson, Eric Mabius, Sean Patrick Thomas, 
Swoosie Kurtz, Christine Baranski. Written by Roger Kumble, suggested by 
Choderlos De Laclos' novel "Les liaisons dangereuses." Directed by Roger 
Kumble. 95 minutes.
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
About 25 minutes into the sneak preview of "Cruel Intentions," during a 
close-up shot of Sarah Michelle Gellar and Selma Blair french-kissing, a 
couple sitting next to me scooped up their young children and left the 
theater in a huff, grousing that they didn't want to expose their kids to 
"goings on like these." I wondered, of course, why Ward and June had 
brought their kids to an R-rated film about sexual manipulation in the 
first place. But even more puzzling was why it had taken 25 whole minutes 
for them to get offended enough to leave. 
Lascivious and trashy, "Cruel Intentions" is so eager to shock and 
titillate that it's almost endearing. In its quest to be this year's 
"Wild Things," the potboiler trots out virtually anything that be could 
considered even vaguely forbidden to a young person, from interracial 
romance and gay male sex to pseudo-incestuous grinding between step-
siblings. The dialogue features surprisingly graphic descriptions of all 
things erotic. Even the most common of cinematic teases, a simple glimpse 
of the male lead's butt, is presented in a flashy pull-away shot intended 
to maximize its impact. Amazingly, the visual "tah-dah!" worked and a 
number of audience members actually gasped at the sight of Ryan 
Phillippe's bare bottom. Just imagine what they would have done had he 
flashed his winkie.
The fourth film based on Choderlos De Laclos' 1782 novel "Les liaisons 
dangereuses," "Cruel Intentions" is a teenage version of "Dangerous 
Liaisons," with Phillippe and Gellar subbing for John Malkovich and Glenn 
Close. While Gellar basically turns her emotion meter to the "bitch" 
setting and leaves it there, Ryan Phillippe gives a much more interesting 
performance. As a young cad trying to fool those around him, he neatly 
slides from effete Malkovich wannabe to faux-sincere weasel to genuinely 
infatuated kid effortlessly. He is a lot of fun to watch.
The story, set in Manhattan's upper-crust society, focuses on the twisted 
antics of two inexplicably jaded brats. While Kathryn (Gellar) schemes to 
turn the naďve Cecile (Selma Blair, whose clumsy, overdone 
characterization resembles some perverse hybrid of Elly Mae Clampett and 
Jethro Bodine) into a tramp, her step-brother Sebastian (Phillippe) sets 
his sights on deflowering the beautiful Annette (Reese Witherspoon), 
daughter of the new school headmaster and author of a "virgin manifesto" 
published in Seventeen magazine. Convinced that the chaste girl is too 
much even for Sebastian, Kathryn makes a bet with her sibling: If he 
succeeds, she'll have sex with him, but if he fails, she gets his 
gorgeous 1956 Jaguar. 
Interestingly, Roger Kumble, author and director of this adaptation, 
proves adept at presenting decadence but stumbles when dealing with 
heartfelt romance. The wicked parts of the film, while undeniably 
ludicrous, are also quite entertaining, but when matters turn sincere and 
moralistic, the production hits the ground with a loud thud. There is 
another problem. Interracial and gay liaisons are depicted in a matter-of-
fact fashion that is refreshing, but the commentary surrounding the 
affairs reinforces racist and homophobic attitudes. Had Kumble exercised 
more care with his writing, he could have made the scenes work without 
fueling bigotry.
Those significant flaws aside, the film was far more engaging than I 
expected it to be. Like "Wild Things," "Cruel Intentions" is forthright 
about its lewd trashiness. This is a calculated guilty pleasure and, on 
those terms, I enjoyed it.

Author
James Brundage
Based on the Novel "Les Liasons Dangereuses" by Choderlos de Laclos
    What have horror movies taught us?  I guess they have taught us what we
already know, that diluting the same idea that may have at one point been
good isn't a good idea.  Think of it.  All of the franchises, with the
exception of Scream, which is only on its second installment, and, thanks to
the grace of Kevin Williamson, has remained fresh in its sequel, have
bitterly failed.
    Perhaps it makes sense that the only people who would star in a redo of
an idea used at least four times before (3 adaptations of Dangerous Liaisons
and the indie smash In the Company of Men) area all veterans of horror
movies.  Phillippe and Gellar starred together in I Know What You Did Last
Summer.  Witherspoon was in Fear and Freeway, and in the anticipated
American Psycho.
    However -- and maybe this is just the reparations paid by fate -- Cruel
Intentions comes out as a good-luck charm.  The movie, although lacking the
literary content of other films with the same plot, is as entertaining a sex
comedy as you get to see from a studio.  The acting is actually half-decent,
perhaps the most monumental achievement of the film considering the odds it
has against it:
    For one, it has a first-time director.  For two, we have not one but
three stars from the WB network, whose motto should be "good ideas, bad
actors."  For three, we have Ryan Phillipe, someone who has never once had a
good role and, like most of the brat pack of 90s actors, most likely never
will.  Perhaps they were inspired by Reese Witherspoon's convincing
performance as a virgin, which actually is a great showcase of her
versatility considering, only a few months ago, she starred as a slut in the
overlooked creative mind-exercise Pleasantville.
    The plot, as I've said, is shared with three adaptations of Dangerous
Liaisons and with the indie In the Company of Men.  Basically, bad bitch
sister Kathryn Merteuil (Sarah Michelle Gellar, returning to her soap-opera
roots) makes a bet with her step-brother Sebastian Valmont (Ryan Phillippe):
seduce the new headmaster's daughter, Annette (Reese Witherspoon), and
incest will become a New York debutante's common practice.  Fail, and she
gets his '57 Roadster.  Now, with most women, this wouldn't be worth it,
but, hey, we're talking about Sarah Michelle Gellar.
    Basically, Gellar is completely enjoyable as a bitch extraordinaire.  He
new motto for acting (aside from the fact that it would plagiarize Mae
West): "When I'm good, I'm really good.  When I'm bad, I'm better."  A nice
fun subplot in the movie, that gives it the majority of its humor, is
Sebastian's "awakening" of Cecile, yet another virgin Gellar seeks to
destroy (for stealing a boyfriend she blew), which leads to most of the sex
in this film, not to mention the best snippet of popcorn film conversation
I've heard in 1999:
    Cecile: This doesn't taste like iced tea.
    Sebastian: It's from Long Island.
    Unfortunately, the story decides not to rely on the acerbic wit that
newcomer Roger Kumble inserts into his film, but instead on(ominous tones)
ROMANCE.  As the relationship between Sebastain and Annette becomes more
sweet and chick-flick, the movie takes a turn for the worse, ending on a low
note.
    Also, for all movie buffs who think they know the ending from the
trailer: you probably do.
    Predictable to a T, Cruel Intentions is nonetheless and enjoyable
popcorn film.  Maybe it's just the Y-chromosome in me: this film does house
a vast repertoire of sex for an R rating (lesbian kiss, etc.).  Maybe it's
just the fact that I munch popcorn and need a film to munch it in.  But
either way, Cruel Intentions is a fun film to see.

Author
Michael Redman
"Intentions" cruel and unusual punishment
At times, especially the eerily quiet early morning hours, when
working on a project at home, I'll have the television on next to my
computer. Usually I'll slip in a "Northern Exposure" or "Seinfeld"
tape that I've seen a dozen times before. Since I know the shows by
heart, they provide audio companions that don't require much
consideration. It's like having friends over that I don't have to pay
any attention to.
Occasionally I'll channel-surf searching for an innocuous nature
documentary or old sit-com for background chatter. Sometimes around
4:00 am, I'll run into horrendous soap operas that are, for some odd
reason, broadcast while most people sleep. I assume these exist
because the network hopes insomniacs will watch anything in the
wee hours, even faux drama with little plot and less acting talent.
"Cruel Intentions", despite its thematic similarity to these, could
never aspire to be even that good.
Sebastian Valmont (Ryan Phillippe) and his step-sister Kathryn (Sarah
Michelle Gellar) are spoiled rich kids who get their kicks by
manipulating other spoiled rich kids. Sebastian's hobby is bedding
down his female classmates by any means available. Kathryn is out for
revenge on innocent Cecile (Selma Blair) who inadvertently stole her
boyfriend.
Somewhere in the middle of this, the siblings bet on Sebastian's
ability to successfully deflower Annette (Reese Witherspoon), a sweet
young thing who has written a pro-virginity manifesto for a national
teen magazine. If Kathryn wins, she gets his vintage Jaguar. If he
wins, she'll give him the ride he really wants.
Kathryn begins her Machiavellian scheme by pretending to be childlike
Cecile's best friend and turning her into a "bad girl." Advising
Cecile to "sleep with as many people as possible," she sets her up for
Sebastian's alcohol-assisted seduction. Meanwhile he is beginning to
have real feelings for Annette. At least he's supposed to be having
those feelings. You'd never know it from watching the actor.
The plot has some solid ground, based, as it is, on the eighteenth
century "Les Liaisons Dangereuses". The loose re-make of "Dangerous
Liaisons" with younger actors quickly turns that ground into quicksand
as it gets mired down in its own inanity.
There's not an actor in the batch that creates a believable
character. Both Witherspoon and Blair come across as Rebecca of
Sunnybrook Farm but without the depth. Gellar desperately wants to
play a vamp but doesn't have the acting chops to pull it
off. Phillippe struts around looking like a Greek god and prettier
than any of the girls, but doesn't demonstrate any emotions beyond
boredom.
The movie is designed to draw in the young teenage market who are able
to talk their way into an R-rated film. It's filled with gratuitous
sexual supposed-taboos. There's an inter-racial romance, a gay
encounter, almost-incestuous gropings and dirty talk. When Kathryn
teaches Cecile about making out, we're treated to an extended close-up
of the girls French-kissing.
Every action is presented in the most exploitive manner possible. The
film is homophobic, sexist, racist, classist and just about every
other word that ends with "ist."
What else could we expect? Give an involved French novel to director
Roger Kumble, responsible for some of the most uninspired films in
recent history ("Dumb And Dumber", "National Lampoon's Senior Trip"),
aim it towards teens and the outcome is inevitable. If this is what
Hollywood thinks America's youth finds entertaining, the industry is
in troubleor the country is.
The movie is remarkable in its ability to grow more insipid with each
passing moment. It's one of the few that I can remember turning to the
person sitting next to me and asking, in astonishment, if the film
could possibly be as bad as it seemed.
Even the tenth viewing of the episode where George is concerned about
"shrinkage" holds more surprises. And you don't have to sit in a huge
dark room for two hours watching it.
(Michael Redman has written this column for longer than the characters in
"Cruel Intentions" have been alive and thinks that even his reviews would make
a better movie. Email your cinematic disappointments to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 3/11/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
Y2K articles: http://www.indepen.com/

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe and Reese Witherspoon.
Directed By Roger Kumble
Running Time: 1 hour 35 minutes.
The new brat packers continue to hit the screens with his updating of
Dangerous Liasons, which was last seen on the screen starring Jeremy Irons
and Glenn Close. Now we get Geller and Phillippe in the starring roles,
which is certainly 'different,' and not entirely successful. Geller plays
Kathryn, who makes a bet with her Sebastian (Phillippe) that he won't be
able to bed virgin Annette (Witherspoon,) who wishes to wait until marriage.
If Kathryn wins, she gets Phillippe's car, if not, Phillippe gets Kathryn.
Unfortunately for Sebastian, he starts getting feelings for Annette, and
isn't sure he can carry on with the bet. And Kathryn has another agenda of
her own, involving Cecile (Selma Blair) and her mother, played by Christine
Baranski.
Cruel Intentions is a well executed experiment that provides plenty of
entertainment for your money. Gellar is on the ball as the bitchy Kathryn,
she's acts like all the bitchy girls you knew at school, only worse. The way
she goes from her false, happy outlook to the disgust inside is nothing
original, but well played by Gellar. It is sometimes difficult to believe
this is the same character who plays the sweeter than sweet Buffy on the
popular television series, and is a rewarding performance. Witherspoon has a
low key role, but gives a nice performance, if a little underwhelming. She
gets the job done, though, and the audience feels for her as she gets played
as a stooge by Gellar and Phillippe. Phillippe, sadly, is less successful,
his acting a little stiff. He is rather evil, but his performance could have
been stronger. The real surprise in this film is the outstanding Selma Blair
as a little girl discovering sex, her performance is very well performed,
and all of her scenes work.
Apart from the above average acting, there's little else in Cruel Intentions
that distinguishes it from other brat pack movies. There's the usual
selection of rock music making up the soundtrack, and some 'hip' incidental
music. The film goes at a cracking pace to make sure no attention is lost
from the largely teenage audience, and the film is over blidingly fast. This
is a shame, because with a little more time the characters could have been
more rounded. Instead, we're just expected to believe that Gellar is a bitch
and nothing else. Phillippe, near the end of the film, gets some development
to his character, but by then it's too late. Again, only Selma Blair gets
any character development during the film.
The direction by Kumble is largely straight forward, but the pace is quick
and interest is maintained. Kumble also adapted the script, and the Gen-Xer
script isn't nearly as embarrassing as it could have been, and is
surprisingly adult and sensible, if a little two dimensional. Unfortunately,
a Dawsons Creek cast member pops up as Sebastians gay friend, but thankfully
he's not in the film for long.
Overall, Cruel Intentions is a nice film with some good laughs and fun
twists. There's nothing original here, and the story has been done many
times before. And when leaving the cinema, the film will probably leave your
mind after a couple of minutes. But while it's lasting, Cruel Intentions is
a fun ride.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 17 February 1999 at the Sony Lincoln Square, preview screening
The prospect of seeing a teenage version of *Dangerous Liaisons* gave me
two expectations: crap or pleasant surprise. I viewed the exact opposite
of both. Well-produced and the unpleasant surprise of homophobia marketed
to America's teens. Just what we need at a time when kids are attacking
their openly gay classmates like never before.
To be fair, the movie is not a running fag joke. However, this well-known,
oft-filmed tale of the depraved and priviledged idle rich was not enriched
by adding fag jokes. The one openly gay character, the campus drug dealer
who's also a real flamer, is used to establish the main character's
depravity. In this case, it involves blackmailing the closet case football
team member so Valmont (Ryan Phillippe) can extort information that helps
him deflower Annette (Reese Witherspoon) as part of his bet with his
venomous stepsister, Kathryn Merteuil (Sarah Michelle Gellar). If he wins
he gets to have sex with Kathryn, or he loses his 1956 Roadster. The
closet case is reduced to sniveling and betraying his best friend.
Hollywood, I am sure, thinks it's being twisted. Of course, doing
something else, like having Valmont seduce a male classmate in his quest
to seduce a female would have been an interesting twist; have him prey
sexually and indiscriminately on both sexes equally, without the epithets.
But Hollywood is still using gay sex for titillation and not much else.
I am not sure if this is what Choderlos de Laclos (1741-1803) had in mind
when he wrote *Les Liasons Dangereuses*. The opening credits indicate that
the story was "suggested by" the novel. Within the first half hour, we are
hearing "Trevor's a fag," when we learn of a boy not demanding sex from
his virgin girlfriend, "could you be more queer?" when Valmont mentions
keeping a journal, and "are you a lesbian?" when Annette doesn't swoon
when Valmont woos her. Kathryn, the most evil character, is shown kissing
the ingenue Cecile (Selma Blair) as part of her scheme. The gay character,
Blaine Tuttle (Joshua Jackson, who also starred in the ultra-homophobic
Apt Pupil), is a complete stereotype who sits back and literally files his
nails while his buddy Valmont blackmails his sex partner with exposure.
Some audience members tittered at the utterance "fudgepacker" but were
appalled and silent later during a race-baiting scene.
Written and directed by Roger Kumble (rhymes with bumble), this sort of
homophobic updating is not needed. He ought to take a lesson from Kevin
Williamson and Wes Craven, both of whom have used current sex symbols in
popular movies without stooping to fag jokes. (Gellar and Phillippe
appeared in Williamson's *I Know What You Did Last Summer*; Williamson's
TV series *Dawson's Creek* just had a character come out.)
As stories go, it is faithful to the original: Libidinous evil duo use
each other to exact revenge on their enemies and sate their appetite for
depravity. The milieu is the prep school set that splits its time between
tony townhouses on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and lush-lawned
estates out on Long Island. The "no expense spared" box was clearly
checked off on the costume and set budget suggestions. 
Kathryn has been dumped by Court for the naive Cecile, which is why she
wants Valmont to take her virginity. Going after Annette is appealing to
him, as he is "sick of sleeping with these insipid Manhattan debutantes."
(Who isn't?) Watching these two manipulate all their acquaintences to
their own ends is entertaining for a while, and lives up to their soap
opera experience (Gellar got her start as Erica Kane's daughter on *All My
Children*; Phillippe was daytime's first gay teen, on *One Life to
Live*--this was not in the press kit.). Blair, the poor man's Tori
Spelling, is very amusing as the clumsy Cecille, and the few adults in the
movie (Swoosie Kurtz and Christine Baranski) turn in some of the best
performances in this movie. Louise Fletcher (Nurse Ratched of *One Flew
Over the Cuckoo's Nest*) is pretty much wasted as Aunt Helen.
There is almost no reason to pay good money to ever see this film. You can
rent *Valmont* or *Dangerous Liaisons*, or even the French-language
*Liaisons Dangereuses 1960*. If you are a fan of any of these stars, there
are other outlets. Gellar appears on Buffy the Vampire Slayer weekly on
the WB; Phillippe has made a few movies (*54*, *Urban Legend*, *Little Boy
Blue*) and you can rent those.
There is no reason to pay Hollywood to insult you. In the case of
Sony-Columbia-Tristar, with movies like the hateful Apt Pupil, they are
doing it repeatedly.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Homer Yen
Have you ever been so rich that the hardest thing in life was to find
new ways of entertaining yourself?  Forget about boring plays or
humdrum sports spectacles.  These venues are just the imagination of
someone else's world.  When you're incredibly rich and spoiled, you
can bring others into your world.  And in the world of Kathryn  (Sarah
Michelle Gellar) and her stepbrother, Sebastian (Ryan Phillipe),
theirs is a cruel game featuring a swirling atmosphere of deception,
tease, and sex.   
Schoolmates and acquaintances become their pawns, unsuspecting guys
and girls become casual targets of their sexual conquests and
manipulative whims, and those that find their way into their game of
one-upmanship will find it to be a ruinous experience.  For Kathryn,
she has set her sights on the sweet, incoming freshman, Cecile (Selma
Blair).  Her goal is to destroy her reputation.  It's not that Cecile
did anything wrong.  But  Kathryn's boyfriend recently ended the
relationship to be with her.  To usurp her in popularity is
unforgivable.  To exact revenge on him, she will befriend her while
secretly plotting her downfall.  Make her into damaged goods just to
hurt him.  And how will she strip her of her good name?  To start, she
gives her a personal lesson on how to French kiss and from there her
journey towards adulthood grows more lascivious. To further deflower
her innocence, she introduces him to the conniving Sebastian. 
Sebastian is quite the charmer and as a sexual conquest, she would be
far too easy.  He currently has his sights on Annette (Reese
Witherspoon), daughter of the headmaster at his expensive private
school and who was featured in a magazine article stating why she
wanted to remain a virgin until she got married.  `A paradigm of
chastity and virtue, she'll be my greatest triumph yet,' he boasts to
his stepsister.  Of course in this kind of film, you can't brag like
that without backing it up with a wager.  The bet is made and if
Sebastian fails, she wins his classic roadster.  But what if he wins? 
`Then,' says Kathryn while caressing herself, `you can have what
you've always wanted since our parents got married.'
By now, you probably have a good idea of what this film embodies. 
It's a film that is filled with twisted sexual innuendo and endless
seduction.  There's no doubt that this is a film for adults (with
adult-oriented language that is shocking yet forthright) even though
the stars are twenty-something.  But there's actually an entertaining
film in here that might surprise you.  The thing that I found
satisfying was how well it utilized its 100 minutes of film time. 
It's a tautly written and well-paced film.  We know that these two are
cruel and we know that someone's going to get hurt really bad.  The
story never detours or strays as it makes its way to its ending.  The
actors do well as people brimming with fake smiles, ulterior motives
and insincerity.  But it's not the acting that merits the
recommendation, although they Gellar and Phillipe carry themselves
confidently.  There's an undeniable sense style and wit that makes
this film wickedly fun and Machiavellian intentions that are
delectably cruel.


Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Some movies, while not totally bad, just piss me off. Roger Kumble's lame
excuse for a drama CRUEL INTENTIONS fits perfectly into this category.
Loosely based on the famous novel "Les Liaisons Dangereuses", "Intentions"
tells the story of Sebastian and Kathryn Valmont, two wealthy New York
step-siblings who are the cause of lots of damage. Sebastian(Ryan Phillippe)
has a reputation of promising women the world to get them in bed, and then
dumping them. Kathryn(Sarah Michelle Gellar), equally evil but more
inconspicuous, is also manipulative, in the way that she helps out with
Sebastian's games. In the first of many plot contrivations, Kathryn bets her
brother that he cannot devirginize Annette(Reese Witherspoon, Phillippe's
real-life girlfriend), daughter of their new school headmaster and
self-proclaimed virgin till marriage. If Kathryn wins, then she gets
Sebastian's car, and if Sebastian wins, he gets to bed Kathryn, the one
woman whom he supposedly can't have. Well, anyway, although Sebastian is
cruel to the fullest sense of the word, Annette can't help but fall for him.
I mean, damn, this guy is manipulative! From that point the film just spins
way out of control, juggling a subplot featuring a teenager(Selma Blair)
also getting involved in their schemes. The movie then goes for cheap
melodrama and any cliche it can think of. None of the film's characters are
at all real, and none of them make any decisions that a normal human would
make. Although many sexual cliches are added in just so that teens will have
a little fun, this film is another case where the trailer is more fun than
the movie. I mean, with a cast like this, the producers did not need to make
a good film in order to ensure that every teenager in the world will see it.
But I wish they at least tried.


Author
Scott J. Promish
CRUEL INTENTIONS is the latest film adaptation of the novel 'Les Liasons
Dangereuses.'  Instead of playing it straight in its historical context
(like 'Dangerous Liaisons' (1988) or 'Valmont' (1989)), however, the story
here involves modern day high school students, with a slightly incestuous
twist.
Sebastian Valmont (Ryan Philippe) and Kathryn Merteuil (Sarah Michelle
Gellar) are bored, rich stepsiblings who control much of the social life in
their academic universe.  Sebastian is a philanderer who gets whatever girl
he wants, and eventually dumps her in the most creative and nasty ways he
can think of, while Kathryn's specialty is pure revenge.  When the new
headmaster's daughter, Annette Hargrove (Reese Witherspoon) appears in a
popular magazine article, boasting about her commitment to wait till
marriage for sex, Sebastian sees a whole new challenge.  Kathryn proposes a
wager: if he fails to bed Annette, she gets his vintage Jaguar; if he
succeeds, he gets to bed his stepsister, the one girl he's lusted after but
could never really have.  Though Kathryn wins either way, he agrees.
This is a gleefully immoral and refreshingly mean-spirited film.  Parents
would no doubt gasp at much of the talk and behavior, while this reviewer
was made to giggle uncontrollably throughout.  CRUEL INTENTIONS doesn't care
about being politically correct, favoring realism over being acceptable.
(Several reviewers have decried the homophobic dialogue in the film,
apparently forgetting what it was actually like to be in high school.)
It's a shame that such good writing is ruined by two really terrible
performances.  Philippe's delivery is so flat and unconvincing, it's almost
inconceivable that none of his character's previous conquests could see
through his act.  Similarily, Witherspoon's Annette is extraordinarily dull.
When Sebastian finally falls in love with her, one can't help but wonder
what he finds so entrancing.
Gellar is good, and Selma Blair is very entertaining as naďve freshman
Cecile, whom Kathryn attempts to corrupt to get back at her for stealing an
ex-lover.  Unfortunately, Philippe and Witherspoon do much to deaden the
film; too bad - it could have been quite good.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   During the Renaissance, the Italian writer Niccolo
Machiavelli wrote a classic handbook, "The Prince," full of
advice to rulers of Italian city-states on how to seize and
maintain power.  He also served as adviser to some of the
potentates of his time.  If he were alive today in America, his
occupation would be obvious: he would have been hired on to
President Clinton's legal staff to tell the chief executive how
to maintain his hold on government.  He might later write a
tell-all book detailing precisely how the president seduced
that woman.  Or was it the other way around?  Now that,
rather than any political treatise, would be a best-seller.  If he
were a screenwriter, though, ol' Nick might use his inside
knowledge of presidential dalliance to dabble with a racy plot
about a two lusty villains--one who gets his jollies from
seducing and abandoning members of the female sex, the
other from egging him on to do just that.  The story would
look like Christopher Hampton's hit stage play, "Les Liaisons
Dangereuses" which was effectively adapted to the screen
ten years ago by Stephen Frears, called "Dangerous
Liaisons."  "Cruel Intentions" is obviously inspired by that
story.
   In "Dangerous Liaisons" the remarkable Glenn Close
performed in the role of The Marquise de Merteuil, a bitch if
ever there was one, a woman determined to crush the spirit
of young women brazen enough to fall in love.  She had a
great lover herself, but when he abandoned her to marry the
innocent Cecile (Uma Thurman), she assigned the Vicomte
de Valmont (played by John Malkovich) to seduce her before
she could present herself to her husband as a virgin.  But the
Vicomte instead becomes interested in the married and
virtuous Madame de Tourvel (Michelle Pfeiffer), who is
ironically fired by the very evil in the Vicomte and decides to
find out what it means to become a bad girl.  Naturally the
Vicomte and the Madame fall in love.
   In writing and directing "Cruel Intentions," Roger Kumble
("Dumb & Dumber," "Kingpin," "National Lampoon's Senior
Trip") targets a younger audience, changing the locale from
the boudoirs of France to the elegant old houses around New
York's Central Park.  More important, he cuts the age of the
characters, putting them in a fancy prep school for
teenagers.  His reasoning--according to the production notes-
-is that high-school kids are a mischievous lot and so a plot
of Machiavellian dimensions would not be unusual for the
preppy set. 
   Unfortunately that very reasoning is the picture's flaw. 
While any audience could take the sinister machinations of
Glenn Close and John Malkovich seriously, especially when
pitted against the innocence of folks played by Uma Thurman
and Michelle Pfeiffer, we have a hard time locating any real
profundity in the young brats of "Cruel Intentions."  The movie
intends to be like an 18th century comedy of manners with
tragic undertones.  Instead, while it possesses an effectively
amusing initial half, Kumble's attempt to mine anguish of
tragic proportions becomes no more than a display of sappy
melodrama.  
   The story takes shape when Kathryn (Sarah Michelle
Gellar) loses her boy friend Ronald (Sean Patrick Thomas) to
the innocent Cecile (Selma Blair).  To get revenge on
Ronald, she becomes determined to turn her successful
competitor into a slut.  He advises Cecile to sleep with as
many boys as she can, assigns her step-brother Sebastian
(Ryan Phillippe) to deflower her, and to inflict damage on
Sebastian as well, he bets him that he cannot seduce the
lovely and virginal Annette (Reese Witherspoon).
   Once the acrid workings of conspiracy give way to the
honeyed charm of love, the film loses its edge.  Sarah
Michelle Gellar, best known for her TV series as Buffy the
Vampire Slayer, is hardly the right choice for a Lady
Macbeth, given her irritatingly nasal voice and all-too-precious
features.  She tries to pass herself off as a veritable monster
but comes across more as a kewpie doll that would
perpetually whine "hug me."  For his part Ryan Phillippe as
the scheming Sebastian Valmont looks more like a
super-senior too effete to play soccer with his fellows, a guy
not too likely to charm today's teenage women--who may not
know how to read but who should be able to see right
through his faux allure.  The one principal winner in the
picture is Reese Witherspoon as Annette, the headmaster's
daughter, who had written an article in Seventeen Magazine
about her intention to stay pure until she marries her
boyfriend.  Her performance is perfectly natural, believable,
and affecting.
   We do come away with the awareness that Kathryn and
Sebastian plot mayhem against the young women in the story
because of the attraction, even adoration, that they have for
each other, a fascination they appear unable or unwilling to
declare.  When love is repressed, it may come out in
perverse ways; thus, the diabolic schemes of the two
frustrated lovers.  By the somber conclusion of the story we
are not moved by a sense of tragedy but by a feeling that
we've witnessed fun and games of two silly but smart teens,
both of whom confront a more serious justice than they
deserve.  A suspension from school for a week would seem
more to the point.
   The work is filmed splendidly in some of Manhattan's
posher areas around Central Park, home to bluebloods and
nouveau-riches alike--effectively transplanting 18th Century
French aristocracy to the Big Apple.  

Author
Scott Renshaw
CRUEL INTENTIONS
(Columbia)
Starring:  Ryan Phillippe, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Reese Witherspoon, Selma
Blair, Joshua Jackson, Sean Patrick Thomas, Christine Baranski.
Screenplay:  Roger Kumble, suggested by "Les Liaisons Dangereuses" by
Choderlos De Laclos.
Producer:  Neal H. Moritz.
Director:  Roger Kumble.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, brief nudity, adult themes,
drug use)
Running Time:  97 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Hollywood has always been obsessed with youth, but that obsession
finally appears to be spinning out of control.  In these halcyon days of
'N Sync, "Dawson's Creek" and the like, it now seems that you can sell any
pitch in Hollywood by naming a piece of source material and tagging on the
phrase "...but with teenagers."  The most recent wave may have started
with CLUELESS ("Jane Austen's _Emma_, but with teenagers"), and has since
generated such classics as THE FACULTY ("THE THING, but with teenagers")
and SHE'S ALL THAT ("PYGMALION, but with teenagers").  So why not CRUEL
INTENTIONS?  Why not "DANGEROUS LIAISONS, but with teenagers?"
     Because it's a really lousy idea, that's why, made even worse by
appalling execution.  The principle players are Sebastian Valmont (Ryan
Phillippe) and Kathryn Merteuil (Sarah Michelle Gellar), Manhattan
step-siblings who are birds of a poisonous feather.  Sebastian delights in
deflowering innocents and building his reputation as a cad; Kathryn seeks
vengeance on a sweet young thing named Cecile (Selma Blair) who
unwittingly stole away her boyfriend.  United in their disdain for all
other feeling human beings, Sebastian and Kathryn strike a wager.  It
involves Annette Hargrove (Reese Witherspoon), a teen who has published a
national magazine article trumpeting her virginity.  Sebastian's mission
is to seize that virtue or risk losing his classic car.  If he wins, his
next conquest will be his own step-sister.
     If that all sounds considerably sleazier than the original DANGEROUS
LIAISONS, that's only because it is.  Writer/director Roger Kumble plays
most of the film as though it's soft-core porn for teenyboppers, teasing
with pseudo-incestuous fondling and money-shot close-ups of Gellar and
Blair tongue kissing.  To make matters even more unpleasant, Kumble even
plays an interracial relationship for titillation value, and goes for
cheap laughs by introducing a pointless subplot in which a stud athlete
(Eric Mabius) is a closet homosexual, complete with gratuitous slurs.  In
a depressing case of lowest common denominator film-making, Kumble has
appealed to his teen audience by reducing the themes of "Les Liaisons
Dangereuses" to "everyone has sex with everyone else."
     In an even more depressing development, Kumble may actually have the
_best_ grasp of the source material.  Ryan Phillippe, in a valiant but
grossly misguided effort to do some acting, spends virtually the entire
film aping John Malkovich's performance in Stephen Frears' 1988 DANGEROUS
LIAISONS.  Every inflectionless line reading, every arched eybrow, every
lascivious double-entendre is familiar, with no apparent adjustment for
the fact that Sebastian is a contemporary teenager instead of an 18th
century nobleman.  Gellar is only a bit better in the lip-curling Glenn
Close role, while Selma Blair plays Cecile not as simple and innocent, but
with a fumbling idiocy that makes her every moment on screen unbearable.
Only Reese Witherspoon brings a shred of dignity to the proceedings,
continuing to show a wonderful presence for a young actress and an
interest in finding something human in her character.
     Unfortunately, that's an interest her director doesn't share.  I
suppose it shouldn't be surprising that CRUEL INTENTIONS is just another
in a long line of glossy high school audience flicks, another film with a
mind-numbingly incessant underscore of shuffle-beats and pop songs,
another vehicle for pretty girls and even prettier boys to pose for their
fans.  It is sad, however, that these filmmakers have to keep picking
promising source material for their libretti, then demonstrating no
concern for that material whatsoever.  DANGEROUS LIAISONS was a tale of
corruption beneath a courtly veneer; CRUEL INTENTIONS makes the shocking
suggestion that adolescents can be petty, manipulative and obsessed with
sex.  It's a stupid and pandering film which will probably appeal to its
audience perfectly, leaving the rest of us to sit back and wait for the
inevitable "MOBY DICK, but with teenagers."

Author
James Sanford
On the surface, a teen version of "Les Liaisons Dangereuses" sounds
like it might be workable. After all, Hollywood managed to transplant
Wim Wenders' "Wings of Desire" to Los Angeles and sell it as "City of
Angels," so why shouldn't writer-director Roger Kumble take a crack at
reconstructing Choderlos De Laclos' tale of romantic intrigue in
modern-day Manhattan?
"Cruel Intentions" offers 97 minutes worth of good reasons why
not. Though glossy in the extreme and occasionally imaginative, the
movie never gets past a crucial structural flaw: Behavior that would
have scandalized pre-Revolutionary France would scarcely raise an
eyebrow among today's drug-dazed and sex-crazed Upper East Side
crowd. So right off thebat, "Intentions" is in trouble.
Matters aren't helped by the casting of the colorless Ryan Phillippe
as Sebastian, this version's equivalent of Valmont. In "Dangerous
Liaisons," director Stephen Frears' acclaimed 1988 film based on De
Laclos' novel, John Malkovich's Valmont was the personification of
passionless sexuality; when he spoke, it sounded as if there were
icicles in between each word.  That Phillippe has studied Malkovich's
portrayal is clearly evident in his attempts to duplicate that sort of
eerie diction, but Phillippe's unfortunate tendency to fall back on
poses and pouts flattens his performance.
Sarah Michelle Gellar, obviously drawing on her years of playing the
bad seed on "All My Children," vamps through the Merteuil role with a
certain amount of style, although the script gives the character very
little backstory.  Screenwriter Christopher Hampton's "Liaisons"
presented Merteuil's devious games as a sort of twisted
feminism. Kumble simply sees her as a two-faced tramp.
"Intentions" pairs wealthy reprobates Catherine (Gellar) and Sebastian
as stepsiblings who plot the downfalls of graceless Cecile (Selma
Blair) and angelic Annette (Reese Witherspoon, who far outclasses her
part), an ingenue from Kansas City who trumpets her virginity in
interviews the way Brooke Shields used to do. Seduction, drugs and
homosexuality figure into the course of events, but, like the virtuous
Annette, "Intentions" is all tease and no action. There was more
nudity in "Dangerous Liaisons" and you'd find more eroticism in the
average "Dawson's Creek" episode.
Perhaps we'd find more exciting material on the cutting room floor,
since it appears "Intentions" underwent some kind of last-minute
hatchet job; for better or for worse, Joshua Jackson, Christine
Baranski and Sean Patrick Thomas barely show up before they disappear,
never to be seen again.

Author
LARRY MCGILLICUDDY
Rating: ***1/2 (out of 4)
Directed by Roger Kumble
Starring Ryan Phillippe, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Reese Witherspoon, 
Selma Blair, Joshua Jackson, Sean Patrick  Thomas, Eric Mabius, 
Christine Baranski, Louise Fletcher, Swoosie Kurtz
"The movies are so rarely great art, that if we can't
appreciate great trash, there is little reason for us to go"
- Pauline Kael
I don't entirely agree with Ms. Kael's pessimistic view, but it is 
the proper frame of mind when viewing something like Roger Kumble's 
Cruel Intentions. The film is a modern day version of Dangerous 
Liasons with upper class high school kids filling in for the main 
characters. While it's certainly no great peice of cinema, it's 
enormously entertaining.
Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe) and Kathryn (Sarah Michelle Gellar) are 
stepsiblings who control the masses at their high school with their 
seductive wickedness. One day Sebastian reads a magazine article by 
the school headmaster's daughter Annette (Reese Witherspoon) 
proclaiming how she is a virgin and plans to wait until marriage. 
Katherine bets him that he can't seduce her. If she wins, she gets 
his speedster. If he wins, he gets to have his way with her. Thus 
begins the sleazy games of sexual manipulation.
Kathryn tries to get revenge against a new student named Cecile, who 
stole her boyfriend away over summer break. She promises Cecile's 
momthat she will look after her goody two shoes daughter and keep her 
out of trouble. What she really does is attempt to turn her into a 
tramp and send incriminating evidence of it to her mother. Meanwhile, 
Sebastian begins to make his moves on Annette, but soon learns that 
she will not be a simple conquest. As played by Reese Witherspoon, 
she is more than resourceful and intelligent, and mere pick up lines 
or false gestures won't do the trick.
What I particularly liked was how the filmmakers didn't try to hide 
the film's trashy nature. Director Roger Kumble is a talented 
craftsman and he is smart enough not to underestimate his audience. 
Many films similar to Cruel Intentions have been made, but they were 
made without any real effort. The material here is executed so 
expertly it rises to a level of sophisticated sleaze.
Ryan Phillippe is a fine actor who brings the right amount of 
sexuality and vulnerability to his role. We must be able to beleive 
he could seduce all these women, and we also must buy the scenes in 
the 2nd half of the film where he begins to fall for Annette. 
Phillippe is able to pull both of these off perfectly. Even better is 
Reese Witherspoon, perhaps the most talented young actress working in 
Hollywood. She
balances innocent charm with sensuality. Another actress could be 
annoying in this role, but Reese is perfect. She makes it beleivable 
that her character would fall under Sebastian's spell without 
allowing her character to look like a moron in the process. And Sarah 
Michelle Gellar has a great time playing the evil wicked queen of her 
school who tries defend her innocent reputation while
manipulating the student body at the same time. 
The technical credits are also superb. Special kudos to the art 
direction team for their view of the large, stylish homes in which 
these spoiled kids wage their battle of conquest. The films moves 
along at a brisk pace thanks to timely editing and a first-rate music 
score. I'm not sure I like the ending very much, but it works fine on 
it's own terms. I won't deny that the final shot is just perfect.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
More reviews at http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Author
Danielle Flynn
Review/Character Analysis by Danielle Flynn
Cast:
Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, Reese Witherspoon, Selma Blair
MPAA Rating:
R for dialogue, language, sexual situations, and thematic elements
Summary:
Rather than the typical Hollywood pattern of promoting promiscuous, immoral
people as accredited examples we can follow, they have broken out of the
corrupt mold of filmmaking and have promoted them as nothing more than
promiscuous, immoral people.
Review:
This is one of those rare, unseen cases where you must look beyond what the
previews unfurl. If one sees the trailer and only the trailer, here is what the
extent of his plot summary will be: spoiled, rich college-age boy bets his
equally spoiled, rich college-age stepsister that he can, what is a nice way of
putting this, sleep with the school headmaster's daughter, famous for her
morals of "waiting for true love", and eventually the boy falls in love with
her instead oh great, more complications. Sounds twisted, huh? Tell me about
it. Ah, how trailers can deceive.
I nonchalantly walked into the theater expecting to be dragged out ten minutes
later by my I-only-like-old-G-rated-movies type of mother who knew nothing
about this flick we had decided to stay and watch after seeing another one. But
instead, I was intrigued by every moment. Go in there expecting what you want,
none of it will matter. I suppose one of the primary reasons I found myself
fascinated was the acting. I had counted on a bunch of Hollywood's teen stars
thrown into a foul-mouthed, tasteless "B movie". I was wrong. You'll never look
at Buffy the same way again.
Sarah Michelle Gellar carries this movie fantastically. Though a fully dazzling
cast shines in every scene, it truly is Kathryn Merteuil we all find ourselves
drawn to simply for her flagitiously wicked disposition and no-conscience
perspective. This is a person who has never been loved by anyone. She gets her
pleasure in life by the pain in others', which she proudly displays wordlessly
in each scene. This is someone with no concrete emotions and a heart of stone.
Yet still there is an aspect of fear; fear of getting seriously hurt. Fear of
the world and of being defeated by people like herself. She perhaps may be a
vicious, relentless villain on the outside but inwardly she is a scared little
girl who desperately needs someone to love her, and you can see it in her eyes
the whole time no matter how brutal she may carry herself to be. Gellar takes
an immense stretch from her famous television role of "Buffy the Vampire
Slayer" as she boldly and successfully plunges into the position of someone
much more sinister. My personal favorite scene in the entire film, and not to
mention Gellar's finest, was at almost the very end, when the entire school
discovers her secret, compliments of Cecile. There is no actual dialogue in
this scene but it is still to me the most powerful and moving one of all.
Another crucial role is that of Kathryn's stepbrother Sebastian Valmont, who
proposes the bet in the first place. Ryan Phillippe (reuniting with Gellar
after their first appearance together in the horror smash "I Know What You Did
Last Summer") renders a scathingly commendable yet unadorned performance as
someone also in great need of attention. He holds an offensive reputation as
the rich kid who takes advantage of every "insipid Manhattan debutante" he
desires. Phillippe's character exhibits great chemistry with the others',
especially Gellar's. An intensely dramatic transformation in the film is when
Sebastian realizes that he truly loves Annette. There is more complexity to
this than meets the eye, seeing how selfish and perverted Sebastian has always
been. Phillippe furnishes this sequence with an emotionally distraught display
of honesty and conviction, which just blew me away.
Reese Witherspoon offers a simple yet simply elaborate show of being "the good
girl" (Annette Hargrove) without making her inaccessibly "goody-goody". A sort
of subtlety and maturity about her character results in the audience being able
to connect to her. This is not someone who needs a lot of figuring out but
rather needs a lot of acceptance. Her spirit holds a tenacious truth that seems
to act as sort of the conscience for the entire film. I would have to say
Witherspoon's most prominently well-mastered scene is when Sebastian reveals
the truth to her. She is able to just lose control without compromising her
entirety, which I thought was nothing more than a finely polished job on her
part.
There is a certain depth and innocence yet mischievous mystery to the role of
Cecile Caldwell, immaculately played by Selma Blair. She is probably the most
complicated character of all because she has so many levels. There is a little
8-year-old version of her that still wants to play and have fun, and there is a
30-year-old version that wants to encounter the so-called great adult
experiences of life. It's a girl who has also not experienced much love in her
life, especially from her wealthy, egotistic, over-bearing mother. She is truly
looking for love in all the wrong places, and rather than find it, she gets
clobbered. But not knowing what she should have expected anyway, she takes it
in a rather naďve way, clumsily playing by the only rules she knows in the only
way she knows how.
I cannot remember the last time I've enjoyed a movie to such an extent. Not in
the way of, "oh this is just so much fun", but more in the vicinity of, "this
is smart, deep, and very dark yet very accessible". A strong word of advice,
however; don't drag anyone under 15 to see this. It may have a cast chock full
of young people, but it's a movie highlighting the cruel intentions of adults
in the world today. A superb, simple, and entertaining script combined with a
surprisingly impressive cast has made "Cruel Intentions" one of the most
exceptional movies I've seen in years. Until next time, "happy hunting", and
remember: "in the game of seduction, there's only one rule: never fall in
love."
Until the next great movie I see, I remain sincerely,
Danielle Flynn, IMR (Independent Movie Reviewer)
AlanisM567@aol.com

Author
Steve Kong
Cruel Intentions is one of those films that you'll like if there is someone
in the film you enjoy watching. Else, the film is a somewhat toned down and
less enjoyable version of Wild Things. For me, I enjoyed the film only
because of Sarah Michelle Gellar. I'm sure that there will be flocks of
young women who will enjoy the film immensely because of Ryan Phillippe.
Cruel Intentions is loosely based on "Les Liaisons Dangereuses" by
Choderlos de Laclos. The film starts off with an intriguing shot; it's a
helicopter shot aimed directly at the ground, the only things we see are
white motion-blurred objects flying by. It took me a few seconds to realize
what I was looking at, and when I did, I knew this was foreshadowing for
something that was going to happen sometime later in the film. 
Sabastian (Ryan Phillippe) is a bored guy, who can bed just about any girl.
The only girl he wants to bed, and can't, is his stepsister Katherine
(Sarah Michelle Gellar). These two promiscuous stepsiblings are bored with
their sexual conquests; they are just too easy for them. Sex is just a game
that these two have mastered it. They turn their attention towards
outsiders; they are cruel and know that they can use sex against others.
Other people's misery is their pleasure. In a game, Katherine bets
Sabastian that he can't bed the daughter of the new headmaster of their
school. A self-proclaimed virgin-till-she-meets-the-right-guy, Annette
(Reese Witherspoon) is the ultimate challenge for Sabastian. If Sabastian
is able to sleep with Annette, then he gets the ultimate prize: a night
with Katherine. If he can't, then Katherine gets his prized possession: his
sports car.
Cruel Intentions is, by all means, an uneven film. The performances, music,
film score, and mood were all uneven. The only thing that is solid is the
cinematography by Theo Van de Sande (Blade).
Performance-wise Gellar and Phillippe put in decent, if a bit sterile,
performances. Both of them hit their parts right on and are believable as
conniving and evil. Selma Blair does not fare as well. Blair's performance
is the sore thumb of the whole film. Her character was just too offbeat and
strange, she did not fit into the film and every time she took to the
screen it drew me out of the film and into the state of thinking, "Does she
think she's in There's Something About Mary?"  The one performer that was
fabulous was Resse Witherspoon.
For the record, no one gets naked in Cruel Intentions (though Phillippe
shows off his butt), there are a few erotic scenes, but nothing too racy in
the film. Still, this film is not for the younger teenage crowd  which the
producers and studio seem to be taking aim at. Cruel Intentions is one of
those films that tries hard to entertain and only accomplishes the task
halfway. The script and direction by Roger Kumble is mediocre at best.
There's a film that I kept thinking is similar to Cruel Intentions and that
film is Wild Things. Wild Things didn't take itself so seriously, and in
the end Wild Things was more enjoyable. Catch Cruel Intentions at a matinee
showing, else, wait for video.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.
