Title
Review for Sleepy Hollow (1999)
Number of Reviews
39

Author
Ross Anthony
Tim Burton's films are oft anticipated for his boldly off-center and usually
dark art direction. "Sleepy Hollow" is no exception. The warm colors have
bled from the footage leaving the flesh stark, cold and clammy, and the
darks -- soot black. Burton also enjoys painting a "small world" set with
which to stage his sideways stories. Frequently, these worlds are neither
live action looking nor quite animated. I find them cartoony, claustrophobic
and distracting, but I'm probably one of only a handful; others seem to
enjoy them.
Gadgetry, on the other hand, Burton excels in -- gadgetry and freakish
characters. Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) wields coroner's tool that look as
if they were designed for handicapped piranhas. And Burton's Headless
Horseman is simply magnificent; it's the heart and soul (though not brains)
that keeps this "Sleepy Hollow" charging mightily through the foggy twisted
forest. This powerful black torso with limbs spinning sword and hatchet from
atop a pounding steed is as splendid as a bolt of lightening from the
heavens.
Unfortunately, sleepy and hollow all too appropriately describe the first
half of the production (prior to any significant appearance of the
horseman). Wrought with exposition and an elusively wry sense of humor
giving even the artfully apt Depp a larger foe to over come than the one of
high shoulders; the horseman charges on, breathing life (from it's severed
esophagus) into this paling production.
Sleepy Hollow. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci and Christopher Walken, Marc
Pickering.
Directed by Tim Burton.
Screenplay by Andrew Kevin Walker.
Produced by Scott Rudin and Adam Schroeder at Mandalay/Lion's
Gate/Paramount/American Zoetrope.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Nick Lyons
  In the past, Tim Burton has taken cinema by storm with the action packed
Batman, and the hilarious Ed Wood, but lately his films just don't cut it.
Sleepy Hollow has some unique features, but the script is a terrible mess.
  For those who remember Disney's fantastic "Adventures Of Ichabod Crane", it
is actually superior to this. Disney's version was at least interesting, while
Burton's film drags on far too long, without any suspense or frights. While the
stories are similar, the new version adds too much to the once likable story,
and throws in some weak dialogue to top it off. Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) is
now apparently a constable, who was sent to New York to investigate suspicious
murders. The victims are headless, and no traces of evidence were found, until
the murderer reveals himself, hence the headless horseman. Now with the help of
Christina Ricci and an orphaned boy, they must stop the headless horseman from
a killing spree, that could destroy the whole town of Sleepy Hollow.
  Sure the headless horseman is an intriguing character, but the story has so
many holes that even he nor Depp can save this disaster. In the original, the
headless horseman was meant to be unstoppable. No one could stop him, not even
Ichabod. By the end of the film, it had audiences in deep thought. Burton
however concentrates far too much on the atmosphere, and how to make the main
characters heroes. He takes no risk what so ever, and this is where he fails.
  Another pathetic element of the film was the script. Like I said earlier, he
just stuffed too much in at one time, and made it look real sloppy, kind of
like the mess the headless horseman made with his victims. He completely
butchered the story to pieces.
  Thankfully there are a few factors that I particularly liked. The acting by
Depp was quite notable. He took the nerdy character of the cartoon, and simply
acted it out in a better manner. If it wasn't for his quirky one-liners, I
doubt I could have remained awake, because quite frankly I was getting sleepy.
Just when I thought Christina Ricci was getting to be a good actress, she winds
up doing this. It just goes to show no actress or actor can pass up a big
blockbuster. It's too tempting to let go, even if the script is mush. The
atmosphere too was quite involving. I should have just gazed at the sets, and
the eerie fog, rather than actually pay attention to what was going on. At
least Burton's films are eye candy, even if they are trash.
  The only real scenes of value were the tree full of heads, and the fight
between the horseman, Depp and Casper Van Dien. Other than that, I wish I could
just fast forward through all the gaping holes in the film, and just sit back
and stare at the scenery.
  By the end, I can only think back and laugh at how bad Sleepy Hollow
developed. This is the biggest disappointment of the year, especially when such
a talented director like Burton handles a project like this. Don't waste your
time or money, because your head will feel hollow.
Grade: D+

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Tim Burton fans are gonna relish this fantasy horror story,
especially the creepy beginning. It's 1799 on a misty road near the
small village of Sleepy Hollow in New York's Hudson River Valley when
a coach carrying the region's richest man (Martin Landau) is attacked
by a mysterious Headless Horseman wielding a deadly sword. Whoosh! Off
goes his head!  Then the killer strikes again. Each time, the victim
is decapitated. Understandably, the insular Dutch locals are upset,
many convinced that they're being haunted by the demonic spirit of a
Revolutionary War mercenary (Christopher Walken) who died in the West
Woods, a place where no one dares go. Then an inquisitive, if
squeamish, new constable, Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) appears, sent to
track down the murderer. He scoffs at the idea of a supernatural
being, focusing his forensic attention on hunky Brom Van Brunt (Casper
Van Dien) but soon learns that, perhaps, there are vengeful
supernatural forces at work. In the meantime, he falls in love with
Katrina Van Tassel (Christina Ricci - in a blonde wig), the bewitching
daughter of his landlords (Michael Gambon, Miranda Richardson).  While
the first few Horseman attacks are scary - thanks to stuntman Ray Park
- it soon becomes evident that all the women are witches and a crazed
serial killer is on the loose. Seven screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker
revises Washington Irving's classic ghost story, concluding with a
millennial flourish, and Emmanuel Lubezki's sepia-toned cinematography
is impressive. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Sleepy Hollow is
a grim, gruesome 6 - a belated Halloween treat with more style than
substance. Be warned: nearly everyone's head rolls and the brutal
beheadings are graphic and violent - not suitable for young children.

Author
Jerry Saravia
An elderly man sits in a carriage at night, watching the silhouetted trees in
the darkness and hearing strange noises. Suddenly, something dashes through his
carriage and the driver's head is gone. The man is scared and leaps out of the
carriage. He walks up to a scarecrow with an ominous, eerie pumpkin for a head.
He hears a noise, turns around and his head is lopped off too. A nice start,
but what a shame that the whole movie is like that - it makes decapitation seem
as matter-of-factly as those "Friday the 13th" movies. We have come a long way
since Disney's scarily amusing classic short, "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow."
Back at Sleepy Hollow, a dreary town saturated in fog, the bland, easily
bewitched constable Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) arrives from New York City to
investigate a series of puzzling decapitations. Puzzling to Ichabod, but not to
the townspeople who are certain that a supernatural figure on a horse, known as
the Headless Horseman, is responsible for the murders. "We have murders in New
York without benefit of ghouls or goblins," mutters Ichabod, in one of the
movie's few clever lines. Eventually, Ichabod discovers that this superstition
is fact, but the reasons for the Headless Horseman's rampage may leave viewers
wishing that director Tim Burton would have had the demonic imagination to
reinvent this fable with more juice than is allowed. 
"Sleepy Hollow's" ad campaign is absolutely correct - heads do roll but with
little pretense or justification. We see the nocturnal horseman galloping
through the narrow roads raising his sword and axe with all his might and
severing each and every head (he even battles Ichabod in a duel that had me
laughing unintentionally). You see a decapitation once and it is threatening,
albeit somewhat scary. Second time is still thrilling with the music score by
Danny Elfman pumping through the speakers even louder. The third and fourth
time, you are left wondering if Tim Burton did nothing more than create a
big-budget slasher film with a headless Jason Voorhees! 
Mr. Burton leaves little to the imagination, an ironic gesture on his part
since he is a man borne of vivid imaginings. Remember the wonderful creation of
Johnny Depp's sad-eyed, clownish, fragile  Edward Scissorhands! The wondrous
surrealism of "Pee Wee's Big Adventure"! The comical belching of Michael
Keaton's Beetlejuice! And what do we have in "Sleepy Hollow"? An angry,
elliptical horseman who huffs and puffs and not much else (oh, yes, he loves to
steal heads). This may be because the monster is from Washington Irving's
novella, not an original creation of Burton's. 
The other characters are barely magnified beyond paper-thin caricature types.
Johnny Depp is not as wild-eyed as he was in "Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas,"
but his Ichabod is too bland and not eccentric enough to stimulate interest.
Christina Ricci is the blonde-curled Katrina whom Ichabod falls in love with
(Winona Ryder was also mistakenly blonde in "Edward Scissorhands"), but they
don't have an iota of chemistry. Ricci is supposed to be some kind of witch but
the script glosses over this characteristic in favor of more beheadings. The
other actors show up merely as window dressing - Michael Gambon, Miranda
Richardson and Michael Gough appear like blocks of wood in Burton's world with
no sense of urgency. In fact, if this horseman is so dangerous and people are
so afraid of him, why don't they all move to another town? Or is there a
conspiracy involving an inheritance and doomed love? We can never be sure. 
"Sleepy Hollow" is both sleep-inducing and hollow, showing us nothing more than
numerous beheadings and bleeding tree trunks. Save for Christopher Walken's
frightening cameo, beautifully captivating cinematography, and a couple of
dazzling dream sequences, this Gothic wannabe fable is charmless, joyless,
frenetic junk. It is time Burton sets his eyes on the vivid, imaginative power
of his own creations. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Alex Ioshpe
WINNER OF 3 GOLDEN APOLLO AWARD
INCLUDING BEST ART DIRECTION AND BEST CINEMATOGRAPHY
"Villainy wears many masks, none of which are more dangerous than virtue."
Ichabod Crane, SLEEPY HOLLOW
Imagine: Sherelock Holmes encounters a mystery, where murder and other
unexplained events are caused by no human, but truly a supernatural force.
"Sleepy Hollow" begins in New York. The year is 1799. The new millenium is
right around the corner and the progress of science and technology has no
limits. The virtuous constable Ichobod Crane (Johnny Depp ), reflects that
mentality and stands as a symbol for the upcoming era, a man ahead of his
time in his belief in scientific evidence and forensics, at the dawn of a
new century of enlightenment -- a sophisticated and moral man, who has
chosen the police work of noble and even poetic reasons. Ichobod likes to
think of himself as a progressive citizen, a pioneer of his work and a
scientist of the modern world. His scientific inventions and humanistic
attitude has become a problem for his superiors. He is therefore sent to
investigate an ancient and unsolved mystery. A row of bizarre murders in an
isolated village, called Sleepy Hollow, where victims have been found in the
woods..decapitated. As Ichobod nobly accepts this task, he finds himself in
a completely different world, a parallel universe, where logic doesn't exist
and science can't help. The frightened villagers reveal the shocking truth
of a demon, a headless horseman that haunts the woods. Determined to
discover the "true identity of the assassin", and paying no attention to the
warnings, he continues to investigate, using his scientific inventions.
While heads continue to fly, Crane experiences frightening childhood visions
of his own, remembering things he wanted to forget. His science and
technology, on which he depended on, show no results, and all he believed
in, slowly fades away. He is on the brink of a complete mental breakdown,
when he falls in love with a mysterious beauty (Christina Ricci ), who
wishes to help him in his quest. Ichobod continues to blindly trust in logic
and reason, until he goes into the dark woods and sees the demon for
himself..
Andrew Kevin Walker ("Se7en" ) and Kevin Yagher have both done a great job,
transforming Washington Irving's primitive ghost story ("The Legend of
Sleepy Hollow") into a likable film. But it is director Tim Burton that has
made it into a memorable experience. He has created a staggering and
beautiful magical world, which is nothing less than a visual feast. This is
simply the most beautiful and visually enchanting film since Francis Ford
Copolla's Dracula. This being the case, it is not hard to guess that the
visual power of this film overshadows the acting, which by the way is
surprisingly convincing. Johnny Depp is fabulous as the confused scientist.
A delightful and fresh performance, combining high humor with some serious
psychological themes. Christina Ricci is solid but a little less impressive
than she has been of late, but she gracefully floats in her role as a clean,
kind hearted white witch who captures Ichabod's heart -- an untamed, free
spirit of the wild. Ichobod and Katrina are completely different souls,
completing each other with their opposites. Their love story is one of the
key elements in the film, but it is the personal evolution of Ichobod Crane
that is its heart. And as the story progresses, we learn more about him and
his past. He is a man blinded by science and naively believing in
technology, reason, logic and simple explanations. Although he would like to
think otherwise, his vision is rather limited and primitive. As he enters
this strange parallel universe, he doesn't know what to do, how to react or
how to explain the events happening around him. This, his aristocratic
origin, dry wit and emotional inexperience serves both as terrifying horror,
philosophical thoughts and comic relief. Caught between dream and reality,
he takes a step into another world and another life...
Like "Don Quixote", "Sleepy Hollow" is a bittersweet parable about the
perils of the imagination as it's affected by reading or hearing stories.
Like Copolla's Dracula, this is a surreal filmatic experience -- a fairytale
vision. Sleepy Hollow is a place lost in time, somewhere between dream and
reality. There's no one that can copy Burton in his work. His exceptional
visual imagination allows him to create wonders on virtually every shot.
There's something undeniably touching about such unreasonable passion and
devotion, and I suppose some of the same sort of piety can be found in
Sleepy Hollow. All his movies have the fervent fanaticism of a cult taste
projected into the mainstream with affection as well as confidence. He
creates a dark and moody atmosphere of contrasts and symbolism. Seeking
balance, Burton paints a landscape of extreme contrasts, purely good and
evil; the man of science, that keeps his feet on the ground, and the woman
of nature, a wild spirit that flows with the wind, are set against the
landscape, which is a reflection of mood and atmosphere -- and what a
magical landscape it is! The only problem is that the film gets rather
unfocused after the all-too-traditional climax, where evil is unmasked and
good prevail. But then again, this is a fairytale.
Sleepy Hollow presents a magical art direction, enchanting cinematography,
moody musical score and some fabulous visual effects--a ravishing visual
experience, and an entertaining and interesting detective story, with the
right dose of horror, romance and humor. This film is a thrilling ride back
to the turn of the 19th century.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Bromborough)
Released in the UK by UIP on January 7, 2000; certificate 15; 105 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Tim Burton; produced by Scott Rudin, Adam Schroeder.
Written by Andrew Kevin Walker; from a screen story by Kevin Yagher, Andrew 
Kevin Walker; based upon the short story "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" by 
Washington Irving.
Photographed by Emmanuel Lubezki; edited by Chris Lebenzon.
Washington Irving's short story "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow", first 
published in 1819, is a well-respected folk tale of supernatural secrets, and 
has survived the generations long enough to spawn several film adaptations -- 
among them an Emmy-winning mini-series for kids and a Disney animation. When 
Tim Burton, that distinctive director of twisted heroic journeys and gothic 
fantasies, decided to do his own remake of the Irving work, the project was 
expected to be his prestigious bid for Oscar success. If David Lynch can make 
a subtle movie with a premise as weird as that of "The Straight Story", 
people thought, surely Tim Burton can take a delicate approach to a classic?
Actually, this "Sleepy Hollow" is as Burtonesque as possible, a gory 
special-effects extravaganza set in 1799 that plays like a cross between 
Thomas Hardy and "The Evil Dead". Tim has determined to stay in his own wild 
world, and along with his screenwriters, Andrew Kevin Walker and Kevin 
Yagher, has confidently shuffled around the details of Irving's plot for his 
own purposes. Even the image of the famous literary figure Ichabod Crane has 
been altered -- he's no longer a lanky, curious schoolteacher who lives where 
the story is set, but a clumsy New York City police constable played by 
Johnny Depp.
Burton and Depp's Crane travels to the village of Sleepy Hollow to 
investigate the murders of three local men -- all of whom were found in the 
woods without heads. The town elders -- Van Tassell (Michael Gambon), 
Hardenbrook (Michael Gough), Steenwyck (Jeffrey Jones) and Phillipse (Richard 
Griffiths) -- inform Crane that they suspect the legendary 'Headless 
Horsemen' of the crimes, a warrior ghost who is said to stalk and decapitate 
the inhabitants of the area in search of his own noggin. But the constable 
does not want to listen, claiming to be a man of science and reason, and 
searching for a human culprit.
There is fun to be had in just watching Crane try to operate his newfangled 
scientific gadgets, which are elaborately designed for no visible purpose, 
with windows and panels and knobs aplenty, which constantly spring out of his 
control. Depp plays the character as a clearly preposterous man who 
nonetheless attempts to maintain serious authority, and who rigidly keeps 
eyes wide open, head upright and mouth poised properly even while cowering 
from a spider, or shrieking in peril under bed sheets.
The amusingly clumsy fellow soon learns that the Headless Horseman is indeed 
a real figure, and also finds such sights as a witch and a magical tree. 
Crane carries out silly interrogations, investigates town records and digs up 
the victims' graves for further research, getting closer to the explanation 
behind Sleepy Hollow's odd events, and to a violent confrontation with the 
villain responsible. There are slow patches, and at times the film gets 
tangled up in unnecessary confusing details on the way to its simple 
resolution. But the payoff redeems the flaws, thanks to Burton's visuals, 
which are not inaccurate to the location and period, but are larger than 
life, with the depth of Emmanuel Lubezki's photography slightly swelling 
every image and casting a sinister blue mist over the night air. When the 
horseman jumps out from these clouds, the camera rushes around in jarring 
close-ups to follow the havoc he wreaks, and this makes for stunning action 
sequences.
Admittedly, I expected terrific production values and an amusing Johnny Depp 
performance from "Sleepy Hollow". Burton, as I keep stressing, is one of the 
most visually astute of all working filmmakers, and Depp has performed 
creatively in the challenging title roles of the director's "Edward 
Scissorhands" and "Ed Wood". The pleasant surprise here is Christina Ricci, a 
young actress whose recent persona has only been fit for satire, with its 
rebellious, dead-eyed, flat-voiced arrogance. She is sincere and subtle as 
Katrina, the innocent maiden who loves and protects Icabod Crane, displaying 
versatility I believed her to have lost.
No doubt Ricci was just so amazed by the movie's carefully constructed 
atmosphere that she could not stand in the way of it with her usual 
distracting sarcasm. "Sleepy Hollow" proves -- as do "Pee Wee's Big 
Adventure", "Batman", "Edward Scissorhands" and "The Nightmare Before 
Christmas" -- that the offbeat crannies of Tim Burton's mind are worth 
visiting, and he knows how to take us into them.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, 
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Brandon Herring 
Rated: R for graphic horror violence and gore, and some sexuality. (And TONS of
heads)
Starring: Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Casper Van Dien,
Michael Gambon, Christopher Walken, Christopher Lee, Martin Landau.
Only Tim Burton could to it: Make a big-budgeted horror flick based on the
classic tale by Washington Irving....and make it great. 'Sleepy Hollow' works
on so many levels that in the middle of the movie, I had a huge smile on my
face and thought 'Man this is awesome!'. Of course most of you know the Legend
of Sleepy Hollow and the book by Washington Irving which has always been one of
my favorites. TIm Burton directs with such skill that he has created one of the
most beautiful films put on print.
The movie opens with a creepy and scary little montage of the Headless
Horseman's first victim. From there on we meet Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) New
York's constable who is sent in my the judge of the town to Sleepy Hollow where
many people have been losing something there. Here in Sleepy Hollow he stays
with the Van Tassel's. He hears the story of the headless horseman and does not
really know what to believe, he meets the Van Tassel's daughter Katrina
(Christina Ricci), who's mother and father are Lady Van Tassel (Miranda
Richardson) and Baltus Van Tassel (Michael Gambon). He really doesn't believe
in the fairy tales of the headless horseman until he himself has an encounter
with him which scares him out of his wits. He however sets out to find the
headless horseman, and for once and for all stop him from killing
again....before he becomes the next victim. 
I must say the best things about this movie are: Johnny Depp's wonderfully
comical performance which he does so good it would almost surpass his Edward
Scissorhand's performance. Christina Ricci seems to also give one of her best
performances to date with strong back-up from Miranda Richardson (always good)
and Michael Gambon. I think the strongest thing of the movie however is the
Headless Horseman himself. Part CGI part man in suit, he is nothing more than
astonishing. He looks incredibly like he has no head, and when you see him a
chill goes down your spine. When he rides his horse its very creepy and when he
chops off someone's head it really does make you scared. For the person who
plays the Headless Horseman he was well-cast and very scary when they tell how
he died. 
Astonishingly enough this isn't the kids story it was before. This is a very
mature film that has so much smartness and cleverness in it, that you have to
wonder why it could not have been made before. It has a dark, creepy atmosphere
and a beautiful setting with incredible costumes. The whole film has a sort of
gothic feel to it, and may be too dark for some people. It is also incredibly
gory and bloody with over twenty beheadings, all resulting in bloody messes.
The beheadings are also very graphic and only one or two are off screen. The
violence and gore may not appeal to everyone so I am just trying to warn you so
you know about it. For those fans and even non-fans of the horror genre I don't
think you will be disappointed.
The directing was also incredible and Tim Burton did just like he did with
Batman and gives it a special touch to be something you didn't think it would
be. He did a great job with shadowing and in the end it's very surprising and
satisfying. One flaw was some slow parts in the movie and one scene that went
on forever, but besides that 'Sleepy Hollow' doesn't have much wrong with it.
The performances are all strong  (except Casper Van Dien YUCK!)as is the clever
writing with a surprising amount of comedy.
Even though the story has been done many times before, this one seems to the be
the best of them all. The 65m dollar budget shows quite clearly and in the end
pays off. It is a beautiful film, with some amazing camerawork, along with the
neat little opening titles. The film is very intense, with some downright scary
moments that had me holding on to my arm chair. 'Sleepy Hollow' does have a few
changes in it than the movie did and adds some surprising twists especially in
the end, and the person who plays The Headless Horseman was quite scary and
well-cast.
'Sleepy Hollow' will go down as a new classic in the horror genre, and shall
not be remade anymore. I would not be surprised if this movie is a hit with
both the young and old crowd. The movie is all entertaining, scary, funny and
gory. It has a touch of this and a touch of that and should have something to
impress or please someone. TIm Burton gives us a great film worthy of the
rating above. With its creepy atmosphere, its graphic violence and witty comedy
'Sleepy Hollow' is nothing but a great movie.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring November 18, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Gary Jones
Washington Irving's story The Legend of Sleepy Hollow has been dusted
down and given the Tim Burton treatment. Burton excels in bewitching us
with bizarre, dark, yet light-hearted visions - Edward Scissorhands and
the Batman films (before the series was effectively ruined when Burton
gave up the helm) are wonderful movies, and the new Tim Burton movie was
a must-see. The story is set in 1799, in the village of Sleepy Hollow
near New York. A series of ghostly and gruesome murders has taken place
in the village and Ichabod Crane, a police constable from the big city,
is sent to investigate. Crane (played by Johnny Depp) soon finds that
there really are some otherworldly goings-on in the village and realises
that he might not succeed in his attempt to bring science and reason to
the investigation and debunk the villagers' spooky tales of the
butchering Headless Horseman.
The film is absolutely gorgeous to look at, the action sequences are
fine and the score shows Danny Elfman on top dramatically-whimsical
form, but unfortunately the movie fails owing to seriously ill-judged
screenplay and performances fundamental problems which no amount of
technical skill can overcome. The film is written by Andrew Kevin
Walker, who wrote Seven with its brilliantly novel construction, but the
source material here ties Walker down to an old-fashioned ghost story,
and in his attempt at producing authentic period dialogue, what we get
sounds horribly forced and unconvincing.
Johnny Depp is a fine actor, but his performance here is little more
than a reworking of his Edward Scissorhands, the similarity between the
roles highlighted when Ichabod wields various spiky investigative
gadgets. But what worked in Scissorhands strangely fails here. Perhaps
Burton's talent for malignant delight works best when it plays against a
contemporary background. Here it just seems a bit silly.
The murderous Headless Horseman is played, in the scenes before the
horseman loses his head, by Christopher Walken, but for the bulk of the
horseman's screen time, the headless figure is played by Ray Park. Park
played Darth Maul in Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom Menace and as the
bonceless butcher he brings a savage grace to his frequent dismemberings
of Sleepy Hollow's inhabitants. Christina Ricci is usually worth
watching and has a knack for taking on interesting roles, such as her
parts in Fear And Loathing In Las Vegas and The Opposite of Sex. Here
she is completely wasted, and it hard to see anything in the script that
can have attracted her, so perhaps she let the attraction of working
with Burton and Depp get the better of her.
The whole film seems to be a homage to Hammer horror films. (The Hammer
connection is strengthened by the use of such fine British character
actors as Christopher Lee, Michael Gambon and Michael Gough.) Such films
can be fun to watch and I have fond memories of sneakily staying up late
to watch them on TV, but even their greatest fans would find it hard to
deny that they were melodramatic, overacted nonsense. In this regard,
Tim Burton's film has captured their essence all too well.
All in all, Sleepy Hollow is a big disappointment.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Tim Burton puts his unique stamp on Washington Irving's classic short
story The Legend of Sleepy Hollow, and the result is a genuinely
frightening and campy picture that's funny in all the right places.
Though changes have been made to Irving's yarn, viewers will likely
appreciate Burton's dark sense of humor, as well as Hollow's fantastic
visual effects.
Hollow opens with a fast, bumpy stagecoach ride through the woods near
Albany, New York.  The passenger (an uncredited Martin Landau) peeks his
head out, notices that the driver no longer has his, and leaps from the
moving carriage.  As he runs through the woods and into a cornfield, the
man comes across a creepy scarecrow that could be an early ancestor of
Burton's Jack Skellington.  Terrified, he stops, turns and is
decapitated by a headless horseman.
Flash to a 1799 New York City courthouse, where the judge impatiently
listens to Constable Ichabod Crane's (Johnny Depp, The Astronaut's Wife)
customary lecture about the importance of collecting evidence from the
scenes of crimes in order to fairly prosecute guilty parties.  Tired of
his liberal thinking, the judge sends Crane to investigate three bizarre
murders in an isolated Dutch farming community called Sleepy Hollow in
Upstate New York.  So Crane, somewhat of a forefather of modern forensic
science, packs his bags with strange chemicals and what looks to be
nightmarish homemade dental tools.
Once he arrives in Sleepy Hollow, the town's leaders give Crane the
lowdown on the murders.  Each victim was beheaded, but the heads were
never found.  Worse yet, Crane learns that the killer is believed to be
the ghost of a Hessian trooper (Christopher Walken, Blast From the Past)
who was himself beheaded twenty years earlier, leaving his spectre to
ride a mighty black steed through the West Woods in a nightly quest for
his skull.  Crane, a weak-hearted fraidy cat prone to fainting spells,
realizes he may be in way over his head.
There are a few sticky points, namely the inclusion of Crane's nightmare
flashbacks to his childhood, where his buxom mother (Lisa Marie) dabbled
in witchcraft.  This appears to be added only to show off Marie's
fantastic rack  she's Burton's real-life girlfriend and has appeared in
his last few films.  But this transgression can easily be overlooked,
however, becausewell, because of the aforementioned rack.  Burton's
film seems pretty true to its source, right down to Katrina Van Tassel's
(Christina Ricci, The Opposite of Sex) `plump as a partridge' stature to
the name of Crane's dusty horse (Gunpowder).  Burton even one-ups his
predecessor, using the twisted, gnarled limbs of The Tree of the Dead as
the Horseman's home.
The major change to Irving's work concerns Crane.  In the book he was a
kindly schoolteacher and musician, and is physically described as
follows:
`He was tall, but exceedingly lank, with narrow shoulders, long arms and
legs, hands that dangled a mile out of his sleeves, feet that might have
served for shovels and his whole frame most loosely hung together.  His
head was small, and flat at top, with huge ears, large green glassy
eyes, and a long snipe nose, so that it looked like a weathercock
perched upon his spindle neck to tell which way the wind blew.  To see
him striding along the profile of a hill on a windy day, with his
clothes bagging and fluttering about him, one might have mistaken him
for the genius of famine descending upon the earth, or some scarecrow
eloped from a cornfield.  His sharp elbows stuck out like
grasshoppers'.'
Doesn't exactly make you think of Johnny Depp, does it?  Howard Stern,
maybe, but not Johnny Depp.  Irving's remarkably vivid representation of
the protagonist stood out in my memory more than any other part of the
original work - it's probably the best description I've ever read.  In
the text, the Horseman's cranium was blasted off by a cannonball in a
nameless Revolutionary War battle.  Interestingly, the script does
include a `woman in white' that lived in the haunted woods, referring to
one of the many legends Irving's townsfolk believed in his story.
In Irving's account, the story was told first-person after Crane's
encounter with the Headless Horseman.  Here, Burton and his writers
(Andrew Kevin Walker of Se7en fame and special-effects specialist Kevin
Yagher) have made the film into more of a Scooby-Doo murder-mystery, and
the baddie is nearly as easy to finger.  For a few minutes in this film,
it seemed like the Horseman was turning into an unstoppable clichéd
modern horror figure, like Freddie or Jason.  The Horseman's battle with
Crane and Brom Van Brunt (Casper Van Dien, The Omega Code) easily puts
any skirmish in The World is Not Enough to shame.
Indescribably beautiful, from Danny Elfman's score to Emmanuel Lubezki's
(Meet Joe Black) amazing cinematography to the breathtaking technical
design work from the team responsible for Fargo, Kafka, Aliens and
Gattaca, Burton's film captures the mood and feel of Irving's short
right down to the eerie wooden bridge and the perpetual fog that seems
to constantly roll through the gloomy town.  And you can't help but
think about Burton's Gotham in Batman when Hollow shows a view of 1799
New York City.
As a side note, the closing credits list a Conrad Hall as the director
of photography for the New York unit of the film crew.  I have been
unable to confirm that this is the same Conrad Hall that was nominated
for Best Cinematography at last year's Oscars (for A Civil Action), as
well as an early favorite for this year's ceremony (American Beauty).
1:42 - R for graphic horror violence and gore, multiple beheadings and
mild adult situations

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Tim Burton.
Cast: Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Mark Pickering, 
Michael Gambon, Christopher Walken, Jeffrey Jones, Lisa Marie, Michael Gough, 
Christopher Lee. 
1999 - 105 minutes
Rated R (for mass beheadings, blood, and a sexual situation).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, November 20, 1999.
Looking back on my childhood, one of the most vivid memories in the world of 
film or television that I have is watching the 30-minute animated film, "The 
Legend of Sleepy Hollow," based on the haunting Washington Irving story, 
around Halloween. I haven't seen it in many years, but it has been engraved 
into my mind for always. After many years of rumors and delays, the 
live-action version, "Sleepy Hollow," has finally arrived, and it is a visual 
masterpiece, dark and eerily beautiful in its cinematography and production 
design, and sumptuous in its costumes. But seriously, what did you expect 
coming from the genius mind of filmmaker Tim Burton, who excels in creating 
brilliant new worlds and feasts for the eyes? 
What "Sleepy Hollow" isn't is an adaptation of the Irving story. Aside from 
the key plot point of a headless horseman who prowls the countryside of the 
farming community, Sleepy Hollow, circa 1799, the film is only very loosely 
related to its source material. The main character, Ichabod Crane (Johnny 
Depp), is the same, but he has been transformed from a gangly schoolteacher 
into a constable who investigates the murders that have been plaguing Sleep 
Hollow, each one of the victims' heads severed and missing.
The element that the film does evoke from the story, which I have read 
countless times, is its overall atmosphere and mystery, and the somehow 
disturbing nature of its premise. Burton could have easily gone the "safe" 
root and made a PG-13 movie where each of the beheadings are shown offscreen, 
but that would be cheating. He realizes that since the whole story revolves 
around a phantom who lops off people's heads, he at least owes it to his 
audience to show every swing, slash, and chop. As is, the MPAA has given the 
picture, which is in the true tradition of the classic, campy Hammer films, 
an R-rating, but despite the frequent blood, there isn't anything graphic 
about it, and a 13-year-old would unquestionably be able to handle the murder 
scenes.
Certain images will stay with me for some time to come: the indelible opening 
scene amidst a scarecrow-filled cornfield; the fog that subtly sweeps in 
around the candlelight as the Horseman approaches; the gloomy autumn forests; 
the lyrical, slightly askew flashbacks to Lady Crane; and Christopher Walken, 
frightening and perfectly cast as the Horseman before his own death, complete 
with razor-sharp teeth and demonic eyes. Kudos must go out to director of 
photography Emmanuel Zubezki and production designer Rick Heinrichs for their 
astounding work that deserves to be remembered at Oscar time. Burton alum 
Danny Elfman should also be mentioned for his lavish, stirring music score.
As much as it has potential, "Sleepy Hollow" is ultimately one of Burton's 
weakest films, not as emotionally satisfying as 1990's poetic "Edward 
Scissorhands," not as entertaining and memorable as 1988's "Beetlejuice," and 
nowhere near the classic that 1985's comedic tour de force "Pee Wee's Big 
Adventure" is. Putting into consideration that I've liked every major Burton 
film except 1989's original "Batman," this is not as much of a criticism as 
it is an observation. "Sleepy Hollow" is a fine horror film that would have 
fit better with Halloween than Thanksgiving, but is, nonetheless, a creative 
achievement.
Where the film might have been improved is in its screenplay, by Andrew Kevin 
Walker, which feels a little rushed and doesn't give most of the characters 
enough material to work with. In "Edward Scissorhands," for example, each 
role, right down to the smallest one, was distinct and impressionable. Here, 
they are painfully thin, and you never really get a sense of who they 
are--that is, except for the three main characters. 
Johnny Depp, working with Burton for the third time (after "Edward 
Scissorhands" and 1994's "Ed Wood"), gives, coincidentally, his third 
performance that really stands out from the rest. Depp wisely chooses not to 
imitate the description of Ichabod described by Washington Irving, instead 
keeping him in spirit and creating his own individual personality.
Christina Ricci, who in the last two years has shed her child image to become 
a respectable adult actress, is angelic and suitably innocent as Katrina Van 
Tassel, the exact antithesis of her slutty, meanspirited character of Deedee 
in 1998's "The Opposite of Sex." Previously appearing in the Burtonesque "The 
Addams Family," Ricci, like Depp and Winona Ryder, is an ideal casting choice 
for a Burton film. 
Finally, Miranda Richardson, as Lady Van Tassel, Katrina's stepmother, is 
spellbinding once her part comes to the forefront in the climax. When a key 
twist occurs near the end, the film stood on that fine line that could have 
easily wavered into the deep end of corniness, but it avoids this unfortunate 
fate and remains nothing less than thrilling.
"Sleepy Hollow" is a horror-fantasy that all involved should be 
wholeheartedly proud to be a part of. In today's times, new visions and 
landscapes are difficult to come by, but every few years, Tim Burton comes 
through and proves there are sights that have never been seen before on such 
a breathtaking level. "Sleepy Hollow," like 1992's "Bram Stoker's Dracula," 
is an invigorating, sophisticated horror film that confirms you don't need a 
group of dimwitted teens being stalked and slashed to be successful.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Sleepy Hollow: lost in the age of reason
Washington Irving's The Legend of Sleepy Hollow has traditionally been
classed with children's lit., and is subsequently invoked every Halloween
along with Charlie Brown specials etc. Which is to say the figure of the
headless horsemen has--via steady bombardment (see: product placement)--lost
much of its scare power, become tame enough for the kids. That's all past
tense, now, with Tim Burton's Sleepy Hollow, which (re)injects fear back
into Irving's story much as Michael Cohn returned the macabre to Snow White
(1997). Of course, too, we all know that the old fairytales were pretty
harsh to start with--the oral equivalent of a warning sign, the
grammar-school equivalent of 'scared straight' programs--but all those
fairytales are imported, have their roots in Europe and Central Europe. The
Legend of Sleepy Hollow, on the other hand, is American, which is to say
still new. Who'd have thought there was anything Grimm going on between the
lines? But there is, or there can be. 1799 does belong to the same decade as
the Salem Witch Trials, after all (see Hawthorne's "Young Goodman Brown" for
a Pre-Burton, Burton tone).
And we all know the story: a bungling Ichabod Crane stumbles into Sleepy
Hollow, into the mystery of a 'headless' horsemen with a vorpal blade. It's
Scooby Doo stuff, yes, all reliant upon levels of curiosity never really
accounted for in character. So, Burton and screenwriter Kevin Yagher simply
changed that, made Ichabod not a schoolteacher, but something like the first
forensic pathologist (~Twain's Pudd'nhead Wilson). Altering the job title
isn't quite enough, however, so they take it one step further, and have
'Constable' Crane's superiors charge him with figuring out these
decapitations. It's more than just a droll homicide case for Ichabod,
though. Sleepy Hollow is his one, good chance to prove his "trappings of
scientific investigation"--a host of DaVinci-clever autopsy devices. The bad
thing is, his one good chance turns out to be impenetrable to reason. It's
hard to measure the supernatural.
There are a few carryovers from the old version, though, too: Ichabod is
still slightly bungling, in the sense that he's prone to feint when
dramatically necessary. And, when he can stay conscious, he tends to use
children as shields. When he's unconscious, though, we get to see his inner
life to a certain extent--what personal demons are driving him to privilege
science over the supernatural. So perhaps his feinting is simply economical,
an easy way into his head. Another carryover is Ichabod's romantic
involvement with Katrina (Christina Ricci), which develops nicely, under the
watchful eye of both her current suitor (Caspar Van Diem) and her current
mother (Miranda Richardson).
And then of course there's the headless horsemen, Hessian mercenary
Christopher Walken at his evil best, made to fit for Burton's colonial
America, where the dead are restless and the cleavage rampant. He does keep
it all reined in, though--never gets quite lost enough in the period that he
thinks he owns the story, can change its fundamentals (1995's Scarlet
Letter). Well, he almost doesn't get that lost. The one time he does, when
ascribing motives to who turns out to be the 'real' bad guy here, he sets
things up such that the bad guy is simply serving some justice on Sleepy
Hollow, albeit it with interest. Which typically allows only two endings:
either the town accepts responsibility for starting the whole mess or the
bad guy kills them all. Sleepy Hollow takes neither path here, but instead
seems to ignore the whole issue, which leaves an important narrative
development conspicuously undeveloped. In it's defense, though, it does give
Washington Irving's tale back to the adults, who themselves may not be quite
old enough for the graphic nature of some of the decapitations.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Joy Wyse
Starring: Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Michael Gambon, Miranda
Richardson, Christopher Walken, Christopher Lee, and many others.
        Everyone is familiar with Washington Irving's The Legend of
Sleepy Hollow, or so you think.  You know that it's the story of
Ichabod Crane and the Headless Horseman, isn't it?  But how much more
of the story do you remember?
        Doubtlessly, you've never heard the REAL story, the one
presented here by a very talented cast and director.
        The tale begins with blood slowly dripping onto a flat
surface, but what you think is blood is merely red sealing wax being
used to close a hand-written will.  In the next scene you see a
carriage traveling down a misty lane and you hear hoof beats
following.  There's the sudden swish of a sword.  A headless man is
now driving the coach.  Is this the headless horseman?  No, it's the
deed of the headless horseman.
        And how does Ichabod Crane come into contact with him.  Well,
he's a police detective in New York City who believes in solving
crimes by examining the evidence.  This drives his superiors crazy, so
when the homicide report comes in from Sleepy Hollow, Ichabod is
dispatched to the little town to "solve the mystery".
        This is a very good movie, but it's so involved that it's
difficult to follow the plot all the time.  In retrospect, you will
remember who was who, and who did what.  It really is a well-written
suspense story.  There are some unforgettable scenes, especially when
heads are cut off.  This motion picture could not have been made this
well without the use of computers.  To see a real actor's head rolling
across the road really enhances the crime.  I want to see it
again?.soon.  I give it an A- for sheer enjoyment, but don't take the
kids.  It's not for them.  Heads will roll!

Author
Murali Krishnan
Washington Irving's story The Legend of Sleepy Hollow is a classic
Halloween tale, so it is a bit odd that this interpretation of that
story was release during the Christmas season. Perhaps it was intended
for the October time frame but was delayed.
Only a scant few elements of the original story are kept. Character
names are preserved, but the story is completely different. Whereas
the original is a simple story of jealousy and deception, this Gothic
film is a much more complex and intricate work. Deeper themes of
objectivity and reason, spirituality, treachery, and even pure carnage
are incorporated.
In this rendition, Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) is a police
investigator in 18th century New York. His rigorous insistence on
rigorous scientific inquiry and thorough investigation is seen as
meddlesome by the courts, so he is banished to the rural village of
sleepy hollow to investigate a series of brutal murders.
The people of the village attribute the gruesome decapitations to the
legendary Headless Horseman, a mythical figure inspired by pure
bloodlust. Ichabod sets up residence at the home of village elder
Baltus Van Tassel (Michael Gambon), but dismisses the beliefs of his
host and the others. To Ichabod, the world is starkly rational, with
scientific explanations for all processes. His patronizing attitude
causes him to be not particularly well-liked except perhaps by his
host daughter, Katrina Van Tassel (Christina Ricci).
The world that Ichabod enters is dark and eerie, a signature creation
of director Tim Burton. The most enjoyable parts of the film are the
noir mood and Gothic themes that are elaborately constructed.
Unfortunately, the story is weak, and does little to complement the
cinematography. Although the film is able to maintain suspense and
keep its mysteries hidden, the story is ultimately muddled and it
builds into a ridiculously frenetic and overly cathartic climax.
Moderately recommended. The success of the film is in its mood and
visuals, not its story. The narrative is clumsy and becomes
uninteresting, but the imagery and special effects are entertaining.
It is not a retelling of the classic story, but a complete reworking
of it that fits it into a different vision.

Author
John Sylva
Sleepy Hollow by John Sylva    Rating: C+
Tim Burton is one of the few directors in Hollywood that can realistically
label himself as a true "artist," rather than simply a "moneymaker" or just a
plain, old "director."  Burton brings a high level of originality to each of
his films, whether it be through breathtaking scenery, fast pacing, or oddball
themes.  Also the director of 1989's masterful Batman and its 1992 sequel
Batman Returns, Burton can take the most unoriginal or mediocre of scripts, and
transform them into spellbinding pieces of art.  Unfortunately, for the first
time I can remember, Burton doesn't deliver his usual promise as an artist,
creating one of his few films that aren't absorbing from start to finish.  The
screenplay for Sleepy Hollow, written by (Andrew Kevin Walker), the classic
tale of the headless horseman, told by any older brother or sister to their
younger siblings to give them a fright, ruins what could have been a
mesmerizing masterpiece, riding on the same mediocre level of many modern
Hollywood films.
Exactly like the tale of "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow," originally written by
Washington Irving, Sleepy Hollow takes place in a small, eerie town of the same
name where constable Ichabod Crane (a lighter Johnny Depp) ventures to
investigate the murders of several persons, in which the head of each victim
hasn't been found.  Townspeople gossip about the cause for the common
atrocities is the Headless Horseman, a fierce, menacing and well,  headless
character who rides through the woods on his dashing horse, beheading those who
he pleases.  The story behind the villain frightens the clumsy Crane, as he
will be the one venturing into the wilderness to find and explore the legend
that haunts the minds of the townspeople.
On his first night of visiting Sleepy Hollow he meets Katrina Van Tassel (the
fabulous Christina Ricci), daughter of Baltus (Michael Gamdon) and Lady Van
Tassel (Miranda Richardson).  From that night on, Katrina will serve as a
sidekick of sorts to Ichabod, standing by his side for much of the remainder of
the film.  These two along with a large ensemble cast, including Casper Van
Dien and Jeffrey Jones, fight to survive, as the Headless Horseman strikes
numerous times over the course of the film.  Once the exposition of Sleepy
Hollow is pieced together, the film becomes a beautifully told, yet lifeless
thriller that certainly has its moments of brilliance, but all in all fails to
deliver.
The cinematography in Sleepy Hollow is indescribable.  From the first frame of
film to the last, the settings are magnificently beautiful, every little thing,
from a tree to simple grave, Sleepy Hollow brings forth spellbinding images,
fog floating abound in almost every scene, the sky always at a twilight gray. 
For this reason, Sleepy Hollow will be looked at by me as a clever work of art,
not for it's script or acting, but for the scenery.  Sleepy Hollow sets a new
standard for how shockingly wonderful a movie's backdrop can be, not for a
second looking the least bit ordinary.
Johnny Depp, who was starting to become one of the downright creepiest actors
in the business, lightens up a few notches from his role in last summer's
surprisingly good film, The Astronaut's Wife.  Depp is flawless as his
character, even if the lackluster screenplay does feed him a few laughably
ridiculous lines here and there, giving him more than enough lame humor to act
out.
Christina Ricci matures more and seems more sophisticated in every role she
appears in, as she went from playing the little girl in Casper to Ichabod's
sidekick in a film based on perhaps one of the greatest, most frightening
legends ever to be told, in just 5 years.  Ricci shows increasing promise with
each performance she delivers, a promise showing that in coming year,s she will
be looked upon as this generation's Susan Sarandon, or even Jodie Foster. 
Ricci conducts herself with such wisdom and perfection here, it's disappointing
the film isn't as compelling and as satisfactory as her performance is.   
Never did I think I'd be comparing Tim Burton films to low grade, campy slasher
fare, but Sleepy Hollow is nothing but a mediocre slasher flick with beefed up
visuals.  What makes Sleepy Hollow lesser of a film compared to other
kill-âem-by-the-numbers flicks is that in the 1996 masterpiece Scream, and
many films with similar themes to it, the predictability level is low because
the battles are between two humans, and anything could be the result.  In
Sleepy Hollow, the battle is between a super human and regular man, resulting
in no suspenseful sequences, as we can always tell who is going to win in a
showdown.  Without a few rare, choice sequences, and the astounding
cinematography, Sleepy Hollow would be as bad as they get, resulting in one of
the worst films of the year, but thank goodness Tim Burton is here to save the
film from such an awful fate.    
Tim Burton has everything established for a bang up, shocking culmination, but
Sleepy Hollow's resolution is lifeless and mediocre, not suiting the capability
of the film.  A visual heaven it may be, but Sleepy Hollow cannot stand on
images alone.  Although Burton isn't at fault, his latest venture into his own
genre is better saved for a weekend movie rental, said even though Sleepy
Hollow is without a doubt the most beautiful movie of the decade.   
The Bottom Line: A visual masterpiece.  A technical flop.

Author
Justin Felix
All of my film reviews are archived at 
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix
This review has been submitted to The Shrubbery  
http://www.theshrubbery.com
Any comments about this review?  E-mail me at justinfelix@yahoo.com
Screen story by Kevin Yagher and Andrew Kevin Walker. 
Inspired by the short story THE LEGEND OF SLEEPY HOLLOW by Washington 
Irving. 
Starring Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, and Casper Van Dien. 
Special appearances by Christopher Lee and Christopher Walken. 
Synopsis:  Investigator Ichabod Crane journeys to 1799 Sleepy Hollow to 
investigate a series of murders involving decapitation.  Townspeople 
believe the spirit of a dead German mercenary is threatening them.  Cute 
blonde Katrina and a listless orphan help Crane solve the mystery. 
Comments:  Tim Burton has directed a number of entertaining and 
groundbreaking films over the years.  BATMAN, of course, is perhaps his 
best-known film and led to a string of less successful sequels.  He's 
done biographical work (on the director ED WOOD), children's movies 
(NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS), and a homage to alien invasion movies 
(MARS ATTACKS!).  SLEEPY HOLLOW, his newest feature which fans have been 
anticipating for a while, shares the similar dark and atmospheric style 
of his earlier work and counts among his better movies. 
SLEEPY HOLLOW quite obviously draws its inspiration from the old period 
horror films of the 1950s and 1960s, especially Hammer Studios' 
reworkings of DRACULA and FRANKENSTEIN, and American International's 
series of movies based on the works of Edgar Allan Poe.  Christopher 
Lee, in fact, star of many Hammer productions over the years, appears at 
the beginning of SLEEPY HOLLOW as a judge who sends Ichabod Crane out to 
investigate the murders.  The movie also borrows from the Universal 
monster movies of the 1930s.  One of the climatic scenes involves a 
windmill and obviously takes its cue from FRANKENSTEIN. 
I mention these allusions for a reason.  Seasoned horror film fans, 
including myself, will smile at their inclusion in this film.  With the 
recent disappointments in theatrically released horror movies, 
especially THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT (the most overblown turkey of the 
decade), we needed a film like this.  Not only does it have a sense of 
history, but Burton's skillful use of setting and mood make this an 
entertaining exercise in horror.  The film's eerie landscapes and foggy 
towns, indeed, overshadow the actors and the plot as the most noteworthy 
aspect of the movie. 
Johnny Depp, a veteran Tim Burton actor who has appeared both in ED WOOD 
and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS, plays Ichabod Crane, who has apparently changed 
occupations from Irving's original story and is now an investigator.  
Depp is adequate in his role.  No more; no less.  Equally adequate is 
Christina Ricci, who plays the love interest in the film.  She's a good 
witch too.  How cute.  One of the few weak parts of SLEEPY HOLLOW is the 
wooden and cliched dialogue between the main characters.  The two 
actors, however, carry the movie well enough, but the supporting cast is 
what makes this movie shine.  Veteran actors such as Jeffrey Jones and 
Michael Gough (who played the butler Alfred in all four recent BATMAN 
flicks) are terrific as the aging townsfolk involved in the conspiracy 
which Depp uncovers.  While I do not wish to reveal crucial plot points, 
I can say that the storyline becomes quite confusing.  You have to pay 
attention.  Andrew Kevin Walker wrote the screenplay.  He's the one who 
also wrote 8 MM and SEVEN.  Walker is quickly becoming one of the 
premiere suspense writers in Hollywood, and SLEEPY HOLLOW certainly 
doesn't hurt his growing reputation. 
As one might imagine from a gentleman like Walker, SLEEPY HOLLOW is 
quite graphic.  There's a lot of blood and a lot of beheadings.  This is 
definately not a flick to take the young kids to.  A lady in front of us 
took her two young sons to see it and spent about 25 - 30 minutes 
covering the youngest's eyes with her hand.  He was obviously upset by 
the movie's intense violence.  If you're looking for a good scare, 
however, SLEEPY HOLLOW is definately recommended. 

Author
Greg King
SLEEPY HOLLOW (M).  
(Mandalay Entertainment/Paramount/Village Roadshow)
Director: Tim Burton
Stars: Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Michael
Gambon, Casper Van Dien, Jeffrey Jones, Richard Griffiths, Ian
McDiarmid, Michael Gough, Lisa Marie, Marc Pickering, Steve
Waddington, Christopher Walken, Christopher Lee, Alun Armstrong,
Martin Landau (uncredited)
Running time: 118 minutes.
Enjoyable, atmospherically staged period horror drama about a
small upstate New York town terrorised by a headless horseman.
Writers Andrew Kevin Walker (Seven, 8MM, etc) and Kevin Yagher bring
something of a contemporary flavour, generous doses of black humour,
and plenty of gore to Irving Washington's classic story of 19th
century horror and spooky happenings.
In this superbly crafted homage to those classic old Hammer
horror films from the '60's, director Tim Burton beautifully captures
the same atmospheric look and feel, albeit it on a larger budget.
Visually, Burton's films have always been quite striking, and Sleepy
Hollow is no exception, with solid technical contributions.  Rick
Heinrichs' suitably gothic production design, Emmanuel Lubezki's
evocative cinematography and Danny Elfman's haunting music score
combine to effectively create the gloomy, fog shrouded and menacing
setting of Sleepy Hollow, a quaint, upstate New York town besieged by
supernatural killings and fear.
When a number of citizens of Sleepy Hollow are beheaded,
modern thinking New York constable Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) is sent
to investigate.  Crane prefers to use rigorous scientific methods to
solve crimes, and doesn't particularly believe in ghouls and goblins,
or even the legend of the headless horseman, which has filled the
locals with dread.  He suspects a human hand at work rather than
supernatural forces.  But even his beliefs are shaken by the strange
events that have possessed this once quiet hamlet, now seemingly in
the grip of witchcraft.
In his third collaboration with director Burton (Ed Wood and
Edward Scissorhands), Depp gives a fabulous performance, tinged with a
hint of ironic humour at his character's expense.  Depp marvellously
captures the contradictions inherent in Crane, a man who autopsies
dead bodies for clues, yet faints at the sight of beheaded corpses and
shrinks from the sight of spiders.  Christina Ricci vamps it up nicely
as the bewitching Katrina Van Tassel, while Miranda Richardson brings
a deliciously evil edge to her role as Katrina's step mother.
Christopher Walken contributes a brief appearance as the
legendary headless horseman, although most of his fight scenes are
doubled by former stunt man Ray Parks (recently seen as Darth Maul in
The Phantom Menace).  Burton has also filled his cast with an ensemble
of British character actors (including Michael Gambon, Michael Gough,
Star Wars' Ian McDiarmid, Richard Griffiths), who lend a touch of
credence to their roles as the elders of the town who all have secrets
to conceal.  Even Hammer stalwart Christopher Lee turns up in a brief
cameo as New York's intimidating magistrate.
          Sleepy Hollow is enjoyable enough for most of its length, but
it seems to run out of ideas by the end, and its finale is a little
messy.  There are also one or two decapitations too many.  It's a
great cinematic trick to begin with, but it starts to lose its novelty
value by the third or fourth time.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
"Sleepy Hollow" is like many other Tim Burton and Danny Elfman
collaborations: a visual treat and a stylistic thriller.  It may not
contain tremendous substance but it is sure a pleasure to look at.  As
he did in the Batman movies, "Edward Scissorhands," "Mars Attacks!,"
etc., Burton proves that he is the master of smoke and mirrors; Elfman
proved, of course, that he can DO scary.
I took a brief look at an e-text of the original "The Legend of Sleepy
Hollow" by Washington Irving (as any remaining memory I had of the
legend itself came from the Disney movie and only featured the
headless horseman riding about), and I must say I liked what the
writers were able to sculpt out of the original story.  They had to,
because the original might have been a fun read but was no movie
material.  Instead, it is to their credit that we get interesting and
*convincing* characters from colonial times who seem to have leapt
right out of the real story from Irving, when in fact most of them
were newly created.  Now I am not so worried for those who might have
their plot spoiled for them because they have read the book.  Much
better than that "Psycho" remake fiasco, eh?
The town of Sleepy Hollow is but one out of many of the film's visual
triumphs.  Perpetually shrouded in fog and gloom, the town seems
steeped in misery even in daytime.  Even the haystacks look morose.
The film begins with awkward shots and a slackening pace but
eventually picks up its rythmn.  One defect of the plot was that we
kept going in this rondeau rhythmn: narrative, we see horseman
galloping and wielding his knife, someone gets killed; narrative,
horseman, murder; narrative horseman, murder.  This gets repetitive
and pretty much every time the sun sets we know what is going to
happen.  We also saw too many heads actually getting chopped off.  If
we hadn't gotten used it so quickly, perhaps it would have a greater
effect on us.  That, however, doesn't distract from the horror when it
*does* happen.  The film is a triumph of black and white and shades of
grey (only to be disrupted by the end by that horrible sunlight) and
mesmerizing visual images and effects.  Burton never once let up on
the fog, and that was a good choice.  Particularly enchanting are
Ichabod's memory scenes which are beautiful yet horrifying to look at.
The red church doors awash in a sea of white were wonderful.  Johnny
Depp plays a wonderfully amusing Ichabod Crane; and while Christina
Ricci was decent in her role, I still maintain that she was miscast
because she looks too much like a child.  Katrina of Irving's story
was young, but not that young.  A stand out is that young assistant
Ichabod employs.  The rest of the characters were just as superbly
cast.
Not only was the film a wonderfully macabre piece, it was a glimpse
into states of affairs when an earlier turn of century was about to
arrive.  It was a treat surveying the costumes, the settings, their
"autopsy bay" and Ichabod's peculiar tools.  Even more so, the film
made a solid social commentary on the dark side of the pioneering
spirit (manifested in the horrors on the killing fields and the head
family's usurption of property which lead to the tragedy itself), and
on ancient and uncivilized practices that religion or social tradition
dictates.  Things that most of us in modern America have forgotten
ever existed before.
Picture an Edward Gorey cartoon.  Ever seen one of those?  They
usually feature someone, often a child, dying or in some state of
mortality.  There's no story to it. It's just death, and even though
it is a simple cartoon, it conjures up a sense of dread in you.  That
is comparable to watching "Sleepy Hollow." It's a gorgeously
illustrated children's book that creeps the heck out of childrens and
adults alike.
Rating: B+ (First viewing, 11/24/99)
* Was that Martin Landau prancing through cornfields in the beginning of
the movie?  Kind of reminded me of that other movie he was in last
summer, where two main characters also ran through cornfields.
* And here we have Christopher Walken with his 15th reprisal of the role
of the freaky villain.  
* There is a nice variation on an oft-seen movie cliche.  Tired of
seeing action movies where hero and villain are at each other's
throats on top of a moving bus/car/train/sailbot/spaceship?

Author
Dennis Schwartz
SLEEPY HOLLOW (director:Tim Burton; screenwriter: Andrew Kevin
Walker/Kevin Yagher/based on the short story "The Legend of Sleepy
Hollow" by Washington Irving; cinematographer: Emmanuel Lubezki; cast:
Johnny Depp (Ichabod Crane), Christina Ricci (Katrina Van Tassel),
Miranda Richardson (Lady Van Tassel/Crone), Michael Gambon (Baltus Van
Tassel), Casper Van Dien (Brom Van Brunt ), Jeffrey Jones (Reverend
Steenwyck), Christopher Walken (Headless Horseman), Richard Griffiths
(Magistrate Philips), Christopher Lee (NYC Judge ), Marc Pickering
(Young Masbeth), Michael Gough (Notary Hardenbrook), 1999)
A "Hollow-wood" production that couldn't be more hollow or Hollywood in
style, and to its only benefit, is visually pleasing. It presents a
classic mysterious aura about it through scenes of thick fog, horrid
decapitations, and framed shots as if it was a period art picture
coming off its frame and onto the screen. But the story, that's a
different story; it is abominable. It is so ridiculous and incredulous
that the filmmaker completely ruins Washington Irving's great short
story. It is not the imaginative parable it was meant to be, but a story
about a serial killer. So, you can forget the book, obviously Tim Burton
did, that is if he ever read it. Here he throws away any imagination
derived from the once (a very long time ago) popular book. In the late
1950s, the story's legend was common knowledge across most of America.
The film is not helped by a cast (I might add a rather talented cast of
British and Americans) that are sleepwalking through their parts. The
two stars, who have inane and unappealing and underwritten roles, and
seem to be acting as if they have no idea of what they are saying or
doing in this film, but seem to enjoy playing it up for the camera,
while showing no chemistry for any romance to be deemed possible between
them; which, without the two stars being credible performers, the film
has little chance of succeeding.
This film has box office appeal as a date movie for the high school set,
comforting each other as they snack on popcorn (which the theater owners
will be largely appreciative of), and the teens, in all probability,
will be reacting with bemused glee or mock horror to all the packets of
ketchup unleashed during the Headless Horseman's romp through the Sleepy
Hollow of 1799. Who else this movie should appeal to, is not for me to
judge. But, when the audience leaves the theater, no harm is done, this
is a totally forgettable film. There is no need to worry about
nightmares over the gratuitous violence seen. This one is so obviously
just a movie, that it can't even begin to match the book for its
eloquence and the great manner of the book's very germane writing style,
that is both lucid and thought provoking. If anything good can be said
about this film, it would be that it brings back to the public's
attention the forgotten writer Washington Irwing, someone who knew how
to craft a ghost story back in the turn-of-the-19th-century and is still
very readable. It's just too bad that a good movie couldn't result from
such an accessible work.
It's best to forget about this movie as in any way connected with the
novel, the only thing  that seems to jive is the time period, the
location, and the character called Ichabod Crane (Depp). But this time
Crane is a constable, leaving NYC on orders from his superiors to hunt
down a serial killer by using his innovative Sherlock Holmes-like
logical detection methods, which are not appreciated by the local police
authorities in NYC. So Crane is not the schoolteacher and choirmaster,
as he was depicted in the book. From here on, the movie is off on its
own tangent, playing havoc with the story. Katrina Van Tassel (Christina
Ricci), the wealthy daughter of the local farmer, will be Crane's love
interest, though she already has a suitor in the brave but chillingly
jealous Brom Van Brunt (Casper Van Dien). In the book, the Headless
Horseman is imaginary. It is Brom, who dresses up as one to frighten the
naive Ichabod away from his rich and attractive woman, and it is the
only way the story can make sense. In the movie the Horseman is real,
and the story becomes a vulgar mystery with some inept attempt to bring
in an air of magical mystery to it, and it almost completely ignores the
romantic rivalry between the two suitors, which was at the heart of
Irving's story.
The town fathers, Reverend Steenwyck (Jones), Magistrate Philipse
(Griffiths), Notary Hardenbrook (Gough), and including the now
wealthiest resident of Sleepy Hollow, Baltus Van Tassel (Michael
Gambon), the father of Katrina, married to her stepmother, Lady Van
Tassel (Miranda). All the town fathers believe the previous 5 murders to
be the work of a legendary Headless Horseman who haunts the area, but
the skeptical Crane scoffs at this. It is only after he sees for himself
that this is true that he decides there is a motive behind these serial
murders, they are not random acts of violence.
Tim Burton ("EDWARD SCISSORHANDS"/" ED WOOD"/"Mars Attacks!"/"Batman")
has succeeded in robbing the story of anything but a cursory look at
Irving's story. How a film could go so far afield, is not unusual for
Hollywood, but in this case the film has gone too far afield from the
story to even claim it is based on the book. Burton has made a story
about a headless horseman who lives inside a tree trunk and is
controlled by a twisted person who uses him to commit murders that will
benefit their cause, but he has miserably failed to capture the
imagination the story requires in its storytelling.
I would suggest reading the short story (about 40-pages) before or after
seeing the film, and then see what you think of the film. I read the
book after the film and am grateful that it called Washington Irving to
my attention, again. Otherwise, I can't say enough bad things about the
film's crass aim to take away the imagination of the story and replace
it with not one shred of what Irving was after in his ghost story about
romantic jealousy but here becoming a story about jejune classical
horror images and a tacked on banal murder story. I'll admit, the movie
looked good, better than most horror movies I might have raved about,
but even with all the gory murders taking place and an excuse for a
who-done-it movie evolving, a tedium set-in and the film seemed to lack
suspense, breath and dimension; and, like a beautiful person without
much else, what else can you say that is complimentary after you say,
you look good!
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I've always been oddly attracted to the dark and the beautiful, the strange
and the black, the surreal and the imagined. I've also loved the leaves of
autumn, the nights of breeze and cold when I could just curl myself up into
bed and wrap my daily reality into dreamy visions of wonder and fantasy,
while knowing full well that not one person on this planet, including
myself, truly knows why we exist. The only thing that we do know is that we
are all lucky enough to have a director like Tim Burton who also seems to
affiliate himself to the surreal and beautiful, and likes to slap his tales
of the absurd with some darkly mined humor.
PLOT:
Constable Ichabod Crane is sent to the small town of Sleepy Hollow in order
to investigate a recent rash of murders by decapitation. Basing his findings
solely on scientific factors and evidence, the detective respectfully
brushes off the townfolks' allegations of a "headless horseman", but soon
discovers much personal evidence to confirm the people's outlandish claims.
Headrollings ensue.
CRITIQUE:
Beautiful. A film which draws you into its grungy world with its impeccable
style and attention to dreary detail, woos you in further with a charmingly
pure performance from an actor who is firmly solidifying his place amongst
his peer group of esteemed thespians, namely Johnny Depp, and topping the
whole gothic show up with an interesting tale of the legendary unknown,
mixed in with some timely humor and bloody carnage courtesy of the coolest
scary son-of-a-bitch of the year, put your hands together for...the headless
horseman. You know I really dug a movie when I run off and into 100-word
sentences, so grammatically wrong, but so emotionally right! This is the
ultimate Tim Burton movie. The entire presentation is a flawless visual
feast which makes you feel like you are really in this dingy town in upper
New York, when in reality, the whole film was shot on sets in London,
England.
I always knew Johnny Depp was a different kind of actor, but also suspected
that he might be taking his goofy roles to hide his lack of true acting
chop, but boy, did this film ever prove me wrong. Johnny chomps up his
scenes during this entire film and had me utterly convinced of his presence
in the year of 1799, engulfed in his character's arrogance on one side and
cowardice on the other. Excellent job! He made this film so much more
enjoyable for me along with the haunting score from Danny Elfman, the wildly
effective sets, the dreamlike cinematography and let's not forget, the
ultimately cool clompety-clomps of the headless horseman riding his way into
town. Brrrr...cover that neck, this bastard's pissed and he's got no head!!
I love this movie! It looks awesome, it feels awesome, it sounds awesome,
it's got Johnny Depp in top form, Ricci letting it all hang out, humor,
thrills, romance, drama, a little murder mystery tossed in, and oh yeah,
let's not forget all the bloody decapitations that you could shake a stick
at!
You'll be happy to know that I've also invited this film back for an annual
visit inside my DVD player every season of the pumpkin, joining its
Halloween staple brother in law, THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS.
And someone tells me that the actual town of Sleepy Hollow is only about
two hours from where I'm stationed. Hmmmm....interesting.
Clompety-clompety-clomp.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
COMING SOON to JoBlo's Movie Emporium

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
What we experience in watching Tim Burton's "Sleepy Hollow" is a modern 
treatment of an eighteenth-century tale.  As such, it is very slick and 
rather fast-paced.  It is not, however, anything close to Washington 
Irving's "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow."
Instead of the gangly schoolmaster Icabod Crane, Johnny Depp portrays Crane 
as a mildly buffoonish constable whose ambition is to be a criminal 
investigator.  In New York City proper, he complains of the brutal and 
backward police work he sees all around him.  Thus a burgomaster (played by 
Christopher Lee) sends him up the Hudson River to a village called Sleepy 
Hollow, where three people have been murdered, their heads sliced cleanly 
off.  Arriving to a rather cold welcome, Crane begins to practice his 
version of the scientific method, exposing all the evidence he can.  
Immediately we meet four leading citizens of the town, men who may or may 
not be involved with the grisly crimes.  Michael Gambon as the rich Baltus 
Van Tassel, Richard Griffiths as Magistrate Phillipse, Ian McDiarmid as 
Doctor Lancaster, and Michael Gough as Notary Hardenbrook - these character 
actors are masterful choices of casting.  Unsavory and gruff, these titled 
citizens support one of the film's themes, that appearance is very different 
from reality.
One aspect already given away in the trailers for the film is that the 
horseman is no legend.  Differing from Irving's scenario, in which we think 
the horseman is probably Brom Bones - the jealous boyfriend of Katrina Van 
Tassel - Burton's version gives a very frightening physical incarnation to 
the specter.  When the doubting Ichabod encounters a fake horseman - Brom 
with padding and a cape - we run up against a red herring that is one of 
many flaws in the script.  But when we see the real spectral Hessian, the 
narrative abandons Irving's ideas.
Why is the ghost of a Hessian mercenary keeping the heads he lops off?  Is 
there a pattern or a reason in the selection of his victims?  Andrew Kevin 
Walker's screenplay tries to cover these possibilities, but it is only 
partly successful.  Although the ghost's motivations are conveyed rather 
clearly, we don't quite understand those of Ichabod Crane, or even of the 
young woman with whom he falls in love, Katrina Van Tassel (Christina 
Ricci).  The film begins to weave a sort of subplot consisting of a series 
of disturbing nightmares.  It seems the 7 year-old Ichabod had a beautiful 
mother who is an "innocent."  What happens with her and Crane's father 
amounts to a failed search for motives, and a third-rate attempt at 
emulating the supernatural plot threads of a director like Ingmar Bergman.  
Here, the thread unravels.
As usual, Burton's film is beautifully photographed.  The sets are 
appropriate, often painted by special effect that capture New York of 1799, 
as well as pastoral landscapes captured on canvases of that time.  As might 
be expected in a horror film, there is a lot of imagery - in this case 
involving darkness, fire, smoke and blood.  Burton displays a morbid 
penchant for showing not only on-screen decapitations, but other wounds.  We 
spy angry-looking yet bloodless wounds on a few characters' hands and 
bellies and shoulders, aside from the cauterized necks of several victims.  
Several times we witness a bizarre, womb-like image in the place from which 
the horseman springs before galloping across the western woods in the next 
murderous venture.
Johnny Depp's acting is usually solid, and here Burton's pal does a nice job 
of depicting his character.  This Crane is, like Irving's, shaky and often 
unsure of himself.  But the very nature of the newer Crane calls for an 
amount of courage the original Crane would never exhibit.  Depp's Crane is 
an aspiring pathologist who actually brings bits of dark comic relief to the 
autopsy-like procedures he practices.  His being squirted with blood becomes 
a running joke.
As Katrina Van Tassel, Christina Ricci is underused.  Her character 
increases in importance as the narrative advances, though her true role is 
kept obscured by the filmmakers.  She and her  stepmother (Miranda 
Richardson) both appear to dabble in the black arts (though Crane calls 
Katrina's magic "white").  Richardson actually plays a double role, as she 
did in "Merlin" she and her twin play interesting roles in the intrigue.  
Richardson's acting is believeable and smooth.
The supporting cast contributes much to the tone and direction of the story. 
  In an uncredited appearance as the horseman-with-a-head, Christopher 
Walken is wild-eyed and menacing, his teeth filed to devilish points.  But 
even he seems baffled in one scene, when he has no lines but must only 
breathe with hatred.  Ray Park is one of the doubles for the headless rider, 
and his fight scenes are sharp and deadly.  The accoutrements of ghostly 
murder work well in his hands:  a saber and a battleaxe were never so 
expertly wielded in a Revolutionary War-era film.
So many of the action scenes are fascinating, their ILM-buffed special 
effects amazing and transparent.  The background for these scenes is 
memorable and truly gothic - something of which Burton is no doubt proud.  
But the script falters so many times, and the main plot - though gripping - 
is not supported well either by explanations or subplots.  I question the 
need for so many graphic beheadings, and also the frequency of characters 
practicing witchcraft or magic.  Do modern audiences really require such 
dark meanderings into the subhuman parts of humanity?  Or is this what it 
looks like to see another film falling far short of greatness?


Author
David N. Butterworth
        "Heads will roll" is the campy tagline for the latest film based on
Washington Irving's classic fable about a horseman with a penchant for
rendering his victims headless, but the ratings board figured there were
too many decapitations in Tim Burton's latest extravaganza and slapped
"Sleepy Hollow" with an "R."  That's a bit of a blow to a film which, in
hindsight, might have done better with a Halloween--rather than a
Thanksgiving--release.
        Burton's film is a strange fish regardless.  Although typically
ghoulish and macabre for the director of "Batman" and "Beetlejuice," it's
too bleak for kids, who'll have to drag a seventeen-year-old along with
them to see it.  And it's too relentless for adults, who are likely to grow
tired of its unsparing focus on severed heads bouncing through the
undergrowth.  Still, they might find some comfort in Rick Heinrichs'
Burton-esque production design or Johnny Depp's no-nonsense performance as
New York constable Ichabod Crane.
        Depp, in his third film with the director (following "Edward
Scissorhands" and "Ed Wood"), is deliciously affected as Crane, a dandy of
a policeman circa 1799 who's sent to the town of Sleepy Hollow in the
Hudson Islands to investigate the mysterious slayings of three of its
locals.  "Their heads were...gone?" gulps Depp when the town's
representatives fill him in on the gory goings-on.  Depp has a great way of
speaking in the film: mannered, polite, and with just a hint of the King's
English.
        Sleepy Hollow's spokespersons are an interesting mix of talent
decked out in fascinating period wardrobes that make them look like
characters in a Lewis Carroll novel, among them Michael Gambon, Miranda
Richardson, Jeffrey Jones, Michael Gough, and Richard Griffiths.  Christina
Ricci, who plays Katrina Van Tassel, provides the pulchritudinous love
interest but isn't given much to do and certainly doesn't connect in any
way with Depp's character.  Also on board, albeit briefly, is horror
veteran Christopher Lee, whose Hammer horror films of the '60s "Sleepy
Hollow" most closely resembles.
        The "R" rating is unfortunate because "Sleepy Hollow," like
Hammer's slew of Dracula pictures, is clearly a gothic fantasy and its
bloodlettings more ludicrously camp than graphic (although Burton never
spares us the post-decapitation shot and seems to revel in squirting blood
in Depp's face at every opportunity).  Since Irving's novel is the stuff of
American folklore, however, it's a pity Burton couldn't have done more with
it.  He's dressed it up some, and then painted it depressingly black.  And
he's milked a great performance from Depp but asked him, for the most part,
only to react to lifeless corpses.
        "Sleepy Hollow" never quite finds its footing despite some strong
performances and a great look (including a creepy-looking windmill in the
closing scenes that recalls Burton's debut short, "Frankenweenie").  As for
that tagline, heads are more likely to be scratched, and it's the eyes that
will be doing the rolling during "Sleepy Hollow."
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Christian Pyle
Directed by Tim Burton 
Written by Andrew Kevin Walker (based on the story by Washington Irving)
Starring Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Michael Gambon,
Casper Van Dien, Jeffrey Jones
Official Site:  http://www3.sleepyhollowmovie.com/flash_intro.html
Grade:  C-
Nearly every film Tim Burton has directed has been an homage to the horror
genre -- "Frankenweenie," "Beetlejuice," "Batman," "Edward Scissorhands," "Ed
Wood," "Mars Attacks!" -- yet none of them have been horror films.  "Sleepy
Hollow" is his first attempt to actually scare people.  I greeted the prospect
with high anticipation; Burton's whole career seemed to be leading up to this. 
I left disappointed.
Andrew Kevin Walker's screenplay takes only the character names from the
classic short story "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow."  In the movie Ichabod Crane
(Johnny Depp) is a New York City police constable who is trying to introduce
scientific methods of investigation to his superiors.  Ichabod is dispatched to
the small town of Sleepy Hollow to investigate a series of murders.  Several of
the town's leading citizens have been decapitated by the Headless Horseman.
Although he rejects the ghost story the town elders tell him, Ichabod finds
that the facts of the case confound his scientific reasoning.  He also
discovers that the killings are not random, that the victims are tied together
by a secret.  Along the way Ichabod gets help from a bewitching (literally)
young woman (Christina Ricci) and the son of one of the murder victims (Marc
Pickering).  
My reaction:  ho-hum.  The plot is an accumulation of cliches without even the
slightest touch of originality to make it interesting.  That in itself is
forgivable; Hollywood constantly tries to sell us used products in new
packages.  However, Burton's attempts at inducing fright come off as goofy.  It
might be his background -- in his previous movies, goofy was the goal.  Along
the same lines, it doesn't help that creature designer (and producer) Kevin
Yagher has done his best work for the tongue-in-cheek Tales From the Crypt TV
series.  A witch's eyes and tongue shoot out like Roger Rabbit's, a tree spurts
blood like it's in a Monty Python sketch, and the Headless Horseman . . . well,
he's a guy without a head . . . on a horse (boo!).
The performances are also awful.  Although he's impressed me with his work in
other films, Depp doesn't seem to know what to do with Ichabod, and his
dialogue is hampered by stilted diction that's supposed to pass for an 18th
century accent.  Ricci seems to put all her effort into seeming enigmatic,
which guarantees that we won't sympathize with her character.  The actor who is
revealed at the end to be the villain comes off as ridiculously cartoonish. 
The only pleasure generated by the cast comes from surprise cameos by
Christopher Lee, Martin Landau, and Christopher Walken.
I wonder if this movie was originally conceived as part of Francis Ford
Coppola's projected series of gothic adaptations, a series that produced only
"Bram Stoker's Dracula" and "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein."  Coppola is an
executive producer for "Sleepy Hollow," and the script reflects his interest in
early forms of "moving pictures," particularly in a toy that Ichabod carries
which blends two pictures to create an optical illusion.  (There's a bird on
one side of the card, a cage on the other.  When the card is flipped rapidly,
the bird appears to be caged.)
Bottom Line:  The hollow isn't the only thing that's sleepy.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Pictures
 Director: Tim Burton
 Writer: Washington Irving (story), Andrew Kevin Walker
 Cast: Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Casper Van Dien,
Miranda Richardson, Michael Gambon, Marc Pickering,
Christopher Walken
   I'm looking at the headline in today's copy of the New York
Daily News: "Deranged Man Bashes Woman Over the Head
in Times Square in Broad Daylight."  No wonder so many
potential tourists steer clear of the Big Apple.  Maybe the
situation was always that way.  Why, for example, wouldn't
the entire town of Sleepy Hollow flee to the state's largest
metropolis in 1799 when a major-league slasher in that
minor-league town was lopping off heads wholesale?  Nope. 
The inbred residents of that village just 2 hours' north of New
York by horse simply hung around refusing to watch their
heads while the propertied officials did their best to cover
their butts.
   Washington Irving told the wonderful tale of Ichabod Crane,
schoolmaster, and his adventures with the headless
horseman in a short story he published in 1812.  While this
was hardly a slash-and-burn tale but rather one suited for a
captivated twelve-year-old audience, horror-meister Tim
Burton uses the legend simply as a jumping off point. 
Eschewing the Irving subtleties in favor of all the ambiance
that modern cinema technology can afford, Burton, whose
contributions range from "Batman" to "Beetlejuice" and
scoring big with the adult fairy tale "Edward Scissorhands,"
achieves wonders with Rick Heinrich's expressionistic
production design.  Alas, the layout loses its novelty after the
first 30 minutes and given the absence of tension--of the
usual false alarms that cause horror stories to raise hairs on
audience heads--"Sleepy Hollow" is both sleepy and hollow.
   Burton, using a screenplay by Andrew Kevin Walker,
transforms Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) from a superstitious
schoolmaster to an enlightened, rationalist New York City
police officer who had testified regularly in favor of a more
scientific treatment of evidence and a less rigid system of
penology.  When yet another burglar is arrested and thrown
unceremoniously into a pit resembling a third-world prison,
Crane goes ballistic and is gotten rid of by an
assignment from the judge to investigate the scene of
numerous beheadings in the village of Sleepy Hollow. 
Arriving by coach, he meets the local Dutch-American bigwigs
and at a reception is kissed by a lovely, masked reveler,
Katrina Van Tassel--daughter of the prosperous Baltus
(Michael Gambon) and his wife (Miranda Richardson). 
Though Katrina has a boy friend, Brom van Brunt (Casper
Van Dien), she switches her romantic loyalties to the
interesting stranger, while Crane employs the latest, turn-of-
the-century instruments (including a grotesque set of
eyeglasses) to examine decapitated bodies.
   "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" is a horror story without
much horror--unless you consider the generic open-necked
victims' cauterized wounds to be anything more than what
you see on a typical day on the hooks of the local butcher
shop.  In a scene involving a witch whom Crane consults in
her shack, the head of the sorceress turns into the standard-
issue ghoul, eyes bulging out of sockets, the kind of video-
game image that's wholly laughable rather than dangerously
terrifying.  Johnny Depp does a reasonable job of holding
back the giggles at his role, one in which he plays a Sherlock
Holmes who jumps on a bed when he spots a spider and who
is accompanied by a young Dr. Watson in the form of
12-year-old Masbeth (Marc Pickering)--who has been
orphaned as a result of the slasher's deeds.  Christopher
Walken looks ridiculous in the construct of the Hessian
soldier who slew scores of enemies with his sword and ax.
After being killed and decapitated himself, he races helter
skelter about the village like an equine chicken without a
head devouring those he has been commanded to kill and
stopping to pick up their heads with his weapon like a Greek
restaurateur spearing a shish kebab.
   Burton's supporting cast includes Michael Gambon, who is
villainous enough in his role as the prosperous farmer but not
nearly the scoundrel he portrays in Michael Mann's movie
"The Insider," and Ray Park and Rob Inch do some fancy
equestrian antics for men with no heads on their shoulders. 
Missing are Brom's practical jokes on the Yankee
schoolmaster in the original story by Irving, and seriously
underplayed is the rivalry between Brom and Ichabod for the
hand of Katrina Van Tassel.  Irving brought out the distinction
of having a special ghost with a definite identity to haunt a
specific locality--a matter of honor and prestige, highly
respected as a folk theme.  This subtlety is ravaged in favor
of seemingly indiscriminate butchery and by Burton's need to
abandon literary style in favor of tired imagery.

Author
Bryant Frazer
       One of the most anticipated films of the year (by me, anyway)
       turns out to be a big, beautiful dud. A must-see for sheer
       visual splendor, Sleepy Hollow is nonetheless a fundamentally
       unsatisfying whodunnit that saddles its towering imagery with
       a tortured story that works so hard at misdirection that it
       never realizes what it's good at.
       Johnny Depp plays Ichabod Crane, who in this version of the
       classic tale is a New York policeman sent to the picturesque
       village of Sleepy Hollow, two days' journey up the Hudson
       River, where a number of locals have been reported beheaded.
       Lore has it that a beheaded Hessian horseman who was
       notoriously vicious in life has returned from the dead,
       galloping through the woods under cover of darkness and
       decapitating hapless villagers. Crane has arrived with every
       intention of dispelling this sort of foolish superstition. By
       the time he leaves, he has learned to believe.
       It's too bad Burton isn't much of an action director. Sure,
       he's big on spectacle, but when it comes time to choreograph
       a big showpiece fistfight or chase scene for the camera, he
       can't quite invest it with the requisite sense of
       physicality. (This is one reason why the first Batman movie
       puts me to sleep.) This gives most of the beheadings that
       take place in Sleepy Hollow a detached quality -- they are
       almost certainly meant to be tongue-in-cheek, but I'd like
       them to be a little more lively. The marketing campaign
       (tagline: "Heads will roll") promised some chaotic wickedness
       along the lines of Burton's previous Mars Attacks!, a
       sensibility that is, to some extent, in evidence; still,
       while the scenes are technically impressive, they remain
       strangely uninvolving. (You'd think a stylist like Burton
       would be above the kind of shameless computer-animated
       ooga-booga that's used for a cheap shock in one scene, but
       you'd be wrong.)
       More on-target are the grisly aftermaths of the murders,
       which are presented with a morbidly tongue-in-cheek
       sensibility. There's a certain gothic fascination in the
       sight of Crane kneeling next to a headless corpse, examining
       the reddish-pink tissue of an open neck. It's gruesome, but
       it's a friendly gruesomeness (Burton complained that his
       movie, which is exactly the sort of thing that healthy
       13-year-old boys live for, was saddled with a restrictive R
       rating, rather than a PG-13, and he does have a point).
       In counterpoint to these almost elegant visuals, the
       screenplay, by Andrew Kevin Walker (Se7en, 8MM) is just too
       busy. Abandoning the premise of the original Washington
       Irving story, which posited the Headless Horseman as a morbid
       hoax perpetrated on gullible villagers, Walker positions the
       Horseman as a strictly supernatural phenomenon -- a fine
       idea, in itself. The dialogue is pleasantly stylized, but the
       story is hopelessly overwritten, drawing our attention away
       from the vengeful galloping ghost who's the film's
       centerpiece and into the banal convolutions of village life.
       It only gets worse as the tale goes on. Not only must we buy
       into some piffle about the horseman being controlled by one
       of the townspeople, but we're expected to care about their
       petty schemings and power plays, all this while there's a
       back-from-the-grave villain running around who's frankly much
       more interesting than any of them.
       That the screenplay is so bloated with unnecessary
       contrivance is a particular shame in light of the various
       wonders that Burton and Co. have worked elsewhere. In terms
       of visuals, this picture is perhaps the most sure-footed of
       the year. It's photographed in shades of blue and slate-grey,
       with a bloody garnish the color of cherry pie. Johnny Depp
       appears as pale and frightened as the little boys who figure
       into the movie's backstory, and kudos are certainly due for
       the casting of an uncredited Christopher Walken as a
       distorted, silver-teethed rhyme to Depp's fragile
       handsomeness. Christina Ricci is even more delicate here than
       Depp, her round-eyed and childlike china-doll demeanor
       married to a potent yet unassuming sensuality. Late in the
       film, with her head pulled back and her throat in peril,
       we're convinced that something beautiful is in horrible
       danger. Sleepy Hollow could have done well with a rewrite
       that relied more on moments of such innate drama, and less on
       narrative convolution.
       Theatrical aspect ratio: 1.85:1
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Author
Christopher Null
     I'll be the first to admit I don't really remember the details of
Washington Irving's `The Legend of Sleepy Hollow.'  But what I do
remember, well, it didn't go like this.
     In typical Tim Burton fashion, a fairy tale gets an update (and the
film's color gets drained out in the process).  The guts of `Legend' are
still there: In 1799, evil headless horseman marauds a tiny village in
upstate New York.  Ichabod Crane (Depp) is sent to investigate.
     Of course, something wicked this way comes, and a plot is uncovered
-- the details of which I'm still trying to get right in my head -- but
which involve just about every inbred member of this little town, most
of whom are beheaded during the picture.
     Depp nearly reprises his role as EDWARD SCISSORHANDS as a quiet
wallflower (sans scissors), and whiter-than-white Christina Ricci (as
the magic-obsessed love interest) sticks out among the drab fogies in
their powdered wigs like Bill Gates at the Playboy Mansion.  The
supporting cast is uniformly bland, just like the scenery (though the
latter is intentional).  The sole exception is Walken, who plays the
horseman (when he has his head, at least) with typical aplomb.
     So what's the sum of the parts?  What should have been a Halloween
treat is instead a late-November humdrum flick worthy of a glance but
little more.  The story is obtuse yet unsurprising.  The humor is sparse
and occasionally funny.  And while Burton's signature is all over the
film, his typical wit is not.
     How will the film fare at the box office?  I can't rightly say, but
I do know that a legion of junior high students is going to be
disappointed, missing a whole lot of questions on their English Lit
exams because of this movie.
Director: Tim Burton
Producer: Scott Rudin, Adam Schroeder
Writer: Andrew Kevin Walker
Starring: Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Casper Van Dien, Miranda
Richardson, Michael Gambon, Christopher Walken
http://www2.sleepyhollowmovie.com/
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Check out G-Rex.com Personal Shopper at http://www.g-rex.com

Author
Jamey Hughton
In Tim Burton's `Sleepy Hollow', there is a mysterious Headless Horseman
who decapitates residents of the small town of the same name. He rides a
beautiful black steed and carries an imposing sword that cauterizes the
wound of his victims with an immediate swipe. Burton's update on
Washington Irving's classic tale of `The Legend of Sleepy Hollow' offers
us the mystery of the Horseman, when the screenplay should have merely
settled on the aspect of the horror. Writer Andrew Kevin Walker
(`Seven') throws in perhaps too healthy a dosage of Sherlock Holmes, but
the visual treatment of the film is absolutely entrancing, as Burton
offers foggy locales and detailed costumes that are gorgeous and
stirring to examine.
As `Sleepy Hollow' opens, we're greeted with a juicy cameo from Martin
Landau, who won an Oscar in Burton's `Ed Wood'. Landau plays a prominent
citizen of Sleepy Hollow, who, on a fateful carriage ride through the
forest, is decapitated by an unseen horseback rider. After two more
murders haunt the residents of the quaint little town, Constable Ichabod
Crane (Johnny Depp) is sent in to investigate. Landlord Baltus Von
Tassel (Michael Gambon) explains to Crane that the heads have been
severed from the carcass and mysteriously taken in each separate case,
and that they believe the murderer is a dead Hessian trooper (played
briefly by a wonderfully jarring Christopher Walken) who has risen from
the grave after being decapitated in the Western Woods. Crane is not a
man of great superstition, and is determined to root out the human
culprit with his assortment of gizmos and gadgets (things I was not
surprised to find in a Tim Burton movie).
First and foremost, `Sleepy Hollow' is a fun horror film. As with
virtually all Burton movies, we are treated to a wonderful score by
composer Danny Elfman, who has once again poured excitement and
imagination into an atmospheric soundtrack that accentuates the gothic
mood perfectly. The Horseman F/X are stylish and impressive,
particularly in perfectly blended battle sequences involving actual
actors. But why did I enjoy `Sleepy Hollow' as much as I did? Although
enjoyable, it was not the numerous beheadings and the plentiful gore
that spurted left and right.. It was the light comic touch that Burton
applied. The film has the sweetness of a candy apple, usually channeled
through Depp's wonderful performance as the lovable geek Ichabod Crane,
who is no longer a mild-mannered school teacher but still attains his
cowardly qualities.
This is certainly not the only alteration that's been made. As the film
progresses, it becomes apparent that Walker is more concerned with the
mystery of the murders than the murders themselves. The momentum is
slowed considerably once Crane begins piecing the mystery together,
because for the audience, it's not an issue we particularly wish to be
solved. It's more effective for the Headless Horseman to be an elusive
demon than an elusive demon with an ulterior motive. Still, we are still
captivated by the breathtaking technical detail and Burton's keen eye to
capture our attention. The costuming is exceptional, and the dialogue is
crisp and effective throughout (it's recognizable that the script was
refined by award-winning playwright Tom Stoppard).
The supporting cast exhibits more color and playfulness than many. A
blonde Christina Ricci is in fine form as Von Tassel's daughter Katrina,
and an unlikely romance between she and Ichabod is surprisingly
consistent. Walken, Michael Gough (who appeared in Burton's `Batman'
films) and Miranda Richardson are all enjoyable in tackling their
separate roles. I suppose the strengths behind `Sleepy Hollow' lie
within the central trio: director Burton, Constable Depp and the
Headless Horseman who hunts him down with ruthless accuracy.
All of this is not to be taken seriously, of course. `Sleepy Hollow' is
a lavish, frightening and altogether amusing reworking of a classic tale
that many people cherished as children. If you've got a decent head on
your shoulders, you'll have the good sense to gallop off to the theater
and enjoy it one last time.

Author
Scott Renshaw
SLEEPY HOLLOW
(Paramount/Mandalay)
Starring:  Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Michael
Gambon, Casper Van Dien, Marc Pickering.
Screenplay:  Andrew Kevin Walker, based upon "The Legend of Sleepy
Hollow" by Washington Irving.
Producers:  Scott Rudin and Adam Schroeder.
Director:  Tim Burton.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, gore, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  102 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Watching SLEEPY HOLLOW, you realize that Tim Burton could have made a
definitive masterwork about the Headless Horseman...if anyone had given
him a script that was actually about the Headless Horseman. Changing
source material -- even radically changing source material -- is nothing
new in Hollywood, so it's not terribly surprising to find only a passing
resemblance between the film and Washington Irving's classic ghost story.
It is both surprising and inevitably disappointing to discover that the
classic ghost story has been turned into a whodunnit. There is plenty of
splendid, grisly entertainment in Burton's brand of quirky gothic horror,
but it's bogged down in a story that's a cross between a parlor mystery
and an episode of "Scooby Doo."
     The story's protagonist is still named Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp),
but in SLEEPY HOLLOW Crane is a turn-of-the-19th-century New York City
constable dedicated to logical investigation and his own early
explorations into forensic science. After a clash with a local judge, he's
sent off to the remote upstate hamlet of Sleepy Hollow, where three people
have already been found decapitated. The town fathers, including wealthy
citizen Baltus Van Tassel (Michael Gambon), believe the murders to be the
work of a legendary Headless Horseman who haunts the area, but the
skeptical Crane is unconvinced. It is only after his own encounter with
the spectral figure that Crane changes the focus of his investigation from
"who" to "why."
     From its very first moments, SLEEPY HOLLOW shows tremendous promise.
The deaths of two of the Horseman's victims -- including Martin Landau in
a cameo as a Sleepy Hollow landowner -- lead into the introduction of
Crane as a jittery opponent of brutality in the name of justice. Depp is
rarely better than when he works with Burton (EDWARD SCISSORHANDS, ED
WOOD). Here he's an eccentric revelation as the big city rationalist
coping with supernatural phenomena. Depp has a ridiculous amount of fun
with Crane's prissiness, and Burton gets lots of mileage out of spraying
him with blood. Burton gets even more mileage out of the spectacular look
of SLEEPY HOLLOW, from the twisted woods to the gloomy town. He nails the
spooky side of the story, combining effective action with flying body
parts a-plenty whenever the Headless Horseman is at the center of the
narrative.
    Unfortunately, he's not at the center of the narrative nearly often
enough. Eventually, the film becomes focused on Crane's efforts to
understand the connection between the victims and who might be controlling
the Horseman. Crane methodically pieces together clues, notes suspects and
ponders motives...and I wonder who might possibly care. The question of
the head behind the Headless Horseman not only becomes an irritating
distraction -- and means you can count on a tedious expository scene of
the villain explaining his/her plan in excruciating detail -- it robs the
Horseman of too much power. Andrew Kevin Walker's script (tweaked by Tom
Stoppard) turns a primally frightening apparition into little more than
hired muscle from beyond the grave. Other plot elements prove burdensome
as well -- radically changing the role of Van Tassel's daughter Katrina
(Christina Ricci), exploring Crane's dark childhood secrets -- but nothing
is so ill-advised as blunting the force of the Horseman.
     I suppose that one glaring misstep is so troubling because SLEEPY
HOLLOW has so much going for it as one of Burton's typically grim fairy
tales. Between the delights of Depp's performance and the dark enchantment
of the production design, it's easy to start feeling the potential for
brilliance. You only need to feel the energy level rise when the Horseman
is on screen to understand that detective work didn't really belong in
this story. SLEEPY HOLLOW may be somebody's idea of "fleshing out"
Washington Irving's story, but what it really needed was less flesh and
more ectoplasm. Burton has made a wonderful monster movie from a script
that doesn't understand this is a monster movie.

Author
Shane Burridge
Did you ever see that short Disney cartoon when you were a kid, the one 
about the Headless Horseman?  Do you remember the wild finale, a mixture of 
scary slapstick, which had Ichabod Crane galloping for dear life towards the 
bridge that marked that essential piece of childhood myth, the Line Of 
Safety.  Tim Burton remembers, and I find it perfectly suitable that the 
former (though briefly-tenured) Disney animator should produce a live-action 
elaboration of that short piece.  Here's another gem from the Burton 
repertoire, and one which few others would have attempted in this day and 
age: a good old-fashioned horror film.
Set firmly in the 18th century and occupying a universe all of its own 
(although strongly derived from the Hammer films of the late 60s and early 
70s), SLEEPY HOLLOW succeeds because it refuses the self-deprecating 
concessions film-makers almost seem obliged to put in their films nowadays.  
No one-liners.  No provision for a sequel.  Its only nudge to the audience 
is a well-timed millennium reference (and, intentionally or not, a couple of 
images from THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS and PEE-WEE'S BIG ADVENTURE, the 
visages of Jack Skellington and Large Marge respectively) and 
state-of-the-art FX notwithstanding, the end result could pass muster as 
some sort of lost classic unearthed in the Hammer Studio vaults - it even 
has that distinct indigo hue and those washed-out faces.  This movie is so 
out-of-era that it's simply wonderful: not exactly a homage, not even a 
revision - it's just a crackling good Gothic Yarn.  New York constable 
Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp), is sent to the small agrarian township of 
Sleepy Hollow to investigate a recent spate of decapitation murders.  The 
townsfolk blame a local legend, which Depp airily dismisses - at first.  A 
first-hand encounter with the Horseman quickly turns him into a believer.  
Depp's transition from rational scientific enquiry to supernatural and 
arcane lore works seamlessly into the story: it doesn't seem wrong to us 
that he should 'switch sides' so easily, integrating a little of both into 
his investigation.  The seeds have already been planted, after all, in the 
skewed flashbacks to his childhood (although that haunted child reminded me 
more of a young Burton than a young Depp), so the appearance of Crane as a 
well-attired adult investigator poking around crime scenes in gloomy forests 
is no more peculiar to us than it would be if we were watching an episode of 
a protean X-FILES.
The concerns of the plot are duly interspersed with Horror intrusions (and 
how Burton loves to see those severed heads roll!) but by its finale SLEEPY 
HOLLOW has let slip its full melodramatic glory.  The usual lightning 
flashes and explosions of shattering glass easily become the type of genre 
standards that are included only because they're expected, but by the time 
you have sat through ninety minutes of SLEEPY HOLLOW, the clichés are no 
longer clichés.  Every swirling mass of leaves and gout of blood conspires 
to produce a cinematic, gothic opera: the Headless Horseman is brutal and 
frightening; the sky is perpetually grey or stormy; the trees are black and 
twisted; everything outside is muted with dampness; the scenes of the 
countryside, the feasts, the cornshocks, the windmills and the kitchens are 
reminiscent of Dutch and Flemish masters; similarly the striking faces of 
the cast could also have been lifted from portraits (although I wish 
Christina Ricci had been left with her raven tresses instead of those blonde 
curls), indicating that Burton's visual sense of the film was inspired by 
paintings.  Irrespective of its reference points, SLEEPY HOLLOW is its own 
entity.  But if it's "supposed" to be a Hammer film, a recreation of 
17th-century art, or post-Disney trauma, then I'll vote for the last on that 
list - if only to tantalize myself with the possibility that Burton might 
have something to say about the shooting of Old Yeller or the death of 
Bambi's mom in his future projects.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One of the greatest horror films ever made is Edgar Ulmer's 1934
THE BLACK CAT.  It is a delightful black comedy, an exercise in mordant
horror starring both Boris Karloff and Bela Lugosi in their first film
together.  It claims to be based on the classic story by Edgar Allan
Poe, but one can search for hours through the film and not find
anything that Poe would recognize.  One could hardly call it a
retelling of the Poe.  It is a little easier to find elements of
Washington Irving's "Legend of Sleepy Hollow" in Tim Burton's new
SLEEPY HOLLOW, but it is amazing to see how many people are calling
this a retelling of the Irving.  It most certainly is not.  Instead the
story has been disassembled and many of the pieces have been used in
telling the story of what might be a supernatural killer bringing
sleepless nights to the little New York State village of Sleepy Hollow
in 1799.
     Ichabod Crane (played by Johnny Depp) is an enlightened police
detective and reformer from New York City.  He is excited about the
coming of the new century.  (He calls it a new "millennium," indicating
that there must have been a bunch of people working on this film who
did not realize that new centuries and new millennia do not always come
at the same time.  So not everything scary about this film is
intentional.)  Though Crane himself is afraid of the sight of blood--
and seemingly even his own shadow--he believes that new scientific
methods will revolutionize police detective work.  He even has invented
for examining evidence a set of instruments that would do David
Cronenberg proud.  However, his methods are not welcomed by the local
constable and burgomaster (cameos by Alun Armstrong and Christopher
Lee).  Crane is sent by carriage upstate to investigate some recent
mysterious killings in Sleepy Hollow.  Three decapitation murders have
taken place in the little village and Crane is to report to prominent
citizen Baltus Van Tassel (Michael Gambon) and begin his investigation.
And if scientific methods can be employed, so much the better.
     Physically, Depp is all wrong to play the gangly Ichabod Crane.
However the queasy detective shows great internal dissonance when the
strength of his enlightened ideas push against his physical and
psychological weaknesses.  And he tries to hide his distress, not very
successfully, with his cold-fish demeanor.  The strain of this police
case eventually is really too much for him and he finds he is cracking
under the strain.  It is a delightful change to have a vulnerable hero
who has self-doubts and weaknesses.  Perfectly matching the spirit of
the film is a terrific Michael Gambon.  He must have spent hours in
front of a mirror achieving just the perfect facial expression for each
of his scenes, frequently conveying at the same time disdain, disgust,
and fear.  His daughter, Katrina Van Tassel, is Christina Ricci who in
spite of her buxom appearance still looks a lot like Little Wednesday
from THE ADDAMS FAMILY.  Perhaps that is a mold she will take a long
time breaking.  Miranda Richardson quietly plays Van Tassel's wife, but
is clearly the source of most of Van Tassel's strength.  When the
Hessian is given his head he is played by Christopher Walken who
appears to be having a grand time of it.  Rumor has it that Tim Burton
is so introverted that he wants to deal with as few new actors per film
as possible.  As a result many of his actors get used over and over.
Familiar faces include Depp, of course, but also Jeffrey Jones and Lisa
Marie, all from Ed Woods's entourage.  There are more familiar faces
including Michael Gough, Ian McDiarmid, and Casper Van Dien.
     Tim Burton is as much a visual stylist as a director.  His
particular visual style is recognizable and goes back to his amateur
film FRANKENWEENIE.  In this film he uses that style a little less, but
it is still recognizable.  The visual aspects of this film are, in
fact, its greatest attraction.  This is a nice film to look at.
Frequently large mattes are used to create scenes, but in a departure,
they are not intended to be realistic.  Instead they are either obvious
paintings of idealized nature or of smoke-filled scenes of villages
setting a tone for the film.  Sleepy Hollow is an area of mists and
darkness.  The few sunny scenes are memories of the past and again at
the end of the film when normality returns.  Burton intentionally lifts
images from classic horror films.  The film opens with an image of
dripping blood spattering borrowed from the Hammer film (THE HORROR OF)
DRACULA.  Later an image is borrowed from THE PIT AND THE PENDULUM.
     Washington Irving might not have thought much of SLEEPY HOLLOW.
But for a horror film, it is poetic and surprisingly pleasurable.  As
it rarely does when I am watching a film it occurred to me at about the
halfway point that I was really enjoying the film.  Even with all its
faults, this film is fun.  I give it 8 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high
+2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     SPOILER WARNING... SPOILER WARNING... SPOILER WARNING...
     There are several points I would fine-tune with this film
including: 1) The birdcage on the disk is always filmed as if it is
right side up including at the end when it is filmed from both front
and back.  Seen from the front the cage and bird should be upside-down
if the user sees it right side up.  2) The ending of the film is
completely given away much too soon by the voice of the witch in the
woods.  Anyone who saw the very good TV-movie MERLIN will have heard
the same false voice used extensively.  3) Toward the end of the film
a clue is presented and interpreted.  Crane says that a dead body will
not bleed.  And starting a short time after the death of the body that
is true.  But if the filmmakers were aware of that fact, why did they
have the earlier pregnant victim's body bleed when it was dug up?  They
should have known it could not do that.

Author
Sebastien Smith
Running time: 105 minutes
Directed by Tim Burton
Starring: Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Casper Van Dien, Miranda Richardson,
Michael Gambon, Marc Pickering, Christopher Walken, Michael Gough,
Christopher Lee.
I've always loved Tim's work.  With Ed Wood and Edward Sissorhands, he has
shown an ability to conquer some emotions and aspects of life that hardly
anyone has.  Blending humor, drama, and horror in some superb workings that
have elevated him to the ranks of top directors.
In this film, he explorers the human spirit and it's fears in a very raw and
unusual presentation of the classic tale of Ichabod Crane and the headless
horseman.
It is a well made film with some superb sequences and brilliant costumes.
They actually built a whole town for this film, with a sombre and dark
ambiance.  The opening sequence is a dark field with some very well made
effect that expresses the unknown,  produced by the fog.
The cast give to this sexy and spooky film a magnificant performance.
Probably, Johnny Depps best work so far.  There is a lot of subtle humour in
this movie that let loose of some of the tension of the movie. It makes the
movie not as scary as most people expect it to be. But, it is unique and has
an incredible storyline. Many will say, "it's been done", but personally I
don't think it's been done this way.  A tale of horror presented with a
light humor, I don't think anyone besides Tim Burton, or maybe Alfred
Hitchcock could have brought this blend of subtle and "humour noir" to a
film like this.  We can't help but laugh at the way death is brought to
us.....
I would recommend it to everyone who does not just looking to be scare off
by some stupid horror movie without a story, such as the House on Haunted
Hills or Final Destination.

Author
Bill Chambers
SLEEPY HOLLOW ** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (bill@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Michael
Gambon
screenplay by Andrew Kevin Walker, based on The Legend of Sleepy Hollow
by Washington Irving
directed by Tim Burton
Googly eyes that spring forth from a ghoulish figure. A burning
windmill. Ornate choir music. Jeffrey Jones. Sleepy Hollow is Tim
Burton's Greatest Hits. The trouble with most compilation albums is that
they're superficial, a bunch of songs with only one context:
retrospection. If this latest gloomfest from Burton doesn't make you
yearn for the days when you were witnessing his directorial flourishes
for the first time, we saw different films. While the setting is hollow,
the storytelling is shallow.
Washington Irving's classic tale has been retooled to the sensibilities
of Burton and screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker (of Se7en). Schoolteacher
Ichabod Crane (Depp) is now a New York City police constable sent
upstate with his wild detecting contraptions (he's a pioneer of
forensics) to investigate a series of decapitations in the community of
Sleepy Hollow. The town's magistrates have pegged The Headless Horseman,
a vengeful ghost, as the killer, but Crane, whose spell-dabbling mother
(Lisa Marie) was tortured to death by puritans, prefers to put his faith
in logic over the superrnatural.
With "Murder She Wrote" or "Scooby Doo Mysteries" instead of Irving's
text as its template, the remainder of the plot feels like filler. Crane
flirts with Katrina (Ricci, in a yellow wig-Burton apparently shares a
blonde hair fetish with Hitchcock), the winsome daughter of landlord
Baltus Van Tassel (Gambon). Katrina's hand has already been promised to
Brom Van Brunt (Casper Van Dien in a role that thankfully doesn't tax
his limited range), which, according to the principles of gothic
literature, means one third of the triangle will have to be dispatched.
Then there's the orphan (Marc Pickering) who tags along with Crane as a
sort of junior Watson, squashing spiders for his wimpy mentor and
shielding him from harm.
Burton and his cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki have concocted some
psychotically pretty images that visually distinguish this
interpretation of ...Sleepy Hollow from all the others, especially in
scenes featuring Christopher Walken, who leaves a lasting impression as
the Horseman. (Don't worry, I haven't ruined anything.) The actor's
unearthly physical presence has been noted in the past, but here, with
snarls for dialogue and a mouthful of pointy teeth, he achieves
heretofore-unexplored levels of camp. His performance lacks the tragic
elements of the most memorable movie monsters, but the very sight of him
defibrilates a movie mired in Hammer cliches and (with one exception,
involving a duel) derivative action sequences.
Yes, yes, I know, those unmotivated bolts of lightning, shots of people
darting awake from a nightmare in a cold sweat, melodramatic line
readings, and fog-drenched, minimalist sets are Burton's way of paying
tribute to the horror pictures he loved as a youth (Hammer mainstay
Christopher Lee even has a cameo), but the effect is muffled by a
self-consciously B-grade and critically underdeveloped script, not to
mention a budget that could've funded fifty or sixty Vincent Price
flicks. Ichabod and Katrina's cursory romance has been spared the
imagination that went into the special effects (which are spectacular),
and the resolution, which follows a carriage race climax that falls
short of thrilling (not enough complications), is a real head-scratcher.
(The filmmakers skip a necessary step in the plotting.)
I referred to some of Burton's other work in the opening paragraph-in
order: Pee Wee's Big Adventure and Beetlejuice; Frankenweenie (a short);
his entire catalogue; and Beetlejuice and Ed Wood. Burton's Sleepy
Hollow is stitched together from spare parts like some cinematic
Frankenstein, and it's unwieldy. This is the third time he and Depp have
collaborated on a project (after Ed Wood and Edward Scissorhands),
annihilating that old adage about charm-their previous unions were much
more fruitful. Depp really disappoints; he emasculates Ichabod, but the
character's cowardice lacks shading. The problem is not that we wind up
rooting for the Headless Horseman, it's that we never root for Crane.
Burton's career is on a downswing-his last effort, Mars Attacks, was
another unsuccessful hommage. His work of late is most signifcantly
characterized by its thematic emptiness-if only, in fishing through his
old bag of tricks, he had pulled up the emotional grandeur of Edward
Scissorhands or Ed Wood, films that spoke volumes about alienation and
passion. It is Burton who loses his head in the dark, dull Sleepy
Hollow. Or, at least, his knack.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Casper Van Dien, Miranda
Richardson, Michael Gambon, Mark Pickering. Rated R.
There are a lot of words that signify praise in the dictionary. If I
used them all, it wouldn't do Tim Burton's Sleepy Hollow justice. Some
movies go beyond the grasp of the English language. I probably can't
give you a satisfactory description of this one, you have to see it for
yourself. I'll try, but listen: if what you read about this movie here
doesn't sound particularly intriguing to you, see it anyway.
It is an adaptation of Washington Irving's "The Legend of Sleepy
Hollow," but it's the Tim Burton version of the classic horror story.
The general plot (especially the ending) has been tinkered with to
accomodate Burton's glorious stylistic eccentricities. It is, of
course, the legend of the Headless Horseman, the mysterious entity that
terrorizes the small town of Sleepy Hollow, chopping off citizens'
heads at will. Or, that is what the superstitous village folk suspect
and are not too eager to be dissuaded from in favor of something less
fantastic.
Enter Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp). A cynical, fancy-schmancy, rather
girlish investigator from New York City, he is called in to investigate
the beheadings in Sleepy Hollow. Of course, he doesn't believe the
Headless Horseman tales for a second; he is convinced that the murderer
is human and is determined to find him. He receives what seems like a
warm welcome, but he can't help but notice something afoot; the town's
prime citizens seem to be plotting something and concealing important
details from him.
He does eventually have an encounter with the horseman himself and is
immediately persuaded of his supernatural existence. What he is not
sure about, however, is his independence. Certain clues lead him to
believe that there is someone behind the horseman, controlling him and
determining his victims. Since nobody in the town is particularly keen
on going into the woods and seeking out the murderer, Ichabod and a
child of one of the murdered are to go it alone.
Meanwhile, Ichabod falls for the daughter of one of the prime suspects
(Christina Ricci) and the two star off an eccentric relationship,
neither of them willing to take it to the next level. She is, of
course, destined to play a vital role in how the rest of the story
unspools.
At the risk of making an overly encompassing, generalizing statement,
Sleepy Hollow is probably the most beautiful movie I have ever seen.
Every shot, every frame is nothing less than a work of art, something
to study and admire. Ordinary is obviously not a word Burton (who,
incidentally, directed stuff like Batman, Ed Wood and, my personal
favorite, Mars Attacks!) is not familiar with. All visual elements --
the trees, the sky, the fog, the town itself -- look and feel like they
are from some twisted gothic fairy tale; the result is the epitome of
gorgeousness. I have yet to see the film another time, but I plan to do
that as soon as possible; one viewing is unsatisfactory if one wants to
pick out all of the film's visual intricacies. If I don't see an Art
Direction nomination from this, I will be, pardon the colloquialism,
bitching.
Aside from being aesthetically stunning, Sleepy Hollow is exciting,
engrossing and fast-paced. The prevalent horror scenes are staged with
thought and panache. Every sequence is executed flawlessly; the editing
if perfect and the gore, while abundant, doesn't seem excessive or get
in the way of the action. Visually adept movies can't merely be pretty;
the camerawork has to serve the plot and the staging has to work
impeccably. In Sleepy Hollow, everything works.
I think Johnny Depp, a Burton veteran, sheds his pretty boy image here,
if only temporarily. His Ichabod is awesome. He's like the anti-hero.
There's a scene somewhere in the middle of the movie where he and a
young boy are walking into what seems to be a witch's lair. Ichabod,
frightened, actually walks into the cave protecting himself with the
boy pushing him in front and "covering" him with a firearm. There's
another where Ichabod sees a spider and, with a girlish scream, hops on
a stool. The beauty about scenes like those is that Depp, of all
people, makes us believe them without eliciting disdain for his
character.
Sleepy Hollow takes a conventional story and turns it into something
wholly extraordinary: a mainstream work of art. I have no doubt in my
mind that mass audiences will get a kick out of this and yet it is much
more than a crowd pleaser. It is simple in plot but endlessly complex
in execution. Heads Will Roll and Sleepy Hollow is perfect.

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated: R for graphic horror violence and gore, and some sexuality. (And TONS of
heads)
Starring: Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Casper Van Dien,
Michael Gambon, Christopher Walken, Christopher Lee, Martin Landau.
Only Tim Burton could to it: Make a big-budgeted horror flick based on the
classic tale by Washington Irving....and make it great. 'Sleepy Hollow' works
on so many levels that in the middle of the movie, I had a huge smile on my
face and thought 'Man this is awesome!'. Of course most of you know the Legend
of Sleepy Hollow and the book by Washington Irving which has always been one of
my favorites. TIm Burton directs with such skill that he has created one of the
most beautiful films put on print.
The movie opens with a creepy and scary little montage of the Headless
Horseman's first victim. From there on we meet Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) New
York's constable who is sent in my the judge of the town to Sleepy Hollow where
many people have been losing something there. Here in Sleepy Hollow he stays
with the Van Tassel's. He hears the story of the headless horseman and does not
really know what to believe, he meets the Van Tassel's daughter Katrina
(Christina Ricci), who's mother and father are Lady Van Tassel (Miranda
Richardson) and Baltus Van Tassel (Michael Gambon). He really doesn't believe
in the fairy tales of the headless horseman until he himself has an encounter
with him which scares him out of his wits. He however sets out to find the
headless horseman, and for once and for all stop him from killing
again....before he becomes the next victim. 
I must say the best things about this movie are: Johnny Depp's wonderfully
comical performance which he does so good it would almost surpass his Edward
Scissorhand's performance. Christina Ricci seems to also give one of her best
performances to date with strong back-up from Miranda Richardson (always good)
and Michael Gambon. I think the strongest thing of the movie however is the
Headless Horseman himself. Part CGI part man in suit, he is nothing more than
astonishing. He looks incredibly like he has no head, and when you see him a
chill goes down your spine. When he rides his horse its very creepy and when he
chops off someone's head it really does make you scared. For the person who
plays the Headless Horseman he was well-cast and very scary when they tell how
he died. 
Astonishingly enough this isn't the kids story it was before. This is a very
mature film that has so much smartness and cleverness in it, that you have to
wonder why it could not have been made before. It has a dark, creepy atmosphere
and a beautiful setting with incredible costumes. The whole film has a sort of
gothic feel to it, and may be too dark for some people. It is also incredibly
gory and bloody with over twenty beheadings, all resulting in bloody messes.
The beheadings are also very graphic and only one or two are off screen. The
violence and gore may not appeal to everyone so I am just trying to warn you so
you know about it. For those fans and even non-fans of the horror genre I don't
think you will be disappointed.
The directing was also incredible and Tim Burton did just like he did with
Batman and gives it a special touch to be something you didn't think it would
be. He did a great job with shadowing and in the end it's very surprising and
satisfying. One flaw was some slow parts in the movie and one scene that went
on forever, but besides that 'Sleepy Hollow' doesn't have much wrong with it.
The performances are all strong  (except Casper Van Dien YUCK!)as is the clever
writing with a surprising amount of comedy.
Even though the story has been done many times before, this one seems to the be
the best of them all. The 65m dollar budget shows quite clearly and in the end
pays off. It is a beautiful film, with some amazing camerawork, along with the
neat little opening titles. The film is very intense, with some downright scary
moments that had me holding on to my arm chair. 'Sleepy Hollow' does have a few
changes in it than the movie did and adds some surprising twists especially in
the end, and the person who plays The Headless Horseman was quite scary and
well-cast.
'Sleepy Hollow' will go down as a new classic in the horror genre, and shall
not be remade anymore. I would not be surprised if this movie is a hit with
both the young and old crowd. The movie is all entertaining, scary, funny and
gory. It has a touch of this and a touch of that and should have something to
impress or please someone. TIm Burton gives us a great film worthy of the
rating above. With its creepy atmosphere, its graphic violence and witty comedy
'Sleepy Hollow' is nothing but a great movie.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring November 18, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Sean Townsend
STARRING:  Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Michael
Gambon, Casper Van Dien, Jeffrey Jones, Ian McDiarmid, Christopher Lee
DIRECTOR:  Tim Burton
WRITTEN BY:  Kevin Yagher, Andrew Kevin Walker (based on "The Legend of
Sleepy Hollow" by Washington Irving)
By now, after Beetlejuice, two Batman movies, and Edward Scissorhands
(also starring Depp), one might conclude that the sky in
weirdo/wunderkind Tim Burton's world is decidedly black.  Yet, his bleak
Gothic imagery has always been tempered by a childlike wonder (perhaps
best realized in the truly marvelous musical fantasy The Nightmare
Before Christmas, which he produced and co-wrote.)  Underlined with
strange and sublime music from constant collaborator Danny Elfman,
Burton's films have a unique, fairy-tale-like quality that has often
endeared him to both critics and audiences in a rare synergy of art and
commerce (although not always; 1996's Mars Attacks! was just plain
dreadful, while 1994's critical favorite Ed Wood was box-office
anathema.)  These same artistic and commercial elements appear in Sleepy
Hollow, but blend less smoothly thanks to writing flaws that complicate
what should have been a simple and straightforward tale.
The film's plot bears only a passing resemblance to Irving's short
story.  Ichabod Crane is now a constable and forensic scientist instead
of a schoolmaster.  This allows the writers to cook up an unnecessarily
convoluted murder mystery involving conspiracy and witchcraft, a
whodunit that in its resolution makes even the origin of the Headless
Horseman seem completely plausible in comparison.  Thrown in for good
measure is some uncalled-for subtext involving Ichabod's Puritan
childhood.  In fact, Sleepy Hollow is even less faithful to its source
than the short but memorable Disney cartoon (the last half of 1949's
Ichabod and Mr. Toad) that is, to my mind, still the best-- and
scariest-- film version of 'em all (so memorable, in fact, that Burton
includes several bits of hommage to it, like the toads that croak
Ichabod's name as he nervously guides his old horse across a covered
bridge at night.)
This is not to say that the film is a waste of time.  On the contrary,
it's worth ponying up the bucks just to see the patented Burton visuals
(accomplished this time by cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki) married to
Elfman's magical music.  Pastoral vistas of upstate New York are as
beautifully rendered as oil paintings, but the real treats are the
gloomy little township of Sleepy Hollow and the gnarled, leaf-strewn
forest surrounding it.  They're like an Edward Gorey drawing come to
ominous life.  Even the few daylight sequences have a dreamlike,
dark-at-the-fringes feel, and the characters all share an
unhealthy-looking pallor that suits the grim (and often gruesome)
proceedings.  Depp's Ichabod Crane, with his constantly pursed lips and
stiff, vaguely effeminate demeanor, matches Irving's conception in
character if not appearance (in this respect, the Disney version is
bang-on.)  Ricci, on the other hand, matches Irving's physical
description of Katrina Van Tassel letter for letter, but is neither
coquettish nor fickle enough to be considered anything but a
goody-goody.  Thanks to the demands of a script that requires obligatory
plot twists and action scenes, we are expected to believe things about
both characters that simply don't add up.  Worse, the villain is made to
explain the whole messy mystery near the end, with the immediate and
unfortunate result that we are suddenly yanked out of Tim Burton's
darkly imaginative world and left sitting in a theater, watching
something no more real than a Headless Horseman.

Author
Walter Frith
Tim Burton's films have always been filled with a sweet or sour amount of
gothic prancing.  The first 'Batman' movie he directed in 1989 was always
balanced with a sense of fun even though it was dark enough to startle the
most loyal fan of Bob Kane's comic book series.  'Batman Returns' in 1992
was a silly, repetitive and nasty assault on our senses with horrible
villains, an incoherent script and some very bad overlapping on the part of
Burton's direction.  'Pee Wee's Big Adventure' (1985), 'Beetlejuice' (1988),
'Edward Scissorhands' (1990) and 'Mars Attacks!' (1996) all have their
audience and it's easy to love or hate any film directed by Tim Burton.
'Sleepy Hollow', set in 1799 and based on Washington Irving's story "The
Legend of Sleepy Hollow" and adapted for the screen this time by Kevin
Yagher and Andrew Kevin Walker, is the story of New York City Constable
Icabod Crane (Johnny Depp) and his investigation into the stories about a
headless horseman who is murdering people by decapitating them while
charging in grand fashion on his horse.  Crane is sent to upstate New York
to investigate these disturbing events at the behest of a city judge
(Christopher Lee).  Some of the people Crane comes into contact with are
Baltus Van Tassel (Michael Gambon), his wife Lady Van Tassel (Miranda
Richardson), and their daughter Katrina (Christina Ricci).  Lady Van Tassel
is her stepmother and is a mysterious character who levels her own ideas
about the headless horseman which are startling and fun to watch during the
film's climax.  Other interesting local characters are played by Jeffrey
Jones, Casper Van Dien and Ian McDiarmid.
If you wanted to take the film seriously, you would have to look at the
characters first and foremost and unfortunately, Depp's is the only
interesting one in the whole picture.  The film seems obsessed, almost
addicted like an alcoholic would be, with showing the decapitation of heads
again and again and again.  The entire production is a well photographed but
familiar looking Tim Burton piece where bad hair and pale expressions extend
to the far ends of celluloid for maximum effect.
Perhaps the most impressive thing about this film is the cameo by
Christopher Walken as the headless horseman.  Many would argue it's a full
blooded role, but in my mind, Walken's not on screen enough to be given
major credit on screen and he isn't.  He is to be given credit, however for
his absolutely frightening portrayal of the film's chief villain (his teeth
alone were hair raising).  Burton directed Walken in 'Batman Returns' and
Martin Landau also makes an uncredited cameo as a man who loses his
head (literally!) in the film's opening scene.  Landau won an Oscar under
Burton's direction for 1994's 'Ed Wood'.
The element of beauty in this film is the cinematography by Emmanuel Lubezki
and the editing by Chris Lebanzon.  The work by these two is absolutely
riveting and may bring them Oscar nominations.  Credit also has to be given
to Johnny Depp.  He is a great performer and looks right at home in a period
piece role as comfortably as any other part he has ever played.  He adapts
to the role of Icabod Crane as well as any actor could have.  He combines
intelligence, bravery in the face of horror and a straight laced portrayal
of the law very well.
Any director deserves credit for putting his stamp on a film so well.  The
true key to a director's vision is for avid movie fans to view a film
without the credits being shown and then trying to guess who the director
is.  That's easy when watching a Tim Burton film.  If Burton hadn't been a
movie director I see him in one of two professions in life.....designing fun
houses for amusement parks or taking on the job of an architect, designing
gothic looking structures with the most bizarre detail given to every part
of his structures.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Tim Burton
Written by: Washington Irving (Story), Kevin Yagher
Tim Burton is a man who has accumulated quite a following for the simple reason
that his films look fantastic. If one goes to a Tim Burton movie, they expect
to see dark, gothic sets accompanied by dark, gothic people and a haunting
score (preferably a dark, gothic one) from the great Danny Elfman. Going into
his latest film, "Sleepy Hollow", this is exactly what I wanted and this is
what was delivered.
Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) is a New York detective in the year 1799. Unlike
his fellow officers, Crane feels that scientific analysis is the way that
detectives will solve crimes in the next century. Crane's superior (Christopher
Lee in a sadly brief appearance) sends him to investigate several murders in
the small town of Sleepy Hollow. Crane is greeted there by a council of old men
(Michael Gough, Richard Griffiths, Jeffrey Jones, Ian McDiarmid, Michael
Gambon) who inform him that the headless spirit of a long dead Hessian
Mercenary (the perfectly cast Christopher Walken) is responsible for the
murders. At first, Crane scoffs at such talk, but as all know, he will soon
believe in the headless horseman. During his investigations Crane meets the
enchanting Katrina (Christina Ricci), who appears to dabble in sorcery, and may
possess some link to the horseman.
To start off with allow me to state that other than the character names, this
film has nothing whatsoever to do with the original story by Washington Irving.
I must also make it clear that if you are expecting to see a film with very
little gore, you are either misinformed, or incredibly naive. Beheadings abound
in this film, and while you might not always see them (though you usually do),
you will hear a sickening sound as the horseman's sword slices through the
hapless victim's neck. Those of you with weak stomachs should probably stay far
away from this movie.
If there were only one reason to see "Sleepy Hollow" it would certainly be the
brilliant sets. The set for the town of Sleepy Hollow is quite a sight to
behold. Constantly covered in fog, surrounded by evil looking mountains and
trees, and filled with dark buildings and darker graveyards. One scene which is
perfectly done involves the fog spreading out and extinguishing four torches
lit around the town. To go along with this unworldly atmosphere is a brilliant
score from Danny Elfman. Not since Burton's "Batman" has Elfman written a score
this perfectly suited for the film. Low and haunting at times, loud and rousing
when appropriate, Burton uses it to perfection when highlighting a scene.
The acting is uniformly adequate, with Depp alone truly standing out. Depp
makes Ichabod a most interesting character. Hilariously inept through most of
the film yet still arrogant around the townsfolk, if any other actor had played
him Crane might have been difficult to relate to and sympathize with. Ricci
gives a fairly good performance as Katrina, but seems slightly miscast. Ricci
is at her best when playing sarcastic characters with witty dialogue such as
Wednesday Addams in "The Addams Family". As the quiet, love-struck Katrina she
always appears slightly uncomfortable. As for the horseman himself, my fellow
Star Wars fans will be delighted to hear that stuntman Ray Park (Darth Maul)
plays the dead Hessian during the fight scenes.
"Sleepy Hollow" won't win any awards come Oscar time, but it's certainly a lot
of fun and a great way to spend a couple of hours (it does run a little long at
105 minutes). The movie earns its R rating as the gore flows freely throughout
the film (wait till you see the bleeding tree), so don't bring the little ones.
Overall I give it a full recommendation and four stars.
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made. See it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it only if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Tim Burton's campily creepy SLEEPY HOLLOW has great visuals and Johnny
Depp's usual imaginative acting.  A fun film, it is light-years better
than the schlock horror pictures that played this past Halloween, when
this movie should have more appropriately opened.
No, not about the gore.  If you purchase a ticket to SLEEPY HOLLOW and
are shocked to see explicit violence in a movie about a serial
decapitator, then you have only your own naive stupidity to blame.
The warning is about the script and the miscasting of the female lead.
Kevin Yagher's underdeveloped script, based on the famous Washington
Irving story, "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow," has some good ideas but
lacks a cohesive narrative.
Cast opposite Johnny Depp, as Constable Ichabod Crane, is Christina
Ricci, as his love interest, Katrina Van Tassel.  Ricci, wearing wisps
whites and pastel blues, looks wonderful on her large white horse.
Everything is fine until she speaks.  The script, which takes advantage
of none of her signature sarcasm, offers her few opportunities to shine.
The result is a bland performance in which there is no chemistry between
her and Depp.  Basically, to enjoy the show the viewers are required to
ignore Ricci and focus exclusively on Depp and on the film's mesmerizing
look.
Called from New York City to investigate the macabre murders in the
remote village of Sleepy Hollow, Crane takes such a soundly scientific
approach to the crimes that he would make Sherlock Holmes proud.  Using
gadgets of his own invention, he researches the crime scenes and the
bodies, which he exhumes.  He completely rejects the notion of the
frightened villagers that the missing heads of the victims were "taken
by the Headless Horseman back to Hell."  (With sharp triangular teeth,
Christopher Walken, in a cameo, does an hilarious, over-the-top
rendition of the Headless Horseman.)
"Murder needs no ghost come from the grave," Crane lectures the
assembled, whom he views as a bunch of impressionable country bumpkins.
Once he encounters the fiend, however, Crane retreats to the safety of
the bedcovers of his bed and whimpers like a schoolboy.
The marvel of Depp's performance is that he encourages us to laugh with
him and not at him.  With shifty eyes and dramatic gestures, he lets us
in on the joke.  When he cuts into a tree that splatters blood on him,
we're supposed to grimace and then laugh.  "It's okay," he seems to be
saying to us, "we know you're going to find this funny.  Laugh all you
want and have a good time."  After all, what other reaction can there be
to a movie that has a headless guy, who can't be killed (he's already
dead, you see), riding around slicing off other people's heads.
Ah, and then there are the visuals, which are certainly worth the price
of admission.  When he pulls the camera back to show the grand vistas,
Burton's picture has the grandeur of a Frederick Edwin Church painting
of upstate New York where the story is set.  The gothic village itself
has a wonderfully eerie feel.  Emmanuel Lubezki's cinematography
features denuded color in some scenes and a strong steel-blue look in
others.  As the scenes change, "wow" is the most common reaction.
It's fun, it's funny, it looks great and it's got Johnny Depp.  What
else do you need to know about the movie, anyway?
SLEEPY HOLLOW runs 1:45.  It is rated R for graphic horror violence and
gore, and for a scene of sexuality and would be fine for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
Throughtout movie history, there have been some very simple rules that almost
all films abide by. Sequels are never as good as the first movie, Demi Moore is
stupid and cannot act, and anything starting with the words I Know or I Still
Know will be bad. There are some exceptions with these rules, Toy Story 2 and
Scream 2 were far better than their originals and I Know What You Did Last
Summer wasn't that incredibly bad. (The jury is still out on Demi Moore's
acting ability and will probably be for quite some time.) The ultimate rule of
all is that when a book gets turned into a movie, the book is always better.
All of us have seen countless novels adapted to the screen that were major
disappointments. Even worse is seeing a trailer for a movie, thinking it looks
absolutely awesome, and then seeing it, only to find out it's a dud. The last
two sentences I've written above do a great job of describing Sleepy Hollow,
the new Tim Burton film that is turning out to be a Thanksgiving hit. While
none of us should really expect that much from any holiday production (Tim
Burton and Johnny Depp bring the expectancy of quality up a notch), the film
doesn't even deliver the thrills and shrieks that parade madly around in the
film's trailer. Elements add up to become something that isn't very fun to
watch at all, not to mention extremely gory.
Ichabod Crane (Depp, who's great and gives the film a much needed dose of
humor) is a constable from New York. He believes in using proper and up to date
(the setting is the late 1790s after all) scientific methods to find criminals
and thieves. He detests the usual torture methods that are used by the court.
He is sent to the north called Sleepy Hollow. Recently, several people have
been found dead in the forest surrounding the town. All of the victims have had
their heads chopped off and the heads are nowhere to be found. The townspeople
believe that the murderer the Headless Horseman, who was actually a man who
died almost exactly five years ago. This is preposterous to Ichabod who views
the legend simply as an old myth until he sees the headless villain on his
mighty black steed one night in the woods.
Searching for clues on how to put him back into his grave for good, he consults
different members of the town including the wealthy Van Tassel family. He also
takes a liking to their daughter Katrina, played by Christina Ricci. He also
talks with various priests and noblemen. The clues begin to add up as Ichabod
discovers why the horseman is alive, and how to make him stop.
Sleepy Hollow is very beautiful. The town itself is beautifully constructed and
the light fog that always seems to be hovering over the ground gives the film a
unique sense of atmosphere. Tim Burton does a great job with the camera and
pays attention to the smallest detail. But besides the wondrous visual beauty
(and a great performance from Depp) I couldn't find much else to like in this
film. All of the scary scenes that are shown in the previews are all that is
scary in the entire movie. The marketing (once again) does a horrible thing by
giving away key points and dramatic special effect moments in the film. The
supporting cast isn't so hot, Christina Ricci is god awful and most other
characters are there for the horseman to kill. The film is also senselessly
violent (much, much more than it needs to be) and contains one too many
beheadings for its own good. The most ideal way to view Sleepy Hollow would be
to watch the preview over and over again. It shows all of the beautiful moments
in the film, as well as the only scary ones, and doesnât show any of the
blood and guts the real movie has. Falling somewhere between OK and good,
Sleepy Hollow gets my ** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: There are at least 10 extremely graphic decapitations, as well
as some other violence and plenty of blood. There is also a brief sex scene
that doesnât show much. Good Age: 16 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html

Author
Lars Lindahl
Directed by Tim Burton
Written by Kevin Yagher
Starring Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Michael Gambon, Miranda Richardson,
Michael Gough, Jeffrey Jones, Lisa Marie, Christopher Lee
Tim Burton has quite a talent of finding a multitude of creepy, dreadful
looking actors to fill roles in his creepy, dreadful films. These actors are so
perfect for roles in Burton's normal dark, bleak style of telling a story that
they rightfully so appear in a number of his movies. Their mannerisms could
scare a child or even an adult, for that matter. Without these actors, Burton
could only complete half of what he is trying to accomplish. Jeffrey Jones, one
of America's greatest character actors, is a member of this unique entourage of
frightening thespians. He holds such odd characteristics with his facial
movements, especially the wicked glare that always seems to be on his face. His
disturbed look is perfect for Burton's disturbed movies and that is why Jones
has appeared in "Beetlejuice", "Ed Wood", and now "Sleepy Hollow" Burton
especially uses Jones' distinct glare in "Sleepy Hollow". Every time powerful
figures of the upstate New York town discuss the gruesome murders by the
headless horseman, there is a certain uneasiness among these men. Jones' glare
shows they are up to no good. Along with Jones, the posse of frighteners
includes Christopher Walken, Michael Gough, Martin Landau, Lisa Marie, and
Johnny Depp.
Depp, in his third Tim Burton film ("Ed Wood" and "Edward Scissorhands" were
the first two), always plays a guy who is over the edge but seems normal to the
audience when compared to the other characters in the film. "Sleepy Hollow" is
no exception to this description Depp does a wonderful job playing Icabod
Crane, a constable from New York City sent to investigate mysterious murders in
Sleepy Hollow in which the murdered victims are found decapitated, their heads
nowhere to be found. The townspeople think it is a headless horseman who has
come back to haunt the area where he was killed. Crane refuses to believe this
and tries to solve the case with logic and common sense. Depp portrays the main
character with excellent acting. We know Crane is haunted by something in the
past the first time we seem him, thanks to the cautious, frightened look
eternally plastered on his face. We know Crane is different from everyone else
because of past experiences. Due to this difference, Crane never seems to fit
in with the people or the environment. A great distinction between the heroic
Crane and the heroic action star is that Crane is actually afraid of things
worthy of fear. Depp shows this fear by fainting after every action sequence,
constantly babbling when he wakes, and even jumping on a chair to avoid a
harmless tarantula. However, Burton could have gone farther with the phobia
stricken protagonist. A number of times Crane tells his helpers to "wait here"
or "I'll go ahead" while he enters the mysterious region. If Crane is so
frightened of a tarantula, why does he suddenly gain enough courage to face the
headless horseman? That miniscule portion of the film was not too believable. 
The action scenes "Sleepy Hollow" were first rate. The powerful Headless
Horseman was like an ancient Michael Myers. No matter how hard you hit him or
shot him or burned him, he'd get up and keep chasing you. This invincibility
made scenes unpredictable and entertaining. The film was suspenseful, scary,
and gory. Innumerable characters lost their heads in bloody, loud, and
disturbing ways. Burton did an outstanding job of showing characters with heads
one moment and no heads the next. The way he completed some of these murder
scenes were ingenious works of art. The sounds alone of the sword cutting off
the head could run a chill down the spine. Danny Elfman's score also helped
create an eerie background to the already eerie environment. 
The only major problem with "Sleepy Hollow" was the romantic side story between
Crane and Katrina Van Tassel (Christina Ricci), the daughter of a wealthy
resident of Sleepy Hollow.  The relationship was rushed and unbelievable. The
speed of the two characters falling in love made absolutely no sense. There was
no surprise of what would happen later on concerning these two in the end of
the film. The performances by the two actors was still fine work. Ricci, who
was perfect in "The Addams Family" films, seemed destined to appear in a Burton
film. It would not be surprising if she appeared in another in the future. 
"Sleepy Hollow" is another fine Burton film. Although it contained a few
imperfections, like most of Burton's repertoire, the positives greatly
outweighed the negatives. The visuals I the film were breathtaking and vividly
accurate. The woods were more frightening in this picture than in "The Blair
Witch Project". Are recent films trying to tell viewers to stay out of the
woods and stay in the movie theaters?
