Title
Review for While the City Sleeps (1956)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Thanks to his classical masterpiece M, made in 1931, German
director Fritz Lang was often referenced as one of the first
filmmakers to use now very popular motive of serial killers.
Quarter of century later, during his final years in
Hollywood, Lang also used that motive, but in somewhat
unusual genre context. WHILE THE CITY SLEEPS, his 1956 film,
deals uses phenomenon of psychopathic serial killer as
nothing more than background for straightforward journalism
drama.
Film begins one night in New York, when young woman falls
prey to young serial killer (played by John Drew Barrymore).
This story is picked by New York Sentinel newspaper, news
service, photo service and television station - all
belonging to old Amos Kyne (played by Robert Warwick). The
same night Kyne dies and leaves this media empire to his
spoiled and incompetent son Walter (played by Vincent
Price). Walter Kyne is aware of his unpopularity among
father's trusted associates and wants to establish his
authority by creating feud among top executives. He offers
top corporate position to the executive whose organisation
scoops the news about identity of serial killer first. That
creates inter-departmental rivalry with back-stabbing and
all kinds of manipulation. Seasoned reporter Edward Mobley
(played by Dana Andrews) is disgusted with all that, but he
also takes part in efforts to catch the killer. His idea is
to publicly offend the killer and thus provoke his violent
reaction, this time against his own fiancée Nancy (played by
Sally Forrest), which should be used as bait.
WHILE THE CITY SLEEPS had its share of more than capable
actors, quite respected and talented director at its helm
and quite intriguing set of subjects - corporate intrigues,
role of the media in modern society, sexual frustrations,
homicidal urges and other forms of human depravity. Yet the
end result is quite disappointing; Lang obviously lacks
coherent vision and movie meanders from one subplot to
another, never dealing with each of them sufficiently. The
general impression of the film relies heavily on good
casting, especially Dana Andrews as cynical, often boozing
but clever and honest professional. His performance is
especially touching in view of actor's well-publicised real
life problems with alcohol. Other actors shine in supporting
roles - Ida Lupino is quite convincing as female sexual
predator, as well as Thomas Mitchell who plays old, yet
still ambitious news editor. Vincent Price, on the other
hand, plays corporate villain, quite uncharacteristic for
his usual villainous roles, although that character doesn't
appear enough to leave lasting. WHILE THE CITY SLEEPS gives
an interesting insight into ways 1950s Hollywood dealt with
some popular subjects of today, but the general value of
this film is far bellow standards expected from someone like
Fritz Lang.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
