Title
Review for Platoon (1986)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Schwartz
PLATOON (director/writer: Oliver Stone; cinematographer: Robert
Richardson. editor: Claire Simpson; cast: Tom Berenger (Sgt. Barnes),
Willem Dafoe (Sgt. Elias), Charlie Sheen (Chris Taylor), Forest Whitaker
(Big Harold), Francesco Quinn (Rhah), John C. McGinley (Sgt. O'Neill),
Richard Edson (Sal), Kevin Dillon (Bunny), Keith David (King), Mark
Moses (Lieutenant Wolfe), Reggie Johnson (Junior), Bob Orwig (Gardner),
Dale Dye (Capt. Harris), 1986)
Oliver Stone's impression of the Vietnam War, taken from when he
observed it first-hand,  as a grunt. He uses an innocent, middle-class
college drop-out, who volunteers to join an infantry unit for patriotic
reasons, Chris Taylor (Charlie Sheen), to be his alter-ego. He is the
narrator and consumate letter writer to his grandmother, which allows us
to hear his personal reactions to what is happening; it is through his
eyes that we see the savagery of the war. It is a film that should
satisfy the protesters of the war for its depiction of it as being
without merit, but it also should satisfy those who are entertained by
the blood and gore action scenes. It portends to be a film about the
real war in Vietnam and not someone's metaphor for the war.
The first thing Taylor sees as his transport plane lands in Vietnam are
all the body bags and the disheartened looks of the soldiers leaving to
go back home. It is 1967. His unit will be somewhere near the Cambodian
border, in the jungle, where just existing in the stifling humidity,
with the snakes and bugs, is difficult enough. Taylor is immediately
sorry he joined and doesn't think he will make it through his year's
tour of duty.
On patrol, the stillness of this alien place is disturbing even if it is
visually beautiful. The men make their way through the dense bush
country on forced marches in the oppressive heat and then spend
sleepless nights, trying to avoid an ambush. No one cares if the new men
live or die. No one tells them what to do. If they survive, it will be
mostly because of luck. Sgt. Barnes (Tom Berenger) believes in the war.
He believes he represents reality and is a defender of the system. He
thinks, once the system breaks down, we all break down. He is hard-nosed
and combat-wise, the most experienced fighter in the company, the one
telling the commanding officer what to do. But while being a great
warrior, he has also lost his compassion for people. The company
commander, Lieutenant Wolfe (Mark Moses), is a college grad,
inexperienced in battle, trying to do the best he can, but not able to
connect with the grunts under him or earn the respect of his sergeants.
Sgt. Elias (Willem Dafoe) is the other experienced leader, called a
crusader by Barnes. He's a pothead who believed in the war in 1965 but
doesn't now. He realizes that the purpose of the war is not clear, that
it is inevitable the Americans will lose. He cares about the men and has
a loyal following, as the men get split in following either sergeant's
leadership. Taylor will side with Elias and joins him in his escape from
reality. Vietnam becomes like a microcosm of the way Americans back home
view the war.
Taylor's baptism under fire occurs at night when the unit sets a trap
for the Viet Cong. In an instant, trip-wired mines detonate, and all
hell breaks loose. Taylor survives with a minor scratch. He is falsely
blamed for sleeping through his watch on guard duty. It was actually the
disgruntled Junior (Johnson) who went back to sleep when Taylor woke him
for duty. Taylor's only blunder was that he froze when he saw the Viet
Cong and couldn't fire at them. As a result a few men are casualties,
including some new recruits.
Taylor joins Elias' drug smoking, rock'n'roll clique and smokes weed for
the first-time. When they question him, they are bewildered as to why he
is there, as he seems to be the only rich kid among them, the others are
high school drop-outs, the unemployed, and the poor. They are the bottom
of the barrel in American society, as the educated found ways of
avoiding the unpopular war. There also is a split along racial lines, as
the blacks and whites mainly stay in their own groups. For Taylor, his
initiation ritual with the potheads culminates, as Elias, in a drugged
state, tells the very high Taylor, now that you smoked, "The worm has
turned for you."
On the next mission, they come across Viet Cong tunnels, which are
booby-trapped. A few of the soldiers are killed and one of them has been
tied to a tree with his throat cut. The company comes to a nearby
village, angered and ready for revenge. These scenes are masterfully
done by Stone, as it is a reminder of My Lai, although it doesn't turn
into such a disastrous outcome. It is shown from the soldier's
perspective, how war dehumanizes one and survival becomes a basic
instinct. In the village, the men are suspicious that there are Viet
Cong forces being sheltered by them. Some act brutally. Some do what is
ethical. Some just want to make sure they don't overlook the danger they
are in and act cautiously. But since the men are in a dangerous
situation, it is hard to determine what is really the correct thing to
do, except there is no excuse for the excessive cruelty shown by some of
the men. There is the horrible incident where a redneck soldier, Bunny
(Dillon), who in an odd way enjoys being in Viet Nam. He feels free here
because no one tells him what to do; he smashes the head open of a
Vietnamese with his rifle butt, of whom he assumes, is an enemy 'gook.'
Barnes's men having arrived first use the excuse of finding some weapons
to begin intimidating the villagers, killing livestock; and, Barnes,
goes so far as killing an old woman. Elias' arrival on the scene
prevents a My Lai, as he tells Barnes of his intention to bring him up
for a court-martial. The tense situation is temporarily handled by Capt.
Harris (Dale Dye), who promises a full investigation back at the base
camp but tells everyone that they're still on the front-line and have to
work together.
This is a visceral film, even if the enemy is not distinguishable in
battle and appear like shadowy figures. They are faceless objects of the
war. The object for the ordinary infantry soldier is just counting the
days when he goes home. No one talks about why they are fighting. But it
is just for survival; survival is what mainly interests the men, and
they will choose which is the way they want to fight for survival. The
ones who follow Barnes think he is invincible, he can't die, that by
following him they will come out of the war alive. For some of the
others, they will do anything they can to make it out of here...even
smoke weed until everything seems unreal. All that counts for them is
get home alive. But one thing is certain, every infantryman lost his
innocence in the war.
Platoon is a moving film about the horrors of war. It is a visual film
that explores the reality of the actual war, told from the soldier's
point of view. It is one of the better war films made because it seems
real. It has an integrity to it because it is made by someone who knows
what the soldier faced and is able to communicate this. Taylor
summarizes the director's view by saying in a voiceover: "Looking back,
we did not fight the enemy, we fought ourselves-and the enemy was within
us." The director's one fault, was that he couldn't resist feeding the
audience with his opinion, not able to rely completely on the visual
impact of his story to do the job.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Oliver Stone's semi-autobiographical account of his own experiences in the
Vietnam War is presented in 1986's 'Platoon'.  When I first saw this film
with a packed audience I was not only entertained, not only informed but I
was astonished at how many people disliked this film all for the wrong
reasons.  Certainly people are entitled to their opinion but more important
than that, 'Platoon' forced movie audiences, politicians, military brass and
society in general to look at an ugly aspect of world history.  A lot of
people don't want to face the many aspects of combat tradgedies associated
with war but Oliver Stone did his part by making a film to which a testament
of thoughtful insight was made to try and prevent history from repeating
itself.  
To depict 'Platoon' as simple war film would be superficial.  It's probably
the best film in at least the last 30 years or more that correctly formulated
the three aspects of quality story telling: man vs. man, man vs. nature, man
vs. himself.  Filmed on an initial 6 million dollar budget and with the
Philippines substituting for Vietnam in location shooting, Stone had a tight
schedule to work with and the results were nothing short of brilliant.  
Charlie Sheen is the film's protagonist, a young man who narrates his
experiences in Vietnam in letters he sends home to his grandmother and we
gain an insight into the men within his platoon.  Tom Berenger plays a no
nonsense, unorthodox and somewhat evil sergeant undoubtedly made a victim of
it all by the insanity of war who tries to shape and mold the men in his
company into fighting without rules, without morals and without comapssion
for anyone, even women and children in a suspicious village they stumble upon
where weapons for the enemy are being stored.  Willem Dafoe plays another
sergeant within the same platoon whose personality is just the opposite of
Berenger's and he butts heads with Berenger's war crime activities and the
two men become at odds with each other with tragic results.
'Platoon' is a smart film that is told with little or no plot but rather a
style uniquely inventive of caring about the characters involved and paying
tribute to the men who fought and died in the Vietnam War and Stone dedicates
the film to them in the movie's closing credits.  Filled with explosive
scenes of combat including a vicious climax which may force some to cover
their eyes and with a cast of ordinary characters of all different
personalities and habits, Oliver Stone's 'Platoon' is a lacerating indictment
of a confict fought and which makes people debate the real purpose of the
Vietnam War.  One of the greatest films in the history of cinema and a war
film like no other.       

Author
David Landers
RATING: **** out of **** - 9.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Charlie Sheen (Chris), Tom Berenger (Sgt. Barnes), Willem Dafoe
(Sgt. Elias), Keith David (King), Kevin Dillon (Bunny), Francesco Quinn
(Rhah), Forest Whitaker (Big Harold), Reggie Johnson (Junior), John C.
McGinley (Sgt. O'Neill)
DIRECTOR: Oliver Stone
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for violence, language, and disturbing war scenes
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1986
ACADEMY AWARDS: Best Picture, Best Director (Stone), Best Film Editing
(Claire Simpson)
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Supporting Actor (Berenger), Best
Supporting Actor (Dafoe), Best Original Screenplay (Stone), Best
Cinematography (Robert Richardson)
PLATOON, the first film in Oliver Stone's Vietnam War trilogy, is an
extremely gripping and powerful first-hand account of the life of a young
soldier in Vietnam.  Continuing in the tradition of Award winning Vietnam
War films, PLATOON stops at nothing in delivering very emotional,
suspenseful, and horrifying images throughout the entire film.
The story is told from the eyes of Chris, an educated, wealthy college
drop-out played by Charlie Sheen in a role similar to his father's role in
APOCALYPSE NOW nearly a decade earlier.  Chris feels that it is his duty
to serve his country in the tradition of his father and grandfather, who
served in previous wars.  He also feels that it shouldn't be just the
poor, unwanted young men who fight for their country, and that it should
be young men like him out on the front lines.  We are able to visualize
and understand Chris' suffering even more through his narrated letters to
his grandmother.
A very interesting piece of information is that PLATOON is based partly on
Oliver Stone's experiences in Southeast Asia.  Stone claims that this
movie was made based on his first-hand account of what the war was really
like, and that he chose to make this movie unlike the others of that past.
PLATOON is not a surreal, obscure anti-war film that leaves you wondering
what the war was really like.  PLATOON is, shockingly, probably a very
true-to-life account of the Vietnam War.
When the film begins, Chris isn't even a true "grunt", the title given to
an infantryman who has earned his place among his fellow soldiers as a
soldier who can take it.  Chris is in his own personal Hell.  He's lost in
a world unlike no other he has ever seen before.  The constant mental and
physical abuse he sustains is constantly punishing him more than he can
imagine.  He lives in continual fear of what lies ahead.  Since he is the
"new guy", his life is basically worthless, because he hasn't really
suffered like the others have.  Therefore, he isn't told a thing by his
peers, who at the time would just assume care less if he were to be killed
the next day.
Eventually, Chris becomes more and more like the others.  His status is
lifted considerably when he is wounded in combat during an ambush that was
blamed on him.  When he returns to combat, he has obviously adjusted more
to the life of a soldier.  However, when a civil war breaks out between
his two superior sergeants, Barnes (Berenger) and Elias (Dafoe), Chris is
again struggling to realize what is right and what is wrong in this
twisted world.  Chris tends to maintain his sanity, for the most part,
unlike many of his fellow infantrymen, as he strives to always do what
seems morally right.  In a way, Chris is fighting two battles: one against
the visible enemy, and one against himself, in which he fights not to be
entirely consumed by the war.
PLATOON is absolutely one of the greatest Vietnam War films, and possibly the
greatest when it comes to the depiction of a soldier's everyday life.  The
film is, indeed, very graphic and disturbing, but that is the way it was
intended to be made.  The shocking images that the young soldier witnesses
throughout the film will make you glad that you did not have to endure
such awful situations.  The awards given to this film were definitely well
earned and should demonstrate the power of this film in a very suitable
fashion.


Author
Victoria Baschzok
Platoon: A film which confirmed its director, Oliver Stone, as the
legitimate heir to Leni Riefenstahl. As in Triumph Of The Will, false
mythology is created making nonsense of reality without seeming to use
manipulation or propaganda.
   Platoon presented itself as the first attempt to reconcile Americans
with what had happened in Vietnam by telling the everyday truth of how
soldiers experienced the war. It was indeed constructed to heal the still
suppurating wound inflicted on the greatest nation in the world by its
defeat in open combat at the hands of a small, poor, third world country.
   Stonešs method was built upon deceptively simple dramatic conflict. His
platoon was made up of a young, naive and well-intentioned officer who
commanded young, well-intentioned soldiers, including the naive hero,
Chris. The source of power in the group was a blondish, pale, beautiful,
gentle yet strong and wise sergeant. These people all believed in the
American dream and saw themselfves as victims of injustice. The source of
power in the company was also a sergeant-a senior staff sergeant. However,
he was dark-skinned, cynical, scarred and cunning. The first represented
the American ideal; the second was the devil. To be more exact, the second
represented a constant in American history-the traitor, Benedict Arnold in
modern dress, the man who believes that men of principle are weak, the
force of evil within each person and therefore within the nation. His
cynicism and crude interpretation of reality enable him to trick others
into temporarily betraying the American dream.
   The film rises through two successive apocalypses. The first ends with
the Christ sergeant being abandoned to a swarm of Viet Cong while the
company rises above him in helicopters in the care of the devil sergeant.
It is a false resurrection. A betrayal. We last see the good man who died
for them on his knees with his arms out as if on a cross. 
   In its final culmination of apocalyptic violence-a confused night of
smoke, explosion, light and sound-the platoon is defeated without the Viet
Cong becoming visible. They remain vague shadows in the trees. They can
not appear. In Stonešs mythology American is neither fighting Vietnam nor
defeated by it. America is struggling to defeat the enemy within itself.
The great and good people are attempting to cast out the devil. The early
morning reveal a wasteland of bodies , some half-alive. One is the devil
sergeant, another the naive hero. He executes the devil, thus freeing
America
   The film ends with his rising from the disaster, again in a helicopter.
In voice-over, Chris reflects as he is evacuated:
This is the true resurrection.
   Stone has vaporized the defeat by converting it into the caricature of
a morality play about a civil war. The would of defeat was converted into
a cathartic experience in which the American dream persisted.
Art heightens memory. As Riefenstahl demonstrated, propaganda can erase it
, as well as any sense of ethical reality. Stonešs visual manipulation
literally exorcised the publicšs memory of failure and of . In the
aftermath of Platoon, other films , such as The Hill, were made,
reflecting this new perception, and slowly the general manner in which the
whole war was treated softened and became positive.
