Title
Review for Miracle on 34th Street (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Richard Attenborough, Elizabeth Perkins, Dylan McDermott, 
           Mara Wilson, J. T. Walsh, James Remar, Robert Prosky, 
           Joss Ackland 
Director:  Les Mayfield 
Screenplay:  George Seaton and John Hughes based on the 1947 
             screenplay by George Seaton; story by Valentine Davies 
Cinematography:  Julio Macat 
Music:  Bruce Broughton 
Released by Twentieth Century Fox 
     Every year around the Christmas season, it seems impossible to
turn on the television without seeing either George Seaton's MIRACLE ON
34TH STREET or Frank Capra's IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE.  Like Handel's
"Messiah", evergreen trees, red suits, and the seemingly-endless
barrage of carols, these films have become indicative of the time of
year.
     Considering the wide availability of MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET, it's
curious why HOME ALONE's John Hughes targeted the movie for a remake.
This isn't some obscure title gathering dust on video store shelves.
Writer/producer Hughes and his director Les Mayfield have taken an
audacious--and some would argue ill-advised--step in remaking such a
highly-visible and often-rerun motion picture. (There was also a 1973
made-for-TV version that I know little about.)
     The result is similar to the case of Warren Beatty's recent LOVE
AFFAIR.  While certainly enjoyable, the film doesn't attain the level
of its predecessor, and there aren't enough changes to infuse this
movie with a sense of freshness or originality.  The touches added to
modernize the story are mostly minor (like Kriss Kringle appearing on
GOOD MORNING AMERICA) and often ineffective.
     For 1994's MIRACLE, Cole's department store has replaced Macy's on
New York's 34th Street, but little else has changed.  The movie opens
with a white-bearded Kriss Kringle (Richard Attenborough) berating an
inebriated Santa for providing a bad example for the millions of
children who will watch him in the annual Cole's Thanksgiving Day
parade.  When the drunk then makes a fool out of himself, parade
director Dorey Walker (Elizabeth Perkins) decides that she needs an
emergency replacement.  Given Kriss' "genuine" appearance, he is her
first choice.  His subsequent success on the parade route leads to the
Santa job at Cole's, where his uncanny ability to communicate with
children and adults leads to a huge leap in holiday sales for the
floundering department store.
     The message of MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET is one of hope for a society
which has become increasingly jaded and cynical: that, even in the
'90s, men and women can still look beyond their selfish interests to
see--and react to--the needs of others.  Kriss Kringle is not just a
red-suited man sitting in a department store, but a symbol of all that
is good about Christmas.  If people can no longer believe in Santa
Claus and all he represents, argues the film, the world has become a
sad and hopeless place.
     Dorey and her young daughter Susan (MRS. DOUBTFIRE's Mara Wilson)
are both non-believers.  For them, Santa Claus is a myth passed down
from parents to children.  This lack of faith leeches away the magic of
the season for them.  Kriss, with the help of Bryan Bedford (Dylan
McDermott), Dorey's neighbor and would-be-suitor, decides to teach them
to accept who he claims to be.
     Because of the unprecedented financial windfall his presence has
brought to Cole's, Kriss becomes the focal point of a power play by the
owner of a rival department store (played by the so-easy-to-dislike
Joss Ackland).  The aim of Shopper's Express is to discredit Kriss by
having him declared insane.  This leads to a trial where Bedford, as
Kriss' attorney, must try to prove that his client is the real Santa
Claus.
     The most significant change made to the 1994 script is the manner
in which Bedford chooses to verify Kriss' identity (it has something to
do with a $1 bill).  Inferior to the method used in the 1947 version
(where the post office forwarded Santa's mail to Kriss), the remake's
resolution relies upon an argument founded on tenuous logic,
diminishing the effectiveness of the court proceedings
     Casting for 1994's MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET varies from ineffectual
to inspired.  Richard Attenborough's finely-tuned, low-key portrayal of
Kriss Kringle recalls Edmund Gwenn's Oscar-winning performance without
copying it.  Young Mara Wilson is not only winsome, but a far more apt
performer than her predecessor, Natalie Wood.  Unfortunately, Elizabeth
Perkins and Dylan McDermott, who function more as ciphers than
legitimate personalities, pale in comparison to the 1947 edition's
Maureen O'Hara and John Payne.
     MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET remains a solid family feature (for those
who don't mind its seasonal--albeit essentially non-religious--theme),
with no vulgarity, nudity, or violence.  Even in this newest
incarnation, the film maintains its appeal, especially for those
willing to suspend both disbelief and cynicism.  MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET
is unrepentantly nostalgic, sentimental, and manipulative, yet for
those very reasons (which typically sink any "serious" production),
it's difficult to dislike.  The magic of the original, although
possibly diluted, has not been dispersed.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Brian Koller
"Miracle on 34th Street" is, of course, a remake of
the 1947 classic.  It is a risky business filming a
new version of a famous movie.  Can you imagine a
remake of "The Wizard of Oz" or "Citizen Kane" that could
rival the original?  Remakes such as "King Kong" (1976)
or "Red River" (1988) were financial disasters or
obscurities.  Comparison to the original can only
show the weaknesses of the later edition.
The basic plot is the same.  A famous New York Department
store (not to be confused with Macy's) hires an
elderly man to play Santa.  He is so good at the role
that he becomes famous.  Evil heads of rival department 
stores plot against Santa, placing him on trial.
Meanwhile, a charming young girl is unsure whether
Santa is real or a fraud.
The story has been updated for the nineties.  A love 
interest subplot has been added,  and Santa is on trial
not only for his integrity as Santa, but is in danger
of being placed in a sanitarium.
The biggest problem that this remake has is its very
wholesomeness.  This guarantees that the mother, father
figure, daughter and Santa himself will never stray
far from their idealized family portraits, and a happy
and predictable ending is in store.
Elizabeth Perkins plays the mother, and her star turn
has her choosing whether or not to accept suitor Dylan McDermott.
Although he is perfect in every way, and is conveniently
a free agent lawyer so that he can defend Santa in court,
it takes the magic of Santa to spur the romance along.
Why Santa would spend so much attention on the well-cared
for child when many others are in greater need is an issue 
not addressed.
"Miracle on 34th Street" is a competent but overly sweet
family picture that the little tykes will likely find
tedious.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET revolves around one simple question: Do you
believe in Santa Claus?   It is indeed a remake, and a fairly faithful
one, of the 1947 classic movie with Natalie Wood as the little girl who
did not believe in Santa Claus (played then by Edmund Gwenn).
     In today's version we have the great director and sometimes actor
Richard Attenborough playing Santa.  The 6 year old girl here is acted
by an absolutely precious actress named Mara Wilson.  Wilson and
Attenborough are well cast for their parts and do an excellent job with
them.  As the movie progresses, you become pretty doggone sure that
this guy really is Kriss Kringle, and if he flew off in a sleigh, you
would find it quite natural.
     Elizabeth Perkins is the mother of the girl and Dylan McDermott is
her mom's suitor.  Their on-again/off-again romance is realistically
done although I found Perkin's character a sadly cold one.
     The basic plot of the movie is that some guy named Kriss Kringle
has been signed to be the Santa at a dying department store's flagship
store on 34th street.  It is Macy's, but they call it Cole's in the
movie.  The store will go under if they do not have a good Christmas,
and a hostile takeover is likely if they start failing financially.
Well, as you guessed, our Kriss will be the key to their potential
success.
     The movie has a long and slow first part that lasts two thirds of
the show.  It tells the story in a sweet and almost dreamy fashion.
Nothing wrong with this part per se except I just wish it were a bit
shorter, has less of the hostile takeover stuff, and wish they had
pumped up the energy level.
     The show comes into its own in the rousing concluding third,
including and, most especially, the court room scene.  The ending to
the trial, which is slightly different than the original, was well
done.  The end of the entire show was telegraphed an hour before, but,
that was okay since it was great.  Everybody in the theater clapped.
     The first two thirds of MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET caused by rating to
be only ** 1/2, but I do recommend it to the entire family.  I would
say that anyone over 4 should like it.  We took my 5 1/2 year old boy,
and he said he liked it.  He got fairly bored with the corporate
intrigue stuff since it went right over his head, and he got a little
scared when the mommy cried and also during the trial, but overall, he
gave it a thumbs up.  It runs 1:54 and is rated incorrectly PG.  This
is pure G stuff--no bad language, violence, or sex.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: December 2, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There are basically two reasons to remake a film.  One reason is
that movie theaters need something to thread into their projectors.
Here the urge is often to try to get the product made as quickly as
possible and to use as the blueprint a film that has already proven to
be an audience pleaser.  One can only hope that the filmmaker will
treat the original material with respect, particularly if the original
is a well-liked film.  The other reason for remaking a film is that
sometimes a filmmaker can discover a new slant on an old story and can
bring something fresh to the story.  And these reasons are in large
part in conflict since the first requires speed, the second slows down
the process.
     The new MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET feels like it was made for both
reasons.  The holiday season is coming and those projectors are hungry
to be fed.  What does the new version add?  Primarily what it adds is
color.  The original has become a great children's film that only
adults will watch.  Why?  Because it is real, real old, from the days
before people knew that movies need color, dude.  The choice seems to
be to colorize, to remake, or to just stop telling the story to
children.  Then I saw this film with absolutely the wrong audience, a
collection of film fans who obviously would have grown up with the
original and knew not to equate monochrome with bad filmmaking.  To
much of that audience this film was a purely redundant remake.
     I suppose I feel much the same way.  But I do admit it generally
did treat the material with a degree of respect.  So often films for
children have gunplay or people kicking other people or attempted
rapes, etc., ad nauseum.  But in this film, besides an attempted
corporate takeover by some shadowy bad guys, which admittedly I could
have done without, this is a likable and a faithful retelling.
     Kriss Kringle (played by Sir Richard Attenborough) is back on 34th
Street.  This time he is not in Macy's Department Store but in a
foundering store called Cole's.  (Macy's reportedly wanted no part ofa
remake that would claim they were in financial trouble.  Other stores
were anxious but none on 34th Street.)  Kriss is the best department
store Santa Claus that any store could have, with just one drawback.
Kriss actually thinks that he is Santa Claus.  And what is more he is
able to convince others of his insanity.  One of the people he would
like to convince is the store's hard-nosed special projects director,
Dorey Walker (Elizabeth Perkins), and her wide-eyed daughter Susan
(Mara Wilson).  But who does nor know the plot of MIRACLE ON 34TH
STREET, one of the perennial holiday classics.
     Kriss is played by Sir Richard Attenborough, formerly of JURASSIC
PARK.  He is still trying to give children something real, but this
time around it is something that won't bite them.  Where Edmund Gwen
was smiling and pleasant, Sir Richard genuinely radiates joy.  His
short beard is a bit of a problem, particularly since young Susan
claims he looks like all the pictures of Santa Claus, but otherwise he
is more satisfying in the role by objective standards.  Mara Wilson
plays young Susan, the wide-eyed premature realist.  Wilson is not the
beautiful child that Natalie Wood was, but does seem to show an
intelligence far beyond her seven years of age.  Elizabeth Perkins and
Dylan McDermott play Dorey Walker and her suitor Bryan Bedford.  Each
know they have to out-act their predecessor in the previous film and
probably do.
     I do not remember the original giving much explanation why the
mother has her attitudes on the danger of living in fantasy.  This
version gives a fairly thin explanation, but at least it is there.  In
some ways it strengthens the new version, but the explanation is alsoa
bit downbeat for a children's film.  The happy climax of the film
trades the original's piles of mail for crowds of people and a much
better legal argument.  Strictly speaking, the happy ending of the
court case is far less contrived in this version, not that it will be
as satisfying to youngsters.
     It is hard to know exactly how to rate a remake.  Do you pretend
you never saw the original?  If so, then this is a fairly good film.
But, if like most people, you have seen the original, there is not a
whole lot new to offer.  Overall, I suppose I will rate it from the
latter point of view and give this a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Richard Attenborough, Elizabeth Perkins, Dylan McDermott,
           Mara Wilson.
Screenplay:  John Hughes and George Seaton.
Director:  Les Mayfield.
     Let's leave aside for a moment the question of whether it was
really *necessary* to make an updated version of the 1947 classic
MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET.  It's the question that plagues every remake,
often unfairly.  While it may be rare to find a film done *better* the
second time around, that doesn't necessarily mean that the remake might
not be perfectly enjoyable on its own merits.  And I believe that this
is true in the case of this gentle fantasy.  While it is nothing
spectacular, it's genuinely touching, and feeds off a surprisingly
strong current of spirituality.
     MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET opens in New York on Thanksgiving day,
where the Cole's Department Store Thanksgiving Parade is about to kick
off the Christmas shopping season.  When the parade's Santa makes a
drunken spectacle of himself, parade organizer Dorey Walker (Elizabeth
Perkins) plucks a replacement right off the street.  He is Kriss
Kringle (Richard Attenborough), and he becomes a sensation as a
department store Santa filled with the holiday spirit.  He even begins
to make a believer out of Dorey's cynical-before-her-time daughter
Susan (Mara Wilson).  But Kriss Kringle's success means trouble for a
rival discount store, whose owner (Energizer Bunny nemesis Joss
Ackland) orchestrates a scandal which will force the people of New York
to decide whether or not they believe in Santa Claus.
     John (HOME ALONE) Huges was the producer and co-scripter of this
film, and it may work primarily because it operates against everything
you might most fear from a Hughes project.  With the exception of some
pratfall shenanigans at the parade early in the film, Huges and
director Les Mayfield avoid excess, keeping the story low-key and
character based.  The characters are not uniformly interesting, mind
you.  The love story between perkins and a too-good-to-be-true
attorney (Dylan McDermott) is not well-developed, largely because
Perkins doesn't do too much with her role to show why such a perfect
guy is interested in such a depressing woman.  The villains are also
pretty boring, and Jane Leeves (Daphne from TV's "Frasier") in
particular has nothing to do and even less to say as one of the rival
store's operatives.
     However, it is the casting of actor/director Richard Attenborough
as Kriss Kringle which helps the MIRACLE happen.  Sure, he's no Edmund
Gwenn, who won an Academy Award for his portrayal in the original, but
Attenborough is a warm and lively presence who is perfectly believable
as an embodiment of human kindness without being *too* saintly.  A
scene in which he "speaks" to a deaf girl in sign language really put a
lump in my throat, and there is a lot of genuine emotion in the film.
Also impressive is Mara Wilson, the youngest daughter from MRS.
DOUBTFIRE, who avoids overly-precocious traps while handling some
tricky dialogue for a young actress.  She too pulls off a touching
scene in which the young Susan, torn over whether or not to believe in
Santa Claus, asks her mother whether she could believe if she wanted
to, without disapproval.
     That conversation is part of a challenging theme in MIRACLE ON
34TH STREET, and it brings us back to the question we started with:
why remake this movie?  The answer can be found in the ways (and
occasionally none-too-subtle ones, it should be fairly noted) that
Huges and Mayfield use belief in Santa Claus as a metaphor for
contemporary views on religious faith.  The film asks whether the world
is a better place for the erosion of faith, not because of some effect
on "values," but because of an effect on the human spirit; it asks
whether it is really a good thing to raise a child without faith.  Many
viewers might not appreciate being confronted with these questions, but
so few films ever dare to deal with the subject of faith that MIRACLE
ON 34TH STREET should be commended for trying.  If it's not entirely
successful, it's partly because Robert Prosky, as the judge presiding
over the Kriss Kringle case, fumbles the speech which should emphasize
this theme by making it far too animated when it should be pitched
lower.  The film's denouement is also somewhat too long, and doesn't
maintain the spirit of the scenes with Attenborough.  But the important
thing is that MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET is a good family entertainment
that takes a chance on being about something.  And it made a believer
out of me.
