Title
Review for Lost and Delirious (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   What goes on at those exclusive, all-girls' boarding schools
when the teen students get under the blankets at night with no
adult supervision in the rooms?  If you've ever rented those tapes
to watch in hotels at  midnight, you're probably aware.  Sort of
makes you wonder how some of the rich parents who are socially
conservative are willing to send their kids away--I guess that's
how much they want their lovely adolescent girls around.  "Lost
and Delirious," a dramatic and vivid new picture by Lea Pool
("Emporte-moi"), does not try to subvert the notion propagated by
"adult" films that while non-coed sleepaway institutions does not
create homosexuality, they don't do a heck of a lot  to discourage
it.  But "Lost and Delirious" is as far removed from a porn fest as
Rudy Giuliani would like to be from Donna Hanover. The picture,
which was featured at the Sundance Festival, is concerned with
exploring the nature of adolescence, in particular with what
happens when one wiseass but highly intelligent and motivated
young woman becomes frustrated as her roommate and sexual
partner suddenly begins dating (and mating with) a young man
and suggests that her roommate and she become simply friends.
   "Lost and Delirious" is told from the point of view of a new
student, freshman Mary Bradford (Mischa Barton), who is
assigned to a room inhabited by two seniors, Pauline ("Pauly)
Oster (Piper Perabo) and Victoria "Tory" Moller (Jessica Pare). 
Though the three girls come from wealthy backgrounds, they're
vulnerable: young Mary because she lost her mother to cancer
some years back and has been hustled to the school apparently
on the whim of her stepmother; Tory, because she has a father
who is socially conservative, a position that will endanger Tory's
lesbian relationship; and the brilliant Pauly, whose birth mother
gave her up early on for adoption and remains unwilling to meet
with her.
   While the actions take place from Mary's point of view, this is
Pauly's movie and Piper Perabo as Pauline steals every scene
she's in.  At first "Lost and Delirious" looks like another one of
those Sundance movies that feature yuppies moaning about their
relationships, dead from the neck up and concerned exclusively
with their sexual performance.  But Pauline's ability to quote
Shakepseare at length, even to solve math problems when called
upon though her mind may be elsewhere, is absorbing.  Yet while
cursing teachers in front of classmates is usually the prerogative
of the dumb kids who cannot get attention by academic
performance, Pauline's overt hostility toward Faye Vaughn, the
headmistress of the school (noted Canadian stage performer
Jackie Burroughs) and her math instructor, Eleanor Bannet (Mimi
Kuzyk) is informed by her growing inability to hold onto the girl
she loves.  When Tory finally gets through to Pauly that while she
still loves her, she is making the plunge into a heterosexual
relationship, the highly strung, brilliant Pauline makes a series of
dramatic moves that propel the movie into the kind of
Shakespearean tragedy that parallels Faye Vaughn's classroom
in English literature.
   "Lost and Delirious," filmed in Eastern Quebec, indicates that
rich kids may well have problems, perhaps as serious as those
suffered by the disadvantaged, that lesbianism during teen years
is not necessarily just adolescent experimentation, and that
profound changes occur in the lives of people when their
hormones are raging and they are most vulnerable.  Piper
Perabo's performance is stellar.  Come to think of it, since I took
in the film "The Boys of St. Vincent," I don't think I've seen a bad
picture made by French Canadians.
Not Rated.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
