Title
Review for Arguing the World (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     ARGUING THE WORLD is a chronicle of political thought in the
United States from the late 1930s though the 1980s.  More precisely it
is a study of four 20th Century political philosophers--Daniel Bell,
Nathan Glazer, Irving Howe, and Irving Kristol--who began their careers
in political philosophy as friends at CCNY, the City College of New
York, in 1937.  They all came from similar backgrounds.  They lived in
New York City where the sidewalks were often decorated with political
street speakers, and even before college each was immersed in political
thought.  One tells how his sister would take him to see Clifford Odets
plays, another how in front of his home were two buildings, the
synagogue and the Young People's Socialist League.  Born into poverty,
all four turned to Marxism as the hope for the poor of the world.  This
was a time when the revolution in Russia was fresh and new.  Many
Americans, from a distance of thousands of miles, thought that
Communism was in the process of saving the Soviet Union.  Take four
young radical thinkers, already drunk with politics, and send them to
CCNY and what develops is just what one would expect.  CCNY was then
one of the radical campuses of the day.  It was boiling over with
excited political debate.  As writer/director Joseph Dorman seems to
imply, the teachers were mediocre, but the best education was to be had
in the cafeteria where there were constant agitated debates.  The room
had a series of alcoves and different groups chose specific alcoves as
their turf.  Alcove One was where the pro-Trotsky students congregated.
Alcove Two was where the pro-Stalin students gathered.  (One wonders
what became of them.)  Another alcove would be the ROTC candidates.
These four Jewish intellectuals were Alcove One regulars.
     ARGUING THE WORLD traces the four through the war years with two
going into the military.  With the conquest of Nazism it seemed that
the world was ready for the Socialist ideal.  However, their view of
Stalin and of Communism changed with the Moscow trials and the purges
and executions of military leaders.  They started founding and/or
writing for magazines like "The Partisan Review" and "Commentary."
Irving Kristol started having a significantly different view from the
others during the McCarthy anti-Communist Movement.  While he did not
think much of Joseph McCarthy as a person, he defended McCarthyism.
     What has been a minor irritation with the film to this point
becomes more obvious and at the same time more serious.  One would not
write a biography of Charles Darwin without a detailed explanation of
evolution.  Dorman does not seem prepared to actually present the
beliefs of his four subjects in any great detail.  While the four
substantially agreed, it would have been useful to be told the
substance of their beliefs, but it was not important to understanding
their history.  But at this point, when they start to diverge in
opinion it becomes frustrating just to be told that Kristol agreed with
McCarthy's goals and Howe did not. These are deep and complex men with
complex ways of thinking, and to reduce their thought to so superficial
a level is a disappointment for the viewer.  Dorman wants to tell us
about the four men but not bother to tell us really who they are.  We
want to know Kristol's reasoning that led to his agreement with
McCarthy.  We want to know the reasoning the others had for their
different viewpoints.
     There is a further dividing of the ways in the 60s protest
movements and particularly in the relationship with the Students for a
Democratic Society.  The SDS was the self-styled successor of the
previous generation's intellectual movement.  But the four saw the SDS
as naive and utopian.  Instead of endorsing the SDS, each found himself
disagreeing with the SDS and Tom Hayden, the leader of the SDS,
attributed this to stodginess and de facto conservatism.
     There was further divergence of opinion based on experience of the
late 60s student protest movements. Nathan Glazer by this point was a
professor at Berkeley where the students were able very much to disrupt
the academic environment with impunity.  Glazer was called upon to
negotiate and in the process lost most of his respect for the
protesters.  His views became more conservative as a result, though not
so far to the right as Kristol's.  Daniel Bell was at Columbia where
the protests were put down with more force by the police and came out
of the experience more left-wing than before.
     Dorman recreates the period with archival footage showing New York
and California at the time of the events, but what is on the screen
frequently is just a scene without much obvious relevance to what is
being said.  There are also interviews with various political figures
who interacted with the four political thinkers. The film is
entertaining and enlightening, but it leaves one wanting to be in on a
discussion among the men to find out what the real differences in their
opinions and reasoning styles were.  Without that there is something
dramatically missing from the film.  I rate ARGUING THE WORLD a 6 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Louis Proyect
Joseph Dorman's "Arguing the World" is a documentary study of the
careers of four celebrated Jewish intellectuals from immigrant working
class families who went to City College in the 1930s. While one of
them, Irving Howe, stayed more or less critical of American society,
the other three--Irving Kristol, Nathan Glazer and Daniel
Bell--evolved from establishment liberalism in the 1950s to
neoconservativism in the Reagan era. I use the word career advisedly
in describing their paths. Perhaps the most honest account of what it
meant to belong to this group is found in Norman Podhoretz's "Making
It," where he admits that what motivated each shift in his political
or cultural affiliation was how it would it advance his career.
Although the film has almost zero value in conventional cinematic
terms, consisting mostly of talking heads, it has a powerful
cumulative effect as a psychological study. The skillfully conducted
interviews encourage the three neoconservatives to speak unguardedly
about their foibles and their ambitions. None makes the slightest
effort to prettify themselves. Howe serves as a counterpoint to the
other three, but even he does not come away unscathed. Although the
documentary does not come out and state it in as many words, the
conclusion it leaves you with is how all-powerful and ineluctable is
the tendency for American capitalism to subvert the critical impulse.
City College was a hothouse of radical politics in the 1930s and the
epicenter was the cafeteria which contained a number of alcoves where
different political tendencies would congregate. The Trotskyists and
anti-Stalinists could be found in alcove one. One anecdote reveals the
peculiar nature of the anti-Stalinist left at CCNY. One of the
regulars, who was gifted with a "foghorn voice," would hawk his
newspaper within earshot of the CP's alcove. He'd cry out, "Read all
about Stalin's murderous deeds" until one of the CP students would get
provoked into an argument with the ideological opponent. This is a
very sterile form of leftism that is obviously more geared to the head
than the heart. Polemics for the sake of polemics has marred the
Trotskyist movement since its inception. What the film reveals is that
the training the four received in the polemical art gave them the
skills they need to advance in the academic and journalistic
professions.
The film spends considerable time explaining the importance of
Partisan Review to their careers. Launched as a journal of the
political and cultural avant-garde, it became a place where
publication signified a certain level of achievement. In the late 30s
it was the sole voice for anti-Stalinist intellectuals and stood
against a well-entrenched universe of Popular Front publications and
institutions that defended the CP line. When the CP was in good graces
with the New Deal, getting published in such publications could open
doors in the larger world of journalism and the academy. After the
cold war started, the Partisan Review became much more useful
career-wise as the Soviet Union was turned into public enemy number
one.
For the three neoconservatives, publishing in Partisan Review served
as a springboard into academic careers. By the late 1940s all had shed
their radical beliefs and had gone to work for prestigious
universities. They admit that the post-WWII boom had a lot to do with
their political evolution. They never had it so good. For the first
time in their lives they could afford an automobile. Furthermore, the
hatred for "Stalinism" that they had cultivated in their youth had
helped to sharpen their skills as defenders of American foreign
policy. If one had a facile command of Stalin's crimes, there always
was a writing or speaking engagement on tap in the 1950s.
McCarthyism opened up a fault-line between the three and American
liberalism. Sneering at the civil liberties concerns of the liberal
establishment, they gave critical support to McCarthy. Nathan Glazer
admits in the film that their position was not "honorable" but,
shrugging his shoulders, questions whether any other position was
possible given their political evolution.
Nathan Glazer was hired by U. Cal-Berkeley, while Daniel Bell went to
work for Columbia. Both became enemies of the student radicalization.
While Glazer was opposed to the ban on political tabling on campus in
1964, he was even more opposed to the student sit-ins that were meant
to overturn the ban. Bell was on a professor's committee to end the
occupation of the administration building at Columbia in 1968. He was
puzzled by the refusal of the students to enter into a debate about
the role of the university. Both he and Glazer could not understand
that the student radicals of the 1960s had little interest in the sort
of scholastic wrangling that had marked their own undergraduate
political career.
Irving Howe had broken with this group in 1954 around the time he
launched Dissent Magazine. His intention was to promote a "democratic
socialism" which would retain the anti-Stalinist beliefs of his youth
while developing a critique of American society. He comes across as
tolerant of Bell and Glazer, while barely concealing his contempt for
Kristol who became strongly identified with the Reagan revolution.
What Howe shared with the other three was an inability to understand
the student radicalism of the 1960s. When he met Tom Hayden, then a
leader of SDS, he tried to get him to take a position on matters such
as the Moscow trials. Hayden found Howe's preoccupations irrelevant to
his own, which revolved around ending the war in Vietnam and racial
oppression. Beyond their ideological differences, Hayden found Howe's
style patronizing and offensively avuncular.
The thirties generation simply could not understand the 1960s. It was
by and large a rejection of the rigid categories that had been
established in the Stalin-Trotsky debate. After Marxism became an
attractive option for these 60s radicals, there was an unfortunate
tendency to gravitate to Marxist groups that still retained a lot of
the ideological baggage that people like Irving Howe were carrying.
Now that we have evolved past the sectarianism of the recent past, it
is useful to consider the more long-term challenge to independent,
radical critiques of American society which is embodied in the career
of the three neoconservatives.
In every other country in the world where there is a tradition of
Marxist thought, it is easier to make an affiliation with Marxism
either as an intellectual or an activist. The United States provides a
very hostile environment. Not only has it remained more prosperous, it
has also elevated rugged individualism to the level of a religion. The
average working person dreams of starting his own business, while the
left-wing journalist or academician is preoccupied with his career. As
"Arguing the World" reveals, when Marxism gets in the way of a career
move, it is excess baggage easily dumped overboard.
When the next upsurge of the radical movement takes place, one can
expect that the preoccupations of the CCNY crowd will have finally
been put to rest. Facilitating that will be the accomplished fact that
the Soviet Union no longer exists. Scraping away the barnacles of dead
dogmas is always a difficult task, but our job is easier now that the
institutional support for them has disappeared. Of course, there is
one last sect-cult that has to be confronted and that is belief in the
American free enterprise system itself.
Marxist discussion is at: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   They say that the Communist Party of the United States is
made up today of 10,000 members, half of whom are FBI
agents.  Now, 10,000 out of a population of 270,000,000
wouldn't make much of a dent in this nation's political box
office, especially since of the legitimate members, most are
said to be little old ladies in tennis sneakers.
   Things were different during the Depression.  Not that
Communism appealed even then to that many workers,
employed or otherwise.  But the ideology did cut some ice
with urban intellectuals, which is not surprising considering
that radicals often come from that class--think Robespierre,
Danton, Franz Fanon, even Karl Marx himself.  
   In a most satisfying documentary produced by its writer-
director, Joseph Dorman captures the flavor of the 1930s
radicals by examining the lives of four of their major
spokespersons, all New Yorkers of professorial bent, all
members of the Jewish faith.  Three are alive today; one has
recently died.  All are articulate about their beliefs and appear
to have strong memories of those perfervid years which are
not at all gone forever, as the three living subjects are still
furiously writing today.  The dramatis personae are Irving
Kristol, Nathan Glazer, Daniel Bell and Irving Howe.  All came
up from poverty, all went to the then-free City College in New
York.  Nowadays they and their acolytes would be considered
members of the Old Left, their ideas having been picked up
and thoroughly changed by organizations of the 1960s and
70s like Students for a Democratic Society: the New Left. 
One of these men, Irving Kristol, did a 180 degree turnaround
and became a conservative.  Nathan Glazer, author of
groundbreaking texts in the field of sociology, became a
moderate, as did Daniel Bell.  Irving Howe did not change his
beliefs all that much, remaining until his recent passing a
leader of the American socialist movement.
   Dorman's film, which is aptly edited by Jonathan
Oppenheim, spends a good deal of time in the present,
dominated by the recent views of the four who sit in their easy
chairs discussing their lives.  The interviews, which are
topically organized as camera person Peter Browscombe
switches his lens from one spokesman to another as each
subject is considered, are laced with flashbacks to black-and-
white snapshots and motion picture clips of demonstrations
from the thirties.  Occasionally we witness scenes from the
fifties, as the treacherous Senator Joseph McCarthy, looking
every bit the malicious and power-seeking politician, grills
those accused of membership in the American Communist
Party--many of whom invoke the Fifth Amendment as a
defense against self-incrimination.
   The strongest point made by the film is that most of these
leftist protesters quit the party and became anti-Communist
when they heard the remarkable news that their idol, Soviet
leader Josef Stalin, did not turn out to be a Slavic Mother
Teresa but was instead a paranoid, totalitarian despot who
put thousands of innocents on trial and somehow got them to
confess to preposterous charges of treason.  Stalin's signing
a non-aggression pact with Communism's arch-enemy,
Adolph Hitler, did not help the cause.
   "Arguing the World" is hardly for everyone.  It is, after all, a
documentary, a genre which does not exactly attract the
"Jurassic Park" crowd.  Even within that category, it focuses
on men from academia, founders of highbrow periodicals like
The Partisan Review, not a favorite subject of masses of
Americans--many of whom probably hated school.
   For its target audience, though, "Arguing the World" is a
splendid look at four American geniuses, in large part
answering the query: Why are so many intellectuals attracted
to left-leaning politics?   Not Rated.  Running time: 106
minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998
