Title
Review for Raising Cain (1992)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
The Phantom
     Although the Phantom attempts to get his reviews written as soon
after he sees a film as possible (for otherwise real life and the
Phantom's day job have an unfortunate habit of intruding), some films
require a little thought before the Phantom can dash off a 1500-word
opinion with any hope of accuracy.  (By way of contrast, the Phantom's
review of BASIC INSTINCT practically wrote itself on the subway ride
home; even so, the Phantom has a feeling that he put more time and
effort into his review than Joe Eszterhas put into his ludicrous
screenplay.)
     This is the case with RAISING CAIN, the latest film by Brian De
Palma and one of the best thrillers of the year.  Only, as the credits
rolled and the Phantom left the theater, he felt that RAISING CAIN
really wasn't all that good -- that perhaps it had been over hyped, or
that perhaps De Palma was starting to play it safe now that he's
"mainstream."  Certainly it reminded the Phantom more than a little of
De Palma's DRESSED TO KILL, and put side by side with that classic,
RAISING CAIN doesn't really measure up.
     But then it occurred to the Phantom that he was about to review the
wrong film (no, he hadn't accidentlly walked into the horrifying,
special effects-bloated DEATH BECOMES HER playing in the theater next
door; although some tedious Hollywood literal-mindedness occasionally
seeped through the wall, and although the sound of 200 frustrated and
patronized adults shifting irritably in their seats was occasionally
audible, this only served to keep the Phantom in his own seat for the
duration of the film, even though he was at times tempted to duck his
head in and discover just exactly how many expensive special effects a
comedy needs to be really, really funny).  For most of RAISING CAIN, the
Phantom had unconsciously kept a number De Palma's early works in mind,
and he'd made the mistake of seeing RAISING CAIN only by way of
comparison to them.
     Yet this is exactly the wrong way to see the film, precisely
because De Palma hasn't made DRESSED TO KILL II.  Once the Phantom
realized this, he also realized how much of RAISING CAIN he'd really
missed -- while searching for the parallels between De Palma's latest
work and some of the films that made his reputation as one of our finest
directors (and perhaps the best horror filmmaker working today), the
Phantom wasn't really attending to the film De Palma had actually made.
     Instead of a rehashed, more-of-the-same Hitchcock homage (a la
DRESSED TO KILL, BLOW OUT, or BODY DOUBLE), De Palma has, with RAISING
CAIN, pretty much said "To hell with it -- let's get rid of the story
and the characters altogether, and see what we have left to work with."
The result is a patently preposterous plot peopled with a parade of
poorly drawn, two-dimensional characters -- and pretty much nothing
else.  (Please, no letters.  The Phantom meant to do that, and he's
truly sorry.)
     Nothing else, that is, except the complete freedom to indulge in
the most lyrical, fluid, gorgeous filmmaking of the year.  Nothing
anyone in RAISING CAIN does makes much sense; there are plot holes at
every twist and turn of an outlandishly twisty and turny plot;
characterization is established solely through cliche and lazy, easy
tricks of the screenplay; and each individual scene in the film could
easily have been lifted from one of De Palma's prior efforts.
     But to focus on this is to miss the point -- something not a few
other reviewers seem to have done.  De Palma didn't set out to make yet
another "Brian De Palma Film (pat. pending)" -- if that's what you're
looking for, the Phantom suggests that you instead rent one of his
previous efforts; with the single exception of the bewilderingly bad
BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, all are worth your time and your attention.
     As is the very different RAISING CAIN.  On the surface, CAIN is
about Dr.  Carter Nix who -- in the words of Janet Maslin -- has at
least three more personalities than he really needs.  While Carter is
the perfect husband and father, Cain -- one of his wicked alter egos --
occasionally makes an appearance and works enough evil to keep the plot
moving along.  As Carter/Cain, John Lithgow is perfectly cast and
remains completely in control of his role(s) and the near-constant
screen time he gets throughout the film.  He is literally at the center
of this very warped fantasy, and the Phantom strongly suspects that a
lesser actor might have taken the opportunity to put in a truly
over-the-top and egotistical performance that would ignore De Palma's
careful balancing act.  One of the things that so distinguishes CAIN
from a multitude of multiple personality films is that it is not at all
a Jekyll and Hyde film.  Instead, De Palma has crafted a much more
subtle vision of a man who is helplessly out of control -- of his
actions as well as his very being.
     In a perfectly turned parallel to this, Lolita Davidovich plays
Carter's wife Jenny, a woman who -- like many of the women in De Palma's
films -- seems more than a little unfocused.  She has the same
dream-like quality about her that Angie Dickinson had in DRESSED TO
KILL, and her quest for a better understanding of who she is and what
she really wants both drives the plot and underscores Carter's own
struggles to remain the thoughtful husband and devoted father.  In fact,
picture for a moment the opening scene in DRESSED TO KILL and you'll
have a pretty good idea how most of RAISING CAIN plays out: using Jenny
as the catalyst, De Palma brings us into a world where it's as difficult
for us to sort out what is real and what is dream as it is for Carter.
Are we seeing what's really happening?  What someone is dreaming or
remembering?  Or what someone is fantasizing about?  At no point in
RAISING CAIN does De Palma ever give us the sort of solid ground that
we've been so conditioned to expect from a Hollywood film -- and for
that the Phantom is profoundly grateful.  RAISING CAIN is a lot of
things, but literal-minded it is not, and that is all too rare in
American film these days -- even in horror films and thrillers, where
one might reasonably expect the line between reality and nightmare to
become blurred.
     But Hollywood (and therefore American audiences) are rarely
comfortable with anything other than obvious plot twists and predictable
conclusions; we like our fantasies nice and tidy by the time the credits
roll, and woe be it to the filmmaker who goes too far out on a limb.
Though De Palma has cautiously (and sometimes not so cautiously) tested
that limb before, this time he's way out on the end and ready to take
the whole tree down with him.  Thus, although we never have the
opportunity to identify with the story's protagonist (in fact, RAISING
CAIN doesn't really have one), De Palma allows us to do something even
better, something even more rare: for two hours he allows us to *become*
Carter.
     It's a scary ride, and one that frequently treats logic as if it
were a four-letter word.  On the surface we can't help but be aware of
De Palma's utter disregard for an original plot, or even an unoriginal
one that makes sense.  But down below, where De Palma is really working
this time, is also where all the fun is; the trick is to put aside your
prejudices and your preconditioned desires for a simple and
understandable plot, sit back, and enjoy the ride.  Once you stop
worrying about whether something in RAISING CAIN could "really" have
happened, you'll see a much different film emerge, one which is
comprised of a series of overlapping scenarios each of which is filmed
and acted to perfection; each of which makes sense on its own; but none
of which really fit together very well.  (It's as if De Palma has given
us an IQ test consisting of various shapes and a box with
similarly-shaped cutouts -- but the only way to pass the test is to use
a hammer and steer clear of the ever-seductive cookie-cutter correctness
that has made so many mainstream films so dreadfully dull.)
     Inside the box are scenes filmed so as to turn lesser directors
green with envy; with the possible exceptions of Stanley Kubrick, Ridley
Scott, Spike Lee and the Coen brothers, no one makes films that look
this good.  RAISING CAIN is exciting on a fundamental, visual level in a
way that very few other mainstream films are; regardless of what you
think about it, the Phantom is willing to bet that you'll remember
vividly many of the scenes in RAISING CAIN long after you've left the
theater.  
     Also inside the box is a sort of free-floating sense of dread that
-- like De Palma's startlingly photography -- is similarly absent from
most of the run-of-the-mill thrillers churned out by Hollywood hacks
each year.  It's a disquieting sense of menace that we've felt before in
bits of De Palma's other films (in the outdoor restaurant scene in THE
FURY; in the lead-up to the climactic scene in CARRIE; in Angie
Dickinson's silent tour of an art museum in DRESSED TO KILL), but here
it engulfs the film whole; without a well-drawn and logical plot to keep
it outside of our focus of attention, it creeps up on us just minutes
into the film and never really goes away.  We just don't know what's
going to happen next in RAISING CAIN, and De Palma ably capitalizes on
our sense of unease as he piles on scene after unlikely scene of terror
and suspense.  It's the end of CARRIE writ large[*]: there are so many
opportunities for a hand to spring out of a fresh grave that we find we
must either reject the film entirely or surrender ourselves to a two
hour-long nightmare.
     Having achieved his aim through guerrilla filmmaking, De Palma
leaves out the gore this time; he also leaves out the in-jokes (no
drills, phans) and the incessant references to Hitchcock.  Some
reviewers have remarked that CAIN is nothing but a reworking of PSYCHO,
but they're misguided.  De Palma did PSYCHO in DRESSED TO KILL, and
while he uses elements of it to establish the framework of RAISING CAIN,
he's obviously not out to do another Hitchcock homage.
     RAISING CAIN has more in common with the equally dreamlike JACOB'S
LADDER than it does with any of Hitchcock's films (with the possible
exception of THE BIRDS); the Phantom only hopes that CAIN does better at
the box office.  Despite a pedestrian ending that in ten minutes
attempts to wrap up the visual nightmare of the previous 120, audiences
found JACOB'S LADDER to be too joyously untethered from reality for
their made-in-Hollywood tastes.  It would be a real shame if RAISING
CAIN suffered a similar fate at the box office because too many people
dissuaded their friends from attending a film that "doesn't make sense"
or that doesn't have a neat and predictable ending.  Yet given the
immense popularity of films like BASIC INSTINCT -- films that are
unrelentingly stupid but that are literal-minded to the core -- the
Phantom fears that audiences will react to CAIN much the way they did to
De Palma's CASUALTIES OF WAR, itself a casualty of our need for films to
take us away from real life, yet allow us to keep our feet firmly
planted on the ground and our minds firmly reassured by pat endings and
ever-clear lines between reality and fantasy.
     People have said that Brian De Palma is not a "normal" director,
that his films are too dark and that he is too drawn to humanity's evil
side.  In the past he's attempted to dress up his dark visions with
Hitchcock's respectable clothing; now he's done away with the window
dressing and let us come along with him on a very naked and effective
exploration of evil, of the blurry line between reality and illusion,
and of his own singular vision of terror.  RAISING CAIN is without a
doubt one of De Palma's best films; if nothing else, it's the most
unrestrained and inventive film he's made in years.
     No thumbs up or down -- but if you're a horror phan, or if you're
in the mood for a thriller that thrills on so many different levels, you
owe it to yourself to see just what a master of the art can do in this
genre.  More than worth full price: it's worth seeing twice.
[*] N.B.: Please, no letters.  The Phantom promises not to use the
phrase "writ large" ever again; chalk it up to a Modern American Film
101 flashback and to the Phantom's desire to give his spell-checker a
workout.  Webster's New World notes that when used this way, "writ" is
"Rare or Archaic" -- either way, a perfect reflection of the Phantom's
own writing style.

Author
Shane Burridge
After feeling compromised during the production of his flop BONFIRE OF THE 
VANITIES, Brian De Palma went back to his roots and set to work on what was 
essentially a home movie.  This unabashed reworking of his earlier thrillers 
and horror films was basically a 'Brian De Palma' film for a 'Brian De 
Palma' audience.  It's silly but also one of his more enjoyable outings.  
John Lithgow, who has played nice guys and villains in other movies 
(including De Palma films), gets a shot at both this time around: he's 
Carter Nix, a self-effacing doctor, husband and father, and Cain, his evil 
twin.  Just to round it off, he's also his father, a Norwegian scientist 
disbarred for doing unethical research on split personality.  But wait - 
does Carter really have a brother or is he just letting a dissociated part 
of his personality get away with murder?
You can spot the twists coming most of the time in this movie, but De Palma 
throws in so many that it doesn't seem to matter.  It's not as if he's 
giving you too much time to figure it all out anyway - the story starts 
moving right from the opening minute and doesn't slow down until his 
obligatory exposition scene in which a doctor delivers a long explanation to 
tie up most of the loose ends.  RAISING CAIN doesn't waste time with any 
supporting characters - everyone who appears in this film is an integral 
part of it, and they are introduced one by one as the tricky storyline 
unfolds.  De Palma keeps the pace of the film from flagging by using not 
only the flow of new characters but also diverse stylistic trademarks such 
as dream sequences, flashbacks, red herrings, slow motion sequences, shock 
appearances of characters into the frame and one of his lengthy one-take 
tracking shots (but not his usual split-screen effects which would be quite 
appropriate in this story!).  And inevitably, there is a PSYCHO ripoff, 
although this time it isn't the shower scene (which he'd already done in 
three other films) but the sinking of a car containing a body.
Many of De Palma's regular viewers objected to RAISING CAIN, considering it 
lightweight, clichéd and unambitious.  I think it's a very approachable film 
that works both as a valentine to the director's fans and as a user-friendly 
introduction for audiences unfamiliar with his earlier work.  I'd hate to 
think that the reason for its dismissive reception was only because it was 
lacking in the nudity, sexism or bloodletting that often (but not always) 
marred De Palma's previous efforts.  But then, De Palma is a director who 
has managed to annoy as many people as he's won over, so why should this 
movie be any different?  RAISING CAIN's climax is a multiperspective 
sequence that stands out as the film's highlight even though it lasts less 
than a minute (when I first saw this in a theater the audience laughed and 
applauded).  Unfortunately, it just doesn't work as well on television.  
Although it might help if you collected a batch of like-minded friends to 
form your own 'Brian De Palma' audience.

Author
Andrew Hall
     After several years trying his hand at various types of films,
Brian De Palma is back in suspense business.
     RAISING CAIN, De Palma's first suspense film in several years,
opened at theaters last weekend.  The film stars John Lithgow as 
Carter, a crazed psychologist, and Lolita Davidovich (recently the
psychologist in BASIC INSTINCT) as his wife.  De Palma also wrote the
screenplay.  
     The film is full of suspense, but the first half of the film is
muddled.  Characters are introduced without much explanation.  Who are
they?  It takes a while to figure that out.
     Although we don't see the film through the eyes of any one
character, reality in RAISING CAIN is often distorted, perhaps to show
the state of the characters.  Much of the film is a swirling of dreams,
flashbacks, and character delusions.  Sometimes (perhaps De Palma's
intention), we have trouble figuring out what's real and what's not,
even after the fact.  
     The plot is unpredictable, and there are some great twists (of
course, sometimes it's hard to follow).  De Palma plays with the
audience quite a lot, too; several times, he plants information to make
you expect something and then does the opposite or does nothing.  For
example, I expected the "wrong man" theme but it fizzled out.
     De Palma once again pays homage to the Alfred Hitchcock; RAISING
CAIN strongly parallels Hitchcock's PSYCHO.  Though Carter isn't
"mother", his character is similarly disturbed (forgive the vagueness;
I'm trying not to spoil it for you).  One scene in the film is DIRECTLY
lifted from PSYCHO--Hitchcock fans will know it instantly.  I was
thrilled--I almost cheered when I saw it.
     And De Palma continues to use some of his own trademarks.  Look for
the *long* take in the middle of the film--through several floors of a
police station, through elevators, etc--that must have been technically
challenging (are you *sure* there wasn't a cut in there somewhere?)  I
liked the slow-motion climax less (similar to the "baby carriage scene"
in THE UNTOUCHABLES)--I think it could have been done better in full
motion.  
     Lithgow is pretty good as Carter--the character has many, many
dimensions (you'll see) and Lithgow plays them all well, sometimes
comically.  
     Although the movie started kind of slow and I found several plot
holes, the suspense sucked me in once it got moving.  Several scenes
sent chills up my spine.  
     There was also a refreshing refrain from excessive on-screen blood
and gore; most of the extreme violence takes place off-screen (unlike
recent slasher/thrillers like BASIC INSTINCT).  Thank you, Mr. De
Palma.  
     The ending is incredible--I loved it!  You may not, but I think it
was the best ending I've seen in a long time.
     If you like straightforward, typical suspense thrillers (UNLAWFUL
ENTRY), avoid RAISING CAIN.  If you like good suspense films that are
a little off-beat, go see RAISING CAIN.  It's not a masterpiece,
perhaps, but worth seeing.  

Author
Craig Good
     When Brian DePalma finished making RAISING CAIN he must have sat
bolt upright in a cold sweat and thought it was a nightmare.  He used
that conceit over and over and over and over again in the film until the
audience wished *they* could wake up and find that it was all a dream.
No such luck.
     It's as though DePalma took bits and pieces of every film he's ever
made, good and bad, and tossed them into some kind of giant celluloid
blender.  RAISING CAIN is so awash in red herrings, dream sequences, and
magic pop-up characters that it's no wonder it took three editors to cut
it.  At least Brian isn't peppering his films with just Hitchcock
references: now he's making references to his own films.  
     I guess John Lithgow just couldn't turn down the opportunity to
play himself, his evil twin, his own father, a woman and a small boy.
Would you?  His performance is all that saves the few good sequences in
the movie.  One of the two times that the audience at our screening sat
quietly at attention can be attributed to his acting.  And Lolita
Davidovich's face is what saves the best close-ups.
     But this is the movie that puts the "osterous" in "preposterous."
While on the one hand DePalma's script and direction try to keep the
audience "guessing" and "off-balance" about parts of the story, the rest
is incessantly explained by characters whose sole reason for existence
seems to be spouting exposition during marathon-length SteadiCam shots.
The result is an audience that is "confused" and "annoyed."  For a while
I tried to let it work as a comedy.  Lithgow provides some good laughs,
and so does DePalma, but I think only one of them did it on purpose.
     I'm an optimist.  So I say that some day, some how, Brian is going
to come to his senses.  He's going to realize that, by golly, he's made
more good movies than many directors ever do in their careers, just not
lately.  He's going to get rid of whatever evil twin it is that made
RAISING CAIN, and rediscover the mature, skilled film maker responsible
for THE UNTOUCHABLES.  Until then, I can only shout...

Author
Frank Maloney
     RAISING CAIN is a film directed and written by Brian De Palma.  It
stars John Lithgow, Lolita Davidovich, Steven Bauer, Frances Sternhagen.
Rated R for violence and subject matter.
     RAISING CAIN is a psychological thriller with a sense of humor.  It
is also Brian De Palma's chance to exorcise some his misogynistic
reputation, a reputation enforced by BODY DOUBLE, OBSESSION, and DRESSED
TO KILL.  With Lolita Davidovich's strong, scrappy performance, he
certainly succeeds in that.  But as for his other reputation as a
plagiarist of Hitchcock and others, CAIN is only going to advance the
negative arguments.  There are the almost mandatory allusions to, or
borrowings from, PSYCHO, but there is also Michael Powell's PEEPING TOM
about a killer raised by a sadistic father.  CAIN involves multiple
personalities and a wacko father and a plot to steal children.  In the
process, a little blood is spilt.
     I must say I am of two minds about CAIN.  It is a showy
tour-de-force for De Palma and for John Lithgow, who plays three
characters and five personalities.  Davidovich lets loose with another
of her high-energy performances, even though she is limited to one role.
Other actors include Steven Bauer, as the dark, handsome other man, in a
performance that is most interesting when he has the least amount of
clothes on, and Frances Sternhagen as the shrink-who-explains-it-all
with a goofy Mitteleuropa accent and an even goofier wig (the wig at
least is explained in the story) is tough and cute.
     Sternhagen is also the focus of a four-and-a-half minute tracking
shot through corridors, down stairs, in and out of elevators.  She keeps
making wrong turns and it is pretty funny, but typically ostentatious on
De Palma's part without a lot of rationale; I had to ask myself whether
there wasn't an elevator that would have taken them the whole way.  And
this is a symbol for my most negative feelings about CAIN.  De Palma is
a director of great ambition, but almost no taste, one who thinks tricky
shots, switching lenses, pseudo-Hitchcockian camera angles, and all the
other technical tricks he steals are their own reward, their own
justification.  The camera is just too busy and there is no point to it
with Lithgow and Davidovich knocking themselves out for us in front of
the camera, if they can remember where the damn thing is now.
     There are thrills, chills, laughter, and horror through RAISING
CAIN, but the end effect is purposeless, without any moral center, just
cynical manipulation of the audience and the characters, mere campiness
and vapid technique, and that's always sad and a cheat.
     I can recommend RAISING CAIN with reservations, but definitely
catch a cheap matinee.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Bizarre Gratia Bizarre.  Brian De Palma
     directs his own not-ready-for-primetime script.  He sew
     together big swaths from PEEPING TOM, PSYCHO, and others,
     then does not have the plot thread to hold them together in a
     decent story.  Very much a lesser effort of a decent
     filmmaker.  Rating: low 0 (-4 to +4).  (Warning: some
     spoilers occur in this review.)
     At one point Brian De Palma was a clever and innovative filmmaker.
PHANTOM OF THE PARADISE is a terrific tour de force.  Arguably it was De
Palma who put Stephen King on the map with his excellent adaptation of
CARRIE.  De Palma also proved he could do Hitchcock thrillers as well as
Hitchcock himself.  In fact, when De Palma's OBSESSION played concurrently
with Hitchcock's FAMILY PLOT, I claimed it was OBSESSION that Hitchcock
should have been prouder of.  I also think that in spite of some of the
obvious faults, SCARFACE is probably the most exciting gangster film of the
last ten years.  But De Palma borrowed too often from Hitchcock, and his
films like BODY DOUBLE became too predictable.  Also he was the wrong
director for BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES.  You have to be very careful giving an
escapist director a film of social comment.  Now he is back with a non-
Hitchcockian thriller that he wrote himself., but he is making a mess of
things.  (It may be overstating things to call it his script; De Palma
heavily plunders other films such as SYBIL and PEEPING TOM.)
     Carter Nix (played by John Lithgow) is a child psychologist who so
loves his baby daughter that he has taken two years off of his practice just
to study her.  In fact, he constantly has cameras on her so that she never
has a private moment.  (Yes, a directed steal from Michael Powell's PEEPING
TOM.)  But we find out very quickly that Carter is stealing babies for a
psychological experiment.  His wife Jenny (played by Lolita Davidovich)
knows nothing of this and is carrying on her own secret life (with the
accent on "carrying on").  The first mild absurdity happens in the first
sixty seconds of the film, when a friend (played by Teri Austin) offers
Carter and daughter a ride and just happens to have a spare baby seat in the
car.  This is only a tiny absurdity and De Palma could have explained it,
but chose not to in order to condition the viewer to accept larger and
larger absurdities without explanation.  The climax of the film is a
flabbergasting lulu requiring precise split-second timing to convince the
audience that no events as shown could ever occur on planet Earth.
     De Palma's script makes clear that he did not have enough story to fill
a film.  While the RAISING CAIN length of 97 minutes is not actually
outlandishly short, the film is only that long due to a lengthy sequence
that is nothing but a throwaway adding zilch to the story but a gratuitous
car accident.  At some point this film was probably written to be a tour de
force for John Lithgow playing multiple roles, but in fact he just gives
weak impressions of James Spader and Max Von Sydow (with exaggerated Swedish
accent while playing a Norwegian).  This new film makes De Palma appear to
be no so much raising cain as just being less able.  I rate it a low 0 on
the -4 to +4 scale.
