Title
Review for Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Steve Rhodes
FREQUENCY isn't the only time-travel movie playing now at your local
cinema.  After spending what feels like over a dozen hours in the
theater watching THE FLINTSTONES IN VIVA ROCK VEGAS, you'll find that
director Brian Levant has managed to transport you back in time to just
an hour and an half after you entered the theater.  An even better
trick, of course, would be for him to give you back all of your wasted
time.
In order to improve the motion picture's bottom line, the second
live-action FLINTSTONES is a prequel, not a sequel.  This allows the
studio to hire significantly cheaper actors than the original cast which
included John Goodman, Elizabeth Perkins, Rick Moranis and Rosie
O'Donnell.  Instead, we get Mark Addy, Kristen Johnston, Stephen Baldwin
and Jane Krakowski as Fred, Wilma, Barney and Betty.  Mark Addy, the
chubby guy from THE FULL MONTY, is no John Goodman.  And if you think
the first movie was bad, wait until you see this one.  Or better yet,
don't.
The winner of the competition for the most gratingly awful member of the
cast has to be Stephen Baldwin, whose stupid smile is permanently
chiseled in stone.  The only bright spot in the casting is Alan Cumming
as a deliciously impudent little green alien named The Great Gazoo.  (He
also plays Mick Jagged, to whom Barney threatens to give a fat lip until
he realizes that he already has one.)  What, you may ask, is this
monster with a face the color of industrial sludge doing in this movie?
He's studying the mating habits of the human race and is foolish enough
to view Fred and Barney as representative guinea pigs.
The production's intentionally cheap looking sets manage to look cheap
but not funny since there's little imagination showing in their designs.
About as amusing as the movie ever gets is in the choice of the name of
its villain, Chip Rockefeller, a dastardly hotel magnate played without
any oomph by Thomas Gibson.
"This is going to be fun, huh?" Wilma asks.  Well, one hopes that the
actors had fun running around barefoot, wearing ridiculous animal skins,
and acting like morons since most viewers will not be able to share in
the fun.  The Great Gazoo calls the show's dynamic duo, Fred and Barney,
a pair of "prehistoric imbeciles," something you may feel like after
being so foolish as to purchase tickets for this poor excuse for a
movie.
THE FLINTSTONES IN VIVA ROCK VEGAS runs 1:30.  It is rated PG for
innuendo and brief language and would be acceptable for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, thought the movie was only pretty good, giving
it ** 1/2.  His favorite character was Dino, Barney's pet dinosaur.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Flintstones_in_Viva_Rock_Vegas_ (PG) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
When Universal announced plans to make a prequel to its horrendous 1994
live-action take of the beloved '60s animated TV series, the general
reaction was, "WHY?"  No one liked the film; in fact, most flat out hated
it (myself included), yet it still eked out $100 million-plus gross
(thanks to the hype machine)--which, of course, is justification enough
in Hollywood.  Hence, it would have been easy for returning director
Brian Levant to continue to be lazy with the development of the script
and simply just pay attention to the production design, as he did in the
first film.  It appears, however, he felt he had something to prove after
the original film's near-universal thrashing.
With _Viva_Rock_Vegas_, Levant is getting a better idea as to how to
bring the modern Stone Age family to life.  Unlike the original film, the
prequel actually has a story, and a cute and interesting one at that: the
courtship of Fred (Mark Addy) and Wilma (Kristen Johnston) as well as
that of Barney (Stephen Baldwin) and Betty (Jane Krakowski).  There are
complications, namely the machinations of the wealthy Chip Rockefeller
(Thomas Gibson), whom Wilma's snooty mother Pearl (Joan Collins) deems a
more suitable match for her daughter.  Addy, Krakowski, Baldwin, and
Collins are much better fits for their roles than their predecessors
(John Goodman, Rosie O'Donnell, Rick Moranis, and Elizabeth Taylor,
respectively).  Baldwin is especially a surprise; while he looks nothing
like his cartoon counterpart, once he opens his mouth, he simply _is_
Barney.  As much as Levant does get right here (including, of course, the
production design and costumes, which are again perfect to the last
detail), two missteps keep me from giving a recommendation.  The Great
Gazoo (Alan Cumming), a tiny green alien that appeared in a number of the
TV episodes, is needlessly and awkwardly incorporated into the story; and
Johnston never convinces as Wilma--the look, voice, and attitude is all a
bit off.  Replace her with the far superior original Wilma, Elizabeth
Perkins, and Levant has the makings for a potentially successful third
installment--that is, if his writing crew (which, for _Viva_, is far
smaller than the infamous 32-person committee employed by the original)
can come up with another engaging story.  Given the unfavorable odds, all
involved would probably be better off leaving well enough alone.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/88855cbe3007b09b882568d1001f4d11?OpenDocument
The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas (2000, PG)
Produced by Bruce Cohen and Steven Spielberg
Written by Harry Elfont, Deborah Kaplan, Jim Cash, and Jack Epps Jr.
Starring Mark Addy, Steven Baldwin, Jane Krakowski, Kristen Johnston,
Joan Collins, Thomas Gibson, and Alan Cumming
 All right.  I withered away my youth watching "The Flintstones" like
just about every other kid in the 80s.  That doesn't mean I have to like
the movie or feel the slightest pang of nostalgia.  I won't give any
special points to The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas for invoking some
memory in me of the pre Cartoon Network days when I watched "The
Flintstones" on a black and white TV located outside of my room in the
house that I grew up in.
 Viva Rock Vegas is bad.  Real bad.  It features the same kind of dry
humor that the show did, and thus makes you wonder why you watched the
show in the first place.  It slowly sucks the life out of you and gets
progressively worse in a 80-minute running time that feels like two
hours.  It has the high point of watching The Great Gazoo, an alien sent
to observe prehistoric man's mating patterns, get kicked and crash into
signs.
 Viva Rock Vegas opens with the standard Universal logo redone in
tied-together wood and retitled "Univershell."  This provides yet
another bleakly high point, as, being tired when I saw this movie, I
read the logo as "Universe Hell" instead of the intended "Universe
Shell."  This brought a small laugh out of me.  It just so happens that
was all the movie was able to garner up in the way of entertainment.
 The story goes as such: Fred (Mark Addy) and Barney (Steven Baldwin)
have just graduated from construction school.  Elated and prompted by
The Great Gazoo (Alan Cumming), the two go out in search for dates.
They find said dates in the form of Betty (Jane Krakowski) and Wilma
(Kristen Johnson).  Betty is very lower class, but Wilma comes from a
large mansion on a mountain overlooking bedrock.  Wilma is under
constant pressure by her mother (Joan Collins) to marry Chip Rockefellar
(Thomas Gibson), so she runs away and moves in with Betty.
 Predictable, the four fall in love.  Even more predictably, Chip
invites them to Rock Vegas to attempt to steal Wilma from Fred.  A few
things from are explained in this film: how Wilma got her pearls, where
Dino came from, and why the dinosaurs went extinct (apparently, someone
had been poisoning their water supply).  To the "Flintstones" fanatic,
these will matter.  To everyone else, who cares.
 Krakowski is delightful as Betty, who she basically plays the same way
she does her character on Ally MacBeal.  Baldwin proves once again why
film critics hate the Baldwin clan.
 All in all, Viva Rock Vegas is a very bad run-of-the-mill movie with a
few bright points, making it a complete waste of your time.  It's lame,
predictable, and just plain unfunny.  So, for God's sake, don't watch
it.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE FLINTSTONES IN VIVA ROCK VEGAS" (Universal)
  Hey, if George Lucas can do a "Star Wars" prequel, why not
The Flintstones?  This prehistoric, live-action prequel goes back to
the bachelor days of Fred Flintstone (Mark Addy) and Barney Rubble
(Stephen Baldwin), showing how they court and marry Wilma Slaghoople
(Kristen Johnston) and her room-mate, Betty O'Shale (Jane Krakowski),
respectively. It turns out that curvaceous Wilma's the daughter of
doddering Col. Slaghoople (Harvey Korman) and snooty, snobbish Pearl
Slaghoople (Joan Collins) who want her to marry Chip Rockefeller
(Thomas Gibson), the suave, sneaky scion of a respectable old-money
family who wants to use the Slaghoople fortune to pay off a mob
debt. But Wilma loves blue-collar Fred, who has just secured a job at
the rock quarry in Bedrock. Chip invites everyone, including Fred and
Barney, to be his guests at the opening of a new resort hotel in Rock
Vegas.  Based on the animated Hanna-Barbera TV series, the
collaborative screenplay, credited to four writers, utilizes every
known prehistoric cliche, while Brian Levant's direction desperately
underscores each sight gag and pun. Alan Cumming plays two roles: The
Great Gazoo, a tiny, wisecracking alien who was sent to Earth to
observe the mating rituals of humans, and Mick Jagged, one of Betty's
suitors, while Ann-Margret warbles on the soundtrack.  Problem is:
it's too talky for kids - they get really restless - and too tacky for
adults. At 90 minutes, it seems excruciatingly long. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas" is an
exaggerated, frantic, cornball 3.  If you really, really, really love
the Flintstones, you're gonna enjoy this movie. If not,
yabba-dabba-don't bother with this fossil.

Author
Steve Rhodes
FREQUENCY isn't the only time-travel movie playing now at your local
cinema.  After spending what feels like over a dozen hours in the
theater watching THE FLINTSTONES IN VIVA ROCK VEGAS, you'll find that
director Brian Levant has managed to transport you back in time to just
an hour and an half after you entered the theater.  An even better
trick, of course, would be for him to give you back all of your wasted
time.
In order to improve the motion picture's bottom line, the second
live-action FLINTSTONES is a prequel, not a sequel.  This allows the
studio to hire significantly cheaper actors than the original cast which
included John Goodman, Elizabeth Perkins, Rick Moranis and Rosie
O'Donnell.  Instead, we get Mark Addy, Kristen Johnston, Stephen Baldwin
and Jane Krakowski as Fred, Wilma, Barney and Betty.  Mark Addy, the
chubby guy from THE FULL MONTY, is no John Goodman.  And if you think
the first movie was bad, wait until you see this one.  Or better yet,
don't.
The winner of the competition for the most gratingly awful member of the
cast has to be Stephen Baldwin, whose stupid smile is permanently
chiseled in stone.  The only bright spot in the casting is Alan Cumming
as a deliciously impudent little green alien named The Great Gazoo.  (He
also plays Mick Jagged, to whom Barney threatens to give a fat lip until
he realizes that he already has one.)  What, you may ask, is this
monster with a face the color of industrial sludge doing in this movie?
He's studying the mating habits of the human race and is foolish enough
to view Fred and Barney as representative guinea pigs.
The production's intentionally cheap looking sets manage to look cheap
but not funny since there's little imagination showing in their designs.
About as amusing as the movie ever gets is in the choice of the name of
its villain, Chip Rockefeller, a dastardly hotel magnate played without
any oomph by Thomas Gibson.
"This is going to be fun, huh?" Wilma asks.  Well, one hopes that the
actors had fun running around barefoot, wearing ridiculous animal skins,
and acting like morons since most viewers will not be able to share in
the fun.  The Great Gazoo calls the show's dynamic duo, Fred and Barney,
a pair of "prehistoric imbeciles," something you may feel like after
being so foolish as to purchase tickets for this poor excuse for a
movie.
THE FLINTSTONES IN VIVA ROCK VEGAS runs 1:30.  It is rated PG for
innuendo and brief language and would be acceptable for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, thought the movie was only pretty good, giving
it ** 1/2.  His favorite character was Dino, Barney's pet dinosaur.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE FLINTSTONES IN VIVA ROCK VEGAS
(Universal)
Starring:  Mark Addy, Kristen Johnston, Stephen Baldwin, Jane Krakowski,
Alan Cumming, Thomas Gibson, Joan Collins.
Screenplay:  Deborah Kaplan & Harry Elfont and Jim Cash & Jack Epps Jr.
Producer:  Bruce Cohen.
Director:  Brian Levant.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild profanity, adult humor)
Running Time:  90 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Brian Levant, director of THE FLINTSTONES IN VIVA ROCK VEGAS (as well
as the 1994 FLINTSTONES feature), says and does everything you'd expect of
a sequel to a film based on a television series. He professes his
affection for the original series, and his desire to remain true to its
spirit. He tosses in touchstones both from the series (the alien Great
Gazoo; Harvey Korman, original Gazoo voice, in the role of Wilma's father) 
and from the first film (Rosie O'Donnell as the voice of an octopus
masseuse). In short, it is Levant's goal to create a thoroughly 
synthesized film experience. If anything in VIVA ROCK VEGAS disrupts the
comfort of the familiar, he has failed.
     That being the case, chalk up VIVA ROCK VEGAS as a smashing success
of the most yawn-inducing sort. The "prequel" story begins with the Great
Gazoo (Alan Cumming) assigned by his race to study the mating habits of
prehistoric earthlings. He lands in Bedrock, where Fred Flintstone (Mark
Addy) and Barney Rubble (Stephen Baldwin) are bachelor pals fresh out of
the Bronto Crane Academy. On a trip to the neighborhood Bronto King, they
meet waitresses Wilma Slaghoople (Kristen Johnston) and Betty O'Shale
(Jane Krakowski), and romance is soon in the air. Little do any of them
know that Wilma is actually a runaway heiress whose would-be fiance Chip
Rockefeller (Thomas Gibson) is sort of a poor loser. Chip invites the
happy couples to his casino in Rock Vegas, where his dastardly plans will
be set in motion.
     It's somehow more depressing when a film like VIVA ROCK VEGAS shows
flashes of genuinely inspired writing, letting you know that those
involved could have done much better if it had mattered at all to them. 
There's a great gag about circus side-show freaks including "a 40-year-old
man," a wonderful ham-fisted compliment with Fred comparing Wilma's eyes
to "two big  eyes" and an addled rock star's vague concern over whether
his female companion is a minor. It's also hard not to get a few giggles
out of Cumming's double-duty as the effete Gazoo and the preening Mick
Jagged. In general, though, the film is content to coast on its special
effects, its insider humor (Ann-Margret, co-star of the Elvis Presley film
VIVA LAS VEGAS, singing the title song) and its bronto-crane-load of
"rock" puns. Handling such a recognizable commodity, Levant sees no need
to rock -- no pun intended -- this particular boat.
     Of course, he has no choice but to deal with a complete overhaul of
the original film's cast. John Goodman gives way to Addy, who's personable
enough and bypasses Alan Reed's Fred entirely to go right to the source
with a decent imitation of Jackie Gleason. The muscular Baldwin isn't
nearly as ideal a Barney as Rick Moranis, nor does Johnston match
Elizabeth Perkins' endearingly flat readings of Wilma's signature "Frad;" 
in neither case does the film waste any time explaining how each one
shrinks several inches by the time the next film rolls around. Only
Krakowski seems more physically right for her part -- God love Rosie
O'Donnell, but she's no wasp-waist -- and her titter is on target. There's
not much one can say to criticize performances like these -- "cartoonish" 
would be a compliment, after all -- but there's not much that 
distinguishes them, either. The actors, like most everything else in the
film, seem set up not to get in the way of the general feeling of good
will.
     Some might argue that a disposable entertainment like VIVA ROCK VEGAS
is nothing more than brightly-colored, slapstick-heavy eye candy for the
kids, and should be treated as such. It might be easier to buy that
reasoning if it didn't take exactly four minutes before the first
flatulence joke, and 15 minutes for the first joke about Fred and Barney
sheepishly denying the appearance of a homosexual relationship. I don't
recall those as the kind of gags typical of the series for which Brian
Levant expresses so much fond remembrance. THE FLINTSTONES IN VIVA ROCK
VEGAS, isolated bursts of genuine humor aside, is a deeply pandering
film. It panders to stereotypes; it panders to the most inane adult
nostalgia; it panders to the most simplistic kiddie humor. That's often
the kind of film you get when your primary goal is the comfort of the
familiar ... in this case, humor that was already tired when dinosaurs
walked the earth.

Author
Bob Bloom
The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas (2000) 1/2 star out of 4. Starring
Mark Addy, Stephen Baldwin, Kristin Johnston, Jane Krakowski, Alan
Cumming, Joan Collins, Thomas Gibson and Harvey Korman
 The line in "The Flintstones' " theme song says `you'll have a gay old
time.'
 Maybe, but not by watching "The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas."
 I cannot stress how bad a movie this is. My proof? About 40 little kids
were in the audience at the preview screening, and the theater remained
as quiet as the La Brea tar pits, which, by the way, is where they
should sink all the prints of this stinker.
 "Viva Rock Vegas" is so bad, that even Joan Collins - who disgracefully
hams it up as Wilma's mother - would probably not write it on her
resume, and she starred in such stinkers as "The Stud" and "The Bitch,"
both of which are rated as bombs in "Leonard Maltin's Film and Video
Guide."
 This movie is nearly amateurish. It plays like a prolonged skit at a
Universal theme park. The sets and costumes are just as tacky.
 Every prehistoric cliché you can think of is thrown at the audience. 
 Even some of the animatronic dinosaurs show more spark than the actors.
 OK, to be fair, the movie has a couple of redeeming qualities. Stephen
Baldwin does a fine Barney Rubble impression, while Mark Addy, familiar
to American audiences for his role in "The Fully Monty", does a very
good Fred. Both sound like their cartoon counterparts. And Alan Cumming
is funny as rock star Mick Jagged.
 Others in the cast include Kristen Johnston as Wilma, Jane Krakowski as
Betty, as well as Thomas Gibson and Harvey Korman.
 Still, that is not enough to lure audiences to this mess. Frankly, it's
just flat. And not because it is aimed at kids, but because it is so
tacky and lame. The humor is mostly verbal when it should have relied on
slapstick. The pace is too slow and, at just over 90 minutes, the movie
runs too long.
 "Viva Rock Vegas" is one fossil that should have remained buried.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Bloom, an associate member of the Online Film Critics Society, has his
reviews posted at http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at
http://www.moviereviews.org/flintstones_in_viva_rock_vegas,_the.htm ---
Alan Reed and Mel Blanc are probably rolling over in their graves. Joseph
Barbera and William Hanna might just go into shock. It's not that the latest
Flintstones movie, Viva Rock Vegas, which `posthumously' credits the latter
two as executive producers, is a live action interpretation of their classic
animated television series that will cause such reactions. Rather, it is
that the movie seems to lack all the non-material traits that made the 1960'
s series an integral part of American culture.
A prequel to both the 1994 film and the television series, this installment
of Bedrock's favorite two families actually pre-dates their being families.
Fred (Mark Addy) and Barney (Stephen Baldwin) are two young bachelors with
nothing but their lives ahead of them. Barney is optimistic, exclaiming `we
get to spend the rest of our lives working in a rock quarry – who says
dreams don't come true?' Fred, on the other hand, desperately seeks a
companion and realizes that this will require action, pointing out `it's not
like something is just going to drop out of the sky, land right in front of
you and change your whole life.' Being that the movie seems to have no
original humor, you can guess what happens as soon as Fred finishes the
aforementioned statement.
Enter Gazoo (Alan Cumming), the pint-sized alien who is temporarily expelled
from his own planet and banished to earth where he is to study human mating
rituals. This leads to numerous sexual jokes and an awkward homosexual scene
that shouldn't be in a film aimed at America's youngest moviegoers. It is
also most ironic that such a subplot is used in a film co-starring Kristen
Johnston (Wilma), an actress who has earned notice for her role in
television's `3rd Rock from the Sun' – a show with an all-too-similar plot.
Opposite Fred and Barney are Wilma and Betty (Jane Krakowski), who are
actually opposites themselves. Wilma is the classic poor-little-rich girl as
she struggles with pressure to marry Chip Rockefeller (Thomas Gibson); she
is a citizen of the upperclass even though her heart is in the unruly valley
of Bedrock, which her mansion overlooks. Borrowing a chapter from another
abysmal movie, Titanic, it turns out that Rockefeller is even sleazier than
Wilma thinks with his sole purpose of luring her being that he needs her
fortune to escape some mob debts. For the mean time, he has Rocko (Danny
Woodburn) and Rocko (Tony Longo), his two `favorite made men' on his
pre-historic tail. And, should he not wed Wilma by a quickly-approaching
deadline, he will `be sleeping with the tunasaurus.'
Betty, on the other hand, is a single waitress with an average apartment and
constant smile on her face. She is hip, she is cool and she not only takes
Wilma under her wing but accepts a date with Fred even though his pickup
line is nothing but a series of incomprehensible grunts. Barney tags along
to make it a double date at the carnival and by night's end the couples have
swapped, Dino is born and Gazoo is viciously assaulted on a Ferris wheel.
The similarities between Fred and the Coen Brothers' Dude Lebowski, from The
Big Lebowski, are a few too many to go unnoticed and far too many to be what
Hanna and Barbera had in mind. Yes, they did create Fred's famous two-toe
bowling technique but surely they didn't mean for him to be the portly bum
he is here. Additionally, Wilma is far larger than she should be, Barney
decidedly more pathetic (how appropriate for one of the Baldwins –if only
that old SNL skit would come true!) and Betty too promiscuous. Perhaps this
could be ignored, although it would certainly be difficult, if the film had
the guts to take off its training wheels and ride on its own rather than
take the time to pay homage to the original Flintstones couple in a mid-film
montage that only serves to remind of more pleasurable entertainment.
Just making matters worse, watching the scenes where the film does venture
astray from traditional Bedrock is like taking The Great Movie Ride over and
over for 90 minutes. Everything from significant plot lines to quick jokes
are stolen from movies ranging from Arsenic and Old Lace and some Three
Stooges pictures to the more recent Honeymoon in Vegas and Aladdin.
Yet, despite all the negative aspects of Viva Rock Vegas, I did discover a
tear streaming down my face right before the credits rolled. I wondered how
this could be and then it struck me – my contact lens had slipped.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
Miscellaneous thoughts noted down during the running time of "The
Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas":
1. According to the movie's press material, four writers received credit for
this film.  Why any of them were needed, or what they contributed, is a
mystery to me.  Collectively they don't even add up to one good one.
2. Jokes about dinosaurs passing gas are not funny.  The only time I have
seen anything remotely amusing about a giant creature passing gas was when
its name was Gamera.
3. Names which are plays on words, which was most of the stock-in-trade with
the Flintstones animated cartoon, are only funny up to a point.  In this
film we get "Mick Jagged and the..." -- are you holding your breath? --
"...Stones."  Chortle, chortle.  Even children, the primary audience for
this film, are going to find this movie tiresome.
4. Ann-Margaret embarrassed herself badly enough as a singer in "Tommy".
History repeats itself in this film.
5. Mark Addy (of "The Full Monty") isn't bad as Fred Flintstone, but he is
faced with the hopeless task of being interesting in a movie that defies
interest.  Barney, played by Stephen Baldwin, looks as though he would be
more at home playing his trigger-happy character from "The Usual Suspects".
6. Live-action movies made from cartoons are often painfully bad, for one
very simple reason.  What we see in animation we can forgive a great deal
of; what we see in live-action is utterly unsparing.  "Inspector Gadget" was
an object lesson this movie has not learned a thing from.
7. A sure measure of desperation on the part of the filmmakers: a subplot
about an alien who has no purpose in the film other than to eat up running
time.  I never imagined 90 minutes would be so difficult to burn.
8. A good movie makes you forget you're watching a movie.  A bad movie never
lets you forget this.  "The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas" is a very bad
movie.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, http://www.joblo.com/
I'm gonna be honest with you on this one, folks. I really didn't want to see
this movie! I love the cartoons, don't get me wrong, love both Hanna and
Barbara, but geez-louise, the original FLINTSTONES movie just didn't do a
thing for me. In fact, I barely even remember any of it (probably blocked it
out of my memory), save for the enchanting performance by Halle Berry, and
from what I do remember, it stunk to high heaven. All that to say that this
film was actually pretty okay. That's right people...it didn't suck!!
PLOT:
Based on the popular cartoon series, this film takes a look at the lives of
our favorite Bedrock residents before they got married and had their own TV
show. Fred and Barney just graduating from school and applying for jobs at
the quarry. Wilma and Betty meeting for the first time. We even get to see
where Gazoo and Dino came from. So will love bloom? Will Fred bowl once
again? Stay tuned to find out.
CRITIQUE:
Not bad, not bad at all. Definitely a crowd-pleaser with all the kids
bellowing at my premiere, this film manages to balance a throwaway plot with
some great special effects, a very cool and funny Gazoo and a quick,
colorful pace. Of course, you don't go into a movie like the Flintstones
expecting an Oscar-worthy script, but suspicious curiosity always abounds
whenever I see the names of more than two people on a screenplay (this film
credits four screenwriters). Some jokes work in this film, others don't, but
for me, the only thing that really kept me going was the oh-so cool
production values. I mean, there it is on the big screen, a whole
prehistoric world filled with cool animal gadgets, oversized hamburgers and
martini glasses, and yup...dinosaurs. I don't remember the original film
impressing me as much with its extras (it also tried to tie a story in there
as well...brrrrr), but this movie is chockfull of fun eye-candy, starting
with an excellent representation of Gazoo.
Give this little green bastard his own movie, dammit! He ruled! Having said
that, Gazoo seems to disappear about halfway through this film, coinciding
with the movie's lame attempt at creating some tension between the
characters (note: bring in a "bad guy"), and the manufactured Vegas
story-line could only take you so far. I swore that if I saw one more scene
with Wilma staring wistfully into the night, I would shit myself. Thankfully
for all involved...no soiling took place. Performance-wise, I definitely
appreciated the new casting choices much more than those in the original
(Rosie O'Donnell as babelicious Betty...what were they thinking?!?), with
the Rubbles scoring even higher points for getting their laughs down pat.
And Stephen Baldwin even managed to go the entire film without shooting Nic
Cage down once! Not bad, dude.
In a nutshell, I would say that this film delivers on various fronts
including its authentic and exaggerated look, its nifty special effects
(Dino is darn cute), and its quick pace. Plot-wise, things run pretty thin,
as do some of the jokes, which hit and miss all around the campfire, but
this movie isn't really targeted to lovers of classic cinema or to all those
messy teens sweaty-palmed over GLADIATOR coming out next weekend. This movie
is made by kids...for the kids! Huh?!? Well okay, it wasn't made by kids,
but it will certainly be those very kids who will most likely appreciate the
mindless frivolity of this movie, as well as certain "child-like" adults.
And yes...guilty as charged.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The bassist of the 80s supergroup "Duran Duran", John Taylor, makes an
appearance in this film as one of the members of Mick Jagged's band. The
character of Mick Jagged is played deliciously by actor Alan Cumming, a man
who also does a great job of portraying the character of Gazoo in this film
as well.
Ironically, two actors in this film were also among the cast of Stanley
Kubrick's final film EYES WIDE SHUT. Bad guy Thomas Gibson, as well as Alan
Cumming, who played the cheeky hotel clerk.
Director Brian Levant is a veteran at the children's movie game. He was also
the man behind the camera of the original FLINTSTONES movie back in 1994, as
well as Arnold's foray into kid's films, JINGLE ALL THE WAY, as well as
BEETHOVEN and PROBLEM CHILD 2.
One of the producers of this film is a gentleman by the name of Steven
Spielberg. I'm not exactly sure what this guy has done before, but people
tell me that he's famous and that he's made a couple of "interesting" movies
himself. Oh well... ;)

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated PG: sexual innuendo and humor, language, mild slapstick violence.
Starring: Mark Addy, Kirsten Johnston, Jane Krowkowski Stephen Baldwin, Alan
Cumming, Joan Collins, Voice of Rosie O' Donnell.
Running time: 90 minutes
In 1994, a family film opened with a 37.2 million dollar weekend, and went on
to gross a little under $140m. That film was based on a hugely popular cartoon
entitled "The Flintstones"...the movies name? The Flinstones. The huge hit
starred John Goodman as Fred Flintstone, Rick Moranis as Barney, Elizabeth
Perkins as Wilma and Rosie O'Donnel as Betty. The co-stars were Joan Collins,
Kyle McLachlan and Halle Berry. It was a very good family movie, with some
terrific acting and special effects. Now in 2000 we get the long-awaited sequel
"The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas", which isn't as good as the first movie.
Now the worst thing about the film is the actors: Mark Addy (an english guy) as
Fred Flintstone who was previously in the great film "The Full Monty" gives a
terrible performance as Fred. Stephen Baldwin (LOL) as Barney...is well
indescribably bad, but the two stars that shine in the lead roles is Kirsten
Johnston as Wilma, and Jane Krowkowski as Better. Kirsten who is in the NBC
show "3rd Rock From the Sun" plays Wilma very well, and brings her
characteristics out, as well as her character herself. Jane who is on the huge
show "Ally McBeal" is beautiful as Betty, and makes me wonder why Rosie
O'Donnell was picked to play Betty in the first film. She fits the character
greatly, looks like Betty, and acts like Betty. Mark Addy is a great actor, but
just doesn't have the capacities to play Fred Flintstone, he doesn't look like
Fred, act like Fred nor does he talk like Fred. Now for Stephen Baldwin,
although he looks like Barney, he doesn't have the mental capacity to play him,
because to me Barney is smarter.
Now for the plot of the movie: Years before Fred and Wilma meet, years before
Barney and Betty meet, Fred wishes for the person that is meant for him to be
out there, and Wilma wishes to go to Bedrock and out of her rich home. Wilma
leaves and meets Betty and moves in with her. They become best friends, as is
Fred and Barney. Fred and Barney meet Wilma and Betty at a Burger King type of
place, and they go on a double date, only to have several misadventures such as
Chip Rockefeller trying to woo Wilma to marry him and get rid of Fred, and a
little alien who is sent to Earth to study the human mating rituals. The story
is quite good, and tells alot about the Flintstones past, and is well
developed, like how Dino came along, how they got married, and how they lived.
The major flaw in this film is the cast though, we could have easily gotten a
better Fred and Barney, but Wilma and Betty are priceless, the great supporting
cast includes: Joan Collins as Wilma's mother, Thomas Gibson as Chip, and
several other cameos. The movie has some great sequences, and the special
effects are quite well developed, but it's missing the charm of the first film,
as well as the comedy. This one seems to be directed towards adults, and
contains some sexual humor that at times for a PG film is quite frank. It's not
a terrible film, but I could have wished for a better Flintstones movie, with a
much better cast.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 4/28/00
For more reviews please visit MOVIE REVIEW CENTRAL at
http://www.geocities.com/moviefan983/moviereviewcentral.html
