Title
Review for Judge Dredd (1995)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sylvester Stallone, Armand Assante, Diane Lane, Rob Schneider, 
      Jurgen Prochnow, Joan Chen, Max von Sydow 
Director: Danny Cannon 
Producers: Charles M. Lippincott and Beau E.L. Marks 
Screenplay: William Wisher and Steven E. De Souza from a story by 
            Michael De Luca and William Wisher 
Cinematography: Adrian Biddle 
Music: Alan Silvestri 
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures 
     Some two decades ago, Sylvester Stallone actually did a little 
acting in a movie called ROCKY.  Since then, he's pretty much strutted 
his way through film after film, grunting convincingly and occasionally 
uttering a line or two of dialogue.  He probably has more range than 
Steven Seagal, but that's not saying much.  RAMBO, CLIFFHANGER, and THE 
SPECIALIST have been box office successes, and now Stallone carries an 
impossibly large price tag.  His latest, JUDGE DREDD, based on a popular 
British comic book, comes across pretty much as a retread of DEMOLITION 
MAN, right down to the basic quality of the production. 
     DREDD has a serious tone problem.  Sometimes, it's rather amusing, 
but it's impossible to decide whether this is accidental or on purpose.  
Is the director playing with the audience or is the picture an exercise 
in campy seriousness that would make Ed Wood smile?  There are few 
clues.  Often, JUDGE DREDD appears to be a parody, but my guess is that 
Danny Cannon was aiming for an action/adventure flick with a humorous 
edge.   
     At least visually, this film aspires to be BLADE RUNNER, but 
aspirations are all it has.  Ridley Scott's science fiction classic gave 
a unique visual look to the future.  DREDD's Mega-City One (formerly New 
York) is a glitzy replication.  In fact, just about everything in this 
silly, sub-par science fiction farce is derivative.  For example, 
there's an air speeder chase lifted directly from RETURN OF THE JEDI, 
and DREDD is littered with nods to ROBOCOP.  Those hoping for a coherent 
story would do better to stay away.  When the film's narrative makes 
sense, it's only because of hard-to-swallow contrivances. 
     It's the twenty-second century on Earth (now called "The Cursed 
Earth", as James Earl Jones informs us in an introductory monologue), 
and crime is out of control.  A new breed of law enforcement officer has 
been born.  With the power to apprehend, convict, and carry out 
sentences, the Judges have become rightfully feared.  Dredd (Stallone -- 
who else?) is the best of the bunch.  Emotionless and rigidly devoted to 
the Law, he doesn't cut anyone any breaks, not even a petty crook just 
trying to save his own life (Rob Schneider).  Then the tables are 
turned.  Dredd is framed for murder and, when his chosen defense 
counselor, Judge Hershey (Diane Lane), can't contradict some DNA 
evidence (no, this isn't the O.J. Simpson trial), he is sent to prison.  
And, while Dredd is on his way up the river, an irredeemably vicious ex-
Judge, Rico (Armand Assante), returns to Mega-City One to wreak havoc. 
     Performance-wise, there isn't much that's memorable here.  Stallone 
is Stallone; need more be said?  Diane Lane is pretty bland, and she and 
her beefy co-star don't threaten to start any fires with their sparkless 
relationship.  Rob Schneider is fitfully funny as the comic relief, but 
that's his job.  Armand Assante seems to be having a whale of a good 
time, though.  Like any actor playing a solid, over-the-top villain, 
he's fun to watch.  Respected thespians like Max von Sydow and Jurgen 
Prochnow have relatively brief appearances.  And Joan Chen again wins 
the "most underused performer of the film" award. 
     In the STAR WARS movies, we had "May the Force be with you."  
Schwarzenegger is known for saying "I'll be back."  The tag line for 
JUDGE DREDD appears to be "I knew you'd say that."  Catchy, huh?  Of 
course, all the "best" lines go to Stallone, and he half-bellows, half-
grunts them in typical fashion.  These include:  "I AM the Law!" and the 
Spock-like "Emotions:  there ought to be a law against them."  Now, 
we're not meant to take this sort of dialogue seriously, are we? 
     The problem is, no matter what you expect from JUDGE DREDD, you're 
likely to laugh at it more often than with it.  It is frequently 
diverting, but this is entertainment of the lowest level.  Other comic 
book characters (most notably Superman and Batman) have weathered the 
transition to live action far better.  Dredd is pure Stallone and, 
irrespective of all the sci-fi trappings, that statement is probably all 
that's needed to define exactly what kind of movie this is. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Paul Easter
     Yes, I know this isn't the first review of the movie.  Yes, I know
most people who want to have seen it.  Despite this, I feel it my duty
to save as many people as possible from the boredom that is JUDGE
DREDD.  I'm not going to beat about the bush: this movie sucks.  With a
licence as potentially rewarding as the Judge Dredd one, any studio
worth its salt ought to have taken care to not mess things up.  But no--
what did they do?  They took the most standard-fare action movie script
I've ever seen, stuffed in a few second-rate SFX and slapped Sylvester
Stallone's name on the top.  Urgh.
     The existing fan-base for Dredd should've been enough to convince
them that this was not supposed to be the average actioner.  It shocks
me that this movie has paid so little attention to the comic fans--for
a start, these people know what Dredd should be! I'm by no means a
comic book Judge Dredd fan, however.  I know people who are, but more
important: I know enough to not assume anything about Dredd.  The
filmmakers in this instance have made wild assumptions about Dredd; they
turn him into yet another muscle-bound bad ass with a good heart.  This
movie makes me sick.
     Okay, enough about my problems with the story.  To be honest, if
you go to see Dredd with no preconceptions you might just enjoy it.
There's nothing really wrong with it, if you like action films.  But
that said, there's nothing right about it either; no innovation on the
part of the script or plot.  This movie looks like it's been produced
by a machine, not by a talented bunch of human beings.  The plot is so
flaky it's unbelievable--full of holes, with no real aim or point to
make.
     Those of you who like big explosions and computer SFX will
be ... will be ... thoroughly disappointed, also! There is *one* very
impressive scene, right at the beginning reminiscent of a similar scene
in Blade Runner.  But that's where it ends: some effects are obviously
fake (the bike chase one) whilst others just look downright silly.
     To those of you who go and enjoy this movie--well done.  You must
be either very charitable when it comes to handing over money to cinema
owners, or else you're also a fan of mental torture.  I fail to see any
way this film could be anything more than average in anyone's books.

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
     JUDGE DREDD seems to be another example of what can happen when a
Big Star attaches him/herself to a project.  The Big Star begins to
bend the content and tone of the project to better suit what he/she
thinks the audience wants or expects from them, and before you know it,
it's just another vehicle, the content reduced to a candy coating
around the same old gumball.  I've never read a single issue of JUDGE
DREDD, but I can't imagine fans of the comic enjoying the film very
much.  I've heard tell of JUDGE DREDD fans boycotting the picture ,
though if this is so, I don't know what they intend to accomplish.  I
can't imagine there can be enough JUDGE DREDD fans to make a box office
dent one way or another, though the character has been around for a
while, so who knows?
     One of the oddest things about the film is the central idea.
We're in another one of those futuristic societies where everything has
gone to Hell in a bullet train.  This society's solution was to gather
most people up into great big huge cities policed by Judges--who are
judge, jury and executioner in one tight-leather,
golden-eagle-shoulder-pad package.  Most of the denizens of the
Mega-cities spend most of their time rioting, and the judges spend most
of *their* time shooting them or getting shot.  The Judges are presided
over by one of those High Councils that sit around in rooms that look
like they were designed by fascist architects.  They argue a lot about
how many Judges are getting greased, and discuss what a
maverick-type-legend Dredd is.  Considering how much authority the
Judges are given, it's unclear what Dredd is doing that's considered
outside the bounds of good judgement.  Further, it's more than a little
odd that we're supposed to accept this society as normal.  In MAD MAX,
for example, it's pretty clear that everything's pretty messed up, and
the people involved with the story would definitely like things to be
much better.  Here, however, most of the plot concerns itself with
whether or not some nasty fellow will take over what is a pretty
fascist set-up in the first place.  Dredd himself seems to be an
"upholder of the Law," but has little problem with the system he works
in.  I've heard that the comic's intent was satirical in asking us to
accept the Judges in the first place, but here it seems to come off
more like, 'Oh No!  That villain almost took control of our police
state!  Thanks goodness Dredd was here to prevent it from becoming a
*really bad* police state!'
     Most of the rest of the film is accomplished but derivative.
Everything feels familiar and tired.  The pacing is decent and the
effects are shiny but not especially diverting.  The production design
feels like Albert Speer, Ralph McQuarrie and Syd Mead teamed up to
re-make BLADE RUNNER.  Stallone feels inappropriate for a role that
would seem to require more steely fanaticism that his usual lovable-lug
bit.  The comedy relief sidekick comes off as rather irritating most of
the time, and every single line written for him punctures the reality
of the world we're supposed to be in with lots of pizza delivery and
ATM gags, with no adjustments made to remind us that we're in a
different culture.  There are sequences that (like CASPER) seem to be
footage for an upcoming simulator ride at Disneyland.  Max Von Sydow
dignifies this effort with a performance that rises above the
script-by-numbers.  Joan Chen looks good but is wasted in a supporting
role.  Alan Silvestri's score has a moment or two but mostly overplays
its hand.  The main villain in the piece seems to be doing an extended
Anthony Hopkins imitation.  Overall, I didn't find JUDGE DREDD as
irritating as BATMAN FOREVER, but I doubt if I'll remember much about
it at all a month or two from now.  Not recommended.

Author
Sue Roberts
     If only Fritz Lang could see this picture.  He would be thrilled
with the modern METROPOLIS.  Exaggerated angles, individual lines of
dialog, (one could almost see the speech bubbles) and a dangerous pace
all conspire to make this the first film to bring the art form of comic
illustration to the screen.  One could feel every line of the drawings
leaping to life.
     Sly Stallone obviously enjoyed working on this one and indulged in
some serious timing on the humour.  It says a lot for his performance
that he competed with the scale of production design and won.
     Cannon certainly kept the pages turning!  I waited ninety minutes
for them to get to the quiet bit and it never came.  At the culmination
I had only one question: "Er, excuse me, is that IT!!!  Well do, you
think we could just run the sequel NOW?"

Author
Choo Eng Aun
Starring : Sylvester Stallone, Armand Assante, Joan Chen,
           Jurgen Prochnow, Rob Schneider, Diane Lane.
Produced by : Andrew Vajna
Directed by : Danny Cannon
Running Time : 1hr 30mins (approx)
A Hollywood Pictures Release
     The future for earth is bleak.  Our home planet has turned mostly
into desert (global warming?) and pollution is worse than anyone could
imagine.  The harsh conditions has earned Earth the term 'The Cursed
Earth.'  People no longer live anywhere they wish, all of them cram
into Mega Cities (very-very large cities), which brings us to Mega City
One, Dredd's very own playground.  In Mega Cities, the higher up the
building you live, the safer you are, the higher your status.  Down on
the street, crime and chaos rules.  The normal judiciary system is no
longer useful in bringing justice to Mega Cities, there is just too
much chaos.  Instead, police-cum-army-cum-judge enforcers are
deployed.  Judgement is passed by the arresting judge as soon as
wrongdoers are arrested.
     Based on the phenomenal British comic series of the same title,
JUDGE DREDD showcases lots of dead bodies (as in the comics) and some
really impressive action sequences laced with goo-goo-bytes of computer
generated special effects.  Judge Dredd (Stallone) prowl Mega City One,
passing judgement on those he arrests.  Meanwhile, a notorious villian,
Rico (Assante) escapes from a penal colony, wreaks chaos in Mega City
One and also contributes to the tons of bodies already donated by
Dredd.  The sets are lavish, the computer generated city is
breathtaking but the costumes, well...a bit too colourful and clean to
be taken seriously.
     The plot is typical of most of Hollywood's action films; just
about as thin as the air in outer space.  I was lucky to have a Judge
Dredd comic fan sitting next to me, and he explained nearly all of the
jargon and culture that only Dredd fans would know.  I actually enjoyed
the movie quite a bit.  The introduction was a bit corny but the thick
action helped erase that negative thought.  There is enough action to
satisfy action-hungry and entertainment-seeking movie goers but the
ending really really does leave a lot to be desired.  The script, too,
proved too corny at times but hey, so were most of Stallone's previous
action flicks.
     Stallone is his usual self; minimal dialogue, 'action speaks
louder than words.'  Assante, though physically less appealing than
Stallone, managed to play the psychotic Rico rather well.  Apart from
the really weak, anti- climactic ending, JUDGE DREDD is a pretty
polished action movie.  I particularly liked the fast-paced chase
sequence around, on top and under the buildings of Mega City One.  The
ABC War Machine which Rico uses as his bodyguard was really menacing.
You'll probably like this movie if you don't mind the ending (highly
unlikely) or you're a true blue Stallone or Judge Dredd comic fan.

Author
Ed Powell
     During the Third Millennium (2000-2999 A.D.), the world has
undergone some bad times, and is now a desert wasteland.  In order to
survive, the American people have gathered into four or five gigantic
cities, or megacities.  To keep order in the megacities, the government
is now a police state, and the police are judge, jury, and
executioner.  They are ... the Judges.
     (In other words, a generic action/sci-fi movie.)
     Judge Joseph Dredd, a genetically-engineered man that is the
perfect Judge.  He gets wrongly accused of murdering a TV journalist,
and somehow manages to find and kill the person who actually did it,
causing death and destruction in his wake that no one really seems to
mind.
     (In other words, a generic action/sci-fi movie.)
     Sylvester Stallone plays Judge Dredd.
     (In other words, a generic action/sci-fi movie.)
* Story and plot
        Have a mentioned that this is a generic action/sci-fi movie?
     Actually, there was a plot, and it wasn't too bad.  The story was
above average too.  Not Oscar material, but not too bad.  Whatever it
was, it was better than BATMAN FOREVER.
     The script seems as if it was directly converted from the comic
book format.  The dialogue was stilted at times, but was overall above
average.
     I thought the best actor in the film was Rob Schnider.  In this
film, he had a bigger role than he had in DEMOLITION MAN (which,
oddly enough, also starred Sly Stallone), and he made the film
hilarious when people weren't being shot, blown-up, or insulted.
     Sly conveys the emotionless Judge Dredd well enough (although I
have not read any of the comic books).   The rest of the acting was
average.
     The film employed an incredible amount of matte shots and models,
which were of high quality, and conveyed the sense of a dark future
well.  The building models I can best describe as a futuristic,
multi-layer "Batman" style.
     The weaponry, vehicles (especially the taxis), and other props
were quite stylish, and worked well with the film.
     Really nothing special.  Some good computer animation.  A few neat
visual effects.  Buildings blew up real good.  Average.
     Again, average ... nothing special.  Won't win any major (or minor)
awards, but it was adequate.
     *This* is the film's shortcoming.  This is definitely *not* family
material, definitely not for kids.  Rare is the scene where someone
isn't being shot, blown-up, or insulted.  As much as I hate to say it,
take your kids to see POCAHONTAS or something.  And as always, thank
you for not poking my hontas.  :-)
     If you like fast-paced, blood and gore sci-fi/action flicks, go
for it.  I was entertained for its 105 minute run-time.  This is the
average action flick--entertaining, funny, but not Oscar material.
Produced by Edward R. Pressman, directed by Danny Cannon.
A Hollywood Pictures release.
(This can't be right, it scored less than BATMAN FOREVER....)

Author
Stephen Rafferty
Directed by Danny Cannon
Starring: Sylvester Stallone, Armand Assante, Rob Schneider, Max Von Sydow.
Written by Bill Wisher, Walon Green, John Fasano, Steven De Souza.
Cinematography by Adrian Biddle, BSC.
Edited by Alex Mackie
     Completely disappointing is the only way for myself to describe
JUDGE DREDD.  I've collected Dredd comics for close to ten years now,
and unfortunately this film is not a good depiction of the comic.
However, this is not for the obvious reasons an avid comic collector
might have.
     Stallone plays Dredd, a Judge in the 21st century who is the
complete package: Judge, Jury, and Executioner.  The Earth is split
into basic two parts: the Cursed Earth which is a barren wasteland
where savages exist, and a few Mega City's spread throughout the
world.  Mega City 1 where Dredd's beat is, is not a far cry from the
futuristic world of BLADE RUNNER, but a little bigger and a little
lighter.  Block wars, where a whole block of inhabitants of Mega-City
basically go on a rampage, are the norm.   Dredd is constantly quelling
these outbursts in his usual calm, unemotional manner.  He is the
quintessential steel nerved man; he Judges with no connection to the
humans involved.
     Basically the plot is this: bad old Judge comes back and tries to
take over Mega-City 1, he tries to kill his old brother Dredd, and
Dredd battles him until the slam-bam climax.  Guess who wins?
     My problem is that the script is just poorly written, and never
challenges the viewer once.  The plot follows the course you think it
will after you've seen the first twenty minutes.   The script being so
bad makes the film a let down because Stallone is actually good in the
lead, and the film does a great job of depicting Mega City 1 as it is
in the comic.  In fact, when I first saw the matte shot of Mega City at
the beginning of the film I was very impressed with it's almost perfect
version of the crime ridden metropolis.   He will have his detractors,
but Stallone is perfect for Dredd, who is really a man turned robot.
Even though he is unmasked unlike the comic, for most of the film he
keeps the stoic posture that is Dredd.  He Judges and executes without
remorse.  Stallone only fails when the character as written fails; when
too much emotion is involved.
     If Director Cannon, a self confessed Dredd fanatic, had stayed
truer to the comic's campy, satirical tone with a stone-faced hero,
he'd have made a much better film.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Despite handsome casting and sharp production values, last month's
second comic-book-to-film is a failure from the get-go.  The tone
problems start in the very first scenes, after James Earl Jones' somber
narration introduces the judicial system of the future, where "judges"
roam the streets of Mega-City One, acting as judge, jury, and
executioner.  The toughest judge is Judge Dredd (Sylvester Stallone),
who's emotionless commitment to "da law" strikes fear in the hearts of
evil men.
     Boasting a great set-up, JUDGE DREDD sounds tougher than it really
is.  The screenplay--by William Wisher and Steven E. De Souza--tries
to cover too many bases at once, as if someone at Disney decided that a
Facist character in a graphic comic book could have some sort of mass
audience appeal.  So they "humanize" the movie by giving Dredd a hollow
sense of humor, a female Judge/love-interest/sparring-partner (Diane
Lane), and even a comic sidekick (Rob Schnieder, who obviously didn't
learn *his* lesson after appearing alongside Stallone in DEMOLITION
MAN).
     Actually, *that* film is much more enjoyable than the wasted work
here.  Director Danny Cannon has visualized correctly, but the story
contains too much absurdity to be taken seriously.  Sci-fi
hillibillies; malfunctioning motorcycles; and, yes, even a cat-fight
(between Lane and Joan Chen).  Sigh.  The whole thing is actually not
awful until the last twenty minutes, when Stone and Armande Assante
(who plays the villain) are standing and shouting in each other's
faces, their respectively flawed diction trying to work their mouths in
the direction of north by northwest.

Author
John Lyons
[Note: this review is from a 12-year-old's perspective.  -Moderator]
     I saw JUDGE DREDD and it didn't suck.  No, really, it was about
how in the Third Millennium people realized police couldn't do crap so
they got ripped brain-stems and made them judge, jury, and
executioner.  So they train this one dude who worships the law and
blows away baddies and announces, "I yam da laaaaaaaaaaawwwww!" People
get peeved at his "law" and he has to take course in ethics then is
suspected of killing the head of the judges, is found guilty and
sentenced to life in prison.
     In the ship taking him to prison he meets someone he sentenced and
Christian rednecks blow up all but one portion of ship and capture Dredd
and his little friend.  The friend claims he's a believer, and it turns
out the rednecks are cannibals.  Dredd kills all but the stupid, ugly
cyborg who kills the Chief Justice who tells Dredd he was a experiment
and had a evil brother who killed the head.  Dredd-2 makes a zillion
clones who are mysteriously sucked out of the plot.  Dredd beats the
crap outta Dredd-2.  Dredd is assigned to head (headredd, har, har.)
refuses, kisses lawyer, movie credits.  R for violence, 8 for cliches (2
cliches within movie.)

Author
Christopher Null
     You know from the first *second* what you're getting into with this
movie.  The opening to JUDGE DREDD, Sylvester Stallone's new sci-fi action
vehicle, is not a smash-bang action sequence, but rather a montage of
comic book covers from old the Judge Dredd series.  This comic book movie
intro is getting popular (the third time I've seen something like it this
year), and it's getting really, really old.
     After the comics are laid out, we have a screenfull of text,
explaining the mind-numbingly unoriginal premise of JUDGE DREDD, which is
this:  in the future, the world sucks.  At first I didn't know why there
was a voice-over attached to this text, but then I realized that most of
the audience of the film probably couldn't read.
     In this happy land, Sly is a genetically-enhanced "Judge," a
super-cop who dispenses judgments to criminals on the spot of their
crimes.  When his psychotic, also-enhanced brother (Rico, played by Armand
Assante) returns from prison to get his revenge on Dredd by framing him,
Sly finds himself on the run in an attempt to save himself and the world
from Rico.
     Yawn.  Full of crappy digital effects, JUDGE DREDD looks like a bad
B-movie from Roger Corman.  Armand Assante is pathetic as the giggling
villain who is supposed to be Sly's *brother*--I mean, Armand Assante, the
guy who danced in red heels in FATAL INSTINCT?  Yeah, right.  Basically,
Assante grimaces his way through 91 long minutes of this schlock so we can
get to the inevitable showdown.
     JUDGE DREDD does clear up one minor mystery for me.  It answers the
riddle, "How many times can one film use the plot device, 'Someone sneaks
up behind someone else.'"  The answer:  about 20.
     Everything about the movie is just ridiculous.  The ultra-high tech
cops don't seem to notice Rico and his 8-foot tall robot traipsing around
the city.  And of course, the only way to fix a flying motorcycle is to
beat it with one's fist.
     Dialogue saves DREDD from one-star hell.  Sly's got a few good
one-liners, and Rob Schneider is often funny as the comic relief
sidekick.  Fellow Judge Diane Lane also seems to be able to act.  But
that's about it.
