Title
Review for Mundo grúa (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Louis Proyect
Filmed in an extremely gritty, almost sepia, black-and-white, "Crane
World" depicts a overweight, middle-aged Argentinian construction
worker named Rulo who is one step away from permanent unemployment. As
part of a growing neo-realist renaissance including films such as "La
Ciudad" and "Central Station," they offer a single-minded focus on the
losers in the new, highly competitive world economy. By the same
token, none offers a vision of how this situation might improve, least
of all through the examples of their characters, who are adrift like
pieces of wood in a stormy sea.
Rulo, played by Luis Margani, has been trained by a friend to operate
a crane on a construction site in downtown Buenos Aires. The new job
would offer the 49 year old not only some security, but a sense of
dignity. His life has been a string of one dead-end odd-job after
another. None has provided him with income beyond what is necessary to
sustain a very modest life-style. He lives in a cramped apartment and
drives to the construction site in a battered sedan that periodically
breaks down on the city streets. None of this bothers the affable
Rulo, who is always looking on the bright side.
His pleasures are modest. Hanging out with male buddies, he prepares
barbecue in his kitchen, watches soccer matches on television, tinkers
with engines and chain-smokes cigarettes. The highlight of his life
has been a gig in his youth as a bass player with a rock band called
the Seventh Regiment, named after the military unit two of the band
members served with.
An encounter with the proprietress of a sandwich stand near the
construction site leads to a new romance, soon after the woman reveals
that she was a big fan of the band. Keeping with his good-natured
personality, he only chuckles when she blurts out that he used to be
so skinny. What happened to him? He replies that we all get older.
Victim of his own excesses, Rulo discovers that his overweight
condition and general poor health excludes him from the crane
operator's job he had been banking on. In desperation he travels south
to an arid and desolate Patagonia where he has been told that another
crane operator's job is just waiting for him. Not only is the
construction site willing to overlook the physical condition of the
workers, it soon becomes obvious that the employer hardly cares
whether they live or die.
A group of a dozen or so men, including Rulo, live in a run-down
dormitory where there is no running water. They work day and night in
harsh conditions. When the boss neglects to provide lunch day after
day, the men hold a meeting to discuss their options. We can not let
them treat us this way, one worker says. During the meeting Rulo
remains silent.
Eventually they are all laid off. In a scene that epitomizes Rulo's
seemingly foolish determination to put the best spin on a bad
situation, he meets with the foreman who is putting him on a truck
back to Buenos Aires. They exchange pleasantries about how nice it is
to have friends and to share good times. In the final scene, we see a
grim-faced Rulo in his darkened apartment smoking a cigarette. What it
lacks in dramatic resolution, it more than makes up for in honesty
about this character and his lot in life.
The Rulos of this world constitute the overwhelming majority. All they
are looking for is the opportunity to share simple pleasures with
friends and loved ones. Driven by the lash of an increasingly
competitive labor market, they are forced to wander from country to
country, or within a country itself, looking for a permanent job that
pays a decent living wage. At one time Argentina had a powerful labor
movement that influenced film-makers. That labor movement, as is the
case in the rest of the world, has been in retreat. When it is reborn,
it certainly will inspire a different kind of movie with a different
kind of central character. In the meantime, it is essential that
directors like Pablo Trapero have the audacity to describe the world
as it is, in contradistinction to the pleasant lies coming out of
Hollywood and its outposts overseas.
("Crane World" is currently being shown at the Screening Room in New
York City. It closes on April 13.)
