Title
Review for Bullets Over Broadway (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Let's face it, Woody Allen never changes and his yearly movies
never disappoint.  That much we know.  His films always open with the
same nondescript titles, they always star an great ensemble cast, and,
lately at least, they always comment on the role of the artist.
     BULLETS OVER BROADWAY is set in the 1920's and stars John Cusack
as a young Village playwright with a mob boss as a backer.  The catch:
the boss's mistress (Jennifer Tilly) has to get a part.  The girl can't
act, but she's no worse than the material--dialogue that a needs
doctor and needs one badly.  Help arrives in the form of the bodyguard
(Chaz Palminteri), who has a better ear than the author and who starts
suggesting rewrites to the playwright.
     Light, loose, and a little bit overlong, BULLETS OVER BROADWAY has
several side-splitting sequences.  The best, by far, is the first
meeting between the playwright, the mobster, and mistress.  Who else
but Jennifer Tilly can pronounce "hors d'oeuvres" as "horse dervs" and
sound so natural?  Then there's Dianne Wiest, enormous fun as an aging
theater queen who bears no small resemblance to Norma Desmond.  Her
great line:  "Don't speak."
OSCAR WATCH:   Wiest and, maybe, Tilly and Palminteri.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  John Cusack, Dianne Wiest, Chazz Palminteri, Jennifer
Tilly, Joe Viterelli, Jack Warden.
Screenplay:  Woody Allen and Douglas McGrath.
Director:  Woody Allen.
     Over the last few years, no filmmaker's work has been linked as
closely to his personal life as Woody Allen's has been.  1992's
HUSBANDS AND WIVES focused on troubled marriages, and showed Allen's
character infatuated with a much younger woman; the parallels to
Allen's life were hard to ignore.  Last year's MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY
was the kind of light comedy Allen hadn't made in years, and seemed to
indicate a desire to return to simpler times.  BULLETS OVER BROADWAY is
another comedy, but it's no pure lark.  Hilarious as it is, it's also a
sly bit of self-mockery, an indication that Allen the artist
acknowledges the foibles of Allen the man.
     Set in Prohibition-era New York, BULLETS OVER BROADWAY is the
story of David Shayne (John Cusack), an earnest young playwright whose
two previous flops are making it difficult for him to find backing for
his latest play, "God of Our Fathers."  An opportunity presents itself
when mobster Nick Valenti (Joe Viterelli) offers to provide all
necessary backing for the play, provided one of the roles goes to his
talentless, would-be actress girlfriend Olive (Jennifer Tilly).  David
is consumed by the idea that he has sold out, but the worst is yet to
come.  As rehearsals progress, it becomes clear that there are problems
with the play, and the solutions come from an unlikely source --
Olive's bodyguard Cheech (Chazz Palminteri).
     Those who found they needed Dramamine to cope with the
hyperkinetic camera movement in HUSBANDS AND WIVES and MANHATTAN MURDER
MYSTERY will be delighted to learn that Allen lays off the hand-held.
In fact, his direction seems a bit too constrained at times, as though
the theater itself were creating a kind of claustrophobia.  But while
this is far from Allen's best work as a director, his script,
co-written by Douglas McGrath, is fantastic.  The dialogue contains as
many laugh-out-loud lines as any film this year, and the plot takes at
least one twist so delightfully unexpected that its revelation may
provide the single biggest laugh.  In a year woefully short on good
comedies, BULLETS OVER BROADWAY may be a saving grace.
     As usual, Allen has a marvelous ensemble cast at his disposal to
bring his script to life, though not all are equally well-used.  Jim
Broadbent and Tracey Ullman, as two of the play's cast members, are
basically one-note types; John Cusack has some marvelous early scenes
as he realizes the kind of person he is dealing with in Nick, but his
character gets lost in the shuffle a bit.  Jennifer Tilly, however, is
dead solid perfect as the simple-minded Olive, and Rob Reiner has a
wonderful bit part as a pretentious playwright who takes great pride in
the fact that "both intellectuals and common people find (his plays)
completely impenetrable."  But the two showcase roles belong to Dianne
Wiest and Chazz Palminteri.  As Helen Sinclair, the play's haughty
star, Wiest brings down the house with her manipulations of David to
spice up her character, and her cry of "Don't speak!"  Palminteri is
even better as Cheech, a career hood who discovers his latent talent,
and that he'll do anything to protect his creation.  It's a wonderful,
subtle performance worthy of Oscar consideration.
     Yet beneath all the laughs in BULLETS OVER BROADWAY is a moral
question framed by the Reiner character's hypothetical question of
which you would save from a burning building:  the last copy of
Shakespeare's works, or some anonymous person.  "The artist creates his
own moral universe," he says, but the turns of the story work against
that notion.  Better to be a good man than a great artist, Allen seems
to argue, and it's difficult not to read that thesis as a minor mea
culpa for his tabloid-headline exploits.  In the course of exorcising
some of his own demons, accompanied by a laugh track, Allen has created
one of his post purely entertaining films in years.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Woody Allen is back and, in case you were wondering, he is as good
as ever.   For this double satire on gangsters and "The Theatre," he
chose the 1920s which was the height of the gangsters a la Damon Runyon
characters as well as Broadway's peak decade.
     David Shayne (John Cusack) is a playwright seeking to get his
work staged and directed by himself.   A starry-eyed writer, filled
with integrity, he is told by his potential producer, Julian Marx (Jack
Warden), that a gangster, Nick Valenti (Joe Viterelli), is willing to
be the play's angel provided his talentless showgirl moll, Olive
(Jennifer Tilly), gets a juicy part in the play.  In this case, she
wants the role of the psychiatrist.
     David, if he sets aside his principles and hires Olive, will be
able to get Helen Sinclair (Dianne Wiest), a prima donna who likes to
imbibe, as well as the money to hire Eden Brent (Tracey Ullman) and
Warner Purcell (Jim Broadbent).   No contest: David's principles
lose.
     Lest I run the risk of being a "Spoiler," allow me only to say
that Cheech, (Chazz Palminteri), the gangster's lieutenant, is assigned
to sit in at the rehearsals to see that Olive gets the part she wants,
act as her bodyguard and to keep an eye on things.  This turns into
some of the funniest scenes in the movie.   Palminteri, by the way, is
the author of that excellent screenplay, A BRONX TALE, in which he
played Sonny, a gangster.
     Also helping things along are Rob Reiner, Mary-Louise Parker and
Harvey Fierstein.   A great cast.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  10/21/94 (NY), 11/4/94 (everywhere) 
Running Length:  1:38 
Rated:  R (Violence, mature themes, language) 
Starring: John Cusack, Dianne Wiest, Chazz Palminteri, Jennifer Tilly,
          Mary-Louise Parker, Jim Broadbent, Jack Warden, 
          Tracey Ullman, Joe Viterelli, Rob Reiner, Harvey Fierstein 
Director: Woody Allen 
Producer:  Robert Greenhut 
Screenplay:  Woody Allen and Douglas McGrath 
Cinematography:  Carlo Di Palma 
Released by Miramax Films 
     Sure as the turning of the leaves, this time of the year, fresh
with the scent of Oscars to come, brings the release of a new Woody
Allen motion picture.  Two years ago, his fall contribution was
HUSBANDS AND WIVES.  Last year, it was MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY.  This
year, the entry is something called BULLETS OVER BROADWAY, which
represents Allen's first stint behind the camera without going in front
of it since 1990 (ALICE).
     It's odd how the director's personal life manages to intrude
itself into his films.  Throughout his career, this has been the case,
and circumstances haven't changed with BULLETS OVER BROADWAY.  The
greatest evidence for this comes in a theme that could have been taken
right out of Dostoevsky's CRIME AND PUNISHMENT: what, if any, ethical
constraints bind the conduct and conscience of a true artist?  Or, to
use Allen's own words:  does a man possessed of true artistic genius
create "his own moral universe"?
     BULLETS OVER BROADWAY is the most insightful and deliciously droll
look at show business since Robert Altman skewered Hollywood in 1992's
THE PLAYER.  Covering much the same ground as NAKED IN NEW YORK, albeit
in a different era (the 1920s) and with much greater success, BULLETS
OVER BROADWAY questions what real art is.  Just because a play is
compromised, does that make it a less valid expression of ideas?  And
is it possible to get anything made without giving in on some element
of artistic integrity?  Allen toys with those issues, taking playful
jabs at his audience, himself, and the entertainment industry as a
whole.
     David Shayne (John Cusack as Allen's alter-ego) is a playwright
with a brilliant script that no one wants to produce.  Since it's
"art", the belief is that it's destined for obscurity. ("If the common
people don't understand your work, you're a genius.")  Then, along
comes a gangster (Joe Viterelli) looking for a role for his manifestly
untalented actress girlfriend Olive (Jennifer Tilly).  For the price of
including her in the play, David can have all the money he needs.
Despite a pricking conscience and the warnings of his girlfriend
(Mary-Louise Parker), he agrees.
     To round out the cast, David chooses as his leading lady Helen
"Don't Speak" Sinclair (a wonderfully over-the-top Dianne Wiest), a
star with an ego to match her mammoth reputation, and as his leading
man, British thespian Warner Purcell (the always-reliable Jim
Broadbent), a food addict who falls off the dieting wagon whenever he
gets nervous.
     Despite noteworthy performances by Cusack, Wiest, and Broadbent,
the standout is Chazz Palminteri's Cheech, a hard-bitten wise guy
assigned the duty of chaperoning Olive.  Palminteri proves that his
performance in A BRONX TALE was no fluke.  This is an actor capable of
astonishing breadth and depth, who can effortlessly switch back and
forth from comedy to drama.
     In Jennifer Tilly, Allen has found the perfect actress to play the
helium-voiced, totally untalented Olive.  It's almost frightening how
good Tilly is in this role.  Other than perhaps Melanie Griffith, it's
difficult to conceive of anyone doing as credible a job.  Also making
appearances are Tracey Ullman, Harvey Fierstein, Rob Reiner (who has
all the best lines), Joe Viterelli, Jack Warden, and Mary-Louise Parker
(whose part here echoes that from NAKED IN NEW YORK, where she also was
the playwright's girlfriend).
     With its legitimate issues couched in laughter, BULLETS OVER
BROADWAY is a delight to experience.  Solid performances, a clever
script (which contains at least one truly outrageous twist), and a
jaunty soundtrack of '20s songs keep this movie a notch above many of
Allen's recent films.  And good Woody Allen is always a sure bet for
entertainment.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Joan Ellis
     BULLETS OVER BROADWAY is a very funny movie that soars on the
talents of an inspired ensemble cast.  Their success springs in part
from the physical absence of Woody Allen, whose celebrity has become a
distraction.  By staying off screen, he showcases his extraordinary
ways as writer, director, and truth-seer.
     Allen wrings truth from life by spotlighting it with exaggerations
of achingly familiar human behavior.  He enlarges the essence of
things.  When his aspiring artists gather in a Greenwich Village
coffeehouse to dissect the dilemmas of the creative life, they are
universal.  When his characters agonize their ways through life, they
are us.  Allen's double edge is that he shows us ourselves so cleverly
that we squirm while we laugh.
     The movie explodes off the starting block when David Shayne (John
Cusack), a writer of bad plays who believes they are good, gets a shot
at bringing his awful new play to Broadway if he will just compromise
his soul.  Nick (Joe Viterelli) will finance David's play if his
girlfriend, Olive (Jennifer Tilly), is given a substantial supporting
role.  Will David sell out? What's to sell when you have no talent?
     Nick's henchman, Cheech (Chazz Palminteri), will baby-sit Olive
for the run of the play.  Prima donna Helen Sinclair (Dianne Wiest)
will star; and she will try to control everyone who steps into her
reflected glory.  Allen brings the cast together for the first
rehearsal in a hilarious piece of revelation, and when he's finished,
we know the foibles and eccentricities of each of his characters.
     This is a gang of Roaring Twenties-era writers and actors who
operate within the magnetic field of Broadway against a backdrop of
period molls, dolls, and the men who own them.  Gangsters talk about
arson, murder, and revenge as if they were items on a grocery list.
People get bumped off on docks as casually as an employee is
reprimanded by a boss.  It's all cardboard, and it's very funny because
Allen telegraphs his obvious punches with great subtlety.
     Diane Wiest invests Helen with the outrageous behavior of the star
who knows her remaining time in the arena is short.  She toasts "an
ideal world with no compromise" as she and everyone around her bargain
their souls away--except for Cheech, who becomes the noble presence.
He is the hood with a surefire ear for the dialogue of life and an
unshakable determination to protect the integrity of the play he has
made his own.  Chazz Palminteri breezed into view last year in A BRONX
TALE, a movie he wrote, directed, and stole from Robert De Niro.  As
Cheech, his performance is nearly perfect.
     Watching other people mess up can be excruciatingly funny.  The
simplest equations in life are usually complicated only by the tortured
egos of the players, and these players twist themselves into pretzels
trying to make life work.  It's a beautiful example of Woody's pastiche
of crystal-clear contradictions.  It's Woody Allen.


Author
Steve Rhodes
     BULLETS OVER BROADWAY is Woody Allen's latest movie.  It is one of
his pure comedies with no attempt at any seriousness.  It is not as
slapstick or silly as say BANANAS or TAKE THE MONEY AND RUN.  It is
more in the vein of THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO or BROADWAY DANNY ROSE.
     John Cusack plays David Shayne, a young playwright in New York in
the 20s.  Shayne thinks he is Chekov and claims he will change none of
his work to pander to the audience.  This causes a problem since he is
going broke and the public hates his plays.  With the public turning up
their noses, funding dries up.
     This lack of money difficulty is solved by his agent (Jack
Warden).  The agent simply finds a gangster who, playing the devil
character, allows Shayne to sell his intellectual soul away.  All he
need do is let the gangster's girlfriend get a major role in the play.
She (Jennifer Tilly) is so awful that Ed Wood might have given up on
her as hopeless.  On the other hand, she has a bodyguard, Cheech (Chazz
Palminteri).  who watches over her and manages to steal every scene he
is in.  My thumb ended in the up position mainly on the strength of
Palminteri's performance.
     The lead actress of the play (Dianne Wiest) is a has been who
thinks she is still the biggest star around.  Many other good minor
characters, especially that of the bohemian artist (Rob Reiner).
     The sound effects editing and, to a lessor extent, the dialog made
BULLETS OVER BROADWAY feel more like a play than a movie.  This can be
heard most of all in the indoor scenes.  The speech dominates
everything, is frequently spoken extra loud without shouting, and there
is a minimum of ambient noise in the background.
     The acting is good, but other than Palminteri, nothing special.
The dialog is bright and funny but not Allen's best.  The street scenes
of New York are extremely well done.  My favorite of these is the scene
of the Bohemians playing chess, eating, and drinking at an outdoor cafe
in Greenwich Village.
     BULLETS OVER BROADWAY runs only 1:38 but still seemed like it
needed a bit more editing.  It is rated R but should have been PG-13.
It has some profanity, a little violence, and no sex or nudity.  It
would be fine for teenagers to see by themselves.  I give it a mild
thumbs up - I had hoped for more, but it is funny.  I award it ** 1/2.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: November 1, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
