Title
Review for For Your Eyes Only (1981)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This is probably the only Roger Moore-James Bond movie 
that effectively mixes action with substance. The next film, 
OCTOPUSSY, would try for the same effect but not quite succeed. 
Most of that comes courtesy of Bond's female sidekick, Melina, who 
looks like a pretty version of Alanis Morissette. She's out for revenge 
on the man who killed her parents, and packs a mean crossbow to 
accomplish it. She crosses paths with Bond, who is tracking the 
location of a transmitter.
        Bond meets two crime bosses, one of which has to be the 
killer's boss. It turns out to be the guy masquerading as an Olympic ice 
skater's sponsor. The skater, a pretty young thing, seems to be the first 
willing female Bond has ever turned down. There she is, lying naked 
on his bed as he walks in, but he won't take her up on her request 
because she's too young. (He's got standards so high he apparently 
won't date anyone who's age isn't in the double digits. Good for you, 
James!) He offers her an ice cream instead of his human popsicle.
        The Winter Olympics motif makes for some interesting 
chases. Not only is thre the obligatory ski chase and a fight on a 
hockey rink, but this time there's a chase on the bobsled run. At least 
they didn't throw in a luge run and some ice dancing. The climax has 
a little more class, as Bond and Melina (wielding her crossbow) 
converge on the villain's monastery hideout. Influenced by such a 
sacred place, Bond decides at the end of the movie that he's going to 
become a monk.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In 1981's FOR YOUR EYES ONLY we learn that even James Bond,
superspy and playboy par excellence, has his limits when it comes to
romantic liaisons.  A sexually attractive, young skater and would-be
Olympian named Bibi, played with provocative pseudo-innocence by
Lynn-Holly Johnson, puts her moves on James by jumping naked into his
bed.  He curtly refuses her with, "Put your clothes back on, and I'll
buy you an ice-cream."  She seems a bit too young, and, besides, her
uncle asked him to keep an eye on her.
     On the other hand, Bond is perfectly willing to take other risks.
When invited in by a lovely woman in what seems certain to be a trap,
he's happy to play the odds in return for a potential night of
pleasure.  Roger Moore, back for his fifth time as Bond, dresses more
casually in this outing.  Wearing a black turtleneck and coat, Moore
has a body that makes every wardrobe fit him like a glove.
     As the show opens, a control boat with a key device that gives
directions and firing orders to British subs is sunk.  Someone needs to
find where it went down and retrieve the secret controls.  But where
exactly did it sink, and which group is responsible?
     As Melina, the daughter of parents murdered earlier, Carole
Bouquet plays Bond's aid and one of his many romantic companions.
Bibi's "uncle" Kristatos, underplayed by Julian Glover, turns out to be
this episode's bad guy.  Without a credible villain or a suitably
sinister plot, the show drifts more than it excites.
     In the de rigueur chase sequence, the movie asks the question: Are
two fast motorbikes with on-board machine guns more than a match for
Bond as he escapes with just a pair of skis?  If you don't know the
answer, this has to be your first Bond movie.
     In one of the hokier gadgets Q (Desmond Llewelyn) ever came up
with, Bond and Q employee an Identigram, which allows one to describe a
person in English.  After a vague description about facial features,
the exact image of the person in question begins to emerge in its
monitor from a sketch so crude that it looks like kindergarten art.
     Continuing in its tradition of good visuals, this time our Bond
travelogue takes us to the sun drenched Greek islands with its
bikini-clad women and twisting narrow streets.  And after that we're
off to the ski slopes of the majestic Italian Alps, all filmed
beautifully by Alan Hume.
     With Kristatos's men in hot pursuit, Bond and Melina eventually
retrieve the sunken control panel.  One of my favorite illogical
aspects of this Bond movie, and every one of them has plenty, is that
with two flashlights 600 feet underwater Bond and Melina brightly
illuminate everything in front and back of them.  And sure to generate
a few chuckles, the attacker's diving suit is an enormous white one
that looks like the robot in the old television series, "Lost in
Space."
     So what does the device that cost so many lives look like?  A
simple keyboard console that presumably contains some secret chips.
How one misses GOLDFINGER and the early Bond films in which the gadgets
had more style and imagination.
     In his first theatrical film Charles Dance from MICHAEL COLLINS
appears briefly to say one inconsequential line before he disappears.
So does Specter's #1, who materializes without showing his face before
Bond kills him again.  Perhaps this time he is completely dead, but you
never know; he might be resurrected yet again.  Such is the magic of
motion pictures.
     FOR YOUR EYES ONLY runs 2:07.  It is rated PG for violence and
sexual innuendo and would be fine for kids around 9 and up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, thought the movie was just okay.  He
liked the ski chase and the underwater parts, but didn't like the way
they showed a little blood in the movie.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Roger Moore, Carole Bouquet, Julian Glover, Topol, 
      Lynn-Holly Johnson, Michael Gothard, Desmond Llewelyn, 
      Lois Maxwell, Walter Gotell
Director: John Glen
Producer: Albert R. Broccoli 
Screenplay: Richard Maibaum and Michael G. Wilson
Cinematography: Alan Hume
Music: Bill Conti
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     With FOR YOUR EYES ONLY, Roger Moore's fifth appearance as Bond and 
the twelfth entry in the long-running series, 007 enters the 1980s with 
a return to the "glory days" of the '60s.  Realizing it would be tough 
to top the technical glitz of MOONRAKER, the film makers wisely chose 
not to try, opting instead for a retro-Bond adventure that takes the 
intrepid superspy back into familiar territory:  KGB involvement in a 
plan that centers on classified British secrets.
     But that's not the only aspect of FOR YOUR EYES ONLY that looks 
more to Bond's past than his future.  Blofeld, the constant nemesis 
during the Connery years, makes a brief return appearance, and the film 
opens with 007 visiting the grave of his dead wife, Tracy.  Regarding 
familiar faces, M isn't in this movie (Bernard Lee having died just 
prior to the start of filming), but Q (Desmond Llewelyn) and Moneypenny 
(Lois Maxwell) are.  Also, KGB general Gogel (Walter Gotell), who first 
came on board during THE SPY WHO LOVED ME, has a small part.  (Gogel was 
in every film from SPY through THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS.)
     Bond's mission this time, "for [his] eyes only", is to locate and, 
if possible, recover Great Britain's ATAC equipment -- a ship-based 
weapons system that allows the user to take control of the country's 
nuclear submarines, ordering them to attack any target.  ATAC was on 
board a freighter that sank in the Ionian Sea, and Bond has at least one 
major rival, a sly villain named Kristatos (Julian Glover), who's after 
it as well.  Joining 007 on his quest is Melina (French actress Carole 
Bouquet), the daughter of a scientist killed by Kristatos, who has vowed 
revenge against her father's murderers.  Also along for the ride is the 
good-natured smuggler Columbo (Topol), who Kristatos set up as a fall 
guy.
     Locations in FOR YOUR EYES ONLY vary across Europe.  On a per-
minute basis, there are more stunts and chases in this film than in any 
previous 007 adventure, and some are quite spectacular.  There's a car 
chase, a shoot-and-dodge race down icy slopes and through a bobsled run, 
a tense mountain-scaling sequence, and nearly as much underwater action 
as in THUNDERBALL.  FOR YOUR EYES ONLY has its share of breathtaking 
moments.  As for the music -- suffice it to say that John Barry is 
missed.
     Alas, Julian Glover's Kristatos won't be remembered as one of the 
great 007 bad guys.  While the actor's ability is beyond question, it's 
usually not talent that makes for a memorable Bond villain, and Glover 
just isn't over-the-top or nasty enough.  (One wonders if the film 
makers might have done better keeping Blofeld around for more than the 
pre-credits sequence.)  Locque (Michael Gothard), Kristatos' henchman, 
is as dull as his master -- he looks evil, but in the wake of Jaws, 
comes across as rather pathetic.  
     Like Diana Rigg in ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE, Carole Bouquet 
is one of the few Bond girls who can actually act (although she doesn't 
get much chance to show it).  Lynn-Holly Johnson plays a young skater 
who's infatuated with 007, but this particular subplot, played for 
comedy, never works, and is occasionally painful to endure.  
Fortunately, it doesn't eat up much screen time.  
     In the final analysis, FOR YOUR EYES ONLY is a solid adventure, 
although it could have been better.  There's enough action to hold those 
with even a short attention span, and Roger Moore's deft charm hasn't 
yet begun to wear thin (that starts with the next film, OCTOPUSSY).  By 
the end of the '80s, Bond would be viewed as something of a relic, but 
at least the decade opened with an enjoyable outing.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin
