Title
Review for Things Behind the Sun (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rachel Gordon
Allison Anders not only has enough balls to revisit one of the worst
experiences of her life in Things Behind the Sun, but she travels
through emotional territory normally unheard of in films based on rape
-- namely a male character who is a victim and a perpetrator at the same
time.
As a woman, it is always difficult to watch a movie involving rape. 
When filmed realistically, as Things is, it's impossible to distance
yourself from the onscreen pain.  And when a film is not constructed
with realism the result is anger from shoddy storytelling, or with a
filmmaker failing miserably to grasp the emotional honesty in a
situation they can't understand.
Owen (Gabriel Mann) works for a music magazine.  A colleague wants to do
a story on Sherry (Kim Dickens), whose music has become popular on
campuses after building a following through the Florida bar scene. 
Sherry's songs are filled with emotional pain, based on having been
gang-raped at a young age.  Owen not only knows her, but he was a forced
perpetrator of the crime by his elder brother Dan, (a chilling cameo by
Eric Stoltz) so he ends up taking over the story.
Sherry doesn't appear as a victimized angel like other women have in
films about rape.  She makes herself easily available for sex,
especially after alcoholically anesthetizing herself, despite the
efforts of her well-meaning boyfriend Chuck (Don Cheadle).  She treats
her fellow band members like peons.  And for some reason, once a year,
keeps passing out drunk in front of a house she can no longer recognize.
There is a fascinating emotional struggle as Owen attempts to help
Sherry remember the details of her worst experience, supposedly for her
sake but also to purge himself of the guilt that still doesn't allow him
to achieve orgasm.  After all, it is Sherry that initially influenced
his appreciation for music, and hence his adult life.  It's
understandable that he would feel as if he owes her some peace. 
Unfortunately, he cannot define what will give her that calm, so this
assistance is also pushed away.
Sherry's turnaround to work for a healthy life is a bit forced, possibly
because after showing one self-destructive scene after another this
change seems so quick.  By the same token, you need her to find some
inner strength, or the film becomes depressingly unwatchable.
This is a hard film to watch, and yet it adheres to a perspective
important for both men and women to see.  It's not a story of good
versus evil, though it's based on a horrible crime.  Films like The
Accused are powerful in that they comment on the short-term effects of
rape -- namely the immediate needs of the victim.  What sets Things
Behind the Sun apart from such predecessors is that it takes these
stories one step further, to the severe aftermath of living with these
memories years later.
Director: Allison Anders
Producer: Daniel Hassid, Doug Mankoff, Robin Alper
Writer: Allison Anders, Kurt Voss
Starring: Kim Dickens, Gabriel Mann, Don Cheadle, Alison Folland,
Elizabeth Pena, Eric Stoltz, Rosanna Arquette
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
