Title
Review for 15 Minutes (2001)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
15 Minutes (2001)
Robert De Niro, Edward Burns, Kelsey Grammer, Avery Brooks, Melina
Kanakaredes, Karel Roden, Oleg Taktarov, Vera Farmiga, John DiResta,
James Handy, Darius McCrary, Bruce Cullen, Charlize Theron, Kim
Cattrall, David Alan Grier. Written and directed by John Herzfeld. 120
minutes.
Rated R, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"15 Minutes" is notable for two things. One is a truly harrowing fire
scene and the other will have to remain a secret. All I can say is that
midway through the film something very surprising happens, something
I've only seen happen in one other movie, and I can't tell you the name
of that film, either. Please forgive me for being so cryptic.
Incidentally, the crow flies south at midnight.
What "15 Minutes" will not be remembered for is originality or finesse.
The violent thriller addresses celebrity culture and media
irresponsibly, themes already (and far better) covered in films ranging
from "Network" to "Natural Born Killers." Director John Herzfeld ("2
Days in the Valley"), working from his own written-in-crayons
screenplay, offers a strutting tabloid newsman who shouts, "If it
bleeds, it leads!" and an immigrant killer who says things like, "I love
America! No one is responsible for what they do!" Subtle, eh?
The title of the film, of course, refers to the beaten-into-the-ground
Andy Warhol prediction that, in the future, everybody will be famous for
15 minutes.
On a guilty pleasure level, "15 Minutes" has its moments. I found the
lurid tone, contrived situations and overwrought dialogue good for a few
cheap laughs. Remember though, that I didn't have to pay for a ticket.
If you're preparing to spend hard-earned money on a movie, for God's
sake, seek out a quality production and don't settle for this sort of
cheese.
The story follows Emil Slovak (Karel Roden) and Oleg Razgul (Oleg
Taktarov), a pair of thugs new to America shores. Within minutes of
their arrival in New York, Oleg, who is such a film freak that he
introduces himself as Frank Capra, steals a pricey video camera from a
Times Square shop. The big man with little boy eyes plans to record
everything that happens to him and his friend, believing that his
"movie" will bring him fame and fortune.
Oleg's documentary takes a dark turn when the pair pays a visit to some
former criminal partners. Emil learns that the money from a bank robbery
has been spent, then murders his ex-colleagues and torches their place
in an attempt to cover up the homicides, all while Oleg keeps filming.
Ah, but there's a witness. Daphne (Vera Farmiga), a jittery hairdresser,
sees it all and, unfortunately, the men see her.
Enter the Americans. Homicide detective Eddie Flemming (Robert De Niro)
is a beloved New York celebrity, thanks to frequent TV news coverage. So
popular is he that Robert Hawkins (Kelsey Grammer), the preening host of
the tabloid series "Top Story," often gathers a camera crew and
accompanies Eddie on busts. Due to the nature of the crime,
just-plain-folks arson expert Jordy Warsaw (Edward Burns) ends up
reluctantly teamed with Eddie. A wary mentor-mentee relationship
develops between the two as they try to find the witness and snag the
killers.
Meanwhile, Emil comes up with a plan. He will continue to let Oleg tape
his monstrous acts and sell the snuff footage for broadcast by some
unscrupulous news organization (guess who?). Then he will allow himself
to be caught, plead insanity due to poor self-esteem and childhood abuse
and get a spot in a cushy mental hospital. After a time, he will be
"cured" and released, enabling him to cash in on his fame, safe from
further prosecution due to the double jeopardy provision in our legal
system.
Oh, what a sick world we live in. Thank goodness we have
writer-directors like John Herzfeld to decry a culture that wallows in
the lurid display of violence by creating a movie that wallows in the
lurid display of violence.
To their credit, I guess, the cast plays the hokum straight. Robert De
Niro is fine in an unchallenging role, hindered only by a needless "Taxi
Driver" style scene that has him staring into a mirror while practicing
what to say on an important date. As usual, Edward Burns is annoying as
hell, using his standard "my underwear is too tight" voice to whine and
shout his way through the movie. In the role of media whore, Kelsey
Grammer comes off like Ted Baxter on cocaine. A number of other
well-known faces pop up in cameo roles without making much of an
impression.
The bad guys are better. As Emil, Karel Roden overacts in an
appropriately villainous fashion, while Oleg Taktarov steals the show as
the would-be filmmaker, managing to be threatening and childlike at
once. Watch this guy closely  he has the potential for greatness.
That, by the way, is the only time you will ever hear the word greatness
in connection with "15 Minutes."

Author
Bob Bloom

 15 Minutes (2001). Starring Robert De Niro, Edward Burns, Kelsey
Grammer, Avery Brooks, Melina Kanakaredes, Karel Roden and Oleg
Taktarov. Written and directed by John Herzfeld. Rated R.
 Supposedly buried deep within 15 Minutes is some profound statement
about our society, its relationship with the media and how said media
allows us to abrogate our responsibilities for our actions.
 Or 15 Minutes could just be another cynical, exploitive melodrama out
to score a quick buck by offering audiences what they crave ó violence
and sex ó or at least female nudity.
 Actually 15 Minutes is an amalgamation of both. It damns tabloid
journalism ó especially those reality-based news shows such as Hard Copy
and Inside Edition ó while simultaneously allowing the audience to be
voyeurs to some rather gruesome proceedings.
 15 Minutes is fascinating in a cheesy and sleazy way. This loud, crass
thriller sucks you into the action, and you discover a kernel of
enjoyment in this overblown drama. Afterward, though, your conscience
berates you indulging yourself in such low-fare, obvious melodramatics.
 15 Minutes tries to take the high-road approach of foisting itself off
as an examination of our culture's cravings for celebrities ó to the
point that we don't care if the people shown on camera are cops or
killers. If they're on TV, they're famous, which gives them to impetus
to try to get away with murder.
 But this is only window dressing, because ó at its core ó 15 Minutes is
nothing more than your standard-fare cops hunting down killers B-movie
plot.
 Some of the plot points are so dumb that you wonder how
screenwriter-director John Herzfeld was allowed to keep them in his
script.
 For example, the two lowlife criminals are Eastern European refugees.
One is a movie-crazy Czech, the other an ex-con from Russia, newly
released from prison.
 They come to the United States to collect money from an old pal with
whom they pulled a job in the old country. Which old country, we are
never told, but it makes no difference.
 From the outset these two goons, Emil Slovak (Karel Roden) and Oleg
Razgul (Oleg Taktarov), should be setting off alarms. They do nothing
but sweat. It pours off them like a sumo wrestler in a Turkish bath.
 Plus, they look so shifty at customs, that the dimwit who allows them
into the country, should be fired.
 But, of course, they are passed through, so they can begin their
murderous spree.
 Representing the side of law and order is Detective Eddie Flemming
(Robert De Niro), a media darling who breaks the big cases and who
manages to always get his mug ó and his collars ó on a fast-paced
tabloid TV show hosted by the smarmy Robert Hawkins (Kelsey Grammer).
 Flemming is aided by fire marshal Jody Warsaw (Edward Burns), who gets
involved in the case after our two slimebags torch a building to cover a
crime.
 All of this leads to a lot of spilled blood, gunfire, cursing and legal
wranglings.
 Of course, virtue triumphs in the end and the American way of life is
preserved.
 15 Minutes does offer one big shocker, but even that is not enough to
elevate it from programmer status.
The media, of course, is the scapegoat as well as the punching bag ó
literally ó for the ills of society.
 The performances are mixed. De Niro, who seems to be taking any kind of
role and whatever he is offered, adds nothing to his canon. Here he
relies on props ó a cigar, a two-headed quarter ó to create his
character.
 Burns seems to whine his every line. At times, he sounds like that Will
Ferrell character on Saturday Night Live who cannot modulate his voice.
 The acting honors here go to Roden and Taktarov as the two émigrés who
try to live the American dream on their own terms. Taktarov, especially,
is memorable as he carries around his little video camera filming
everyone and everything he sees. Life ó and death ó to him are merely
extensions of some cosmic movie in which he is vying for the final cut.
 15 Minutes is a brutal excursion that may make you uncomfortable. But
as a serious examination of the ills of the media and the cult of
celebrity, it is laughable. So take it for what it is, a two-hour-plus
game of cops and robbers played by some well-paid actors.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Steve Rhodes
In 15 MINUTES, Oleg Razgul (Oleg Taktarov), a self-styled Frank Capra, 
has just landed in the USA and is ready to make a "great American movie 
with what America wants -- sex and violence."  With the camcorder that 
he stole in broad daylight from a Times Square electronics store, he has 
the wherewithal to make his magnum opus if he can just find the right 
subject material.  Given that he has arrived with fellow crook Emil 
Slovak (Karel Roden), a murderous miscreant, material will not prove a 
problem.  (Roden is such a dead ringer for TRAINSPOTTING's Robert 
Carlyle that many moviegoers may misidentify him.)
The action starts when Emil commits a double murder as Oleg films it.  
Most of the rest of the movie has Oleg and Emil trying to keep the only 
witness, Daphne (Vera Farmiga), from revealing their identity.  Chasing 
Oleg and Emil are two cops, Eddie (Robert De Niro) and Jordy (Edward 
Burns).  Following the typical buddy cop formula, they start off at 
odds, but end up best buds.
The cigar-chomping, wise-cracking, hard-drinking and (literally) 
hard-driving Eddie is a homicide detective who is so famous that he has 
had his picture on the cover of People magazine.  This high profile cop 
dates a rising network news star.  When Eddie speaks, New York City 
listens.  And when people find out he's on the double murder case, the 
large newspaper headlines reassuringly proclaim, "Eddie's On The Job."
In contrast to the telegenic Eddie, Jordy is an arson investigator used 
to working behind the scenes and never getting into any trouble.  Well, 
there was this one time when he handcuffed a mugger to a tree in Central 
Park and forgot about him, but other than that minor infraction, Jordy 
is a cop who has always kept his nose clean.  The catalyst that brings 
this unlikely cop pair together is the fire that Emil sets to hide the 
evidence after the murder.
"I love America," Emil decides after overdosing on television shows like 
"Roseanne."  "No one is responsible for what they do."  With this 
knowledge, Oleg's tape and help from a sleazy newsmagazine host, Robert 
Hawkins (Kelsey Grammer), Emil devises what he believes to be a 
foolproof scheme to gain fame, fortune and freedom.  Hawkins, whose 
motto is "If it bleeds, it leads," is always ready to sell his soul if 
the price is right.
Written and directed by John Herzfeld (2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY), the uneven 
movie has trouble deciding what kind of picture it wants to be.  At 
first, it goes for light comedic drama, and the parts of the bad guys 
could easily have been played by Robin Williams in his full comedic 
schtick mode.  This light heartedness gives way to an intense and 
sometimes quite violent crime drama.  The intriguing movie works in fits 
and spurts but keeps you with it even with some troubling logical 
problems.  The criminals kill some witnesses but not others, and the 
cops are slow to call for proper backup.  Still, De Niro and Burns are 
both terrific, so it is a movie whose flaws can be easily overlooked.
15 MINUTES runs two hours.  It is rated R for strong violence, language 
and some sexuality and would be acceptable for older teenagers.  
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A media-savvy cop joins a young arson investigator on a case featuring two
nasty Eastern European immigrants searching for their fifteen minutes of
fame.
CRITIQUE:
A very original and timely movie which connects on various levels. Now I
know that I've said this before but here's yet another great performance by
Robert DeNiro, charismatic, funny and as intelligent as ever, an interesting
script which takes the "hot" elements of the day and turns them into a
digestible story and even a little bit of action and humor. In fact, I
probably wouldn't know how to qualify this movie exactly, but one thing that
I can say about it is that it'll definitely have you talking. It'll have you
talking about its meaning, its truth, its fiction, its message, its
reality...pretty much everything that the film tries to address. Unless of
course, you think the movie sucks, in which case, I doubt you'll care to
look over any of it... :)
You see, this film is basically about busting the balls of all the "good
folks" in the media who cannot seem to look past their ratings to ask
themselves if what they're doing is right. Is what they are doing the right
thing to do? Should they be setting couples up on an island filled with
pretty single people just to see if anything will happen? Should they be
showing live child-births on TV? (for journalistic purposes, of course) And
ultimately, what are we gonna do once things start getting really out of
hand? What are we gonna say to live executions on the air, a hostage
negotiations gone awry or maybe even the telecast of an actual murder. Is
that newsworthy? Perhaps...but does that mean that we need to show it on TV?
Has the media lost all sense of decency, morality and self-control? Well, I
won't bore you too much with my own opinion regarding all of this stuff,
other than to say that I am very much against the sacks of human garbage who
continue to propagate this type of sensationalistic so-called "journalism",
but that's another story and column altogether. 
This movie softly touches on all of these questions and concerns, and does
so in a very convincing and entertaining manner. It reveals all of the
hypocrisies by which most of these people live, and also exposes the
manipulative ways by which many of them achieve their goals. Sure, there are
a few weak spots in the script, with the impulsive "bad guys" always seeming
to be one step ahead of their "good guy" counterparts, despite their obvious
nonchalance, and a certain amount of farfetchedness in their ultimate goal,
but overall, I bought most of it with a mighty big spoon. Another great
thing about this movie was its element of surprise. There I was sitting in a
theatre and literally not knowing what would happen next. Quite the unusual
position to be in, let me tell you. It was refreshing to watch a movie in
which originality actually replaced cliches and the characters helped guide
you through their world of real emotions. What else can I say about this
movie? It's basically got a lot of different elements working within it and
most of them worked for me. There are touches of humor, some cool action
scenes, a genuine sense of unpredictability, a little romance, an undeniable
message and many questions left to be discussed. In fact, how many movies
can you name that are actually able to entertain and make you think and
engage in conversation at the same time? Not many, eh? Well, for me this
movie was one of this year's early nice surprises. You go, Bobby!!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Broadcast News (7/10) - EdTV (7/10) - Fight Club (10/10) - Mad City (4/10) -
Ronin (8/10) - The Truman Show (6/10) - Wag the Dog (5/10)

Author
Ross Anthony
"15 minutes" is a title way too small for its film -- like a cork meant 
to damn the Nile. This is the most intense production of the year. 
"Hannibal" scary? Forget it -- comparatively speaking. Director John 
Herzfeld brews up a fervent stew of hard as brass conflict, gruesome 
homicides, tasteful sprinkles of humor, rock solid dialogue, 
tight-as-gears direction, solid performances, grinding sound track, and 
whirling cinematography. Powerful, simply powerful. 
Unfortunately, a few implausibles abate the punch - but not enough to 
stop this rumbling steamroller of a film. Never a dull, boring moment - 
ever. 
Two Europeans thugs come to the States to collect their money from a 
fellow thief and comrade. When they learn he's spent it all, the mean 
thug kills the friend with a kitchen knife while the Hollywood-loving 
thug videotapes the murder. It's gruesome and it's vile and it's angry. 
This film is not for the weak of stomach. Realizing that the friend's 
wife witnessed the crime, the mean one kills her too. Again the somewhat 
comedic Capra-wannabee tapes. Here lies the first implausibility. That 
mean thug would smash that camera against the wall -- this would be 
consistent with his rage and motivation to destroy all evidence of his 
crime. A smashed camera wouldn't have effected the play of the rest of 
the story. 
Those are the two bad boys; the good guys have a duo of their own. Bobby 
De Niro laps up the press as poster cop and "friend" of "Top Story" TV 
tabloid host Kelsey Grammer. Edward Burns plays a crackerjack Arson 
Investigator - a fireman with a gun. The give and take between this cop 
and firefighter team splendidly constructs the spine, heart and soul of 
the film. 
A second implausibility arises when the two bad guys begin to argue over 
ownership of their master plan. It's conceivable of course that this 
would happen, but the manifestation and timing of the event rides an 
altogether different grain from the rest their interplay. 
Both thugs are strong performers. "You think I came to America to work?" 
When the mean thug delivers that line ... you just know he's not very 
well tempered. De Niro endears the viewer to his character by first 
teasing, then assisting his unlikely partner, "You remind me of a puppy 
I used to have." His prep for a proposal moment further cements our 
sympathies ... however the actual proposal scene plays prominently 
cliche in this gritty original film. 
"15 Minutes" starts out like an independent picture, but eventually 
explodes into an all out Hollywood production that takes you up with it 
and slams you down. Excellent dynamics and direction ... this film will 
do very well at the box office. 
15 Minutes. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Robert De Niro, Edward Burns, Kelsey Grammer, Avery Brooks, 
Melina Kanakaredes, Karel Roden, Oleg Taktarov, Vera Farmiga, John 
DiResta, James Handy, Darius McCrary. 
*  Written by Directed by John Herzfeld. 
*  Produced by David Blocker and John Herzfeld at Industry/New 
Redemption/Tribeca a New Line Presentation. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
15 Minutes is, I think, a well-meaning film with lofty intentions, but it
comes off more than a bit contrived and about as subtle as Jesse Ventura.
What is supposed to be a damning indictment of criminal celebrity and the
forces that aid said criminals (i.e. the media, entertainment industry,
justice system and law enforcement) instead comes off as a weaker version of
Natural Born Killers.
15 Minutes focuses on the actions of two Eastern European criminals - crafty
Emil (Karel Roden) and beefy Oleg (Oleg Taktarov) - who, as the film opens,
arrive in New York City to meet up with a partner they believe is holding
onto their share of a bank robbery that the three men committed back in the
old country.  Problem #1: The partner has spent every dime from the heist.
Problem #2: Emil, the group's ringleader, is a stone-cold nutter.  He kills
his (former) partner and torches the building, but a witness (Vera Farmiga)
watches everything go down.
Because the crime is a homicide and involved arson, the city's police and
fire departments butt heads over the investigation.  In the blue corner is
Eddie Flemming (Robert De Niro, Meet the Parents), a media-savvy homicide
dick who has become a national celebrity because of his involvement in a
recent high-profile case.  In the red corner is Jordy Warsaw (Edward Burns,
Saving Private Ryan), an arson investigator for the NYFD.  As long as he
gets the job done, Jordy couldn't care less what the public thinks of him.
The film's hook is that the It's-a-Wonderful-Life-loving Oleg, who stole a
digital camera from a Times Square electronics shop, is filming everything
that he and Emil do.  At first, he does it for kicks, but as the two men
become accustomed to the ways of the Western world (via daytime television),
they realize that robbing banks is a waste of time and energy.  The real
money, it seems, isn't in committing crime, but in selling your story after
you're caught.  Once apprehended, all one needs to do is whine about an
abusive childhood and you're virtually off the hook.  And what better way to
sell your story than with video evidence of your crime spree?
Other than the presence of Oleg's video camera (which is lifted from the
superior French film Man Bites Dog) and the heavy-handed message, 15 Minutes
is full of every cop-flick cliché you can think of.  You've got your old
cop/young cop thing happening, as well as the good guy/bad guy race to get
their hands on the lone witness (and the obligatory romance that follows).
And, of course, you've got the hot-headed police captain who screams until
he's blue in the face.  The last 30 minutes offer a couple of surprises, but
it takes way too long (ironically, about 15 minutes too long) to get to the
inevitable conclusion.
DeNiro does decent work here, but it's nothing too special for someone of
his stature.  He seems better in comedies lately, and does get one funny
scene that's a takeoff on his famous monologue from Taxi Driver.  Burns is
merely adequate, showing that it takes more than just puppy-dog eyes to
excel as an actor.  Kelsey Grammer (Frasier) logs in a nice - albeit brief -
performance as the anchor of a popular tabloid television show, but his
character disappears for 90 minutes.  Providence's Melina Kanakaredes plays
a news reporter and Eddie's girlfriend, but her part seems to be included
only to add a human touch to DeNiro's character (or, possibly, to waste
time).  The real star here is Roden, who easily creates one of the scariest
and most believable screen antagonists in recent memory with this breakout
role. And just in case you weren't tired of seeing Charlize Theron in, like,
every movie, she appears in one scene as the manager of an escort service.
15 Minutes was written and directed by John Herzfeld (2 Days in the Valley).
He does a decent job with the picture's pacing and, thanks to
cinematographer Jean-Yves Escoffier (Cradle Will Rock), is able to get the
most out of using two different sources of film (the normal film stock and
Oleg's digital footage).  A film made only of Oleg's footage (like Man Bites
Dog) would have made for a more interesting and thought-provoking film.  15
Minutes also seemed to let the various evils (the media, et al.) off the
hook way too easily, which kind of undermines the whole point of the
picture.
The scene I found the most interesting was the one that got the largest
response from the audience.  After being wounded in a shootout, Emil pops
open a bottle of Excedrin, pours half the contents into his mouth and
crunches on the chalky pills at top volume while the moviegoers groaned and
grimaced.  This same audience didn't make a peep for the two charred bodies
or the hooker who was cut up like Swiss cheese, but, God forbid they're
forced to watch a guy chewing aspirin. It's a great, and probably completely
unintentional, example of America's desensitization to violence.
1:58 - R for strong violence, language and some sexuality (nudity)

Author
SSG Syndicate
             "In the future, everyone will be famous for 15 minutes," said Andy Warhol, back in 1967, and this action thriller follows a celebrated New York Homicide Detective (Robert De Niro) who teams up with an idealistic, young Fire Dept. Arson Investigator (Edward Burns) to track down a pair of Eastern European killers (Karel Roden, Oleg Taktarov). "I love America! No one is responsible for what they do," marvels the cunning Czech, while the Russian obsessively records their crime spree on video tape. Using their media attention to attain fame, they capture the attention of a glib tabloid news anchor (Kelsey Grammer) and wind up as his lurid "Top Story."
    While director/writer John Herzfeld ("2 Days in the Valley") "borrows" much of this concept from "Network," the plot has the subtlety of a sledgehammer. Cinematographer Jean Yves Escoffier creates edgy suspense, particularly during the graphic arson scenes. Wearing a black wig, Charlize Theron does a cameo as the madam at an escort service, Melina Kankaredes ("Providence") is a reporter, and Kim Cattrall ("Sex and the City") scores as a ruthless "If it bleeds, it leads" TV producer.  Robert De Niro's role is so reminiscent of his previous performances that he seems to do it effortlessly, if superficially, while Edward Burns struggles to overcome the sheer blandness of the way his part is written. As the savvy sociopaths, Karel Roden and Oleg Taktarov steal the picture, leaving Kelsey Grammer as a slimy, one-dimensional villain. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "15 Minutes" is a gritty, satirical 6. If sensational  fame is truly the American game, we're all lo!
sers.

Author
Laura Clifford
When arson investigator Jordy Warsaw (Edward Burns, "Saving Private Ryan")
arrives at a burned out NYC apartment, he finds celebrity cop
Eddie Flemming (Robert DeNiro) intruding on his crime scene.  The two end
up joining forces on the trail of fame seeking killers and the reluctant
witness to their crime in writer/director John Herzfeld's ("2 Days in the 
Valley") "15 Minutes."
Andy Warhol's long lived quote is hammered down from every angle in this
unsubtle but entertaining satire.  We're introduced to Flemming as the 
repeat subject of a Hard Copy-like news program hosted by Robert Hawkins
(Kelsey Grammer, TV's "Frasier"), currently battling his producer (Kim
Cattrall) to maintain his lurid content.  Hawkins is routinely tipped by his 
buddy Eddie to arrive on the scene just as Flemming is about to make arrests.
Meanwhile, new US arrivals Oleg Razgul, (Oleg Taktarov, "Air Force One")
a Russian and Emil Slovak, (Karel Roden) his slow witted Czech buddy, make 
their way to their former partner's home for their share of stolen cash.
When Oleg discovers he's spent time in a Russian prison for nothing, he
brutally murders his old friend and his wife.  Emil, who's stolen a digital
video camera on the way there, videotapes the event.  They discover too
late that their crime has been witnessed by illegal alien Daphne (Vera 
Farmiga, "The Opportunists"), but she leaves her purse, including
identification, behind.  Ensconsed in a seedy hotel, Oleg calls Worldwide
Escorts and asks for a Czech girl.  When he doesn't get Daphne, the duo
tape their third murder.  Television introduces them to Hawkins, Flemming
and his most famous case.   Stephen Geller is a killer who's made a fortune
from his crime because he got off on an insanity defense.  Voila - the
psychopath and aspiring film director now have a plan.  'I love America - no
one's responsible for what they do.' gurgles Oleg.
Herzeld's script is a bit psychotic itself, zigzagging from satire to
thriller, from comedy to excessively gruesome violence.  The whole thing
comes off as wildly over the top, but it's a fun ride, largely due to its 
heroic partners' bantering and its villainous partners' tomfoolery.  Dual 
romances are less successful, with Flemming about to propose to television 
reporter Nicolette (Melina Kanakaredes, TV's "Providence") while Jordy makes 
eyes at forbidden witness Daphne.  Thriller aspects are well done, with a top
notch street chase scene admist midtown traffic and a tense fire entrapment
which pushes Jordy's expertise to the limit.  Herzeld has one surprise up
his sleeve that makes one doubt its reality even after the fact, although
he uses cheap cinematic tricks to set it up.
The cast is terrific with DeNiro utterly believable as a detective who works
the fame game.  Burns is fine as the laid back everyman who first loses, then
wins, at the hands of the media.  Grammer is pitch perfect as the sleezy 
tabloid host while Kanakaredes puts a worthier face on the TV news profession.  
Utterly diabolical, Oleg Taktarov suggests a young Gary Oldman, joyfully 
brutal, completely immoral.  Roden plays  auteur Emil like a wide-eyed puppy 
dog lapping at Oleg's heels, funny yet chilling at the same time.
Cinematographer Jean-Yves Escoffier ("Nurse Betty") uses a full range of
visual mediums to capture the media and movie obsessed characters.  Original 
music by Anthony Marinelli and J. Peter Robinson stirringly underscores
the action.  Production design by Mayne Berke features very realistic looking
arson sets.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Homer Yen
"15 Minutes" was probably a good idea when it was just
an idea and not the laborious 130-minute movie that it
ultimately became.  Probably envisioned as an
issue-driven film about the public's increasing
fascination with bizarre social behavior, this film
seemed to want to make a statement about how askew
society's moral compass has become.  
Our appetite for the obscene has mutated and swelled. 
It has helped to buoy shock programs like Roseanne and
Jerry Springer, spawn circus-like programs like Who
Wants to Marry a Millionaire and the XFL, and has even
reinvented the familiar-but-staid news reporting
format with efforts such as NakedNews.com.
Our standards of decency have considerably decreased,
especially in a metropolitan area such as New York
City in which the film is set.  With its diversity and
anything-goes atmosphere, it has degenerated into a
freakish arena of opportunism where the most bizarre
and frightful are often (and unjustly) rewarded.  
You can blame their undeserving fame on people like
Richard Hawkins (Kelsey Grammer), a tabloid TV
reporter whose personal mantra is "if it bleeds, it
leads" (referring to the kinds of pieces he wants to
show).  Ratings are all that he cares about, and to
that end, he'll risk his life to reveal the identity
of a psychotic killer or air the cold-blooded murder
of a celebrated public official.  Richard is a
double-edged sword, representing the aid and
hindrances that arise from selfishness and neutrality.
 He's an interesting character, but everything else is
extraordinarily dull. 
"15 Minutes" ultimately becomes nothing more than a
flat police thriller in which two psychopaths use
their infamy to become rich.  This duo realizes that
publishers and movie studios will pay for an absurd
story, the double jeopardy rule is a huge legal
loophole, and you can always plead insanity and never
have to go to jail.  "No one is responsible for what
they do," comments one of them.  So, off they go on a
killing spree where each additional victim means more
dollars for them.
On the case are Police Detective Eddie (Robert DeNiro)
and Arson Inspector Jordy (Edward Burns). 
Individually, these two are likeable characters. 
Eddie is a straight shooter while Jordy is earnest. 
But together, the two never develop any chemistry. 
There's a noticeable lack of character development. 
The characters (in fact, every character) just seem to
be doing their own thing as if they were different
planets following different orbits.
Actually, to give them some added dimension, there is
a romantic subplot involving both Eddie and his
girlfriend and Jordy and a pretty witness.  Jordy's
relationship is more pertinent to the story, but the
DeNiro romance could have been eliminated.  This
element seemed needlessly distracting.
While "15 Minutes" is marginal at best, we can sense
the passion that the filmmakers have for this topic
and the ideas that they wanted to get across.   The
message is admirable, but the film lacks polish and
wit and feels very rough around the edges.  In the
end, the good guys get their justice and the bad guys
get theirs, but we will never get ours.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 15 MINUTES (director/writer: John Herzfeld; cinematographer: Jean Yves
 Escoffier; editor: Steven Cohen; cast: Robert De Niro (Eddie
 Flemming), Edward Burns (Jordy Warsaw), Kelsey Grammer (Robert
 Hawkins), Kim Cattrall (Cassandra), Avery Brooks (Leon Jackson),
 Melina Kanakaredes (Nicolette Karas), Karel Roden (Emil Slovak), Vera
 Farmiga (Daphne), Oleg Taktarov (Oleg Razgul), Roseanne (Herself),
 David Alan Grier (Mugger), Bruce Cutler (Himself); Runtime: 119; New
 Line Cinema; 2001)
A mindless action film that exploits the current news headlines while it
presents Andy Warhol's dictum that, in the future, everybody will be
famous for 15 minutes, and adds to that its ludicrous plot revolving
around how everyone is enchanted by fame, either wanting to be a
celebrity or to gawk at them. It also presents an annoyingly didactic
message about violence encouraged by the media for ratings and of
criminals getting away with murder because they know how to bend the
rules, as its maddening story only worsens with an incoherent finale.
There is nothing subtle about this heavy-handed thriller. The good part
of the film is its fast-paced street action scenes and the attention
grabbing psychopathic villain (Karel Roden) challenging the
self-absorbed celebrity ace homicide detective (De Niro), which makes
for vulgar entertainment. It's a film that has about 15 minutes of
fervor to it before it gets grounded into a mixture of sleaze, violence,
and heartless melodrama.
Two vile Eastern European émigrés come to America, believing it is the
land of opportunity for everyone, including criminals. The morose Emil
(Karel Roden) is a Czech, with the bulging eyes and simpering grin of a
lunatic. His partner is a creepy, dim-witted Russian, Oleg (Oleg
Taktarov), who is into taking pictures of everything he sees around him
with his mini camera.
Emil will at one point declare: "I love America! No one is responsible
for what they do," after watching a dumb American tabloid TV show (which
is the way most foreigners unfortunately learn about America).
Before they take care of their NYC business, Oleg impulsively steals an
expensive camcorder off a Times Square store and immediately starts
videotaping everything in his sight. The two then go to the apartment of
Emil's partner in an old country robbery, who stashed the money for them
to split while Emil spent time in prison for the crime. When he tells
Emil he spent the money and can only offer Emil a job as a plumber, Emil
picks up his partner's kitchen knife and savagely stabs him to death and
then chokes his wife to death. To conceal the crime, he puts their
bodies together and douses them with gasoline and burns down the
building. The only problem, is that there was a Czech woman in the other
room who witnessed the murders and escaped down the fire escape. Oleg,
who thinks of himself as Frank Capra, got it all on video.
First on the crime scene, is the 55-year-old homicide detective, Eddie
Flemming (Robert De Niro), who tells a popular tabloid TV program,"Top
Story," hosted by sleazy Robert Hawkins (Kelsey Grammer), a business
friend of Eddie's, about his arrests so he can get exclusive footage of
it which enables his show to have top ratings, in return Eddie gets
publicity which has made him into a celebrity, the toast of the grateful
town. Eddie's girlfriend is that program's TV reporter (Melina
Kanakaredes), and they mutually help their careers grow. The only good
thing about this arrangement, is that despite its seamly nature, Eddie
is a dedicated and good cop, and the show does help in catching
criminals. Second on the crime scene is a young fire marshal, Jordy
Warsaw (Edward Burns), who is upset that the publicity hound homicide
detective is stepping on what is supposed to be his crime scene. But
they both conclude there was a double homicide committed before the fire
started, and decide to exchange their takes on the case and work
together.
The eyewitness is an edgy hairdresser Daphne (Vera Farmiga), who is in
this country illegally and therefore afraid to come forward. But Eddie
and Jordy track her down to her workplace salon, where she works as a
hair washer. Meanwhile Emil is also trying to locate her and finds in
his victim's wallet a card to an escort service, whereby he calls for a
Czech prostitute to come over to his hotel. He beats the address out of
where the unfortunate prostitute works before killing her and beats the
detectives to the salon where he threatens the Czech witness not to
squeal or else. The detectives come by and they spot the two thugs in
the street, and the best action sequence in the film takes place, as the
detectives run through the crowded East Side streets chasing the
murderers who escape into Central Park.
The next part of the film is its big surprise, it involves these two
lunatics making a "snuff" film and selling it to Top Story for a million
dollars. Emil figures out that he and Oleg should be captured in Planet
Hollywood, with their sleazy attorney at their side (the real-life Mafia
mouthpiece, Bruce Cutler). The mouthpiece will plead insanity for them
and blame the crime on Emil's abusive childhood and he will move to get
Oleg sent to a mental institution, where he can then claim he's sane and
be released. Oleg's insane plan is to then cash in on his celebrity for
a movie deal knowing that he won't be tried for the crime again because
of double jeopardy.
John Herzfeld ("2 Days in the Valley"), in his second feature, has used
the media for his whipping boy to get out his overstated message about
how slimy they are. Other than the action scenes brilliantly filmed by
Jean Yves Escoffier, the movie is unappealing.
As for the actors: De Niro is playing a part he always does very well,
showing off his comical gift for quirkiness and endowing his character
with a larger than life presentation. Burns is his opposite, a bland
personality, who doesn't watch TV or seek publicity, and the performance
succeeds only in being a bland one, intentional or not. The juiciest
part is reserved for Roden, who makes the most out of being a scary
figure, a sociopath with an unintentionally droll wit. Grammer plays a
cardboard villain, who lives for the ratings which gives him fame and
wealth. He could be any one of a number of tabloid TV slimy hosts,
reminding me most of the ass kissing Geraldo Rivera.
There's not much to this flick, except for the beautiful way its mayhem
was filmed. Its cynical opinion of the media seemed hypocritical, since
this film is just as exploitive and violent as the tabloid TV show it
was railing against for the whole two hours of this film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Herzfeld.
Cast: Robert De Niro, Edward Burns, Karel Roden, Oleg Taktarov, Kelsey 
Grammer, Melina Kanakaredes, Vera Farmiga, Avery Brooks, John DiResta, Darius 
McCrary, James Handy, Charlize Theron, Bruce Cullen, David Alan Grier, Kim 
Cattrall.
2001 - 120 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, gore, sexual situations, and nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 10, 2001.
In today's day and age, when it seems like a progressive amount of people are 
committing extreme criminal acts in order to, at least in part, become famous 
(i.e. last week's San Diego high school shooting), writer-director John 
Herzfeld's "15 Minutes" stands as a timely, thoughtful motion picture. Taking 
a satirical, if on-the-mark, look at the outrageous lengths some people will 
go to get their fifteen minutes of fame (a term coined by Andy Warhol), as 
well as their learned savviness thanks to the media around them, the film is 
an intense, well-written thriller that, for once, has more of a purpose than 
to simply entertain. It actually has a brain in its head, and a sharply 
observed '70s-era sensibility that recalls such classic films as "The 
Parallax View," "The French Connection," and "Dog Day Afternoon."
The second that the scummy Czech immigrant Emil (Karel Roden) and Russian 
movie-lover Oleg (Oleg Taktarov) step foot into America, hell starts to break 
loose. Equipped with a snazzy video camera that Oleg steals, he and Emil set 
out on a precisely-planned, murderous rampage throughout Manhattan that 
includes stabbings, beatings, shootings, and arson to anyone they feel like 
doing it to. Their purpose is very simple: to commit enough murders to 
catapult them to the top of every media outlet in the world, intentionally 
get caught, plead that they were the subjects of physical abuse growing up, 
get acquitted, and reap in loads of money on movie and book deals.
After a fatal building fire, arson investigator Jordy Warsaw (Edward Burns) 
meets famed homicide detective Eddie Flemming (Robert De Niro), who has been 
assigned to the case. They soon team up together to investigate the string of 
killings that have begun to escalate in the city, with Eddie not knowing Oleg 
and Emil already are familiar with his celebrity, and have plans of their own 
for him.
Always involving and often exciting and downright unsettling, "15 Minutes" is 
a bravura police/media drama that has been written and directed by John 
Herzfeld (1996's "2 Days in the Valley") with a clear precision that offers 
up more than the usual glossy, mainstream grab-bag of senseless action and 
pointless violence. The picture is clever and knowing in its attitudes about 
violence in the U.S., and the effects their outcome have on the criminals 
themselves. It also has plot developments that, for once, are not easily 
predicted (including a twist at the beginning of the second half that is 
absolutely shocking), and the strengths of these, as well as the 
thought-provoking material dealt with, are able to overcome many of the 
weaknesses found in the uneven character development.
While Robert De Niro (2000's "Men of Honor") and Edward Burns (1998's "Saving 
Private Ryan") both start off with a somewhat shaky, unfocused grasp on their 
roles of Ed Flemming and Jordy Warsaw, respectively, they manage to 
strengthen the evolution of both personalities by the film's latter half. 
Burns, especially, starts off with a noticeable blandness, but somehow 
transforms along the way to the conclusion into a striking, memorable 
character. 
The stars of the film, however, are Eastern European newcomers Karel Roden 
and Oleg Taktarov, whose frightening, unhinged bad guys turn out to be the 
center of the movie. Arresting every second they are onscreen, Roden and 
Taktarov are utterly talented finds that will hopefully find more film work 
based on what they have accomplished here.
In supporting roles, Melina Kanakaredes (TV's "Providence") shows much 
promise as news reporter Nicolette Karas, who is also carrying on a romance 
with Eddie. Nicolette is not given an overly generous amount of screen time, 
but Kanakaredes makes the best of it, fleshing out her character into a 
sympathetic, realistic individual. Kelsey Grammer is okay as tabloid show 
anchor Robert Hawkins, successfully getting rid of his "Frasier" image, but 
is so one-dimensional that he spends his time making little to no impression, 
or going over-the-top. Meanwhile, Charlize Theron (2001's "Sweet November") 
makes a splashy cameo as the black-wigged worker of an escort service.
What ultimately makes "15 Minutes" such a success is its willingness to try 
novel techniques not seen in many years that throw the viewer off balance, 
making them unsure, and sometimes even a bit nervous, of what is to come 
next. Not only that, but it is one of those rare recent thrillers that 
doesn't go the easy route, nor does it present a nonsensical and exploitative 
storyline for mainstream mass consumption. "15 Minutes" actually has 
something to say, and it says it remarkably well.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
Something shocking happens in "15 Minutes." It is so shocking and unexpected 
that it will leave you coming up for air wondering why the filmmakers went 
through such lengths to shock the audience. And yet its shocking twist 
results in a final half-hour of ridiculous implausibilities squandering its 
initial premise. 
Robert De Niro plays Eddie Flemming, a New York City homicide cop who loves 
to be surrounded by the media (he also dunks his head in ice water to sober 
up). Eddie is a celebrity cop, having had his hide splashed on the covers of 
People magazine. The latest murder in town involves arson, and Eddie is there 
ready to mingle with the press while solving the crime. Trouble is that an 
arson investigator Jordy Warsaw (Edward Burns) has solved the crime first, 
realizing it was actually a homicide than an accidental arson case. Eddie 
knows it too and gets all the credit. You do not have to be a film buff to 
know that Eddie and Jody become partners in what appears to be a buddy-buddy 
cop flick, only Jody is no cop and realistically, he would not have been 
allowed to follow Eddie everywhere since the subsequent murders do not 
involve arson! We will allow logic to be suspended for now since their banter 
is occasionally intoxicating. 
The latest string of murders are committed by two European thugs. One is 
Olgen (played by Olgen Taktarov), a bald-headed and grins uncontrollably and 
his partner, Emil (Karel Roden), who also grins and shoots their murders with 
a stolen digital camera. Their motives remain unclear at first but 
afterwards, their intent becomes clearer - they want to publicize their snuff 
videos on television and become celebrities. Olgen's idea is that in America, 
nobody is blamed for what they do and everyone is a celebrity for at least 
fifteen minutes. Andy Warhol might have wished his words were not used 
synonymously with murder.
"15 Minutes" is nothing new, and its theme of how amoral and devalued our 
country (and the media) has become has been explored in everything from 
Sidney Lumet's "Network" to Martin Scorsese's "The King of Comedy" to Oliver 
Stone's "Natural Born Killers" to the blackly comical "Man Bites Dog," which 
this film so closely resembles. But what the film says is that someone crazy 
enough would be willing to create a snuff film and try and sell it to the 
media in return for some exposure. Sure there is jail time served but who can 
say no to book rights, movie rights and the right lawyer who can negotiate a 
percentage of the profits (Olgen's lawyer is played by real-life Gotti lawyer 
Bruce Cutler).  
Most of "15 Minutes" has a jazzy, immediate feel to it, and there are some 
terrifically choreographed scenes. One involves a gruesome murder seen from a 
witness's point-of-view. Another involves a shootout on the streets near 
Central Park that is hair-raising and frenetic. I also liked a long scene 
involving an escape from a burning building. But "15 Minutes" lacks much 
thrust or purpose. It seems to evolve from one type of genre to another. 
First we get some harrowing scenes of violence from a camcorder's 
point-of-view. Then we get the buddy schtick of De Niro and Burns at odds 
with each other. Then there is a developing romance between De Niro and a 
reporter (Melina Kanakaredes from TV's "Providence"). Then there is the brief 
satire of the media (such a cliched attack at best) where Mr. Frasier himself 
(Kelsey Grammer) plays a famous TV tabloid reporter whose sole purpose in 
news is summed up in one line, thanks to actress Kim Catrall: "If it bleeds, 
it leads." At this point, I was confused since the film doesn't stick close 
to any consistent tone or style. 
De Niro has some bright, lively moments but it is mostly a thankless role for 
someone of his stature. He does have a touching scene, however, where he 
fills out a card to his possible bride-to-be written in a different language. 
Edwards Burns is not always up to the task and I had a hard time believing 
him to be an arson investigator (ironically enough, De Niro did wonders with 
a similar role in "Backdraft"). The two thugs are so inhuman, callous and 
pathetic that nothing registers them as anything but cartoonish, jocose 
villains whom I did not care for in the slightest. 
"15 Minutes" has that unexpected twist in the middle (which will not be 
revealed here) that leaves the rest of the film without much soul or 
interest. Let us just say that another pile of cliches follow, including the 
obligatory turn-in-the-badge scene and a host of other predictable scenes 
from the "Dirty Harry" school. And the ending is so melodramatically silly 
and over-the-top (similar to the finale of the remake of "Shaft") that it 
ruins its thought-provoking premise. This is the kind of film possibly 
written by one person that is then run through a full-scale committee turning 
it into your average Hollywood run-of-the-mill thriller, satire, commentary, 
or whatever the heck it is.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, complaints or general comments at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Herzfeld.
Cast: Robert De Niro, Edward Burns, Karel Roden, Oleg Taktarov, Kelsey 
Grammer, Melina Kanakaredes, Vera Farmiga, Avery Brooks, John DiResta, Darius 
McCrary, James Handy, Charlize Theron, Bruce Cullen, David Alan Grier, Kim 
Cattrall.
2001 - 120 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, gore, sexual situations, and nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 10, 2001.
In today's day and age, when it seems like a progressive amount of people are 
committing extreme criminal acts in order to, at least in part, become famous 
(i.e. last week's San Diego high school shooting), writer-director John 
Herzfeld's "15 Minutes" stands as a timely, thoughtful motion picture. Taking 
a satirical, if on-the-mark, look at the outrageous lengths some people will 
go to get their fifteen minutes of fame (a term coined by Andy Warhol), as 
well as their learned savviness thanks to the media around them, the film is 
an intense, well-written thriller that, for once, has more of a purpose than 
to simply entertain. It actually has a brain in its head, and a sharply 
observed '70s-era sensibility that recalls such classic films as "The 
Parallax View," "The French Connection," and "Dog Day Afternoon."
The second that the scummy Czech immigrant Emil (Karel Roden) and Russian 
movie-lover Oleg (Oleg Taktarov) step foot into America, hell starts to break 
loose. Equipped with a snazzy video camera that Oleg steals, he and Emil set 
out on a precisely-planned, murderous rampage throughout Manhattan that 
includes stabbings, beatings, shootings, and arson to anyone they feel like 
doing it to. Their purpose is very simple: to commit enough murders to 
catapult them to the top of every media outlet in the world, intentionally 
get caught, plead that they were the subjects of physical abuse growing up, 
get acquitted, and reap in loads of money on movie and book deals.
After a fatal building fire, arson investigator Jordy Warsaw (Edward Burns) 
meets famed homicide detective Eddie Flemming (Robert De Niro), who has been 
assigned to the case. They soon team up together to investigate the string of 
killings that have begun to escalate in the city, with Eddie not knowing Oleg 
and Emil already are familiar with his celebrity, and have plans of their own 
for him.
Always involving and often exciting and downright unsettling, "15 Minutes" is 
a bravura police/media drama that has been written and directed by John 
Herzfeld (1996's "2 Days in the Valley") with a clear precision that offers 
up more than the usual glossy, mainstream grab-bag of senseless action and 
pointless violence. The picture is clever and knowing in its attitudes about 
violence in the U.S., and the effects their outcome have on the criminals 
themselves. It also has plot developments that, for once, are not easily 
predicted (including a twist at the beginning of the second half that is 
absolutely shocking), and the strengths of these, as well as the 
thought-provoking material dealt with, are able to overcome many of the 
weaknesses found in the uneven character development.
While Robert De Niro (2000's "Men of Honor") and Edward Burns (1998's "Saving 
Private Ryan") both start off with a somewhat shaky, unfocused grasp on their 
roles of Ed Flemming and Jordy Warsaw, respectively, they manage to 
strengthen the evolution of both personalities by the film's latter half. 
Burns, especially, starts off with a noticeable blandness, but somehow 
transforms along the way to the conclusion into a striking, memorable 
character. 
The stars of the film, however, are Eastern European newcomers Karel Roden 
and Oleg Taktarov, whose frightening, unhinged bad guys turn out to be the 
center of the movie. Arresting every second they are onscreen, Roden and 
Taktarov are utterly talented finds that will hopefully find more film work 
based on what they have accomplished here.
In supporting roles, Melina Kanakaredes (TV's "Providence") shows much 
promise as news reporter Nicolette Karas, who is also carrying on a romance 
with Eddie. Nicolette is not given an overly generous amount of screen time, 
but Kanakaredes makes the best of it, fleshing out her character into a 
sympathetic, realistic individual. Kelsey Grammer is okay as tabloid show 
anchor Robert Hawkins, successfully getting rid of his "Frasier" image, but 
is so one-dimensional that he spends his time making little to no impression, 
or going over-the-top. Meanwhile, Charlize Theron (2001's "Sweet November") 
makes a splashy cameo as the black-wigged worker of an escort service.
What ultimately makes "15 Minutes" such a success is its willingness to try 
novel techniques not seen in many years that throw the viewer off balance, 
making them unsure, and sometimes even a bit nervous, of what is to come 
next. Not only that, but it is one of those rare recent thrillers that 
doesn't go the easy route, nor does it present a nonsensical and exploitative 
storyline for mainstream mass consumption. "15 Minutes" actually has 
something to say, and it says it remarkably well.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
15 MINUTES (2001)
Rated R; running time 120 minutes
Genre: Crime/Thriller
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.15minutesmovie.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0179626
Written by: John Herzfeld
Directed by: John Herzfeld
Cast: Robert De Niro, Edward Burns, Karel Roden, Oleg Taktarov,
Kelsey Grammer, Melina Kanakaredes, Avery Brooks, Vera Farmiga,
John DiResta, Darius McCrary, Charlize Theron, Kim Cattrall
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bams15minutes.html
Failing to write my reviews immediately after I've seen a movie, is a
blessing and a curse.  I find it best to write soon after I've watched,
because the movie is still In The Moment, if you will; I'm clear, as
precise as I get, and certain about how I feel about said flick.
But there's something about sleeping on it, that allows one to more
carefully examine what seemed Simply Bloody Brilliant the night before,
and go "uh...whathell?"
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Remember in SPLASH, when Darryl Hannah's mermaid character learned how
to speak English by watching television?  15 MINUTES exists in an Evil
Parallel Universe...
Emil Slovak (Karel Roden) and his partner Oleg Ratzgul (Oleg Taktarov)
come to America to seek their fortune.  No, not the one noted in The
American Dream: they want the one for which they served time in the
Europe.  When their ex-partner Milos, living as a plumber in New York,
doesn't come up with the goods, Emil does Bad Stuff to Milos while Oleg,
a man who fancies himself a frustrated director, nonchalantly videotapes
the act.
Somewhere down the road, arson investigator Jordy Warsaw (Edward Burns)
becomes attached to a case involving a fire set up to mask a double
homicide; cue celebrity homicide cop Eddie Flemming (Robert De Niro),
whose high-profile cases have been spotlighted by scummy TV "journalist"
Robert Hawkins (Kelsey Grammer).  Jordy doesn't have a lot of respect
initially for Eddie's showboating - but Eddie comes to the attention of
quick learners Emil and Oleg, who seize the tragic moment that could
bring them fame and fortune.
There's More Stuff, involving Eddie's partner Leon Jackson (Avery
Brooks), a Czech woman named Daphne (Vera Farmiga), Beat Reporter
Nicolette (Melina Kanakaredes), and a Cast Of (seeming) Thousands, but
you get the drift, eh?
The Upshot:
The bad? Too many characters [did we *really* need a Seedy TV "Newsman"
_and_ a TV Reporter Chick cum Love Interest for Eddie?  Uh, couldn't
they have been combined?  And whathell was Kim Cattrall's character
about?], and nonsensical plot devices [one simple change - nixing the
fireman angle in favor of a Rogue Youngbuck Cop, would've kept the
whathell?s to a minimum], top the list.  Edward Burns' constant empty
stare would occupy a list space, too, but I was too busy wondering why
Kelsey Grammer (who I adore in FRASIER) was so busy trying to get us to
forget his TV persona by cussin' up a storm, that I was able to
effectively block Burns' rather silly character and plot, right out of
my view for the first half of the movie.
The good?  Robert De Niro, in both Tender Mode [call me a softie, but I
dug his half of the love story.  And by the way, my pal from TIME SLOT,
Melik, wanted me to note that I failed to grasp the TAXI DRIVER
reference when Eddie was talking to himself in the mirror.  So sue me.],
and during his climatic confrontation with the bad guys.  Though it was
quite a shocker to me that De Niro *wasn't* the heart of this movie,
when he *was* the focus of attention, it was close to impossible to
notice much of anything else around him.  In the world of Stars and
Actors, De Niro is the rare combination that disproves the rule.
The sublime?  The music (more on this below), and especially Karel Roden
as Czech National Emil Slovak and Oleg Taktarov as the Frank Capraesque
Russian, Oleg Ratzgul.  Somebody oughta call the cops, because this duo
completely stole 15 MINUTES out from under everybody, including De Niro.
There wasn't a single scene in which Roden and Slovak participated, that
I wasn't captured by [how's *that* for a double negative?], and in fact,
the pivotal scene that I mentioned earlier with De Niro, was made damn
near perfect by the fierceness of Roden and the eerie playfulness of
Taktarov.
Emil's near-insane temper and Oleg's humorous, blind madness, cut right
to the "15 minutes of fame" issue in a way that all the intended
moralizing by writer/director John Herzfeld about the Robert Hawkinses
of this world, never touched.  That I found myself laughing at Oleg when
my brain told me that what he was doing was no laughing matter, was what
made this movie so scary, and immediate.  In that, it earned its genre
title: thriller.
One more thing: I think I have a crush on Charlize Theron.  I swear, her
eyes go right through me.  Not That There's Anything Wrong With That.
In The Movie House:
I had thought about doing a quickie Black Factor here - ok, here's a
quickie: Avery Brooks is good, and plenty; Darius McCrary was just more
unnecessary flotsam - but decided against it, in favor of praise for the
movie's musical score.
9 out of 10 times, movie music irritates me.  If it's loud enough for me
to notice it, it's usually 1) too daggone loud and 2) not all that good.
But as with FINDING FORRESTER before it, the score in "15" was used
quite effectively, wonderfully accentuating many a scene (the techie
girl in me hurrahed the musical emphasis when De Niro and company went
a'chasing the bad guys), and generally adding quite a bit of spice to
this flick.  Combined once again with Celebration Cinema's awesome
surround sound environment, this score left me awed.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
As my pal Melik said, 15 MINUTES rocked; at times, it was
thought-provoking, and disturbing, and the musical score was brilliantly
executed (this will be a good DVD/surround sound flick to pick up).  On
the neutral-to-negative side of things, Robert De Niro and Edward Burns
were just okay; Kelsey Grammer's Slimy Journalist wasn't slimy *enough*;
and some of the silly things the audience was asked to believe, kept it
on this side of Best Of 2001 territory for me.  But Karel Roden as the
Czech and Oleg Taktarov as the Russian, Made this movie.  Watch it, if
only for them and the score.
15 MINUTES (rating: greenlight):
Another one for the "can't wait till it hits DVD" file.
