Title
Review for Sniper (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     Thomas Beckett (Tom Berenger) is one of the best snipers in the
U. S. Military--an expert on the jungles of Panama with 74 confirmed
kills to his name.  Now, the National Security Council has decided that
a candidate for Panama's upcoming Presidential election needs to be
eliminated.  Beckett gets sent in, but not on his own.  Along with him
is Richard Miller (Billy Zane), Beckett's superior and new partner.
Although Miller scored well on the range, he's never killed anyone and
Beckett isn't sure he's capable of doing so.
     SNIPER starts out with a slickly-filmed, tense action scene that
promises a thrill-a-minute experience which the remainder of the movie
is unable to deliver.  There are about five or six action sequences
throughout the one-hundred-minute running time, and, while all are
exciting, it's what's in between that bogs down an otherwise-promising
film.  The reliance upon formulas is also annoying.  With just a little
more inventiveness on the part of writers Beckner and Leyland, this
could have been an eye-opener, but the script consistently falls back
on the tried-and-true.  There was an instant when I thought something
truly daring had been accomplished, but, alas, it was only my
misunderstanding of events.
     I also had a lot of trouble accepting the relationship between
Beckett and Miller.  The tension between them feels manufactured--a
plot device and nothing more.  One of the problems is probably that,
while I came to understand Beckett, Miller never gelled as a
character.  As far as I could tell, that was more the fault of the
script than Billy Zane's acting.
     The action scenes are expertly-directed, and even though the
slow-motion bullet effects have been lifted from ROBIN HOOD:  PRINCE OF
THIEVES (where the projectile was an arrow, not a bullet), they work to
good effect here.  Unfortunately, director Luis Llosa has trouble with
the long periods between shootings, especially in the first half of the
movie where there's a lot of aimless meandering about in the jungle.
     The plot, which seems relatively intelligent at the beginning,
falls apart in the last third.  So much for a tightly-constructed
film....  For a while, things were happening so fast that it was
difficult--and confusing--trying to keep up.  Maybe a different editor
would have helped the problem, but SNIPER needs help in the pacing
department.
     Overall, however, I don't think action fans will be offended.  This
isn't a complete no-brainer.  Some attention has been paid to plot and
character, and Berenger is certainly capable of giving a solid
performance.  No matter how many faults SNIPER may exhibit--and it has
a lot of them--it never commits the cardinal offense of becoming dull.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Greg Bole
     Saw an advanced screening of the movie SNIPER last night, and I
have to say I wasn't too impressed.
     This film is about an expert marine sniper, played by Tom Berenger,
who is teamed with a hot-shot-young-no-experience-never-killed-a-man new
partner to take out some drug-kingpins and military strong men in
Panama.  Sound cliche?  That's only the beginning.
     Billy Zane (MEMPHIS BELLE) played the rookie, and never seemed to
get a handle on his character.  He was so contrary and pig-headed in
the beginning, you just wanted to smack him.  Then he goes "crazy" from
the pressure, but seems to immediately snap out of it.  I'm not sure if
the blame should lie with the directing, editing, scriptwriting, or
acting ... but it didn't all come together.
     I think Berenger is a pretty good actor, and he looked great in the
part, covered in camo, face painted, stalking through the jungle with
his high-power rifle ... but once again, his character was given some
pretty bad dialogue, and didn't react too logically to many of the
situations.  There was very little logical development in these
characters.
     My biggest problem with this film was it's tendency to put these
two snipers in as *many* inches-from-death situations as possible.  They
began to resemble G. I. Joes, the Greatest American Hero.  And of course
their almost supernatural accuracy with their guns was called upon to
get them out of far too many close calls.  Now a lot of movies are
stamped out of this mold, in fact that's what made DIE HARD so much
fun: the super-hero avenger type.  So some will enjoy the action hero
heroics, but I didn't think it fit with the nice tension that was built
up in the earlier scenes, and the "real life" feel of covert operations
in Panama.
     A word must be said on the camera work, much of it was very nice.
The jungles of Panama (or their stand-ins in this case) formed a very
picturesque background ... and the drama of speeding bullets was captured
using some nice trick photography.  Many have seen the slowed down
"bullet-cam" following the projectile to its target.  This was used well
in the beginning to show the feverish nightmares Berenger gets when
remembering the moment of the kill.  It was dramatic when used in
flashback...but it seems the director liked the technique so much he
started inserting these shots (pardon the pun) into the real time
action...then it just seemed silly.
     All in all, not a real dog: there is some nice action, good
atmosphere, and pretty photography.  But the plot is pretty lame, the
acting didn't form a cohesive whole, and far too much
thisclosefromdeath heroics.
