Title
Review for Reindeer Games (2000)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Sean Molloy
Starring Ben Affleck, Charlize Theron, Gary Sinise
Directed By John Frankenheimer
Warner Bros., Rated R, 2000
Running Time: 1 Hour 45 Minutes
Your first clue that something isn't gonna be quite right with the
movie you're about to see: It's heavily Christmas-themed and its
release date is, oh, say, at the end of February.
Your second clue that something isn't gonna be quite right with the
movie you're about to see: Charlize Theron, one of the movie's dubious
stars, makes an appearance on The Daily Show in which, when asked if
her new movie's any good, she replies with the equivalent of a verbal
sigh... assuring us that, yeah, it sure is a movie, all right!  And
there's some scenes like those you'd expect to find in a movie, and
there's some action... and there's other...  stuff... too.
How to immediately grab my attention: Open your movie with five dead
guys in Santa Claus suits.  Then show a caption reading "Six days
earlier..."  Ya know, I was honestly interested to find out what
killed all those poor Santas...
How to immediately lose my attention: Follow your opening scene with a
terminally dull nice-guys-who-don't-deserve-to-be-in-prison scene.
Write a line for the one of prisoners like "I just want to go home and
eat Christmas dinner and watch some ball with my dad."  Then, have Ben
Affleck actually say that line, on film, and forget to leave it on the
cutting room floor.  For good measure, throw in a poorly motivated
prison riot and have Affleck's best buddy stabbed... aw... and just
two days before his release, too.  Already the cliches are piled on
thick, and when it rains, it pours.
How to take my attention, dash it violently against the rocks, and
make it so that I'm contemplating my strategy for calling "shotgun"
about an hour before I know the credits will roll: Deny your
characters the ability to think.  Have Ben Affleck, for some reason
I'll never understand, pretend he's his dead prison buddy so that he
can get his girlfriend, played by Charlize Theron.  Have Gary Sinise
show up and force the two of them to participate in a poorly planned
casino heist.  The villains' big idea?  Kidnap Affleck because he used
to be a security guard at the casino, force him to tell you where all
the doors in the place are, then dress up in Santa suits, create some
"diversions" and rob the place.  On paper, it seems like the stuff of
a potential caper comedy, but veteran director John Frankenheimer
wrongly picks up that piece of paper and thinks he's looking at the
makings for some sort of clever action-crime thriller.  It's not like
the man isn't capable... far from it.  He's the man responsible for
classic political thrillers like The Manchurian Candidate and Seven
Days in May.  He wowed me with some the most memorable car chases I've
ever seen in last year's Ronin.  But he's certainly guilty of churning
out some certifiable losers... put Reindeer Games on the shelf of
shame with his 1996 version of The Island of Dr. Moreau.
Step one in making your movie as easily forgotten as possible: Cast
Ben Affleck in the role of the world's most generic hero.  He gets no
good one-liners, he doesn't get to shoot or implode anything in new
and interesting ways, and all we know about him is that he regrets his
past as a car thief and wants a cup of hot chocolate and piece of
pecan pie.  His name is Rudy (short for Rudolph, in all likelihood.
See, it's called Reindeer Games.  Get it?  Get it?  Shut up.)  In the
past, Affleck has been at his best as a supporting actor, and Reindeer
Games does nothing to further his viability as a leading man.
Step two in making your movie as easily forgotten as possible: Gary
Sinise's villain dresses and looks like the most standard movie crook
a filmmaker could have some up with.  He's dirty and potty-mouthed,
he's got long, scruffy hair and a goatee, and I fully expected him to
walk out of the casino carrying sacks with giant dollar signs on them.
He's also extremely inept at what he does.  He thinks garish cowboy
costumes and Santa suits make acceptable disguises, and he trusts
Affleck's character to pull through even after, time and time and time
again, he tricks him and lies to him and nearly kills him.  But
instead of tapping into the comic possibilities of this role, Sinise
seems to think he's playing some sort of tough, smart, and smooth
criminal mastermind, rather than the complete moron that was obviously
written into the script.  [On a side note, Gary Sinise wins this
week's "Title!" award, as he's the one who gets to awkwardly cram the
name of the movie into one of his lines early in the proceedings.
Last week's winner was Natasha Henstridge for The Whole Nine Yards.]
How to take your bad idea and make things worse: Include two or three
plot twists that, instead of making the apparently stupidity of the
plan seem suddenly intelligent, make the plan seem even more
ridiculous and unlikely.  This is a bad movie.  And what's worse is
that, except for a few moments near the not-so-stunning conclusion as
the preposterous is replaced by the ludicrously preposterous, Reindeer
Games never really gives us the satisfaction of being laughably bad.
If they'd done that much, at least I would have been entertained.
_____________
Media Junkies - Movie reviews, music, books, games, and more
http://www.mediajunkies.com
E-mail: sean@mediajunkies.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Reindeer_Games_ (R) ** (out of ****)
Ben Affleck is such a gosh-darn likable fella.  In every film (not to
mention talk show appearance) he does, he projects an ebullient, affable
charisma that easily endears him to the audience.  However, it's that
very quality that defeats him and the entirety of _Reindeer_Games_
-- though, in all fairness, there are plenty of others to blame for how
the film goes wrong.
_Reindeer_ was written by Ehren Kruger, and after making a strong debut
with last summer's chilling _Arlington_Road_, he is beginning to look
like a one-trick pony.  He ruined the _Scream_ trilogy with his weak
script for its final installment, and now comes this film, which, I must
admit, has the seed of a good idea at its core.  Affleck plays Rudy
Duncan, a just-released convict who decides to pose as his just-murdered
cellmate Nick to get some action with Ashley (Charlize Theron), with whom
Nick shared a passionate mail correspondence.  But the roll in the hay
comes at a price--turns out that Ashley's brother Gabriel wants "Nick" to
help in the robbery of a casino where "Nick" once worked.  Of course, the
problem is, not only is "Nick" not really Nick, but he also hasn't the
slightest idea how to pull off a heist--Rudy served time for grand theft
auto.
Numerous twists ensue, and per Dimension's request (as stated in a
disclaimer at the top of the press notes), I won't reveal any more. 
While a number of the turns are genuinely surprising, they soon spring
out of control.  By the final reel, the script twists for the mere sake
of twisting, going for the cheap shock at the expense of all logic or
sense of reality.  It could be countered that Kruger never takes the
material too seriously, throwing in numerous one-liners to break the
tension.  But, as evidenced in _Scream_3_, Kruger isn't much of a comedy
writer, and the failed attempts at humor end up taking viewers out of the
increasingly complicated story rather than making it more enjoyable.
With such a script so uneven in tone, it's little wonder that the
performances are wildly varied.  One minute Sinise is a sinister villain,
the next minute he's somewhat of a buffoon.  At least he tries to ride
along with the material, unlike the other two leads, who nail one extreme
and stick with it.  Theron is a good actress and a stunning screen
presence, but she plays her character much too straight, making certain
turns of events that much more preposterous.  Affleck plays up the
jokiness of the script, and while that famously light approach has worked
elsewhere, it isn't quite what's needed in this type of action thriller. 
Certainly Bruce Willis cracks wise in all of his action vehicles, but
when it came down to business, he was a convincing tough guy; Affleck, on
the other hand, has a look of smug bemusement on his face most of the
time, as if to knowingly mock the ridiculous affair.  If our hero doesn't
appear to believe--or believe in--what's going on, how does one expect
the audience to?
The audience may not believe in _Reindeer_Games_, but director John
Frankenheimer does his best to at least keep them superficially
interested.  The film is fast-paced; the numerous suspense and action
scenes are all smoothly done, and every now and again one is able to get
a momentary adrenaline rush.  But the excitement is just that, momentary
and very fleeting--proving that without a story or characters to really
care about, an action thriller is, to borrow the term Gabriel uses in the
film, just a silly little reindeer game.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Jon Popick
What does it mean when a movie called Reindeer Games comes out in late
February?  There are two possible explanations:  The film just wasn't
ready for a Christmas release (the studio response) or the film would
have been slaughtered by Toy Story 2 and Any Given Sunday, not to
mention The Talented Mr. Ripley (the real response).  If there's one
thing that Hollywood knows, it's not to pit Ben against Matt at the box
office.
The first scene of Reindeer Games immediately made me forget about any
talk of stalled release dates.  Any film that opens with an overhead
shot of a dead, smoldering Santa will do that to you.  Of course, this
means that the action has already taken place and that the entire film
will be one big flashback, likely featuring a voice-over provided by the
protagonist.  Anybody getting tired of this trend?  Did the MPAA pass a
law that required at least one major theatrical release per week include
the whole flashback/voice-over thing?  It was cool when Kevin Spacey did
it in American Beauty, but come on.
The flashback reverts to six days earlier and the voice-over comes
courtesy of Rudy Duncan (Ben Affleck, Boiler Room).  Rudy is a two-bit
hoodlum three days away from his release from Iron Mountain Prison in
Michigan, where he's been locked up since his grand theft auto
conviction.  His cellmate, Nick (James Frain, Hilary & Jackie), is also
scheduled to be released on the same day.  All Rudy can think about is
getting home in time for Christmas dinner to wolf down hot chocolate and
pecan pie, while Nick drools over pictures and letters from his pen-pal
sweetheart Ashley Mercer (Charlize Theron, The Cider House Rules).
Long story short, Rudy gets out of the clink, but Nick doesn't.  Rudy
pretends to be Nick so he can nail Ashley, who turns out to have a
psychotic, gun-running brother named Gabriel (Gary Sinise, The Green
Mile), who wants to use Rudy/Nick to pull of an Indian casino heist.
But it's not easy to tell who is playing who as the story twists and
turns into the film's final reel.  The script was written by Ehren
Kruger (Scream 3 and Arlington Road), so you almost have to expect
somewhat of a surprise ending.
In addition to several plot holes wider than Bill Bradley's neck,
Krueger's script also includes a handful of jokes about Native
Americans.  I don't have a problem with that kind of humor, as long as
it's funny (which it is here), but I couldn't help wondering how they
would have gone over if they had been told to an opportunistic magazine
reporter by a relief pitcher.  And speaking of race, could they have
cast a more ethnically diverse trio of hoodlums to support Gabriel?
There's the black guy (Clarence Williams III, The General's Daughter),
the Latino guy (Danny Trejo, ConAir) and the white guy (Donal Logue,
Runaway Bride).
On the plus side, Affleck shows that he is one damn charismatic actor.
Whether he's taking a punch in the gut or a dart in the chest, his
reactions are some of the most realistic I've seen.  He can scream and
gasp for air with the best of them.  The bad thing is that he's totally
unbelievable as a convict.  Hammy, perhaps, but Affleck really made the
film tolerable.  Sinise does well chewing up scenery as the bad guy, but
I just heard him crowing in a television interview that he came up with
the `look' for his character all on his own.  Wow  I'm pretty sure
that's he's the first bad guy to have a goatee, long hair, a leather
jacket and an earring.
Seventy-year-old director John Frankenheimer doesn't quite match his
previous effort (Ronin) but doesn't really come close to recreating his
all-time low (The Island of Dr. Moreau), either.  Even though
Frankenheimer has produced some of the finest car-chase scenes ever
captured on film and Affleck's character plays an auto thief, there are
no road hijinks in Games.  Even so, at seventy, Frankeheimer shows he
can still make a pretty decent action flick.
1:45 - R for strong violence, adult language, nudity and strong sexual
content

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-Ben Affleck, Charlize Theron, Gary Sinise, James Frain,
Dennis Farina, Danny Trejo, Clarence Williams III and Donal Logue
Director-John Frankenheimer
Canadian Rating-14A
Is it somehow bending the rules of screenwriting not to insert the
intended title of your project into a script nowadays? We witnessed it
just last week in `The Whole Nine Yards', in which a certain character's
vocabulary stumbled over the phrase, even though it didn't necessarily
apply. It's a similar case with `Reindeer Games', a limp new heist
thriller utterly devoid of the kinetic energy and stimulating action
that it requires to heat up the cineplex during the snowy season. The
villain, a shaggy, long-haired trucker named Gabriel (Gary Sinise,
channeling Lieutenant Dan from `Forrest Gump') stands over our
protagonist Rudy Duncan (Ben Affleck) with gun in hand. In a moment of
questioning Rudy's honesty, Gabriel threatens him by incorporating
Rudolph & Co. into the conversation: `Don't you play no reindeer games
with me.' Now, what exactly are reindeer games'? The term is fairly
vague. Originally, I thought it was a catchy title for a
Christmas-oriented action/adventure, but having a character utter it so
deliberately is just plain goofy.
Granted, there are bigger problems with `Reindeer Games' and its overly
trite, fatigue-ridden script (written by flavor-of-the-month Ehren
Kruger, the `Scream 3' scribe). After a striking opening collage of
snow-covered imagery, we cut to a Michigan prison environment. In for
auto theft, Rudy and his cellmate Nick (James Frain) are eagerly
anticipating their release in a mere two days - Nick in particular, who
has been carrying on a steamy postal relationship with a beautiful
pen-pal named Ashley Mercer (Charlize Theron). But in the aftermath of a
violent cafeteria scuffle, Nick is stabbed to death. This leaves Rudy in
a certain dilemma of conscience: once he sees Ashley outside the prison,
should he explain the tragic situation or walk on by? Ignoring those
options, Rudy does something really absurd... he poses as Nick. Having
never seen a photo of the real Nick, Ashley will not be able to identify
the impostor, leaving the cute couple with a sexy Christmas holiday for
roasting chestnuts on the open fire.
The situation, however, is complicated by Gabriel - Ashley's criminal
brother. Gabriel and his elite team of gun-runner underlings (Danny
Trejo, Clarence Williams III and Donal Logue) want to take down The
Tomahawk, a wealthy casino built on an Indian reservation. To do this,
they require Nick's expertise of the structure and the security, some
knowledge he would have attained from working at The Tomahawk a few
years back. Unfortunately, Gabriel and his goons don't have Nick....
they have Rudy posing as Nick. Kruger proceeds to complicate matters
even further, tossing in a few 360 degree twists and thickening the
mixture drastically as the casino robbery nears execution. It may read
like a made-for-cable plotline, but Kruger's premise is both a clever
and promising set-up for high-wire action/adventure. Imagine my
disappointment when I realized how sluggish and unexciting `Reindeer
Games' actually was. It's a thriller of perplexing tedium, limply
directed by aging legend John Frankheimer (`The Manchurian Candidate'),
which is a surprising pratfall given his last film was the rousing chase
film `Ronin'. The fact that `Reindeer Games' is thoroughly lacking
visual flair and animation coupled with the detached presentation of a
few action sequences makes for... well, a rather ho-hum experience.
The proverbial nail in the coffin, however, was an insipid move that
Kruger could now label his trademark punch: the final twist. It worked
marvelously for him in the terrorist thriller `Arlington Road', but here
Kruger indulges to the point of idiocy. No one will be able to foresee
such a doozy of a twist, but that doesn't mean it's clever - a better
choice of words would be ludicrous and illogical. Kruger does have the
talent to make a name for himself in the screenwriting underworld of
Hollywood. His script for `Reindeer Games' is not a total loss, with a
pair of genuinely funny one-liners and a handful of inventive moments
sprinkled with humor and suspense. He just underestimates the
intelligence of the audience too often.
Tis a shame, because Frankenheimer does coax a few enjoyable
performances from Sinise (taking the villainous grunge look to new
extremes) and Theron (beautiful and light-footed wherever her travels
take her). Affleck has trouble convincing us that he's an ex-con, but he
does alright. While not totally defective in the suspense department,
`Reindeer Games' doesn't succeed at much anything. It's a mediocre
mystery, a lazy action film and a decidedly unfestive Christmas movie.
Let the `Games' begin.... at your own risk, of course.
Your Comments Appreciated! movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Frankenheimer.
Cast: Ben Affleck, Charlize Theron, Gary Sinise, Clarence Williams III, 
Dennis Farina, James Frain, Donal Logue.
2000 - 104 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sex, nudity, and gore).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, February 26, 2000.
It's getting to be like clockwork. Nowadays, every single week comes a 
high-profile film with killer talent that you can't believe could ever miss 
the mark, but does--majorly. Last week's candidate was "Hanging Up," a 
disastrously sloppy pile of trash that starred Meg Ryan, Diane Keaton, Lisa 
Kudrow, and Walter Matthau.  This week's Garbage Bin award goes to "Reindeer 
Games," directed by world-class filmmaker John Frankenheimer (1962's "The 
Manchurian Candidate," 1998's "Ronin") and starring Ben Affleck, Charlize 
Theron, and Gary Sinise in a movie that should never have been greenlit, 
particularly with the inanely ludicrous screenplay by Ehren Kruger. The fact 
that Kruger went so very wrong here is a surprise, considering his exciting 
contributions to 1999's "Arlington Road" and the current "Scream 3." 
Hopefully, this was just a minor slip on his part, because, truth be told, 
his work here is pretty crummy.
Rudy Duncan (Ben Affleck), who has been in prison for a short time due to 
grand theft auto, is about to be paroled. It's Christmas time, and all he 
wants to do is go home to see his family, and settle down with a cup of hot 
chocolate and a slice of pecan pie. His cellmate, Nick (James Frain), has 
been carrying on a six-month relationship with a beautiful 25-year-old woman 
named Ashley (Charlize Theron), through letter correspondence. She is 
planning on meeting him outside the jail on the day he gets released, which 
is the same day as Rudy. The only problem is, two days before they are to 
meet, Nick is stabbed and killed in a cafeteria riot. After seeing Ashley 
poignantly waiting outside the prison for a man she has fallen in love with 
but who is nowhere to be found, Rudy decides to take over the identity of 
Nick for her. After a shy chat in a cafe, a lustful roll in the hay (or off 
the hay, as they get so carried away they fly right off the bed!), and a trip 
to a clothing store to buy him some new clothes, they run headfirst into a 
major predicament. 
Their happiness does not last long when they are stalked down by Ashley's 
slimy brother (Gary Sinise) and his three cohorts, all of which, like Ashley, 
believe that Rudy is Nick. Nick, it seems, had a previous job at an Indian 
reservation casino, and so what they want him (Rudy) to do is head up a heist 
of the joint, even though he knows nothing about the place.
"Reindeer Games" isn't as much a movie that is supposed to make sense as it 
is a blatantly gimmicky action-thriller with the sole purpose of consistently 
fooling the audience. That's it. Without the token plot twists during the 
conclusion, which, by the way, are unpredictable because we are given 
absolutely no hints beforehand, there would be a vacuous filmstrip where a 
visual picture was supposed to be. 
The first twenty minutes are the only bright spot of the picture. Beginning 
with the startling image of five slain Santas lying in the snow; then moving 
straight into the close and believable relationship that is set up between 
Rudy and Nick; and finally ending up with what looks to be turning into an 
unlikely, yet undeniably sweet romance, the picture's opening has next to no 
action in it, but does a nice job of setting up the characters of Rudy and 
Ashley. Their initial meeting at a cafe is the film's best scene, as it gets 
that feeling of nervousness and hesitancy in meeting someone you feel like 
you already know just right.
When the plot finally thickens with the entrance of Sinise and his 
shamelessly generic bad-guy comrades, so do the problems with the film 
itself. Running on autopilot for the next hour, and reminding me, in certain 
ways, of that awful 1996 Keanu Reeves vehicle, "Chain Reaction," it is 
evident that all Kruger and director John Frankenheimer are doing is wasting 
our time until the obligatory surprise, which (they think) will make the 
audience exclaim, "oooh!," when all it really will do is cause them to groan. 
There is very little to recommend here, aside from the sex scene between Ben 
Affleck and Charlize Theron, where they both are freely in the buff (and 
let's face it-- who wouldn't want to see that?). While Sinise is nothing more 
than an unredeeming, one-dimensional baddie, Affleck and Theron both have 
what it takes to topline a big movie, but this isn't the ideal one. Working 
as mere puppets in service of the overly convoluted plot, they have talent to 
burn, but nowhere to place it here. 
By the climax, "Reindeer Games" has degenerated from being a mere bore into 
something that is overwrought, mean-spirited, and graphically violent. The 
movie also isn't very fair to one of the central characters, nor do they 
treat him/her with satisfactory respect on the writing level. And then, after 
it has left us feeling unclean and rather depressed, it tacks on a feel-good 
conclusion that so obviously was filmed during reshoots that it sticks out 
like a sore thumb. You know you're in trouble when you set out to make an 
action picture, and it concludes with more sappiness than a Robin Williams 
movie.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "REINDEER GAMES" (Dimension Films/Miramax)
 Ehren Kruger's screenplay must have read better on paper
because the film, directed by John Frankenheimer, lies like a bleak
lump of coal in a Christmas stocking. Ben Affleck plays a convicted
car thief whose cellmate (James Frain) in a cold Michigan prison has a
gorgeous penpal girlfriend, Charlize Theron, whom he met through a
lonely hearts magazine. When the cellmate dies in a food fight,
Affleck assumes his identity, getting the sexy girlfriend but also her
psychotic older brother (Gary Sinese), a small time crook who wants
his help in taking down the Tomahawk Casino on Christmas Eve.  His
bizarre scheme includes having his grungy gang dressing up like Santa
Claus with the "ho, ho, ho" becoming a heist. From the beginning,
wholesome Ben Affleck, who always seems to look like an aging frat
boy, is miscast in this cartoonish saga of betrayal, particularly as
when openly yearns for a cup of cocoa and slice of pecan
pie. Beautiful Charlize Theron has enough charisma for both of them,
along with an ability to convince men to believe anything she says,
particularly when she flashes her bare breasts. And no one can do a
buffed, tattooed, over-the-top nutcake like Gary Sinese.  But the
dim-witted plot consists of a fast-paced series of intricate
double-crosses that stretch from the barely plausible to the patently
ridiculous. And the absurd ending, literally, had people laughing in
disbelief.  Fortunately, Ehren Kruger has Arlington Road and Scream 3
under his belt and John Frankenheimer will be best remembered for
Seven Days in May and The Manchurian Candidate. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, Reindeer Games is an icy, idiotic, illogical 3. My
advice: don't play. Christmas has come and gone - just as this movie
will.

Author
Scott Renshaw
REINDEER GAMES
(Dimension)
Starring:  Ben Affleck, Gary Sinise, Charlize Theron, Clarence Williams
III, Danny Trejo, Donal Logue, James Frain, Dennis Farina.
Screenplay:  Ehren Kruger.
Producers:  Marty Katz, Bob Weinstein and Chris Moore.
Director:  John Frankenheimer.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, nudity, sexual situations)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I did not out-guess the first released film from an Ehren Kruger
script, ARLINGTON ROAD. Nor did I out-guess the second released film from
an Ehren Kruger script, SCREAM 3. Kruger has shown himself to be
particularly fascinated with labyrinthine plot developments, the kind of
stuff that's supposed to leave an audience thinking, "Ooooooh, I didn't
see that coming." In ARLINGTON ROAD, however, you _could_ have seen it
coming. The twist _was_ the story, brilliantly re-casting the entire film
as a retrospective experience. SCREAM 3 twisted because it had to, and you
got the sense that any one of a dozen possible endings would have seemed
just as plausible. REINDEER GAMES would be round three, perhaps proving
which of Kruger's first two scripts was the exception, and which was the
rule.
     Once again, I did not out-guess Kruger. And, as with SCREAM 3, it
didn't really matter. REINDEER GAMES stars Ben Affleck as Rudy Duncan, a
convicted car thief nearing the end of his sentence in a Michigan prison.
When his cellmate Nick (James Frain) is stabbed during a riot the day
before their scheduled release, Rudy sees an opportunity to hook up with
the gorgeous pen pal named Ashley (Charlize Theron) with whom Nick has
been corresponding. Posing as the pen pal Ashley has never seen, Rudy gets
a wild night with Ashley. Then things get much wilder when Ashley's
psychotic brother Gabriel (Gary Sinise) shows up. He believes "Nick" has
insider information about a reservation casino where he used to work, and
which Gabriel and his colleagues plan to hold up. A reluctant Rudy
therefore finds himself forced to mastermind a heist in a place he has
never been.
     Admittedly, it's sort of a nifty premise. The road to much cinematic
garbage has also been littered with nifty premises. REINDEER GAMES may not
be garbage, but there's also nothing that builds a sense of identification
with the film's ostensible hero. Affleck is a pleasant enough performer,
and he's certainly built like an action star, but there's something he
lacks as a screen actor. Despite the fact that most of his roles to date
have required him to lose his temper, there never seems to be an edge to
Affleck's performances. There's nothing behind his words; when he yells,
he's yelling lines of dialogue. Any attempts the film makes to dig into
who Rudy is, or why he does what he does, feel pointless. As the film's
central character, Affleck is just occupying space.
     Of course, genre films like REINDEER GAMES often don't ask more of
its characters. This one hits a few high notes along the way when Kruger
just decides to tell an action-filled story. He's got a great director for
that kind of work in John Frankenheimer, who knows how to make the most of
dialogue-free mayhem. He's got a top-notch villain in Gary Sinise (though
you could argue that his characterization doesn't make much sense once all
the pieces of the plot fall into place). And he's got Charlize Theron,
who's as easy on the eyes as anyone working in film (and, if I'm any
judge, destined to be considered like Michelle Pfeiffer as an extremely
talented actress once people can get past how breathtakingly gorgeous she
is). The casino heist itself is appropriately frantic, and plenty of
Kruger's small script moments along the way are slick enough to keep a
viewer interested.
     Then come the double-crosses, triple-crosses and quadruple-crosses so
fast and so frequent that another one is upon you before you can remember 
the prefix for the next "-uple" you're up to. There's no question that the
events in the final half-hour of REINDEER GAMES prove surprising, in the
sense that the average viewer probably won't expect them. It's also true
that they don't matter in the slightest except as a sort of false
cleverness. Not only are they arbitrary -- I dare anyone to watch the film
a second time and spot a single clue that points in the right direction --
but they're insulting in a film that then goes on to make the denouement 
an act of supreme stupidity (hint: try not to leave a trail to your
whereabouts if you're leaving the scene of a crime). For a simple genre
story, REINDEER GAMES ties itself up in far too many unnecessary knots. 
Kruger has shown himself to be smarter than your average screenwriter. 
He has also shown that he can be too interested in proving it.

Author
Ron Small
Starring: Ben Affleck, Charlize Theron, Gary Sinise, James Frain, Donal 
Logue, Clarence Williams, Dennis Farina, Danny Trejo
REINDEER GAMES is easily the worst of the three recent films penned by Ehren 
Kruger (SCREAM 3 and ARLINGTON RD are the others, each derivative in their 
own special way). The guy can't seem to write believable dialogue (Sample 
from REINDEER GAMES: "Rule #1: Never put a car thief behind the wheel"), 
create multi-faceted characters, or even engineer coherent plots but he sure 
knows how to pile on numerous nonsensical twists and turns (no matter if each 
one deems the actual story increasingly unlikely). His screenplay for 
REINDEER GAMES turns the tables on the audience so many times that watching 
the film becomes something of a punishment with no reward anywhere in sight. 
I can just envision Kruger laughing behind his keyboard, "Oh you thought my 
movie was gonna go here, f*ck you jack ass, take that twist, decipher this 
mother f*cker!" It's almost as if the writer were angry at us for shelling 
out money to see his stupid movie. And why the hell would anyone want to 
invest time in a movie when the screenwriter keeps changing his own rules for 
no reason other than to congratulate himself on how damn clever he is? Auteur 
theory be damned; it's Kruger's "style", not the director's that winds up on 
screen.
Kruger has obviously never paid much mind to the old chestnut "sometimes less 
is more". And his numerous twists can't even claim to be originals; ARLINGTON 
RD's ending is a direct steal from the much better Alan J. Pakula thriller 
THE PARALLAX VIEW, and in REINDEER GAMES we get this ol' gem; Character 
incriminates themself by saying something they shouldn't know (pronouns used 
to protect the gender of the "character"...grammar be damned). "How did you 
know that?" the stunned protagonist asks, suddenly realizing that the 
character was in on the whole thing all along. . .
Since twist endings are currently so in vogue, and seeing as how Kruger's 
screenplays usually come equipped with about three twists per ending, I guess 
it's no wonder why he works so frequently. He's quickly becoming MIRAMAX's 
Mickey Mouse; the company has already signed him to work on several of their 
upcoming projects. This is appropriate considering that MIRAMAX (which used 
to place their label on some of the most artistically daring films) has 
quickly become a grindhouse for coddling foreign imports (LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL) 
and Freddie Prinze Jr. vehicles. Their company's current logo could be "We 
ride the trends".
REINDEER GAMES stars Ben Affleck as Rudy, a supposedly hardened criminal 
spending his days and nights behind bars with fantasies of pecan pies dancing 
atop his head. Although Affleck is given some barbed wire tattoos to 
insinuate bad assness, he plays the role like Steve Guttenberg preciously 
mugging through a POLICE ACADEMY flick. Affleck is such a puppy dog that it's 
impossible to believe he could survive in a harsh prison environment without 
becoming nearly everyone's bitch.
The role itself is so badly written (the character only grows balls when the 
plot calls for it), the twists so outrageous, and the directing so self 
consciously gritty that this is about as close to self parody as I can recall 
a recent "serious" movie getting. It may have been wiser had the film makers 
simply went all the way in that direction, casting Jerry Seinfeld as the 
hardened criminal and Howard Stern as the sniveling bad guy (who's played 
here by Gary Sinise in yet another over the top villain performance)
James Frain is Nick, Rudy's cellmate, a manslaughterer who's found a pen pal 
in the gorgeous Ashley Mason (Charlize Theron). Ashley is a prison groupie 
who sends Nick many cheesecake photos of her though she's never seen one 
picture of him. Which works out fine since the character is killed in a 
near-riot, and Rudy (who was to be paroled on the same day as Nick) takes his 
place, which leads to a sudden and very frenzied sex scene between Ashley and 
Rudy (so frenzied it kinda looks like rape) and a surprise visit from 
Ashley's brother, Gabriel (Gary Sinise), who waltzes into their shabby hotel 
room flanked by his thuggish co-horts. He plans to rob an Indian Casino on 
Christmas Eve with the assistance of Rudy who he thinks is Nick who, 
according to what he wrote in the letters to Ashley, used to work as a guard 
in the Indian casino. Though by the end, the film pulls the rug out from 
under us so frequently that everything I've described might as well be 
irrelevant.
This is what you can expect should you chose to take this Reindeer on; 
several scenes in which, after catching his prey, the bad guy proceeds to 
stall interminably until the good guy has a chance to kill his captor and 
crack a stupid one-liner. Included: Two (2) scenes of two (2) different bad 
guys explaining their motives to the hero when they should be killing him 
(one following the other no less). Though it's an action film, the ending is 
more a talkfest where we get the whole movie explained to us by one flustered 
character actor after another while 
Affleck looks on, incredulous as the audience.
The flick was directed by John Frankenheimer, a straightforward action 
director who lucked into THE MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE early in his career, fell 
off the A-list following a string of flops and now, in his old age, is slowly 
climbing his way back up. It would be a success story if he were choosing 
better scripts but his last major film was RONIN (one of those almost but not 
quite movies) which followed THE ISLAND OF DR.MORNEAU (you remember, the one 
with Marlon Brando in mime make-up and a not so flattering moo-moo), and now 
this. He films action sequences with a minimum of quick cutting which I like 
considering that nowadays action scenes are commonly comprised of millisecond 
flash cuts strung together and laid out for a brain-zapped MTV audience to 
pick apart. Problem is these action scenes (nearly all failed escapes) serve 
no purpose in the story other than to further pad out the running time and to 
remind the audience that their watching an action movie rather than a filmed 
radio play.
Character problems abound; Rudy is made to shift between sweet boy next door 
earnestness and hard edged wiseacre, the latter of which is not (at least at 
this point) something Ben Affleck is capable of pulling off. The former he 
can do with ease and often the actor coasts on his lackadaisical charm while 
those around him growl and swear. But then suddenly Affleck starts growling 
and swearing alongside them like the class clown imitating a Tarantino 
gangster.
Charlize Theron, an extraordinary talent, is, like Affleck, playing whatever 
part the script requires her to play, whether it be vulnerability at one 
moment, anger at the next. She never has a chance to evince any charm or make 
much of an impression beyond her obvious physical attributes (Frankenheimer 
has her needlessly pop her top to further italicize this.
Gary Sinise has played this role frequently, and here, as in SNAKE EYES, he 
does the snarling bad guy thing with such over the top vitriol (the guy must 
be so incredibly bored of stomping through the same paces that going out of 
control is the only thing that keeps him interested any more), that it 
becomes more of an annoyance (oh there he goes againâŚ) than a threat. These 
are talented people who made the mistake of jumping on to a script with 
little but stock characters and a bag of tricks that it dully springs on its 
audience. 
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Homer Yen
Since this film's setting takes place during the
season of giving, I feel compelled to give at least
one compliment. I like Ben Affleck, who plays an
amiable anti-hero that gets himself caught up in a
case of mistaken identity.  But would I be a scrooge
for saying that the film itself has the unenviable
feeling of being caught under the mistletoe with the
dogfaced Gary Senise?  
"Reindeer Games" is a film that has the intention of
being a not-so-ordinary action film.  It tries to be
hip.  Case in point: the beginning scene starts off
with the camera showing several dead men in Santa
suits and then in the next scene displays the words
"Six Days Ago," bringing us back to when the story
begins.  It tries to add some spice to its characters.
 Case in point: a henchman philosophizes about the
economic advantage of adding another Christmas holiday
to bolster retail sales (not a good idea if it means
more movies like this).  It also tries to be
unpredictable.  Case in point: there are plot twists
galore.
But "Reindeer Games" is only sophisticated enough to
gather these elements together.  There they are, just
sitting there.  And like oil and water, they never
seem to be able to mix.  What a shame, because in the
hands of a more talented group, this could have been a
really fun movie.  
Ben Affleck plays Rudy, a small-time car thief who is
about to be released from jail.  The first thing that
he wants to do with his freedom is to get a cup of Hot
Chocolate and a slice of Pecan Pie.  His cellmate,
Nick (James Frain) will also be released on the same
day.  Over the last few months, Nick has been
receiving love letters from a mysterious woman named
Ashley (Charlize Theron).  Nick has never met this
woman.  She's a pen pal who learned of Nick through
one of those prison magazine personals.  Nick's wall
is plastered with pictures of Ashley, who is quite
adorable.  And he reads her letters to Rudy, who is
moved by her prose.  Nick, unfortunately, falls victim
in a prison fight and when Rudy is released and sees
her waiting outside, Rudy assumes Nick's place. 
"Don't do it, Rudy," he says to himself.  But how much
of a conscience does a thief really have?
Although things seem blissful at first, she is a woman
who can only draw you into trouble.  Ashley is
connected with a group of gun-running truckers.  Led
by the sinister-looking Gabriel, (perpetually scowling
Gary Senise), he has read Nick's letters and knows
that he was a security guard of an Indian-run casino
and that he is familiar with their safeguards.  Of
course, Affleck-as-Nick couldn't tell you where the
bathrooms are, but to avoid being killed, he goes
along with the charade as best as he can.  Ashley
weeps, "I've finally found a boy that I'm crazy about,
and my brother wants him worse than me."  I'm weeping
too because despite Affleck's affability and
potentially interesting material, "Reindeer Games"
doesn't amount to much more than a conventional action
film.  Been there, done that, seen it all.
Though I shouldn't do this, I think about all of the
opportunities squandered.  One of the main points of
the movie is that Affleck-as-Nick has no clue about
security at a casino.  Can you imagine him bumbling
his way around trying to case the place out without
arousing the suspicion?  We also learn that none of
the truckers have ever committed robbery before.  Here
is a golden comedic opportunity that may take place of
the senseless yet inevitable bloodbath at the film's
conclusion.  You may remember that in my review of the
"Whole Nine Yards," I had said that this gangster film
is a comedy that would have been better off as a
drama.  "Reindeer Games" is just the opposite.  It
tries to be a hip action film, but would probably be
better off as a psuedo-comedy.  Thank goodness this
film wasn't released before the Christmas season. 
Otherwise, it would have certainly dampened my holiday
spirits.  

Author
John Beachem
Ehren Kruger has certainly been busy these days. After last summer's
surprisingly good "Arlington Road" and the surprisingly bad "Scream 3", from
earlier this month, Kruger seems to have become the most sought writer in
Hollywood. The problem is, if "Reindeer Games" is any indication of Kruger's
writing abilities, he may be in some very serious trouble. "Reindeer Games"
is loaded with corny, cliched dialogue and horrendous action sequences. The
film throws "surprises" at you left and right, but anyone can see them
coming a mile away. In fact, the only thing that saved the film from an even
lower rating from me was the presence of Charlize Theron and Gary Sinise,
who manage to spark some life into their dreary parts.
It's one week till Christmas, and Rudy (Ben Affleck) and his best friend,
Nick (James Frain), are just about to be released from prison. Nick's
primary reason for wanting desperately to be released is so that he can be
with Ashley (Charlize Theron), a girl he has fallen in love with while
corresponding with her from prison. However, a brawl in the mess hall
results in his being stabbed and killed. Rudy leaves prison the next day and
hooks up with Ashley, while posing as Nick. While everything goes well at
first, Rudy is soon "introduced" to Ashley's brother, Gabriel (Gary Sinise),
who wants Nick's help robbing a casino. Rudy is unable to convince Gabriel
and his cohorts that he isn't Nick, and he soon finds himself planning a
heist which he has no idea how to accomplish.
While the film started off poorly, I thought maybe it would pick up once the
real bad guys showed up. I knew I was in some very serious trouble when the
line behind the film's title came out. It goes like this: Gabriel has been
told repeatedly by Rudy that he is not Nick, and is now pointing a gun at
Rudy's head. Rudy starts yelling that he is Nick afterall, and Gabriel
responds by lowering the gun and saying "don't you be playing any reindeer
games". I actually spent the next few minutes trying to figure out just what
in the world that meant. My advice, don't bother trying to figure that, or
anything else in this movie out. You'll just get a headache. Rudy also
appears to have the greatest luck in history in this film. I'm not talking
about John McClane kind of luck, where you're shot at by a machine gun for a
few seconds, and it does nothing but hit walls. I mean, Rudy gets shot at
from point blank range constantly and yet always escapes unscathed.
Along with the cheesy dialogue and insanely unbelievable luck, there are the
"surprises". I saw this film in a fairly crowded theater, and, as a result,
I was able to listen in on a few conversations. These mainly consisted of
people saying, "And next, he's gonna" or "I'll bet you that he's really,"
followed by something which would occur in the next couple minutes. As for
the casting, Ben Affleck is horribly miscast as a car thief who's been in
prison for the past five years or so. Throughout the film, he looked like he
just got out of college and took a wrong turn in a really bad neighborhood.
He found everything that transpired to be shocking, and he wanted nothing to
do with any illegal activities. Sorry folks, it's not that I don't believe
in reform, but I don't believe prison turns you into a boyscout either.
Like I said, the two supporting actors, Gary Sinise ("Forrest Gump", "The
Green Mile") and Charlize Theron ("The Devil's Advocate", "The Astronaut's
Wife") are all that make this film worth seeing. However, both these actors
have appeared in far better films, and I suggest you go rent one of them
rather than seeing this one. "Reindeer Games" runs about fifteen minutes too
long at 105 minutes. I recommend it only to those who adore Ben Affleck
(he's in almost every scene),or to those of you who are starved for an
action movie (though this hardly qualifies). If you want my advice, go see
"American Beauty" this weekend instead. I give "Reindeer Games" a sadly
generous two out of five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Pen pals have been reduced to a relic thanks to e-mail and
cell phones have made Western Union virtually passe.  There
is yet room, though, for good old-fashioned correspondence
by mail, and 2000 could turn out the year of the longhand
prison notes.  In John Grisham's latest thriller, "The
Brethren," three mischievous ex-judges concoct a scam from
their jail cells involving the writing of love letters to people on
the outside who have advertised their lonely hearts in gay
magazines, only to blackmail them when they get back a
batch of amorous responses.  In "Reindeer Games," thrill-
king John Frankenheimer helms a fast-paced, slyly comic tale
of betrayal which begin with a prison correspondence and 
concludes with a slam-bang series of twists
and turns in no way as surprising as the resolutions in Neil
Jordan's "The Crying Game" or M. Night Shyamalan's "The
Sixth Sense," but I challenge the audience to unravel the
design by mid-point.  
   "Reindeer Games" is unfortunately not a step forward for
Frankenheimer, best known for deeper, more resonant
thrillers like "Seven Days in May" which was, unlike his
current offering, a believable story about a design to
overthrow the government.  Nor can it compare to his
towering "Manchurian Candidate" made thirty-eight years
ago, which featured the strange but plausible experiences of
a decorated Korean War veteran and his mother's
machinations to advance her husband's career.  In fact,
credibility is the one element sorely lacking in this sometimes
convoluted drama, which like so many B-grade tinglers deals
with a bad guy who could have won the day if only he had
blown away the hero at obvious points in the story.
   "Reindeer Games" is a noir project which in former times
would have been filmed in black and white to accent its bleak
character and cynical attitude.  The story opens in a Michigan
prison where Rudy Duncan (Ben Affleck) has done five years
for car theft and is to be released in two days.  His mind has
been kept active by his cellmate, Nick (James Frain), who
has periodically read him ardent letters from a woman named
Ashley (Charlize Theron) whom he does not know but has
established an epistolary relationship through a magazine ad. 
On the day after Nick is stabbed during a food fight, Rudy's
sentence ends.  When he sees a woman waiting to drive
away with Nick who meets Ashley's description he sees his
opportunity.  Passing himself off as Nick, he establishes a
quick, erotic relationship with her, but when fun in a motel is
broken up by a gang of thugs led by Ashley's brother Gabriel
(Gary Sinese), the group become involved in a complex
scheme to rob a casino on an Indian reservation.  Since Nick
had worked as a security guard there before landing in jail,
the gang considers him the key to the break-in, not believing
Rudy's story that he is not Nick at all but simply an
impersonator.
   Though Ehren Kruger's script cleverly negotiates the twists-
-which begin with Rudy's identity crisis and pile up two-thirds
of the way through the story--the direction is Frankenheimer
lite.  Whereas his "Ronin," a similar tale of double-crosses
which made us wonder who can be trusted--contained some
of the great car chases in movie history (he directed "Grand
Prix," remember)--this time around J.F. throws around all too
many implausible coincidences, casting the thugs as
interchangeable parts with Steppenwolf's eminent Gary Sinise
a one-note, off-the-wall nut.  Moreover unlike performers like
Laurence Olivier, Burt Lancaster, and Robert De Niro whom
Frankenheimer utilized wonderfully in his other works, Ben
Affleck does not work as a noir tough guy but comes across
more like a recent member of the University of Michigan's
Alpha Sigma Rho chapter.
   Even if you're not a big fan of this genre, you can enjoy it
for the gorgeous scenery, and I don't mean the snow-capped
roads of British Colombia where it was filmed.  Charlize
Theron, the hottest actress in Hollywood today, is the one to
watch here (as she is anywhere else that she appears).  Not
exactly the sort who'd correspond with a jailbird while whiling
away the hours sewing until he got released, her performance
as Ashley is the most pleasing part of this popcorn piece.
Rated R.  Running Time: 104 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Rudy (Ben Affleck) must feel like the luckiest guy in the world.  In
just 2 days he'll be out of prison and able to get that big mug of hot
chocolate that he's been craving.  Once out, however, Rudy is hit by
such a tornado of events that he'll soon begin to miss the relative
serenity of incarceration.
REINDEER GAMES by director John Frankenheimer (RONIN and THE MANCHURIAN
CANDIDATE) is unadulterated fun.  Mixing in black comedy, a big robbery
and a cat-and-mouse game, the thriller moves with the speed of a
locomotive.  Director Frankenheimer keeps his foot firmly and
confidently on the throttle, and the bright and humorous script by Ehren
Kruger creates characters as funny as they are genuine.  Even when the
story twists and turns with its series of double crosses, it always
feels honest and somehow plausible even if outlandish.
It all starts when Rudy's cellmate and buddy, Nick (James Frain), is
stabbed to death just before they get released.  Nick has been
corresponding with a pen pal, Ashley (Charlize Theron), who comes to
meet him.  One look at the gorgeous Ashley, and Rudy decides he must
impersonate Nick, at least long enough for some much-missed good sex.
Set during a snow covered Christmas season, the movie starts with
short-lived joy.  Rudy finds Ashley to be the best Christmas present
that a man has ever received.  But their blissful time of intimate small
talk and enthusiastic sex is soon interrupted by her slimy brother,
Gabriel (Gary Sinise), and his band of thugs.  They want Rudy, whom they
think is Nick, to help them rob the Tomahawk Casino where Nick used to
work as a security guard.
Since claiming not to be Nick would just make him look expendable, Rudy
says he is Nick.  The rest of the picture has him in constant danger of
being killed by the hotheaded crooks.  He keeps trying to escape when he
isn't busy planning the robbery that he wants no part of.  He figures
that they'll kill him as soon as the job is done.
With so many movies these days misusing great casts and so many scripts
having trouble creating credible characters, it is refreshing to watch a
picture that lets the audience have a high old time without insulting
the viewers' or the actors' intelligence.
Ben Affleck seems born to play parts like Rudy, an everyman caught up in
circumstances beyond his control.  Rudy tries to stay one step ahead of
the game, but he spends most of his time in catch-up mode.
Gary Sinise's villain is at once frighteningly vicious and quite
charming.  Like most of the rest of the characters, his Gabriel seems
constantly in jeopardy of being out-conned.
Charlize Theron (so wonderful in THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE) plays a woman
that's tough yet vulnerable and always sexy.  As the plot advances, she
just keeps getting better and better, and no scene tops her poolside
one.
"A lot of relationships start off this way -- family problems," Ashley
tells her would-be boyfriend Nick (actually Rudy), as all hell breaks
loose.  Since he figures her brother will plug him at any moment, this
platitude isn't exactly reassuring.
The script is full of little PULP FICTION like moments.  One of the best
has one of Gabriel's tattooed henchmen reading a BusinessWeek article on
stock investing strategies.  After discovering that fifty percent of all
retail sales occur in the weeks leading up to Christmas, he reasons
that, if the government was smart, it would designate a Christmas II
during the summer.
The out-of-the-way casino is run by Jack Bangs, played by a perfectly
cast Dennis Farina, who'd rather be in Vegas.  "Nobody even comes here
to cheat," he laments as he looks down on the sparsely populated
gambling floor.
Although the film relies more on the dialog than the sight gags for its
laughs, some of the costuming is deliciously funny.  When Rudy goes into
the casino to case the joint, Gabriel dresses him in a garish Cowboy
outfit which looks like something that a circus clown might wear in a
rodeo.  The pičces de résistance are the costumes that the guys wear for
the big job.  They dress up as department store Santas with the worst
fitting beards imaginable.
REINDEER GAMES runs 1:45.  It is rated R for strong violence, language
and sexuality and would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Ben Affleck, Gary Sinise, Charlize Theron, Dennis Farina, Danny Trejo,
Clarence Williams III, and Isaac Hayes.
What makes Reindeer Games even more disappointing than just a predictable,
lifeless action flick is the cast and crew who signed onto the project. Most of
the people involved in Reindeer Games just came off terrible slumps with
excellent comeback performances in their most recent films. John Frankenheimer,
who made the unforgettable Cold War drama The Manchurian Candidate way back in
the early 60's, recently showed critics and fans alike that he still had some
magic left in his directorial skills when he created the brilliant car chase
scenes in Ronin. Screenwriter Ehren Kruger gave a remarkable first impression
when he wrote the script for the underrated Arlington Rd.  Ben Affleck
displayed his comedic talents in Dogma and Boiler Room, and even on Saturday
Night Live directly after the horrible Forces of Nature and 200 Cigarettes.
Even Charlize Theron, who I was convinced couldn't act, did a decent job in
Cider House Rules. When all of these bright stars come together, one would
assume that the movie will have great potential to be entertaining. After
coming out of the theater showing Reindeer Games, disbelief was my first
reactionthen frustration. The movie could have premiered on Cinemax at two in
the morning starring an all-rookie cast and still would have been equally
lacking in entertaining. The acting is so pitiful and the script so dull, I may
have to rethink some of my opinions on how talented these actors actually are.
It seemed like everyone was restricted to just the script and not given a fair
amount of improvisational rights. We have all seen Ben Affleck have some fun on
the set, it is so apparent in a number of scenes in Good Will Hunting when he
exchanges jokes with his friends at a bar. The actors in that movie were having
fun and, from that, the audience had fun. Reindeer Games is the complete
opposite; the actors don't seem to want to be their characters (even Danny
Trejo, who will do practically anything, doesn't look like he is enjoying
himself), causing the audience to quickly lose interest. Evidence of public
disapproval was noted when a woman behind me yelled "Boy this movie is
horrible!" and when there were scattered giggles during the most dramatic
moments.
The story follows a man, Rudy (Ben Affleck), who is leaving prison in a few
days along with his best friend and cellmate Nick (James Frain). Nick has been
exchanging love letters with a beautiful woman, Ashley (Charlize Theron), and
cannot wait to leave prison and meet her in person. When Nick is killed in a
prison riot, Rudy decides to pretend to be Nick and take Ashley out on a date
for the Christmas holidays. Unfortunately Ashley's brother, Gabriel (Gary
Sinise) interferes with their relationship. Thinking Rudy is Nick, he kidnaps
Rudy and threatens to kill him unless he helps rob a casino, which Nick use to
work at as a security guard. Now Rudy must pretend to be Nick so he can protect
Ashley from her brother Gabriel. Confused? The movie only gets more complex as
it goes on, until it gets way, way too complex at its climax. 
But Reindeer Games makes its first serious mistake during the first half an
hour. The hero commits a greedy, selfish act when he decides to pretend he is
his dead cellmate in order to date Ashley. Some hero. The point of a hero is to
do the morally correct thing, a person for the audience to relate to or admire.
When Rudy lies and cheats his way into trouble, instead of gathering support
from me for him to ultimately succeed in getting the bad guys, I felt more like
he was getting what he deserved and even wanted to see him fail at times. The
most irritating part of the film (besides the fact that this is a Christmas
movie released in February) is the number of chances the bad guys get to kill
Rudy but fail or delay for some idiotic reason. The routine in which the bad
guy must explain his genius plan to the hero before attempting to kill him with
some elaborate machine is getting so tired nowadays, especially when I eagerly
want to see the hero dead. 
The only saving grace keeping this movie from receiving zero stars is an
amusing but pointless cameo from Isaac Hayes as a prisoner upset with his food.
Why he was in this movie for such a pointless role beats me. Why any of these
people had anything at all to do with this movie beats me.  

Author
Walter Frith
Cast - Ben Affleck, Gary Sinise, Charlize Theron, Dennis Farina, James
Frain, Donal Logue, Danny Trejo, Clarence Williams III, Issac Hayes.
Directed by - John Frankenheimer
Written by - Ehren Kruger
Produced by - Marty Katz, Chris Moore, Bob Weinstein
(Rating) > Motion Picture Association of America - R (Restricted), Rated R
for strong violence, language and sexuality.
Running Length - 105 minutes
Distributor - Dimension Films
If this person were alive today, the inventor of the gun might be troubled
by the lack of use of them at the proper time in 'Reindeer Games'.  While
there really are no good guys in this film, how many times have we seen the
Hollywood cliche of the villains holding someone at gun point while the
audience is frustrated that the silly and simple action of pulling the
trigger doesn't come at the right time.  Even when we don't want to see
someone get shot in the picture because he or she is the hero, it still
smacks of a lack of credibility.  The only time I found this acceptable was
in the old 'Batman' t.v. series, where the villains wouldn't or couldn't
shoot straight and the dynamic duo was always put into some kind of campy
trap from which they always managed to escaped.  To roughly quote 1976's
'Network', "No matter how much trouble the hero is in, just look at your
watch and you'll know when all will be resolved".  By rights, Ben Affleck
should have died about five times throughout the course of 'Reindeer Games'
and while I'm not giving away the fact as to whether he lives or dies in the
film, the keyword for this film is "duh"!
Affleck plays Rudy, a convict on the verge of release where, when released,
he will meet with a young woman who will help him get his life back on
track, supposedly.  He's never met her and she's never met him.  They met
through letters written.  But wait!  This is only a smoke screen.  Rudy
passes himself off as his cell mate, a man who was killed in a prison riot
who was supposed to meet this woman.  While finding the company of women
irresistible after getting released, Rudy gets more than he bargained for
when his new main squeeze Ashley (Charlize Theron), has a supposed brother
named Gabriel (Gary Sinise) who wants Rudy to help him knock over a casino.
It seems that Rudy's cell mate wrote Ashley that he used to work at this
casino, run on a native American reservation in Michigan, near Detroit, and
Gabriel, thinking this is him, wants instructions on the casino's
construction, pattern of security and other tidbits of information that will
make the casino heist successful.  Of course, Rudy can only bluff his way
through the scam since he isn't the right or real person intended for this
crime.
The film is so full of plot holes, you could drive a transport truck through
its openings and believe me, they try this also!  At one point Rudy tries to
explain that he isn't the right man and a hand written letter is produced by
Gabriel so to establish if this is really the right guy, why didn't they
just take a sample of Rudy's hand writing to see if it's the same guy.  Rudy
also has several chances to contact the police but we see that admitting to
the police that he is being held by criminals would be a violation of his
parole, therefore landing him back in the slammer.  Even if this is beyond
his control?  Several confrontations between the characters are also
laughable and the film is full of smug humour and novice plot twists that
don't seem exciting, plausible or even remotely entertaining and something
is also wrong when the leading man can't get any support from the audience.
Director John Frankenheimer ('The Manchurian Candidate', 'Birdman of
Alcatraz' 'Grand Prix', 'Black Sunday' and more recently 'Ronin', directs
this film with his usual look of perplexity.  The trouble is, that while
crafting his vision for this film, he overlooked the flaws in the screenplay
by Ehren Kruger who wrote 1999's 'Arlington Road', a crackling thriller
about
terrorism and 'Reindeer Games' doesn't even look like it's written by the
same guy.  Perhaps the desire to be completely different threw Kruger off
course and he faltered badly with this film.  Several other mishaps that
make the film somewhat aloof involve Rudy trying to make an escape from the
casino and getting caught in the wilderness.  We see that he has a knack for
hot wiring cars.  There are plenty around in this scene.  Why not just
hi-jack one and make a run for it.  Oh, the irony of it.  Geeeeeesh!
Characters played by Dennis Farina, James Frain, Donal Logue, Danny Trejo,
Clarence Williams III, and Issac Hayes are given no real focus and some of
them have major time on screen and this is only an added and unwanted
annoyance.  John Frankenheimer has tried his hand at hack second rate
pictures before such as '52 Pick-Up', 'The Holcroft Covenant' and 'Year of
the Gun' and had little or no success with them.  He is a director capable
of so much more but falls into the rut of making movies like 'Reindeer
Games' and for a man whose been in the business for 50 years, you'd think
he'd know better.  It isn't evident here.  Perhaps a better name for this
film would have been 'Silly Games'.
A film must receive a three star rating or higher to be eligible for a
recommendation.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Dennis Schwartz

REINDEER GAMES (director: John Frankenheimer; screenwriter: Ehren
Kruger; cinematographer: Alan Caso; editors:Tony Gibbs/Michael Kahn;
cast: Ben Affleck (Rudy), Gary Sinise (Gabriel), Clarence Williams III
(Merlin), Charlize Theron (Ashley), James Frain (Nick), Dennis Farina
(Jack Bangs), Isaac Hayes (Zook), Donal Logue (Pug), Danny Trejo
(Jumpy), 2000)
How the mighty have fallen! John Frankenheimer was once recognized as a
quality filmmaker capable of making great paranoid thrillers (The
Manchurian Candidate), who has slipped off the precipice of reliability
and is now reduced to making this nonsensical, exploitive actioner, that
has a bleak metallic snowy look to it. It is made as if to bypass movie
houses and go straight to video rentals. It is made from a mindless
script. No director, cinematographer, or actor could have made this into
a credible film (Well! replacing Affleck as the lead couldn't have hurt
in immediately improving it. He didn't fit the part, looking collegian
and clueless throughout the entire film).
The film's only purpose seems to be to come up with as many ludicrous
plot twists as possible and see if any one in the audience can guess how
it will work itself out. The violence is gratuitous and in the last 20
minutes or so, the story proves itself to be an insulting one. The
characters became gradually less and less human as the twists kept
piling up. The shame of this film, is that it was oddly enough
entertaining for long stretches, as it seemed to pass for being a
diverting actioner, until it reached the point of no return in
tolerability.
Reindeer Games is shot in British Colombia but set in Michigan; the
movie is from an original story written by Ehren Kruger (Arlington
Road/Scream 3), about an ex-con being forced into participating in a
casino robbery and having a love affair turn very ugly.
Rudy (Ben Affleck) and Nick (James Frain) are prison cellmates, both
getting out in a couple of days. Rudy was in five years for auto theft
and Nick three years for manslaughter; he killed someone trying to
defend his girlfriend from being attacked. Nick developed a pen pal
relationship with a girl named Ashley (Theron), who will meet him
outside the prison when he gets out. Nick's cell is filled with photos
of his glamorous pen pal and he has talked with Rudy about her for some
time now, even sharing with him the intimate letters she wrote.
A prison fracas develops and a prisoner shanks Nick to death, as Nick
comes to the rescue of Rudy. When Rudy gets out, he sees Ashley waiting
by the prison gates and sees for himself that she is the fine looking
babe he saw photos of, so he decides to tell her that he's Nick. To say
that this film had holes in the script and that everything about the
story could be challenged, goes without saying. Just to show what I
mean, Rudy would have to wonder or at least have some suspicion why
Ashley did not receive by now a photo of Nick and did not visit him in
prison. But things only get more contrived the further along the story
moves, so better to forget all the contrivances to the story and try to
enjoy the film as is, and take this B- film for what it is.
After the couple returns to the motel they rented for another round of
lovemaking, Rudy discovers how dangerous a mistake he made when Ashley's
sinister brother Gabriel (Sinise) and three other armed thugs of his
gunrunning gang show up and beat him for violating his sister. They were
led to believe by Ashley that Rudy used to work in an Indian casino in
rural Michigan--you see, they think Rudy is Nick. Gabriel forces Rudy to
tell him about the casino's security setup, but Rudy, now, says he isn't
Nick, but he then says he is Nick after the gang threatens to kill him
for not being Nick. Gabriel has a confused look at all this indecision,
and keeps deciding whether to kill him or not. This little ploy will go
on for the remainder of the film, as Rudy is sometimes Nick and
sometimes he's just plain Rudy. Though, by being Nick, which is the name
he will use for most of the film, he at least gets to remain alive.
If you think you have seen the main twists, let me warn you, that's just
the beginning of all the surprises. The more of them there are, the less
sense the film seems to make. John Frankenheimer moves the action along
at breakneck speed but the more the characters try explaining the
ever-changing situations, the more ridiculous the explanations become.
The casino robbery on Christmas Eve starts the lowlights of the film, as
the gang, along with Rudy, are disguised as five Santas, and they will
fill the Michigan snow with enough blood to satisfy a blood bank for
years. Then the film tries to pull a complete 360 degree reversal and
end on a note of Christmas cheer, since I think this is supposed to be
some kind of Christmas story. What disturbed me more than anything else
about the film, which includes its senseless violence and its need for
an obligatory nude shot of Theron, was the audacity to try and clean up
the mess it made, by relating the film's finale to the holiday spirit of
giving. It seems to want to spread its desperate gloom over everything
it can touch. The thing this film mostly gave me, was a sense of
astonishment that Frankenheimer, who could still in flashes shoot a
scene that is mesmerizing (the one on the cracked ice with Affleck
jumping into the chilly water to save Theron) and then follow it up with
one that is so dopey (machine-gunning warfare in a casino that looks
like a supermarket), that you wonder what happened to the director in a
career that spanned 44- years. What compelled him to make such a dumb
film as this one!
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Sanford
        For every thriller like "The Usual Suspects" or "The Sixth
Sense" that can pull off a spectacular surprise ending, there are half a
dozen like "Reindeer Games" that work themselves into a sweat trying to
cram in twist after twist. After "Suspects" or "Sense" wrap up, you can
replay the movie in your mind and put all the pieces together, but when
"Reindeer Games" runs its course, you'll probably be wondering why you
bothered sitting through the film in the first place.
 You know you've wandered into a bad movie when the finale
begins with the bad guys preparing to do away with the hero, then
stopping just long enough to engage him in a long-winded conversation in
which the villains carefully explain every step they took in setting up
their wicked scheme. All this blather, of course, gives the hero several
minutes in which to figure out how he's going to escape and kill his
captors. In "Reindeer Games," Rudy Duncan (Ben Affleck) has what seems
like a week to get away from the nefarious Gabriel (Gary Sinise) and his
partners; suffice to say, theirs was an extraordinarily complicated
plan.
 The film was written by Ehren Kruger, who did a swell job of
ruining "Scream 3" by packing the last reel with absurd action and
ridiculous last-minute revelations. In "Games," the denouement involves
more double-crosses, false identities and dirty secrets than you'd find
in an entire library of Raymond Chandler novels, and you can bet no one
is going to mistake this mess for "The Big Sleep" or "Farewell, My
Lovely."
 Rudy, the closest thing to a real person in Kruger's world, is
fresh from prison and anxious to hook up with some hot chocolate and
pecan pie before going home to his family. Instead, he connects with
Ashley (Charlize Theron), the former pen pal of his now-deceased cell
mate. Aside from her mile-long false eyelashes and ugly coats, Ashley
also brings with her a vicious brother named Gabriel, who wants Rudy's
help in robbing an Indian casino.
 On its way to the big heist, "Games" wobbles uncertainly
between suspense and spoof, mixing harsh violence with awkwardly
inserted comedy. If director John Frankenheimer was hoping his film
might be mistaken for a Quentin Tarantino opus, he was sorely mistaken.
Tarantino's screenplays have a good deal more depth and color than
anything Kruger can whip up.
 Although Affleck and Sinise are reliably solid and Theron does
everything in her power to make the best of an unplayable role, no one
should have bothered wasting their energy. These "Games" were not worth
playing in the first place. James Sanford

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Reindeer Games (2000) 
Rated R; running time 105 minutes
Genre: Action Adventure 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0184858 
Official site: http://www.dimensionfilms.com/  
Written by: Ehren Kruger
Directed by: John Frankenheimer
Starring:  Ben Affleck, Charlize Theron, Gary Sinise, 
Dennis Farina, James Frain, Clarence Williams III
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsreindeer.html
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below):
In what must have been a good idea to somebody down the line (though 
lord only knows why), Ben Affleck stars as Rudy [Get it?  "Rudy", as in 
"Rudolph"...you know, on the "Reindeer Games" theme?  Yah, that's what I 
said, too.], newly released from prison after doing time for car theft.  
While in prison, Rudy bunked with Nick (James Frain), who was in a 
serious pen-pal relationship with Ashley (Charlize Theron), a woman 
he--and Rudy--obsessed over.  Nick was also due to be released at the 
same time as Rudy, until he was attacked by a con who was after Rudy; 
when Rudy got out, he assumed Nick's identity so he could get with 
Ashley.  But Ashley's brother Gabriel (Gary Sinise) had plans for 
"Nick": he needed Nick to set up a heist of the casino owned by James 
Banks (Dennis Farina)--and Gabriel's not the type to take "no" for an 
answer...
The Upshot:
I know what you're thinking.  "Self," I hear you saying to yourself, 
"just what's got that Chick up in arms about that description, enough 
for her to say 'Reindeer Games is On Drugs'?"  Well, I'll tell ya: the 
way this story is told by writer Ehren Kruger and director John 
Frankenheimer, has got to be the most preposterous load of baloney I've 
ever seen--and it got worse as the movie got longer.  I sat there, 
stunned, unable to believe that they really wanted us to run with this 
one.  I couldn't play along; my Disbelief was Suspended so high, it 
developed a nosebleed.  And what's more: from the stunned looks on the 
faces of most of the actors, especially Ben Affleck and Charlize Theron, 
I find it hard to believe that they believed it, either.  
I'll be kind and blame it on the writer and director, giving the actors 
the benefit of the doubt. After all, it's not Affleck's fault that his 
character seemed so dunderheaded throughout most of the movie [movie 
character rule number one: if given the chance to escape your kidnappers 
and you come back for no obvious reason, you deserve to be chained to 
your bed], resorting to lame humor that fell completely flat during the 
casino scenes.  I bet Affleck is regretting having raised such a stink 
about being billed as the star of "Boiler Room" right about now; Ben, 
old boy, maybe you should just count the money and run. 
Affleck got off easy compared to the rest of the cast.  Sinise, so good 
in even a quick cameo in The Green Mile, is as wasted here as poor 
Dennis Farina is--though at least Sinise actually got to act during his 
screen time.  I have no idea what it was that Farina was doing; alas, 
it's a long way from his heyday in TV's "Crime Story" to this mess.  And 
speaking of TV heydays, Clarence Williams III--"Linc" in "Mod Squad" 
from back in the day--was so exchangeable with The Bad Indian and The 
Bad White Guy sidekicks, I never noticed they had individual names.  
As for Ms. Theron, my heart broke, seeing her so badly miscast (not to 
mention, acting so badly) here after her good performance in "The Cider 
House Rules" last year.  I have no doubt that Sinise, as talented as he 
is, can bounce back from this bad idea; I can only hope the same for 
Theron (Affleck, on the other hand, will probably do just fine.  There's 
something to be said for being Flava Of The Month, and Affleck, Matt 
Damon, and Leo DiCapitated seem to have that market cornered pretty 
well).
It's hard to go into detail about exactly what ticked me off so about 
this flick, without giving away "key" scenes, so I won't--except to say 
that the "twist" at the end goes down in my book as the worst excuse for 
a "reason why it all happened" that I've seen in a long time.  Suffice 
it to say that if you go see it, when you hear yourself mumbling "what 
the hell?" over and over again, you'll know what I mean.  
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
I wasn't gonna bother with the BF for this flick--Clarence Williams III 
having such a nothing part in this that it didn't much matter--but on 
second thought, there was one thing that I actually got half a chuckle 
over.  In a blink-and-you'll-miss-it moment, Isaac Hayes (on leave from 
"South Park" perhaps?) shows up as a prisoner grossed out by 
the..."protein" supplement in his jello.  My, Chef, how the mighty have 
fallen...
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Note to Movie Executives: please please a thousand times please, 
institute a No Hallucinogens Allowed policy during your storyboard 
brainstorming meetings with these wacko writers and directors.  Movie 
viewers everywhere will thank you.
"Reindeer Games" (rating: redlight): 
...This is your writer/director On Drugs.  Any questions?

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Allow me to get philosophical on you for a minute. If a bad ending were to
fall in an otherwise "okay" movie and you were sitting in the audience to
witness it...would it be considered a "bad" movie? Well, in the case of this
film, the ending was so over-the-top that it just tore away any cozy
feelings that I had burrowed in me during the hour and a half previous. A
note to writer Ehren Kruger: it's called over-writing...look into it : )
PLOT:
A convict gets out of jail and finally meets the girl that he'd heard so
much about during his stint in the big house. Unfortunately for the tender
loving duo, the girl's older brother decides to crash their party and
blackmail the ex-con into helping him and his gang of hooligans rob the
Tomahawk casino.
CRITIQUE:
An okay movie with a few decent one-liners, a couple of semi-interesting
action sequences and Charlize Theron looking great is dramatically killed
with an ending so ridiculous that it practically washes away the entire
entertainment value of its previous ninety minutes. I say "practically"
because I do not like to blow a movie off just because "one aspect" of the
film didn't click for me, so let me tell you what I did like about this
film. First of all, Charlize Theron is now officially a grade A movie star!
She's the type of actress that can make you love her no matter what she
says, does, wears or doesn't wear. She is a beauty to behold, a solid
thespian in her own right and a sparkplug of charisma, all wrapped in one.
Fans of Charlize will love her in this film, as will fans of Theron's
boobies, which make an uncredited cameo about halfway through the picture.
Ben Affleck does an okay job, but his performance in this film won't be
putting him on the Brendan Fraser action-hero map anytime soon (To be fair,
Big Ben also flashes us some ass during an early sex-scene). And let's not
forget Sinise, who fills the shoes of the official "bad guy" pretty well, as
well as his tank top, which he fills rather nicely with his newly buffed
body. Nice biceps, dude!
So the actors were are all pretty good, the film started with an intriguing
shot (Five dead bloody Santa suits spread across old man winter), and it
even included a couple of neat twists and turns. So what went wrong?
Unfortunately, the film on the whole just runs along with a little humor
here and there, a little bit of pseudo-romance, which actually drags the
film down especially at the very beginning, a little bit of action and an
even smaller bit of suspense. All in all, nothing to majorly crow about, but
certainly a film which I would have had no problem recommending to people
who liked Theron or Affleck, like "winter" movies and Christmas songs and
didn't mind suspending their disbelief every now and again. But
unfortunately for Frankenheimer and crew, they decided to finish the movie
off with one of the most absurd endings that I've seen in a while. So
whatever little recommendation there was left in me by that point
disappeared along with all sense of reality in the script. Of course, to
each his own, and God knows every single one of us has our own barometer of
far-fetchedness, so who knows, maybe you won't mind the ending so much. But
as much as my buddy and I tried to make sense of the cards that we were
dealt during this film's final moments, it was obvious that neither one of
us could pretend that any of it made much sense.
An okay movie...with a laughable ending.
Little known facts about the movie and its stars:
Charlize Theron stands 5'9". She is fluent in Afrikaans. Ben Affleck stands
6'3". He speaks decent Spanish. Apparently, poor ol' Ben was accidentally
knocked unconscious by football player Dana Stubblefield during the filming
of this movie when Stubblefield slipped and knocked Affleck down. Bennie was
quickly taken to the hospital, and fully recovered.
Clarence Williams III is best remembered for his part of Linc Hayes, his
big-ass afro role in TV's "The Mod Squad".
When Senator Robert Kennedy was shot at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles
on June 5, 1968, it was his good friend John Frankenheimer who had
personally driven him there that day.
Writer Ehren Kruger is the latest flavor of the month in Hollywood, with no
less than three films carrying his writing credits in the past year alone.
Besides this one, he also wrote the thriller ARLINGTON ROAD (7/10) and the
last of the Scream movies entitled SCREAM 3 (7.5/10).
Watch closely and you will notice singer Isaac Hayes in a small cameo part
at the beginning of this movie, as the convict in jail who finds a roach in
his jello, eventually leading to a food fight. You will also note the acting
debut of Washington Redskins tackle Dana Stubblefield who plays another
fierce convict named Alamo. Apparently while casting for the film, director
Frankenheimer told his associates that he "wanted a mean, tough guy to play
Alamo. I want a guy like that Dana Stubblefield". When the filmmakers
contacted the ballplayer, he was more than willing to play the part.
Thankfully the filmmakers decided not to change this film's title from the
pretty cool REINDEER GAMES to the very lame DECEPTION.
This film was shot entirely in the province of British Columbia, Canada.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
REINDEER GAMES (2000) * Directed by John Frankenheimer. Written by 
Ehren Kruger. Photography, Alan Caso. Editing, Tony Gibbs and Michael 
Kahn. Production design Barbara Dunphy. Music, Alan Silvestri. 
Producers, Marty Katz, Bob Weinstein and Chris Moore. Cast: Ben 
Affleck (Rudy), Gary Sinise, (Gabriel), Charlize Theron (Ashley), 
Dennis Farina (Jack Bangs), James Frain (Nick), Danny Trejo (Jumpy), 
Donal Logue (Pug), Clarence Williams III (Merlin). A Dimension (i.e. 
Mramax) release. 99 minutes. R (violence, language)
Director John Frankenheimer was once a big name in films as well as TV.
Among his 1960s  pictures were Birdman of Alcatraz; the political, 
paranoid cult-thriller The Manchurian Candidate; the political 
conspiracy thriller Seven Days in May; the WWII Resistance adventure 
The Train; the affecting melodrama of skydivers, The Gypsy Moths; the 
touching The Fixer; the haunting, chilling, humanistic sci-fi 
Seconds,  the best film ever starring Rock Hudson.
By the 1970s Frankenheimer had crested but still made some gems: The 
Iceman Cometh; the sequel French Connection II -- which my minority 
opinion rates above the original French Connection;  Black Sunday, a 
suspenseful, intelligent entry in the terrorist sub-genre. Then came 
a decidedly mixed bag, although when Frankenheimer returned to 
television in the 90s, he did very well with TV features 
(Andersonville, The Burning Season, George Wallace). On the big 
screen he stumbled in 1996 with the ludicrous yet campy The Island of 
Dr. Moreau., followed by the disappointing Ronin  (1998).
Now comes the sad news that Reindeer Games is a genuine flop. It was 
supposed to be released during you guessed it, the Christmas 1999 
season, presumably as
an action "film noir" that might stand out among the sugary 
end-of-year items. But they postponed it.
It's a heist movie of sorts.  Cell mates Nick (Farina) and Rudy (as 
in Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer, ha-ha) played by Ben Affleck, are 
inmates of Michigan's Iron Mounatin Prison. (In fact the movie was 
shot in Canada). At Christmastime, those two about to be released, 
which is not as bad as releasing this film.
At the last minute, there is a nicely shot  food riot caused by 
cockroaches being served to the prisoners.  Nick gets stabbed, to 
death, we assume. Outside the prison Rudy meets Ashley, Nick's the 
pretty pen-pal  who did not know what Nick looked like. Rudy says 
"I'm Nick" and before you can say Jack Robinson or Jack Frost, the 
two are making passionate love. To maintain his deception Rudy even 
flushes down the toilet his Michigan driver's license. (But was it 
valid after five years in the slammer?-- Rudy by the way had been 
imprisoned for car theft).
The Love Games are savagely  interrupted by a gang  of  low-life, low 
I.Q. types led by truck  driver Gabriel,  said to be Ashley's 
brother. They think that the new Nick is the real Nick. He denies it. 
They beat him up mercilessly. Again and again. They don't believe 
him. The violence level is high. It turns out that Nick (the real 
McCoy) had sent Ashley (don't ask) a hand-drawn map of the American 
Indian  Tomahawk Casino, where Nick had worked. The gang plans to 
"take it down."
Skipping the skippable, which is most of the movie, under major 
duress Rudy admits he is Nick, claims that the casino has been 
remodeled while he was in prison. Ordered to case it  incognito, 
Rudy-Nick goes there as a ridiculous cowboy.
Enough, enough. Miscast Ben Affleck, who looks like a nice boy from 
the 'burbs, foils and re-foils the villains, gets re-beaten, gets 
chained to a bed, etc. His face which should have been a pulp, 
magically recovers from scene to scene. He knows, near-magically, how 
to undo his lock. And so on.
Gabriel is an almost comically brutish, savage guy. The dialogue is 
for the birds, which is an insult to our flying friends. Performances 
are pathetically bad. The casino heist is done by the gang members 
all dressed up as Santa Clauses. Bur as the Marx Bros, would say, 
there is no Sanity Clause at any time, be it so tiny, in the picture.
I'll say zero about the plot's twists, turns, re-twists and re-turns. 
It is beyond the unbelievable. If you keep watching it is to see how 
far ludicrousness can go. The movie was written  by  Ehren Kruger 
whose scripts for Arlington Road and Scream 3 call for a five-year 
sentence in Iron Mountain Prison.
Through the stupidity of it all you might just  sense that 
Frankenheimer still knows how to direct, to be like an orchestra 
conductor who keeps things going. But the score is much too dismal 
here. Perhaps he will take a gun to Kruger after he reads the reviews.
A major character is a humongous 18-wheeler. The movie is like that 
vehicle. It has 18 wheels, but no two of them run at the same time.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Bob Bloom
 Reindeer Games (2000) 1/2 star out of 4. Starring Ben Affleck, Charlize
Theron and Gary Sinese. Directed by John Frankenheimer
 Take my word for it, you don't want to play in any of these "Reindeer
Games."
 This convoluted heist caper is turgid, stupid and preposterous, an
embarrassment for director John Frankenheimer, a man whose distinguished
career has included such classics as "The Manchurian Candidate," "Seven
Days in May" and "Seconds."
 The main problem with "Reindeer Games" is the illogical complexity of
what is basically a simple robbery. Plus the actions of the characters
seem dictated more by script necessities than by what could be
considered normal - or even abnormal - human behavior.
 The basic story involves Rudy (Ben Affleck), a car thief who, when
released from prison, masquerades as his slain cellmate Nick (James
Frain), because he has fallen in love with Ashley (Charlize Theron),
Nick's prison pen pal, who promised to meet him upon his release.
 Rudy and Ashley's brief romantic interlude is violently cut short by
Gabriel (Gary Sinese), Ashley's brother, who wants Rudy - whom he
believes is Nick - to help him and his gang rob a Michigan casino at
which Nick once worked as a security guard.
 Of course, no one believes Rudy when he tells them he is not Nick,
despite his complete ignorance about the casino and its workings.
 Gabriel and his cohorts are the gang that couldn't shoot straight. They
are long-distance truckers who run guns on the side. And they all have
unusual names such as Merlin, Pug and Jumpy. Gabriel's nickname is
Monster, so of course he acts like one.
 As "Reindeer Games" progresses, we are treated to a series of double
identities, double crosses, botched set-ups, lots of gunfire and more
twists than a Chubby Checker dance marathon.
 Now all of this sounds like it should be an exciting outing. But, for
some reason, there is too much talk, too much exposition and "Reindeer
Games" just drags and sputters on and on.
 The characters are so cartoonish, so unbelievable - and act so dumb
that one wonders how they could rob a 7-Eleven, let alone a casino.
 Affleck has no chance to stretch his acting chops. In fact, he goes
through the movie merely posing, acting the leading man, instead of the
paroled convict.
 Sinese, who is usually a performer of exceptional quality, made a bad
career decision with this flick. His Gabriel merely rants and raves, and
he is supposed to be the brains of the outfit.
 Theron looks pretty and works hard at acting the seductress, but she
lacks that Barbara Stanwyck-"Double Indemnity" hard edge needed for her
character.
Frankenheimer merely lets his scenes drag on. Judicious editing -
cutting "Reindeer Games" from its nearly two hours to about 90 minutes -
may have improved the overall pacing, but it is doubtful it would have
salvaged this mediocre misfire.
 "Reindeer Games" is no fun at all. It is a slow, dim-witted excuse for
sex, gunfire and a Ben Affleck butt shot. And even that's not reason
enough to spend your money.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Christopher Null
     REINDEER GAMES is one of those movies that thinks so much of itself
it sports a special cover sheet over the press notes, reading, "REINDEER
GAMES is filled with twists and turns that we hope will keep the
audience guessing," followed by a plea that critics will not spoil the
fun by divulging these twists and turns to the gentle readers.
     Set on a cold Christmas Eve in Michigan, REINDEER GAMES borrows
heavily from its northern brethren FARGO and A SIMPLE PLAN, leaving the
best elements of both those films on the cutting room floor.  Writer
Ehren Kruger (ARLINGTON ROAD, SCREAM 3) has tried his darnedest to
create a formula heist movie that breaks from the formula.
Unfortunately he has given us something barely worthy of Arnold
Schwarzenegger.
     The plot starts off with promise: Rudy (Ben Affleck) and his
cellmate Nick (James Frain) are set to get out of prison in 3 days, but
the day before release, Nick gets killed (oh no!).  Rudy takes one look
at Nick's pen-pal Ashley (Charlize Theron) and decides, what the hell,
he'll impersonate his best jail-friend to get a little nookie.  But Rudy
quickly gets drawn into a casino-robbery scheme by Ashley's evil brother
Gabriel (Gary Sinise), and then the twists begin.
     Of course, by that time a long and lonely hour has passed.  The
first half of REINDEER GAMES just sits there, spiked with droll
voice-over setting up the notion that Ben Affleck just might be the next
big action hero.  (He's not.)  While Kruger and all-star director John
Frankenheimer try to imbue REINDEER GAMES with that FARGO mystique, they
mainly end up relying on Theron's bared breasts to captivate the
audience.  Mind you, movies have been carried on less before, but the
ho-hum thrills and coincidental mystery of these GAMES will likely leave
you shrugging with indifference on the way out the door.
     How could a two-inch shiv kill Nick?  Why would anyone believe Rudy
is Nick?  Why does Gary Sinise look like he did in FORREST GUMP?
Whether you bother to worry about the details is up to you.
Director: John Frankenheimer
Producer: Marty Katz, Bob Weinstein, Chris Moore
Writer: Ehren Kruger
Starring: Ben Affleck, Gary Sinise, Charlize Theron, Dennis Farina,
James Frain, Donal Logue, Clarence Williams III
http://www.reindeergames-themovie.com/
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
