Title
Review for Ben-Hur (1959)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
     Made for 15 million dollars in 1959, 'Ben-Hur' stands the test of
time and is an example of how the screen epic must be presented.  Lavish
in its presentation, it ranks highly as a favourite among fans of the
biblical genre while critics over the years have had mixed feelings
about it.  'Gone With the Wind' and 'Lawrence of Arabia' probably rival
it as the greatest spectacle of all time and 1997's 'Titanic' has won
the same number of Oscars, 11, giving these two films the distinction of
being the most honoured films of all time among their peers.  Some
critics seem to regard 'Ben-Hur' as corny at times, with a phony
emotional tone throughout and I suppose that isn't entirely without
merit.
     Nominated for 14 Oscars and winning 11, 'Titanic' lost in three
categories, Best Actress for Kate Winslet, Best Supporting Actress for
Gloria Stuart and Best Make-Up.  Nominated for 12 Oscars, 'Ben-Hur'
didn't win an Oscar for its screen writer, Karl Tunberg but came away
victorious in every other field of achievement, including Best Picture,
Best Actor (Charlton Heston), Best Supporting Actor (Hugh Griffith) and
Best Director (William Wyler).
     Legendary filmmaker William Wyler had already won two Oscars for
his meticulous direction of such films as 1942's 'Mrs. Miniver' and
1946's 'The Best Years of Our Lives' when he received a third trophy for
handling the hectic panoramic scale of directing 'Ben-Hur'.
     Historians will know that the Roman empire ruled the Earth at the
time Christ was born and that's how 'Ben-Hur' begins its story.  I wish
ABC television would show this film every year at Easter instead of the
inferior 'The Ten Commandments' which has nothing to do with Christ
while 'Ben-Hur's' climax takes place on Good Friday during Christ's
crucifixion and ends with a triumphant re-birth of the human spirit for
the mortals in the film.
     As the year's progress after the birth of the Jesus, Prince Judah
Ben-Hur (Charlton Heston) is re-united with his boyhood friend Messala
(Stephen Boyd) and the two of them would soon become mortal enemies.
The scene where they meet for the first time and embrace each other as
friends is a scene that director Wyler had them do over and over again
and a rumoured 140 takes is said to have been collected.  The Roman
empire's persecution of the Jews leads the Jewish prince himself to
plead for freedom for his people, much to the resistance of Messala,
whose only goal is power and to end up at the side of Caesar.
     There is a central theme of noble family love in 'Ben-Hur' as
Ben-Hur's mother and sister are the most important things in his life.
After breaking off his friendship with Messala, an accident occurs which
injures a high ranking Roman official and Ben-Hur and his family are
accused of attempted assassination and without a trial, the mother and
sister are imprisoned  to an underground dungeon and eventually develop
leprosy while Ben-Hur is sentenced as a prisoner to serve as a slave on
the Roman galley ships, chained to the floor and forced to row the ship
with other slaves.  During a fierce battle, Ben-Hur saves the life of a
Roman officer, played by Jack Hawkins who adopts him as a son and he
returns to his life of nobility and continues his search for his mother
and sister.
     In the time after his re-birth, Ben-Hur meets an Arab sheik (Hugh
Griffith) with a magnificent stable of four Arabian white horse that
will compete in the annual chariot race which Messala has won
consecutively for the past four years.  Griffith is an example of how
actors can contribute a relatively small part to a film but still be
memorable and Griffith won the Best Supporting Actor Oscar as the film's
comic relief and ally to Ben-Hur.  The scene where he negotiates a bet
with the Romans and a scene where he talks tenderly to his horses,
earned Griffith the well deserved honour he received.  It is the chariot
race that makes 'Ben-Hur' the spectacular film that it is as errors
during the filming of it were left in as a convincing example of what
might have been and were appropriate for inclusion into the film's final
cut.  There is, however, the continuity error of one of the cast
actually wearing a gold watch during this scene, giving away its 20th
century identity and the scene where Charlton Heston flies out of the
chariot and then climbs back in was said to be "unrehearsed".
     The film's religious sub-text is tastefully presented as we see
Jesus only from the back, as no mortal knows what he truly looks like
and his two scenes of confrontation with Ben-Hur will bring a tear to
the eye of even the least sentimental movie fan.
     At a running time of 212 minutes (3 hours and 32 minutes) 'Ben-Hur'
manages to tell a story without including too much of a romantic
sub-plot and it makes its mark as a film of epic proportions not only
with its scale of production but by the size of its historical
importance, a part of history not recognized by all, but for others, it
can be observed as a part of religious culture with debate among all.

Author
Christopher Null
Scratch that. Ben-Hur is no stupid gladiator movie.  As the title
sequence tells us, this is "A tale of our Christ," an unabashed
religious fable, albeit one that only shows its hero from the back.
Of course, Jesus is not the real subject of this tale, it's Judah
Ben-Hur, a Jewish prince living in Judea, played by the incomparable
Charlton Heston.  Ben-Hur lives high on the hog, here in the year 26, as
we're told.  And he's a good guy, nice to his slaves and everything. 
But woe be unto Judah when the Romans step up their military presence in
his territory.  Despite their being led by his old friend Massala
(Stephen Boyd, who never starred in another big hit after Ben-Hur),
tensions run high, and when some tiles accidentally fall from Ben-Hur's
roof, nearly hitting the new Governor of Judea, Judah is quickly
sentenced without trial to hard labor, rowing in the galleys of the
Roman navy.
>From prince to slave he goes, and because of his endless compassion,
Ben-Hur finds himself legally adopted by a Roman nobleman whose life he
has saved years later.  He practices his charioteering, and soon enough
he is at liberty to avenge not only his imprisonment, but that of his
mother and sister as well.  That vengeance, as any moviegoer knows,
takes place on the chariot course in a sequence so famous, dramatic, and
long it consumes 10 chapters of the film's 61-chapter DVD release.
At 3 1/2 full hours of running time, you aren't likely to find another
G-rated film that kids will hate more than Ben-Hur.  Even as an
(ostensible) adult, I'm torn on the film.  It's not particularly
well-written.  The music is heavy-handed and grates on the ears.  The
story is far-fetched and lacks proper editing.  And it's 3 1/2 hours
long.
But don't mind me.  Nominated for 12 Oscars, Ben-Hur won 11, a record. 
Shot on 65mm super-widescreen film, it is one of the most resplendent
films you'll ever see (check out the new DVD release if you don't
believe me -- it also includes a documentary about the making of the
film and a commentary track by Heston).  And Heston is unforgettable
(the rest of the cast is another story).  Moviegoers agreed, when
Ben-Hur's grosses saved MGM from bankruptcy.  (Warner Brothers has the
rights now.)
All told, I'm content to let the overly dramatic theatrics of Ben-Hur
fall by the wayside (case in point: after four years in prison,
Ben-Hur's sister and mother develop leprosy -- and who do we know that
can cure leprosy, hmmmmm).  Instead, I'll sit back and take my place in
the stands for that thundering chariot race.  Hell, that's better than a
cruddy, overrated gladiator picture any day.
Director: William Wyler
Producer: Sam Zimbalist
Writer: Karl Tunberg
Starring: Charlton Heston, Jack Hawkins, Haya Harareet, Stephen Boyd,
Hugh Griffith, Martha Scott, Cathy O'Donnell, Sam Jaffe, Finlay Currie
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Brian Koller
"Ben-Hur" is a massive, sprawling MGM epic set in
the first century AD, during the life of Christ.
Directed by William Wyler, the film plods along
for most of its 212 minutes, marginally good but
lacking in humor, action, or spark.  There are
solemn religious overtones and the usual stereotypes
in Roman epics (The bad, corrupt Romans; The good,
oppressed Jews).  The famed chariot race sequence
delivers the goods, and is much better than the rest
of the film, but is hardly sufficient to bring the
entire film to a higher grade.
Charlton Heston stars as the title character.
Ben-Hur begins the film as a wealthy Judean prince.
He is the childhood friend of the new Roman precept
Messala (Stephen Boyd), but politics soon makes them
enemies.  Boyd finds a good excuse to imprison
Ben-Hur's family, making Ben-Hur a galley slave.
After Ben-Hur saves the life of moody Roman general
Arrius (Jack Hawkins), Arrius adopts Ben-Hur, who
becomes a champion chariot racer.  But soon Ben-Hur
leaves Rome for Judea, to find his family and get
revenge on Messala, who co-incidentally is a great
chariot racer.  On his way, he just happens to meet
Sheik Ilderim (Hugh Griffith) who has great horses
but no jockey.
The viewer must wait over two hours before seeing
the film's centerpiece, the Chariot race sequence.
This was directed by legendary stuntman Yakima Canutt
and is excellent.  Messala's dirty tricks, especially
the spiked probe, adds much dramatic tension to an
already exciting sequence.  The problem is that
the chariot race is about the only action that
"Ben-Hur" has.
I have no problems with Charlton Heston's performance.
He has screen charisma, and can project indignation well.
The film might have been more fun with offbeat casting
(Robert Mitchum? Gregory Peck?) but Heston does fit
the melodramatic bill.
Christ shows up in the story now and then, and his
crucifiction is depicted in the finale.  We do not
see Christ's face or hear his voice.  By film's
end, Ben-Hur has become religious propoganda.  Anyone
who has seen a Hollywood film before is not surprised
when the leprosy of Miriam (Martha Scott) and Tirzah
(Cathy O'Donnell) is cured.
"Ben-Hur" won a mountain of Academy Awards, including
Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor (Heston),
Best Cinematography, and Best Supporting Actor (Griffith).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
