Title
Review for Other People's Money (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
90 min, R, Comedy, 1991
Director: Norman Jewison
Cast: Danny DeVito, Gregory Peck, Penelope Ann Miller, Piper Laurie
     Danny DeVito owns a business that buys up businesses that are worth
more money dead than alive.  Then, after the business has been bought
up, the company liquidates the business and makes money.  DeVito sets
his sights on a small company based in Rhode Island called New England
Wire and Cable, which is making very little but could be worth a lot of
money.  When the owners of New England Wire and Cable find out what
DeVito plans to do they hire lawyer Penelope Ann Miller to help save the
business.
     OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY is rated R for explicit language, adult
situations, and adult humor.  I give OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY a three on a
zero to five scale.  This film is not Danny DeVito's best film, but, it
is not his worst.  (His worst film, in my opinion, was a 1972 Italian
film called LADY LIBERTY which was directed by Mario Manicelli.)  I don't
suggest seeing OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY for full price but it is well worth
seeing at a matinee price or you might want to wait until OTHER PEOPLE'S
MONEY comes to video.
     One of the two major problems with this film is that it tries to be
a comedy while also trying to be a drama.  In some cases this would
work, but not totally in this film.  The film tries to portray a serious
message and then makes you laugh.  What usually ends up happening is
that people forget the message that they just heard.  The other problem
that I think hurt this film is that when an actor becomes a star, the
film industry figures that anyone will go see the film.  The film
industry doesn't put as much money into writing the film as they maybe
should hoping that the star can carry the film.  That might be the case
for this film.
     Don't get me wrong, OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY is a very funny film, it
just could have been better.  Danny DeVito is able to carry the film
through the slow spots it hits and Penelope Ann Miller puts in a great
performance.  In short, okay film especially if you are a big fan of
Danny DeVito.

Author
Anton J. Panagos
- Starring Danny DeVito, Penelope Ann Miller, Gregory Peck,
           Piper Laurie, and Dean Jones
     OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY is a slightly humorous version of Oliver
Stone's WALL STREET.  OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY is the story of a corporate
raider, played by DeVito, who wants to buy out a company.  He's so
ruthless that he is nickname "Larry the Liquidator."  The company DeVito
wants to buy goes by the name of New England Wire and Cable (as in
TELEPHONE wire and cable).  (There are even some obvious plugs for AT&T
phones!!)  The company is situated in a sleepy little town of Rhode
Island.  Trying to stop him are the chairman of the board of NEW&C,
great actor Gregory Peck, his wife, Piper Laurie, and their lawyer,
Penelope Ann Miller.  Miller and DeVito fight it out for who should keep
the company: DeVito, who will do anything to "help his stockholders," or
Miller, a clever business lawyer who will do almost anything to save the
old company and its employees.  The difference between this movie and
WALL STREET is that DeVito and Miller have a love interest.  Or is it a
lust interest?  
     Good performances are had by all, especially by DeVito.  DeVito has
a knack for nasty roles.  From RUTHLESS PEOPLE to THROW MOMMA FROM THE
TRAIN, he has delivered well.  Peck makes a short role interesting.  His
impressive speech at the annual shareholder's meeting is a notch in the
case against "liquidators."  Penelope Ann Miller gives a sultry but
otherwise okay role.  She's been cast in better roles, such as in THE
FRESHMAN.  Unfortunately, the movie was slowly paced with occasional
humor thrown in by DeVito.  The payoff at the end of the movie was not
really worth it either.   I'd give this movie this movie a "B" for
effort (on acting) but a "C" for execution.  The director, Norman
Jewison,  has directed better in other movies.  Jewison thought the
romance between DeVito and Miller was enough to carry the movie.  It
doesn't.  It isn't complex and neither is the plot revolving DeVito's
intended buy-out.  
     I'd rate this movie on a scale on 1 to 4 stars, a generous 2 stars
for the good, but not great acting.  OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY is rated R for
language, and adult situations, but no violence.
