Title
Review for Ballad of Little Jo, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
*THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO* --  1993, drama, based on (the few known) historical
facts
PLOT/KICK-OFF:  Society woman Josephine Monaghan is kicked out by her
father and heads out West to make a new life for herself.  After
escaping a rape attempt, she cuts her hair and dresses as a man
(illegal at the time) so she can survive life in the mining camp she's
trying to reach to make her fortune.
CHARACTERS/ACTING:  Suzy Amis is totally believable as Jo in both parts
(as well as the transition).  Ian McKellen plays the cold, strange
Percy who teaches Jo survival skills in the West and gets her out of
mining.  Bo Hopkins manages to give warmth to the part of bigoted,
ignorant sheep herder Frank Badger, who gives Jo a job.  David Chung
gives a wonderfully subtle performance as "Tin Man" ("The correct
pronunciation is "Tien Mahn" (sp?) he tells Jo with dignity), an
escaped railroad laborer whom Jo later rescues from Frank's attempted
lynching.  It's a keen pleasure to watch him gradually lose his
"grinning dumb Chinaman" act with Jo as they learn more about each
other and lower their defenses, and then snatch it up again whenever
Frank comes by.  Writer-director Maggie Greenwald is generous with
unspoken scenes:  she allows characters to develop as much or more
through looks and body language as dialog.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  Uncompromising look at life in Montana in the
1860's; the viewer's impressions of the wide-open vistas and the stark
surroundings Jo endures will suffer a bit on the small screen.  Some of
the scenes are annoyingly intercut in an attempt to be artistic, I
guess, but for the most part the editing is straightforward.
SCORE/SOUND:  We know it's a Western from the banjo and fiddle opening
music as we watch Jo trudge along the "road."  I liked the music;
mostly instrumental, but some female folk/country-ish vocals.
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  As I said, uncompromising.  Jo mars her face
with a razor to complete her disguise; we also see a prostitute who has
been slashed with a knife for refusing Percy's request for alternate
sex, and a slain family of immigrants (victims of a cattle
rancher/sheep herder range war); also a shoot-out.
SKIN/SITUATIONS:  The most *tender* erotic scenes I've seen since
*Autumn Moon* at the Toronto Film Festival last year.  After all her
years alone, Jo's feelings of longing and wistfulness at seeing (the
gorgeous shot of) Tin Man washing in the river have quite an impact.
The role reversal of seeing short-haired, rough Jo and Tin Man, with
unbraided long silky black hair, in bed (both bare-chested) is
intriguing.
ANALYSIS:  I went afraid this movie would be cute, preachy or
romanticized; happily, it greatly exceeded my expectations.  This movie
is not flawless, but the unexpected irony (the audience laughed out
loud several times) and gentle humor, plus the depth of
characterizations of Jo and the others, make this movie worth watching,
if you can take the upsetting scenes (not gratuitous!) mentioned
above.  I liked the ending, too.
- Sarah Elkins (elkins.wbst139@xerox.com)

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO is a film written and directed by Maggie
Greenwald.  The cast includes Suzy Amis, David Chung, Bo Hopkins, Ian
McKellen, Carrie Snodgrass, and Rene Auberjonois.  Rated R for violence
and sex scenes.
     THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO is based the life of Josephine/Joe
Monaghan, a woman who spent her life in the frontier mining districts
of Idaho as a man.  Josephine was expelled from her wealthy Eastern
family for having a baby out of wedlock.  She drifts out West and soon
discovers, almost too late, that a woman without a male protector is a
victim in the making.  After being betrayed and narrowly escaping a
gang rape, she finds the only ready-to-wear clothes available are men's
and thus almost casually begins a lifetime role as a cross-dresser.
The historical Little Jo is mostly unknown, but she did become a cowboy
in Owyhee County, Idaho.  She was thought to be "odd" for her
stand-offish attitudes to drinking and whoring, but enjoyed some respect
for her horsemanship.  Her secret was discovered only upon her death.
(See THE COWGIRL COMPANION by Gail Gilchriest for information about
Little Jo and the other known female cross-dressers of the Old West, as
well as women in the West in general.)
     One should note en passant that the phenomenon of women assuming
men's clothes and men's roles is by no means either extinct nor
unnecessary even in today's society.  I have a friend who says she
feels she loses all her personal power if she wears women's
clothes--even women's jeans, instead of men's.  And it is still
difficult for women to pursue full careers in many fields--director
Greenwald suggested in a New York Times article--"whether it's playing
jazz or directing films or flying planes.  Then there's being president
of the United States." And there is the locally famous case of Billy
Tipton, the American jazz pianist and saxophonist, who upon his death
in 1989 in Spokane, was discovered to be a woman and who originally
assumed a man's persona to get ahead in jazz.
     However, the pressure to pass a man was even greater in the last
century than in this one.  Even wearing clothes "inappropriate to one's
sex" was illegal throughout the states and territories.  On the other
hand, the mere act of wearing pants might well have been enough to let
a woman pass as a man, the sight was so unthinkable to most people that
they appear to have been blinded to any other possibility.
     And it is to everyone's credit that Suzy Amis--even though she
never really convinces us--is presented without mascara or lip
gloss--unlike Barbra Steisand in YENTL or Julie Andrews in
VICTOR/VICTORIA.  Amis worked with voice and movement coaches and
pumped iron and learned to shoot and herd sheep on location in the Red
Lodge country of Montanta.  Amis does an admirable job as Little Jo,
giving us little hints that help flesh out a character that is by the
nature of her situation strong, silent, and unable to talk about
herself.  Josephine was something of a rebel even back in Buffalo and
that streak helped set the direction of her life as Joe.  Amis gives us
a performance that is full of surprises, entirely as original as the
character she plays.
     Amis's fellow actors provide strong backup for her, especially
Rene Auberjonois as the peddler, Ian McKellan as the complex,
contradictory, alcoholic cabinmate who first teaches Joe about
surviving in the West, beautiful David Chung as Tinman (Tienman) the
Chinese man who helps set her free to be a complete person again, and
Bo Hopkins as the bigotted, violent, good-hearted neighbor who wants to
be Joe's friend and who can never quite gap the distance between them.
All are excellent and pretty much represent the range of the types of
male characters in the film.  The film's view of men is as complex as
anything else in it.
     Complementing this excellent cast are the cinematography of Declan
Quinn and the music of David Mansfield.  Quinn gives a full, lush look
at the panoramic as well as the close-up beauties of the intermountain
West, in addition to interior work that looks like available light--the
beauty of sunshine through a cabin window or the murk of a cold and
grimy tavern/whorehouse.  Mansfield's music is charming and appropriate
throughout, picking up folk and ethnic themes, but never overwhelming
the scenes.
     But clearly the real star of LITTLE JO is writer/director Maggie
Greenwald.  Greenwald has worked carefully and imaginatively within her
limited budget to give us a rich and full realized film.  I liked this
film even more than I did the excellent 1000 PIECES OF GOLD, Nancy
Kelly's film about Lalu Nathoy (Rosalyn Chao), the Chinese woman sold
into slavery and prostitution who made a life for herself in Idaho.
Both stories, based in Western history, have their points of
similarity, but in terms of treatment LITTLE JO has the more polished
look and feel.  My only quibble is that the final scenes of death and
discovery do not feel entirely necessary and drag out an excellent film
to an ending that seems to put the final emphasis on Bo Hopkins instead
of Suzy Amis.  I think an epilog would have been well used here.
     However, THE BALLARD OF LITTLE JO is a first-rate film and I
recommend it without reservation to all of you.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Suzy Amis, Bo Hopkins, Ian McKellen, David Chung
Director:  Maggie Greenwald
Producers:  Fred Berner and Brenda Goodman
Screenplay:  Maggie Greenwald
Music:  David Mansfield
Released by Fine Line Features
     Once, Hollywood framed our vision of the Old West as a place of
gallantry and bravery, where the good guys and bad guys would shoot it
out, and right would always triumph over wrong.  Women, when they had
parts in these films, had few lines, and rarely broke from the
stereotypes of dancing girl or meek, dutiful frontier wife.  Lately,
however, the images given to us by the film industry have been
changing.  UNFORGIVEN showed that the line between good and evil is
blurred, and Posse made sure that the role of the black cowboy isn't
forgotten.  Now, THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO comes along to clear up a few
more misconceptions.
     Once Josephine Monaghan (Suzy Amis) lost her virginity and gave
birth to a bastard, her future was ruined.  With her past sins hanging
over her like a hangman's noose, she has no choice but to flee the
constrained, pampered socialite's world she knew in the East, and head
West.  There she discovers that the best life she can lead as a woman
is that of a prostitute, so she makes the bold decision to grab at
freedom and independence by masquerading as a man.  Whiskers and
muscles aren't necessary.  The mere appearance of a female as a male in
a time when it's "illegal to dress improper to your sex" is enough to
convince just about everyone.
     THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO follows UNFORGIVEN in presenting a gritty,
dirty view of America's Nineteenth Century frontier.  The scenery is
still nice, but it's hard to appreciate a beautiful vista when an
innocent family is getting butchered in the middle of it.  There aren't
many heroes here; shooting people turns out to be a lot more difficult
than plunking tin cans.
     Loosely based on the true-life story of a woman about whom little
is known, the story of LITTLE JO is a masterpiece of detail and
intelligence.  Maggie Greenwald has done her homework, piecing together
an engrossing tale that movies quickly enough to keep the easily-
distracted involved, but not so rapidly that it misses the nuances of
the situation.  Touches of humor are mixed nicely with drama as LITTLE
JO explores the entire spectrum of human emotions.  And just because Jo
has chosen to live life as a man doesn't mean that she can't yearn for
her lost femininity.
     The focal point of this film is Jo.  As played by Suzy Amis, the
character is perhaps not perfectly developed, but the actress gets
better as the movie unfolds.  I was particularly unimpressed with her
early scenes (when she's openly female), but after the
"transformation," she settled into the role.  Amis is not an especially
emotive actress, and her Jo is reserved--perhaps occasionally too much
so.  The most effective scenes are those of quiet emotion, such as when
Jo sheds a tear.
     Physically, Ms. Amis is not so classically beautiful that she
can't be made up to look like a boy.  It's amazing how much a change of
clothes and a haircut can do.  Certainly, the transformation here is
far more believable than in ORLANDO.  I was never able to accept Tilda
Swinton as a man; it's less difficult with Amis.  Then again, she's
only acting like a man, not actually trying to be one.
     The standout actor in LITTLE JO is Bo Hopkins, who gives a
boisterous performance as the cursing, gunslinging Frank Badger, a
rough man with as good a heart as they come.  Hopkins makes Frank come
alive, and his relationship with Jo, which deserves far more screen
time than it's accorded, is one of the most real and interesting
elements of the movie.  Would that all the other character interaction
was as good.
     The last scene belongs in another movie, however.  Throughout
LITTLE JO, the humor is of the subtle variety, but as the film draws to
a close, there is an overt attempt at outright comedy.  It works as far
as getting laughs, but the presence of this moment somehow cheapens the
twilight of an otherwise mostly-effective motion picture.  LITTLE JO
doesn't need complete closure, and certainly not in the manner by which
it is attained.
     LITTLE JO is successful in capturing the atmosphere of the Old
West.  Camerawork and musical score deserve credit for this--especially
the latter.  From the first notes of the opening theme, it's apparent
that the choice of David Mansfield was perfect for composer.  Rarely
has a score so expertly matched the tempo of a film--it becomes a vital
part of LITTLE JO without forcing itself upon the audience.
     If you like films about the "new Old West," THE BALLAD OF LITTLE
JO is not to be missed.  Even for those who aren't particularly fond of
Westerns, this movie still has a lot to offer.  Keeping the conventions
of the genre to a minimum, it strikes out in bolder directions,
reflecting personalities and lifestyles through the eyes of a woman
whom everyone accepts as a man.  LITTLE JO loses its focus on a number
of occasions, but never for very long, and never in such a manner that
seriously jeopardizes the viewer's overall enjoyment of Maggie
Greenwald's film.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
