Title
Review for Student Bodies (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Statistics have shown us most slasher movies outright 
suck. They're formula-ridden, low-budget flicks where the same 
stock characters commit the same stock sins before getting killed 
off one by one by some bulky, masked killer. The worst thing about 
it is that most slasher movies take themselves completely seriously, 
making the entire genre ripe for parody. And yet the few times any 
movie has tried to parody the genre (MOTEL HELL, RETURN TO 
HORROR HIGH), it turned out worse than the straight slasher 
movies. STUDENT BODIES is no exception.
        It takes its cue from HALLOWEEN in particular, making 
its killer "The Breather," a guy who makes obscene heavy-breathing 
noises before taking his victims. And every time a victim is taken, a 
big white number is superimposed on the screen to register the 
body count. Throughout the movie, more white words pop up on 
the screen, mostly intended to make us laugh or to needlessly 
point out that someone is "Unconscious, Not Dead (Important To 
Plot)."
        It's supposed to be funny, but none of it is. The horny 
high school characters satirized here were more outrageous in their 
original slasher movie incarnations. To make them funny would 
require more than just giving them lame jokes to tell and having 
them hump like bunnies every few minutes. One girl and guy sneak 
under the bleachers at the Homecoming game to have sex on the 
ground, but all sorts of trash slips through the bleachers and lands 
on them. When the girl complains, the guy replies, "The garbage 
gets me hot." Classic comedy? Comedy, period? No.
        STUDENT BODIES starts out on a ridiculous note, with 
subtitles reading, "Halloween... Friday the 13th... Jamie Lee Curtis' 
Birthday," and the movie just gets worse from there. Soon the 
phone is ringing so hard it jumps off the table and The Breather 
himself is interrupting the movie to announce we have technical 
difficulties (more like "creative difficulties"), "killing" time by 
asking us if we can guess who he is.
        Yes, on top of it all, STUDENT BODIES is supposed to 
be a murder mystery. But the big mystery is how this appalingly 
bad movie was ever made. Perhaps the best clue is in the very first 
set of superimposed white words, which inform us that "Last year, 
twenty-six horror movies were released... None of them lost 
money." I have a feeling this one did.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!
