Title
Review for Cyborg 2: Glass Shadow (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
It is the late 21st century and the ruthless Pinwheel corporation
has perfectly Glass Shadow, an explosive reagent that they put
into androids so as to use them as assassination devices.  One
such android Cash (Jolie) elopes with martial arts instructor
Colt (Koteas).  Pursued by the sinister tracker Danny (Drago),
they go on the run, seek the help of the mysterious Mercy
(Palance), yadda, yadda, yadda.
"A sequel to 'Cyborg', one of the worst Jean-Claude van Damme
pictures?  How can it fail?"  I hear you ask.  (Just above the
adolescents saying "Does Jolie get her clothes off?").  The
answer is "very quickly" (and "yes, but haven't you better things
to do?").  Nearly a Bad Movie, "Cyborg 2" is just a bad movie,
stock video store fodder.
The connection to the earlier film is fairly tenuous, with a
few gratuitous clips of Jean-Claude inserted at random into a
plot written by one of those novel-generating machines from
"1984".  In the all-too-typical opening scenes, a Pinwheel exec
demonstrates the power of the explosive Glass Shadow with a film
of (yes) an over-endowed female android having sex with her
target.  In rock-video montage, we see her orgasm and explode,
undeniably making the point that the scriptwriters have deep,
deep, psychological problems.  But instead the company decides
that this means they rule the world.
Jolie, working on her sneer, kicks a few heads to show how
deadly she is before running off with Koteas.  From that point on
_he_ does all the fighting.  (Don't ask me why.  Carry a
perfectly good killer android with you and insist on doing all
the fights yourself?  Maybe he was saving her for a suicide
mission against the producers.)  Jack Palance - a walking
advertisement for compulsory superannuation - growls, weeps and
issues cryptic hints to our heroes, obviously thinking of his
role in "Gor" and how that was supposed to be the bottom of the
barrel.  Drago plays the cyborg tracker as a cut-price Julian
Sands which is bad enough, but once you think that Sands must
have turned this role down, is even worse.
Rubbish and not even entertaining rubbish. Exactly how lame
does an idea have to be before it doesn't get made into a movie?
[*/misfire] and Jean-Claude squared on the Sid and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."
