Title
Review for Little Odessa (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release 5/95 
Running Length: 1:38 
MPAA Classification: R (Sex, violence, brief nudity) 
     LITTLE ODESSA, the stunning feature debut of 24-year old 
writer/director James Gray, is about to become the victim of distributor 
politics.  As a result of recent changes in upper management, Fine Line 
Features has chosen to limit--if not completely withdraw--support 
for this film.  Considering the strength of the material, the adeptness 
of Gray's direction, and several memorable performances, this is a 
classic case of cinematic injustice.  LITTLE ODESSA deserves to be seen 
by as many movie-goers as possible, not just those living in the few 
locations where Fine Line choses to release it. 
     At the focal point is Joshua Shapira (Tim Roth), a deeply-troubled, 
emotionally detached hit man who has come home to Brooklyn to commit an 
assassination.  Although difficulties in his past make it dangerous for 
him to be seen near Brighten Beach, the real impediment to a return is 
his father, Arkady (Maximilian Schell).  For, while Josh loves his dying 
mother, Irina (Vanessa Redgrave), and his younger brother, Reuben 
(Edward Furlong), there is nothing but antipathy between father and 
eldest son.  Nevertheless, left without a choice, Josh ventures back to 
the Russian/Jewish community, and eventually encounters all the members 
of his family.  While there, he also hooks up with an old girlfriend, 
Alla Shustervich (Moira Kelly), a young woman who is reluctantly 
attracted to the lonely killer. 
     LITTLE ODESSA is an extremely complex motion picture, layered with 
powerful themes and fascinating characters.  The dysfunctional family 
dynamic is examined from a different perspective--this is a case of 
the best intentions gone awry.  The film's ending has a strong 
allegorical, as well as dramatic, impact.  Not only is the final 
sequence emotionally crushing, but it slams home a vivid and telling 
message about prices paid by both the innocent and the guilty for crimes 
within the community.  And the consignment of a Jewish body to an oven 
calls to mind a chilling association. 
     At the opening of LITTLE ODESSA, Josh is in a hell of his own 
making.  During the course of the film, there are opportunities for 
redemption and love, all of which are rejected.  Josh has no emotional 
capacity; when he makes love to Alla, the act is passionless and 
mechanical.  He is unable to respond to his brother's simple offer of 
devotion.  He cannot cry when he faces his dying mother.  Only his 
father provokes a reaction, and that is a decidedly negative one.  By 
this performance, Tim Roth adds yet another impressive credit to his 
resume.  
     Equally as complex is Josh's tormented, self-pitying father--a 
man who has lost all authority over his household and his existence.  
Assimilation to the American way of life is a continuing struggle for 
someone like him, born and raised on traditions and values that his 
children don't share.  Arkady loathes Josh as much as he hates himself.  
He has a mistress, but feels guilty about not being with his dying life.  
He is educated, yet is forced by economic circumstances to run a 
newsstand.  He loves Reuben, yet his actions seem always to hurt his 
younger son.  Maximilian Schell, an accomplished actor who hasn't had 
much screen exposure in the past few years, encourages in viewers a 
mixture of resentment and sympathy. 
     Moira Kelly, despite the most limited screen time of a member of 
the primary cast, turns in one of the best performances of her career.  
Her confusion, self-doubt, and conflicting feelings for Josh, as well as 
her recognition that the relationship is doomed, add a subdued poignancy 
to Alla that less skillful acting would not have conveyed.  Edward 
Furlong, a young actor gaining presence with each new role, somewhat 
underplays Reuben, but not to the point where it interferes with the 
story.  Vanessa Redgrave does her usual fine job. 
     The violence of LITTLE ODESSA is brutal, quick, and always 
shocking.  As in SCHINDLER'S LIST, scenes of bloodshed are presented 
graphically, but never gratuitously.  The deaths in this film, when they 
occur, cause a momentary contraction of the viewer's stomach muscles.  
This is a credit to the director, who has a clear vision and uses all 
the tools at his disposal to attain those ends. 
     Because of the richness of the subject matter and the complexity of 
the characters, gangster movies, especially those with strong ethnic 
overtones, make excellent vehicles for social commentary.  LITTLE ODESSA 
is the latest example of what such a film can accomplish.  With an 
emotional impact as strong as its intellectual appeal, LITTLE ODESSA is 
deserving of a far better fate than the one Fine Line Features has 
consigned it to.   
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Alexandre Tylski
Main title: directed and written by james gray. (1994) Drama. 100min. 
Perfomed by tim roth, edward furlong, moira kelly, vanessa redgrave and
maximilian schell. Music by dana sano. 
Story: The film takes place today, in New York. Joshua (tim roth), a
professional killer, comes back to his native (and Russian) neighbourhood,
Little Odessa, to kill a jeweller. His brother Reuben (eddy furlong) is
told of his return and wants to spend some time with him. 
_____________________
LITTLE ODESSA has obviously a Tragical dimension. It contains the Oedipus
complex, the presence of a Chorus (the film music in fact) and irony : the
young Reuben can be aware of his destiny through the movie he sees at the
beginning. 
Little Odessa is also a movie dealing with cinema, with the themes of 
"identification" (Reuben almost admires Joshua, as a film hero...) and the
"field of vision" (the way Joshua comes into or goes out the shot is
extremely significant vis-ŕ-vis his own situation in his family and
society. Or better, remember the great analogy Gray did between
the western Reuben sees in the prologue - the screen in this movie theater
seems to have a hole in it because the film burns during the happy end -
and the bullet which made a hole in the white sheet at the end and kills
Reuben). 
Little Odessa can be interpreted in many ways of course, that's all its
interest. One can see in this film a biblical story (a jewish and
patriarchal family, with the themes of the good and evil, brotherhood or
"wandering"...); a search for identity (Joshua seems not to know who he is,
that's probably the main reason of his "come back" to his native Little
Odessa. Reuben is also in quest for himself; he really needs the image of
someone to create his own personality); an observation of our inability to
communicate with each other (lots of telephone scenes for example); or
simply a kind of chase against death (the imminent death of the mother
looks like a countdown; Joshua also prepares the assassination of a man and
Josh is himself endangered by death because people want to kill him). 
....etc.
However, if it is true that James Gray's main intention is obscure, his
stylistic approach is very clear : no sen-ti-men-ta-li-ty. His camera is
like a voyeur, seldom near the characters (very few close-ups) and it leads
to the audience's inability to identify with the characters. Gray's
mise-en-scčne is motionless and seem to mummify, in a way, the
actors who cannot really escape from it. (The characters are clearly like
prisoners of their environment, their own acts or mouvements, let's say it,
they are the prisoners of their innerself actually.) Another way to avoid
that emotional identification is Gray's treatment of sound which often
contradicts what is showed on the screen. For instance, the seemingly happy
grandmother's anniversary was overshadowed by a sad and cold choir as if
the characters were like ghosts. 
The term "ghost" could be one of the keywords of Little Odessa, not only
because all the characters seem to lack feelings, or existence (even the
mother, who is showed like a living dead), but also because Gray uses an
onirical style (with the use of the choir) which makes the whole film
extremely cold and disturbing. However, this style is associated with a
true-to-life style with notably, the use of the steady-cam (as if the film
was a documentary). It gives the impression of realism but actually
underlines that notion of ghost characters and creates a state of
weightlessness.
Little Odessa is one of the most personal and powerful movies of this end
of century. And there is certainly something significant in that word "end"
since that this movie describes a director's vision of the apocalypse to a
certain extent...

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Joshua Shapira is back in Brighton Beach.  This is not necessarily
good news for his family.  Joshua's parents came from Russia to Little
Odessa, the Russian Jewish section of Brighton Beach, Brooklyn many
years ago and raised two sons, Joshua and Reuben.  Years ago Joshua
fell in with the organizatsya (Russian Mafia), committed a contract
killing, and fled.  Now he is back for another contract kill.  He wants
to come and go unnoticed by his family, but his younger brother Reuben
hears of his presence and arranges to contact Joshua.  Reuben has
already been skipping school for weeks and hiding the fact from his
parents.  Now he is drawn to the influence of his brother.  Rueben's
father Arkady must try to hold on to his son, but his position is badly
compromised by his own long-standing affair with an immigrant woman.
What follows is not so much the morality play it might sound, but a
bleak and at times violent story of crime in a community that has not
been portrayed in film before.
     The dark spirit of this film is underscored by dim or occasionally
harsh lighting.  In addition, while the film is in English, some of the
dialogue in Yiddish and Russian and not all of the Yiddish is
translated for the audience, occasionally adding to the dark tone of
the film.
     LITTLE ODESSA was written and directed by twenty-five--year-old
James Gray, who already has a very sure hand at directing and has
assembled a surprisingly well-known cast for so young a director's
first film.  Reuben Shapira is played by Edward Furlong, probably best
known from TERMINATOR II, but he also was the main character in A HOME
OF OUR OWN.  Joshua Shapira is played by Tim Roth, who already has a
distinguished career playing creeps of various sorts including the
effete but ruthless Cunningham in ROB ROY and the restaurant-robbing
"Honey-Bunny" in PULP FICTION.  His Joshua is a mass of contradictions,
loving his family but as ready to reach for his gun and point it
between a victim's eyes as he would be to reach for a house key and put
it in a lock.  Maximilian Schell plays Arkady, the immigrant father who
just cannot relate to his two sons.  When they were just small children
he read them CRIME AND PUNISHMENT.  Neither of his sons can respond to
his Old World intellectualism and neither can summon much respect for
him.  Also present in the cast are Moira Kelly and Vanessa Redgrave,
the latter as the main characters' mother dying of cancer.
     One false move seems to be the music assembled by Dana Sano.  It
draws heavily on Russian source music, but much of that is choral
music.  Somehow this conjures up images of the Russian Orthodox Church
and just does not feel like the music of the Russian Jewish community.
While I am willing to be corrected, I suspect that this music would be
no more popular with Russian Jewish immigrants than with any other
immigrants from any other part of Europe.
     LITTLE ODESSA is a complex and disturbing film with a dark tone.
It may have a teenage main character, but it is not a film for young
audiences.  There is a good deal of violence in the film, but it is
more implied than shown and there is very little blood.  This film gets
a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Christopher Null
     LITTLE ODESSA refers to an old Russian Jewish neighborhood in
Brooklyn, New York, along the lines of Little Italy or Chinatown.  There,
everyone speaks Russian, wanders through bleak snow-covered streets,
drinks vodka, wears heavy wool coats ... and most carry guns.  This is the
age of the "organizatsya," the Russian mafia, for whom Joshua (Tim Roth)
is employed as a hit man.
     Joshua, a long-time Little Odessa expatriate, is called back to the
neighborhood to perform a hit on a big shot resident.  When he arrives, he
encounters his worshipful brother Reuben (Edward Furlong), former lover
Alla (Moira Kelly), hateful father Arkady (Maximilian Schell), and dying
mother Irina (Vanessa Redgrave).  Together, the cast creates a highly
dysfunctional family the likes of which you've probably never seen before.
     As Joshua closes in on his target, relations with his father become
more and more strained, as Joshua tries to return home to visit his mother
before she dies.  While Reuben and Alla grow closer to Joshua, so do the
thugs who are out to avenge the man Joshua has murdered.  Ultimately, the
film culminates in a tragic shoot-out that Quentin Tarantino could have
scripted.
     Tarantino is not the man behind this film, however.  LITTLE ODESSA is
the surprising first feature of James Gray, who wrote and directed it. 
Gray is obviously good at scripting action sequences like the finale, but
when it comes to old-fashioned storytelling, he still hasn't arrived.  The
film's opening and long expository sequences set the tone well, but many
scenes don't serve any real purpose, dragging the narrative out instead of
moving the picture forward.  A huge problem for me was that a number of
characters look, dress, and sound the same, making it often impossible to
figure out what's going on and who's involved.
     Thankfully, most of this remedies itself by the end.  The
multi-layered story ties up neatly, and the net result is a generally
satisfying yet heartbreaking finale.  However, the acting is what makes
LITTLE ODESSA watchable.  Roth is perfect as the dark and disturbed hitman
who still loves his mother.  Redgrave as Mom is truly jaw-dropping:  the
veteran actress playing a cancer-ridden matriarch with frightening
realism.  Even Furlong shines, proving he has something left after PET
SEMATARY 2.
     A more polished script would have carried LITTLE ODESSA a lot
farther.  The film's intentions were honorable, and the cast and crew
obviously genuinely wanted the film to succeed.  It unfortunately isn't
the masterpiece they were hoping for, but it is enough to make you
consider vacation spots other than the real Little Odessa.
