Title
Review for Pred dozhdot (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Rade Serbedzija, Katrin Cartlidge, Gregoire Colin 
Director: Milcho Manchevski 
Screenplay: Milcho Manchevski 
Cinematography: Manuel Teran 
Music: "Anastasia" 
Released by Gramercy Pictures 
In Macedonian, English, and Albanian with subtitles 
     "Time never dies.  The circle is not round."  As well as being a 
repeated line in BEFORE THE RAIN, this statement clarifies director 
Milcho Manchevski's perspective.  The film is an exploration of the 
vicious circle that is violence in the Balkans, and the way tribal and 
ethnic bloodshed in that part of the world can spill over into more 
"civilized" countries. 
     BEFORE THE RAIN opens and closes in Macedonia.  The middle
section--an interlude of sorts--takes place in England.  The structure
of the movie is non-chronological with the conclusion actually
occurring about forty minutes into the film.  The flow of the narrative
follows the "imperfect circle" pattern.  Beginning and end meet and
merge, but the closure is broken by one very disconcerting (and not so
obvious) flash-forward.
     What at first appears to be several disparate stories resolves
itself into a cohesive single entity, and the characters who start out
as BEFORE THE RAIN's central figures (including a monk played by
OLIVIER OLIVIER's Gregoire Colin) are ultimately reduced to supporting
roles.  Most of the film is about--in one way or another--Pulitzer
Prize-winning photographer Aleksandar (Rade Serbedzija), who became
involved in the war in Bosnia by taking sides.  Now, back from that
war-torn place and wracked with guilt for having caused a man's death,
he intends to leave England (and his English lover, played by Katrin
Cartlidge, late of NAKED) for Macedonia in hopes of making a positive
difference in the violently unstable country of his birth.
     Manchevski, directing his first major feature following a string
of music videos, presents his message with a sublime intensity that
eludes the film world's Oliver Stones.  During the course of BEFORE THE
RAIN, he meticulously dissects the male-dominated Macedonian mindset,
then illustrates how modern technology and altruism are impotent when
faced with the madness of an ingrained tradition of violence.  In a
land where men would rather kill their own than give up the fight, what
hope is there for peace?  BEFORE THE RAIN isn't explicitly about
Bosnia, but it goes a long way towards explaining the "whys" of what's
happening there.
     The film is as rich in symbols as in narrative.  Circles are
everywhere, and water takes on its age-old meaning of purification.
The titles of BEFORE THE RAIN's three chapters--"Words", "Faces", and
"Pictures"--reveal aspects of the thirty-five-odd minutes they each
represent.
     If there's one weakness in BEFORE THE RAIN, it's that despite an
ambitious story, beautiful cinematography, convincing acting, and a
powerful message, character development is surprisingly feeble.  Part
of the problem is undoubtedly the odd structure of the plot, but even
Aleksandar, who has more screen time than anyone else, seems a little
hollow.  There are instances when he's more the mouthpiece of a
philosophy than a unique individual.  This is indicative of BEFORE THE
RAIN's most apparent flaw:  that Manchevski occasionally lets the "art"
of his production obscure its emotional impact.
     The visceral effectiveness of BEFORE THE RAIN is undeniable--it
brings home the global reality of violence without ever glorifying or
glamorizing it.  The film is loaded with chilling little touches of how
this particular circle has trapped humanity.  BEFORE THE RAIN doesn't
offer hope.  As "Words" reminds us, communications problems are often
more fundamental than language differences.  In Manchevski's world,
when peace exists, it's an exception, and redemption is perhaps a
futile gesture.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Pedro Sena
One of the five finalists for the Oscar for Best Foreign Film, this entry
from Macedonia does not wait to let its position and feelings known. This
film starts with powerful music and developments to get
directly into the meat of the story.
The film is told in three parts, and we find that the ending of the story is
in actuality the start of the first story.  However, the photographs in the
second and third stories are about the very first story.  So we end up with
what might be a cyclical story, but in essence is not.  The priests discuss
the continuity of the world and how things are cyclical.  And for these
people, and their families, the only cyclical thing is death, and senseless
killing.  The law in the hands of whoever feels he is in charge.
Macedonia has some intricate problems with the Albanians, and it is
something which has lasted several hundreds of years, and has never been
fixed.  On top of it, the Albanians do not have a homeland per se, because
their space is occupied by the Macedonians.  The usual religious
divisions are clear.  We have the Christian fashion and the Moslem fashion.
The indication in this film, is that the Moslem fashion is basically
uncivilized, and runs its own rules.  The Christian fashion
adheres to its own biblical stuff, taken from the BOOKS.  Which is the first
part of the story.  It is called WORDS. And it already depicts how the
chants and the words of the religious structure already are
failing in its desires and tasks.  They do not stand by the young man,
regardless of his culpability.  Fate brought the young girl to his room,
rather than another priest's.
The second story, exploits a photographer and his editor ( lover as well, it
seems ), and his desire to go home and get away from the wars.  He has just
been in Bosnia, where things are not exactly peaceful.  His editor and him
can not get it together, she is still married to an Englishman, and the
whole thing ends up in a tragic disaster for her.
And the third story, is the best.  The photographer comes home to his own
people.  But they are still caught up in the lawlessness of their own
country.  And while he means well, and to rescue the
daughter of the woman he would have married, were circumstances a bit
different ( she is a servant and second class citizen now ), he is now faced
with the same problem that we saw in the first story.
The family structure is meaningless, in light of the political decisions
that everyone has come to make and live by.
The brutal film then follows the young girl that has managed to save her
life, and we are back at the start.  Things are indeed cyclical.  But does
it really matter.? No.  No one learns their lesson.  The viciousness, even
between family members, has fostered for so many years that nothing seems to
be able to end it. The sad point, and the film kinda drops it quietly, when
Alexandr dies ( he has a smile on his face ), is that the best solution is
for all this thing to come to the saddest ending of all.
SHOULD SEE
4.5 of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Moderator of Ygdrasil's Film Newsgroup
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BEFORE THE RAIN is a story in three parts: Words, Faces, and
Pictures.  The parts form sort of an Escher print and the movie itself
is somewhat of an enigma.  The movie is from Macedonia and is one of the
academy award nominees for 1994 Best Foreign Film.
     As one who has traveled to Yugoslavia when (1986) it was peaceful
and beautiful and one who even went to the trouble of carefully
learning to speak Serbo-Croatian before the trip, this movie held a
special fascination for me.  Although I went to what is now Serbia,
Croatia, and Slovenia and not Macedonia, the language, scenery, and
people all looked familiar but so tragically sadder.
     The story, written and directed by Milcho Manchevski, tells the
story of a small village in Macedonia where part of it is populated
with Macedonian speaking Orthodox Catholics and part by Albanian
speaking Muslims.  Every boy above the age of puberty carries an Uzi.
Although the village has a deceptively serene look, it is filled with
constant and unrelenting hatred and violence.
     High above the village is a monastery where a young Orthodox monk
(Gregoire Colin) hides a frighten young Albanian girl (Labina
Mitevska).  The concatenation of a house of God to the violent village
provides a strong irony.
     Part of the movie takes place in London where a Pulitzer Prize
winning photo-journalist, played by Rade Serbedzija, wants to go back
to his native Macedonia.  He asks wants his girlfriend and fellow
photographer (Katrin Cartlidge) to leave her husband and go with him to
his homeland to film the civil war there.
     The cinematography is spectacular in the outdoor scenes.  The
editing on the other hand was terrible.  Sometimes, the scenes dragged
along way too long.  More frequently the editing was too choppy and
made the movie had to follow.
     The director had the actors act in a distant almost removed
fashion.  The quote at the first of the review was used as the glue to
link parts of the movie.  Its obtuseness was reflected in the script
where the images of the war were very moving and yet the characters
seemed unreal.  I found the movie as a whole interesting and yet
inaccessible at the same time.
     The movie runs a bit long at 1:55.  It is in Macendonian,
Albanian, and English with English subtitles for the first two.  The
movie is unrated, but would have certainly gotten an R for gory,
graphic, and realistic violence plus a little sex and female nudity.
The violent scenes include people with partially blown off faces and
one of a cat being slowly blown to bits with a machine gun.  I give the
show a mild thumbs up for adults only, and I rate it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my employer's.
