Title
Review for Hexed (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Andrew Hall
     Whew!  What a weak selection of movies there was this weekend.
After suffering through BODY OF EVIDENCE last week, I decided to take a
break from "erotic" thrillers for a while - maybe forever.  And
LORENZO's OIL seemed like too much of a tear-jerker (plus, I had just
seen Nick Nolte in CAPE FEAR on video).  So I opted instead for what
threatened to be a stupid comedy.
     Nonetheless, since I expected little, I was pleasantly surprised by
Alan Spencer's new film, HEXED.  The film stars Arye Gross, Claudia
Cristian, and Adrienne Shelly.  Norman Fell (Mr. Roper on THREE'S
COMPANY) has a bit role as a hotel manager.  Spencer also wrote the
script.
     The story concerns Matthew (Gross), a career hotel clerk who
escapes his dull life by pretending to be glamorous, successful men.
Instead of dating his cute co-worker Gloria (Shelly), Matthew would
rather dazzle other women with his BS.  Yet his co-workers constantly
remind him of his meager life.
     When they mock him for claiming to know European supermodel Hexina
(Cristian), a guest at the hotel, Matthew is determined to prove he does
by impersonating a man Hexina is supposed to meet.  He succeeds beyond
his wildest dreams, and he takes Hexina back to his place, where she
turns out to be a wildwoman.  Unfortunately, she's perhaps a bit too
wild, and she soon embroils Matthew in a blackmail-murder plot.
     As a whole, the movie doesn't quite jell.  The pieces are better
than the sum of the parts.  But there are lots of great lines, silly
gags, and slapstick falls.  Spencer pokes fun at everything from models
to police to horror films.  I liked the right-wing detective and cop who
gives fashion tips.  Another cute bit was the nod to Hitchcock's
VERTIGO, which also appeared in the trailer.
     A few of the jokes of questionable taste.  For example, there's the
mocking of the Rodney King beating.  I found it darkly funny, but some
people might be offended.  And people *die* in this "comedy," so the
comedy is a little black at times.
     Perhaps the funniest part of the film was the sex scene between
Hexina and Matthew.  This is one of the goofiest love scenes I've ever
seen (right up there with Leslie Nielson and Priscilla Presley in THE
NAKED GUN).  The audience was just dying.
     Cristian does a hilarious send-up of a glamorous model gone mad,
but Gross can't quite carry the film as the comic lead.  Still, Alan
Spencer shows promise as a filmmaker (his first film, I believe).  I
hope he gets the chance to make more films, though, because HEXED
probably won't make any money.  I doubt it will be at the box office
long.
     At least HEXED fulfills the basic rule of a comedy:  it makes you
laugh.  So if you're tired of Madonna and Nick Nolte and you're in the
mood for a little silliness, go for it.  Just don't expect the comic
masterpiece of the decade.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Ayre Gross, Claudia Christian, Adrienne Shelly, Norman Fell
Director:  Alan Spencer
Producers:  Marc S. Fischer and Louis G. Friedman
Screenplay:  Alan Spencer
Music:  Lance Rubin
Released by Columbia Pictures
     Matthew Welsh (Ayre Gross), a clerk at the Holiday Palace Hotel, is
a dreamer who has trouble keeping straight the line between fantasy and
reality.  His life takes a turn for the bizarre when Hexina (Claudia
Christian), the world-famous model, checks into the hotel.  Through an
elaborate ruse, Matthew manages to lure her back to his apartment for a
night of wild, uninhibited passion.  Unfortunately for him, sex isn't
the only thing Hexina gets him involved in.  Matthew soon learns that
she also has a thing for knives and guns.
     Occasionally, small-budget comedies with relatively-unknown actors
can be charming and entertaining (witness 1992's THE CUTTING EDGE with
Moira Kelly and D. B. Sweeney).  HEXED is not such a film.  While it
obviously cost little to produce, and offers Norman Fell as its
best-known name, "entertaining" is about the last word I would use to
describe it.  Offensive, humorless, and tiresome are more appropriate
adjectives.
     While comedies are not generally known for advocating a social
agenda, HEXED is reprehensible in the attitude it presents.  Originally
scheduled for a 1992 release, it was temporarily shelved after the Los
Angeles riots.  The reason is obvious:  a scene where uniformed police
officers beat an unarmed man.  Designed to parody the Rodney King
incident (with the line by the white victim of "I'm a Republican"
supposedly providing the irony), it's unclear why this moment wasn't
relegated to the cutting room floor--its presence is disgraceful.  Only
the most twisted mind will find humor in lampooning such an event.
     On top of that, the film's attitude toward blacks is disturbing.
The sole black character in HEXED is a valet who is portrayed as being
stupid and selfish.  In no scene is he presented in a positive light.
While an injustice like this might go unnoticed in other movies,
attention is drawn to it by the aforementioned parody of the King
beating.  I won't go so far as to charge director/ writer Alan Spencer
with racism, but he is guilty at least of insensitivity.
     HEXED is yet another in a long line of supposed comedies that
doesn't contain a single humorous line.  The placing and intent of the
jokes is obvious, but they're all so juvenile that even the
easily-amused will discover little to make them laugh.  Most TV sitcoms
serve up better fare.  This film did not elicit one chuckle from me, and
that's rare for even the most lame of movies.
     As a satire, HEXED is no more successful than it is as anything
else.  There are quick visual references to BASIC INSTINCT, FATAL
ATTRACTION, and a number of other slasher/exploitation films, but none
of these are memorable or amusing.  They lack teeth and wit.
     Finally, a word should be said about the performers.  They deserve
to be in a box-office bomb.  They have no range.  It's a fair indication
of how intolerable they are to say that Norman Fell's performance is
among the most credible.  Claudia Christian does a fine job by the
standards of high camp, but even her die-hard fans would be hard-pressed
to justify sitting through ninety minutes of this dross simply to listen
to her screeching lines, and watch her making faces and strutting around
in a black leather mini-skirt.
     It's curious that HEXED was released to theaters in the first
place.  It's the kind of movie that, on those occasions when it gets
filmed, usually goes straight to video.  From the reception it got from
the pitifully small crowd on "opening night", it won't take long to
reach there.  This review is a warning not only to miss it on the big
screen, but to give it an equally wide berth when it's available for the
smaller one.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Evelyn C. Leeper
92 min., R, Comedy, 1993
Director: Alan Spencer
Cast: Arye Gross, Claudia Christian, Adrienne Shelly, Ray Baker,
      R. Lee Ermey, Michael Knight, Robin Curtis, Norman Fell
     Hotel clerk Arye Gross is in love with French model Claudia
Christian.  He finds out that Christian is going to be staying at the
hotel where he works.  Gross tricks Christian into going out with him,
and while they are out, Christian kills a man.  Christian sets up Gross
so that police officer R. Lee Ermey thinks that he did it.  Gross has
to prove that Christian did it before he gets caught.
     HEXED is a very funny film that is enjoyable to just sit down and
watch.  I recommend HEXED to fans of slapstick comedy.  I enjoyed
watching this film, and so did the audience in the showing that I went
to.  On a scale of zero to five, I give HEXED a four.  HEXED is rated R
for female nudity, adult situations, explicit language, adult humor, and
violence.
     The cast for this film does a good job.  My favorite person in the
film is R.  Lee Ermey (FULL METAL JACKET).  He does an excellent job.
Adrienne Shelly (TRUTH, THE UNBELIEVABLE TRUTH) outshines most of the
cast.  Claudia Christian (CLEAN AND SOBER, RELENTLESS: MIND OF A KILLER)
does a reasonably good job.  Arye Gross (HOUSE 2: THE SECOND STORY, SOUL
MAN) gives a great performance.
     This film may offend some people with a scene mocking the Rodney
King beating which involves a white man being unnecessarily beaten in a
hotel lobby by several police officers and being videotaped by a
tourist.  I happen to have found this scene funny, even though I also
thought it was in bad taste.
     Like the soon-coming NATIONAL LAMPOON'S LOADED WEAPON 1, HEXED
makes fun of many of the movies that have come out.  And for those who
haven't seen the movies that HEXED is lampooning, there are plenty of
sight gags.  The funniest are: the sex scene between Claudia Christian
and Arye Gross, the dead hotel worker, the Rodney King beating mockery,
and the ending.
     This film is not one that it matters greatly if you see it in the
theater or see it on videocassette.  If you have the time, definitely go
see this film.  If you don't, the film will probably be released on
videocassette in about six months and you can see it then.
