Title
Review for Leap of Faith (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     This country no longer needs the proverbial, good five-cent
cigar.  What it needs is a multi-million fund for a big, muckraking,
round-the-clock, "60 Minutes"-like governmental agency with teeth,
to take on the unorganized but multi-billion fraud, swindle and scam
industry.
     It's all around us: boiler-room deceptions that operate by phone,
by official-looking junk mail, or on TV.  Phony "charities," life,
health, burial insurance schemes; sham investments, bogus "retirement
communities," or cheating land-schemes.  We are all targeted daily,
starting with those letters that state "You, John/Jane Doe, have won a
million dollars Just send us $10 or $20 to defray expenses and become
eligible."
     The victims are mostly older, gullible people, who, in the
least-painful scenario may get stuck with unwanted magazines and in the
worst-case scenario can have their life savings wiped out.
     Among the oldest forms of deception is the cruel imposture that
exploits the religious faith of simple people.  As seen, for example,
in LEAP OF FAITH.  This movie has the makings of a dynamite expose of
charlatan evangelists and itinerant faith healers, but in spite of its
initial promise and several brilliant parts that follow, it evolves
into a confused, ineffectual mishmash that compromises, as it were, the
integrity of its cynicism.
     In LEAP OF FAITH, Steve Martin is a road evangelist who calls
himself Jonas Nightengale.  He has perfected a tent-show operation, a
gold mine.  It is a state-of-the art, high-tech affair, complete with a
large staff of conspirators, a huge (and excellent) all-black gospel
choir, computers, TV screens, hidden microphones and surveillance
equipment.
     Jonas's lieutenant-manager is Jane (Debra Winger).  Among her
accomplishments, she gets fed information about the audience by the
staff and, from her multi-screen TV console, she relays useful facts to
Jonas who wears a hidden ear piece: "in sequins, in row two, a pregnant
teenager"; "positioned in row one is the old lady with rheumatism";
behind her are the man with a drinking problem, the woman with neighbor
troubles, the widow of a farmer who killed himself when he lost
everything, and so on.
     Nightengale is a master scam artist and performer.  In the film's
opening, when his motorcade gets stopped for speeding, Jonas, without
the benefit of computerized information, somehow guesses the cop's
family problems and ends up by getting the man's gratitude plus a
contribution.  It is all extremely unlikely but for a while it
entertains in a sick way.
     Engine trouble has the custom buses and trucks stuck for a few
days in totally depressed Rustwater, Kansas, a farming community
afflicted by record unemployment and a killing drought.  Nightengale
and Co. decide to make the most of it.  As it is, in another outrageous
improbability, Jane has at her electronic fingertips all possible data
about Rustwater, down to the name of the richest man in town.
     With efficient, D-Day-like logistics, the troupe pitches its tent
and Jonas pitches his scam in a show of glitter, smoke effects and
music, far more a rock concert rather than the thunderings of
old-style, hellfire and damnation preachers.
     Jonas has chosen his pseudonym well.  He poses as a brother of
mercy, in the savior line of Florence Nightingale, but he is a
consummate showman, like Florenz Ziegfeld At the same time Jonas is the
familiar, wild-and-crazy guy from Steve Martin's Saturday Night Live
shticks.
     The machinery of the "spiritual" snake-oil salesman is beautifully
oiled and attention-getting, yet the film's development suffers from
overkill.  In a world where, as we all know, anything that can go
wrong, will, neither the aplomb of Jonas nor his electronic gimmickry
or the troupe's sleight-of-hand tricks (note how "magically" extra
dollars appear in donors' wallets) ever falter.  As in the recent
"Sneakers", the combined excesses of techno-gadgetry and of plot
twists make the movie increasingly unbelievable while the characters,
albeit colorful, get no dimensions or development.
     Two subplots are implausibly worked in.  One has the film's
likable Sheriff Liam Neeson fully aware of the fraud and trying to
expose it.  But he is checkmated at every turn by Jonas who, using
jiu-jitsu principles, turns reverses into advantages.  Neeson too knows
from the start that Jane is a manipulatrix, yet a dumb,
out-of-character, soupy and gushy affair is grafted on, with trappings
like a silly, sentimental interlude about a field of butterflies.
     The other subplot involves a pretty waitress (well-acted by Lolita
Davidovich) whom lubricious Jonas, in the best travelling-salesman
tradition, wants to add to his conquests.  More to the point, the
story somehow sticks in Lolita's accident-crippled younger brother.  He
is convincingly played by Lukas Haas, but the boy's
physical/psychological/religious makeup is a murky mess.
     On several occasions the film gets good mileage from reversals in
the attitudes of Martin and Haas, but when it climaxes with a "real"
miracle--the title's leap of faith--the movie leaps into a monstrous
cop-out of artifice.
     It is as though, in its last part, the film got the shakes,
worried that its unvarnished cynicism would alienate a part of the
audience, and tried to compensate with a three-stage, gloppy and
sentimentalized wrap-up:  the crippled kid, Nightengale's abrupt change
of heart and the end scene, which I won't reveal.
     Downplaying much of the glitz, smarm and high tech would have
improved the movie and enhanced many of its admittedly clever and
occasionally funny parts.  Had they let bad enough alone, the film
might have been a contender.
     The production values are excellent, the photography appropriately
slick and the direction by Richard Pearce is good, in keeping with his
high standards of THE LONG WALK HOME, COUNTRY, or the prize-winning
HEARTLAND.
     Yet the script, after a pretty good start, keeps bobbing up and
down in quality and interest, eventually declining and finishing lamely
(even though someone gets un-lamed).
     It is the film debut of the oddly named Janus Cercone who is the
wife of the co-producer.  Before this she was publicity director for
various bands, then a studio musician.  Pardon me, Ma'am but your
professional past shows in LEAP OF FAITH and your show keeps slipping.

Author
Jon Webb
     Steve Martin plays a con man revival preacher who goes through a
life-changing experience.  Part of the film is a look into technically
sophisticated cons -- identifying people in the audience with particular
problems so the preacher can call on them as if God told him they needed
his help, using wireless microphones to control the show with the aid of
a computer -- and part is a story about a man's relationship with, well,
God.  It's an interesting film in that it doesn't back down an make
acceptable to this Godless world its central dramatic moment, which
hinges on the difference between real and fake miracles.
     This is Steve Martin's first major non-comic role.  He does fairly
well, especially during the shows, when the moves he developed as part
of his comic routines come in handy.  But I found him less believable
off-stage.  He seems too young and hip to be an evangelist.  I suppose
this contrast is intentional, and maybe even based on studies of the
private lives of evangelists.  But either the writing or the acting
didn't convey what it was supposed to convey, to me.
     Another problem with Steve Martin's role is that it is undeveloped.
He was supposed to have an affair with the Lolita Davidovich role, but
that part was almost completely cut.  (She is left with a few scenes,
and almost a superfluous presence in the film.)  So we're left with an
incomplete person.
     By contrast, Debra Winger's character is well-developed in much
fewer scenes.  The only thing left out was parts of the relationship
between her and Martin's character.  I found her role and acting to be
completely credible.
     Lukas Haas is good as the crippled brother of Davidovich, and Liam
Neeson is good (though his role is depressingly familiar from other
movies) as the sheriff.
     The direction is great, particularly during the shows.  Martin's
sermons and the gospel singing move us even though we know they are a
con.
     I liked this film.  But it's a lot more shallow presentation than its
subject matter demands.  A little more soul-searching by Martin's
character, which might have been provided had the relationship with
Davidovich been more developed, would have made it much stronger.
