Title
Review for Field of Dreams (1989)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Randy Parker
        FIELD OF DREAMS almost defies description.  Although it's about
baseball, it's not a baseball movie.  Although the film is extremely
spiritual, it's not about religion.  And although FIELD OF DREAMS is
melodramatic, it's not a tearjerker.  To really understand what FIELD OF
DREAMS is all about, you have to see it.
        In the film, Kevin Costner plays Ray Kinsella, a baseball fan, '60s
Berkeley graduate, and Iowa farmer.  One day as he is standing in the
middle of his expansive corn fields, Ray hears a voice; it tells him: "If
you build it, he will come."  Then Ray has a vision and somehow concludes
that if he builds a baseball field in the middle of his corn, Shoeless Joe
Jackson will arise from the dead to play ball once again.  And even though
it depletes his family's savings and his neighbors think he's crazy, Ray
clears away the corn and builds a baseball field, complete with bleachers
and flood lights.  "If you build it, he will come."  And lo and behold,
Shoeless Joe does come--bringing with him several of his dead teammates.
        And then Ray hears The Voice again; it tells him to "ease his
pain."  Ray thinks this means that he must travel to Boston to meet Terence
Mann, an influential and radical novelist from the '60s who has since
stopped writing and dropped out of society.  With great aplomb, James Earl
Jones plays the disillusioned author who joins forces with Ray and embarks
with him on a magical and spiritual journey.
        The cast in FIELD OF DREAMS is excellent, especially Kevin Costner
in the lead role.  Costner gives a quiet, subtle, and moving performance as
a man who before building the baseball field had done nothing crazy or
spontaneous in his entire life.  Costner gives Ray just the right mix of
enthusiasm and idealism to make us believe in his mystic visions and
swallow this wondrous fairy tale.
        Amy Madigan gives a fine supporting performance as Ray's feisty and
loving wife, who against her better judgement supports her husband's crazy
ideas.  In her most impressive scene, Madigan vehemently argues against
book burning at a P.T.A. meeting, displaying the sincere passion of a '60s
Berkeley radical.  Ray Liotta is appropriately eerie and awe-inspiring as
the ghost of Shoeless Joe, the legendary batter who was suspended from
baseball for his involvement in the 1919 Chicago "Black Sox" Scandal.  And
finally, Burt Lancaster is memorable in a small, but important, role as a
small town doctor whose professional baseball career was limited to only
one inning.
        FIELD OF DREAMS is a touching fairy tale full of life, wonder,
mystery, spirit, and humor.  It, for the most part, succeeds in capturing
our emotions and suspending our disbelief.  Ray Kinsella's spiritual quest
in pursuit of his dreams proves to be moving and miraculous.  But while
FIELD OF DREAMS generally avoids excessive melodrama, it unfortunately does
at times go overboard, and by the end it gets down-right sappy.  In
general, however, FIELD OF DREAMS is an emotionally satisfying fantasy--one
I can recommend to everyone but unromantic cynics.

Author
Jeff Meyer
Summary: The Best Film of the Year (so far)
     No, I'm not a baseball fan, and yes, maybe this film is a bit too Utopian
for some of you.  That's your problem.  There is no film I've seen this year
that I've enjoyed more than FIELD OF DREAMS; it combines an absolute sterling
story and script with excellent performances, and I enjoyed the living
daylights out of it.
     First the story -- and don't worry, I'd feel criminal if I gave anything
away.  All I'll say is that it's about a novice farmer in Iowa who hears voices
in his cornfield, and it weaves heaven, nature and baseball in and out of one
of the most graceful plot designs I've seen placed on the screen.  I can tell
you what it has in it, though.  It's got a basic plot that twirls around on
about 6 different axes, each independent but linked to the others, each
beautiful in its own right, each culminating in a resolution (actually, the
same resolution) and each catching me completely off-guard when it touched
down.  It has characters who get their personalities across in about three
minutes (aided by some very skillful actors); I found them uncommonly easy to
laugh with and impossible to forget.  It contains some of the most beautiful
images I can remember, looked for in a place few others would give a second
glance to.  And it has more imagination and creativity than any fifteen films
out there today.
     The actors uniformly absorb the spirit of their characters and literally
radiate them out.  I kept wondering if Costner's role in BULL DURHAM would
slide over to FIELD OF DREAMS, on my part or on his.  It doesn't; he is a
character the others react to, and when he finally has the spotlight... well,
it's a fine thing to see, a fine thing.  Amy Madigan has *never* been better;
she juices her role into three-dimensionality in about thirty seconds.  A
delight!  James Earl Jones is absolutely a pleasure to watch; his unrolling of
his character from the tight, cynical ball it arrives in was a pleasure in
itself.  The players are all good, especially Ray Liota as Shoeless Joe
(certainly a change in roles for him), and Burt Lancaster is himself, which
should be enough.  Only the guy from "thirty-something" seemed stuck in a rather
deadpan manner as the heavy, but that's really having to scratch at the dirt
for criticisms.
     This is a picture of dreams, of images, of men fading into the shadowed
green of a cornfield, and of white spheres fading into the dusk beyond the
lights.  It's romantic, and hopeful and it believes in magic and family and
baseball.  And probably Mom.  I don't know about apple pie, but I'll give it
the benefit of the doubt.

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critic's Association' at:
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
When it was released in the spring of 1989, 'Field of Dreams' was a
film that people talked about until the very next year when the film
received three Oscar nominations for Best Picture, Best Screenplay
Adaptation and Best Original Score.  A movie theatre manager at the
time, I can recall people's acute observations on the film.  One
gentleman commented that after seeing the film, "You wanted everybody
in the world to be your friend".  The film managed to find a theatre
in my city that would show it for practically the entire year leading
up to its Oscar race, and it eventually came away empty handed from
the Academy.  Perhaps the most preposterous shut out was in the Best
Original Score category when Disney's easily forgettable score to 'The
Little Mermaid' beat James Horner's lovely and emotionally feel good
notes.  It looks like Horner is poised to receive a long overdue Oscar
for the 'Titanic' score, but that remains to be seen.
Acutely obvious but not easily done by other films, 'Field of Dreams'
rides a wave of continued success for its overbearing simplicity.  As
the 1998 baseball season is about to get underway in less than a
month, 'Field of Dreams' is a classic motion picture that commands
every baseball fan to see it.
Written for the screen by its director Phil Alden Robinson, based on
the book Shoeless Joe by W.P. Kinsella, the phenomenal success the
film enjoyed was derived from the fact that you didn't have to be a
baseball fan to enjoy it and it appealed to people from all walks of
life.  Baseball was used only as a metaphor to enhance the story of
one man's search for redemption and finding it in a baseball field he
builds by sacrificing some of his rich farmland in the heart of Iowa
after a strange voice tells him "if you build it, he will come".
Ray Kinsella (Kevin Costner) was a man always fascinated by the
greatest game in the world, baseball.  It was one of the things that
kept him going but also reminded him of the painful relationship he
shared with his father, deceased in the film, and how an ugly exchange
of words forced Ray and his father to become alienated from each other
over a disagreement about the status of 'Shoeless' Joe Jackson,
portrayed in 'Field of Dreams' by Ray Liotta.
Jackson had been a player banned from baseball for life for throwing a
World Series in the era of Babe Ruth (Ruth saved baseball after the
scandal by being a top drawing card of the sport and symbolizing all
that good about baseball) and the detailed examination of the infamous
Black Sox scandal can be seen in the brilliant film 'Eight Men Out'
(1988) from director John Sayles.  Ray took exception to the fact that
'Shoeless' Joe had been his father's hero and said he "couldn't
respect a man whose hero was a criminal".
Ray is excited that spirits from the past other than 'Shoeless' Joe
have also come to his Iowa baseball field to play ball.  One early
evening, Ray hears the mysterious voice again, the same one that
inspired him to build the baseball surface, and this time it tells Ray
to "ease his pain".  This leads Ray to Boston where he makes contact
with Terence Mann, played splendidly by James Earl Jones.  The two of
them form an awkward relationship and travel to Minnesota to find a
former baseball player turned physician (Burt Lancaster in his last
big screen appearance).
The clever thing about 'Field of Dreams' is that it seems to have no
point until the film's final scene when it all becomes clear.  The
film's dreamlike atmosphere and fantasy enhanced theme, displayed in a
perfect flow of emotion from start to finish are symbolic to the very
essence of its genre.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith at:
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A complex and witty fantasy film that
     features great performances by James Earl Jones and Kevin
     Costner.  Even if you do not like our (stupid) national
     pastime, this film about ghosts of the White Sox and a quest
     is a solidly entertaining fantasy.  Rating: low +3.
     I do not like baseball.  And because I do not like baseball, baseball
films do not work on me as well as they do on other people.  Most baseball
movies assume that there is something somehow noble about playing baseball.
I don't buy that.  A good baseball for me is one that would still be good if
you substituted professional wrestling as the game.  PRIDE OF THE YANKEES
just does not stack up very well under this criterion.  You have to consider
baseball important to respect Gehrig.  BULL DURHAM is an okay but not great
character comedy.  BANG THE DRUM SLOWLY would still be a good study of the
relationship of two men.  I find that even with no respect for baseball, THE
NATURAL remains a fine fantasy allegory of talent and treachery, of darkness
and light.  Now another baseball fantasy has come along with enough human
values, enough fine acting, and a good enough script that it is well worth
seeing even if (like me) you hate baseball.  FIELD OF DREAMS is a real
surprise: a (usually) genuine piece of quality writing for the screen.
     Kevin Costner plays Ray Kinsella: a would-be ball player's son, a
college activist in the late 1960s, and now an Iowa farmer.  One day while
working in the field he hears a disembodied voice tell him, "If you build
it, he will come."  After days of puzzling over hearing the message
repeated, he has a vision that the "he" is Shoeless Joe Jackson of the White
Sox (and, incidentally, of EIGHT MEN OUT), a personal hero of Ray's dead
father.  "It" seems to refer to a baseball diamond to be placed in Ray's
cornfield.  In time, the eight convicted White Sox have been wished out of
the cornfield and are playing baseball in the field.  Then another message
comes and Ray finds himself on a mysterious mission to Boston to find
controversial 1960s writer Terence Mann, supremely played by James Earl
Jones. Jones's performance is quirky and brilliant.  Mann's first meeting
with Ray is worth the ticket price all by itself.  Ray continues his
ridiculous set of tasks and quests until at the end it all comes together
and makes sense.
     Faults?  Well, over the rest of the story there is superimposed a
rather prosaic "save the farm" plot that gets into the way of some of the
better story-telling.  Then toward the end of the film there is a rather
gratuitous piece of cheap suspense.  It is needed for the larger plot--
almost every shot in this film is--but the actual cause of the suspense
seems forced.  Universal has taken a chance on an intelligent fantasy film
with a complex script and has made one of the best films of the year.  I
would give it a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  Pity it was about baseball.
