Title
Review for Belle époque (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  varies 
Running Length:  1:48 
Rated:  R (Sexual situations, brief nudity, language, mature themes) 
"BELLE EPOQUE is the story of Paradise:  too good to last.  It's about
the discovery of life, but the real one, I mean: freedom, art, love,
sex, friendship ... all the things that make life interesting.  It's an
oasis ...  Maybe it's too idealistic, but I always thought one of the
reasons for cinema was to give pleasure and happiness to the audience.
I don't want to make people think about how miserable life is.  I
prefer to leave that for tomorrow.  I like to hear the audience
laughing in a dark theater.  That's the best music for me."
          - Fernando Trueba, director/producer of BELLE EPOQUE 
     BELLE EPOQUE, the winner of nine Goyas (Spanish Oscars), is a
charming motion picture that requires only enough thought and
concentration to read the subtitles.  As a diversion, the film is
fabulous.  How it managed to win the Best Foreign Language Film Oscar
(especially over a contender like FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE) is another
matter altogether.
     It is 1931.  Spain and the country's monarchy is facing its final
days.  During this time of confusion and conflicting loyalties,
Fernando (Jorge Sanz), whose allegiance is to the republic, deserts
from the army and goes on the run into the Spanish countryside.  There,
he meets Manolo (Fernando Fernan Gomez), a painter who shares his
political beliefs.  The two quickly become friends and Fernando spends
a night at the older man's house, listening to his stories and cooking
for him.  Then, in the morning when Fernando is to leave, Manolo's four
young, beautiful daughters--Luz (Penelope Cruz), Rocio (Maribel Verdu),
Violeta (Ariadna Gil), and Clara (Miriam Diaz-Aroca)--arrive.  Fernando
takes one look at them and decides to prolong his stay with Manolo for
a while longer.
     Some of issues presented by the tumultuous political climate and
the churning waters of religious uncertainty keep BELLE EPOQUE from
being a completely brainless endeavor.  Nevertheless, anything serious
is kept strictly in the background, and even the most dismal scenes are
presented with enough playfulness to avoid betraying the giddy tone.
     With a minimum of nudity, BELLE EPOQUE demonstrates that the
blatant displays of flesh from something like SIRENS are unnecessary to
set an atmosphere of sensuality.  This is a steamy motion picture with
its share of bed-hopping and partner-swapping.  Penelope Cruz (who
revealed a lot more in JAMON, JAMON) alone is enough to make the screen
sizzle.
     All six major characters are nicely-developed and well-portrayed.
Despite the numerous sexual trysts he engages in, Fernando is still
something of an innocent, and Jorge Sanz plays him to wide-eyed
perfection.  The most complex character of all is Manolo, who is based
on a real-life acquaintance of producer/director Fernando Trueba.  The
character's own words describe him best:  "I am a rebel, an infidel,
and a libertine by nature, living life like a scared old bourgeois."
     Each of Manolo's four daughters is different.  Rocio is the
playful and glamorous one, who in turn fights off and embraces the
advances of a clumsy suitor.  Violeta is a tomboy, who dresses as a man
and won't consider sex until her partner is dressed as a woman.  Clara
is a widow desperately yearning for companionship.  And Luz is a
virgin, annoyed that she's not always privy to her older sisters'
confidences.
     Very little of the humor in BELLE EPOQUE is especially
high-brow--in fact, much of it is quite earthy.  More important than
the nature of the comedy, however, is that it successfully provokes
laughter.  As was the intention of Fernando Trueba when he crafted the
film, the ultimate reaction of the audience is to smile.  Despite the
subtitles, this is less art than it is fun.  BELLE EPOQUE is an
enchanting, unpretentious, two-hour vacation from the rigors of real
life.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jorge Ganz, Fernando Fernan Gomez, Ariadna Gil, Maribel Verdu,
           Penelope Cruz, Miriam Diaz-Aroca.
Screenplay:  Rafael Azcona, from a story by Azcona, Jose Luis Garcia
Sanchez & Fernando Trueba.
Director:  Fernando Trueba.
     It was considered something of an upset when the Academy Award for
Foreign Language Film went to Spain's BELLE EPOQUE, but in retrospect
it really shouldn't have been.  The category has recently favored safe,
small entertainments over big political epics, as evidenced by the
victory for MEDITERRANEO.  BELLE EPOQUE bears more than a passing
resemblance to that former winner; it's a sunny, sensual comedy with
all the makings of a crossover success.  Although it features no real
story to speak of, and some clownish characters, its frisky tone and
clever direction by Fernando Trueba make it a worthwhile experience.
     BELLE EPOQUE takes place in 1931 Spain, where a republican
revolution has challenged the monarchy and the Catholic Church.
Fernando (Jorge Sanz), a member of the king's army with republican
sentiments, has deserted into the Spanish country side.  He meets
Manolo (Fernando Fernan Gomez), a free-thinking artist and political
simpatico who offers to take Fernando in for the night.  However,
Fernando's arrival coincides with a visit from Manolo's four
daughters:  serious widow Clara (Miriam Diaz-Aroca); mannish Violeta
(Ariadna Gil); lusty Rocio (Maribel Verdu); and innocent Luz (Penelope
Cruz).  Fernando ends up staying just a bit longer than planned,
switching affections between the sisters as fast as he changes beds,
while the political drama plays out in the background.
     Comedy is probably the hardest cinematic genre to translate from
foreign language films, so it is high praise indeed to note that BELLE
EPOQUE had the audience where I saw the film laughing hard and often.
The subtitling is superb, losing only minor idioms in the translation.
Those more familiar with Spanish history and culture might be quicker
to figure out what a "Carlist" is, or the humor behind the parish
priest's affinity for philosopher Miguel de Unamuno, but far more of
the fun in BELLE EPOQUE transcends particulars of culture.  There are
delightful moments of physical comedy, most notably Violeta's
gender-bending seduction of Fernando while both are in costume at a
carnival.  Another highlight is the arrival of Manolo's opera singer
wife and her jealous manager, accompanied by a window serenade.  The
humor is almost entirely accessible, and it's very winning.
     Much of BELLE EPOQUE's earthy charm comes from the slightly
anachronistic "if-it-feels-good-do-it" attitude of many of the
principal characters.  This is not, as one might expect, some leering
variation on the old traveling salesman/farmer's daughters story;
Manolo's response to Fernando's revelation of his tryst with Violeta is
delightfully unexpected.  Director Trueba uses the backdrop of the
republican revolution to highlight a shift away from the rigidly
Catholic Spain to a more liberal era, a transition emphasized in
wonderful scenes involving Rocio's uptight fiance Juanito and his
domineering mother.  Juanito is so deeply rooted in Catholicism that
when he rebels against his mother, he goes to the local church
believing there is some ceremony involved in renouncing the faith.
     However, BELLE EPOQUE makes no pretense to being "about" anything,
and it is in that respect that the film commits its few errors.  There
is really no plot, just a series of amusing encounters which don't
serve to develop any of the characters.  The characterizations are
somewhat weak, particularly that of Fernando, whose seminarian
background, professed agnosticism and unabashed romanticism are never
successfully linked.  Clara, Luz and Rocio are too sketchy, and Juanito
is simply a buffoon.  There are two strong performances, from Ariadna
Gil as Violeta and Fernando Fernan Gomez as Manolo, and it is no
coincidence that they are also the most fully developed characters.
Still, BELLE EPOQUE does what Trueba intends for it to do, which is to
entertain and amuse.  It may not have been my choice for an Oscar, but
there could have been far worse choices.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BELLE EPOQUE is the movie from Spain that won the Academy Award
for best foreign picture.  It is a delightful light hearted romance.
     The story is the classic one of the old man with beautiful young
daughters who is each in turn romanced by a handsome young stranger who
befriends the father.  In this retelling, the old man (Fernando Fernan
Gomez) is a painter who has long since given up painting.  When the
young man (Jorge Sanz) deserts from the army, he is aided by the
painter .  This is Spain during the 30s revolution, and there are mass
desertions.  The young man in turn aids the painter by reading him to
sleep and being his companion for a short while.
     The fun starts when the four beautiful young daughters (Penelope
Cruz, Maribel Verdu, Ariadna Gil, and Miriam Diaz-Aroca) return home.
He falls in love with them sequentially, and they in him - some more
than others.  It is a romantic tale that makes you fall in love with
romance itself and certainly, depending on your sex, with the handsome
actor and strikingly beautiful and wholesome actresses.  There is even
a love scene for people in their 60s and 70s.  Also, one of the girls
was raised as a boy and does a lot of cross-dressing, but mainly this
is pretty straight romantic stuff.
     The movie was filmed in the Spanish countryside.  The
cinematography (Jose Luis Alcaine) could easily win awards for its
bright earthen colors, and its sharp facial close-ups.  The picture of
all of the girls looking out the window to wave to their mother would
make a great still to blowup and mount on your wall.
     On the negative side, there is not a lot here.  The directing by
Fernando Trueba was to focus on mood over character development.  The
script by Rafael Azcona, Jose Luis Garcia Sanchez, and Fernando Trueba
had few memorable parts.  BELLE EPOQUE is more images than substance.
Ah, but they are wonderful images.  Very evocative and romantic.  I did
not like the ending, but it was not essential to the enjoyment of the
movie.
     BELLE EPOQUE is in Spanish with English subtitles.  I suppose I
should give it more, but there was only enough here to have me rate it
** 1/2.  I do recommend seeing it.  It has very much the overall feel
of SIRENS (***), but it is not as good.  The movie runs 1:48 and is
rated R (but could have almost gotten a PG-13 I think).  Certainly the
movie is fine for teenagers.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Pedro Sena
Belle Epoque is a fun film to watch, but one better be prepared to get a
handle on the political jokes, or this film will simply come off as a bit of
a weird, and unusual story.  What really drives this film, is not the story,
or the lucky young man, but the political upheavals that even the family is
going through, from the father, to the daughters, and finally, the mother.
It is the story of a young man that deserts the army because it has gone
crazy on him, and is fighting too many political battles that don't make
sense at all.  And he wants out of it.  But his wanting out of it, only
lands him in a place where politics reigns supreme, even if not honorably.
When he is ready to leave the place he wound up in, he finds out that the
old man he has befriended has four daughters.  And he decides to stick
around.  In no time he makes himself helpful in the
household where he cooks up some specialties that everyone enjoys, from the
priest to anyone else, even if their politics are all screwed up.  At least
they agree on something.... food..... and well .... sex.
But what starts out as what might appear as a good intention on the young
man's part, becomes either a joke, or just another conquest. And everyone is
on a conquest, except Don Manolo.  And he is the
best part of the story, and the most interesting.  Surprisingly enough he is
the only not walking around thinking of sex.  Well for good reason, if we
can appreciate the fact that his own wife is also on a conquest.
But BELLE EPOQUE is a fun film to watch, as things turn so quickly and get
so mixed up that it is a wonder that worse things do not happen all the
time.  While well directed, with almost all the political stuff as throw
away lines and bits of comedy, Fernando Trueba's terrain seems to indicate
that the area of love is never to be mixed up with politics.  One of the
daughters lives a terrible ( is it.? ) mess because of it, but takes
advantage of it when it serves her.
Eventually Fernandp finds his match, well, the one that he got caught with,
anyway. And the film comes to a nice close.... nothing changed, it seems.
And politics are still alive and well. And maybe Juanito and Luz will make
it and have a better time for it. But after three sisters, this may take
some doing.
Unlike some other spanish films that take the political situations
seriously, this one makes a complete mockery of them, starting with Juanito,
who has a terrible problem with his mother.  But even their politics only
last as far as the guns seem to be aimed at certain political factions.  In
1931, and after the second world war, this was a serious problem.  Many
country folks did not take to the new system as easily as the town folks did
under the pointed guns.
BELLE EPOQUE is a fun film to watch and stay with, even if it appears to
drag here and there.  All the girls are interesting and everyone of them is
well defined as a character.
3.5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Ygdrasil's Film Newsgroup
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
