Title
Review for Patch Adams (1998)
Number of Reviews
26

Author
Michael Dequina
_Patch_Adams_ (PG-13) * (out of ****)
_Patch_Adams_ tells the true story of an American original: Hunter
"Patch" Adams (here played by Robin Williams), a former mental patient
turned doctor who pioneered a philosophy of treating patients with a
strong prescription of humor. 
However, the film itself is far from original, following an all-too
familiar checklist for assembly-line "heartwarming human comedy-drama." 
Williams breaks absolutely no new ground playing a goofy guy who is
really brilliant but _misunderstood_.  Check.  He bucks convention and
draws the ire of a sternly traditional authority figure (Bob Gunton's med
school dean).  Check.  The hero takes a liking to an icy young lady
(Monica Potter) initially turned off by our lovable eccentric but
eventually comes around.  Check.  An arbitrary and completely predictable
tragedy causes the  confident hero to question his beliefs and abilities.
 Check.  Friends tell him how special he is, but our hero only finds new
inspiration after receiving an apparent sign from a divine source. 
Check.  The hero then faces the authority figure and wins.  Check.
As if the by-the-letter formula of _Patch_Adams_ weren't bad enough,
writer Steve Oedekerk and director Tom Shadyac (yes, they of
_Ace_Ventura_ infamy) drown the proceedings in a sea of schmaltz that is
even more insulting than it is nauseating.  Patch's tear-wringing
monologue at a climactic hearing is sappy enough, but was it really
necessary to follow that with a group of cancer-stricken youths donning
red noses in support?  It's enough to make anyone gag--that is, if they
don't go into insulin shock first.
Michael Dequina
Chat Forum Host, The Official Michael Jordan Web Site
http://jordan.sportsline.com
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown


Author
John Carroll
A very funny film, at least for the first half. Then it goes to a drama and is
only mediocre. Patch Adams has its moments. Then, it does not have any good
moments. This is not something you see everyday in Hollywood. Some movies
flip-flop between comedy and drama or horror throughout the film, but Patch
Adams does not do that. It actually changes around the midway point of the
film. The first half of the film is hilarious, and Robin Williams was
delivering a great comedic performance after his mediocre What Dreams May Come.
But, then things go sour.
As said before, Robin Williams is great as a doctor who wants to help patients
more then medically. He is great, at least, humorously. Then, when things "go
drama" Williams starts to disappoint. This part of the film just was not for
him. In Good Will Hunting, he showed he could be good in a drama. At least in a
supporting role. In Patch Adams, he falters. This role should have gone to
someone who could handle both clever humor and drama. 
Monica Potter, who looks exactly like Julia Roberts, delivers one of the only
straight through performances. She does nothing outstanding, but is good in her
supporting role. She is there for some humor and shines as the only actor to
stand out during Patch Adams' drama phase. 
Daniel London plays Patch's sidekick and is average. He really does nothing to
stand out in the film. The rest of the cast is basically there to set up
Williams' humor. 
The main theme throughout the film is, as Patch puts it, "You treat a disease,
you win you lose.You treat a patient, I guarantee you'll win." The humor that
starts off the first half of the film is hilarious. From Williams' plain out
humor to the gynecologist convention, the humor is fast and furious. This comes
in complete contrast to the second half of the film. When the drama half of the
film starts, it is sluggish and not as fast paced as the first half of the
film.
Williams does have some good parts when doing his drama. But, he does not lead
the way in the film. Monica Potter's part is extremely underwritten because she
is the only one to stand out during the drama part of the film. The sluggish
pace is the nail in the coffin for this film, though. If the humor in the first
half was not as quick, the sluggishness of the second half of the film would
have been acceptable. However, the sharp contrast is detectable to everyone and
it will become hard to concentrate on the film. The only time that the screen
seems to light up during Patch Adams' drama is when Monica Potter and Robin
Williams are on the screen together. Potter is basically unheard of in
Hollywood, but this role should bring her other roles. She seems to bring out
the best in Williams' acting and is the saving grace for Patch Adams. 
I had big doubts for Patch Adams heading down the homestretch. Then came the
ending. The ending was great. You might perceive it as corny and cliché but for
some reason, it caught my attention. Monica's death (sorry for spoiling it) is
truly surprising and Williams' best dramatic acting comes during his appearance
before the board.
Overall, Patch Adams is good, depending on whether you like drama or comedy. I
would like to give it a great rating, but it never decides what its main
objective is. If you like comedy, maybe you should leave after the first hour.
But, it is a decent film and I would recommend for those looking for an
"enjoyable' film.
The Movie Page- http://jump.to/moviepage
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Patch Adams (1998)
Robin Williams, Daniel London, Monica Potter, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Bob 
Gunton, Josef Sommer, Irma P. Hall, Frances, James Greene, Michael Jeter, 
Harold Gould, Richard Kiley. Produced by Barry Kemp, Mike Farrell, Marvin 
Minoff, Charles Newirth. Screenplay by Steve Oedekerk, based on the book 
"Gesundheit: Good Health is a Laughing Matter" by Hunter Doherty Adams 
and Maureen Mylander. Directed by Tom Shadyac. 110 minutes
PG-13, 1 star (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
The most annoying of several cloying holiday films, ''Patch Adams'' takes 
the true story of a '70s medical student who defied school authorities 
with his humorous, personal approach to patient care, and twists it into 
yet another platform for Robin Williams to ham it up. The human Care Bear 
chucks all the restraint he displayed in ''Good Will Hunting'' and 
returns to his tired shtick, careening between manic cornball gags and 
mawkish sentimentality. The whole thing plays like a really long Robin 
Williams' talk show appearance with a plot slapped on.
Williams plays Hunter ''Patch'' Adams, a real-life doctor who currently 
operates a highly unorthodox clinic in West Virginia. His interest in 
medicine began in 1969, when he became suicidal and committed himself to 
a mental hospital, only to discover that his contacts with fellow 
patients were more therapeutic than sessions with his doctors. Adams 
decided to become a physician himself and entered medical school, where 
he annoyed the hell out of the medical establishment by blurring the 
doctor/patient line with his heartfelt, Catskills comic approach to the 
sick and suffering.
Adams' real-life story, documented in the 1993 book ''Gesundheit: Good 
Health is a Laughing Matter,'' is fascinating, but the film version is 
simply painful, turning mainstream doctors into cardboard villains and 
allowing Williams 110 minutes of insufferable self-indulgence. Robin 
Williams deserved his Best Supporting Actor Oscar for ''Good Will Hunting.
'' His performance was tight, controlled and compelling; everything that 
is absent here. Williams is the sort of performer who requires a director 
to reign him in, protecting the actor from his own worst tendencies. In 
''Patch Adams,'' he simply runs amok. 
The film pits Adams against paper tigers, presenting traditional doctors 
as anal-retentive, self-righteous prigs. I found the blanket portrayal 
offensive, an insult to the many dedicated, overworked men and women who 
tirelessly devote themselves to quality patient care, often at the 
expense of their own well-being. If you believe this film, Patch was a 
red-nosed missionary, a medical superhero single-handedly fighting 
arrogant, uncaring pill-dispensers in the name of truth, justice and the 
Borscht-belt way. I didn't buy it for a second.
Adams' chief nemesis is Dean Walcott (Bob Gunton), a character with 
absolutely no depth or humanity, given to statements like ''we will 
rigorously and ruthlessly train the humanity out of you and turn you into 
something better.'' He fumes nonstop at Adams, raging over the Patch's 
attempts to ''bring us down to their level.'' Continuing the stereotyping,
 the film presents all nurses as uniformly sympathetic, twinkling angels 
beaten into submission by the evil doctors and all too happy to assist 
Patch in his whoopee-cushion quest. What a load of crap. 
The film engages in non-stop emotional manipulation, stretching 
situations to ridiculous lengths to make Patch Adams a comic martyr. 
Watch Patch restore an elderly woman's will to live by plopping her into 
a vat of noodles! See Adams break the shell of a hateful cancer patient, 
bonding with him so completely that the man shoos his wife and children 
away from his deathbed, so he can spend his last moments on Earth with 
Patch! Gaze in amazement as the filmmakers wrap up the movie with a 
hearing in front of a medical board, allowing Williams one more 
opportunity to deliver a maudlin speech.
Or better yet, don't. Avoid this parade of clichéd schmaltz and read the 
book instead. It has to contain more truth than this syrupy disaster. At 
one point, a fellow student turns to Patch Adams and says ''God, you're 
being so self-indulgent!'' If only the director could have had the 
courage to say the same thing to Robin Williams.

Author
Jamey Hughton
To think that the two people behind the Ace Ventura movies would combine
to make a movie like this. It is true, Tom Shadyac (director of Ace
Ventura) is behind the camera, and Steve Oederkerk (director of Ace
Ventura: When Nature Calls) has written the screenplay in one of the
year's most touching films.
Robin Williams brings all his hilarious baggage and his dramatic side
with him playing the title character, Patch Adams, a med student who
believes that laughter is the best medicine to help his patients.
Discovering his talent to help people while admitted to a mental
institution, Patch sets his goal of becoming a doctor. Toting a fake
white overcoat to disguise himself (actually, it's a meat packing
jacket), Patch weaves in and out of hospital rooms making people laugh.
If at least a smile doesn't form across your face while watching
Williams make hospitalized children laugh, then you must be closely
related to the Grinch.
I'm not at all surprised to say this is an excellent movie. At the
same time, it is a long distance from being a perfect movie. But you
have to applaud a film when it has the ability to make you laugh and
cry so much in a limited 2-hour period. Despite the obviously serious
premise of Williams helping those in need, there is still plenty to
laugh about here.  One scene, in particular, will have to go on the
record shelves for one of the funniest moments in movie history. And
yet, the filmmakers never stray too far and fail to make the point
that they're attempting.
Robin Williams is again wonderful - heck give the man another Academy
Award. He's the heart and soul of Patch Adams, balancing the movie on
his shoulders like a scale about to tip at any moment. Amazingly, he
never lets it drop, or even budge, for that matter. He gets and
excellent supporting turn from Philip Seymour Hoffman, playing another
doctor who at times questions Patch's methods of viewing death, as
something humorous. Monica Potter is also memorable as his
self-conscious love interest, who's studying medicine herself.
There's lots of emotions to feel in this movie. Whether they are good or
bad, the entire project is so heartwarming you may have the urge to hug
the people sitting next to you. Patch Adams is a movie each and every
human being should see.
Jamey Hughton was a 1999 Writing Finalist in the YTV Achievement Awards
and writes a Published Column in The StarPhoenix (Saskatoon Sk. Canada).

Author
Homer Yen
Hunter `Patch' Adams could probably be considered something of a
pioneer during his day.  He was a knowledgeable doctor for sure.  He
tried to introduce into the world of medicine at that time something
called TLC  tender loving care.  Appalled by the snobbery and the
holier-than-thou attitudes that many doctors exhibited, Patch tried to
develop a bond with those that he treated.  It was a bond that went
beyond the traditional doctor-patient relationship that stretched into
unconditional friendship.  As he put it, `if you treat the disease,
you win, you lose.  You treat the patient andyou'll win every time.'
`Patch Adams' (starring Robin Williams) is based on the true story of
this compassionate medicine man.  We learn about the turning point in
his life that redirects him towards the field of medicine.  We
accompany him to medical school and familiarize ourselves with the
obstacles that try to sway his optimism such as his competitive
roommate and a militaristic college Dean who doesn't accept his kind
of enthusiasm.  We also see that which inspires him.  These include a
budding romantic interest, the support of a meek but loyal friend,
and, of course, the anticipation of finally being able to treat
patients with his own special brand of TLC.  It is a noble ideal
indeed, but while Patch himself has a big heart, this film seems to be
missing one.  Of course, he acts like a clown and tear ducts will
begin to fill when he bonds with several children suffering from
cancer.  And there is an extremely funny scene involving a convention
of OB/GYNs, which I dare not say anymore about.  But all good stories
about battling the system' must have some evidence of drama as well
as some kind of seemingly insurmountable obstacle.  This is especially
true when any movie incorporates a pivotal courtroom scene, which this
one has.  Instead, what we get is Robin Williams acting coy and
innocent while hamming it up just before the movie goes into a lull. 
What was most odd was that not once do we see Williams's character
actually practice any medicine.  That seemed like a big element that
should have been incorporated.
When I walked out of the theatre, I couldn't help but draw a
comparison between this movie and another film/tv show that
successfully combined grit, humor and medicine.  Remember M*A*S*H? 
You'll probably see more than just a passing resemblance when you
think about the doctor that never seemed to take things seriously, a
snooty roommate from the upper class, a cold-as-ice female colleague,
and a timid supporter.  Still, I will tip my hat to the real `Patch'
for making the inroads that he did.  Anyone who can remove the pall of
indifference from a doctor's waiting room deserves a salute.


Author
Susan Granger
In this true comedy/drama, Robin Williams ("What Dreams May
Come," "Good Will Hunting") plays Hunter "Patch" Adams, a
manic-depressive who decides it's better to be a doctor than a
perennial patient. Problem is: Patch is also a clown, infuriating the
medical establishment by doing outrageous things.  Based on the 1993
book "Gesundheit: Good Health is a Laughing Matter" by Hunter Doherty
Adams, the film's timely theme is the therapeutic value of humor,
characterized by a personalized approach to medicine, but writer Steve
Oedekerk and director Tom Shadyac cater to Williams' talent for
improvisation. The story begins in 1969 in Fairfax Hospital's
Psychiatric Ward, where Patch voluntarily commits himself after
attempting suicide and acquires his nickname by repairing another
inmate's paper cup with a piece of adhesive.  Patch then moves on to
Virginia Medical College where, as an idealistic med student, he wants
to "treat the patient as well as the disease."  He succeeds
brilliantly with the hospitalized children, using an enema bulb to
make a red nose, and even with a surly, dying patient (Peter Coyote)
but fails dismally with his up-tight roommate (Philip Seymour Hoffman)
and the villainous Dean (Bob Gunton), who is determined to expel
him. A serious fellow student (Monica Potter) with her own demons to
exorcise provides the love interest, joining Patch to create an
unconventional clinic to "use humor to cure pain and suffering" - and
their Gesundheit! Institute still proves free care in West
Virginia. There's joy and sorrow, despair and determination, not
unlike Williams' far better "Awakenings" (1990), but the conclusion is
sheer melodrama.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Patch Adams"
is a syrupy, simplistic, sentimental 7. It's a whimsical, feel-good
film.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If you are a reluctant public speaker, you are advised by a
recent study to avoid having your fans in the audience.
Mothers, dads, sweetheart and all others who might be
rooting for you could disrupt your talk.  You're better off
speaking to a bunch of strangers who have no particular
opinion of your merit.  Sounds strange?  The explanation is
that you will be especially nervous in front of your devotees
for fear of letting them down.  Could we stretch this concept a
bit and apply it to medicine?  Sure.  If you are performing life-
threatening surgery on a member of your own family, you
may be particularly jittery, since a mistake could cost you
someone you hold dear.  In other words, it's best for doctors
not to be emotionally involved with the patients they are
treating.  Some physicians, though, go to the other extreme
and are absolute cold fish.  You want the best that
technology has to offer if you're in the hospital, but you also
want human beings to treat you as a person and not just as a
disease.  "I'm wheeling in the appendix from room 303," just
doesn't cut it, so to speak.
   Now, "Patch Adams" is about a physician who  violates the
rule against emotional involvement, an infraction which brings
him in conflict with the administrator of a hospital and dean of
his medical school.  By the conclusion of the film he has
gained the enthusiastic approval of everyone else--the girl of
his dreams who was repelled by him at first meeting,
the roommate who challenged his way of thinking, the kids in
the cancer ward, the nurses who pretty much said "let
Patch be Patch," even the head of a medical disciplinary
board that considered expelling him from school.  Patch
Adams is probably going to be your hero, especially if you've
ever gone to the typical full-of-himself, godlike doctor who
may hardly make eye contact with you or call you by name or
refer to you by anything except a case.  He clowns around
wildly with the deadly sick kids, using an enema bulb to make
a red nose; he insists that a diabetic being studied by a group
of medical students be called by her name and not "the
diabetic," when making the round he wears shirts that
Hawaiians would consider loud.  He's a genuine human
being. But alas, he's not the sort of guy you'd want for your
own physician.  While he pricks the pretensions of the
pompous practitioners, he goes to the other extreme instead
of finding the golden mean.  You want your professional to be
highly sympathetic, even get somewhat emotionally involved
with you and your background.  But for laughter, you'd best
do what the late editor of Saturday Review magazine,
Norman Cousin, did when he was hospitalized with a fatal
illness.  Rent Charlie Chaplin movies, look at the Marx
Brothers, laugh laugh laugh.  But you don't want your doctor
wear a Pinocchio nose or an enema bulb, do you?
   Though Patch Adams may not be your cup of curative
chicken soup, the movie, which is based on an actual person,
is involving and emotionally fulfilling, if quite a bit over-
sentimental.  Conventionally directed like a TV story by Tom
Shadyac and based on Hunter Doherty Adams's own story,
"Patch Adams" begins in 1969 when Adams voluntary checks
himself into a psychiatric hospital, a suicidal wreck.  There he
discovers that he has the gift to reach his fellow patients,
something the head psychiatrist is unable to do since the
latter does not even look his clients in the eye.  ("You suck at
helping people," Patch says, even though the year is 1969.) 
Though middle-aged, he decides at that point that he wants
to help people and, with the aid of his brilliant mind, is able to
enroll in medical school and attain super grades with a
minimum of studying.  He falls in love with one of the few
women in the class (the adorable Monica Potter who looks
about twenty years his junior) and with the help of an
empathetic classmate, Truman Schiff (Daniel London), he
converts that ultra-serious student to his philosophy.  His
ideology can be summed up, "You treat a disease, you win
you lose...you treat a patient and I guarantee you'll win."
   Much of the film is taken up shtick performed by the title
character, played wonderfully and with sincerity by Robin
Williams, who has sprung back from his role in the disastrous
"What Dreams May Come."  As Adams, Mr. Williams finds
that he can draw laughter from people of all walks of life and
ages, as he demonstrates in speaking to a convention of
meat packers where he jokes, "In New Zealand they found a
new use for sheep...wool."  As the school's dean, Bob
Gunton is appropriately villainous, a man whose serious
stature is threatened by this great bag of fun.  Their
personality clash leads to Adams's near dismissal from the
school for violating just about every rule of proper behavior in
the book, but Adams brings out the humanity of other
doctors, such as one played by Josef Sommer (who is, by the
way, exactly the sort of physician I would like to have
rather than Adams) and the head honcho played by Harve
Presnell.
   The major drawback of the work is its conventional story-
telling, not too different in structure from what you might see
on the tube.  But given the hostility that so many people have
against the presumptuousness of the medical profession on
whom we all depend so much, you will be drawn to Robin
Williams's temperament however much you may find it
excessively good-natured and whimsical.  After all, his 
character did ultimately establish a large, free clinic for
uninsured patients called the Gesundheit Hospital on 105
acres of countryside.  "Patch Adams" should have been
released years ago where it could have served as effective
advertising for the Clinton medical plan.

Author
Walter Frith
Life can be manipulating.  Really?  Thanks for telling us that.  The
question is whether it's for bad or good.  How many times have you been
coaxed by a friend who's twisted your arm to do something you didn't
really want to do at first but later on you were glad that you did?
What's so bad about that? Politicians manipulate us and later on we're
often sorry that we voted for them.  Product placement ads on television
and the movies manipulate us by planting subliminal thoughts in our
heads, enticing us to buy their brand and there are many entertaining
advertisements and a lot of stupid ones as well.  'Patch Adams' is
easily recognizable as a manipulative film but it feels good and
therefore it is good.
Many question the sincerity of the medical community.  The true nature
of tackling major diseases and curing them raises economical questions
rather than ethical ones.  A cure for cancer, AIDS and many other
diseases means billions of dollars lost for the pharmaceutical companies
in existing medications and treatment.  1/7 of the American economy is
driven by medicine run as a business rather than as a humanitarian
effort and many cannot afford to pay and they die.  It's refreshing to
see a film that treats medicine with humanity and with delicate grace
and humour that can make human suffering a little easier and since its
based on a true story, it has even more credibility.
Robin Williams redeems himself in this film after the disappointing
'What Dreams May Come', released earlier this year.  Beginning in 1969,
Williams plays Hunter Adams, nicknamed 'Patch', a man who brings
humanity to his patients by using humour as a treatment for those with
fatal diseases and other serious ailments.  As the film begins, Adams is
a voluntarily patient in a mental institution and finds that he has a
positive influence on some seriously catatonic patients and finds he
wants more and decides to check himself out of the institution and into
medical school.  The medical students are driven in the wrong direction
by the chief of the medical program (Bob Gunton) who actually tells a
group of them in class that he will take the humanity out of them and
make doctors out of them!  Shame on him!
He meets other medical students who become his close friends and he has
a relationship with a female student (Monica Potter) that he's sweet
on.  The elder instructors feel that Adams' methods are unorthodox as he
dresses up in funny clothing, makes jokes and improvises his way through
the hospital wards and tries to make the sick and the dying feel
better.  Adams and his friends open free clinics, take supplies from the
wealthy hospital in secret and aren't supposed to see patients at all
until the third year and Williams has a clash of ideals that leads to a
bumpy road that may prevent him from graduating.
Director Tom Shadyac ('Ace Ventura: Pet Detective', 'Liar Liar') proves
he can handle a touching and human story as well as he can a shallow
comedic film and while Williams is allowed to invent a lot of his own
routines, I think a lot of movie fans will appreciate it as vintage
Robin Williams and few have a better balanced career that the one
Williams has carved out for himself.
The film is based on the book 'Gesundheit: Good Health Is a Laughing
Matter' by Hunter Doherty Adams and Maureen Mylander and is adapted for
the screen by Steve Oedekerk who keeps his writing fresh and alive and
has some good observations and gives the film social commentary and
something that audiences can take home with them and think about.  My
father doesn't smile much but did so sincerely after seeing this film.
'Patch Adams' is no classic but given the fact that the film will be
attacked by many as manipulative, those same people enjoyed and
recommended Williams' 1989 film 'Dead Poets Society' which was far more
manipulative than this film and 'Dead Poets Society' won an Oscar for
its writing!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Tom Shadyac.
Cast: Robin Williams, Monica Potter, Bob Gunton, Philip Seymour Hoffman, 
Peter Coyote, Irma P. Hall, Ellen Albertini Dow.
1998 - 110 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for profanity).
Reviewed December 14, 1998.
Written by Dustin Putman Dustin Putman's Film
Reviews>
"Patch Adams," is highly reminiscent of the wonderful 1990 film, 
"Awakenings," also starring Robin Williams. There are many similarities, 
as well. Both films are based on true stories; they both take place, 
partially, in 1969; they are both set in a hospital; and they both mix 
humor and drama. Maybe this is one of the biggest problems with, "Patch 
Adams," since it is far inferior to, "Awakenings," which felt so much 
more realistic and honest. That isn't to say that, "Patch Adams," is a 
bad film, though. Actually, I enjoyed it quite a lot up until the highly 
disappointing climax.
Robin Williams stars as Patch Adams, a depressed man who, at the start 
of the film, checks himself into a mental hospital after an attempted 
suicide. After helping his roommate get over his fear of squirrels, 
which he imagines have surrounded the room, Patch is suddenly cured, 
realizing that making others feel better through humor helps his own 
problems to disappear. Sure enough, two years later, Patch starts a 
medical school in Virginia, and begins sneaking into the hospital and 
having fun with all of the patients, some of which are terminally ill. 
Although he firmly believes that making other people laugh helps them to 
feel better, the hospital board disagrees, putting his plans of becoming 
a doctor into jeopardy.
For the majority of its running time, "Patch Adams," was very enjoyable 
for a number of reasons. The characters were all superbly handled, and 
written very well. Philip Seymour Hoffman was a standout as Williams' 
college roommate, who begins to grow envious of him when Patch starts to 
get some of the highest grades in the class, even though he does not 
seem to ever study. The character could have been a throwaway role, but 
Hoffman turns a potentially one-dimensional character into a completely 
believable person who is very serious about becoming a doctor, and is 
struggling to get by. Another element I liked in the film was its smooth 
mixture of comedy and drama. Although often funny, Williams never went 
overboard as he occasionally does, and there were a few gentle, quiet, 
and touching moments. A subplot involving the blossoming romance between 
Williams and a serious pre-med student (Monica Potter) was smartly 
written, and the payoff caught me totally by surprise, even if its 
strains at drama, in this respect, came off as slightly obvious. 
Before the climax arrived, I liked the movie, but did not love it. The 
workings of the plot were a little too conventional and predictable for 
my taste. However, when the ending came, the whole effect of the movie 
was pretty much ruined. Without giving away what happens, it concluded 
with a courtroom scene that was so falsely sentimental and cliched that 
I felt rather betrayed at its severe reaches for cheap melodrama. It was 
at the point that I knew for a fact how everything was going to end, and 
it saddened me to think that the screenwriter, Steve Oedekerk, took such 
an easy way out. 
When all is said and done, "Patch Adams," is an earnest attempt at 
making a film that is both comedic and moving, and as a vehicle for 
Robin Williams, it is perfect. Williams, along with his last two 
pictures, "Good Will Hunting," and, "What Dreams May Come," has proven 
that he is an actor with a lot of range, and doesn't always have to be 
silly. But coming out of, "Patch Adams," I had this strange feeling 
that, although based on a true story, the film took extreme liberties in 
order to construct it into a more managable film for mainstream 
audiences. This is quite unfortunate, since, "Patch Adams," clearly held 
so much promise. 

Author
James Brundage
Starring Robin Williams, Monica Potter, Daniel London, Philip Seymour
Hoffman, and Bob Gunton
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 My main gripe with Mickey Blue Eyes was that it was using a new formula.
Similarly, my main gripe with Patch Adams is that it is using an old
formula.  In fact, Patch Adams is using the old formula that annoys me most:
the schlock based-on-a-true-story drama.
 As a collective group, when we see the line "Based on a True Story", this
is supposed to open the valves of our tear ducts.  This is supposed to make
the story believable, the characters likeable, even if it actually isn't and
they aren't.  We're supposed to give a damn when people in the movie die.
We're supposed to hate to see them go.  We're supposed to have a triumphant
ending with some moral or another.
 Whenever I see the line "Based on a True Story" in front of a movie, I want
to cringe.  Whenever I reach the highly pretentious ending which is often
only missing an usher with a collection plate, I want to puke.  Whenever the
movie inevitably takes a turn for the worse, I get really sick and tired.
 The problem with "Based on a True Story" versus "A True Story"
(documentaries) is that whenever "Based on a True Story" exists, there
become conflicts.  We all know that the events displayed in the movie are
complete fictional representations of events that weren't that interesting
to begin with, and thus are completely blown out of a proportion.  Whenever
we enter the movie theatre we expect to have this "resounding human
sympathy."
 When was the last time anyone you know had "resounding human sympathy".
This is the 90s, the Age de la Nihilist, and someone should clue studio
executives in that nine out of ten of us don't really care unless you make
us care.  We see the news and only put up with the first ten minutes because
a) it's mildly entertaining, b) we want a stock quote or the whether or
something that comes later.  I show my true cynicism when I say that I
honestly believe that most people are apathetic, myself included, and will
not care about a movie just because it says "Based on a True Story" in front
of it.
 If a movie is done well, if it draws me in and actually makes me care some
way or another about the characters then I will actually have some sympathy,
but I really don't much care about fictional representations of real people
I never met.
 Furthermore, I doubt I would care about Hunter "Patch" Adams were I to meet
him.  I have a sense of humor, and my sense of humor is juvenile I'll admit
that.  But I do not go to a meat-packing convention and make a speech that
begins "friends, cow men, bullshippers, lend me your steers."  It's just not
funny.  Although I laud what the man did for modern health care, we still
have a long way to go and his casual disregard of authority is the same
behavior that most people call me a jerk for.
 I make a call to studio heads: stop using "Based on a True Story" as a
marketing ploy to conceal a bad movie.  Yeah, we have the occasional
"Schindler's List" and "Alive" which can bring you in to a true story, but
those were strong movies.  When you have a weak movie, don't tack on "Based
on a True Story" and expect a result.  It's an insult to our intelligence
and its playing off of the guilt we feel when we should care but don't.

Author
James Sanford

 If actors won Oscars purely for their ability to produce raging rivers of
tears on command, Robin Williams could start writing his acceptance speech
for next year's ceremony right now. Between "What Dreams May Come" and
"Patch Adams," he would have the prize locked up.
 Williams' routine goes something like this: First, there's a forlorn look,
followed by the wrinkling of the eyes. Then his lips begin to tremble, like
the ground around Yosemite moments before a geiser eruption. Finally --
boom! -- industrial-size drops of saline begin cascading down his cheeks,
accompanied by cracking in his voice or a heavy wheeze.
 It's an act that can be used to good effect when Williams is working with a
director such as Gus Van Sant ("Good Will Hunting"), who knows when to cut
away from the waterworks. But "Patch"'s Tom Shadyac is not one to say no to
his stars -- his previous films are the Eddie Murphy remake of "The Nutty
Professor" and Jim Carrey's "Liar Liar" -- so "Patch" pauses every 20
minutes or so to allow Williams a chance to drain his tearducts.
 The movie opens with a warning that what we're about to see is a true
story, perhaps because the filmmakers recognized Steve Oedekerk's script was
so corny it might otherwise have been mistaken for something written 60
years ago and just recovered from the vault. Williams plays Hunter "Patch"
Adams, who overcame clinical depression to become a physician dedicated to
treating patients like people and using humor to ease pain and suffering.
The real-life Adams (who looks more like Salvador Dali than Williams) is the
author of  the well-reviewed books "Gesundheit!" and "House Calls," and he's
also considerably more fascinating than the film gives him credit for being.
 The screenplay is so intent on turning Adams into a modern-day saint it
never offers any genuine insights into the man's background or psychological
makeup, concentrating instead on his clashes with cardboard authority
figures, such as a scheming dean (Bob Gunton) and institutional orderlies
who are too quick to restrain and subdue.
 The brightest patches in "Patch" are those that have little to do with the
basic story, such as a foray into a meat-packers' convention and a
ridiculously elaborate prank played by Adams on a group of visiting
gynecologists. Unfortunately, those moments come early in the film and are
followed by such bitter pills as a grueling scene in which Adams weeps his
way through a rendition of "Blue Skies" and a lengthy soliliquoy allowing
Adams to berate God for being so inefficient and distant. "You rested on the
seventh day," he bellows. "Maybe you should have spent that day on
compassion!"
 "Patch Adams" will probably sway those viewers who sigh whenever they see
that coffee commercial where "Peter" comes home unexpectedly and brightens
everyone's Christmas, but this attempted tribute to the human spirit more
often than not seems like it was written by a computer. All the cliched
characters fall into place -- the frosty/friendly colleague (Monica Potter,
doing her best Julia Roberts imitation), the uptight roommate (Philip
Seymour Hoffman), the adorably kook (Michael Jeter; tummy, be still) -- and
perform exactly as expected, while Williams does his best to moisturize
everyone in his vacinity. The real Patch Adams could have told all concerned
that laughter, not saccharin, is the best medicine, both for patients and
for moviegoers.
James Sanford

Author
Sharon Connolly
Cast:  Robin Williams, Monica Potter, Bob Gunton, Daniel London, Philip
Seymour Hoffman, Josef Sommer and Peter Coyote Directed by Tom Shadyac
Written by Steve Oedekerk Released by Universal Pictures
This film is based on real-life doctor Patch Adams of Virginia who tried to
reinvent the medical practice through humor and a free clinic.        Patch has
been described as an iconoclast, a pattern-breaker and professional clown,
and who could play Patch any better than Robin Williams, who's proven to the
world over and over again that he's a comedic genius! Williams also has that
unique ability to make you laugh and cry almost within the same scene.
With a Christmas premiere, the timing is perfect because it's a "feel-good"
film for the holidays.        Now I ask you - what's wrong with that?  Its clever
script brings rich humor poking fun at the medical establishment and the myth
of doctors as godlike creatures. And that's something nearly every one of us
can relate to.        Described as a drama/comedy, the script focuses on five years
of the doctor's life. As an amateur film critic, I have to declare "Patch
Adams" a definite winner DESPITE the influx of complaints from national
critics who have referred to it as syrupy, beyond belief and toying with the
emotions with a heavy hand, even going so far as to say that the soundtrack
was also manipulative.        Well, name one that isn't.  At the sneak preview I
attended, the audience responded with a round of applause, highly unusual. I
think moviegoers have had their share this year of action and special-effects
films, which demand total suspension of disbelief for a solid two hours! 
Therefore, "Patch Adams" has a refreshing appeal and can be embraced as a
story of joy and hope in the face of illness and death, which we must all
eventually succumb to.
Bob Gunton plays his villainous role with fervor as Dean Walcott (remember
him as the prison warden in "Shawshank Redemption"?) while Monica Potter
delightfully plays Patch's love interest despite her Julia Roberts'
look-alike image.  Kudos also goes to Daniel London as Patch's geeky pal as
well as to Philip Seymour Hoffman as the earnest but pompous and humorless
roommate. (A bit like some of these film critics, eh?)        And, yes, the
cantankerous, dying patient in Room 305 is indeed Peter Coyote, whose awesome
voice can still be easily recognized.
As a final note, this film has received two Golden Globe nominations, one for
Best Picture in the musical/comedy category and one for Williams as Best
Actor. Guess there must be plenty of other folks out there who agree with me.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Joy Wyse
There really is a Hunter `Patch' Adams, a doctor who has the Gesundheit
Institute in West Virginia where he treats people for free.  In order to
raise funds to continue his work, he wrote a book about his life, which
has now become a movie.   He was very insistent that he be portrayed for
what he isa loving caring and very eccentric doctor.  He couldn't have had
anyone portray him better than Robin Williams.
The story is delightful from beginning to end.  The first scenes, set in
a mental hospital are explosive.  What might have been a deep brooding
scene becomes hysterical as young Patch pokes fun at a catatonic patient. 
The following scenes with Michael Jeter are even funnier.
It is not all fun and games, however, as we follow Patch through his
years at Medical school.  Rules are not for him.  Everything seems too
slow, too impersonal.  While touring the hospital he is dismayed that
people are referred to by their bed number, or their illness rather than
by a name.  He truly cares about people and they know it.  Impossible
patients become nicer just by knowing him.  Sometimes they get better. 
Sometimes they don't.  
In school he is attracted to another student, Carin,  but she is not
responsive to Patch and his poor study habits.  She dreams of being a
doctor and her education is all that is important.  
This is definitely a MUST SEE movie.  It s one of the best that I've
seen in years, and it's wholesome.  It makes you feel so good.  It
definitely should be nominated for Best Picture, and Robin Williams for
Best Actor and  I hope that they win.      I give it a strong A+.

Author
Thomas Glebe
Lately, it has become my custom to see "recent" releases long after they
first come out.  There are many reasons for this.  I don't like crowds,
I don't like off screen noise (from crowds) when I'm trying to enjoy
what's on screen, and these days, I resent paying seven or eight dollars
(or more?!) to see a flick.  The practice of seeing movies on the big
screen like this however, hasn't really affected my overall opinions;
that is, the "hype" and/or critical praise, or downturned thumbs and
critical blasting, haven't made a difference.  I saw "Titanic" awhile
after release and felt the praise it received well justified.  The
opposite was true for me personally with Spielberg's "Saving Private
Ryan."  Call me an iconoclast, but the opinions of others rarely affects
me at all when it comes to movies.
With this in mind, the totally wacky bipolar reactions that "Patch
Adams" had received by the time I got around to it (audiences loved it,
critics trashed it), made me curious enough to cough up my $3.25 to see
it at a bargain theater on a warm, sunny Saturday afternoon.   I didn't
expect much and entered the theater reluctantly.  I was not really a
Robin Williams fan (or wasn't until this, which has since made me go
back and look at his other work with more favor), the subject matter
didn't seem to interest me too greatly, and if this were really the
"bomb" most of the critics were saying it was, I was about to waste two
hours and the price of a happy meal.  Several  thoughts entered my mind
as I sat down in my usual third row middle seat down front in the nearly
deserted theater and the lights dimmed.  I had read mostly negative
reviews of this film, and yet, it had been a big moneymaker, audiences
loved it,  and it was nominated for a Golden Globe as best picture of
the year.  "Best Picture?!"  How could a movie that was condemned so
harshly by the critics, be all that bad if the movie goers themselves
loved it?   Something seemed strange about that, I thought, as the movie
beganvery strange.
Take note, all.  The critics on this one are totally full of shit.  This
is a wonderful film!
I was swept away by this film, almost from the very beginning.  The
opening scene and voice-over narrative by Robin Williams set me up
nicely with its very solemn and philosophical tone, and the visuals and
music nicely countered that in a very enticing manner.  For here we were
introduced to a sad, depressed man on his way to the "nut house" after a
failed suicide attempt, riding through some of the most beautiful, sunny
countryside one can imagine.  I wonder if the powerful, dialectic nature
of this opening scene and narration, was actually the moment when the
"critics" were already annoyed, but the audience (ahem, like real
people, you know?), could immediately identify with William's character
and plight?  Despite the movie's frequent excursions into over the top
silliness and improbable behavior by Williams and various other
characters later on, the beginning is really the most manipulative part
of the film (and I mean that in the most positive sense).  Only now do I
realize why so many reviewers hated this flick.  One really has to
understand Patch's whole state of mind at the start, to identify with
him throughout and find the rest of the movie enjoyable, plausible and
meaningful.  In essence, even at our lowest moments in life, truly the
"best medicine," like the movie's tag-line goes, is humor.  It is my
firm opinion after seeing this extraordinary film, that most of those
who didn't like it, simply didn't "get" it, from the very beginning.
Either that, or that piece of their hearts that can still revel in the
glory and power of the simple pleasures in this great big mysterious
"concept" we're all sharing called "life," is in cardiac arrest, and
needs exactly the type of "medical care" Patch preaches after quickly
learning during his brief stay at the psycho ward, is scarcely present
in our modern day medical institutions.
Those institutions, as Patch strongly believes and within which the
movie's whole concept relies on for its very real truths, are truly a
daily, functioning contradiction.  On the one hand, hospitals and
doctors have as their guiding principle (or so they say), the noblest of
goals.  To treat people in need, to care for the sick and for those
without the means to care for themselves, and to acknowledge that we are
all basically just human beings living out our lives together in a
"society" where the "Golden Rule" is actually the only one which
matters.  But who, if they've been run through the impersonal, HMO
horror that is the state of today's "medical care," who, if they've ever
spent any amount of time "in the hospital," would agree with the notion
that "altruistic" and "loving" care is any part of the present day
health care "system?"  That system is a lie, a contradiction, and in
many cases today, the whole concept of "medical care" is an oxymoron of
the highest order.
"Patch Adams" is truly a "socialist" movie on this issue, dwelling
gloriously and unashamedly from start to finish, in the concept of
"socialized medicine," where people are truly put first and foremost in
importance.  I really think this film could not have been made during
earlier times, notably during the 50's and the whole McCarthy
witch-hunt/blacklist days.  Sadly, if the medical "industry" continues
on the track it has been, films like this and the ideas within, will be
rarer still.  Only but the most cold-hearted cynic about life and the
sanctity of that, and those who consider the medical profession as just
another "business," could deny that increasing the "personalizing" of
the doctor-patient relationship, could do anything but positive things.
 Old habits and customs, old traditions and ways of thinking die hard
however.  Is the "philosophy" of Dr. Hunter "Patch" Adams really all
that bizarre or unworkable?  Or is it just a return, if only in spirit
and intent, to the "good old days" when a doctor would actually get his
butt over to your house and tend to your sick child because he gave a
damn?  Having read many other reviews of this film, it is my suspicion
that those who denounced this film the strongest, simply find the
politics of it something to be reacted against, instead of understood
and embraced.
Those "critics" who have damned this film so roughly I think, are
playing the most politically correct game possible these days, and that
is that any ideas and ideals even remotely related to "socialist"
thought or political persuasion, is by default, especially these days,
quite un-chic.  Why then, did this movie find such a wide audience and
enjoy such basic, heartfelt "people" popularity?  I've yet to meet one
other "real" person out there who has seen the film and not loved it,
but why the snotty, stuck-up reviews, which seem to me to not even be
discussing the same movie?  Can the answer also be found in politics,
but ones of money?  After all, anyone out there who is not wealthy, who
cannot afford the finest medical care available today, who has seen
firsthand that the last place to find true health in mind and spirit
these days is the inside of a hospital or clinic, and who more often
than not in real life has run into the same cold, inhuman "healers"
(doctors) that this film shows fictionally, "gets" the movie's message
loud and clear.  Doesn't wealth in this country buy a different kind of
health care?  Could it be that the majority of "Hollywood" and industry
"critics" have a standard of health care all of us "commoners" out there
(who loved the film) only dream of?  Perhaps.
What touched audiences besides these possible factors?  Do all of us
normal people (who can't afford Mayo for every sneeze or bout of
heartburn) get the idea that there's something dreadfully wrong with the
medical system we have today, and that it needs change, almost any
change, and needs it now?  Does the whole idea of experimentation, of at
least trying to do things a better and more humane way, resonate deeply
in the majority of us, who fall through the cracks when it comes to the
medical "state of the art" these days?  In an early part of the film, a
psychiatrist who is supposed to be "helping" Patch and at the very
least, "listening" to him, fiddles around with his coffee, avoids eye
contact, and eventually doesn't even hear what Patch says.  A bit later,
Patch opts to dismiss himself from the institution, for the obvious
reason that he's just not getting any true medical help there.  The
psychiatrist, ego puffed up, tells Patch that he disagrees with the
early release, and that after all, "he" is the doctor.  In a wonderful,
fleeting, but subtly powerful moment, Patch replies, "Yeah, but you suck
at it."  Patch can, and does, do better.
The truth is, for all the pitfalls and possible impracticalities of some
of Patch's "methods," almost anything would be better than the medical
system we have today.  In a broader sense, the dichotomy between the
majority of critic's almost snobbish rejection of this movie and its
general philosophy of life, and its popular acceptance, is a comment on
these modern times themselves.  The elite and the prosperous and the
media tell us one thing, but most of us are not really as ignorant as
all of that.  As in the uptight and virtually fascist 50's, there are
two realities we are all living in.  Patch Adams was/is clearly ahead of
his time, but so were Jesus, Ghandi, and Martin Luther King.  The
magical part of this movie to me is that for all the protestations of
the fuddy-duddy uptight bureaucrats and status-hungry money-grubbers
(doctors, deans, and medical students) Patch fights along the way, most
of his "methods" are virtually cost-free, extremely effective and
healing, and any real "reasons" for not giving them a try, are totally
without substance.
Every now and then it seems to me, a movie like this comes along, which
the critics roll over the hot coals, and the audience shakes their heads
in remembering their fond enjoyment.  The film reminded me of many of my
favorite movies of the past along the general "theme" celebrating the
wisdom and morality of the common, caring individual caught up in a
crazy world, including "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Next," "Forrest
Gump," and  "The Grapes of Wrath."  Over the top and bordering on
pretentious at times, "Patch Adams" is not without its flaws, but its
heart is squarely in the right place, and so is the heart of the
true-life man the movie is based upon.  I recall (the late) Siskel and
Ebert, who I admired for the most part and agreed with on most films,
taking "Patch" to task bitterly, almost "over the top" in their own
acrimonious criticism, and have found the same negative "spirit" in
almost every other critic who has cursed this movie.  An interesting
phenomenon, this "over-reaction" I think.  "Patch Adams" sneaked up on
Hollywood I think, and sneaked up in the hearts of those who let its
message in.  Siskel and Ebert asked at one point in their scathing
condemnation, something like "would you want a doctor to be tending to
you like Patch Adams?"  Speaking for myself, yes.  Call me
"old-fashioned," or just a bloody socialist agitator, but the whole
concept of a doctor looking into your eyes once in awhile, seems
strangely appealing.
Regardless of whether the most cynical among us want to reject the
sentimental and unabashed sincerity of this film's message and spirit by
attacking the messenger, "Patch Adams" obviously reached out past them,
to the appreciative audience, the common folk who the real doctor Adams
would be glad to sit and talk with, like any two human beings should.  I
think this movie should be required viewing at all of this country's
medical schools, and if the students, like the critics, don't "get it,"
they should have to watch it again and again until they do.  The
"message" here is clear, even if some, including the Hollywood
establishment itself who failed to include this as a best picture
nominee (as glaring an omission as I've seen in years), still don't "get
it."  The people do.  The "patients" out there do.  As one of them,
that's good enough for me.
In another early part of the film, one of the "patients" in the
psychiatric hospital Patch meets, an aging, "crazy" but brilliant former
mathematician, holds up four fingers, asking Patch "How many fingers do
you see?"  Patch answers four.  The old man grumbles angrily, saying,
"No, no, no, look beyond the fingers, tell me how many do you see?"
Only a bit later, as Patch begins to realize that he has just as much
healing power inside himself as anything or anyone outside of him, he
repeats the same experiment with the old man, looks beyond the obvious,
the man's four outstretched fingers, and sees "ghost" fingers right next
to them.  "I see eight fingers," Patch laughs.  His heart is opening,
he's beginning to truly "see."  He "gets it."  A trick of the eye.  A
trick of the heart.  Simple but sublime.  One of many such clear lessons
in a film as deep and meaningful as one wishes to make it in their own
heart.  It helps a lot I think, to view "Patch Adams" with an open one.
 A tricky thing this day and age, as evidenced by the majority of
critics out there, who hated a film the "people" loved.  Like a doctor
can always learn a thing or two from a patient (such a revolutionary
idea, let's ban it!), maybe the critics ought to sit up and take notice
of something they've obviously intentionally tried to forget in viewing
and reviewing this great little film, the "audience is never wrong."
Finally, always second guessing even myself in my initial reactions to
movies, especially those seen on the big screen, then later otherwise, I
recently had the chance to see "Patch" again, this time on cable tv.
Amazing, once again.  I had only turned it on to watch the beginning
again.  I couldn't switch channels, and ended up watching the whole
thing again, again, feeling all the same emotions.  I laughed, I cried,
I felt that wonderful tingle up my spine in so many parts.  A great
filmand the critics be damned.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: December 25, 1998
Starring: Robin Williams, Monica Potter, Daniel London, Philip Seymour
Hoffman, Bob Gunton, Harve Presnell
Directed by: Tom Shadyac
Distributed by: Universal Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (strong language, crude humor) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/patch.htm
The long and illustrious career of Robin Williams, which has included
both forgettable turns like MRS. DOUBTFIRE and FLUBBER, was punctuated
with the actor's first Academy Award in 1998 for his role in GOOD WILL
HUNTING. It was his first truly dramatic role since 1989's DEAD POETS
SOCIETY, and critical remarks were unanimously positive. His next role,
that of a deceased pediatrician in WHAT DREAMS MAY COME, was
unfortunately lackluster. And so, after a six-year stint as a comedic
actor, the proof on whether or not Williams can cut it in the dramatic
league has come down to PATCH ADAMS. 
Williams is the title character, Hunter "Patch" Adams, sporting scruffy
facial hair that falls between the clean-shavenness of DREAMS and the
grotesque hairiness of WILL HUNTING. We're introduced to Patch as he
commits himself to a mental institution because of his suicidal
tendancies. It's at the institution, however, that he discovers a latent
talent for relating to people. He removes himself from the institution
and enrolls at the University of Virginia's medical college, where he
finds that medical doctrine is a calculating, impersonal trade. His
attempts to inject humanity into the profession result in several bouts
with expulsion, and the movie climaxes with Patch's appearance before
the state medical board. 
The characters are well-defined in an Oscar-worthy sense. Although the
script does not perform well as a narrative -- there's little story to
be told outside of Patch's skit-length experiences -- the script does go
a long way toward building the relationships of characters. At medical
school, Patch meets up with Truman Schiff (Daniel London), an outsider
like himself who relishes Patch's zest for humanity. The two instantly
become the best of friends, and it's easy to see why. Monica Potter
plays Patch's love interest, a young woman who personifies the things
that Patch hates about medical school. For some reason he's attracted to
her, and although it never gets said, the audience understands from an
intrinsic point of view. The script -- based on Hunter Adams' own story
-- works well this way. 
The rest of the cast, Bob Gunton as the villain professor in particular,
is solid. Director Tom Shadyac (LIAR LIAR) leads us in and out of
Patch's life in a sound, intentional manner; combined with Williams'
presence on screen, the movie rarely becomes boring. PATCH ADAMS' lack
of purpose is its major shortcoming, and for the first ninety minutes
out of two hours, there's little feeling of continuity or the passage of
time. Nevertheless, it's an emotionally moving picture, and PATCH ADAMS
looks to be one of the more memorable of the holiday season. It succeeds
at everything it tries, and only fails at the stuff it doesn't try in
the first place. By and large there may be another Oscar nomination
herein for Williams, but more importantly, it's entertainment for the
entire family. 

Author
Greg King
Patch Adams tells the story of a dedicated and unconventional
doctor who challenged the traditional wisdom of his teachers and
peers.  An idealistic medical student, Hunter "Patch" Adams (Robin
Williams) believed that doctors should treat the patient as well as
the disease.  His views brought him into disfavour with the
establishment, and he clashed many times with the staid and humourless
dean of the medical school (Bob Gunton, best remembered as the
sadistic warden from The Shawshank Redemption), who announces that all
the humanity will be trained out of them.  Adams was a naturally
gifted student, which also attracted the ire of his roommate Mitch
(Philip Seymour Hoffman), who came from a family of doctors and was
determined to succeed.  He resented Adams' frivolous attitude, which
undermined all that he believed in.  But it was Adams' ability to
strike a chord with the patients that led to him risking his
reputation, his career and his future to create an environment in
which the patients were happy and temporarily forgot their pain.  He
eventually set up a free clinic with the help of fellow students
Truman (Daniel London) and Carin (a very Julia-Roberts-like Monica
Potter), which became known as the Gesundheit Institute.  Although
Patch Adams is based on a true story, one wonders how many liberties
the film makers have taken with the facts to accommodate Williams'
normally manic persona.  The real Adams was actually a good twenty
years younger than Williams, who seems uncomfortably aware that here
he is the oldest person on campus.  He was only a teenager when he
checked himself into an asylum to overcome his suicidal tendencies and
discovered his talent for healing people's pain through humour,
understanding and compassion.
Patch Adams is meant to be an inspiring and uplifting film,
but it is also a horribly saccharine, clichéd and cynically
manipulative movie that wears its heart on its sleeve.  It is also a
tad predictable, and most audiences will probably be able to join the
dots of the plot by about midway through.  There is the brutal and
unexpected death that brings on a crisis, a moment of self doubt in
which he questions everything he believes in, and then there is the
final vindication.  The idealistic, wise-cracking maverick who rails
against authority and tradition and becomes an inspirational figure
for many along the way has become something of a cliché in
Williams' repertoire (think Good Morning Vietnam, Dead Poets' Society
and even Awakenings, etc).
Director Tom Shadyac has previously drawn restrained
performances from normally outrageous comics like Eddie Murphy (The
Nutty Professor) and Jim Carrey (Liar Liar), but he seems unable to
keep his star on a tight leash here.  There are plenty of scenes in
which Williams cuts loose with the sort of energy and seemingly
improvised humour that audiences love and expect.
 Dramatically, Williams is 
also permitted a number of moving and emotional scenes.  His outrageous 
performance dwarfs the 
otherwise solid work of his co-stars, who find themselves lumbered with 
one-dimensional, stereotyped 
characters.  
Patch Adams is a film designed to show case the talents of its
popular star, and fans will find plenty to admire.  Others, not so
enamoured of the outrageous Williams, may find the whole thing a
vaguely unsatisfactory experience.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        It's a shame when a film comes so close to getting it right.
"Patch Adams" seems to know what it's doing and where it's
headed for so much of the time that its gradual descent into
cheap, manipulative melodrama is a far greater tragedy than anything
depicted in the story itself.  As a comedy, there are plenty of
wonderful moments... but as a drama, this film needs immediate
medical attention.
        It's been said that laughter is the best medicine, and Hunter
"Patch" Adams (Robin Williams) apparently agrees.  A fun-loving
and mischievious (but big-hearted) scamp, Patch thinks the power
of humor and kindness are traits that can be used to facilitate
healing.  As a medical student, Patch's outlandish antics earn him
the scourn of the medical powers that be... even as this same
behavior endears him to his patients.
        Does that plot summary seem a little familiar?  Of course
it does: it's the same basic formula used in any number of other
Robin Williams vehicles, including "Good Morning Vietnam,"
"Dead Poets' Society," and, to a certain extent, "Good Will
Hunting."  Although the same basic storyline appears in each of
these films (kind-hearted mentor uses unorthodox methods to
reach out to others as supervisors frown), "Patch Adams" does
not reach the dramatic heights attained by its illustrious
predecessers, despite a number of attempts.  The main reason:
a complete lack of subtlety on behalf of its screenplay.  This
film is shameless in the way it assaults the audience with its
manipulative juices.  Let's take inventory: we have (1) an
abundant supply of sick, lonely children; (2) an orchestral score
that beats you over the head with the pure force of its saccharine;
(3) the death of not one but *two* characters important to our
protaganist over the course of the story, which leads us straight
into (4) a heartfelt speech delivered to a tombstone.  All this I
might be willing to overlook, but there is a moment towards the
end of the film that it so blatant and astoundingly ridiculous that
I must make mention of it.  I won't reveal the specific details,
but it involves all those sick, lonely children making an appearance
when  Patch's spirits are at their lowest ebb.  I was so moritifed
at this obvious attempt to give the audience 'warm fuzzies' that I
actually grabbed the arm of my chair to prevent myself from
walking out.
        If the dramatic elements of the story are disappointing,
however, the comedic moments are a lot of fun.  The film is most
successful when it deals with Adams's effervescent personality, for
it's then that Williams is allowed to do what he does better than
any other actor in Hollywood: go completely crazy.  I can't deny
that the character of Patch is a lot of fun to watch, which once
again proves my theory that when Robin Williams is having a good
time, the audience will too.  The gags are fast, frequent, and
laugh-out-loud funny, with the best moments involving Adams's
special preparations for a visiting gynecological convention, and
the hosting of a "balloon safari" in a patient's room.
        The stumbling blocks (and alas, there are many) show up
when the film attemps to convince us that it's a far more important
work than it actually is.  Unquestionably the story deals with
important issues, but the delivery of this material is so heavy-handed
that I felt quite put off by it.  Basking in stereotype, "Patch Adams"
paints everyone in strict black and white terms; they are either
"good," like Patch and his shy friend Truman (Daniel London), or
"bad," like Dean Walcott (Bob Gunton) and most of the other authority
figures we meet.  I don't know a single person in the real world who
is strictly one-dimensional, yet this film is overflowing with them.
        "Patch Adams" has flashes of creative inspiration, a message
that's worth hearing, and a tremendous performance by Robin Williams
in the title role; these three items are enough to make me
hesitatingly recommend it.  It's a shame, however, that these positive
traits are forced to fight for screen time with cardboard-like
supporting characters and countless attempts at audience manipulation.
A good drama can make an audience cry, but "Patch Adams" jams a tube
in its viewers' eyes and attempts to siphon their tears.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Matt Williams
In Patch Adams, Robin Williams portrays a real-life doctor struggling to
reform the impersonal medical system with a human touch.  It's a good
premise, and Williams seems to be perfect for the role...perhaps a bit
too perfect. The film is nothing if not emotionally manipulative, and at
times it gets downright irritating to be pushed around so much.
Hunter Adams (Robin Williams) has been suicidally depressed.  The
pointlessness of his life has driven him to the brink, and he finally
checks himself into a mental hospital.  While there, he observes the
detached soulessness of the medical staff, and discovers a purpose for
his own life.
Sporting the new nickname, "Patch", he enrolls in med school.  He
desires nothing more than to connect with people in need, and to help
them out as best as he can.  To this end, he enlists the aid of fellow
students, Carin (Monica Potter) and Truman (Daniel London) to bring
humor and enjoyment into the lives of patients at the local hospital.
But, Patch's unique methods have their detractors.  Patch's study-minded
roommate Mitch (Philip Seymour Hoffman) is frustrated with his
anti-studious attitudes. But the biggest obstacle in Patch's way is Dean
Walcott (Bob Gunton), who sees his actions as a challenge to the medical
establishment, and is willing to prevent Patch from graduating in order
to protect that establishment.
The movie, Patch Adams, is shamelessly manipulative.  It trots out not
just one, but a whole hospital full of sick kids and adults to elicit
sympathy and tears from the audience, while Robin Williams' antic
schtick counterbalances it with laughter.  The ploy partially works:
the film is slightly moving, and slightly amusing.  But it might have
been more so it the manipulation weren't so blatant as to be
distracting.  By the time the film reaches its final "clown salute",
you're half-ready to strangle Robin Williams just to wrap it up!
The role of Patch Adams seems custom tailored for Robin Williams.  First
of all, he's given several moments for "improv" comedy (most of which
are too awkwardly staged to be more than mildly amusing).  Then, the
role has some dramatic heft, as Patch Adams is coping with his own
depression (as well as the depression of others).  Plus, the role is
brimming with plenty of touchy-feely "warm-and-fuzzies" (which Williams
has lately specialized in delivering).  And for the most part, Williams
plays it well.  However, "Patch Adams" is never fully realized as a
character... it's always Robin Williams playing a doctor.  He never
disappears into the role.
The supporting cast is colorful, and mostly enjoyable to watch. The
thorn in the works is Bob Gunton, whose Dean Walcott is so irrationally
mean and dour that he seems like a movie device, rather than a real
person.
All of this is not to say Patch Adams is a bad film.  It is merely one
that not only wears its heart on its sleeve, but has a prominent
exoskeleton too.  If you can overlook the obvious machinery churning
away to produce the next emotion filled "moment", the film can be
moving.  It just requires a lot of concentration to ignore all of that
grinding machinery.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Mac VerStandig
Kid yourself not, Patch Adams is an awful comedy. The jokes are rare, 
and often are overpowered by the circumstances surrounding them. 
Fortunately, though, despite Universal's advertising campaign, Patch 
Adams is far from a comedy, and most certainly a drama. And one of the 
best films of the year at that. Through a combination of a strong story, 
brilliant acting, and overall power, Patch Adams is one of the best all 
around films of the decade.
Hunter "Patch" Adams is a suicidal mental patient in the beginning of 
the film. Early scenes show him as what appears to be the one sane 
person in a crowd of insanity. Much resembling the 1975 film, One Flew 
Over The Cuckoo's Nest, this part of the film is remarkably powerful and 
stunningly effective. But the similarities between the two films are few 
enough that Nicholson's role seems to be missing, and just the scenario 
seems familiar.
Soon Patch leaves this institution, and begins a new life with a new 
goal. His objective is to become a doctor and help people. So it is that 
we now move to medical school, were the rest of the film is to take 
place. Patch is a new student who is clearly older than the rest of the 
crowd. He has a "prick" for a roommate, and is immediately thrown into 
classes that offers principles he disagrees with. He becomes a rebel 
constantly fighting for humanity, and is perceived to be far from a hero 
in doing so.
The rest of the film tracks these adventures of the medical student that 
dares. Patch encounters everyone from a love interest to a pancreatic 
cancer patient to a friend that seems to be little more than the 
stereotypical medical student. The story is clearly the force behind 
this incredible film. Based on the autobiographic book, Gesundheit! : 
Bringing Good Health to You, the Medical System, and Society Through 
Physician Service, Complementary Therapies, Humor, and Joy by Hunter 
Doherty Adams, the films goes on to explore many darker and harsher 
realities. This is far from a hero-always-does-well type story, and no 
part of this incredible film seems to be too much like Hollywood, always 
maintaining a real world aspect to it.
Robin William is OscarAE worthy as Patch Adams. He gives what is most =
certainly the best performance of the year by anyone. Despite much 
resemblance to his previous film, Awakenings, he has created a new and 
original character here. He also seems to have proven once again that 
his talent reaches so far from comedy alone, that he truly can do 
anything. But the talent doesn't stop there. Hollywood newcomer Philip 
Seymour Hoffman (Bullworth, Happiness) and Monica Potter also give award 
worthy performances as the roommate and love interest respectively.
Director Tom Shadyac has truly created a film that is an all around 
masterpiece. Parts are visually stunning, others are tragically 
dramatic, and some just a pleasure to watch, but none are anything less 
than extraordinary. Although it is Williams' performance that will be 
remembered, this film goes so far beyond one man's talents, not matter 
how perfect that man.
To not see Patch Adams would be to deny yourself one of the great 
privileges of the film industry. It is an incredible achievement worthy 
of the highest praise possible. So, do yourself a favor and don't miss 
this one, it's worth every penny of the $7.50.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
What an offensive and repellent movie this is.  "Patch Adams" has garnered
praise from audiences everywhere, but that only underscores the idea that no
one ever went broke underestimating the taste of the American public.
Drawn to some extent from a true story, it tells us about a fellow named,
yes, Patch Adams (Robin Williams), who checks into a mental hospital as the
movie starts.  He's suicidal, but he quickly finds that the patients are more
help to him than the doctors are.  A more cynical, knowing movie would have
addressed this by making Patch think, gee, maybe there are people worse off
than me, but instead we're subjected to the dishonest fiction that in the
asylum, it's the doctors who are really the sick ones.
Patch enrolls in medical school and is given the hardline about medicine by
Dean Walcott (Bob Gunton): "We are going to take the humanity out of you and
make you into something BETTER," he intones ominously.        Anyone who has seen
more than two movies in their lifetime will instantly realize that the
Walcott character is being set up for us as a strawman, and that this film is
a stacked deck.
Patch fights back against the "impersonality" of medicine by trying to be
every patient's best friend, a Holy Fool to the invalids.  The only problem
is that he does this by being an unholy pain in the ass.  He puts bedpans on
his feet and tapdances; he cuts off the ends of enema bulbs and sticks them
on his nose; he straps himself to a motorized bed and feigns being thrown
around on it. It's not that any of this stuff is unfunny, but that it's
wrongheaded.  Any doctor started jollying me up like this, I'd phone my HMO.
I said the movie was a stacked deck, and there isn't a scene that doesn't go
towards reinforcing that.  Adams is the free-spirited rebel, the
nonconformist, and everyone who stands in his way is just a stuffed-shirt
with no blood in their veins.  This is neither true nor convincing.  If the
movie had an ounce of honesty, it would show that people who assume the role
of the rebel or nonconformist do not often do it out of altruism or
benevolence, but out of immaturity or the need for attention.  Break a
window, and poof! you're a rebel.
The film's gears are loud and persistent.  Patch has (no!) a Love Interest
(Monica Potter), who serves no purpose in the story except to die at the worst
possible time and throw Patch into a (manufactured) pit of despair from which
he must climb out.  And once he does climb out, there's a giant piece of
speechmaking for him at the end of the movie, where Patch cries out against
modern medicine's cold heart, etc., etc.
This I could have tolerated, but there is one additional piece of shameless
manipulation that left me speechless.  On cue, the doors open, and in come a
whole slew of sick children, chemotherapy patients that Patch gave enema-ball
noses to earlier.  The scene is horribly false in so many ways that I can
barely count them.  One, if those children are as ill as we have been led to
believe, what are they doing out of bed?  And two, isn't this a blatant
ripoff of the equally bogus scene in the equally bogus "Dead Poets Society"
(also a Robin Williams vehicle) where all those kids stand on their desks in
"protest"?
It's one thing to be sentimental, but it's another thing entirely to use
sentimentality in the service of a foolish, exploitive story.  "Patch Adams"
is not a three-hanky movie -- it's a subsidy plan for a Kleenex factory.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Scott Renshaw
PATCH ADAMS
(Universal)
Starring:  Robin Williams, Monica Potter, Daniel London, Philip Seymour
Hoffman, Bob Gunton.
Screenplay:  Steve Oedekerk, based on the book "Gesundheit!" by Hunter
Doherty Adams and Maureen Mylander.
Producers:  Barry Kemp, Mike Farrell, Marvin Minoff and Charles Newirth.
Director:  Tom Shadyac.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     We've seen this Robin Williams before, though not much recently.  We
saw him in GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM as the disc jockey whose unconventional
approach to military broadcasting endears him to grunts while irritating
The Establishment; we saw him in DEAD POETS SOCIETY as the teacher whose
unconventional approach to literature endears him to students while
irritating The Establishment.  This is Robin Williams the crowd-pleasing
riff-meister, playing the comedy-drama character arc in which he is
temporarily sobered by tragedy but eventually emerges triumphant in the
lives he has touched with humor.
     This is the Robin Williams -- the stand-up comic with the heart of
gold -- that we see in PATCH ADAMS, the fact-based story of a medical
student whose unconventional approach to patient care endears him to
patients while irritating The Establishment.  Unfortunately, we've never
seen this character so compromised by such an aggressively feel-good film.
It opens in 1969, where Hunter "Patch" Adams is a voluntary inmate in a
mental hospital.  His experience with the patients there energizes him
with a desire to heal, leading to his enrollment two years later in
medical school.  There he becomes a top student, but angers a conservative
dean (Bob Gunton) by testing his theory that laughter is the best medicine
on actual hospital patients.  While repeatedly butting heads with
administrators, Patch and two classmates (Monica Potter and Daniel London)
commit themselves to creating a place where they can treat patients not
just with prescriptions, but with compassion, personal contact and big red
clown noses.
     The first half of PATCH ADAMS certainly belongs to Williams the
Clown, given free rein to do his stuff; not coincidentally, it's also the
most entertaining half.  He performs and pratfalls for a juvenile oncology
ward, grants the wishes of the ailing and elderly, and breaks through the
anger of a surly terminally ill man (ubiquitous commercial voice Peter 
Coyote).  His rebel with the mile-a-minute mind delivers quite a few
laughs through an hour of PATCH ADAMS, but then again, he has to.  It's so
obvious where this narrative is headed from the moment he enters medical
school, Williams offers the only spark of invention.  Even when contending
with the hammering pathos of grinning, hairless children, he still has the
ability to disarm an audience with a joke.
     Those grinning, hairless children do bode ill for the second half,
when PATCH ADAMS gets serious on us.  It's not just that screenwriter
Steve Oedekerk and director Tom Shadyac (who teamed up on Eddie Murphy's
THE NUTTY PROFESSOR) play to the most cliched devices of emotional
manipulation, like a tearful speech over a grave and a pedantic speech in
a courtroom setting.  What's worse is that they don't understand when 
_not_ to resort to emotional manipulation.  There is a particularly
distasteful moment in PATCH ADAMS when a character reveals that she is a
survivor of childhood sexual abuse.  Instead of allowing the scene any
sort of sensitivity or dignity, they turn it into a romantic interlude,
complete with Marc Shaiman's obtrusive, syrupy underscore (Shaiman's work
should be declared a health risk for diabetics).  PATCH ADAMS not only
dares you not to be uplifted, it jams a forklift under your seat and
slowly grinds you into the ceiling of the theater.
     I know plenty of viewers will be amused enough by Williams' antics to
consider PATCH ADAMS worthwhile.  I know plenty of viewers will be
applauding Patch sticking it to Big Medicine as the end credits roll.
PATCH ADAMS is a calculated, carefully constructed Response Machine,
unencumbered by complexities like making the traditional doctors anything
more than ogres.  True story or no, this is a vehicle for Robin Williams
as we've known him best and loved him most.  He's the non-conformist ready
to quip you into submission...except that he appears all-too-willing to
conform to formulaic roles in formulaic films.  Doctor, order this film up
an IV of subtlety, stat.

Author
Ryan Davis
        The scene at the end of 1989's `Dead Poets Society,' when Robin
Williams' English students stand up on their desk and say, `Captain, My
Captain,' gets me every time. Unfortunately, the court room scene near the end
of Robin's newest film, `Patch Adams,' doesn't have anywhere near the same
impact.
        From the surface `Patch Adams' looks very promising. It's a story
about a not so young man, Patch Adams (Robin Williams), who finds meaning in
his life through helping sick people. When the film opens, we find Patch,
depressed and suicidal, checking himself into a mental hospital. In a few
scenes, strongly reminiscent of `One Flew over the Cuckoo's Nest,' he ends up
helping the patients through their problems; and it's here that he finds how
much he loves working with people. So he checks himself out of the hospital,
and heads straight to medical school.
        Right from the start, Patch uses comedy to help make the patient more
comfortable. He continuously breaks medical tradition and makes the Dean of
the school angry. Shortly after joining medical school, he meets and falls in
love with Carin (Monica Potter). They, along with Patch's dork friend, Truman
(Daniel London), start a medical clinic for uninsured people. Once the Dean
catches wind of the clinic, he tells Patch he can't graduate and kicks him
out of school. Patch, like what any true American would do, takes the school
to court. It's here where the not so climatic court room battle takes place,
over whether or not Patch can become a real doctor.
        I have never seen a movie with some potential just completely blow
it. It seems more like a series of short sketches, rather than a full-length
movie. Considering it runs almost two hours, much too long for such a light
film, it could have flowed much smoother. Not to mention the fact of how
serious the film takes itself, and manages to cover all the cliches of bad
melodrama. Robin Williams saves the film from being abysmal with several
comic scenes that elevate the movie to entertaining and worthwhile levels. 
But those moments are rare and in the end `Patch Adams' is barely average.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Tom Shadyac
Cast: Robin Williams, Monica Potters, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Bob
Gunton, Daniel London, Peter Coyote
Screenplay: Steve Oedekerk
Producers: Mike Farrell, Barry Kemp, Marvin Minoff, Charles Newirth
Runtime: 115 min.
US Distribution: Universal
Rated PG-13: strong language, crude humor
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
There is a scene in Patch Adams in which Patch is in the center of a
courtroom, surrounded by people who are giving him a lively standing
ovation because of his strong-worded attack on a group of stoic doctors.
When I noticed that the audience with whom I saw this film was
reacting the same way, I realized that I was going to have a hard time
finding someone who agrees with me about the quality of the picture.
You see, Patch Adams revolted me beyond all boundaries. I hated this
movie for every second that I sat watching it, and I actively hate it
now, days later, with the simpering, superficial, nauseatingly
sentimental images forever plaguing my memories. I hate every element
of the film, beginning with Tom Shadyac's shameless direction, and all
the way up to the misguided and mishandled themes that the screenplay
wants so desperately to convey. The badness of Patch Adams is
stupefying. It's confounding. I can't believe a film can be this bad.
And yet, it's based on a real man who probably has a good point to
make.  In the film, Patch is played by the undefeatable and
indefatigable Robin Williams, in a performance of such insulting pathos
and sledgehammer sympathy that I wonder now if he is even human.  In the
beginning of the film, Patch commits himself to a mental institution
because he doesn't want to kill himself.  While there, he notices that
the doctors don't care about the patients, and that the best way to get
through to the patients is to treat them like human beings.
So, Patch goes on a crusade to be a great doctor who actually talks to
his patients.  He goes to medical school, where he meets Truman (Daniel
London) and convinces him that it's good to help people.  He also meets
Carin Fischer (Monica Potters), the anti-male med student who just wants
to go through the motions and be a successful doctor.  Naturally, the
dean of the medical school (Bob Gunton) hates Patch, and wants to thwart
his plans, even though Patch gets the highest scores on all of his
exams.  So Patch decides that he's going to build a free clinic in the
middle of nowhere to help people with any problem they may have.
And that, my friends, is the synopsis for what is easily the most
abhorrent picture of 1998.  On a superficial level, the film is not
particularly bad:  I wouldn't say the cinematography bothered me, and
most of the performances seem to be exactly what Shadyac was aiming for
(I actually liked Potter's performance, even if she is wasted).  But the
film fails fundamentally in execution.  Every scene swells with grand,
"emotional" music, played at maximum volume just to get us all to cry
real hard.  Take, for instance, the first scene, which shows Patch
sitting on a bus.  We don't know Patch yet, but there's sad music, and
it's supposed to make us really sad that he's sad.  Later on, Patch
makes a lot of progress:  he helps a dying patient (Peter Coyote) to
enjoy the last days of his life, and the music as Patch is pushing the
patient recklessly through the halls of the hospital is very lively. 
And when that patient finally dies (spoiler alert!), the music is very
very sad.
But the problem with all of this is that the music should not be the
center of the emotions.  Real drama is character-based.  You grow to
like someone, and then something bad happens, and you feel it.  We don't
ever grow to know the dying patient; he's simply a vehicle for Patch's
greatness.  Real drama doesn't seem forced, or present just to make the
audience cry.  That's why Patch Adams is not real drama.  It goes for
every cheap tear imaginable, wringing tired and overbearing
sentimentality out of every scene.  Even scenes that have very little
impact on the overall film are drowning in Marc Shaiman's sickening
musical score.
Sentimentality like this is indeed bad.  But it's not as bad as
half-baked, simplistic themes.  You see, Patch is a really great
student.  He aces his tests without studying, and does it so effectively
that people think he's cheating.  But Patch doesn't think that
memorizing facts is the way to become a good doctor.  "Why don't we see
patients until the third year?" he bursts out every three seconds. 
Well, Patch, that might have something to do with the fact that you need
to LEARN SOMETHING before you go treating patients.  Not everyone has
the capability of memorizing facts with no effort.  Most of us have to
study.  And a doctor who really wants to help, but doesn't know a toe
from a finger, probably won't be too successful in preventing death.
Oh wait, I almost forgot:  the point of doctors is not just to "prevent
death," but to "improve the quality of life!"  Yes!  That is true!  And
you can not do that without studying.  You can not do that without going
to medical school.  What Patch never seemed to understand was the
possibility that maybe, just maybe, it is a good idea to study first and
talk to patients later.  Follow the rules?  Bah!  Who needs the rules! 
Only uptight doctors follow the rules.  The real saviors are the ones
running around the hospitals with big red spheres on their faces and
sporting baggy yellow pants.  
And then there's the free clinic issue, which I find shockingly,
frighteningly idealistic.  A free clinic.  In the middle of the forest. 
Where patients can be taken to be helped.  For free.  How will patients
be transported to the free clinic?  Will it have an emergency room?  Or
is it just for mental patients?  And who, may I ask, will pay for it? 
The film does give some token attempts to question Patch's motives (I
think another character asks him how he's going to pay for it, in
addition to a little bit of meaningless blather about HMOs and medical
insurance), but they certainly don't explore or challenge Patch's ideas
to any meaningful extent.
Reader, please understand this:  I am not making any kind of judgment
on the real Patch Adams.  I know nothing about him.  If his beliefs
mirror those of this film character, then I might like to have an
intelligent discussion with him about them.  But regardless of what the
real Patch Adams believes, the themes put forth in this film are
simplistic and phony.  And in the last scene, the big, obligatory
courtroom scene that forced my lunch halfway up my esophagus, Patch does
a lot of shouting.  Actually, Robin Williams does a lot of shouting.  He
shouts a lot about helping people, and a lot of people cry because they
are moved by his words.  I won't tell you that you can't be moved by his
words, because I, too, was moved by his words.  I was moved in such a
profoundly negative way that I was reminded of how cheap and phony a
cinematic experience can be.  Patch Adams is the cheapest of them all.

Author
Christopher Null
Ironically, what I was most excited about seeing in PATCH ADAMS is what
eventually left me feeling cheated by it in the end.  After seeing the
trailers, I knew I was going to get Robin Williams playing that lovably
sensitive, extremely funny man, that shows people there's more to life. 
You know, the guy from DEAD POETS SOCIETY and GOOD WILL HUNTING.  I love
that guy; probably because he had truly inspired me before.  And things
were going so well for the first two-thirds of this movie too.  Until it
was over and I thought to myself, "Wait, I think I've seen this movie
before."
In the end, my impression of PATCH ADAMS is that is has some really
funny scenes, and you can't help but fall in love with the guy when he's
doing all of these great things, a lot of which you have probably seen
in the trailers.  And he has a lot to teach everyone he comes into
contact with in the film.  So throughout I'm thinking, "What a great
guy; I wish I was more like him."  Which is always a good set-up.  But
it never follows through.  The dramatic conclusion falls flat, and based
on a true story or not, the plot points are a bit cliched.  PATCH ADAMS
is a comedy, but more appropriately it would be classified as an
inspirational film.  And the hallmark of the inspirational film is that
climactic scene at the end where the inspirational character takes a
stand and is met by stiff consequences, but ultimately we realize that
he made a difference.  You see it in DEAD POETS SOCIETY in the "Oh
Captain, my captain" scene.  In PATCH ADAMS though, it never comes. 
Though Patch does take an emotional stand at the end in a scene that
tries to steal the emotion of a film like DEAD POETS SOCIETY, I don't
know that we're convinced that he truly made a difference.  He is a
great guy, yes, but maybe not great enough.
Director: Tom Shadyac
Producer: Barry Kemp, Mike Farrell, Marvin Minoff, Charles Newirth
Writer: Steve Oedekerk
Starring: Robin Williams, Monica Potter, Daniel London
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - Writer and Script Consultant
Check out The Movie Emporium's new design at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
"It is our mission to ruthlessly train the humanity out of you and make
you something better," Dean Walcott (Bob Gunton) lectures his new
medical students.  "We're going to make doctors out of you."  To those
of you who believe that a medical school dean would actually brag at
orientation that his school's goal is to train the humanity out of its
students, this movie should be dedicated.
Although based on a true story, as the movie reminds us, the preachy and
overlong film stretches credulity at every turn.  Robin Williams, at his
worst as Hunter "Patch" Adams, plays a man who late in life decides to
go to medical school so he can "connect" with people.  Spending his time
making jokes in order to help his desperately sick patients, he never
studies yet manages to make almost the best grades in the entire class.
As directed by Tom Shadyac and written by Steve Oedekerk, who worked
together on the recent remake of THE NUTTY PROFESSOR, the movie should
come complete with two warnings.  First, the FDA should serve notice to
the audience.  Although the agency knows that the ingestion of large
quantities of artificial sweeteners can kill lab rats, the effect on
audiences of such a sickeningly sweet script have not been tested.
Second, parents should be on notice that the film, quite unlike its
happy trailers, is full of death and dying.  We have patients shown in
the final spasms of death, dying before our eyes.  The realism is more
than one might expect from the film's marketing and its PG-13 rating.
Parents, as they did in the foul-mouthed THE NUTTY PROFESSOR by the same
team, may find some of the humor and language questionable for preteens.
Jokes about masturbation and gynecologist's stirrups are just a few of
the movie's questionable inclusions that may surprise parents expecting
lighter fare.
Patch is a philosopher who constantly treats us to his schmaltzy
theories.  The syrupy script feeds him lines that sound more like
readings than conversations.  ("If we want to be a doctor, we must treat
the patient as well as the disease.") The nefarious dean gets the worst
of the cliched lines.  ("Patients don't need to be entertained!
Patients don't need a friend!  They need a doctor!")
The movie, heavy on messages, has as a basic theme that it isn't the
drugs and the operations that will save your life.  What you need is a
feel-good doctor.  And if he doesn't cure you, at least you'll die a
little bit happier.
Putting bedpans on his head and feet, Patch dances around the room to
cheer up a group of desperately ill children.  These bald,
cancer-stricken kids are genuine and cute, the only such characters in
the story.
The movie lets Robin cut up for no reason other than getting some cheap
laughs.  He impersonates a beef producer at a convention.  At the
podium, he shouts "Eat cow!" to the cheering audience of conventioneers.
What -- you may ask -- is this scene doing in this movie?
Robin Williams is a comedic genius but one who is desperate need of a
stronger-willed agent, an agent who will insist Williams avoid films
like PATCH ADAMS and FATHER'S DAY.
The manipulative story ends in a tearjerker followed by the canonical,
big confrontation scene in which Patch takes on the medical
establishment.  Going up against a large board of old fogies who look
like they are conducting the Spanish Inquisition, Patch lectures them
pedantically on the precise meaning of the word "doctor."  Want to place
any bets on the winner?
Movies like PATCH ADAMS need aids to help you through it.  When you have
trouble falling asleep, you count sheep.  In order to stay awake in
PATCH ADAMS, try to count the number of outlandish shirts Patch wears.
It almost seems that he manages to wear more shirts than there are
scenes in the movie.  There may be other survival tricks, but,
hopefully, this one will suffice.
PATCH ADAMS runs too long at 1:55.  It is rated PG-13 for frightening
scenes of death and dying, profanity and crude humor and would be
acceptable for kids over 12.  (We took two 9 year olds expecting a film
more like the trailer.)
My son Jeffrey, age 9, was bored and upset by the film, giving it only *
˝.  He liked some of the humor such as the invisible squirrels' scene.
He didn't like the "bad words" and complained that the movie was way too
sad.  His friend Alan, age 9, liked the way the film was "funny and
disgusting" but thought it was too sad.  He generously gave it ***.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Redman
Poster boy for co-dependency needs patching
Mediocrity is a pox on civilization. In our heavily consumer oriented society,
there is an enormous demand to churn out "stuff." What would happen to our
economy if we didn't feel the need to have more things? To make us buy more,
businesses need to produce a ton of product. The sheer volume of items
necessitates that most of them are of dubious quality.
The film industry is like any other. In order for studios to survive, they
have to make money. The prevailing attitude is that more films equal more
profit. 
Some movies obviously exist only to put wares on the screen and to do that,
less talented people are used. There aren't enough great directors and actors
to create the number of films necessary. For some reason, it's never crossed
anyone's mind that the real equation is quality films = more profit.
Often, mediocre films are more of a pain for the audience than the horrendous
ones. At you can have a good time making fun of bad movies.
I'm not suggesting that "Patch Adams" was tossed out just to rake in the
bucks. My guess is that someone was asleep at the wheel. It features an
accomplished actor and a potentially engrossing story, but it's as dull as
could be.
Hunter "Patch" Adams' (Robin Williams) desire to become a doctor has an
unusual genesis. Checking himself into a mental institute after a suicide
attempt, he discovers that he can help the other patients by clowning around. 
Patch could be a poster boy for co-dependency. He explains that he likes
devoting himself to others because then he doesn't focus on his own problems.
He decides that he wants to be a physician, leaves the place and a couple of
years later enrolls in the Medical College of Virginia.
As a med student, Patch's antics at the school's hospital catch the attention
of his soon to be arch-enemy, straight-laced Dean Walcott (Bob Gunton). The
dean is so opposed to the goofiness that he wants Patch kicked out of school
although he's one of the top students. He writes in Patch's academic file that
he shows "excessive happiness."
I walked into the film knowing little about its history and wondered about its
odd mechanical pacing. There also seemed to be no reason that it is set in the
early seventies. Then it struck me. It must be based on a true story. The
movie is an adaptation of a book by Hunter Adams who founded the Gesundheit
Institute, a free clinic.
Robin Williams is an amazing actor. While he is adept at dramatic roles, his
forte is over-the-top free spirits. That's what makes his failure here so
remarkable. Patch is exactly the character he should be best at, yet even the
scene where he and another mental patient are battling fierce imaginary
squirrels falls flat. Something holds him back.
Most of the rest of the cast is two-dimensional. For a film that champions
seeing patients as human beings, it's curious that the ones here are cardboard
characters. Peter Coyote as a man dying of cancer is refreshing because he
seems like a real person. Unfortunately he's in the film for only about two minutes.
The audience is blatantly lead by a ring in its nose from scene to scene.
We're not left to our own emotional decisions: we're hit over the head with
them. Shaved-headed children with cancer, an elderly woman whom Patch makes
laugh, a beautiful woman  who can't love because of her abusive history. When
a group of students fix up an old house to use as a clinic in the Andy Hardy
"Hey, let's put on a play! We can use the barn and my mom can make the
curtains!" mode, they laugh and roll around while painting each other.
There might as well be giant signs flashing: "Feel good now!" "Feel bad now!"
"Patch" is a good title for the film. It is a patchwork of every manipulative
scene you can think of. The full-of-life student fights stodgy establishment
types. There's a touching death. Then there's another. The film doesn't trust
us to get it the first time. The dean tries to kick Patch out and later he
tries again.
Worst of all is the final courtroom bit. Scary-looking old men sit in judgment
of a man who only wants to help people. The room is packed with Patch's
supporters. Williams makes a supposedly impassioned speech about the humanity
of all. It has as much emotion as his earlier statement "humans are the only
animal that kills members of its own species" contains truth.
Most of the blame must be placed with the director Tom Shadyac and
screenwriter Steve Oedekerk. Shadyac also directed the first "Ace Ventura"
movie. Oedekerk directed the second one. Need I say more?
The real Adams is to be admired for his devotion to treating patients as
people rather than diseases. The film has a number of worthy messages about
the state of the modern medical business with HMOs and managed care. The
"doctors are not gods" theme will resonate with a number of people, but it's
so poorly produced that no one will care.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years. After being
inundated with Y2K information, he thinks that Kevin Costner's "The Postman"
might have found a bigger audience had it been released late this year.
Redman@indepen.com will reach him...probably.)
[This appeared in the 1/8/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
