Title
Review for Day of the Woman (1978)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
It was one thing to have films like this playing in cinemas back in the late 
70s, but another to have them on hand for home viewing in the years soon to 
follow.  I SPIT ON YOUR GRAVE became one of the 'video nasties' that many 
self-appointed watchdog organizations condemned without really having being 
aware of its previous existence as a 'cinema nasty'.  It's unpleasant 
viewing, but not unwatchable.  Plotwise, it's as basic as you can get: a 
magazine writer (Camille Keaton) rents a house in the woods so that she may 
work on a novel.  She attracts the attention of a group of men who brutally 
assault her.  After recovering, she seeks them out for revenge.  It's the 
primal nature of the film that repels many viewers (it was banned in several 
countries), the inference being that a story this simple cannot have any 
redeeming subtext.  As if to flout this point, the rape sequence that caused 
most of the controversy is protracted unflinchingly.  It isn't helped by the 
murkiness of director Meir Zarchi's motives - is this scene out-and-out 
exploitation or is he trying to present the nature of rape in all its 
ugliness?  At least he can't be accused of making it arousing, exciting or 
titillating.  Keaton's attackers are a reprehensible bunch and you won't 
care what happens to them, but perversely the film-maker's dehumanizing of 
the men is just as bad as their dehumanizing of Keaton.   Two wrongs don't 
make a right, whether in a story a basic as this or as fluffed up as 1998's 
courtroom drama A TIME TO KILL.
I'm not suggesting that Zarchi included themes in his film so that it could 
be viewed on levels other than its obvious exploitation, but some strands do 
become noticeable.  It's a straightforward enough ploy to necessitate a 
character's isolation by making her a novelist, but it's interesting that 
the first thing we see Keaton do after recovering from her ordeal is write 
(anybody else would have contacted the police).  She creates her own 
scenario of revenge, playacting with the men and turning their own egos and 
machismo against them, while also using weapons and tools unwittingly 
supplied to her by the men themselves - the kind of thing that would appeal 
to any scenarist's inclinations of poetic justice.  She also arranges 
confrontations to take place in or near water, as if her writing 
sensibilities require any cleansing on her part to be represented 
symbolically.  It would be easier to give these notions more credence if 
Keaton didn't keep stripping off her clothes during these scenes.  In some 
ways the use of her body as a lure is in line with her sense of irony but it 
also comes across as just another cheap thrill from the director.  What 
finally deflates any serious intent of the film is the way that Keaton's 
vengeance falls apart at the conclusion: without a plan she simply becomes 
randomly murderous.  Is this any improvement on calculatingly murderous?  
That in itself is an idea worth developing, but you won't find any answers 
in this picture: the film's title change from the original DAY OF THE WOMAN 
pretty much established where the film-makers were standing on this one.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Meir Zarchi.
Cast: Camille Keaton, Eron Tambor, Richard Pace, Anthony Nichols, Gunter 
Kleemann.
1978 - 100 minutes.
Not Rated (equivalent of an NC-17 rating for explicit sex, nudity, 
violence, gore, and profanity).
Suggested Retail Price: $29.99
Widescreen format; Aspect Ratio 1.85:1
Languages: English
Digitally transferred and personally supervised by Meir Zarchi
Meir Zarchi's infamous 1978 film, "I Spit on Your Grave," is inarguably 
one of the most controversial films ever filmed. At the time of its 
release, the film was critically bombasted, audiences were largely 
outraged, and it was banned entirely from the UK and Germany. What 
mostly got under people's skin about the picture, I think, was in its 
extremely graphic and brutal depiction of a woman being raped. Although 
I would also feel uncomfortable watching the movie in a theatre with 
others, that is simply human nature, since what occurs here is very 
difficult to watch due to its subject matter. 
With that out of the way, I first rented "I Spit on Your Grave" about 
three years ago to see what all the commotion was about, expecting the 
worst. Surprisingly enough, however, I actually did like the film. Sure, 
it's not for everybody and certainly deserved its original X rating. 
It's not a "fun" or "entertaining" film in any regard. But what "I Spit 
on Your Grave" is is a fairly thoughtful and realistic examination of a 
person being tortured by another, and then what happens to the victim 
afterwards, if they survive. To single one certain critic out, Roger 
Ebert rated the film "Zero Stars" at the time of its release, and like 
everyone, was in a frenzy over what takes place during the 100-minute 
running-time. What I don't understand is how, with such harsh feelings, 
he could give 1972's "The Last House on the Left," which has more or 
less the same plot, a * * * 1/2 rating! Well, I have seen that film as 
well, and "I Spit on Your Grave" is infinitely better. In contrast, 
"LHOTL" which, aside from being loosely based on Ingmar Bergman's "The 
Virgin Spring," is far more exploitative and includes a fairly 
ridiculous plot gimmick: that the rape offenders unknowingly spend the 
night at the victim's parents' house. I simply do not "get" Ebert's 
thinking when dealing with these two pictures, and how he could love the 
more cheap and manipulative one, and then criticize the other even 
though they are so startlingly similar in story.
"I Spit on Your Grave" has a fairly straightforward story. A young, 
attractive writer (Camille Keaton, Buster Keaton's niece!) leaves her 
home in Manhattan and travels upstate to stay in the country at an 
idyllic, remote cabin she has rented for the summer, in order to write 
her first novel. Everything is going perfectly for her until one day, 
while out on the lake in her boat, four men, all of which she had 
previously met while getting gas on her way there and incuding one who 
is retarded, force her into the woods and each of them, aside from the 
mentally handicapped one, rape her and beat her repeatedly, leaving her 
for dead in her cabin.What they don't expect is that she does not die, 
but in fact, slowly begins to recuperate from the ordeal. She certainly 
doesn't want the men to get away with what they did, and finally decides 
to take matters into her own hands.
"I Spit on Your Grave" could have easily fallen into the manipulation of 
"The Last House on the Left," but is more serious in its treatment. The 
main female character is an intelligent women who could easily go to the 
police about what happened, but what good would that do? The reasoning 
she comes up with is that even if they went to prison, they would 
eventually be released, free to do such a thing again to someone else. 
One of the major discrepancy that people have about "I Spit on Your 
Grave" is that it is a horror film, but it isn't; at least, not in the 
sense of a slasher film. Instead, it is a horror story about the human 
condition, and how far some people can actually go if they do not have 
any respect for other human life. There are no murders in the film 
either, until the climax, but it isn't in the same sense that Michael 
Myers or Freddy Krueger is a killer. On the contrary, the killer in "I 
Spit on Your Grave" ultimately turns out to also be the heroine, and she 
has a real reason for doing what she does. In a particularly shocking 
sequence, right before she goes through with her revenge, she pays a 
visit to the local church where she prays for forgiveness of what she is 
about to do. Now when exactly was the last time you saw that in a 
low-rent exploitation piece? I don't know about anyone else, but my 
answer is "never."
One of the aspects of the film that struck me the first time I viewed "I 
Spit on Your Grave" was how much it reminded me of an independent film. 
Sure, it is low-budget, but in its style, I found it to border on the 
artsy. One scene, for example, which lasts a couple minutes, is filmed 
entirely in a long shot, as the camera is trying to distance itself away 
from the hurtful thing that is happening on the screen. 
Another smart move on writer and director Meir Zarchi's part is that he 
does not paint the four men as outright monsters, and spends a lot of 
time with them. The mentally retarded character is actually touching in 
the way that, through a chain of events, he becomes the outcast of the 
group, and it also came as an unexpected twist to find later on that the 
leader of the group (Eron Tambor) is married and has two children, whom 
he loves. What these men do is vile, cruel, and unforgivable, but thanks 
to Zarchi, they were not in any way one-dimensional.
Since my first viewing, I have seen "I Spit on Your Grave" three more 
times and although I still find it to be a striking and courageous 
motion picture, it does have a few noticable problems. For one, we do 
not really get to know the heroine very much. After being raped and 
bruised and cut up, she gets well very fast...too fast, perhaps...and 
although she murders the men for revenge, she never was really able to 
come across as someone who has gone through the terrible ordeal, and has 
no real emotional attachment to what she does, aside from physically 
doing it. Maybe what Zarchi was attempting to do by choosing to go this 
route in the finale was to show that she had become numb inside from 
what had happened to her, and that she could very well be on the edge of 
a nervous breakdown. Still, I would have probably chosen to do that a 
little differently. Another problem is that the revenge conclusion 
requires the Tambor character to make some very stupid actions, only so 
he will, in return, fall victim to his victim This particular scene I am 
discussing, however, is one of the best in the film, although I do not 
want to give away what happens except to say that it is incredibly gory 
and won't easily be forgotten.
The DVD edition of "I Spit on Your Grave" is probably more suitable for 
fans of the picture only, since it doesn't offer any special features 
other than the cheesy theatrical trailer (is it just me or are all the 
trailers from '70s films unintentionally hilarious?). For those people 
who do like the picture, the DVD is very good on many accounts, and 
disappointing on others.
Starting with the good, the "new digital letterboxed transfer personally 
supervised by director Meir Zarchi" (as written on the back of the case) 
is beautiful and nearly flawless, increasing the impact of the images on 
the screen. The picture includes very little grain and highly emphasizes 
the impressive cinematography and camera work, particularly of the quiet 
country landscape. 
With such wonderful picture quality, it ulimately came as a letdown to 
discover that the sound on the DVD is fairly bad. In order to clearly 
hear the people talking, the volume had to be raised up to nearly its 
highest level because of the low sound transfer. This caused a 
considerable problem, then, during the rape and murder scenes when 
characters were screaming, since that sound erectified as if the overall 
sound quality had been normal, and so I had to quickly push down the 
volume. There is no excuse for the sound to come across so inadequately 
since on the video version I have watched, which has terrible picture 
quality, the sound is perfectly fine.
On the whole, I was fairly disappointed by the DVD of "I Spit on Your 
Grave." Although the picture quality was fabulous, and I'm glad I could 
see it in the way it was originally meant to be shown, the sound is 
underwhelming, to say the least. Since the film is so controversial, an 
audio commentary would have been an extra treat, as I would have loved 
to have heard Zarchi's opinion on everything that has occurred with his 
much-talked-about directing debut. In conclusion, the DVD of "I Spit on 
Your Grave" could have been improved, but the film itself, I think, is 
one of the most underrated motion pictures ever made. It most definately 
did not deserve the severe criticisms it got.
