Title
Review for Scary Movie 2 (2001)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Michael Dequina
_Scary_Movie_2_ (R) no stars (out of ****)
        "No mercy.  No shame.  No sequel."  If only those two groups of
brothers--Wayans and Weinstein--had heeded the last part of that tagline for the
original _Scary_Movie_.  But since that tiresome wallow in bodily fluids was the
shock blockbuster of last summer, here now is, indeed, the sequel--even though
the first film more than drained the well of teen slasher movies to lampoon.
        So what's left for _Scary_Movie 2_ make fun of?  That the first film's
primary target/model was _Scream_ and that this one's is Jan DeBont's justly
maligned remake of _The_Haunting_ says everything about _Scary_Movie_2_'s
creative bankruptcy.  The story--which simply has the characters from the first
film stay in a haunted house--is supposed to get its (for lack of a better term)
"inspiration" from thrillers of a supernatural bent such as _The_Haunting_,
_What_Lies_Beneath_, _Poltergeist_, and _The_Exorcist_.  But in this film more
than the last, director Keenen Ivory Wayans and the writing crew headed by stars
Shawn and Marlon Wayans depend on tangents based on non-genre films and other
pop culture items of the moment.  That wouldn't be a problem if the bits
actually paid off, but all the gags in the film either start well then sputter
at the end (e.g. the opening _Exorcist_-inspired sequence, which for all its
eventual shortcomings is still the most effective in the film; an overlong
takeoff on a Nike commercial) or are dead on arrival (a forced _Weakest_Link_
reference).
        But _Scary_Movie_2_ fails less because of its lack of laughs than its
lack of shocks.  _Scary_Movie_ was by no means a good film nor a particularly
hilarious one (though, admittedly, it had its moments); the only reason I can
come up with for its wild popularity was the startling and unexpected extremes
of its vulgarity.  For this sequel, audiences are fully expecting the gratuitous
semen jokes and cartoonish raunch, thus whatever novelty the crassness had the
first time around is severely diminished.
        Not diminished, however, is the appeal of returning lead Anna Faris. 
Her Cindy Campbell is now a stand-in for Lili Taylor's rather dour role in
_The_Haunting_, and as such Faris has considerably fewer chances to flash her
natural comedic instincts; nonetheless, she makes the most of what little is
given her.  Someone cast her in a real movie, please--not a slapdash, rushed
hack job like _Scary_Movie_2_.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Frankie Paiva
2001 - USA 
Director: Keenen Ivory Wayans 
Starring: Anna Faris, Christopher Masterson, Tim Curry, Marlon Wayans, Regina 
Hall, Shawn Wayans, Kathleen Robertson, James Woods, Chris Elliott, Tori 
Spelling, David Cross 
The original Scary Movie was released under the radar last year and astounded 
analysts and its studio, Dimension Films, with its high box office gross. The 
film spoofed classic horror films using `Scream' as an outline, with plenty 
of disgusting and raw scatological humor. Scary Movie placed number three on 
my worst five films of the year list for 2000, but since the film earned $157 
million domestically, and because life is unfair, a sequel was inevitable. 
The surprise is that it really isn't that bad. The sequel is far more clever 
than the first, this time adding political references and current events into 
the mix. There's a nice balance between Firestone tire and Nike TV ad jokes, 
and a clown being choked to death by a phallus jokes. The film is fun 
overkill. 
Anna Faris (who, in a bizarre side note, was born and raised in the small 
Seattle suburb of Edmonds, Washington where this author resides) reprises the 
role of Cindy Campbell. Her horny psychology professor (Tim Curry, who else?) 
stages some type of psychological experiment for her and all her friends from 
the original Scary Movie, who all happen to go to the same college. The 
experiment involves spending the weekend in a haunted mansion. Things, of 
course, go terribly and hilariously wrong. 
Not that the plot really matters. The film moves from one joke to another so 
quickly it's really a string of punch lines rather than a story. This is 
forgivable because the material is very funny... but there's a problem. 
If you haven't kept up on popular culture lately, you're likely to miss many 
of the jokes. A very clever spoof of Save the Last Dance flew by even the 
teenagers at my packed screening, as did a Rocky send-up. Other films are so 
cleverly woven into the plot that one viewing isn't nearly enough to spot 
them all. Less obvious jokes spoof films like The Game, The Amityville Horror 
, Urban Legend, and Hollow Man. All that and a character named Jamie Lee 
Curtisto. 
One of the biggest problems with Scary Movie was that it had to adhere so 
closely to the storyline of Scream. Scary Movie 2 is a combination of House 
on Haunted Hill and The Haunting, but even that's a loose structure. 
This gives the actors time to roam around, and the result is a more relaxed 
pace. Regina Hall gives a funny performance that goes against the premise 
that African-Americans always die first in horror movies. Christopher 
Masterson and Faris have good chemistry, but the film really belongs to Chris 
Elliott. As Hanson, the house's caretaker with a deformed, odd-looking left 
hand, and less than appealing facial features, he is completely wonderful and 
over-the-top. Tori Spelling is criminally underused. She gets to have wild 
sex with the invisible man, but not much else. I was waiting for a `90210' 
gag or her dad to pop out from somewhere. 
The biggest surprise of all may be that Scary Movie 2 seems tamer than the 
original. Oh sure there's abundant sex humor, but America has become less 
taboo about these issues since the original's release. Whether tamer or more 
outrageous, there's plenty of laughs here for a normal person to have a great 
time, and a Joe-Lieberman-person to start fuming. 
Read more reviews at www.moviepie.com 

Author
Bob Bloom
Scary Movie 2 (2001) 1 star out of 4. Starring Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Anna
Faris, Regina Hall, Chris Masterson, Kathleen Robertson, James Woods, Tim Curry,
Tori Spelling and Chris Elliott. Written by Shawn Wayans & Marlon Wayans &
Alyson Fouse & Greg Grabianski & Dave Polsky & Michael Anthony Snowden & Craig
Wayans. Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans. Rated R. 
 They should have stuck to the promise emblazoned on the original movie's
poster: "No sequel." 
 Scary Movie 2 is nowhere near as funny as its predecessor, and it is not
because the Wayans brothers, Shawn and Marlon doing the writing and Keenen Ivory
behind the camera, don't try. 
 What defeats them is the genre they have chosen to spoof. The first movie - an
outrageous, low-brow, savage satire of teen slasher flicks such as Scream and I
Know What You Did Last Summer - succeeded because of its take-no-prisoners
attitude toward a type of film that was in vogue, familiar and popular. 
 In Scary Movie 2, the filmmakers take on the haunted house-ghost story format
which, if you look at the grosses for such recent lame offerings as the
respective remakes of The Haunting and House on Haunted Hill, did not draw
audiences nor enter the cultural psyche as did the various teen slasher series.
 Scary Movie 2 does start off promising with a wonderful spoof of The Exorcist,
featuring James Wood in the Max Von Sydow role and Veronica Cartwright
lampooning Ellen Burstyn. Of course split pea soup is the punch line - an
overabundant amount, which offers the hope that the rest of the movie will be
just as tasteless and excessive. 
 But this pre-credit sequence has nothing at all to do with the main action,
which features the cast members from the original signing up to spend a weekend
at a creepy haunted mansion as part of a university class project. 
 Some of the jokes are as scatological and offensive as in the original, but
they lack that take-no-prisoners bite that raised Scary Movie to the heights of
burlesque. 
 Scary Movie 2 merely lurches from one lame sendup to another, offering weak
spoofs of that Nike shoe ad in which everyone does acrobatics with a basketball,
and the films What Lies Beneath and Hannibal (features that only faired
adequately at the box office), John Woo's Mission: Impossible 2 and Charlie's
Angels. 
 It is as if the Wayans and their team of writers - at least seven are credited
- just threw ideas in a blender and hoped they'd coalesce. They don't. 
 While the pace of the original left you breathless, the sequel moves with the
speed of an 18-wheeler carrying two tons of concrete up a steep mountain road.
You can almost hear the reels panting. 
 Scary Movie 2 tries very hard to live up to its original, but it falls very
short. It's a dissatisfying spectacle, a very weak sister of a very good movie.
The really scary aspect of this sequel is how disappointing it really is. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com. Other reviews by Bloom
can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom 

Author
Blake French
The original Scary Movie was no cinematic masterpiece, but Scary Movie 2
isn't even on that par.  Keenen Ivory Wayans directs this shapeless,
excruciating mess of a movie that delivers exactly what we expect, just
not in a funny way.  While I admire the risk it takes in pushing pushing
the envelope, I don't admire Scary Movie 2 as a whole.  Tasteless,
raunchy humor is expected -- but does anyone want revolting and
nauseating humor?  There's a fine line between funny and just plain
sick; this movie goes way beyond that line.
The original was imaginative with its send-up of teen slasher flicks. 
Although relentless in its humor, it contained a definite purpose, a
true central character, and motivation.  Not that I liked it, but it
offered a lot more than this sequel.  Here, setting replaces story, and
that leads to an assortment of problems.
Screwball humor works best when it is situation based.  Scary Movie
spoofs recent movies such as Hannibal, What Lies Beneath, The House on
Haunted Hill, Charlie's Angels, The Haunting, and many others. 
Unfortunately this movie rarely captures the attitude of a screwball
comedy.  It's a bitter festival of perversion; the sequences feel
distant, unrelated, and seldom do they advance the plot.  Well, if you
can call it a plot.  The first film loosely followed the structure of
Scream, but SM2 has nothing.  It just fires off a lot of rounds, but
they rarely hit their targets.
Why's that?  It took seven screenwriters to create Scary Movie 2, and
it's almost as if the only guidance given to each writer was that he be
locked in a room and forced to concoct his own gross-out situation in an
attempt to outdo the others.  The product of those efforts gives us a
few early laughs, notably a hoot of an opening scene, wherein James
Woods stars in a memorable parody of The Exorcist.  But after the title
sequence, everything plummets downhill.
Scary Movie 2 contains plenty of creative jokes that evolve from
sexuality, drug use, intestinal difficulties, a vulgar talking bird,
reproductive organs, homosexuality, race relations, bodily fluids... oh,
and once in a while there's a gag about a ghost.  Any semblance of this
being a "scary" movie is lost altogether.
Of course, I sigh in surrender, as nobody will see Scary Movie 2 for a
thought-provoking story, well-developed characters, or a solid
narrative.  In fact, they'll come for the exact opposite reason --
because it doesn't have those things it will offer a cheap laugh.  While
this is no critics' picture, I can find pleasure in slapstick and
screwball humor, and I treasure the creativity it takes to spoof serious
material.  The problem comes when there is absolutely no humor and no
creativity in the end product.  Now that's scary.
Director: Keenen Ivory Wayans
Producer: Eric L. Gold
Screenwriter: Alison Fouse, Greg Grabianski, Dave Polsky, Michael
Anthony Snowden, Craig Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Shawn Wayans
Stars: Anna Faris, Jon Abrahams, Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Tori
Spelling, Christopher Kennedy Masterson, Regina Hall, James Woods, Chris
Elliot, Natasha Lyonne, Tim Curry, David Cross, Keenen Ivory Wayans
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
      It must be said of Scary Movie 2 that it is a very fluid 
movie.  Pretty much every fluid that can emerge from the human body does 
emerge from the human body, in living color and copious, screen-filling 
quantities.  There is solid waste as well, and of course the indispensable 
gaseous emissions without which no contemporary American comedy worthy of 
the name would dream of being seen or heard.
In short, Scary Movie 2 has pretty much everything that its 
chart-busting antecedent Scary Movie had except an original idea.  It has 
the same cast, more or less, including those wacky eternal college kids 
Shawn Wayans (30), Marlon Wayans (29), and Tori Spelling (28), and 
including a lot of characters who were killed in the original.  It has the 
same pacing, the same quality of jokes, the same striving tastelessness.
2 opens in a place called Hell House with an Exorcist take-off, which 
offers one of the few mildly amusing moments in the picture: a group of 
middle-aged white people gathered around a piano singing a rap hit.  But 
before we leave Hell House we are treated to dueling vomit, and the sight 
of James Woods (in the role of the Exorcist) straining and performing at 
top volume on the toilet.  It could have been worse.  The role was 
originally intended for Marlon Brando.
We move from there to One Year Later , and pick things up with our 
heroine Cindy (Anna Faris) now in college.  Evil Professor Oldman (Tim 
Curry) and his wheelchair-bound sidekick Dwight (David Cross) have hatched 
a nefarious research project that involves getting the stupidest 
undergraduates on campus to spend the weekend at a haunted house, the same 
Hell House where the opening Exorcist stuff took place, now presided over 
by Hanson (Chris Elliot), a butler with a deformed hand and mind.  This 
serves as a vehicle for a rapid-fire burst of parodies of haunted house 
movies, but Wayans and his team of seven, count em, writers never heard of 
a joke that didn t involve bodily functions, so if you were looking for wit 
with your haunted house mystery spoof, rent the 1976 Neil Simon movie 
Murder by Death.
Much hilarity is wrung from Hanson's deformed hand, and from Dwight's 
wheelchair, and from Tori Spelling performing ghostly fellatio, and from a 
sexually aggressive talking parrot, and from the heroine using the black 
cat's kitty litter box.  A reasonable definition of what is funny might be 
something that makes you laugh, and at the showing I attended, which was 
also attended by a lot of small children, there was the occasional ripple 
of laughter.  The original Scary Movie was the largest-grossing R-rated 
movie in history, so there is undoubtedly an audience for this one 
too.  But if you are literate enough to be reading a newspaper, it probably 
isn't you.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Dimension Films
 Director: Keenen Ivory Wayans
 Writer:  Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Alison Fouse, Greg
Grabianski, Dave Polsky, Michael Anthony Snowden, Craig
Wayans
 Cast: Anna Faris, Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Tori
Spelling, Christopher Masterson, Kathleen Robertson, Regina
Hall, James Woods, Andy Richter
   Though "Scary Movie 2" opens on the Fourth of July, the
picture does not give off much in the way of satiric fireworks. 
With a script written by committee of seven, the film is more proof
that if two heads are better than one, se7en can kill a script better
than  David Fincher can show humankind's depravity.
   Given the studio's tagline, "The movie that dares you to come,"
can you expect the story to transcend the sophomoric? 
Essentially a series of skits that provide a few laughs, "Scary
Movie 2" parodies several films, mostly of the horror genre, its
principal good being that it makes even "What Lies Beneath" look
like something made by Hitchcock.  The Wayans brothers each
have a hand in getting flows of fluid from their characters from
every bodily orifice so that even the squeamish in the audience
cannot be blamed for wishing that blood--strangely absent from
this story--were to gush forth instead.
   Keenen Ivory Wayans, who returns from the helm of  the first
"Scary Movie," challenges his targeted teen audience to guess
which film is parodied in which scene, but it doesn't take a James
Agee to figure out when the energetic cast, helped quite a bit by
stunt people and the special effects technocrats, is spoofing "The
House on Haunted Hill," or "Poltergeist," "Charlie's Angels," 
"Mission Impossible 2," or "Hannibal."
   The one promising scene occurs at the very beginning, taking
place within Hell House like the remaining sequences but
appearing to be part of a different movie.  The accomplished
opener thrives mostly because of the presence of James Woods
in the role of Father McFeely, who together with Father Karris
(Andy Richter) has arrived to exorcise a fifteen-year-old--who has
shocked a group of party goers by demonstrating that she has
nothing in common with men plagued by benign prostatic
hypertrophy.  The party goes downhill during a puke contest,
topped by Mr. Woods in his most vulgar bathroom scene ever. 
>From then we're in the hands of a professor (Tim Curry) who has
maneuvered some coeds in his Psych. class to visit Hell House
for an experiment, promising an A to anyone who manages to
survive the course--a feat which is not at all guaranteed.
   Featuring the most obvious sexual and bathroom humor,
"Scary Movie 2" shows us what happens when a randy instructor
assembles a motley group of blockheads, challenged within Hell
House by the ghost of Kane--a now-deceased man who had
murdered his mistress and seeks to abduct young Cindy (Anna
Faris) to be with him forever.  Marlon Wayans once again
provides the bulk of the over-the-top raillery while Kathleen
Robertson contributes her well-equipped frame, Matthew
Friedman the voice of an obscene parrot, Chris Masterson his
nice-guy horniness and Chris Elliott his palsied hand. 
Wheelchair bound Dwight (David Cross) allows the cast to make
politically incorrect gags about the handicapped.  All in all, "Scary
Movie 2" is unamusing enough to make us appreciate the movies
it parodies.
Not Yet Rated.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Something about a bunch of kids going into a haunted house and playing 
out parodies of other horror and non-horror movies. Oh yeah, there's 
also something about a ghost possessing the mansion and shit, but trust 
me, you won't care much about the "plot" in this film...
CRITIQUE:
Parody movies either work or they don't and this one just doesn't work! 
The laughs aren't as pronounced this time around, the energy level, the 
gags and all of the characters just seem to be going through the motions 
here. It's like they were all in a hurry to finish the film or something 
(wink, wink). And the scariest part of it all? Check out the number of 
screenwriters it took to pen this puppy: seven! I say again, it took 
seven people to write 82-minutes worth of fart jokes, half-assed stunts 
and spoofs of films other than horror. Now I'm not exactly sure if each 
of the writers wrote their own parts separately or just tossed "funny 
sketch" ideas out there while smoking the chronic themselves, but the 
end result is a film that basically plays out like an extended skit on 
"Saturday Night Live". There are a couple of funny one-liners, but 
mostly just rehashed one-joke scenes, a lot of dead silence and lame 
gags. Add to that the very unoriginal title and movie poster and you 
gotta start asking yourself if anybody was even trying here (the film's 
website isn't even up yet!!! What the f***?!?). I do however have to 
give it up to James Woods, the man who opens up this movie with the 
funniest parody of them all (the EXORCIST take-off-- miss this and 
you've missed any reason to see the flick). I especially liked his 
one-liner as he walked in to see the possessed woman's head turning. 
Very funny!
Unfortunately, the film plummets straight down after that, with dumb 
parodies of many teen flicks that have nothing to do with horror such as 
SAVE THE LAST DANCE and DUDE, WHERE'S MY CAR, and other action movies 
like CHARLIE'S ANGELS and MISSION IMPOSSIBLE 2. Now help me figure this 
one out, will you? Isn't this supposed to be a parody film of HORROR 
MOVIES?!? (or maybe that's just the title of the film F-ing with my 
head). Well, I'm sorry to have to say this but the only horror in this 
film is its lame-ass script! The Wayans brothers should have known 
better than to look towards the Weinstein brothers (money) instead of 
the Zucker brothers (comedy) for this sequel. Unfortunately for us, all 
we're left with here is a skeleton of a film which might've been funny, 
had it been worked over a few more times, tightened up here and there, 
and been injected with more solid laughs. But as things stand now, there 
is no doubt in my mind that the obvious greed to capitalize on the 
success of last year's film has led everyone down this path, so screw 
them for not trying as hard (critically speaking, of course). You should 
all be ashamed of yourselves for not putting enough "real" effort into 
this chop-job and for not providing your fans with the ultimate of your 
talents. Pooh on you! (That's telling 'em, JoBlo! Sheesh)
BTW, I'm allotting one point alone to actress Kathleen Robertson, whose 
massive breasts and skanky g-string had me chompin' at the bit. You go, 
girl! Everyone else...stay!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Airplane (10/10) - Airplane II (10/10) - Galaxy Quest (8/10) - Hannibal 
(7/10) - The Haunting (3/10) - Mafia (5/10) - Naked Gun (8/10) - Scary 
Movie (8/10) - Top Secret (9/10)

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans. Screenplay by Shawn Wayans, Marlon
Wayans, Alyson Fouse, Greg Grabianski, Dave Polsky, Michael Anthony
Snowden, and Craig Wayans, based on characters created by Shawn Wayans,
Marlon Wayans, Buddy Johnson, Phil Beauman, Jason Friedberg, and Aaron
Seltzer. Starring Anna Faris, Marlon Wayans, Shawn Wayans. Running time:
100 minutes. Rated AA for sexual content and coarse language by the MFCB.
Reviewed on August 22nd, 2001.
Synopsis: An unscrupulous college professor (Tim Curry) cons several of 
his students -- many of them survivors (and otherwise) of the first "Scary 
Movie" -- into spending the night at "Hell House". Cindy (Faris) and 
friends have to contend with an angry ghost, a demonic cat, a disturbing 
caretaker, and cheezy parodies of everything from "Poltergeist" to "The 
Weakest Link"...
Review: "Scary Movie" may have been the climax of the gross-out comedy -- 
the last hilarious, disgusting hurrah of a genre which seems to have worn 
out its welcome on the big screen. "Scary Movie 2" is like an echo of its 
predecessor: not as funny nor as vomit-inducing, but still possessed of 
some of the qualities that made the original so entertaining. The main 
problem seems to be that it lacks confidence in the very subject material 
it's lampooning. Whereas the first installment wormed considerable mileage 
out of parodying slasher flicks like "Scream", the sequel goes after the 
older genre of the haunted house movie. And even though its main targets 
include such recent fare as the 1999 remake of "The Haunting", it seems 
the small army of scriptwriters were not convinced that their target 
audience of teen boys would be familiar with most examples of the genre. 
As a result, numerous unrelated jokes are haphazardly strewn throughout 
the proceedings, making "Scary Movie 2" feel disconnected and cobbled 
together, a loose panoply of brief set pieces that are knocked down as 
quickly as they're set up. There are still some funny bits (especially the 
opening "Exorcist" rip), but the picture consequently builds little 
momentum. The filmmakers should realise now that the well is dry, and keep 
to the promise made in the tagline for the first "Scary Movie": no sequel.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans.
Cast: Anna Faris, Marlon Wayans, Shawn Wayans, Regina Hall, Christopher 
Kennedy Masterson, Chris Elliott, Tim Curry, David Cross, Kathleen Robertson, 
Tori Spelling, James Woods, Natasha Lyonne, Andy Richter, Veronica 
Cartwright, Richard Moll.
2001 - 82 minutes
Rated R (profanity, violence, sexual situations, and nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 4, 2001.
Literally three days away from a whole year since the release of Keenen Ivory 
Wayan's mega-grossing horror spoof, "Scary Movie," "Scary Movie 2" comes with 
the same director, many of the same writers (there are seven screenwriters 
listed in the credits!), and several cast member returnees. What has, 
unfortunately, not returned in "Scary Movie 2" is its predecessor's 
rapid-fire energy, shockingly raunchy humor, or even its joke-to-laughter 
ratio. What was once a novel idea just last summer has since grown rather 
stale, and it shows. "Scary Movie 2," while occasionally uproarious (but not 
occasionally enough), is a wasted opportunity that comes off less as a major 
motion picture, and more as an endless parade of comedic skits strung 
together by the thinnest of stories, with no purpose other than to make the 
studio heads mucho dinero.
Bypassing the lampooning of slasher films, "Scary Movie 2" takes direct aim 
at the supernatural genre, and loosely follows the plotting of 1999's "The 
Haunting," which was a very bad movie in and of itself. Sweet-faced heroine 
Cindy (Anna Faris) and her college friends, including pothead Shorty (Marlon 
Wayans), repressed homosexual Ray (Shawn Wayans), and sassy Brenda (Regina 
Hall), are chosen by a college professor (Tim Curry) to participate in a 
study taking place at the infamously haunted Hell House. Once the setup is 
finished, there isn't much in the way of a cohesive narrative, with Cindy and 
her college pals getting stalked by a bunch of ghost, one of which is drawn 
to Cindy because she bears a striking resemblance to his beloved mistress.
The first thirty minutes of "Scary Movie 2" are its best. Getting off to a 
side-splitting start with a spoof of "The Exorcist" (with James Woods and 
Andy Richter playing priests out to exorcise the possessed Natasha Lyonne), 
the film remains fast-paced and snappily written until, following a 
disgustingly funny dinner scene, it completely falls apart, jumping 
inconsistently from one scene to the next without any sort of coherence. It 
is as if the opening half-hour was fully written and planned, and then 
director Keenen Ivory Wayans and his ragtag team of "writers" just began 
randomly pulling stuff out of their head to shoot on any given day.
Direct movie spoofs make up the majority of the picture's running time, 
whether it be "Poltergeist," "The Haunting," "Hollow Man," "Charlie's 
Angels," "Hannibal," "Dude, Where's My Car?," or "Save the Last Dance." While 
some are certainly amusing, most feel merely desperate, tired, and 
predictable. It's one thing to turn a film's memorable moments on their head, 
and quite another to simply remake the scene without any skewering. This is 
basically what Wayans has done here, and it is lazy filmmaking. 
Whereas the original developed characters with distinct, yet appropriately 
silly, personalities, the sequel wastes its cast terribly, with only one 
person making a notable impression. Chris Elliott (1998's "There's Something 
About Mary") is an absolute showstopper as the mansion's weirdo caretaker, 
Hanson, who has a deliriously deformed left hand that is the subject of many 
tear-inducing laughs. Whenever Elliott is onscreen, the movie jump-starts to 
life just as it has begun wading through an abyss of unfunny material. Anna 
Faris, as good-girl Cindy, doesn't get as much to do as she did in "Scary 
Movie" #1, despite remaining the central character. Faris is a promising 
actress, and could very well hold her own in a more down-to-earth kind of 
movie. The only other actor worth positively mentioning is Regina Hall, who 
has resurrected her spicy role of Brenda, and brightens up her scenes.
The movie's new additions don't fare nearly as well. Every single one has 
next to nothing to do but stand around and recite myriad lines of dialogue 
that are supposed to be funnier than they actually are. Tim Curry (2000's 
"Charlie's Angels"), so talented, is so transparent as to not even seem, in 
retrospect, like he was even in the film. The same goes for Tori Spelling 
(1999's "Trick"), as Alex, a supposed innocent who begins a lurid affair with 
a ghost; Kathleen Robertson (2000's "Beautiful"), as the voluptuous Theo; and 
Christopher Kennedy Masterson (TV's "Malcolm in the Middle"), as Cindy's 
token horny love interest.
Filled with gags involving sex, semen, urine, puke, and farting, "Scary Movie 
2," nonetheless, feels tame in comparison to the original, perhaps because 
the jokes are shameless rehashes of scenes that were already done last year. 
"Scary Movie" was shocking in what it could get away with, and what it was 
willing to show; this follow-up, on the other hand, is predictable and 
doesn't even attempt to outdo its competitor.
"Scary Movie 2" does have some big laughs, as expected. The "Exorcist" 
prologue, as already mentioned, is deliciously zany, as is an ongoing gag 
involving a foul-mouthed, trash-talking parrot, and the unforgettable role of 
Chris Elliott. Even still, long stretches are vacuous of successful humor, 
and at 82 minutes, the whole thing plays like little more than an 
afterthought that seems to have taken about five days to shoot. Choppily 
edited and obviously rushed to theaters to quickly make a tidy profit, "Scary 
Movie 2" reinforces the age-old adage that sequels really do usually suck.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The poster for Scary Movie proudly declared there wouldn't be a sequel, and
there really shouldn't have been.  It's yet another testament to the power
of the almighty dollar.  Here's how the conversation probably went down on
the Monday morning after its $42 million opening weekend (which was less
than one year ago):
Bob Weinstein: "Hey, fellas.  We'd like you to do a sequel.  How quickly can
you make it happen?"
Keenan Ivory Wayans: "Ummm...we're ready right now."
Weinstein: "Really.  What's the sequel about?"
Shawn Wayans: "Well, errrr, this time we're going to make fun of older
horror films instead of the newer ones."
Marlon Wayans: "Aaaaaaaaaaaaahhhhhhhhhhh!"
The original was mostly a send-up of the Scream series (which made it a
spoof of a spoof), but the sequel is a lot messier.  Scary Movie 2 has a
bigger budget and bigger stars, but it's not nearly as funny.  Part of it
has to be attributable to the quick turnaround time, which becomes painfully
obvious when you see send-ups of recent hits like Charlie's Angels and
Hannibal. The sequel doesn't even roll outtakes during the closing credits,
presumably because they had to scrape every inch of film together to break
the 80-minute running time.
The principals are back both in front of and behind the camera, with Keenan
Ivory Wayans directing brothers Marlon and Shawn, who are also two of the
film's seven screenwriters.  Anna Faris (who looks completely different) and
Regina King are back as well, alongside newcomers Tori Spelling, Christopher
Kennedy Masterson (Malcolm in the Middle) and Kathleen Robertson
(Beautiful).  Hey, didn't Shawn and Regina die in the first one?
This time around, the kids are in college and are required to spend the
weekend in an allegedly haunted house as a course requirement of a lecherous
professor (Tim Curry) and his wheelchair-bound assistant (David Cross, who
has the best cinematic comb-over since Bill Murray's coif in Kingpin).  The
caretaker of Hell House is played by Chris Elliott, who sports a gimpy arm.
Wheelchair-bound?  Gimpy arm?  I can practically hear Eric Cartman
screaming, "Cripple fight!"
Okay, so there isn't much of a story, but Scary 2 is still full of the sick
sight gags that made the first one such a hit.  Commercials for the film
that ran as recently as a few days before it opened claimed the film wasn't
yet rated, which means the producers were probably trying to decide if they
should tame it down to a PG-13 or keep it a more disgusting R.  Here's your
answer:  There's a piss scene within 90 seconds, a priest taking a shit less
than three minutes later, and the film's first vomit scene comes within the
first six minutes.  And, yes, there's another gratuitous dick scene.
There are a bunch of cool cameos, too, like James Woods (who replaced a
sickly Marlon Brando at the last minute), Andy Richter, Richard Moll and
Natasha Lyonne.  But best of all is Beetlejuice from The Howard Stern Show,
who makes a brief but unforgettable appearance.
1:21 - R for sexual content, drugs and language

Author
Steve Rhodes
It has to be a record.  Even with 7 writers (Alison Fouse, Greg Grabianski, Dave
Polsky, Michael Anthony Snowden, Craig Wayans, Marlon Wayans and Shawn Wayans),
SCARY MOVIE 2 still couldn't come up with a single good scene.  Another record
might go for the biggest drop in quality from the original movie to the sequel. 
SCARY MOVIE was imaginative and funny, but its sequel is neither.  Long
stretches of boredom are interrupted periodically by whispered groans of
"Yuck!"
Although outrageous physical comedy can be hilarious, as THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT
MARY proved, the mere presence of gross-out gags does not guarantee that
something will be funny.
Let me take you on a tour of some of the humor misfires in SCARY MOVIE 2.  In
the restaging of the bedroom barfing scene from THE EXORCIST, they appeared to
have used the same special effects team that created the massive waves in THE
PERFECT STORM, as huge wave after wave of vomit hits everyone in the room. 
Another scene has a priest (James Woods) on the toilet, grunting like he's going
to explode as flies crawl all over his body.  There's also a trash-talking
parrot and a self-described "cripple" who makes one handicapped joke after
another when he isn't falling down the stairs.  
The verbal jokes aren't much better than the physical comedy.  "Kiss my grits,"
is one of the insults that, one guesses, is supposed to be funny.  Never has a
movie franchise fallen so far so fast.
SCARY MOVIE 2 runs long even at a mere 1:20.  It is rated R for strong sexual
and gross humor, graphic language and some drug content and would be acceptable
for older teenagers.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the movie just one *.  He said that it was
sometimes funny and sometimes disgusting.  The foul-mouthed parrot appeared to
have generated the majority of his laughs.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Anna Faris, Marlon Wayans, Shawn Wayans,
Regina Hall, James DeBello, Natasha Lyonne, Andy
Richter, James Woods, Chris Elliot. Directed by Keenan
Ivory Wayans. Rated R.
When I reviewed Scary Movie last year, I said that the
only litmus test for a movie like this is whether it's
consistently funny, making it exceedingly difficult to
review. While that film worked more times than not,
its obligatory sequel is far less consistent. Yes,
there are laughs in Scary Movie 2, but they're
sporadic, with a lot of the jokes being regurgitated
from the original.
The movie brings back those characters that weren't
offed in its predecessor. Anna Faris returns as Neve
Campbell... um, I mean, Cindy Campbell, who has now
gone on to college along with her friends Ray Maker
and Shorty Meeks (Shawn and Marlon Wayans). While the
first movie spoofed Scream and its slasher flick
rip-offs, this one bewilderingly sets its sights on
The Haunting, of all movies: a relative box-office
flop and a bad reviews magnet (though I liked it). Why
this alleged pop-culture parody focuses on a movie
that disappeared after a couple of weeks in theaters,
we may never know.
But the central "plot" doesn't begin until after the
opening sequence, a priceless take on The Exorcist. A
group of friends, including a priest, is gathered
around the piano singing old showtunes when, suddenly,
they break out into Mystikal's rap song "Shake Your
Ass." Shame when a comedy's first gag is its funniest.
But there's still some fun to be had when James Woods
shows up as Father McFeely, parodying Max von Sydow's
unforgettable Father Merrin.
It's mostly downhill from there. Director Keenan Ivory
Wayans is stuck spoofing what doesn't particularly
need to be spoofed, and winds up repeating his jokes.
Chris Elliot shows up as the creepy caretaker with a
mutilated hand and Tim Curry has the dubious privilege
of making fun of the Liam Neeson role in The Haunting.
Most of the jokes after the first 10 minutes miss
their mark, and those that hit are non sequiturs that
are funny by accident.
Dimension Films, hungry for a quick and easy cash cow,
refused to postpone the release date for Scary Movie
2, forcing Wayans to rush through production. Perhaps
that is the reason for the film's sloppy,
unprofessional feel. Then again, it's also credited to
seven -- count 'em -- screenwriters, and one of the
rules of moviemaking is that the number of scribes is
inversely proportional to a script's quality.
I'm at a loss for what else to write. See Scary Movie
2 if you have nothing else to do. It's not a complete
waste of time, but it doesn't quite work as the
laugh-out-loud culture parody it wants to be. 
Up Next: Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within

Author
Robin Clifford
Last year, Keenen Ivory Wayans and his brothers Marlon and Shawn promised
us "No sequel!" as part of the advert blurb for their enormously popular
"Scary Movie." But, a domestic take of $200 million is apparently enough to
make them to go back on their word and the result is "Scary Movie 2."
I wish the Wayans had kept their pledge, after spending an interminable 85
minutes suffering through "Scary Movie 2." If you are a fan of urine, feces
and semen jokes, you will probably like this bomb. You get ample, even
copious, amounts of each. For more discerning filmgoers (i.e. anyone over
the mental age of 12), be warned, this second installment to the new Wayans
franchise lacks the rapid-fire humor of the original. The first flick made
fun of the modern horror film genre, like "Airplane!" with one gag after
another coming at you. If you didn't like one joke, you just had a few
seconds to wait for the next. Overall, they hit a lot more than they
missed.
With "Scary Movie 2" the Wayans brothers decided to forgo the
one-gag-after-another formula and, instead, use a plot-driven story that is
mainly a parody of the recent mediocre horror movie, "The Haunting." Sure,
there are a whole bunch of other movies and pop culture references
throughout - "The Exorcist," "The Amityville Horror," "Dracula," "Dirty
Harry," "Mission Impossible 2," "Charlie's Angels," "Hannibal" and those
noisy basketball commercials all get their due. The problem with "Scary
Movie 2" is it spoofs a movie that, if you saw the original "The Haunting,"
is really a parody of that classic horror flick. You would think that the
seven credited writers could come up with a better idea.
Coupling the lame plot line of "The Haunting" with buckets of bodily fluids
makes this venture very unfunny, indeed. The opening "Exorcist" parody,
before the credits, turns out to be the funniest part of "Scary Movie 2,"
thanks to an outrageous twist on the Father Merrin character by James
Woods. His unholy holy man made me feel that we might be in for a
continuation of the first flick. Then the credits roll and we get the
aforementioned buckets. All the original characters are here, but they are
simply going through the motions. The filmmakers had something going the
first time around, but they lost it here. Even a foul-mouthed parrot named
Polly isn't funny, and I love foul-mouthed birds.
Techs are probably OK. I was too numbed by the non-humor of "Scary Movie 2"
to notice. You're better off renting the original and getting yourself a
pizza with what you'll save by not going to see "Scary Movie 2." They said,
the first time, "no sequel." I wish they kept their promise. I give it a D.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
It has to be a record.  Even with 7 writers (Alison Fouse, Greg Grabianski, Dave
Polsky, Michael Anthony Snowden, Craig Wayans, Marlon Wayans and Shawn Wayans),
SCARY MOVIE 2 still couldn't come up with a single good scene.  Another record
might go for the biggest drop in quality from the original movie to the sequel. 
SCARY MOVIE was imaginative and funny, but its sequel is neither.  Long
stretches of boredom are interrupted periodically by whispered groans of
"Yuck!"
Although outrageous physical comedy can be hilarious, as THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT
MARY proved, the mere presence of gross-out gags does not guarantee that
something will be funny.
Let me take you on a tour of some of the humor misfires in SCARY MOVIE 2.  In
the restaging of the bedroom barfing scene from THE EXORCIST, they appeared to
have used the same special effects team that created the massive waves in THE
PERFECT STORM, as huge wave after wave of vomit hits everyone in the room. 
Another scene has a priest (James Woods) on the toilet, grunting like he's going
to explode as flies crawl all over his body.  There's also a trash-talking
parrot and a self-described "cripple" who makes one handicapped joke after
another when he isn't falling down the stairs.  
The verbal jokes aren't much better than the physical comedy.  "Kiss my grits,"
is one of the insults that, one guesses, is supposed to be funny.  Never has a
movie franchise fallen so far so fast.
SCARY MOVIE 2 runs long even at a mere 1:20.  It is rated R for strong sexual
and gross humor, graphic language and some drug content and would be acceptable
for older teenagers.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the movie just one *.  He said that it was
sometimes funny and sometimes disgusting.  The foul-mouthed parrot appeared to
have generated the majority of his laughs.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
After the surprise success of "Scary Movie," a sequel was inevitable.  
The survivors of the first are joined by some newcomers, including Tim
Curry posing as a dream research professor right out of "The Haunting"
who wants to subject the old gang to Hell House in "Scary Movie 2." 
"Scary Movie 2" opens with an "Exorcist" parody teaming with bodily
fluid gross-outs before the title credit comes up.  It's also the only
worthwhile part of this flabby affair.  The film got a lot of publicity
when Marlon Brando was withdrawn as the Max von Sydow character due to
heath problems.  James Woods is a hilarious replacement as the child molesting
Father McFeely, trading tongue with an unrecognizable Natasha Lyonne 
("Slums of Beverly Hills") as 'Megan.'  Ex-Conan O'Brien sidekick Andy
Richter is Father Harris, who literally ejects his mother from Megan's 
bed while Veronica Cartwright steps into Ellen Burstyn's role.  Then the
real movie begins and demonic possession suddenly seems like a better
alternative than remaining in the theater.
"Scary Movie" succeeded mostly because of its sheer audacity.  It went
too far, but it was funny.  This "The Haunting" parody, directed by the
first's helmer Keenen Ivory Wayans, just goes through the motions of parodying
one movie after another without any apparent stab at wit or humor.
Initially, Chris Elliott seems intriguing as Hell House's handyman with 
a grossly disfigured hand, but by his second scene the 'laughs' are being
forced from the same gross-out bits he was introduced with and the boredom
squirming sets in.
"Scary Movie 2" wastes a lot of talent (one even almost feels sorry for Tori
Spelling appearing in this mess) referencing "MI: 2," "Poltergeist," "Hollow
Man," "What Lies Beneath," etc.  Clearly this movie's demographics are those
who will feel entertained by recognizing bits from other, all better, films.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
2001 - USA 
Director: Keenen Ivory Wayans 
Starring: Anna Faris, Christopher Masterson, Tim Curry, Marlon Wayans, Regina 
Hall, Shawn Wayans, Kathleen Robertson, James Woods, Chris Elliott, Tori 
Spelling, David Cross 
The original Scary Movie was released under the radar last year and astounded 
analysts and its studio, Dimension Films, with its high box office gross. The 
film spoofed classic horror films using `Scream' as an outline, with plenty 
of disgusting and raw scatological humor. Scary Movie placed number three on 
my worst five films of the year list for 2000, but since the film earned $157 
million domestically, and because life is unfair, a sequel was inevitable. 
The surprise is that it really isn't that bad. The sequel is far more clever 
than the first, this time adding political references and current events into 
the mix. There's a nice balance between Firestone tire and Nike TV ad jokes, 
and a clown being choked to death by a phallus jokes. The film is fun 
overkill. 
Anna Faris (who, in a bizarre side note, was born and raised in the small 
Seattle suburb of Edmonds, Washington where this author resides) reprises the 
role of Cindy Campbell. Her horny psychology professor (Tim Curry, who else?) 
stages some type of psychological experiment for her and all her friends from 
the original Scary Movie, who all happen to go to the same college. The 
experiment involves spending the weekend in a haunted mansion. Things, of 
course, go terribly and hilariously wrong. 
Not that the plot really matters. The film moves from one joke to another so 
quickly it's really a string of punch lines rather than a story. This is 
forgivable because the material is very funny... but there's a problem. 
If you haven't kept up on popular culture lately, you're likely to miss many 
of the jokes. A very clever spoof of Save the Last Dance flew by even the 
teenagers at my packed screening, as did a Rocky send-up. Other films are so 
cleverly woven into the plot that one viewing isn't nearly enough to spot 
them all. Less obvious jokes spoof films like The Game, The Amityville Horror 
, Urban Legend, and Hollow Man. All that and a character named Jamie Lee 
Curtisto. 
One of the biggest problems with Scary Movie was that it had to adhere so 
closely to the storyline of Scream. Scary Movie 2 is a combination of House 
on Haunted Hill and The Haunting, but even that's a loose structure. 
This gives the actors time to roam around, and the result is a more relaxed 
pace. Regina Hall gives a funny performance that goes against the premise 
that African-Americans always die first in horror movies. Christopher 
Masterson and Faris have good chemistry, but the film really belongs to Chris 
Elliott. As Hanson, the house's caretaker with a deformed, odd-looking left 
hand, and less than appealing facial features, he is completely wonderful and 
over-the-top. Tori Spelling is criminally underused. She gets to have wild 
sex with the invisible man, but not much else. I was waiting for a `90210' 
gag or her dad to pop out from somewhere. 
The biggest surprise of all may be that Scary Movie 2 seems tamer than the 
original. Oh sure there's abundant sex humor, but America has become less 
taboo about these issues since the original's release. Whether tamer or more 
outrageous, there's plenty of laughs here for a normal person to have a great 
time, and a Joe-Lieberman-person to start fuming. 
Read more reviews at www.moviepie.com 
