Title
Review for Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band (1978)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Whether you like the Beatles or not, nobody wants to see the Bee Gee's take on
some of the Fab Four's best known songs. Well, maybe that's not true . . .
maybe you're curious, the way you have to look in your hanky after you blow
your nose. You just have to know how bad bad can be. If that's the case,
rejoice, because it was twenty years ago today (or so) that SGT. PEPPER'S
LONELY HEARTS CLUB BAND was released (unleashed?) to the world, and thanks to
our modern technological advances, you can find this retched piece of
filmmaking on VHS.
Derived from the lyrics of various Beatles' songs, SGT. PEPPER'S tells the
story of the fictitious band made popular from the song (and album) of the
same name, released in 1967. Of course, the movie was made eleven years later,
the Gibbs three have become the Lonely Hearts, Peter Frampton is the one and
only Billy Shears, and aside from being about a rock band, the story doesn't
correlate to the song at all. And oh, what joy - we're the lovely audience
they'd like to take home with them. I don't think so. But at least these
characters are actually *people* in a Beatles' song, whereas other characters
such as Strawberry Fields (Sandy Farina) gets her name from a song about a
*place* called Strawberry Fields. The debate over this is really quite futile
when it comes down to it, because all the film really has to offer is a feast
of horrid cover tunes, embarrassing cameo appearances (George Burns?! Steve
Martin?!? ALICE COOPER?!?!), and UUUUUUGGGGGGGLLLLLLLYYYYY 70's fashion and
faces. Check please!
The plot is a bit unclear. People with bad 70's hair run around in leisure
suits engaging in music video sequences that look like a sick and twisted
world of make-believe from an overly demented Mr. Rogers. Mean Mr. Mustard
(Frankie Howerd) somehow gets hold of all Billy & Co.'s instruments, calling
Dr. Maxwell Edison (Steve Martin with a silver hammer and an out-of-key
singing voice), the Sun King, Marvin Sunk (Alice Cooper!), and a couple of
creepy robots to his aid. Supposedly this is a horrible thing? I guess in
Heartland, the talent is pretty non-existent. Meanwhile, the Lonely Hearts are
off doing the classic "sex, drugs, and rock n' roll" thing, leaving poor
Strawberry Fields without her true love, Billy. She sets out to find him,
leaving her poor dad and mom (Mrs. Fields! Hey, wanna cookie?) all alone to
sing a horrible rendition of "She's Leaving Home", accompanied by those same
creepy robots. But is Billy getting it on with Lucy (Dianne Steinberg)? Ya
know, the diamond possessing girl who hangs out in the sky? Well, there's some
crazy chick singing soprano on the roof of a building next to a bus stop, and
I assume that's who it was.
It's movies like this that make ya sit back and ask the unanswerable question,
"What the hell were they thinking???" Nobody will ever know, but as a novelty,
SGT. PEPPER'S is one to examine. Carol Channing, Robert Palmer, Keith
Carradine - they're all here. But why???? Who knows. It's irrelevant. There's
as much meaning to be found here as there is to be found in your belly-button
lint, although the latter may be more interesting. With the recent onslaught
of 70's nostalgia in the movie world (THE ICE STORM, BOOGIE NIGHTS, reissues
of the STAR WARS trilogy, etc.), let's pray this doesn't get a special 20th
anniversary, second-chance in theaters. In the words of Paul McCartney, live
and let die. In fact, bury this one while you still can.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Obvously, no one has ever put the Bee Gees in the same
league with the Beatles, but for some reason, Barry, Robin and
Maurice (the Brothers Gibb) seem to think they can take on the legend
of the Fab Four. Like the other zero-star features in this book, SGT.
PEPPER is an absolutely dreadful, horrendous movie, especially for
Beatle fans. As someone who owns and enjoys the Abbey Road and
Sgt. Pepper albums, the elevator music renditions of such classics as
"Here Comes the Sun" (a.k.a. "Here Goes Our Career") and "Lucy in
the Sky With Diamonds" (a.k.a. "Guys in Leisure Suits With No
Talent") are more than painful.
        It's not just the Bee Gees doing frightfully bleak covers of
Beatle songs in this movie. Co-star Peter Frampton (oh boy) gets into
the act, along with George Burns' serious take on the song "Fixing a
Hole" (you'll laugh yourself silly during this number), Alice Cooper,
who thinks he's the voice of Satan in a remake of the effeminately
psychadelic "Because," Aerosmith with "Come Together" (if you're
wondering why Aerosmith agreed to be in this movie, just remember it
was during their heavy drug use period), Earth, Wind & Fire with a
disco version of "Got to Get You Into My Life," and Billy Preston in a
banana-yellow leisure suit, singing "Get Back" (sample lyric: "Maurice
was a man who thought he was a woman").
        The absolute worst remake in the movie (besides the fifteen
Bee Gee-Frampton numbers) is Steve Martin's version of "Maxwell's
Silver Hammer," a song from the Abbey Road album about a young
man who kills people with a hammer. Martin's version, unlike the
"Dentist" song from Little Shop of Horrors, ruins the spirit of the song,
where he voices the lyrics of the song instead of singing them, a clear
sign of absence of talent (Just think of all the times Madonna has done
that).
        The "plot" here has Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band
(consisting of Frampton and the Bee Gees) getting discovered, signing
a contract after an orgy (You haven't lived until you've been to a PG
Bee Gee orgy), and rocketing to stardom (in that alternate world where
Frampton and the Bee Gees are considered talented). Meanwhile, the
movie's villain Mean Mr. Mustard (just like the song) is out to steal
their instruments (just like they stole the Beatles' songs), so they won't
be able to make their musical magic. Like they can't find another
synthesizer and drum machine at the shop around the corner. Other
characters from Beatle songs include Mr. Kite (George Burns), Lucy
(in the sky with diamonds) and Strawberry Fields (I'm serious).
        In addition to the bad Beatle remakes, Frampton and The Bee
Gees try to come off as the world's most successful ladies' men (i.e.
Robin sitting on a pool diving board, singing "She's so Heavy!" while
stroking the legs of two beautiful women), but instead look like the
gayest foursome on the earth. At least the producers had the good
sense to change the line in the song "Here Comes the Sun" from,
"Little darling, it's been a long, cold, lonely winter," sung by
Strawberry Fields to Frampton after a literal roll in the hay, to "Little
Peter, you've really got a little peter." No, not really, but don't you wish
they did?
        Even worse are the costumes in the movie. During one
sequence, the Bee Gees are riding in a hot air balloon in aviator
costumes (which, in itself, is dreadful) when they are hit by a bolt of
lightning. Suddenly, they're all dressed in costumes strangely
reminiscent of the Power Rangers. Oh great, the Mighty Morphin Bee
Gee Rangers.
        Perhaps the most ironic sequence is a fight between Steven
Tyler of Aerosmith and Peter Frampton, where Frampton actually
wins. Well, Frampton never made it into the 80's, much less the 90's,
and we all know Alicia Silverstone never would have agreed to appear
in the music video for "Show Me the Way." Aerosmith is still going
strong, while Frampton is working the fry bin at Hardee's outside of
Pittsburgh.
        This movie is a huge embarrassment for everyone involved
(yes, even Frampton and the Bee Gees). Once you get over laughing at
the sheer idiocy of all these people thinking they're the Disco Beatles,
you'll still have to sit through almost two hours of falsetto Bee Gee
Beatles songs. Trust me, you won't make it through the movie. No one
makes it through the movie. I did, of course, but I'm the movie critic
and, believe me, it wasn't in one sitting.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
