Title
Review for Guantanamera (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     What happened to the appreciation of foreign films?  Are we
Americans becoming happily oblivious to the rest of world as seen
through the eyes of their cinema?  Although a few foreign movies such
as IL POSTINO and LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE have become popular, most
never even get a U.S. distributor.  And the vast majority of those that
do are promptly ignored.
     As I sat by myself in an empty theater at the press screening of
GUANTANAMERA, I lamented the presence of other critics.  The large
local daily chose to go with a syndicated feed rather than send a live
critic.  The local weeklies, the radio station, and, most tragically of
all, the local colleges chose to pass on this sweet, subtitled picture.
At least the local bastions of learning might be expected to show up,
but their newspapers chose not to cover it.  Everyone seems convinced
that Hollywood blockbusters and English language, usually American,
independents are all that are worth seeing.
     End of diatribe.  Granted they didn't miss an award winner, but
this Franz Kafka Meets "Scientific Socialism" tells more about the
state of Cuba today that many more learned treatises.  And its precious
style will engender many a smile if few guffaws.
     GUANTANAMERA comes from the same creative team as the acclaimed
Cuban film STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE, including directors Tomas
Gutierrez Alea and Juan Carlos Tabio, and stars Jorge Perugorria and
Mirta Ibarra.  Both pictures are light-hearted farces with delightfully
uplifting spirits.
     Opening to the happy tunes of the song "Guantanamera," we find
ourselves in an impoverished country with asinine bureaucracy.  The red
dirt roads that cut through the towns are set off by white, dilapidated
buildings with peeling paint.  The colorful clothes of the women and
big smiles from some of the inhabitants provide a contrast to the
otherwise rampant visual gloom.  (Patriotic signs, such as "Socialism
or Die," periodically dot the roadway.  Considering the conditions the
people live under, the signs prove highly ironic.)
     The famous singer Yoyita (Conchita Brando) has come all the way
from Havana to her hometown of Guantanamera to see her old sweetheart,
Candido (Raul Eguren).  Since they haven't seen each other for half a
century, the happiness proves too much for her.  She drops dead in her
long-lost lover's home.  The rest of the film is a road picture with
the corpse and its entourage making its way slowly back to Havana.
     In the two car procession are Candido, Yoyita's niece Georgina
(Mirta Ibarra) and her husband Adolfo (Carlos Cruz).  Adolfo, an anal
retentive government official, uses his previously devised and
excruciatingly complex scheme to save gas.  Coffin-carrying cars are
supposed to form a kind of relay race with the coffins changing
vehicles in towns along the way.  How this could possibly save gasoline
is never explained, for obvious reasons.
     Along the way, they go to various restaurants only to find they
are out of food.  One has only tamarind juice and another just tea and
rum.  After one frustrating attempt to get sustenance, the radio in the
would-be hearse brags of another record food crop for the country.
After they finally get a decent meal at a speakeasy-like underground
restaurant, Candido reflects on his life.  "Loneliness is the worst
sort of hungry," he tells Georgina.
     In another scene, one funeral parlor has set out small pastries to
comfort the mourners.  When people who never knew the dead begin to
show up to get the food, they start issuing tickets only to certified
relatives.  But this scheme turns into mayhem when people claiming to
have relatives who have died before the food policy demand tickets.
     Along the way Georgina keeps coming across her ex-student and now
a truck driver named Mariano (Jorge Perugorria).  Mariano reveals he
had a crush on her in school.  Georgina is bored silly with her stiff
husband, and she and Mariano begin to make eyes at each other.
     One moment captures the film best.  When the wrong body is about
to be buried, Adolfo looks briefly perplexed.  "There are always
problems," he says.  "And there are always solutions."  His has the
logic of a consummate bureaucrat.  Just bury it.
     GUANTANAMERA runs 1:41.  It is in Spanish with easy to follow
English subtitles.  The film is not rated, but it would probably get an
R for brief nudity and a little profanity.  This sweet little film
would be fine kids around 11 and up.  Although the story far outshines
the acting, I do recommend the picture and give it ** 1/2.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 30, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
GUANTANAMERA (Cuba,1994)  *** 1/2  Directed by Tomas Gutierrez Alea and
Juan Carlos Tabio. Written by Eliseo Alberto Diego ,Alea and Tabio.
Photography, Hans Burmann. Art direction, Onelia Larralde. Music, Jose
Nieto. Editing, Carmen Frias. Cast: Carlos Cruz (Adolfo), Mirtha Ibarra
(Georgina, aka Gina), Raul Eguren (Candido), Jorge Perugorria (Mariano),
Pedro Gernandez (Ramon), Luis Alberto Garcia Novoa (Tony), Cochita Brando
(Aunt Yoyita), Suset Perez Malberti (Oku), et al. A Cinepix release.
Subtitled. 104 minutes. Not rated.
Road movie, farce, satire, picaresque picture, black comedy, bedroom farce....
Take your pick as they all apply to "Guantanamera," the last film by the
"Maestro" of Cuban Cinema, Tomas Gutierrez Alea (1928-1996), called Titon
(Tee-TON) by all his friends. He was already ill with lung cancer when he
made it.  As for his penultimate feature "Strawberry and Chocolate" (1993)
he sought the collaboration of filmmaker Juan Carlos Tabio, 15 years his
junior, who also gets directorial credit in both features.
"Guantanamera" means the woman from Guantanamo (the town, not the U.S.
base). It is probably the best-known Cuban song. In Cuba, various singers
put their own lyrics on the melody. Here it is heard several times, with
different comments, descriptions or suggestions.
The film's structure is that of the familiar road  movie in which  people
try to get from point A to point B as events, happenings or adventures
accumulate. In her teens, Yoyita left Guantanamo, became a famous singer,
returned after 50 years to see her niece Georgina (aka Gina), also met
Candido, the great love of her youth who had never stopped thinking of her.
The charming senior citizens have a wonderfully romantic reunion.  They
reminiscences of the same event but with different images, are just like
those of former lovers Maurice Chevalier and Hermione Gingold singing "I
Remember It Well" in the musical "Gigi." Then big-time artist Yoyita dies
suddenly in the arms of provincial brass-player Candido.
The main female role belongs to Gina. She is played by the enchanting
stage-and-screen actress Mirtha Ibarra, whose film debut was in "The Last
Supper" by Alea. Mirtha and Titon married (he for the second time), had
three daughters and were still together 22 years later, when Titon died.
Gina, formerly an economics professor, is now married to Adolfo, an
official fallen from grace (for undisclosed reasons). Sidelined by the
administration as the head of a minor committee on burials, he is now
trying to regain recognition. Adolfo conceives a pea-brained scheme for
savin fuel in gasoline-strapped Cuba:  those who die far from their desired
burial places will be transported by a system of relays between cemeteries.
Fate would have it that the first candidate for this long-distance
experiment is Auntie Yoyita, who must be taken to Havana, almost at the
other end of the island. The trip,  fraught with obstacles and
coincidences, takes through the landscape and, more importantly, the
humanscape. We see a Cuba whose inhabitants do not lose their sense of
humor but have to invent ways to survive financially. Truck-driver Mariano
who has an engineering degree but must make a living, and his more mature
buddy Ramon, who though sensible still believes in witchcraft, take illegal
passengers. Sellers along the roads  offer goods, mostly edibles, for
dollars, not Cuban money. Adolfo has none, but his chauffeur, himself a
black-marketeer (or entrepreneur) does, buys bananas and shares them with
his boss.
A sly reminder by a tour guide mentions that a certain town, over several
centuries was the center of smuggling and had dealings with forbidden
countries. It doesn't take a doctorate in history to see the reference to
contemporary Cuba.
The paths of Mariano's truck and Adolfo's troublesome car (no doubt
Soviet-built) with Adolfo, Gina and Candido as passengers, keep crossing.
Both background and foreground keep pointing to the shortages (of
everything) in Cuba, where one-table "secret" restaurants spring up; where
a fan-belt is a small treasure; where coupons are needed for many things,
even in a cemetery's cantina; where the car's riders munch bananas from the
subterranean economy as the radio spouts positive agricultural statistics
Among many disturbances, there's another romance brewing. I will not let
the cat out of the bag except to say that Mariano is at the love story's
epicenter, and that he complicates things. Mariano is a Don Juan with the
equivalent of a girl in every port. Here it's a lover in every town,
gas-station, truck-stop or train-crossing. (A sex-hungry young woman brings
to mind the Czech satire "Closely Watched Trains.") The relationships are
funny even when the premises are not.
Gags are brought in naturally.  Windshield wipers activate when the car is
bumped;  a woman tells of man who died unexpectedly, then reveals that he
was 107 years old.  But "Guantanamera" is not simply an entertainment. It
is a movie about life, love and death during the hard times of an
impoverished nation.
Alea, started his career as a dedicated celebrant of the Cuban Revolution.
Later, when he made the first big pictures that brought him international
fame ("Death of a Bureaucrat"1966; "Memories of Underdevelopment"
1968),many began to see him as a critic of the Fidel Castro regime, even
though Alea and Castro had been schoolmates and were friends. But it was a
misinterpretation of Alea's complexity, and a matter of semantics.
As Alea repeatedely phrased it (with varations), "to be critical is to make
a militant film for the Revolution". Or, "for the Revolution to grow, for
our country to develop positively, criticism is necessary."
"Guantanamera" has no villains. It looks upon all its characters with
sympathy, understanding or at a minimum, tolerance. The main butt of its
criticism is Adolfo, that misguided, counterproductive, symbolic,
ambitious, egotistic and silly bureaucrat. In its own, rather kinky way,
"Guantanamera" is like Part Two of "Death of a Bureaucrat" of some thirty
years earlier. Like that film, like much of the rest of Alea's output
(about a dozen out of a total of ca. 22 pictures), there's always a tricky
patriotic balancing act of theory against practice, of Marxist dialectics
that uphold principles while they castigate misapplications. The process,
neither obvious nor simple-minded, sometimes caused confusion in the public
as well as the critics.
It seems to me that Alea is sending his viewers, especially the Cubans, a
message about the necessity to clean house. This is colorfully, deviously,
subtly recounted  as the legend of Olofin, the God who created life  but
forgot to create death. There follow millenia of ever-aging populations
which engulf the young -- until the other deity, Iku, brings about rain and
floods, so that all the aged drown and only physically fit younger people
survive. Thus did Iku terminate progress-impeding immortality. All this is
far more poetic than the American "Time for a change," or "We need new
blood."
Among the subtleties of this seemingly simple movie, is the fact that we
see very  few slogans: only one banner says "Socialism or Death." And the
fact that this seriocomic, appealing "realistic fantasy" neither mentions
nor hints at the Big Bad Wolf. One can almost hear Alea saying:  "Yes, the
Yankees are partly to blame for our troubles, but we should not use this as
an excuse or an alibi for our own shortcomings."
"Guantanamera" was nominated for the Golden Lion at the 1996 Venice Film
Festival and honored at several others.
