Title
Review for Atlantis: The Lost Empire (2001)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Laura Clifford
Linguist/cartographer Milo Thatch (Michael J. Fox) dreams of following in his
explorer grandfather's footsteps searching for the lost civilization of
Atlantis.  Instead he tends to the boiler in the basement of a museum whose
board of directors will not hear his proposal.  When mysterious blond
seductress Helga Sinclair (Claudia Christian, TV's "Babylon V") leads him
to the home of millionaire Preston B. Whitmore (John Mahoney, TV's "Frasier"),
Milo discovers an unknown friend of his grandad's is now prepared to
fund his expedition complete with a crack team of specialists.  But that 
team contains two with a mercenary agenda which will threaten the civilization
Milo dreams of studying in the latest Walt Disney animation "Atlantis:  the
Lost Empire."
While Disney faces an uphill battle against the likes of the family-friendly
"Shrek" and early mixed reviews from NY and LA, animation fans should delight
in this gorgeous, eye-popping widescreen adventure tale.  While the story
(Bryce and Jackie Zabel, screenplay by Tab Murphy and Josh Whedon) bogs down 
in its midsection with fantastical New Age crystal mumbo-jumbo better suited
to the "Pokemon" films, the large cast of characters are all entertaining,
the adventure set pieces rousing.  It's like "20,000 Leagues Under the Sea"
cast with improvizational comedians, dastardly villains, 'good' aliens
and kindly sidekicks as led by "Peter Pan's" bespectacled John Darling.
This PG Disney film immediately marks its difference by opening with a Plato
quote and the subtitled destruction of Atlantis (an Atlantean language was
invented for the film).  While the animation recalls past Disney efforts,
such as the great deep canvas effect created for "Tarzan" to produce 
multi-planed backgrounds, it also has a new look based inspired by the works of
comic book artist Mike Mignola, ("Hellboy") who assisted in production design,
exhibited most startlingly in the drawing of Helga.
The voice cast is simply outstanding led by Michael J. Fox who gives Milo plucky
depth.  Corey Burton gives the film's weirdest character, Gaetan "The Mole"
Moliere, a burrowing expert allergic to soap whose eyeballs appear to rest
at the end of his night vision goggles, a nifty Gallic babble.  Don Novello
of Father Guido Sarducci fame is Vinny Santorini, a comical explosives ace.
Florence Stanley, best known for playing Fish's wife on TV's "Barney Miller,"
gives hilariously guttural asides as the chain-smoking Mrs. Packard.  The
late Jim Varney makes his final appearance as "Cookie," the cook who worships
beans and bacon grease.  Phil Morris makes the giant Dr. Sweet gentle with
his smooth smoky delivery.  Commander Lyle T. Rourke is given stature by 
veteran actor James Garner.  Leonard Nimoy is also on hand as the King of
Atlantis whose daughter Kida (Cree Summer) teams up with Milo to save their
world.
Veteran Disney animation directors Kirk Wise and Gary Trousdale ("Beauty and
the Beast") have delivered something different from the usual Disney
animation, while maintaining the high quality we've come to expect from the
mouse house.  While the fast-paced adventure slows to establish its
ill-conceived object of contention, this high caliber production delivers on 
every other front.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In the late 1800s there was still a lot of the world that was
terra incognita.  Much of the map had still to be filled in and
adventure stories were being written about fabulous finds of ancient
cities still alive in the far corners of the world.  The greatest of
these stories, in my opinion at least, was H. Rider Haggard's SHE,
filmed in multiple silent versions and at least two sound versions.
Other authors who have written lost race stories include Edgar Rice
Burroughs, Ian Cameron, and A. Merritt.  What science fiction is to
many branches of science and alternate history is to the study of
history, lost race stories are to archeology.  They are the stories
of the imaginative dreams of every archeologist.  (For those
interested in the lost race genre I can recommend the web site
http://www.violetbooks.com/lostrace-check-guide.html.)
     The current film starts at a breakneck pace as a huge wave
rushes foreword to engulf the advanced island-civilization of
Atlantis and some strange flying machines racing it to try to save
the island.  Meanwhile there is something strange and mystical
happening on the island, but not so powerful that it saves the
island from sinking below the waves.
     Flash forward to 1910 or so.  Exploration runs in the family
for Milo Thatch (voiced by Michael J. Fox).  Thatch's grandfather
searched for the lost city of Atlantis.  Milo has his own ideas as
to where the city can be found.  His dedication and energy applied
to this goal has won him a reputation of being a little demented on
the subject.  Then an enigmatic millionaire has his own plan to find
Atlantis with the help of an ancient book thought to be lost but
found by Milo's grandfather.  A new expedition will search for the
city and its mysterious power source.  The expedition will be led by
Commander Lyle Tiberius Rourke (James Garner) and begin with a
descent to the ocean floor in a fabulous submarine.
     The base story by Bryce and Jackie Zabel leaves room for some
spectacular action scenes with an undeniable excitement.  The film
seems to be an H. Rider Haggard adventure in concentrated form.  The
story moves faster and has more action than Haggard would have given
it, but the spirit is there.  One thing that does seem a little out
of place: most lost race stories were told in a serious tone.
Because of the subject matter the stories were rarely told with much
humor.  There is a lot of Disney-style comedy and weird
international characters on the expedition.  (Is the character of
Moliere based on the character of the same name in the ZBS's Ruby
series?  There are definite similarities.)  The writers make the
usual politically correct choice for the presence and ethnicity of
the villain.  The script in the end feels a little top-heavy with
fighting and mysticism.  Some may long for the subtlety of some of
the writers of years past, but overall the film does have its
moments.
     To some extent ATLANTIS: THE LOST EMPIRE is an experiment.
First it is a PG cartoon, unusual for Disney.  The whimsical nature
and the less realistic animation techniques seem less likely choices
for the subject matter.  The style might go better with a humorous
animal story.  Further toward the end of the film a lot of what is
happening is not carefully explained and is left to the viewer's
interpretation.  The film does have some breathtaking images of the
city Atlantis and especially of the great submarine seen all too
briefly in the first part of the film.  The submarine seems like a
cross between Disney's Nautilus and the interior of an airship.
Real submarines don't look like this, but they ought to.
     Once again we have an all-star cast of voices in an animated
film where their familiarity can be only a distraction.  We have
Michael J. Fox in the lead.  We also have James Garner, Jim Verney
(who died in February of 2000), Claudia Christian, Don Novello (who
on frequently played the comedic Father Guido Sarducci), John
Mahoney, and Leonard Nimoy as the King of Atlantis.  While far from
ideal, Atlantis is a good adventure film with at least some of the
nostalgic feel of classic exploration films.  I rate it a 7 on the 0
to 10 scale and a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Disney's annual summer animation extravaganza has the misfortune of opening
less than 30 days after Shrek bowed to rave reviews and boffo box office.
The DreamWorks film is certainly a hard act to follow, but Atlantis: The
Lost Empire has one other thing working against it:  It's simply nowhere
near as entertaining.  (This is the second year in a row that DreamWorks
kicked Disney's ass in the Battle of Summer Animation - it was the wonderful
Chicken Run versus the stupid Dinosaur in 2000.)
Sure, you could say Atlantis is being unfairly compared to Shrek (the former
uses standard animation while the latter opted for cutting-edge computer
animation). You could just as easily blame the whole thing on Disney, who
hired the directors (Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise) and writer (Tab Murphy)
responsible for The Hunchback of Notre Dame, which was arguably the Mouse
House's biggest summer animation flop in years. But my finger points at
comic book creator Mike Mignola. The author of Hellboy has to be the person
responsible for filling a Disney cartoon with uncharacteristic violence,
superhero dialogue, sci-fi fantasy scenarios and scantily clad women with,
uh, positive attributes. They even unspooled early scenes of Atlantis at a
comic book convention last summer.
It's not like Disney didn't exert the effort to make Atlantis into a decent
film. They even went so far as to get the guy who developed phony dialects
for Star Trek to make up an Atlantian language and also brought in
hotter-than-hot writer Joss Whedon from Buffy the Vampire Slayer (he, too,
has connections to comic books) to punch up Murphy's script. This could
explain why Atlantis seems so similar to the dud that permanently closed the
doors of rival Fox's animation studios last year. That's right - Whedon also
had a screenwriting credit on the dismal Titan AE. What's more, Atlantis
shares more than a few similarities to Warner Brothers' critically acclaimed
underachiever The Iron Giant, which, like Titan and Atlantis, strayed more
toward dark drama than the lighthearted musicals we had been getting
spoon-fed by Disney on an annual basis. Are the forefathers of animation
scrambling to keep up with the times? It sure looks like it, but right now
they seem to be running in place.
After a quick prologue that shows the advanced civilization of Atlantis
(they had spaceships, even) being wiped out by a giant wave, the film
flashes forward to 1914 Washington, D.C., where a nerdy Christopher Columbus
wannabe named Milo Thatch (voiced by Michael J. Fox) is about to pitch a
proposal to his stuffy museum colleagues (led by David Ogden Stiers). Milo,
the wiry laughingstock of the museum, wants his superiors to finance an
expedition to find the lost city of Atlantis, but they pooh-pooh him away,
saying that he's just as silly as his dead grandfather.
But armed with Grandpa's lucky hat and fat journal, Milo finds an old,
yoga-loving kook (John Mahoney) to bankroll his voyage into the briny deep.
Before you know it, Milo is being whisked away in a state-of-the-art
submarine, complete with a crew that must have been assembled by the Rainbow
Coalition. There's a powerfully gentle black doctor (Phil Morris), a Latino
mechanic (Jacqueline Obradors), a gravelly-voiced octogenarian (Florence
Stanley), a hillbilly (the deceased Jim Varney), an Italian who sounds like
a stereotypical Father Guido Sarducci-type (Don Novello, of course) and an
unwashed Frenchman with flies constantly buzzing around him (Corey Burton).
The sub is led by Commander Lyle T. Rourke (James Garner) and his icy
sidekick, Helga Sinclair (Claudia Christian).
Their journey includes a Leviathan attack that reduces the crew from 200 men
to just a couple dozen, but that all hardly matters when Milo and company
finally find Atlantis, which is still a thriving metropolis full of folks
with dark skin and white hair (in other words, a city crawling with Bob
Barker clones). Milo meets King Kashekim Nedakh (Leonard Nimoy) and
instantly falls in love with his daughter, Princess Kida (Cree Summer),
whose mother was lost during the whole wave thing. There's a lot of talk
about a special light, a mysterious power source and the "Heart of
 Atlantis," but not much makes sense until Rourke and Helga reveal
themselves to be mercenaries who have come in search of Atlantis' energy
supply so they can sell it to the Kaiser.
As if that wasn't dumb enough, there are a few subtitled scenes, loads of
gunplay and a body count that rivals Pearl Harbor's. Atlantis is way too
complicated for kids and just too dull for adults. There might be a very
narrow age demographic that could enjoy it, like boys between the ages of
9.31 and 9.44 - and, of course, 13-year-old boys, who will probably get a
funny feeling after gazing upon the women.

Author
SSG Syndicate

Susan Granger's review of "ATLANTIS: THE LOST EMPIRE" (Walt Disney Pictures)
    Disney dives into summer as an inexperienced young explorer follows his grandfather's long-lost journal on a mission to find the legendary island of Atlantis. It's 1914 when a nerdy linguist named Milo Thatch (voiced by Michael J. Fox) is recruited to "advise" an expedition on the Ulysses, a state-of-the-art submarine under a gruff military Commander (James Garner), his cool assistant (Claudia Christian) and a motley crew that includes an explosives expert (Don Novello), a flippant mechanic (Jacqueline Abradors), a crusty cook (the late Jim Varney), a fast-talking doctor (Phil Morris), a zany geologist known as The Mole (Corey Burton), and a cranky, chain-smoking communications op (Florence Stanley).  Milo thinks it's going to be all "discovery, teamwork and adventure," but they're a Jules Verne-like "Dirty Dozen." En route, their most memorable encounter is with the ferocious Leviathan, a mechanical, lobster-like sea-serpent, who shreds their sub. Then, after surv!
iving some fiery flies, they meet the Atlanteans who are in the midst of a "crystal" crisis, losing their mystical source of power and healing. Romance sparks between Milo and Princess Kida (Cree Summer), much to the dismay of her father (Leonard Nimoy) and there's a treacherous twist from the mercenary Commander. Directors Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise opt for a non-traditional approach - no songs, no cutsey animal sidekicks. Instead, they're into the courageous derring-do, solidly punctuated by James Newton Howard's music.
 The flat characters pale in comparison with the flashy, eye-catching action and it's best to just ignore some of the obvious plot loop-holes. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Atlantis" surfaces with an imaginative, spectacular 7. Another triumph for Disney animation.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Atlantis: The Lost Empire (2001)
Michael J. Fox, James Garner, Cree Summer, Jim Varney, Corey Burton,
Claudia Christian, Phil Morris, Don Novello, Jacqueline Obradors,
Florence Stanley, Leonard Nimoy, John Mahoney, David Ogden Stiers. Music
by James Newton Howard. Screenplay by Tab Murphy. Directed by Gary
Trousdale and Kirk Wise. 95 minutes.
Rated PG, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"Atlantis: The Lost Empire," the latest feature-length cartoon from
Disney, is an adventure story offering a smooth blend of traditional
drawing and computer animation, top-notch voice work from an impressive
cast and lots of action. In addition, there are no cheesy musical
numbers or adorable animal sidekicks. On the surface (if you'll pardon
the expression), it sounds likes a can't-miss enterprise, but the
finished product is merely serviceable. "Atlantis" suffers from an
over-familiar storyline, underdeveloped characters and a surprising lack
of imagination, especially in the all-important visuals.
Everything in the production appears to be culled from other Disney
movies. The humans look like refugees from the animated "101
Dalmatians," while the Atlanteans appear to be first cousins of "The
Little Mermaid." Add a submarine that would fit in "20,000 Leagues Under
the Sea" and mystical spinning crystals reminiscent of the central
controller in "Tron" and you start wondering if the artists from the
other films will receive royalty payments for this one.
Then there's the matter of Atlantis itself. One of the most enduring
legends of all time, the fabled city that disappeared beneath the sea
cries out for overkill. Atlantis should be an opulent vista of majestic
buildings stretching as far as the eye can see. Flowing ivy should
entwine the massive pillars supporting the exotic and ornate structures.
Atlantis should look like a combination of ancient Rome and the Emerald
City from Oz. Instead, we get shots of what looks like a grandiose
office complex. Where's the magic? Where's the wonder? Trust me, ladies
and gentlemen, Donovan would never have written a song about this place.
As for what happens in the office complex, here's the skinny. Following
a prologue depicting the sinking of Atlantis, the story jumps to 1914,
where we meet scrawny linguist and map expert Milo Thatch (voiced by
Michael J. Fox), a young man obsessed with the lost kingdom. His boss
(David Ogden Stiers) and coworkers dismiss the museum curator as a
crackpot, but Milo remains a true believer; after all, his grandfather
once told him about the mysterious Shepherd's Journal, said to contain
the secret to locating Atlantis.
Enter billionaire Preston B. Whitmore (John Mahoney), who has the book
and wants Milo to join an expedition to the mythic land. In short order,
the kid ends up in a Captain Nemo-style submarine with a ragtag (is
there any other kind?) group of mercenaries. Heading the crew is brawny
Commander Rourke (James Garner) and his tough lieutenant Helga Sinclair
(Claudia Christian), along with dirt-covered geologist Gaetan Moliere
(Corey Burton), affectionately called "Mole"; Mrs. Packard (Florence
Stanley), a chain-smoking radio operator; droll demolitions expert Vinny
Santorini (Don "Father Guido Sarducci" Novello); fast-talking Dr. Sweet
(Phil Morris); Audrey Ramirez (Jacqueline Obradors), a no-nonsense
mechanic; and a crusty cook known as  what else  Cookie (the late Jim
Varney).
The crew nearly meets their end early on when a violent encounter with
the Leviathan, a giant Crustacean-like machine, results in the
destruction of the sub. Scrambling into escape pods, the team continues
the adventure, following the directions in the Journal. They eventually
discover the lost city, only to find it is still inhabited. Atlantis
lives, courtesy of a crystal energy that provides the denizens light,
power and the ability to heal.
Milo and company meet Princess Kida (Cree Summer), a radiant being who
takes them to meet her father, the King (Leonard Nimoy), who immediately
orders them to leave. They do and the story is over. Just kidding. To no
surprise, certain members of the expedition have ulterior motives,
leading to a kidnapping, lots of fighting and a heaping pile of New Age
hooey.
The New Age stuff fits in with Disney's intense desire to be all things
to all people. The expedition, a rainbow coalition of sexes, races and
ethnic groups, reflects the same mindset, although the gang contains a
number of stereotypes. What's the deal with the filthy Frenchman? Do all
Latin women in cartoons have to sound like Rosie Perez? Must all black
male characters be gruff, but gentle giants? And does the leading man
always have to be white?
Continuing a long-standing Disney tradition, parents are an endangered
species here. Milo is an orphan (Disney loves orphans) and, while I
don't want to reveal specifics about the fates of Princess Kida's mom
and dad, it is safe to say that by the end of the film her Christmas
list is shorter.
Given the scarcity of big screen family material, "Atlantis: The Lost
Empire" will likely draw a huge audience. Admittedly, the movie is light
years better than most of the junk currently being cranked out for
children, and the filmmakers deserve credit for avoiding gross-out
humor, but this production nonetheless remains a minor league affair.
Incidentally, if you think I'm being unduly hard on "Atlantis," remember
this: With their stellar list of creations, it was Disney that set the
quality bar so high. Now it's their responsibility to live up to their
own standards.

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A clumsy nerd with a lofty dream to find Atlantis, the lost continent, 
finally finds a believer in his cause, gets a crew and heads towards the 
unknown.
CRITIQUE:
Hmmmmm. Remember when Disney used to churn out animated greatness during 
the 1990s? Well, it appears as though those days are far behind us, as 
this film checks in with rather unimpressive features. First of all, 
this isn't a "kids" movie. This seems to be an animated movie created 
for adults, but one that doesn't completely click on either level. It's 
not a film that will bore anyone stupid, I mean, it does sprinkle a 
little bit of entertainment here and there, but once all is said and 
done, the only thing that I was left with was a nasty case of the 
ho-hums. Which is why I'm not recommending this film to anyone in the 
theatres (especially since the animation in the film is less than 
impressive), but might suggest that you check it out on video one day, 
if the topic interests you. Actually, much like its counterpart opening 
film this weekend, the missed opportunity that was TOMB RAIDER, this 
picture also lacked a certain "energy" about it. It wasn't all that 
funny, all that interesting, all that exciting or all that entertaining. 
Sure, the movie sets up an interesting premise, but why did it have to 
spend half an hour showing us how they all get to Atlantis? We already 
know that they're gonna end up there anyway, and since the development 
of the story up to that point isn't all that interesting (no real funny 
moments, little action, no real "bad guy", etc...), the film just helped 
me shrug my shoulders during its opening half.
They also set up all of these "quirky" side characters (all of whom 
seemed ideally picked to cover as many races/ethnicities sitting in the 
audience), but I really didn't think that any of them were all that 
humorous or interesting. Actually, I did like the "Italian" guy a 
little, he was pretty funny at times, but what was the deal with that 
Mole character? Talk about seeming "out of place" in a movie! Hmmmm, I 
don't know. This movie is definitely not the next SHREK. But to be fair 
to Disney, I guess this film wasn't really trying to be funny or reach 
for the "kids" audience either (at least, it didn't appear to be). I 
guess this film was more of a "serious animation" experiment, which for 
the most part, just didn't do it for me. None of the characters really 
stood out, the story was somewhat interesting, but not really all that 
engaging, and the animation, well...I'm sorry but there was practically 
nothing that was special about the animation in this film. It was quite 
rudimentary, to say the least.
But yeah, I did still appreciate the whole Atlantis "behind-the-scenes" 
stuff, dug the connection between the lead character and the chick from 
Atlantis, and did finally "get into" the movie during its final 15 
minutes or so (which concluded on a pretty touching moment and some cool 
action scenes). But overall, the film just didn't live up to all of the 
previous Disney animated movies, or any of the cooler, hipper 
computer-generated animated flicks that have rocked the box-office over 
the past couple of years. I don't know what it was exactly, but 
something was just missing from this movie. All in all, a 
disappointment.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Emperor's New Groove (8/10) - Hercules (6/10) - The Iron Giant 
(5/10) - Mulan (7/10) - The Road to El Dorado (7/10) - Shrek (8/10) - 
Titan A.E. (7/10) - Toy Story (7/10) - Toy Story 2 (8/10)

Author
Eugene Novikov
Featuring the voice talents of Michael J. Fox, James
Garner, Cree Summer, Don Novello, Claudia Christian,
Phil Morris, Jacqueline Obradors, Florence Stanley,
Jim Varney, John Mahoney, Leonard Nimoy, Corey Burton,
David Ogden Stiers. Directed by Gary Troudsdale and
Kirk Wise. Rated PG.
I support Disney's efforts to move away from their
traditional "Broadway musical" formula for making
animated features. Though some great films emerged
from the Disney showtunes era, the format is tired,
and the latest installments have been weak. Last
year's The Emperor's New Groove was a huge step
forward. Atlantis: The Lost Empire is a step back.
Apparently, the animators were looking to place an
emphasis on story this time around, and they failed.
The movie earns points for making its protagonist a
linguist, of all things. Disney also reportedly hired
a real-life linguist to make up a language for the
Atlanteans, but more on that later. Michael J. Fox,
who, since beginning his fight with Parkinson's
disease, has become voice artist extraordinaire, plays
Milo, the scientist in question. He has dedicated his
career at a museum of natural history to discovering
the lost continent of Atlantis. His superiors have
rebuked his efforts, dismissing his obsession as a
hopeless flight of fancy.
Little did Milo know that his father, also a
researcher dedicated to finding Atlantis, discovered
an ancient book that explains how to find it. He left
this book to an old friend of his, who has already
booked a state of the art expedition to the fabled
underwater continent, and saved Milo a seat.
So Milo and a motley crew of military officers,
pilots, diggers and demolitionists, take off in a
bizarre-looking submarine to look for Atlantis. As the
advertising not-so-subtly suggests, they find it, and
find also that its ancient society has survived to
this day. But Milo's companions aren't interested in
studying these people; they want to steal the Heart of
Atlantis, the industrial-sized diamond that is the
continent's life force, and leave the inhabitants to
die.
Disney has ditched most of the extraneous elements
here; there are no funny sidekicks, no cute animals,
no musical numbers. It's all about story, folks. The
problem is that the story is weak, possibly even more
so than "ordinary" Disney features. The movie puts in
some strictly surface-level mythology to justify the
bizarre supernatural proceedings (the film has been
compared with Japanese anime, but even the weakest
entry in that genre has more guts than Atlantis) and
then bases its climax on the entirely illogical
presumption that the gang of profiteers would take the
trouble to destroy the continent before leaving with
the loot.
You can't have it both ways. A Disney movie must
either have the distractions that the filmmakers tried
so hard to purge or it must have a solid storyline
that stands on its own merits. If anything, Atlantis
won't be notable in 10 years as a new Disney
rennaissance a lá The Little Mermaid, but as the last
stand of tranditional cel animation against the
newfangled CGI that seems to be taking over the genre.
And while the graphics here are impressive, they
amount to little compared to the likes of Shrek.
With The Emperor's New Groove, the Mouse House proved
that it can still tell a good story and make a
terrifically entertaining production. Atlantis proves
that if you want to tell a story, you need a story. 

Author
Bob Bloom

 Atlantis: The Lost Empire (2001) 2 stars out of 4. Featuring the vocal
talents of Michael J. Fox, James Garner, Cree Summer, Leonard Nimoy,
Phil Morris, Jacqueline Obradors, Don Novello, Corey Burton, Claudia
Christian, John Mahoney, Jim Varney, David Ogden Stiers and Florence
Stanley. Screenplay by Tab Murphy. Story by Kirk Wise & Gary Trousdale,
Joss Whedon, Bryce Zabel & Jackie Zabel and Tab Murphy. Directed by Wise
and Trousdale. Rate PG. Running time: 93 minutes.
 Disneyís new animated adventure, Atlantis: The Lost Empire, suffers
from a lack of focus.
 The feature is an uneasy mix of comedy and action thriller, with a
violence quotient higher than the usual Disney fare.
 The body count alone should make parents think twice before allowing
the young ones to visit Atlantis.
 Yet the movie seems aimed at them, but the storyline and situations
appear to be tilted toward an older audience.
 The toll ó though no actual deaths are shown ó is high. The feature is
riddled with explosions that claim scores, but it all happens so quickly
that the youngest viewers may not even comprehend the consequences.
 This is not your fluffy, cuddly Disney. No singing teacups, wacky wort
hogs or talking apes, here.
 At about 93 minutes, Atlantis begins rather slowly, building up to the
action sequences. A lot of dialogue and exposition may cause the
youngsters to squirm until the story picks up steam.
 The animation, of course, is top-rate. After all, this is Disney. The
composition is multilayered and the water looks so real you think you
might be able to go for a swim. But it lacks the majestic sweep of The
Lion King or the magical texture of Beauty and the Beast.
 Atlantisí hero is Milo Thatch, a dreamer who wishes to follow in the
steps of his famed explorer grandfather. His obsession is the lost
continent of Atlantis. Milo claims he knows its location, but, of
course, his ideas are ridiculed at every turn.
 An old friend of his grandfatherís ó honoring a wager made with the old
gent ó finances an expedition. The plot thickens as the groupís leader
has a hidden agenda, a point that may be too subtle for some in the
audience to immediately pick up on.
 Of course, Milo unknowingly leads his band of craven mercenaries to
Atlantis, and that is when the plot kicks in at full throttle. A battle
sequence involving bi-planes, a hot-air balloon and futuristic-looking
Atlantian airships is exciting ó even if it does feel borrowed from
George Lucas ó but, again, itís a lot of death and destruction.
 Atlantisí saving grace is the vocal talent of Michael J. Fox as Milo.
He is a milquetoast-like hero, favoring brains over brawn. He is
childlike and overly enthusiastic about fulfilling his dream of
discovery.
 Fox is able to convey all this, making Milo a most likable young chap.
 Other voices lending themselves to the proceedings include James Garner
as Commander Rourke, the expedition leader; Cree Summer as Princess Kida
of Atlantis; Leonard Nimoy as the King of Atlantis; Phil Morris as Dr.
Sweet, Jacqueline Obradors as Audrey, the group's precocious mechanic;
Don Novello, basically reprising his Father Guido Sarducci, as
explosives expert Vinny; the late Jim Varney as Cookie; and most
notably, Florence Stanley, as Mrs. Packard, the droll, chain-smoking
communications operator.
 Though set in 1914, Atlantis is a very PC outing, with individuals from
every color and gender represented.
 Atlantis pales in comparison with some past Disney efforts, most
notably Tarzan and The Lion King. The film does offer some spectacular
animated sequences, but overall it lacks a certain spark. It's a bit
hollow and flaccid.
 One clue to the filmís ultimate problem is the number of credited
writers. While the screenplay is credited to Tab Murphy, story credit is
given to co-directors Kirk Wise and Gary Trousdale as well as Joss
Whedon, Bryce Zabel, Jackie Zabel and Murphy.
 The very young will view Atlantis as eye-candy, while the older kids
and adults will probably appreciate the storyline and pyrotechnics.
 But this is one effort that lacks that fabled Disney magical touch.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Robin Clifford
Young Milo Thatch (voice of Michael J. Fox) has the heart of an adventurer.
When a long lost and very old journal, once found by his explorer
grandfather, surfaces, the cartographer/linguistics expert becomes the key
to unraveling an ancient mystery in Disney's latest animation, "Atlantis:
The Lost Empire."
Disney Studios has played the release of "Atlantis" very close, too close,
to the chest for a potential animation blockbuster, so I had mixed feelings
of anticipation when we attended a Saturday morning kids' screening. Then,
the MPAA rating came up on the screen - Rated PG. What's this? A Disney
summer anime with a PG rating? I suspected, at this point, that something
good was up.
The movie starts with our soon-to-be hero, Milo, lecturing his "colleagues"
on the existence of the lost continent of Atlantis. It turns out he's just
pretending as he prepares to present his theory to his doubtful boss, Mr.
Harcourt (voice of David Ogden Stiers). Unfortunately for Milo, Harcourt
considers the theory - Atlantis is in Iceland - absurd. But, when a
gorgeous blonde, Helga (voice of Claudia Christian), sets up a meeting with
eccentric billionaire Preston B. Whitmore (voice of John Mahoney), Milo
finally finds someone who will listen to him.
Not only does Whitmore listen, he has already invested enormous sums of
money preparing for an expedition to find lost Atlantis and has been
waiting for someone with Milo's unique talents to join his team. In charge
of the mission is the burly Commander Rourke (voice of James Garner) who
leads his crew, in an enormous submarine, to the map coordinates dictated
by Milo from the ancient journal.
When the team reaches the undersea entrance to Atlantis, Leviathan, a huge,
metal, lobster-like guarding the doorway to the lost land, attacks them.
Rourke orders an attack on the beast and launches a phalanx of mini-subs.
They are only partly effective in stopping the metal monster and most of
the crew of 200 is lost. As the remaining explorers journey, heavily armed
and equipped, into Atlantis, Milo and the rest soon learn that they are not
entering a dead archaeological site but a living, breathing land teaming
with life, including the Atlanteans, and Milo is the only one who speaks
the language.
It's at this point that the story shifts gears from adventure and a search
for the ancient culture to one of intrigue. The mythical power source that
allowed the advanced evolution of the Atlaneans comes to the attention of
Rourke and his henchmen and they plan to take the treasured crystal for
their own gain. At the same time, Milo falls for a beautiful Atlantean,
Princess Kida (Cree Summer), and learns that the land and its power supply
are slowly dying. Only he can read the ancient runes and save Atlantis, but
is it too little, too late in the face of the invaders?
Much in the tradition of Jules Verne adventures, "Atlantis: the Lost
Empire" melds past period setting with the futuristic. Such adventures as
"20,000 Leagues Under the Sea" and "Journey to the Center of the Earth"
come to mind as the high-tech action of "Atlantis" kicks in and animated
splendor of Disney comes to the fore. This is, visually, one of the most
advanced animation works to come out of the industry giant. The deep canvas
background animation developed for "Tarzan" is used liberally, giving the
proceeds a live action look and feel. The combination of traditional cell
animation and computer-generated imagery (CGI) is seamless, with fluidity
of movement that, too, harkens to live adventure/action films.
There is a big cast of vocal talent accompanying Michael J. Fox - who gives
naďve, boyish charm to his intelligent, kind Milo. James Garner gives a
good twist as his Commander Rourke shifts from benign leader to ruthless
mercenary, along with his babe henchlady, Helga (Christian), who is one
tough chick. There is an ample supply of comic relief provided by the other
vocal cast and their characters. The late Jim Varney lends his drawl one
last time in the guise of Cookie, whose idea of nutrition is meat along
with great quantities of grease. Don Novello (Father Guido Sarducci) lends
his vocal talent as the sardonic, carefree explosives expert, Vinny
Santorini. Florence Stanley (TV's "Barney Miller" and "Fish") is a riot as
the chain-smoking, curmudgeon communications office, Mrs. Packard, in a
vocal perf that would have made Thelma Ritter proud. Vocal talent Corey
Burton provides and outrageous French accent to his character "Mole"
Moliere, the team's earth digger. Leonard Nimoy provides dignity to the
voice of the king of Atlantis.
The production owes a great deal to other animations that have preceded it.
Elements from such films as Ralph Bakshi's "Wizards," "The Iron Giant" and
"Beauty and the Beast" are evident, as are the aforementioned Jules Verne
adaptations to the screen. These various antecedents may have influenced
"Atlantis," but the makers take these elements and spin them into a fresh,
rip-roaring action/adventure that will please older kids through to the
adults. Younger kids will be left behind with this more adult-oriented
Disney animation, so send them to see "Shrek" instead.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Max Messier
The Disney Industrial Complex and Atlantis: The Lost Empire
A feature story by Max Messier
Copyright 2001 filmcritic.com
Say what you will, but the Disney juggernaut is a sight to behold. 
Recently, filmcritic.com sat down with a few of the biggest names in
Disney, to discuss its big 2001 summer release (Atlantis) and the future
of animation as we know it.
We talked with Thomas Schumacher, the head of Disney Animation, who
discussed the main elements for creating a financially successful
animated feature, as well as with Kirk Wise and Gary Trousdale,
directors of Atlantis, to discuss the process of creating an animated
feature through CGI and traditional cell animation.
Thomas Schumacher -- Head of Disney Animation
filmcritic.com: Does Atlantis mark a departure from the Broadway
musical-style of Disney's past?
Schumacher: Disney actually produces an entire canon of musicals as
first envisioned by Walt Disney -- the Broadway musical style, the film
musical style, the pop musical style such as Tarzan -- and with
Atlantis, the film represents the first time we didn't use music or
songs for character illuminating or storytelling.  Looking forward
though, Lilo and Stitch [Disney's big 2002 release] uses six Elvis songs
-- original tracks used for storytelling purposes -- which is called in
the business "needle drop music" -- songs which people are familiar
with.  That film represents the first time Disney is using that type of
known music in one of its animation features.  Phil Collins is working
on another animated feature for Disney as well.  Even John Resnick from
the Goo Goo Dolls is contributing a song to the upcoming animation
feature Treasure Plant -- a retelling of Treasure Island set in outer
space, equipped with Long John Silver and his cyborg, shape-changing
parrot.  All of these projects represent Disney's continued support of
various music styles incorporated in its feature animation pieces.
Was there a concern about the PG rating of Atlantis?
No because the last summer's Dinosaur was PG, and if Atlantis could do
the sort of business that movie did [$140 million domestic and the
number one U.S. animated movie in Japan of all time], I would be very
happy.  The market varies all the time and I also believe that if Lion
King came out today, it would have a PG rating as well.  I am not
nervous at all.
That said, there has always been a history of controversy in Disney
animation features.  There was a particular sequence in Snow White and
the Seven Dwarfs that had to be cut due the reactions of the audience. 
The dramatic elements of the characters always have been a trademark of
films produced by Walt Disney all the way up to the current animation
features of today.
How will Atlantis -- which is mainly being viewed as another big Disney
summer movie -- be positioned to stand out among the big summer releases
of 2001?
Atlantis does fit into "The Disney Brand."  It does represent the type
of film Walt would have made.  Atlantis is being positioned as an
"action film" and its trailers will be seen with such films as Pearl
Harbor.  These trailers will give the audience the clear impression that
you are not watching another Beauty and the Beast.  It's a kids' film as
well as a film that will fill the seats with adults during the nighttime
screenings.  Given that, many different pockets of animation lovers will
be drawn to the film.
Generally, are Disney's animation features more financially successful
than its live-action movies?
2/3 of an animation feature's business is done internationally.  During
the heyday of home video, for every $10 million of domestic box office
revenue for a Disney animated feature, you would expect to sell a
million videos.  That trend started to dip when every household had 50
to 70 videos in their libraries.  But with the advent of DVD, that trend
is starting to pick up again.  The DVD of Atlantis has already been laid
out with all kinds of different supplement materials.  Animation films
also make a sizable amount of money from merchandising.
Has the Happy Meal deal already been set up?
Yep, the McDonald's promotion is always very successful because it
elevates their brand with the association with all different Disney
characters -- including the characters of Atlantis.
What other projects are generated from a single Disney animation
feature?
Generally, live action features do not the have the life spans that
animation features are able to produce.  For example, Lion King had the
original movie, the Timon and Pumbaa cartoon show, Lion King II: Simba's
Pride, Lion King III (in production), and ultimately a re-release. 
Also, the Broadway version of Lion King was the most successful
production of the decade.
A new IMAX version of Beauty and Beast -- with added footage -- is
scheduled for release next year.  The direct-to-video sequel Lady and
The Tramp II will possibly generate the largest video sales of the year
for Disney.  Also, a weekly cartoon show derived from Atlantis is in the
works as well.
Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise -- Directors of Atlantis
How do you two share the directorial duties of an animation feature?
Wise: Animation is mainly a strong collaborative medium.  Gary and I
were fortunate to work with many talented artists during the making of
Atlantis.  Our relationship on the movie is mainly based on
collaboration -- the story, design and look, the editing of the movie. 
The only time we split up was during the full production mode of the
movie.  I mainly worked with the animators and the clean-up artists and
Gary would work with layout and special effects.  It's a very informal
division.
Trousdale: During the screenings of the dailies, if Kirk sees some
special effects he doesn't like or I see some animation I don't like,
we're pretty vocal: "What the hell were you thinking?"
Wise: It's understood, though, that not one area of the film is one
person's own turf.  Some days Gary would work with the animators and I
would work with the special effects guys.  It's a very big give and
take.
Trousdale: It's kind of an experimental division.  When we worked on
Beauty and the Beast, it just kind of worked, so we've used it ever
since.
What part of animation is the most challenging when making a feature
length movie?
Wise: The longest process is mainly the story development and
pre-production.  Pre-visualing the entire story on storyboards.
Trousdale: It's an ongoing process when we are working on the story.  We
don't work with a script like a live-action movie but with a basic
script outline.  We give those to our animators.  The script pages may
say something like, "The submarine is attacked by a huge sea creature." 
We've got six minutes to do this and you mainly rely on your story
artists to visually create that scene.
Wise: The story artists have tons of freedom to create action, dialogue,
and every facet of the script's outline.  The storyboard artist's
effects are what shape the story and its characters.  Sometimes, the
storyboard artist's suggestion can change the makeup of a certain
character.  In the case of Moliere [a character of Atlantis], as
scripted, he was a very stuffy, professorial guy -- a French
mineralogist who was a connoisseur of dirt.  One of story artists took
this original concept and juiced up the character into this horrible
little burrowing creature with a wacky coat and strange headgear with
extending eyeballs.  We were so enthralled with the new look that we
changed to script to fit the new character.
What other characters in Atlantis didn't make the final cut?
Wise: In the early drafts of the story, Preston Whitmore had a nephew --
sort of like a Miles Crane character -- who was always getting into
trouble on the expedition.  We decided to cut him because the story was
more about Milo and his 'odd-man out' scenario and the nephew character
ended up being too distracting from that key element of the story.
Milo, at one point, had a pet rat that lived in his pocket.  But as the
story progressed, we felt it was too familiar, like we've been down that
road before -- the animal sidekick that would mimic Milo's actions.  The
main reason for discarding that character was because you would have
expected it from a Disney story.  We want the story to be about Milo --
his story and his relationship with the characters -- instead of some
cute sidekicks.
How did the Atlantian language that was used throughout the film
develop?
Wise: It was inspired mainly by other works of fantasy we like.  We are
big fans of the Star Wars series and Star Trek series -- and even Lord
of the Rings.  Any scenario where an alien culture is so well
thought-out with history and customs and language -- Atlantis present
the unique opportunity to create a similar vein as seen in previous
fantasy pieces.
Trousdale: The issue of the language came up when we talked to linguist
Mark Okerran -- we wanted something like a Tower of Babel kind of
language -- a language which birthed many other languages.
Mark used a combination of dead languages from extinct California-based
tribes, Hebrew, Chinese, and a pinch of Latin for the final product of
the Atlantian language.
Wise: Mark was like the real-life version of Milo Thatch.
Was the production time lessened by using CGI (computer generated
images) components in the film versus the traditional cell animation
techniques?
Trousdale: It's not any easier. It's not any shorter.  It's not any
cheaper.
Wise: Certain sequences like the leviathan sequence would have taken ten
years to draw in traditional cell-based animation.  As you get more and
more tools for placing images on the screen, your appetite grows and you
start imaging things like, "Hey, we could build a mile-long giant
lobster with these things."
Trousdale: The fact is, Kirk and I come from an era before the inclusion
of CGI animation in a feature.  We always tell the guys that build the
CGI stuff, "Don't get too cocky because we could always do this
traditionally."  We always have a plan B up our sleeves.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise.
Voices: Michael J. Fox, James Garner, Cree Summer, Jim Varney, Corey Burton, 
Claudia Christian, Phil Morris, Don Novello, Jacqueline Obradors, Florence 
Stanley, Leonard Nimoy, John Mahoney, David Ogden Stiers.
2001 - 93 minutes
Rated PG (for action violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 16, 2001.
"Atlantis: The Lost Empire," Walt Disney Pictures' latest summer animated 
feature, is a step away from their usual cartoon offerings. In place of cute, 
furry, wise-cracking animals and a stream of pop songs is an old-fashioned 
adventure yarn with the only appearance of an animal coming in the form of 
the hero's meowing pet cat. None of the characters break into song, and the 
legend that the story is based on comes from the words of ancient philosopher 
Plato. The film is rated PG, as well, and has one character who chain-smokes 
throughout. It's pretty safe to say that "Atlantis" is most certainly not the 
movie you've grown to expect from the Disney studio, and that isn't 
necessarily a bad thing.
Set in 1914, Lanky Milo Thatcher (Michael J. Fox) is a Washington, D.C. 
native whose linguistic skills have helped him to get a job from the local 
university. Obsessed with the legend of the lost city of Atlantis, which is 
said to have been engulfed into the sea thousands of years ago, Milo is 
delighted to be asked to participate in an expedition in search of the 
underwater ruins. Following a disastrous encounter with a giant sea creature 
that leaves their submarine destroyed and much of the crew dead, the 
remaining members are taken aback to finally reach Atlantis, and just a 
little surprised to find an entire Atlantian society that has mysteriously 
survived after all these years. Striking up a friendship with Princess Kida 
(Cree Summer), who, in turn, tell each other about their separate ways of 
living, Milo is distraught to find that the rest of his crew, most notably 
Commander Rourke (James Garner) and Helga (Claudia Christian), are planning 
to make a ton of money off their discovery, with little regard to the people 
of Atlantis.
While "Atlantis: The Lost Empire," directed by Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise 
(1991's "Beauty and the Beast"), is a remarkably more mature, adult-minded 
Disney film than the norm, it fails to go down as one of their more 
successful contemporary features. Lacking the pure entertainment value of 
1999's "Tarzan," 1994's "The Lion King," and 1989's "The Little Mermaid," 
"Atlantis" is deliberately paced and not nearly as child-friendly, although 
kids will, no doubt, enjoy it. It's a good movie, to be sure, and one with 
several rousing action scenes, but it lacks that something--that 
finesse--that all of the best Disney movies have attained.
Even if "Atlantis" isn't terribly memorable, it does set up several 
interesting characters and relationships. The gradual romance between Milo 
and Kida is understated and charming, with both Michael J. Fox and Cree 
Summer turning in emotionally involving voice work. It isn't love at first 
sight for this pair, and they don't predictably spend the whole movie making 
goo-goo eyes at each other. Instead, they are intelligent people with their 
own ideas and thoughts. Also standing out are Sweet (Phil Morris), a muscular 
doctor who is a softy at heart (and the first black character to appear in a 
Disney animated movie); Cookie, a very bad cook who means well, and is 
poignantly voiced by the late, great Jim Varney; and the street-smart, 
teenage mechanic, Audrey (Jacqueline Obradors).
The animation style that "Atlantis" uses is fairly conventional, but it works 
within the confines of this particular story. While the majority of what is 
onscreen is hand-drawn, there are occasional lapses into computer-generated 
territory, with just a hint of anime influence. "Atlantis" is not quite as 
bold or redefining as it would like to be, particularly in the shadow of the 
superlative "Shrek," but it does succeed in not seeming like a movie strictly 
made for children. More along the lines of 2000's "Titan A.E." than anything 
else, "Atlantis: The Lost Empire" is a worthwhile venture that may not go 
down as a modern animated classic, but it does expose Disney as a studio more 
than willing to break free of tradition and try something a little different, 
for once. It's about time.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/reviewsby?Dustin+Putman
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/dustinputman.htm
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Walt Disney Pictures
 Director: Gary Trousdale, Kirk Wise
 Writer:  Tab Murphy
 Cast: Voices of Michael J. Fox, James Garner, Cree
Summer, Jim Varney, Corey Burton, Claudia Christian, Phil
Morris, Don Novello, Jacqueline Obradors, Florence Stanley,
Leonard Nimoy, John Mahoney, David Ogden Stiers
   For animated stories that can absorb the attention of both
adults and kids and provide substantial lessons as well, you
can't go wrong with "Shrek" (which pokes fun at the concept
that surface beauty is everything), "Chicken Run" (a shrewd
tale which among other things conveys a note about animal
rights), and "The Iron Giant" (which parodies 1950s paranoia). 
For sheer spectacle, however, without Disney trademarks like
Broadway songs and snugly animals and without any real
Aesopian dimensions, look to "Atlantis."  "Atlantis" provided
me with my first experience with digital projection, the wave of
the future, and darned if the colors aren't brighter, sharper
and, well, more colorful than film stock could afford. For the
kids there's non-stop action and loud noises which make this
film a must for the big big screen.
   Directed by Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise ("Beauty and the
Beast," "The Hunchback of Notre Dame"), "Atlantis" takes us
back to 1914 when a bright-eyed, idealistic young man, the
grandson of a great explorer who found a map of Atlantis,
succeeds in raising foundation money to search for the lost
continent.  After a dazzling prologue featuring the big bang
which caused this fabled land to be lost near the coast of
Iceland, we watch Milo Thatch (voice of Michael J. Fox)
emerge behind his oversized glasses to join a group
in search of the buried land.  They include a cook who is
awfully fond of bacon grease, Cookie (Jim Varney); an expert
with explosives who, as one character remarks, looks as
though he had just come out of a Turkish prison, Vinny (Don
Novello); a robust physician adept at chiropractic
manipulations of the neck, Sweet (Phil Morris); a mole (Corey
Burton) who is considered like a pet but is adept at digging;
and good-looking but cynical Helga (Claudia Christian)
together with the commander of the group, Rourke (James
Garner).  
   Zipping along in a submarine-like object that could have
come out of Jules Verne's most celebrated sci-fi novel, they
engage soon enough in battles; first with the largest lobster
ever discovered east of Maine, ultimately with a couple of
members of their own team who break off into a minor civil
war with the crew.  When they do discover their objective,
which could be a Shangri-La if the civilization were not
doomed to die out, they meet King Nedakh (Leonard Nimroy)
and his heir-apparent, the lovely Princess Kida (Cree
Summer).  Kida is sharp-looking and playful, giving the
impression that "Atlantis" is not going to fall into the Shrekian
idea that beauty is unimportant in heroines.
   Less talk, more action, appears the credo of Disney's latest,
spectacular animated feature, while James Newton Howard's
music, which at some times appears ready to compete with
the score of "Pearl Harbor," inflects the drama of this heroic
adventure.  "Atlantis" features subtitles whenever the local
dialect is spoken (a language known to the adventurers as
gibberish), a concept which could help habituate the small fry
to the idea that English is not spoken everywhere and that
there just may be a few foreign films in their future that could
match "Armageddon" in quality.
Rated PG.  Running time: 93 minutes.  (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Disney's ATLANTIS: THE LOST EMPIRE mindlessly follows an animated 
formula so old that it creaks.  A rag-tag group of eccentrics, led by a 
self-described "adventure capitalist," Commander Lyle T. Rourke (James 
Garner), is out to find and plunder the riches of the lost continent of 
Atlantis.  Occupying the high moral ground, Michael J. Fox plays Milo 
Thatch, a museum cartographer and linguist who wants to locate Atlantis 
for all the right scientific reasons.  Once there, Milo finds a babe in 
a bikini, Princess Kidagakash "Kida" (Cree Summer), who is a couple of 
thousand years old, but doesn't look more than 20.
The movie's exterior sequences dazzle with sweeping grandeur, but the 
interior ones are as flat as the story's lifeless, silly dialog.  "Melt 
the butter and bring out the bibs," Commander Rourke barks to his crew.  
"I want this monster served up on a silver platter."  The crew includes 
one guy who likes to blow holes in things, one who likes to drill holes 
and one old codger who has holes in his head.  They all look act like 
tired veterans of a hundred Saturday morning cartoons.  Where is the 
imagination and humor that Disney put into TARZAN?  It had more to offer 
in five minutes than ATLANTIS does in a long hour and a half.  And 
ATLANTIS really pales in comparison to Dreamworks' SHREK.  Long sections 
of ATLANTIS could put those under thirteen to sleep.
Sometimes it is the funniest joke in a disappointing movie that best 
defines the film's limitations.  The old guy in ATLANTIS has a tattoo of 
the United States on his chest.  In order to impress a girl, he brags, 
"Watch me make Rhode Island dance," as he wiggles his tummy.  That's as 
good as ATLANTIS ever gets.  
ATLANTIS: THE LOST EMPIRE runs 1:33.  It is rated PG for action violence 
and would be acceptable for any kid of any age.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the film ***, saying that it was "good but 
wasn't that funny."  His friends, Rajiv, Maxim and Sam, all 12, gave the 
picture ****, saying that it was creative and had a good plot.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 15, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century 
theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
