Title
Review for Sydney (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chris Loar
Starring Philip Baker Hall (Sydney), John C. Reilly (John
Finnegan), Gwyneth Paltrow (Clementine), Samuel L.
Jackson (Jimmy)
Written and Directed by Paul Thomas Anderson
HARD EIGHT is Paul Thomas Anderson's debut feature, and it's
not so different in most respects from his much-hailed BOOGIE
NIGHTS.  True, NIGHTS offers us an Altman-esque sprawl of
story and character, while HARD EIGHT focuses on a small
cast and a simple tale.  But Anderson is repeating himself
thematically, and those who liked NIGHTS' family of porn stars
and low-grade filmmakers will also appreciate the strange, slightly
seedy surrogate family he creates here.  One hopes that
Anderson will start to broaden his horizons a bit, but the fact
remains that in HARD EIGHT we have a competent piece of
storytelling from a precocious young director; the film is a
vehicle for some very good performances and has a pleasant
visual style that hints of better things to come.
HARD EIGHT is essentially the story of Sydney (Philip Baker
Hall), an aging gambler who takes a young fellow named
John Finnegan (John C. Reilly) under his wing, becoming a
stand-in father to him.  We meet both Sydney and John during
the film's prologue outside a dingy roadside coffeshop in Reno.
John is sitting outside in the dirt, very visibly down on his luck.
He's just lost his money in Vegas, and in the process lost the
chance to give his mother the funeral she deserves.  Sydney
takes John inside, buys him a cup of coffee, and offers to help
him bury his mother and perhaps put his life back together --
by showing him how to play the casino system for everything
it's worth.  John, though skeptical, accepts the offer.
We skip over the next two years to get to the heart of the film.
John and Sydney have become friends -- or, rather, family.  John's
missing both his parents, and it's obvious from the get-go that
Sydney serves as a surrogate father to him.  They're an
appropriate match; John is an overgrown child, all puppy-dog
eyes and naivete, while Sydney as played by Hall has a powerful,
relaxed presence.  Hall's an actor of impressive talents, and while
his performance here is slightly uneven, he is perfectly cast; the
lines in his face convey far more than those the script gives him.
He hints at restraint and secret knowledge with every blink of his
heavy eyelids, and he's a delight to watch.  Reilly is also good
here as the weak and gullible son; his lack of experience is
written all over his well-intentioned face.
The only other two characters who matter are Gwyneth Paltrow's
Clementine, John's slightly troubled love interest, and Samuel L.
Jackson as Jimmy, John's disrespectful, irreverent, and slightly
dangerous friend.  Jackson and Hall are particularly good when
onscreen together; Hall's old-school Mafia conservatism -- his
deference to women, his dislike of anything loud or flashy --
contrasts vividly with Jackson's crass, upstartish muscleman
with a gun.
The rest of the story really ought not be revealed; the film traffics
in Sydney's secrets, and it's important to see it the first time
without knowing where the plot is going.  Suffice it to say that
Sydney's relationship with John is more complex than is initially
obvious.
I said the film covers the same ground as BOOGIE NIGHTS,
and the films are nowhere closer than in their treatment of
their morally ambiguous father figures, Sydney and BOOGIE
NIGHTS' Jack Horner.  Both serve as ersatz parents to otherwise
lost young men, and both seem like strange choices for that role,
with their seedy lifestyles and questionable morals.  But Sydney
is a more interesting and complex variation on this theme -- more
fleshed-out than Horner.  For while Horner doesn't see his own
sins -- just his own impending obsolescence -- Sydney knows
how many secrets he has, and needs to pretend to be much that
he is not if he is to serve effectively as John's father.  And that's a
very interesting way of looking at fatherhood in general; for I
suppose that many fathers must feel at times that they're playing
a role they simply aren't cut out for.  Fathers in stories (though
not, I suppose, in the real world) always hide their weakness and
their guilt from their children.  Sydney does this, too, and goes to
extraordinary lengths to keep John innocent of the knowledge of
his new father's sins.  It's not clear in the end if we're supposed
to see this as noble or as base, and whether we should feel love
or revulsion for Sydney.  Perhaps both.
Taken as a whole, HARD EIGHT is far from perfect.  There is much
in both the film's conception and its execution that could have been
handled more effectively, and everything from the lighting to the
dialogue suffers from amateurism at times.  But unlike many
imperfect films, it has a number of perfect moments:  Sydney
sitting quietly at a casino table, chatting in a fatherly way with
Clementine; Sydney drinking coffee, offering a young man a second
chance at life; John and Clementine chatting nonsensically about
rigging the pay-per-view system in the hotel, slowly falling in love.
Anderson is simply superb at creating moments like these; I'm
hoping that his ability to tie these moments together into whole
movies will soon catch up.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Samuel Goldwyn/Rysher)
Starring:  Philip Baker Hall, John C. Reilly, Gwyneth Paltrow, Samuel L.
Jackson.
Screenplay:  Paul Thomas Anderson.
Producers:  Robert Jones and John Lyons.
Director:  Paul Thomas Anderson.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I'll give this to Paul Thomas Anderson:  he's got a sense of
atmosphere.  HARD EIGHT, Anderson's feature writing and directing debut,
may be even more successful than LEAVING LAS VEGAS at making casinos look
ugly, and his characters exchange dialogue as though every word had to be
yanked out of them with pliers.  That's the good news.  The bad news is
that HARD EIGHT is yet another frustrating independent film by a rookie
film-maker who has an idea of what his film should be _like_ without
having an idea of what it should be _about_.  Though generally well-acted
and interesting to look at, HARD EIGHT is more a collection of thematic
ideas than a story.
      HARD EIGHT opens with an encounter between two men at a roadside
diner somewhere in the American West.  John Finnegan (John C. Reilly) is
down on his luck after a failed attempt to win the money for his mother's
funeral playing blackjack; Sidney (Philip Baker Hall) is a solemn older
man who seems interested in helping John out.  A veteran gambler, Sidney
offers to drive John to Las Vegas and teach him a few tricks of the trade.
Though suspicious at first, John accepts Sidney's offer, and soon learns
that his methods work.  Two years later, the two are still friends and
companions now working the casinos of Reno.  There John gets involved with
a young cocktail waitress named Clementine (Gwyneth Paltrow), an
involvement which soon turns into trouble.  As Sidney tries to help John
out of his predicament, he finds himself in a predicament of his own when
a man named Jimmy (Samuel L. Jackson) reveals that he knows some dark
secrets from Sidney's past.
     An extended sequence during the first half hour of HARD EIGHT might
lead you to believe that the film is going to be a revelatory study of the
gambling culture.  On the evening of the day they first meet, Sidney
teaches John how to fool a casino into believing he had gambled thousands
of dollars, prompting offers of a free room and other perqs from the floor
manager.  It is an interesting lesson in deception -- as is a later
instruction on how to steal pay-per-view movies which could send hotels
all across America scrambling to cover themselves -- which gives HARD EIGHT
a welcome sense of authenticity.
     That sociological curiosity factor isn't enough to sustain a film,
though, and sooner or later Anderson has to get down to the business of
examining the relationships between these characters.  At least he should
have, but he never does.  We see far too little of Sidney and John
together to get a sense of their friendship, making the significant
revelations to come ring totally false.  Philip Baker Hall, the
too-little-seen actor who was so masterful as Nixon in Robert Altman's
1984 SECRET HONOR, gives an impressive, controlled performance as the
Weary Sidney, but Anderson doesn't seem to know what to do with him.  We
get a chance to see him in a variety of situations -- playing the big shot
at a craps table, cleaning up after John's messes, showing kindness to
waitress/hooker Clementine (a thanklessly unpleasant role for Paltrow) --
without really giving us a sense of who he is, as though Anderson thinks
teasing us with a dark past is sufficient.  It's not.  Every once in a
while, HARD EIGHT breaks out of its languid stupor long enough for some
gratuitous violence, a half-hearted attempt at fooling the audience into
thinking something is happening.  Every time, it doesn't take long for the
film to settle back into a bleak somnambulism.
     The only time HARD EIGHT really wakes up is when Samuel L. Jackson
turns up in two scenes, once to be crude and once to be nasty.  Jackson's
profanity-laced tirades are entertaining to a point, but it soon becomes
clear that he's merely recycling riffs from PULP FICTION's Jules because
there isn't anything here on which he can base a unique character.  He's
not really a character at all here; he's a plot device, someone who turns
up when it's necessary for something to happen.  A number of things happen
in HARD EIGHT, but none of it adds up to a narrative we should care about.
If Anderson is trying to tell a tragic tale of a man's misguided attempts
at redemption, he doesn't succeed because he has forgotten to give us
enough information about Sidney to make his fate matter.  HARD EIGHT is
evocative but thoroughly unsatisfying, a film in which an oppressive
atmosphere of foreboding is the real central character, crushing the human
characters like empty beer cans.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 2/28/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:41
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, violence, sex)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Philip Baker Hall, John C. Reilly, Gwyneth Paltrow, 
      Samuel L. Jackson 
Director: Paul Thomas Anderson
Producers: Robert Jones, John Lyons
Screenplay: Paul Thomas Anderson
Cinematography: Robert Elswit
Music: Jon Brion and Michael Penn
U.S. Distributor: The Samuel Goldwyn Company
     Inertia.  The dictionary defines it as "a property of matter by 
which it remains at rest or in uniform motion," and this is an apt 
descriptor for Paul Thomas Anderson's debut feature, HARD EIGHT.  During 
the first half, virtually nothing happens -- the characters are stuck in 
a stasis from which escape seems impossible.  Then, during the second 
half, momentum carries the story to its inescapable conclusion.  The 
dualistic nature of HARD EIGHT makes it a difficult picture to size up.  
At times, it's engrossing, but, on other occasions, it's a lesson in 
frustration.
     HARD EIGHT opens with a fascinating, twenty-minute prologue.  A 
dapper, elderly gentleman named Sydney (Philip Baker Hall), approaches a 
disheveled, younger man, John (John C. Reilly), outside a roadside 
diner.  Sydney invites John to join him for a cup of coffee and a 
cigarette.  Inside, they talk.  John's on his way back from Vegas, where 
he lost all his money trying to win enough to bury his mother.  Sydney 
thinks his intentions are admirable, and offers him an opportunity:  
come back to Vegas and learn how to get a free room and maybe even win a 
little extra cash.  Sydney's scam is deceptively simple and undeniably 
effective, and Anderson presents it with flair and an undercurrent of 
wry humor.
     The rest of HARD EIGHT takes place two years later in Reno, when 
Sydney and John are good friends.  Theirs is a father/son relationship, 
with John never far from Sydney's side.  As John's girlfriend, 
waitress/prostitute Clementine (Gwyneth Paltrow), observes to the older 
man, "He follows you and worships you like you're a captain."  
Clementine's actions soon introduce new obstacles in Sydney and John's 
friendship, as do those of a seedy security advisor named Jimmy (Samuel 
L. Jackson).
     HARD EIGHT borrows its share of conventions from noir thrillers, 
but this is more of a character drama than anything else.  Sure, there's 
some violence, gunplay, and a few plot twists, but everything keeps 
coming back to the relationship between Sydney, an aging man with an 
opaque past, and John, the damaged and none-too-bright individual he 
takes under his wing.  Clementine too is one of life's castoffs, but 
Sydney's interest in her is primarily as a companion for his surrogate 
son.  As much as Sydney likes Clementine, however, that's how much he 
dislikes Jimmy, whose vulgar, arrogant manner marks him as trouble from 
the beginning.
     I said earlier that portions of HARD EIGHT are frustrating.  
Indeed, some scenes are almost painful to watch because of everyone's 
inability to act decisively.  People talk and talk and talk, but the 
words don't mean anything, and nothing gets resolved.  Characters 
frequently speak in an elliptical manner, taking forever to get to the 
point.  It's the inertia thing.  There's a palpable reluctance to change 
to status quo.  Once it's altered, however, the chain-reaction is 
forceful and unstoppable.
     Anyone expecting the high-octane, pop-saturated drive of PULP 
FICTION will be disappointed.  HARD EIGHT is a different sort of movie 
altogether.  In fact, it owes more to films like THE MUSIC OF CHANCE 
than to Tarantino's effort.  The dialogue is rich but never glib, and 
the characters, all pictures of loneliness in one way or another, are 
carefully drawn and developed.  In fact, about the only elements PULP 
FICTION and HARD EIGHT have in common are stylistic similarities 
grounded in the noir tradition and effective performances by the always-
solid Samuel L. Jackson.
     Jackson is great, as is Gwyneth Paltrow, but those two only have 
supporting roles.  The core of HARD EIGHT, and the reason to see it, is 
the dynamic between Philip Baker Hall's Sydney and John C. Reilly's 
John.  Hall, who once stunned audiences with his amazing portrayal of 
Richard Nixon in Robert Altman's SECRET HONOR, is especially noteworthy.  
Though Sydney exudes a confident, assured manner, it doesn't take long 
for us to recognize the desperation and loneliness eating away at him 
from within.  Hall brings this out subtlety, through a carefully-
modulated performance that will linger in the mind long after the 
details of HARD EIGHT's minimalist plot have faded.
     HARD EIGHT perhaps teases us with more than it delivers.  The 
casino scenes have a sense of energy and verisimilitude that isn't 
always present when the action switches to swank hotel room and sleazy 
dives.  Yet there's something almost hypnotic about the way HARD EIGHT 
develops -- even in its slowest, most tedious moments, it keeps our 
attention.  And, at a time when independent films are relying ever more 
on comfortable formulas, that's something of an accomplishment.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Re-released unceremoniously to cash in on the success--or perhaps
more descriptively the ensemble chic--of P.T. Anderson's "Magnolia," "Hard
Eight" is writer/director Paul Thomas Anderson's first feature of four
years ago about a professional gambler (Philip Baker Hall, the game show
host in "Magnolia") with a penchant for taking lost souls under his wing.
In the film's opening scene, Sydney (Hall) approaches what appears to be a
bum sitting outside a Nevada rest stop and offers to buy him a cup of
coffee.  After John (John C. Reilly, the cop in "Magnolia") tells his tale
of losing his shirt trying to win enough money to pay for his mother's
funeral, Sydney offers to take John back to Reno and show him the tricks of
the trade.  As he showed with his second film "Boogie Nights" (as well as
the one with the frogs), Anderson has a staggering knack for snagging top
talent and bringing out their best.  In addition to Hall and Reilly, who
are very good in the film, there are also appearances by Gwyneth Paltrow as
a cocktail waitress/hooker named Clementine and Samuel L. Jackson as a
nasty piece of work named Jimmy whom the naďve John befriends against
Sydney's better judgment.  "Hard Eight" (which, if you're curious, refers
to a roll of the dice in craps) is an auspicious debut in the truest sense
of the word, an intricate and evocative work filled with Anderson's rich
characterizations, huge close-ups, and trademark snappy patter.  Can you
believe the young upstart actually has the nerve to write Sidney a line of
dialogue that begins "My darling Clementine..."?  Well he does.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Clementine (Gwyneth Paltrow) is a waitress and hooker who has a
brain the size of a small reptile.  She has recently married small time
gambler John (John C. Reilly), whose IQ is a perfect match for hers.
The night after their wedding finds them not having much luck.  Her
trick has refused to pay her $300 fee, so Clementine and John get rough
with him.  After handcuffing him and pistol-whipping him, they call his
wife to demand Clementine's hard earned cash.
     When this scheme goes awry, John calls his mentor Sydney (Philip
Baker Hall) to bail them out.  Ever laconic John tries to get them out
of their predicament.  This claustrophobic scene, which makes up the
second act of the movie HARD EIGHT, feels as if it will never end, but
at least something is happening, albeit painfully slowly.
     The first act of the movie is much worse.  The acting is superb,
the problem throughout the picture is the script and the directing by
first-time writer and director Paul Thomas Anderson.  Anderson writes
and directs in the style of David Mammet (HOUSE OF GAMES), but he lacks
Mammet's talent and insight.  Mammet's characters speak in staccato
cadence with lines full of power.  Anderson's characters have little to
say, and he makes sure they enunciate the words slowly so that we can
ponder their non-meanings.  Anderson's languid film noir may start a
new genre of dark and inane pictures.
     The film alternates between leaden prose and pregnant pauses.
"I have the money now, this moment," Sid tells Jimmy (Samuel L.
Jackson).  "I will give you all that I have."  I found myself wondering
what grade the script would get in a film school.  Would the teacher be
charitable and just suggest a rewrite or would it be deemed hopeless?
     Cinematographer Robert Elswit is fond of still lifes.  His camera
lingers on close-ups of ashtrays full of burnt-out cigarettes and ashes
to symbolize the character's lifestyles.  Most of the scenes happen in
Nevada's inexpensive casinos and hotels.  His gritty and garish images
of them make them menacing and lonely.
     HARD EIGHT is a comedy without humor, a tragedy without emotion,
and a story without meaning.  Notwithstanding these flaws, the acting
is uniformly good with my favorite being the stoic performance by
Philip Baker Hall.
     HARD EIGHT becomes an endurance test for the audience.  Will a
hundred people stick around for almost two hours hoping that sooner or
later something will happen.  In HARD EIGHT something eventually does,
but was it worth the pain?  I think not.  I talked to another critic
after the screening, and he said he thought about walking out on the
film.  I must admit, I was similarly tempted.
     HARD EIGHT runs 1:41.  It is rated R for violence and non-stop
profanity.  The show would be acceptable for most teenagers.  I do not
recommend the picture, and I give it * 1/2 only for the acting.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HARD EIGHT (director: Paul Thomas Anderson; cast: Philip Baker Hall
(Sydney), John C. Reilly (John), Samuel L. Jackson (Jimmy), Gwyneth
Paltrow (Clementine), 1997)
There are many stories that can be told in Las Vegas about those who go
there to chase their dreams. This one has a reflective mood and a quiet
sparseness to it, that gives its lonely characters a chance to either
grow as the story develops or for them to become clearer about who they
are and what they are doing.
We can see Vegas at night (or is it day), with its bright lights, as we
scrutinize those on the low end of the gambling hierachy scratch out a
living in this casino town. Las Vegas can arguably be, America's
alter-ego, even if, that city is a sharp contrast to what the rest of
the country is like. But it does offer a lure for foreign and American
visitors to see how the free wheeling, capitalist country, they imagine
America to be, operates, when it lets its puritanical hair down.
In many ways, this film reminds me of Melville's wonderful film, BOB THE
GAMBLER, as the old pro, with style and old-world charm, Sydney (Hall),
teaches the young neophyte gambler, John (Reilly), how to eke out a
living from gambling. How to do it smartly, with class. It only differs
from Melville's film, in the violence that ensues, as HARD EIGHT moves,
reluctantly, into noir film dimensions, where no bombardment of bright
neon from the swank casinos can hide the darkness present in the
characters' hearts, whose dreams have been poisoned and compromised by
the dire circumstances they find themselves in. While, Melville's film,
retains an almost unbelievable lightness to it. First time director,
Anderson, revels in the nuances of his protagonists, with a need for
them to be respected and thought of as tough minded, prepared to go as
far as killing someone in order for them to protect what they consider
valuable.
Sydney treats John to a coffee and a smoke in a diner, after Sydney
finds John sitting slumped down and unkempt in front of the diner. He
offers to help him out, no strings attached, if John will just tell what
is troubling him. John says he needs $6,ooo to pay for his mother's
funeral. The conversation between the two is guarded and minimal, and we
are left to wonder why this older, sophisticated, seasoned gambling pro,
would want to help out this youngster, as a father/son relationship
begins to develop. The answer comes toward the end of the film, though
we never really learn his pyschological reasons for doing what he does.
So we are left tantilized with this mystery man and his impeccable
manners, wondering who he is, realizing that he is not a St. Francis
type of savior, but probably some kind of wise-guy, who seems to have a
certain worldly wisdom that he can dispense to someone who is willing to
trust and follow him.
The two of them head for Vegas in Sydney's car, as Sydney stakes John to
some money and teaches him how to gamble small time, a skill he will
need to learn if he wishes to stay in Vegas. The Las Vegas scene, where
the dim-witted John operates the scam Sydney taught him, is an actual
scam of the casino. It gives me great delight to see the casino get
ripped off, as John works his $150 into $2,000 worth of credit and a
free room and amenities. I wonder if this scam really works!!!
A couple of years go by and John has come to idolize Sydney, as he feels
contented with what Sydney has done for him, feeling right at home in
Reno, attracted to the alluring but dumb cocktail waitress and part-time
hooker, Clementine (Gwyneth), in whose conversations with Sydney, we get
a look at what Las Vegas is like without all the glitter, as its
inhabitants are caught in the dark web Vegas spins. Jimmy (Jackson) is a
friend of John's, who works security inside for the casinos, but who
does not impress Sydney as being anything but a sleazy loudmouth and a
sure bet for trouble.
The final scenes involve the trouble John and Clementine get into after
getting married, and how Sydney discretely helps them, while Jimmy plays
a part in uncovering Sydney's past, something that he can't run away
from, as we, at last, find out why Sydney is doing all this for John.
The acting is more than credible, it is superb, as it is just right for
the atmosphere it sets. The sparse dialogue helps give the story an
intensity that is riveting, giving off the impression that there is
something deeper happening than there is. The characters make this film
happen. It is a good first effort by the director, who has told a tight
story and told it well, holding our interest with a fresh approach to an
old story.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ben Hoffman
HARD 8 is so perfect in every respect, it is hard to know where to
begin.  Let us start with the writing by Paul Thomas Anderson..   There
is not a word in the entire film's dialog that should be changed.
Every word has meaning; every word carries with it questions that are
raised as the story progresses.   I cannot recall when last I saw a
movie with dialog as well written. . . and delivered.
Then there is the acting.  The film has a  superb cast starting with
"Sydney," (Philip Baker Hall who one would hope will be remembered when
Best Actors are being nominated for 1997 films.)  What about the
direction, also by Anderson?  And the editing by Barbara  Tulliver of
this very taut story that feels as if at any moment something will snap
and you hope it will not.
Sydney, a middle aged  well-dressed man approaches a down and out loser
who is sitting hunched outside a coffee shop.  That is John (John C
Reilly).  Sydney asks John if he would like a cup of coffee.  John asks
for a cigarette and follows Sydney into the cafe.  Sydney asks John if
he has any money. The answer is that he does not; he lost it playing
blackjack.  Sydney asks John if he knows how to count cards while
playing blackjack.  No, he does not.  Sydney tells him only a fool
would play blackjack if he did not know how to count the cards.  Sydney
then offers to take him to Reno and teach him how to win.  And so they
are off and, in fact, John does very well.
The film moves two years forward.  We meet Clementine (Gwyneth
Paltrow), cocktail waitress and part-time prostitute.  We also meet
Jimmy (Samuel L Jackson) who is a scummy security guard at a casino who
tries his hand at blackmailing Sydney on whom he has some unsavory
dirt.
Throw all that together and HARD 8 is an absolute gem, a perfect
illustration of how to do nail-biting film noir.  Do not miss this
one.
Written and directed by Paul Thomas Anderson.
