Title
Review for Born Yesterday (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BORN YESTERDAY (1993)** Directed by Luis Mandocki. Written by Douglas
McGrath, based on the play by Garson Kanin. Photography, Lajos Koltai.
Editing, Lesley Walker. Production design, Lawrence G. Paull. Music, George
Fenton. Cast: Melanie Griffith, John Goodman, Don Johnson, Edward Herrmann,
Max Perlich, Fred Dalton Thompson, Nora Dunn, Benjamin C. Bradlee, Sally
Quinn, et al. Released by Hollywood Pictures. 102 minutes., Rated PG
(language)
Two movies by Mexicans in one week: Maria Novaro directs the Mexican
ณDanzonฒ and Luis Mandocki (ณGaby-a True Storyฒ and ณWhite Palaceฒ) directs
ณBorn Yesterday.ฒ
In 1946, Garson Kaninนs ณBorn Yesterdayฒ was a Broadway hit. In 1950 it
became a movie directed by George Cukor. Both works made a star of Judy
Holliday. The current ณBorn Yesterdayฒ claims to be based on the play, but
it is closer to the movie.
I am getting tired of comparing originals and remakes, as I have done
recently for ณSommersby,ฒ ณThe Vanishingฒ and ณPoint of No Return.ฒ  This
time, I will make only passing remarks.
The 1950 film is by far the better of the two. It is also good in itself,
even though the comparison is, understandably, making some critics
overpraise the original. The new version, though only fair, does make an
unboring  time-passer.
Crass and shady millionaire Harry Brock (John Goodman) goes to Washington
in order, not to clean it up like Mr. Smith, but to push some crooked
senators already on his payroll into saving a military base adjoining his
mammoth development.  He is accompanied by his mistress Billie Dawn
(Melanie Griffith), a ditsy blonde ex-Vegas hoofer whom he loves but treats
like dirt. Also with him are his "consigliere"  Edward Herrmann and Harryนs
nephew Max Perlich.
In a world of luxury, name-dropping, phony chic and dachshund limos, and in
a series of scenes -- some funny, others not -- Billieนs unbelievable
mega-stupidity and ignorance prove to be embarrassments. Harry hires
smarty-pants journalist Paul Verrall (Don Johnson) to tutor her. At first
Paul refuses, but then a $500 a day fee (plus expenses, I would imagine)
overcomes his principles.
Even a pea-brain can guess what will happen, starting with Billieนs ณI
donนt want some stuffy old tutor.ฒ Guess whom the camera shows next? Right
away, she makes blatant passes at Paul, and after some bits oน business
(funny and non-funny)Billie blooms instantly into wisdom, learning and
Paul-crush.
She asimilates learning with the speed of a movie E.T., learns about the
Constitution, reads Tocqueville, discusses him -- when in reality she might
have learned, at the very most, to speak like tabloid headlines. Educating
Eliza Doolittle or Rita was credible, but educating Billie?
The hors-dนoeuvre to this menu is in ณBeing Thereฒ mode, as Billie learns
the eight responses for all occasions. Cued by Paul, she applies them. Itนs
dumb, itนs entertaining, and it includes the goof ณThatนs about as funny as
a Democrat  being elected President. ฒ The movie must have been made during
the Bushian post-Desert Storm glow.
Among the howl-inducers is Billieนs profundity. She contemplating a Van
Gogh in a museum.  ณItนs so small but it feels bigger than the whole room.ฒ
Another is her mnemotechnical trick to remember Constitutional Amendments.
At a posh Washington restaurant she sings them to the tune of ณThe Twelve
Days of Christmasฒ with band and co-eating celebrities obligato. Just
recalling this can make one blush from embarrassment.
Meanwhile, back at a dude ranch, Paul has been falling for Billie faster
than the "blitzkrieg,"the lightning-fast initial  German victories in World
War II.  This is infinitely less credible than in the 1950 edition. But
then Paul himself is unbelievable, a pallid character with a deep tan that
keeps reminding you that you are watching Don Johnson, a.k. a. Mr. Melanie
Griffith, Hollywood  Actor, here transferred from the streets of Miami to
the power corridors of Washington Vice.
Everything is telegraphed and marked like runway lights in an airfield.
Itนs no surprise that the pliant Billie (in whose name Harry has most of
his properties) will rebel and show Harry and Washington a thing or two.
She also shows her legs. I had not intended to see this film until I saw an
ad that showed, intriguingly, a pair of beautiful legs with a manนs leg
(contortionism?) draped over the gams (a word used  in the original playนs
period). My curiosity was not libidinous but nostalgic and cine-referential
: the photograph somehow brought memories of ณThe Graduateฒนs poster and
Mrs. Robinson.
Lackaday!  Even if Billie becomes a graduate of sorts, this movie is no
ณGraduate.ฒ But it does have some small surprises. Item.  The legs in the
photograph must be those of a body double. Item. Don Johnson is short,
shorter even than Melanie. I bet that, as in Alan Ladd pictures, they used
a lot of boxes and special camera angles to play down the differences in
size. Item. Edward Herrmann is wasted. Item. In his microscopic role, the
small Max Perlich is totally superfluous. Perhaps he was edited out in the
final cut. Perhaps Perlich knew somebody.
Item. Goof or subtlety? Paul, a writer and savant who also teaches at
Georgetown, tells Billie: ณIf I get involved with you Iนm no different THAN
Harry.ฒ Billie, seconds later: ณYouนre no different FROM  Harry.ฒ
(Capitalization mine).
Item. Paul: ณHello, how have you been?ฒ  Billie: ณVery GOOD  And you?ฒ
Paul: ณPretty GOOD.ฒ  To think that in spelling bees, some kids age 11 to
13, in my town, can spell ณsporran,ฒ ณcerography, ฒ ณzaibatsuฒ or
ณwapentake.ฒ
Among the sins of ณBorn Yesterdayฒ. First, not any two characters ever
connect or show rapport. Secondly, Johnson and Goodman are both miscast,
the first being made into a phony intellectual, the second into a massive,
crude ball of dumbness that lacks the nastiness of his predecessors, Paul
Douglas on the stage, Broderick Crawford on the screen.  This Harry is so
ludicrous that his contorsions on a dance floor conjure up Barnum and
Baileyนs kneeling elephants.
The movie misses a major opportunity : to illustrate that a little
knowledge is a dangerous thing by taking many of the Washington celebs who
scoffed at Billie and expose them as mere possessors of tidbits and
veneers, morsels handy for posing as smart, educated, literate or chic. In
the kingdom of the blind, one-eyed people are kings. Thereนs a whole
comedic expose to be made on this subject.
"BY"has an ostentatious look of unbridled capitalism and profiteering. The
hotel where much of the action takes place is the luxurious Willard, gutted
in 1986 and restored as the Willard-Intercontinental. But Harryนs
imperially Presidential  penthouse suite is an imaginary construct of 4,000
square feet where charges for a few days can be more than the average
Americanนs yearly salary. The skillful setup of this suite allowed a great
deal of camera mobility and deep-focus shots.
The better news is that overall the picture  does not bore and does
entertain, even though there are no major laughs, because, perhaps of the
underlying, mean-spirited mood of the picture.
The Golden Raspberry Foundation has awarded Melanie Griffith the prize for
Worst Actress of the Year (for ณShining Throughฒ and ณ A Stranger Among
Usฒ). But now she redeems herself as the best of four choices to replace
Judy Holliday. Melanie, a Black Belt among cerebrally challenged stars,
fits her part so effortlessly here that you are not even conscious of her
notorious little-girl voice. But then again, Judy Holliday convinced us
that inside her uncultured dumdum persona a smart, sharp ณnaturalฒ was
waiting to come out.  With Melanie Griffith, this takes a leap of faith.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Frank Maloney
     BORN YESTERDAY is a film directed by Luis Mandoki, from a
screenplay by Douglas McGrath and based on the play by Garson Kanin. It
stars Melanie Griffith, Don Johnson, and John Goodman. Rated PG for
sexual references.
     BORN YESTERDAY was first filmed by George Cukor in 1950 and is
based on a Broadway comedy by Garson Kanin. The 1950 version won Judy
Holliday an Oscar for best actress and established her as one of the
great stars of the 50s. This 1950 version is so great, so definitive,
and so identified with Holliday that any performer who dares to take is
either going to dazzle us with her chutzpah or confirm us in our
prejudice against remakes of great films.  After all, who would have
the presumption to recapitulate Rick in CASABLANCA or Scarlett in GONE
WITH THE WIND?  As a matter of fact, sequels have been attempted to both
these classics with the same effect as dropping a pebble in the ocean.
     So, ladies and gentlemen, hats off to Melanie Griffith. She pulled
it off. Her version of Billie evokes Holliday's without aping it and
allows Griffith to make this famous character her own. Griffith could
never deliver the amazing repertoire of shrill squeaks and noisy
whines, but she has the nerve and the skill to confront the legend of
Holliday directly in such recreated scenes as the gin-rummy game with
her brutally rich paramour, a role played by Broderick Crawford in 1950
(and Paul Douglas on Broadway) and by John Goodman in 1993.  One thing
that Griffith -- and director Luis Mandoki -- do is to play down the
dumb-blonde thang and quieting down some of the broader humor of the
1950 version. Griffith's Billie is uneducated but right from the
beginning we -- and Don Johnson's political-reporter character -- see a
hint of an insightful intelligence underneath those amazing earrings.
     John Goodman is quite an improvement in fact over Crawford just as
Johnson is better than William Holden. Goodman is vulgar, selfish, and
violent but still he manages at times to make his monster character
almost likable, or at least sympathetic (the gin-rummy game and the
dancing sequence, for example); he throws this away near the end, but
up until them we did a more complex, more dramatically interesting
character than Crawford's junk-dealer turned ogre.
     As for Don Johnson, let me say right here that he is a major
cutie, a man who keeps getting more and more attractive. He is also a
delightful actor, a fact I have been aware only since he and Griffith
made PARADISE a year or two ago.  Holden was never very credible as an
idealist, given his tough, cynical persona as developed throughout the
course of his career. Johnson convinces us more readily and brings a
certain less-than-perfect complexity to his part, just as Goodman is
for most of the movie less-than-monstrous.
     This is an uplifting movie in which something magical and heroic
happens, in which a lot of bubbles are exploded (National Public Radio
comes in for some delightful knocks, for example), stereotypes are
overcome, and people learn to do the right thing for themselves and for
their world.
     I recommend BORN YESTERDAY to you, even at full ticket price. And
if you can, take a look at Judy Holliday's version. It is one of the
great comedies of its era, just Melanie Griffith's version could very
well turn out to be one of the great comedies of the current era.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Melanie Griffith, John Goodman, Don Johnson, Edward Hermann
Director:  Luis Mandoki
Producer:  D. Constantine Conte
Screenplay:  Douglas McGrath
Music:  George Fenton
Released by Hollywood Pictures
     Powerful, multi-millionaire business man Harry Brock (John
Goodman) has come to Washington to bribe a few senators to keep one of
his business ventures afloat.  Along with him is his airhead mistress
Billie Dawn (Melanie Griffith).  After Billie has embarrassed Harry at
one-too-many social functions, he hires Paul Verrall (Don Johnson), a
respected journalist, to "smarten her up".  But, as Paul sets to work
on Billie, Harry comes to realize that he's getting more than he
bargained for.
     The original 1950 BORN YESTERDAY, directed by George Cukor and
starring June Holliday, William Holden, and Broderick Crawford, is an
occasionally amusing, but mostly-flat film, and certainly not
deserving of this kind of straightforward remaking.  If anything, BORN
YESTERDAY was in need of a major reworking - something that writer
Douglas McGrath was, for whatever reason, unwilling to do.
     Silly, contrived plots like this rely on strong, likable
characters to carry a film.  When such characters are not present, like
in BORN YESTERDAY, the whole project sinks like a stone.  The blatantly
ridiculous elements of the story become highlighted, the most obvious
of which is the movie's central concept that, in a matter of weeks (or
is it only days?), an admitted bimbo can be changed into a clever,
insightful woman by reading a few books and talking to a charming man.
I didn't buy the transformation.
     There are a few funny moments which save the movie from becoming
terminally tedious.  However, one scene that is supposed to be cute and
entertaining - a rendition of "The Twelve Days of Christmas" with the
amendments of the Constitution replacing the days - is embarrassingly
bad.  Also, for a movie that's supposed to be lighthearted, there's a
depiction of a disturbingly real instance of abuse.
     John Goodman is the only member of the cast who gives a reasonable
performance.  Like many good actors given unredeemably bad guys to
play, Goodman has a tendency to go a little too far but, even as he
chews on the scenery, he's enjoyable to watch.  The same can't be said
of either of his co-stars, both of whom continually cause winces.
     Melanie Griffith is at least better here than in SHINING THROUGH
or A STRANGER AMONG US, but not by much.  Admittedly, Billie isn't much
of a role, but there are countless other actresses who could have given
a better performance.  Ms. Griffith appears incapable of doing any real
acting, whether the medium is comedy or drama.  She was good in
SOMETHING WILD, merely competent in WORKING GIRL and PARADISE, and
downright awful in everything else.  At least in this film, she hasn't
been saddled with a role of substance.
     Don Johnson is a stiff as a board throughout.  At times, he's
uncomfortable to watch.  Since he's married to Ms. Griffith, one would
expect some sort of spark to come across between them, but there's no
chemistry evident.  I only hope they have a better time together
off-screen than they have before the cameras of BORN YESTERDAY.
     There's nothing to recommend this movie.  It's another lame duck
to add to Hollywood Picture's ever-growing collection.  With each new
film, it's becoming increasingly difficult to remember anything good
that they've been responsible for.  At any rate, with a combination of
Melanie Griffith and a decidedly-weak script, the quality of BORN
YESTERDAY - or lack thereof - should be obvious.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
