Title
Review for Before and After (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Another butt-number in a season of long-sits.  Director Barbet 
Schroeder (KISS OF DEATH, REVERSAL OF FORTUNE) adapts the Rosellen 
Brown best seller to sluggish, somber effect.   As a soap opera-- 
did small-town rich-kid Eddie Furlong really kill his girlfriend?-- 
it's hardly compelling; as a morality play-- what happens when 
parents try to shield their kids from the consequences of inap-
propriate behavior-- it's a mess.  Even less appealing is Alfred 
Molina's character, a defense lawyer whose ethics are as a scary as 
the dye job he wears.  This crap belongs on television.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BEFORE AND AFTER *** Directed by Barbet Schroeder. Written by 
Ted Tally,based on the book by Rosellen Brown. Photography, 
Luciano Tovoli. Editing, Lee Percy. Production designer, 
Stuart Wurtzel. Music, Howard Shore. Produced by Schroeder and 
Susan Hoffman. Cast: Meryl Streep (Carolyn Ryan), Liam Neeson 
(Ben Ryan), Edward Furlong (Jacob Ryan), Julia Weldon (Judith 
Ryan), Alfred Molina (Panos Demeris). A Hollywood Pictures 
release. 108 minutes. PG-13
Given the people involved the film ought to be good. It is.  
Frenchman Barbet Schroeder,has directed "General Idi Amin 
Dada," "Barfly," "Single White Female" and sev eral other 
films --and has also been a producer, performer, screenwriter, 
photo-reporter, documentarist and critic. Meryl Streep is 
currently on her 10th Oscar nomination. She won Supporting 
Actress in "Kramer vs. Kramer" and Best Actress in "Sophie's 
Choice". Liam Neeson, best known for "Schindler's List," has 
held very different roles in nearly thirty movies since 1981. 
The production designer and cinematographer are class A. 
The Ryan family lives near a small New England town.  Carolyn 
is an MD, Ben a sculptor of massive wood and metal artifacts, 
son Jacob is a 16-year old with problems and not unusual 
clashes with Dad, younger sister Judith is problem-less and 
sensitive. 
A young working-class girl, who, unbeknownst to the senior 
Ryans, was Jacob's girlfriend, is found dead. It looks like a 
clear case of murder. Suspicions fall on Jacob. His parents 
disbelieve, but just the same, Ben checks out the car Jacob 
was driving. Finding bloody evidence, Ben panics and foolishly 
destroys it. 
That action starts a series of false moves by nearly everyone. 
Jacob skips town for six weeks, then is caught. Out on bail, 
he eventually comes out of his shell and relates to his family 
his version of the events. The Ryans hire a skilled lawyer, 
but even then feed him what information they consider 
helpful...  
In its first part the film runs like a drama observed with 
rather documentary distancing. The total movie is also a study 
of parental pain --and guilt -- combined with one of those 
judicial cases where the concealing of the truth by 
well-meaning adults only makes matters worse and entraps them 
mercilessly.  
The contest between the law and naive individuals is uneven. 
It's like the opening shots of ice-fishing through holes made 
by special power drills. The fish don't stand a chance against 
those techniques.
In a change from formulaic movies, "B & A" plays down 
suspense, bathos, whodunit and mystery-story elements, thrills 
or feelgood revelations.  As the movie distances itself from 
cliches it gets closer to real life. We are shown the town and 
its people in careful, small doses, which is good, as the 
film, by avoiding much local color, can concentrate on the 
Ryans. 
The source novel was rather rhetorical compared to the sober, 
clinically observed film adaptation by an Oscar-winner ("The 
Silence of the Lambs"). Also, in the book the Ryans were the 
Jewish Reiser family, a fact that added racist reactions by 
the locals. We do get, however, some class prejudice ("you 
rich people") in the movie. 
I cannot tell why the Reiser-to-Ryan change was made 
(prudence?) but I imagine that the addition of another level 
-- intolerance -- would have burdened the story with more 
screen time, detracted from its in-family drama and made of 
the film a heavier document. 
The acting is excellent. For this, much credit goes to Barbet 
Schroeder who directs intelligently but not sentimentally. The 
Ryans mix but do not match. The parents go from a happy couple 
to one with differences and conflicting notions of how to deal 
with the situation. 
Except for Michele Pfeiffer, Meryl Streep is the only other 
actress I know whose eyes, even without tears, can have a 
redness that means pain. Liam Neeson, mercurial and 
temperamental, is prone to instinctive (often wrong or 
violent) decisions, yet even so a new bond is forged between 
father and son. 
Julia Weldon makes a fine debut as a young girl who sees her 
seniors with quiet perspicacity, and understands them. Alfred 
Molina, as the pragmatic Greek-American lawyer who calls 
people "kiddo" and calls the shots, has to fight on two 
fronts: the prosecution and the misguided parents who do not 
realize that morality, justice and the law are not synonymous. 
Molina has a vigorous presence just this side of flamboyance. 
Some of the most striking scenes are with Edward Furlong who 
does much with minimalist acting. When visited by his parents 
in juvenile jail, he is surly, silent and, in his father's 
words, "catatonic." This translates to a child who is scared 
to death. 
As thin and wan as a consumptive youth in a 19th century 
novel, Furlong later acquires a trace of improved health. His 
face has a marked feminine look,reinforced by a voice that, I 
hope, will some day lose its high-pitch nasality. The way he 
is now, Furlong could make a beautiful transvestite in some 
picture.
In the neglected "A Home of Our Own" scripted by Patrick 
Duncan (the writer of "Mr. Holland's Opus"), Furlong was 
impressive as the oldest of widow Kathy Bates's six children. 
In "Little Odessa" he was the son of Vanessa Redgrave and 
Maximilian Schell, and the young brother of Tim Roth. Look for 
him in future films.  

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BEFORE AND AFTER is a gripping story of a teenage boy in trouble.
His girlfriend was murdered, and he was the last one seen with her
before she died.  He has disappeared, and everyone is searching for
him.  His family closes ranks to support him, and his father even hides
what may be evidence to protect his son.
     From the director of the even more chilling SINGLE WHITE FEMALE,
Barbet Schroeder came up earlier this year with a thriller that will
terrify parents, especially those with teenagers.  The script by Ted
Tally, based on Rosellen Brown's novel, is full of problems and flaws,
but the stellar acting by Meryl Streep and Liam Neeson as the parents
more than compensates for its deficiencies.  They both give convincing
and empathetic performances and raise an otherwise pedestrian movie
into a compelling motion picture.
     The movie deals as much with the tensions within the family as
those surrounding the murder.  Even the father's brave but potentially
foolish evidence destruction is derided by the mother.  The mother,
Carolyn Ryan (Streep), tells the father, Ben (Neeson), "You can't just
destroy evidence.  What if you've destroyed evidence that proves him
innocent?"  When she gets tired of her husband's schemes, she cries
out, "I just want my boy back.  I just want to hold him again."
     The dad blames himself since he had fought with his son the
morning of the murder and thus "sent him out in a rage."  He has the
irrational hope that, "If we all keep quiet, maybe they've got no
case."
     In a good minor role is John Heard as their friend and initial
lawyer Wendell Bye.  Even better is Alfred Molina as the tough criminal
lawyer Panos Demeris, who takes the case when "mortgage lawyer" Wendell
begs out.  Demeris explains to the mother his take-no-prisoners
approach to beating the prosecution, and it infuriates her.  She scolds
him, "It's not the truth.  You're talking about opposing ad campaigns."
     Rarely believable are Edward Furlong as the son and possible
murderer Jacob and Julia Weldon as his sister Judith.  Both characters
are underacted and miscast.
     The constant music by Howard Shore is sweeping and sad.  The
cinematography by Luciano Tovoli makes you feel the cold snowy settings
and the effect the weather must be having on the characters trying to
cope with their misery.
     As the story develops, the noose tightens around the son before he
ever enters a courtroom.  The director's pacing is excellent, and the
tension ratchets up by the minute.
     I was really moved by the show as I think any parent will be.
Nevertheless, I would be remiss if I didn't give you a feel for some of
the illogical problems in the script.  Without giving away any of the
twists in the story, let me just say that: 1) the one time the parents
choose to make love in the story is ridiculous, 2) most aspects of the
Grand Jury testimonies make little sense, and 3) then there is the
show's conclusion.  Notwithstanding these flaws, the film works because
of the acting by Neeson and Streep and the well paced direction.
     BEFORE AND AFTER runs 1:48.  It is rated PG-13.  There is a little
sex, some non-gory violence, and a gory photograph.  There is no nudity
and the language is pretty mild.  The film would be fine for teenagers,
and maybe very mature kids a year or two younger.  I recommend the
picture to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
