Title
Review for Legally Blonde (2001)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Michael Dequina
_Legally_Blonde_ (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
        With its premise of a pampered, ditzy girly-girl somehow making her way
into Harvard Law, _Legally_Blonde_ has been dismissed as "_Clueless_ goes to law
school."  Actually, the film is more than that.
        In all seriousness, though, _Legally_Blonde_ is able to transcend its
unpromising origins due to two words:  Reese Witherspoon.  While the film goes
through its unsurprising paces from start to finish, Witherspoon keeps the
proceedings so perkily likable that one will be too busy smiling to complain.
        Director Robert Luketic isn't nearly as ambitious as Alexander Payne,
who used Witherspoon to such dazzling comic effect in her best film, _Election_;
whereas Payne mined her perkiness for subtly sinister satire, Luketic simply
uses it for the easy lightweight laugh.  That's just as well, for screenwriters
Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith clearly aim low.  Witherspoon's Elle Woods
is a very rich, very blonde, very _Clueless_ sorority girl about to graduate
with a degree in fashion marketing.  When her ambitious beau Warner Huntington
III (Matthew Davis) dumps her instead of popping the question before heading off
to Harvard Law, Elle makes like the WB's Felicity Porter and works her butt off
to gain entrance to the same school.  Needless to say, flamboyant Elle is like
the proverbial fish out of water in the stuffy Ivy Leagues, but don't
underestimate the power of blond ambition.
        Even with such modest goals, Luketic and the writers don't quite hit
every mark.  The climax brings to mind Marisa Tomei's classic testimony in
_My_Cousin_Vinny_ but quite pales in comparison since _Legally_Blonde_'s take is
rather abrupt, not to mention the film's central trial plot leaves a lot to be
desired.  But hitting every required mark and many in-between is Witherspoon. 
Not only is she a superb verbal and physical comedienne with precise timing, she
pulls off the critical task of making Elle ditzy in personality, not in nature. 
When Elle inevitably starts to prove her naysayers wrong, it's completely
believable--even if the surrounding circumstances are less so.
        _Legally_Blonde_ may get a bit heavy-handed and obvious in its conveying
its trite "Believe in yourself" and "Don't judge a book by its cover" morals,
but Witherspoon's finesse with the funny makes everything else go down fairly
easily.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Joshua Tyler
You'd have to be legally intoxicated not to realize that Legally Blonde
is little more than Clueless goes to college.  Yet, unlike most other
teen-to-twenties translations, Legally Blonde manages to maintain a
certain sense of charm, while casting off any sense of dignity Reese
Witherspoon attempts to maintain.
Blonde, as my UA ticket stub so proudly dubbed it, stars Reese
Witherspoon as Elle Woods, a blonde sorority babe with fashion as a
major and cuteness as a minor.  But when her boyfriend jumps ship to
find a more appropriately intelligent brunette, she sends in a Harvard
application and follows him to law school.
In spite of its 1001 Blonde Jokes-inspired name, Legally Blonde is out
to prove wrong every dumb blonde crack in the book, sort of.  Apparently
you can be incredibly intelligent and still be a shallow,
fashion-obsessed airhead.  But most of all, you have to be pink.  And I
mean really pink.  This film is pinker than the Pink Panther.  More pink
than a Mary Kay Cadillac.  Pinker than even my wife's freaky fuzzy
bathroom... but that's another story.  Girly color choices aside;
Witherspoon portrays the cutest lawyer this critic has ever seen.
But like most comedies you're likely to spot in the local megaplex,
Legally Blonde frequently and tragically forgets to be funny.  That's
not to say there aren't enough jokes; far from it.  Rather, most of the
jokes tend to turn into "Awww, isn't she cute???" opportunities rather
than out-loud, belly-laugh guffaws.
In all fairness, maybe Blonde wasn't really even trying to be funny. 
Perhaps some wise sage got it into his head that the blonde bimbos of
the world have something important to teach us and figured it was high
time they tell it, through their own unique brand of fuzzy pink
moralism.  Or maybe Blonde's writers just lack a legitimate sense of
humor.  I'll take the latter.
Legally Blonde is a lovely attempt to re-ignite the Valley Girl fervor
among the now-twentysomething teens who went all gooey over Alicia
Silverstone's high-class, high school airhead in Clueless.  And while
any who venture in to Elle's world are likely to emerge with a smile,
one can't help but wonder if the revival of the Valley Girl trend didn't
begin and end with Cher.
Director: Robert Luketic
Producer: Rick Kidney, Marc E. Platt
Writer: Karen Lutz, Kirsten Smith
Starring: Reese Witherspoon, Matthew Davis, Selma Blair, Ali Larter,
Holland Taylor, Luke Wilson
http://www.mgm.com/legallyblonde/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Reese Witherspoon, who charmed us in ELECTION and PLEASANTVILLE, is back at it
again using her Type A personality for maximum comedic effect.  The twist this
time is that rather than playing her usual brainiac part, she is a ditzy blonde
but one with a hidden turbo charger in her brain.  This ditzy but driven
personality allows the screenwriters, Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith
(both from 10 THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU), great latitude in developing the comedy.
 Elle Woods (Witherspoon) has some definite blonde moments and some quite
resourceful ones.  (Maybe the movie brings out your inner ditz, as I spilled
iced tea all over myself while writing this review.)
As Robert Luketic's LEGALLY BLONDE begins, we meet Elle as she prepares for the
big date, the one in which her college boyfriend, Warner Huntington III (Matthew
Davis), will pop the big question.  Or so she thinks.  In a candlelit
restaurant, he dumps her instead, explaining, "If I'm going to be a senator, I
need to marry a Jackie and not a Marilyn."
Since he's off to Harvard Law, she sets out to do the impossible and get
accepted as well so she that can be near him and win him back.  After all, she
does have a 4.0 undergraduate record, albeit in "fashion merchandizing."  
Cranking up her overdrive, she sets out to convince Harvard to take her.  The
Harvard Law admissions committee, a bunch of old suits, do not quite know what
to make of her admissions video, which looks like an Anthony Robbins
inspirational tape prepared by Playboy Enterprises.  Eventually, they decide
that, since she has been in a Ricky Martin video, she qualifies under their
diversity program.  
When she arrives, she does bring a dramatic amount of diversity to a drab
looking group of young overachievers who ridicule her, calling her "Malibu
Barbie."  Her clothing choices of faux fur, rose colored glasses and
outrageously bright colors are hilarious.  The students look at her as if she
were an alien from another planet and treat her like she has a contagious and
incurable disease.
When Warner sees Elle on campus, he can't believe she got accepted.  "What, it's
like hard?" she asks him, rhetorically.  Elle is shocked to find that she now
has a rival.  Warner introduces her to his new fiancée, fellow student Vivian
Kensington (Selma Blair), a very serious brunette, who is Elle's opposite.
When the pressure mounts, as it quickly does, Elle likes to get her nails done. 
This leads to an unnecessary, but still cute, subplot involving a manicurist,
Paulette (Jennifer Coolidge from AMERICAN PIE), whom she befriends.
In contrast to the serious, dark colored laptops of all the students in class,
Elle takes her notes on a pink, heart shaped paper notepad.  Later she upgrades
to a bright tangerine colored portable, which still stands out.  For her résumés
she prefers pink, perfumed paper.  The movie is filled with these visuals that
are so funny that you'll be laughing even if the sound system fails.
Filled with lots of big laughs, the movie is willing to take the risk to pause
at unlikely times to have some serious moments.  One of these occurs when Elle
is dressed in, of all things, a Playboy bunny outfit at a large student party. 
Tricked in order to be humiliated, Elle was told that it was a costume party. 
Most movies would have her shrieking away in horror, but in LEGALLY BLONDE,
rather than being embarrassed, Elle toughs it out and acts natural.  As natural
as possible, that is, when her considerable physical assets are on display for
all to see.  
After LEGALLY BLONDE, it would be easy to envision Reese Witherspoon producing,
directing, writing, editing and starring in her own movies.  She has such
unbounded energy and optimism that it would appear she could do anything that
she sets out to accomplish.  I can't wait to see what's in store for her next.
LEGALLY BLONDE runs 1:36.  It is rated PG-13 for language and sexual references
and would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up.  
My son Jeffrey, age 12, who laughed a lot during the movie, gave it *** 1/2.  He
thought it was really funny, imaginative and interesting.  He especially liked
all of the courtroom scenes.
The film opens nationwide in the United States today, Friday, July 13, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
Elle Wood (Reese Witherspoon, "Election") is blonde, beautiful and about to 
graduate from her junior fashion retailing college.  She's also preparing to 
receive an heirloom engagement ring from her East Coast boyfriend Warner 
(Matthew Davis, "Pearl Harbor").  She's shaken to her core when she discovers
that instead, he's breaking up with her, as she's just not 'serious' enough
for a future senator.  Elle's mettle is up, so she gets a Copolla to direct
a video essay and gets accepted to Warner's school.  Harvard Law has never
seen the likes of Elle Wood, but they turn out to be a surprisingly compatible
combination in "Legally Blonde."
"Legally Blonde" is essentially "Private Benjamin" goes to law school, with
liberal dashes of "Clueless" thrown in.  Although Reese Witherspoon has 
charm to spare, first time feature director Robert Luketic, armed with an
adapted screenplay by Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith ("10 Things I
Hate About You"), serves up a film that lacks focus.
Elle, with her California couture, pink pumps and color-coordinated chihuahua
Bruiser, is out to dispel the dumb blonde stereotype without toning down
her wardrobe.  But she receives a double shock her first day at school,
which is a lot tougher than she had expected (surrounded by black lap tops,
Elle brings out a heart-shaped notepad and pink feather pen).  She's 
ejected from her class by preppie Vivian Kensington (Selma Blair, "Cruel
Intentions") and then discovers that Vivian's wearing Warner's family rock.
An emergency manicure at the Beauty Oasis, where she meets pathetic Paulette
(Jennifer Coolidge, "Best in Show"), gives her a boost, though, and she
decides to stick it out.
After some advice from third year student Emmet (Luke Wilson, "Charlie's
Angels"), Elle counters Warner's thoughts on the parental rights of sperm
donors by comparing masturbation to reckless abandonment and captures the
attention of Professor Callahan (Victor Garber, "Titanic").  Soon she, along
with Warner and Vivian, are interning on a murder case.  It's here that
"Legally Blonde" begins to go seriously astray.
The young fitness wife of a wealthy older man accused of murdering him turns
out to be an alumnus of Elle's California college.  The creaky plot mechanics
don't hold a lot of laughs and take the focus away from Elle's plan to win
back Warner.  The romantic possibilities of pairing Elle and Emmett aren't 
explored and Vivian's scheme to show up Elle at a party is a visual joke done
months ago in "Bridget Jones's Diary."
Still, Reese Witherspoon shines as the perky, pampered blonde, injecting
the film with so much good will it's hard to dislike it.  Moonie the chihuahua
is a great find as Bruiser, a natural extension of Elle Woods' persona.
No one else in the cast, with the exception of Brooke Taylor as tough as 
nails Professor Stromwell and Oz Perkins as Dorky David, really offers much.
Raquel Welch has a flamboyant cameo as the murder victim's first wife.
Production design by Melissa Stewart ("To Die For") and costume design by
Sophie de Rakoff Carbonell ("Crime + Punishment in Suburbia") mix elements
of "Clueless" with those of "The Paper Chase."
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Imagine a hybrid of Clueless, Felicity and Erin Brockovich, and you'll be
somewhere in the neighborhood of Legally Blonde, a surprisingly funny comedy
about a ditzy West Coast girl who tries to make a name for herself among the
blue bloods of the Northeast when she tackles an Ivy League school just
because the boy she likes is headed there.  Although the dialogue isn't
nearly as witty as Clueless, and nobody says anything like, "They're called
boobs, Ed," the film is filled with some great one-liners and a whole lot of
legal mumbo-jumbo mixed up with Valley Girl speak.
Reese Witherspoon (American Psycho) stars as Elle Woods, the Homecoming
Queen of CULA and the Sorority President of Delta Nu.  Elle is the kind of
girl who dresses in pink and makes irritating noises like a little dog when
she cries (and even owns one of those dogs, too), which we get to hear when
her boyfriend, Warner Huntington III (Matthew Davis, Pearl Harbor), dumps
her at a fancy restaurant - not because he doesn't care for her, but because
he's an aspiring politician who wants "a Jackie, not a Marilyn."
Elle, who thought Warner was going to propose to her, is crushed and decides
to show him that she isn't just a bubblehead by applying to Harvard Law
School, which is where he is headed in the fall.  After struggling through
the LSATs (which she previously thought was a rash on the hey-nanny-nanny),
Elle heads east, but quickly discovers her uphill ascent has only just
begun.  She's kicked out of class by a sadistic professor (Holland Taylor,
The Practice), laughed at by her fellow students, and, worst of all, finds
out Warner is engaged to an ice princess named Vivian Kensington (Selma
Blair, Down to You).
Things proceed fairly predictably, with Elle making the successful
transition from BHOC (Big Hair on Campus) to a promising legal mind with a
bright future.  She gains the respect of her classmates and even befriends a
homely trailer park queen (Jennifer Coolidge, Best in Show), giving her tips
on handling men.  And, of course, Elle gets a love interest in a character
named Emmett (Luke Wilson, Charlie's Angels).  We don't know who Emmett is
or why he's hanging around the law school until the film is two-thirds over,
but it's pretty clear that he's Noel to Warner's Ben.
Witherspoon is perfectly cast, and without her special brand of clueless
determination, Blonde would have been much, much worse.  This might sound
ridiculous, but it's the year's second-strongest female performance, after
Renée Zellweger in Bridget Jones's Diary.  Even more ridiculous, Blonde and
Diary even share a similar scene in which the main character shows up at
social event skimpily dressed as a bunny, even though it's not a costume
party.
Blair does well, even though she's practically Linda Fiorentino at this
point, and manages to keep her lips off her female co-stars (unlike the last
time she starred with Witherspoon).  There are also bit parts from Titanic's
Victor Garber, Raquel Welch, Anthony Perkins' son, Final Destination's Ali
Larter and a nearly unrecognizable Linda Cardellini from TV's Freaks and
Geeks.
Blonde's script (which, shockingly, is based on a novel by Amanda Brown) was
written by Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith, who also penned the
underrated comedy 10 Things I Hate About You.  The film is the directorial
debut of Robert Luketic, who scored a festival hit with his short titled
Titsiana Booberini.  Aside from a Toni Basil-choreographed dance scene
(which is easily the worst part of the film), things stay pretty well-paced
and enjoyable throughout.
1:32 - PG-13 for language and sexual references

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "LEGALLY BLONDE" (M.G.M.)
          It's a "Pretty in Pink"/"Clueless" coming-of-age story for the new
millennium as Elle Woods (Reese Witherspoon), a perky Southern California
sorority queen, switches from fashion to law in order to win back her yuppy
boyfriend (Matthew Davis). The girl-power story begins as this sweetheart of
Delta Nu is unceremoniously dumped by a bonehead who says: "If I'm going to be a
Senator by the time I'm 30...I need to marry a Jackie, not a Marilyn."
Determined to prove she's as smart a snobby brunette (Selma Blair) from
country-club Connecticut, Elle not only applies to Harvard Law School but gets
in, much to the amazement of family, friends and faculty. Once there, this
flaxen-haired fish-out-of-water not only survives but tenaciously thrives,
befriending a local manicurist (Jennifer Coolidge), dazzling a professor (Victor
Garber) and rescuing a defendant (Ali Larter) in a celebrated Boston murder
trial, plus finding a more worthy beau (Luke Wilson). In the tradition of
teen-comedy film-maker John Hughes and his disciple Amy Heckerling, there's wit,
cheerfulness, a fidelity of observation and a penchant for problem-solving.
First-time feature director Robert Luketic is blessed with Reese Witherspoon
who's joyously  incandescent in this utterly formulaic light comedy written by
Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith, based on a soon-to-be-published novel by
Amanda Brown. The supporting cast is terrific, particularly Raquel Welch and
Holland Taylor - and I particularly got a kick out of the gag of Elle
distributing scented resumes in pink, her signature color. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Legally Blonde" is a frivolous, funny, feel-good 8. Filled
with ditzy blonde ambition, it's a movie for high-school kids that their parents
would be happy to have them see. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   People who are against affirmative action and quotas--generally,
but not exclusively, those of a conservative bent-- like to say that
so many people are considered minorities that those who are
covered by this legal umbrella make up 80% of the population.  I
suppose their case can be strengthened when liberals say that
blonde women are an oppressed group also, i.e. that so many
employers and others in authority consider flaxen-haired women
to be bimbos that they will refuse to hire them or admit them to
the better schools.  Elle Woods (Reese Witherspoon) opens
Robert Luketic's movie, "Legally Blonde," as a perfect fit for this
stereotype.  Her hair is canary-yellow, she dresses in bright, pastel
colors (mimicked by the pink pigments in the opening credits),
she attends a secondary school majoring in fashion rather than
one that affords rigorous academic preparation.  Her parents, who
think little of law as a profession, discourage her from thoughts of
pursuing that field, but then again Elle suggests the possibilities
of her attending embarking on legal training only because her
steady boy friend Warner Huntington III (Matthew Davis) breaks
up with her because he considers her too frivolous: he intends to
become a U.S. senator by age 30 and needs a sharp, intelligent
woman on his arm to improve his quest for political fame.
   Robert Luketic, who directs "Legally Blonde" from a script by
Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith, is firmly within "Clueless"
territory, with the wonderful Reese Witherspoon in the role taken
by Alicia Silverstone in Amy Heckerling's 1995 comedy about 
Beverly Hills high school teens of the 1990's.   Just as
Silverstone's character is named Cher after the celebrated
actress, Witherspoon has been christened Elle after the women's
fashion magazine, while the film emulates "Clueless" in being
satirical, charming, and never mean.   This in itself is a triumph in
a movie opening a week or so after the abominably vulgar and
unfunny "Scary Movie 2," and if Luketic's picture brings in the kind
of box office that it anticipates, Witherspoon in the role of a
budding lawyer would supply evidence that a light comedy these
days need not be patently offensive to succeed.
    Though "Legally Blonde" is nothing if not predictable, the film
sustains a lighter-than-air mood, filled with both amiable sitcomish
jokes and an altogether screwball ambiance.  Opening inside the
Delta Nu sorority house where Elle is eagerly anticipating a
proposal from the rich boy friend she loves, the picture quickly
presents a female scorned, as the usually spirited blonde drips
mascara after being jilted by her beau.  Determined to become
"good enough" for the man who considers her just plain not
smart, she succeeds in cracking the Law Aps, gets into Harvard,
and after standing out from the crowd, a pretty-in-pink student
amid a chorus of earnest and competitive scholars, she becomes
reflective for the first time in her life as she turns from cracking up
her classmates to cracking the law books with earnest.  Selected
as an intern to her professor (Victor Garber)--for the wrong
reasons as we soon find out--Elle winds up defending a woman
accused of murdering her wealthy husband by using the very
knowledge she had acquired back in her days at the fashion
institute.
   "Legally Blonde" would not have succeeded as it does without
Reese Witherspoon in the lead, in virtually every scene, standing
in as a role model who effectively uses her less-than-accredited
training to turn the tables on her more conventional colleagues
and on one randy instructor.  Harvard Law School obtains a
product placement that it scarcely needs given the ratio of
applications to acceptances, while the film's production team
garners laurels partly for its exhibition of feminist empowerment,
partly for cleansing the bad taste that preceded its opening in the
form of Keenen Ivory Wayans' exploration of a new low in
adolescent cinema.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 96 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "LEGALLY BLONDE" (M.G.M.)
   It's a "Pretty in Pink"/"Clueless" coming-of-age story for the 
new millennium as Elle Woods (Reese Witherspoon), a perky Southern 
California sorority queen, switches from fashion to law in order to win 
back her yuppy boyfriend (Matthew Davis). The girl-power story begins as 
this sweetheart of Delta Nu is unceremoniously dumped by a bonehead who 
says: "If I'm going to be a Senator by the time I'm 30...I need to marry a 
Jackie, not a Marilyn." Determined to prove she's as smart a snobby 
brunette (Selma Blair) from country-club Connecticut, Elle not only applies 
to Harvard Law School but gets in, much to the amazement of family, friends 
and faculty. Once there, this flaxen-haired fish-out-of-water not only 
survives but tenaciously thrives, befriending a local manicurist (Jennifer 
Coolidge), dazzling a professor (Victor Garber) and rescuing a defendant 
(Ali Larter) in a celebrated Boston murder trial, plus finding a more 
worthy beau (Luke Wilson). In the tradition of teen-comedy film-maker John 
Hughes and his disciple Amy Heckerling, there's wit, cheerfulness, a 
fidelity of observation and a penchant for problem-solving. First-time 
feature director Robert Luketic is blessed with Reese Witherspoon who's 
joyously  incandescent in this utterly formulaic light comedy written by 
Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith, based on a soon-to-be-published 
novel by Amanda Brown. The supporting cast is terrific, particularly Raquel 
Welch and Holland Taylor - and I particularly got a kick out of the gag of 
Elle distributing scented resumes in pink, her signature color On the 
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Legally Blonde" is a frivolous, funny, 
feel-good 8. Filled with ditzy blonde ambition, it's a movie for 
high-school kids that their parents would be happy to have them see. 

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Robert Luketic. 
Cast: Reese Witherspoon, Luke Wilson, Matthew Davis, Selma Blair, Jennifer 
Coolidge, Victor Garber, Ali Larter, Holland Taylor, Jessica Cauffiel, Alanna 
Ubach, Oz Perkins, Linda Cardellini, Meredith Scott Lynn, Bruce Thomas, 
Raquel Welch. 
2001 - 96 minutes 
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and brief sex-related humor). 
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 14, 2001. 
Reese Witherspoon, one of the brightest, most intelligent young actresses in 
Hollywood, has been around ever since her feature debut at 14 in 1991's 
nostalgic "Man in the Moon." Solid star turns followed in 1996's "Fear," 
1996's "Freeway," 1998's "Pleasantville," 1999's "Cruel Intentions," and 
1999's "Election," but never before has she had an entire movie rest solely 
upon her shoulders--until now. 
"Legally Blonde," the directing bow of Robert Luketic, is an intentionally 
frothy, good-natured comedy about female empowerment and getting to show your 
true colors in a cynical society. At the forefront is Witherspoon, in a role 
that is perfectly tailor-made for her sturdy comedic talents, and she shines 
in every second of its entertaining, fast-paced 96 minutes. 
Elle Woods (Reese Witherspoon), no doubt named after the magazine, is about 
to graduate from college with a 4.0 GPA and a degree in fashion 
merchandising. She also expects to get a marriage proposal from her longtime 
boyfriend, Warner Huntington III (Matthew Davis), when, instead, he dumps her 
due to not believing that she would make an acceptable senator's wife. 
Distraught over this unexpected turn of events, Elle decides to follow Warner 
to Harvard with her beloved Chihuahua in tow, where she will major in law and 
prove him wrong about just being a "dumb blonde." 
This is the clever setup of "Legally Blonde," a sunny, hip confection that 
uses 1995's delightful "Clueless" as an indirect blueprint. The screenplay, 
scribed by Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith (1999's "10 Things I Hate 
About You"), is spunky and very sweet, but the film really would sink or swim 
based on its leading lady. 
Luckily, just the right one was chosen and Witherspoon is up for the 
challenge, turning Elle into a positive, well-meaning heroine for the 
21st-century who proves looks are, indeed, only skin-deep. Elle may be a 
beautiful girl with a keen fashion sense, but the key to her appeal is that 
she is a genuinely good person, plain and simple. Witherspoon wins you over 
from the very beginning, much like Alicia Silverstone did in "Clueless," 
because she's cute, funny, and isn't self-involved like you may expect from 
the way she looks. No, Elle does things her way, and she'll be damned if 
she's going to change just because people think she should. 
The aforementioned script is a particularly smart one, alternately satirical 
and down-to-earth when it needs to be. Elle's application tape into Harvard, 
which she got "one of the Copolla's to direct," for example, is both winning 
and silly, with her proving that she can successfully use proper legal jargon 
("I object!," she exclaims as a passerby touches her backside), as well as 
hold inordinately huge amounts of information in her head by rattling off the 
various current storylines on the soap opera, "One Life to Live." Late in the 
picture, as the action turns toward a murder trial, writers Lutz and Smith 
hilariously incorporate the usual court matters with significant plot points 
concerning designer shoes and the proper way to manage a new perm. 
The actors around Witherspoon fall into two categories--those that are nice 
to Elle, and those that aren't. Jennifer Coolidge (Stifler's mom in 1999's 
"American Pie") is notably charming in the type of part she's never played 
before--a shy manicurist who befriends Elle when nobody else initially does. 
Selma Blair (2000's "Down to You") does well as Warner's new brunette 
girlfriend at Harvard, at first coming off as stuck-up before feeling remorse 
about the way she has wronged Elle. Finally, Luke Wilson (1999's "Blue 
Streak") does what he can with the underwritten role of Elle's new potential 
love interest. Not enough time is spent developing their relationship, and it 
is one of the few missteps that is made throughout. 
The journey that Elle takes as she sets out to reclaim her beau, only to 
discover that she is more than capable of standing on her own two feet, is a 
predictable one, as is the outcome of the climactic murder trial. Then again, 
"Legally Blonde" makes no false accusations about being a deep or intricately 
plotted motion picture. It's a lighthearted, breezy comedy that is sure to 
gain Reese Witherspoon the full recognition she has deserved for years. And 
more so than anything else, it sure is a whole lot of fun. 
  - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman 
    http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman 

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A bubbly sorority girl who gets dumped by her boyfriend because he doesn't think
that she's "serious" enough in life, enrolls in Harvard Law School in an attempt
to win him back. Wow, you mean that she really is smart?!? The message: don't
judge a book by its cover, boys and girls.
CRITIQUE:
The best and only way to describe this movie is with one word and that word is
"cute". Reese Witherspoon is damn cute in this film, the plot is cute, the jokes
are cute, the dog is cute, the outfits are cute, some of the dialogue is cute,
the ending is cute (and a little cuddly) and nothing much in this film is meant
to have any more meaning than what you get out of this word, and that word again
is...yup, you guessed it: cute! But is the film trying to have a deeper meaning
than that? No, not really. This is obviously a remake of many rehashes of many
revisited films in which the main character tries to become something that
they're not (fish out of water, anyone?) and succeeds initially, but then falls
upon harder times later. Does that make the film any less interesting to watch?
No, not really. Does the fact that you could telegraph the entire plotline of
the film really matter in your overall, bottom line enjoyment of the picture?
Well, maybe a little bit, since the film doesn't really offer you many real
surprises, but you gotta give credit to the filmmakers for one thing which takes
this movie to the level of recommendation here and that is...the casting of one
Reese Witherspoon in the lead role! Damn, this girl's got it going on!!
Ryan Phillippe, if I ever meet you in the streets, allow me to shake your hand,
and not necessarily because you're a dude in your own right, but because your
lovely wife is...well, lovely, talented, beautiful, charming, infectiously
attractive and...an all-out movie star! Of course, she also plays this role
perfectly (which is tough, especially since Alicia Silverstone portrayed the
ideal goofy California girl in CLUELESS) and even managed to add another layer
to the cake. And what layer might that be, you're asking? The layer of
conviction, my friends. The layer of believability, intelligence and an actual
person living inside her phony-baloney exterior. I don't think that there's
anyone out in the crowd who will not feel sorry for Reese's character in this
film, especially when she breaks down in front of her boyfriend and says,
"Nothing I can do is ever going to make you love me, is there?" Or something
along those lines. The look in her eyes, the sadness in her face...damn girl,
c'mon over here and let me give you a hug!
Seriously though, I'm slobbering all over Reese here because she is honestly the
one and only reason to see this movie. Is the plot believable or innovative?
Eeeeeh, not really. Are the rest of the characters three-dimensional or
interesting? Eeeeh, not really. But Reese just pops out of the screen and begs
that you love her ditziness (which surprisingly, isn't all that ditzy...she's
actually very smart but just likes "acting" ditzy!) and for that, I would
recommend that you see this movie, especially if you're looking for a confidence
boost yourself (just set your mind to something, and you can do it!). By the
way, I'd also like to officially nominate this picture as the one with the
happiest ending of the year (as if you didn't expect it). So if you're not into
sugar, it goes without saying that you should just skip this sachran-coated
fluff-piece altogether.
PS: Can Ryan Phillippe sue me for harassing his wife from my review alone? Nah,
he couldn't, could he? Dang, I better check with my lawyers...
PSS: If there's even one review of this film out there that doesn't make mention
of the film CLUELESS, I will personally...well, I won't do shit, but needless to
say, it's undoubtedly gonna get compared by everyone!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
10 Things I Hate About You (7/10) - Billy Madison (7/10) - Clueless (7/10) -
Cruel Intentions (8/10) - Election (7/10) - Erin Brockovich (7/10) - Miss
Congeniality (7/10)

Author
Homer Yen
Seldom are lighthearted comedies so smooth and
enjoyable to watch as `Legally Blonde,' a very
palatable comedy that is both cute and funny. 
Underneath its exterior of cutesy silliness, there is
inner beauty as well.  Don't let it's vapid look of
cluelessness fool you.  The film's heart and mind show
intelligence, warmth and a great deal of appeal.
So too does it's lead character, Elle Woods (Reese
Witherspoon), whose effervescent personality and sunny
disposition make her thoroughly likeable.  Alas,
because of her radiant blonde hair and her love for
all things pink, she is mistakenly assumed to be a
ditzy airhead.  Okay, she may be the spitting image of
a Barbie doll, a TOTALLY popular member of her
sorority (whose membership seems to require that you
are blonde, fit, and wear belly-button exposing
outfits), and considers fashion mag Cosmopolitan to be
her bible.  However, she has a 4.0 grade point
average, is brilliant when it comes to merchandising,
and is an aspiring fashion designer.
But that's not enough for her long-time beau and
selfish cad, Warner (Matthew Davis), who has just been
accepted to the prestigious Harvard School of Law.  `I
need someone serious,' he coldly says and then breaks
up with her.  From this moment on, she sets out on a
mission to prove that she is good enough for him, and
more importantly, that she can rise above the
fluffiness of her own lifestyle.  
She sacrifices the party life in favor of LSAT study
sessions and submits a hilarious video essay on why
she would make a great lawyer.  Witherspoon is
adorable and possesses a girl-next-door demeanor that
gives her an endearing charm.  We care about you!  We
feel for you!  You go girl!
Up to this point, smiles are a sure thing.  But it
gets even funnier once our determined freshman arrives
at Harvard.  The poor thing is just not prepared for
the rigors of academia.  Hollywood and Harvard just
don't mix and she quickly becomes the subject of
ridicule by both teachers and students alike.  While
everyone else brings laptops to class, she brings a
heart-shaped notebook with pink, feathery frills.  She
is immediately challenged by a catty coed (Selma
Blair) and has a difficult time gaining acceptance
among her other classmates.
But don't underestimate Elle, who has a mind as sharp
as a hairdresser's safety pin and a heart as big as
Texas.  She studies rigorously, and soon she's going
nose-to-nose with the snobbish elite over Socratic
principles of law.  She even garners a highly coveted
internship at a top firm where she assists in
defending a client in a celebrity murder case. 
Incredibly, the defendant is a former sorority sister,
and Elle's background allows her to have the
psychological insight that eludes the other lawyers.
Yet while she discovers new frontiers of determination
and develops a new sense of focus, she never forgets
about the virtues of friendship and helping others. 
This is brought forth in a cute side story involving
an aging manicurist who is still waiting to meet Mr.
Right.  Elle imparts a hilarious lesson on how to
attract guys by using a bend and snap motion.  She
possesses brains, beauty and a bubbly sense of humor. 
And `Legally Blonde' does too.

Author
Eugene Novikov
"I even got a Coppola to direct my admissions video!"
Starring Reese Witherspoon, Luke Wilson, Selma Blair,
Holland Taylor, Matthew Davis, Victor Garber, Jennifer
Coolidge. Directed by Robert Luketic. Rated PG-13.
Blondes may have more fun, but not if they're stuck
watching Legally Blonde, a mostly witless comedy that
is blessed with Reese Witherspoon. It's a
featherweight romp that wants to flaunt stereotypes
but instead winds up reaffirming them. Hovering
somewhere between outright silliness and heavy-handed
moralizing, the movie never decides where it wants to
go or what it wants to be. This middle-of-the-road
indecision keeps the farce firmly on the ground when
it should be taking off.
Elle Woods (Witherspoon) is your classic, ditzy,
stereotypical blonde. She has a 4.0 GPA in beauty
school, spends her time reading fashion magazines and
talking movie stars out buying "truly hideous angora
sweaters." Her boyfriend, on the other hand, comes
from an established family of congressman, and wants
to be one himself. He dumps poor Elle because he needs
someone "serious," even if they have no fashion sense.
Elle does not understand what it is about her that
isn't "serious." Then she sees an article in a
magazine and it comes to her: the love of her life
doesn't want a fashion maven, he wants a law student!
So she hits the books, takes the College Boards, gets
"a Coppola" to direct her admissions video and voila!
-- in the mail comes an acceptance letter from
Harvard. If only it was actually that easy...
For a while, the movie coasts on Witherspoon's
charisma and the inherent charm of the
Clueless-goes-to-Harvard scenario. The brilliant
Holland Taylor shows up as a tough law professor,
immediately livening up the proceedings, and Elle's
battle with the snobby Harvard types is amusing, if
never brilliant (although the irony of Elle's own
snobbishness, one much more egregious and less
deserved, irked me). When Elle gets assigned to a
murder case involving a fitness guru and takes all
kinds of bizarre initiatives and learns all kinds of
unwanted "lessons," Legally Blonde loses its bounce.
The final courtroom scenes, in particular, are
counterproductive. Not only are they unfunny, easily
the least clever section on the script, but they
undermine the film's admirable, if unnecessary, "open
mind" message. I was troubled by how Elle was shown to
be incompetent in everything except fashion, fitness
and hair perms. The movie wants us to accept her as
sharp and intelligent, but prods us to laugh at her at
the same time. Mainstream filmmakers -- or maybe their
financiers -- always try to make movies that are all
things to all people, and it invariably blows up in
their faces.
What's worse, Legally Blonde doesn't have a sense of
the ridiculous. You can feel director Robert Luketic
trying in the courtroom scenes, but something always
stops him from delving into the truly madcap. Thus we
have time to question the movie and ponder its logic,
something that should never happen in a movie as
profoundly silly as this.
Witherspoon is a great actress, here playing the
opposite of her Tracy Flick character in the
infinitely superior Election. The movie's failure is
not hers but the script's, which chooses the
well-trodden path at every fork in the road, and
sometimes even tries to take both paths at once. The
Chihuahua is cute, though. 

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Robert Luketic. Screenplay by Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten
Smith, based on the novel by Amanda Brown. Starring Reese Witherspoon,
Luke Wilson, Selma Blair. Running time: 98 minutes. Rated PG for mild
language by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 22nd, 2001.
Synopsis: Before heading off to Harvard Law School, wealthy Warner 
(Matthew Davis) breaks up with Valley girlfriend Elle (Witherspoon) 
because she doesn't fit his image of a future Senator's wife. Nonplussed, 
Elle enrolls at Harvard to win Warner back, only to find herself looked 
down upon by faculty and students alike. Determined to prove herself, Elle 
wins a role as an assistant on a defense team for a murder trial, 
alongside kindly eccentric Emmett (Wilson), Warner... and Warner's new 
fiancee, Vivian (Blair).
Review: Proving again that Reese Witherspoon is one of the best comedy 
actresses of her generation, "Legally Blonde" is a joy from start to 
finish. A simple fish-out-of-water story at heart, rarely has the genre 
been blessed with such wit and verve. Elle would seem ludicrous if she 
wasn't so well-acted; neither too ditzy nor too smart, Witherspoon finds a 
happy medium which never grates and is genuinely endearing. The script by 
Lutz and Smith succeeds on several levels. Not only is it hilarious from 
beginning to end, but the laughs derive naturally out of the given 
scenario; there are no extraneous, grafted-on hijinks here. And, most 
importantly, real pathos is generated for Elle; when she finds herself the 
butt of student jokes and professorial scorn, it is hard for viewers not 
to be reminded of occasions when we've felt like we're in something over 
our heads. If "Legally Blonde" has a flaw, it's that none of the 
supporting characters can compete with Elle: this really is a one woman 
show. Nonetheless, good performances are turned in by Blair as the
supercilious Vivian, and by Jennifer Coolidge as Elle's hapless beautician 
confidante, Paulette. Only Wilson's Emmett feels somewhat out of place, 
his role as plot catalyst proving rather too obvious. Regardless, "Legally 
Blonde" may be this summer's best non-animated comedy.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Legally Blonde (2001)
Reese Witherspoon, Luke Wilson, Selma Blair, Matthew Davis, Victor
Garber, Jennifer Coolidge, Holland Taylor, Ali Larter. Screenplay by
Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith, based on the novel by Amanda
Brown. Directed by Robert Luketic. 95 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Don't expect an in-depth look at "Legally Blonde" here. Doing a critical
analysis of this movie would be akin to dissecting tofu. "Legally
Blonde" is fizzy and featherweight, an underachieving, yet affable
cousin to "Clueless" and "Romy and Michelle's High School Reunion." The
movie has two things going for it. First, the filmmakers clearly realize
they are making a formulaic, crowd-pleasing girl power movie and they
know how to do it. Second, Reese Witherspoon is so gifted that she finds
and maintains the perfect balance between her character's air-headed
presentation style and her underlying strength and smarts.
Elle Woods (Witherspoon) is the ever-smiling queen of her school.
Bedecked in a seemingly endless series of kicky outfits (with the
highlight on pink), she was Miss June in the campus calendar and a
runner-up for Miss Hawaiian Tropic. Elle is also totally devoted to her
boyfriend, Warner (Matthew Davis). When he asks her to dinner at their
special place, she is sure he is going to pop the question.
Instead, he calmly informs her their relationship is over. As a young
man with political aspirations about to attend the Harvard School of
Law, he requires a girlfriend that is more serious and less blonde. At
first, Elle is devastated, but she quickly comes up with a plan,
informing her girlfriends (who appear to exist solely to fuss over her)
that she will win Warner back by proving she is good enough. How? By
attending Harvard Law School as well.
She gets admitted to the prestigious school by studying hard and
submitting a bubbly admissions video (directed by a Coppola!), only to
be treated with contempt by her fellow students, particularly Warner's
new girlfriend, Vivian (Selma Blair). As is that isn't enough,
Professors Callahan (Victor Garber) and Stromwell (Holland Taylor) treat
her like an addled child.
But never fear, because Elle has girl power! She becomes friends with
Paulette (Jennifer Coolidge), a klutzy manicurist, and wins the respect
of Emmett (Luke Wilson), Callahan's right-hand man. Before you know it,
she has her trial by fire, as the defense attorney (don't ask how) for
an informercial fitness guru (Ali Larter) on trial for murder.
The whole thing is just as idiotic as it sounds, but the filmmakers
understand their target audience and give them what they want in spades.
There are two adorable dogs (large portions of the audience went "Awww"
at least three times), a couple of montages set to pop songs and even a
dance number. Every character does exactly what you expect them to do
and the giddy ending is as obvious as every other element in the film.
"Legally Blonde" is mildly enjoyable precisely because it is so
predictable (comfortable as an old shoe, you know), and because Reese
Witherspoon can make almost anything play better than expected.

Author
Robin Clifford
The burden of carrying "Legally Blonde" falls upon the shoulders of Reese 
Witherspoon and, with confidence and capability, she pulls it off. There is 
little beneath the surface of the story as we watch Elle prove herself 
smart time and time again. She is not just pretty and soon proves herself 
equal to any intellectual task presented her.. She is, of course, selected 
by one of her professors (Victor Garber) to be a law clerk on a high 
profile murder case. Her ex-boyfriend, Warner, and his new, serious (i.e. 
not blonde) girlfriend Vivian (Selma Blair) are also part of the team and 
Elle has to prove, repeatedly, that her blonde roots have not dumbed her 
down. Eventually, everyone gets the point. 
There is little going on with the supporting cast, mainly due to the 
shallow script that develops no one besides Elle. Luke Wilson is an obvious 
romantic interest, but that whole development is left as a footnote at the 
end of the film. Selma Blair, who made such a funny, charming splash in 
"Cruel Intentions," is left out in the cold as non-blonde Vivian. Matthew 
Davis is clueless as Warner and it makes one wonder just what Elle would 
see in such a narrow-minded and not that bright a guy. The rest of the cast 
members are more symbolic than real. 
Overall, production values are on the cheap side and, like the screenplay, 
shallow. Photography, by Anthony B. Richmond, looks murky and, except for 
some nice shots of Boston and Cambridge, is not notable. Kudos to Sophie de 
Rakoff Carbonell for her costuming of Witherspoon and her pet Chihuahua, 
Bruiser. 
There is more than just a passing similarity to the comedy hit, "Clueless," 
as Elle goes about improving the quality of life for those around her, 
including making a dorky law student a babe magnet. We've been here before 
and seen it done better. But, Witherspoon holds her own and makes "Legally 
Blonde" watchable, at least. I give it a C. 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Bob Bloom
Legally Blonde (2001). 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Reese Witherspoon, Luke
Wilson, Selma Blair, Matthew Davis, Victor Garber, Jennifer Coolidge, Holland
Taylor, Ali Larter, Jessica Cauffiel, Alanna Ubach, Oz Perkins, Linda
Cardellini, Bruce Thomas, Meredith Scott Lynn and Raquel Welch. Screenplay by
Karen McCullah Lutz & Kirsten Smith. Based on a book by Amanda Brown. Directed
by Robert Luketic. 96 minutes. Rated PG-13. 
Star quality is that intangible gift that simultaneously enables  performers to
rise above their material as well as elevate projects - no matter their
shortcomings - on the weight of their talent. 
With Legally Blonde, Reese Witherspoon shows that she is such a performer. 
Legally Blonde is a very appealing feature despite its stock situation and
clichéd and stereotypical characters. 
The feature's charm rests squarely on Witherspoon's lovely shoulders. In films
such as Cruel Intentions, Pleasantville and especially Election, Witherspoon has
demonstrated her keen acting ability. However, it was not necessary in any of
those films for her to carry the burden of the projects' success or failure. 
But this bubbly comedy is different. From opening scene to final fadeout, this
is Witherspoon's baby, and, as Elle Woods, she delivers. As played by
Witherspoon, Elle is no dumb blonde. 
She's an achiever, a go-getter but without the pathological drive of her
Election's Tracey Flick. Elle,  a senior at CULA, is president of her Delta Nu
sorority, has a 4.0 G.P.A. - her major is fashion design - appeared in a Ricky
Martin video and was a runner-up in the Miss Hawaiian Tropic contest. 
Elle is a warm, loving person. But because she is very perky, blonde and
beautiful, no one takes her seriously. Her boyfriend, Warner, dumps her on his
way to Harvard Law School, because he plans to run for the Senate and Elle is
not his nor his family's picture of a senator's perfect wife. "I need a Jackie,
not a Marilyn," he tells her upon dumping her. 
Elle, to win him back, determinedly works her way into Harvard Law School,
creating a dynamite video essay (directed by a Coppola) to impress the all-male
admissions board. At first, her stuck up East Coast classmates treat her as a
joke, but Elle, despite some setbacks, proves her worthiness and wins the day. 
In a sense, Legally Blonde is a movie about perceptions. It's one of those
don't-judge-a-book-by-its-cover life lessons. The movie says nothing new nor
profound. As Elle complains, People just "see my blonde hair and my big boobs."
Legally Blonde is a pleasing pastiche about self-worth and self-confidence. 
Witherspoon gives a finely honed performance. She's ebullient, quick-witted and
a rather nice person. She is sensitive and caring, and even though she looks
clueless, she's not. Witherspoon uses makeup and wardrobe to deflect from Elle's
intelligence, but allows you to see it in her eyes. 
The rest of the cast merely lives in her shadow. Matthew Davis is rather bland
as Warner, and it is difficult to understand why Elle is so infatuated with him.
Some memorial turns are provided by Oz Perkins as one of Elle's dorky, but
brainy, classmates and Ali Larter as a murder suspect Elle comes to defend. 
The lawyers in the audience may cringe at some of the courtroom antics, but keep
in mind that this is a comedy not Anatomy of a Murder. 
Legally Blonde is a fun summer date movie, a lightweight enjoyable outing that
in its own sneaky way will make you think twice before judging someone merely by
their appearance. 
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier  in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net
Other reviews by Bloom can be found by going to www.jconline.com and clicking on
golafayette. 
Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom 
