Title
Review for Others, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Dimension Films
 Director: Alejandro Amenabar
 Writer:  Alejandro Amenabar
 Cast: Nicole Kidman, Christopher Eccleston, Fionnula Flanagan,
Elaine Cassidy, Eric Sykes, Alakina Mann, James Bentley
   Any hack can knock out a parody of a genre movie.  All you
have to do is closely observe a straight version of, say, a horror
story, then imitate it by peppering jokes throughout.  In summer
camp we used to satirize commercials all the time because
commercials, like so many horror movies, are virtually parodies in
themselves.  But it takes talent to write the real thing: a
"Nosferatu,"  a "Phantom of the Opera," a "Golem."   Given the
junk that's been splashing across the screens since at least the
1950's--the Godzillas, the Frankensteins, the Draculas, with sons,
brides and ghosts of same--we don't wonder that the movies
mocking them are equally bad: "Scream 2," "Scary Movie 2," you
know the rest.
   That's why it's such a pleasure to see a chic ghost story, not
unlike the kind we heard our counselors tell around the campfire
during the summers of our childhood.  "The Others" is pure class,
a gem of a poltergeist prevarication, featuring the reliably grade-A
acting of Nicole Kidman who, as Grace, the owner of a spooky
house in the English island of Jersey, resembles no one so much
as Grace Kelly or Ingrid Bergman.  "The Others" is so carefully
drawn, avoiding the usual kitsch false alarms of teen-targeted
trepidation, with such a great twist in its concluding segment, that
we wouldn't be surprised to see it open in art houses as well as in
major commercial theaters on August 10th.
   By coincidence, the story, which opens in the year 1945, is
driven by a concept that could have been torn from yesterday's
news story--the one about the suicide of the wife of former
German chancellor Helmut Kohl.  Apparently the poor woman had
a rare disease whereby she could not expose herself to sunlight.
Like Dracula, she had to confine herself indoors lest she
experience terrible pain.  The claustrophobic existence was too
much for her and she was found hanged by her own hand.  In like
manner, Grace has two children, Anne (Alakina Mann) and
Nicholas (James Bentley), afflicted with a similar ailment requiring
that all windows in the large and deteriorating Jersey mansion be
curtained and, to protect them from electric lights, before opening
a door to another room, the door to the present room must first be
shut.  The distressing, if accustomed, life of the manor is about to
change dramatically when three servants arrive, the elderly Mrs.
mills (Fionnula Flanagan), the mute, young Lydia (Elaine
Cassidy), and an aging gardener, Mr. Tuttle (Eric Sykes).
   Though Alejandro Amenabar helms the unconventional film in
Spain standing in for the English island of Jersey, the setting is a
standard as they come.  Fog embraces the landscape as far as
the eye can see even as the story stays away from the hackneyed
dark and stormy nights.  We get our first clue that something evil
is in the house when the servants themselves begin plotting with
one another to make some interesting changes in their status. 
The thrills and chills take off, particularly when Anne, who comes
across as streetwise despite her lack of access to, well, the
streets, begins to notice the ghostly presence of a young man
named Viktor whom no one else can see.  There are intruders in
the house!  Given the care that Mr. Amenabar takes in developing
the story, we come to care about the characters.  We want to
shout out and warn the increasingly frightened Grace that evil
lurks and that perhaps she should abandon the mansion and take
a pad in London's Soho district, but we again understand that she
is staying in the house of horrors only to protect her youngsters
from seeing the light--which she herself cannot see, as it turns
out.
   Though Christopher Eccleston as Grace's husband Charles is
given second billing, he gets little to do.  Fionnula Flanagan as the
scheming Mrs. Mills becomes the center of audience fear in her
remarkable portrayal of a domestic who seems increasingly
determined to overthrow the demeaning role she must take as
cook to the coiffed and overbearing mistress of the house. 
Alakina Mann stands out as well in the role of a kid who is
alternately rebellious and frightened of the trespasser that only he
seems to see.  "Ther Others" is the spookiest story of its kind
since M. Night Shayamalan's "The Sixth Sense," and is graced
moreover without that film's slick Hollywood patina.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 104 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Others (2001)
Nicole Kidman, Christopher Eccleston, Fionnula Flanagan, Elaine Cassidy,
Eric Sykes, Alakina Mann, James Bentley, Rene Ascherson. Written and
directed by Alejandro Amenábar. 104 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
It's hard not to recommend "The Others." The supernatural thriller,
written and directed by Alejandro Amenábar ("Open Your Eyes"), adroitly
establishes and maintains a low-key atmosphere of menace. The
cinematography, by Javier Aguirresarobe, is as good as I have ever seen
and Nicole Kidman gives another in her growing body of fine
performances. But the pacing of the story moves from deliberate to
downright sluggish and the payoff of the tale left me less than
satisfied.
Overall, the film plays like a very high quality version of any number
of old "Twilight Zone" episodes where the characters spend a great deal
of time wandering about looking afraid and disoriented, only to learn
they are actually a child's toy, a military test subject or a department
store dummy. Watching those vintage shows and listening to the players
chatter, I always wanted to shout, "Get on with it!" As much as I
appreciated the atmosphere and acting in "The Others," my reaction was
much the same.
Set at an island mansion off the coast of England during World War II,
the story focuses on Grace (Kidman), who tends to her children Anne
(Alakina Mann) and Nicholas (James Bentley) and worries about her
husband, Charles (Christopher Eccleston), a missing serviceman. Anne and
Nicholas suffer from photosensitivity and Grace patrols the estate with
the keys to all 50 doors, protecting the little ones from excess light
by making sure that only one door is open at a time.
At the beginning of the film, three servants, Mrs. Mills (Fionnula
Flanagan), young, mute Lydia (Elaine Cassidy), and Mr. Tuttle (Eric
Sykes), an aging gardener, join the family. The two that speak seem
agreeable enough at first, but it soon becomes apparent that they know
something that Grace does not. To make matters worse, the children are
upset: Nicholas is unusually jittery and Anne claims to be seeing
ghosts. Grace attempts to blame the troubles on the new arrivals to her
home, only to realize that whatever is happening is beyond them.
That's essentially the whole story, with the tension growing until the
pivotal moment when everything becomes clear. Earlier, there is an
outstanding scene where Grace darts outside, only to be enveloped in
fold after fold of shimmering fog. The visuals in the otherworldly
sequence, courtesy of Aguirresarobe, are simply astounding.
I also enjoyed the presence of religion, a rarity in films dealing with
the supernatural. Grace is a Christian and answers her children's
questions about life and death with the assurance of a devout worshiper.
When mother is away, though, the kids speculate whether her statements
are fact or folklore, just as real children do.
But those nice touches fail to enliven a film that is too slow or make
up for a lackluster ending. "The Others" sets out to be a classic ghost
story, but fails to grasp that special something that makes such films
more than layers of mist.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "THE OTHERS" (Dimension Films/Miramax)
  "No door is to be opened before the previous one is closed and
locked," instructs Grace (Nicole Kidman), as mistress of a mysterious mansion on
the remote British island of Jersey. It's 1945 and she's waiting for her husband
(Christopher Eccleston) to return from fighting the Germans in France in W.W.II.
But the war is over and she hasn't heard from him. Plus the servants have left,
departing in the middle of the night, only to be replaced by three strangers who
appear on her doorstep looking for work. But it seems Mrs. Mills (Fionnula
Flanagan), Mr. Tuttle (Eric Sykes) and the mute Lydia (Elaine Cassidy) worked in
the mansion, years ago, for previous owners. "My children are allergic to
light," Grace continues. "The curtains and shutters must always be drawn."
Without electricity, they exist in almost total darkness and within this
macabre, claustrophobic atmosphere, bizarre things start to happen. There are
strange sounds and ghoulish apparitions, indicating intruders, which terrify
Grace and her children (Alakina Mann, James Bentley) but, oddly, not the
servants. "Sooner or later, they will find you," Mrs. Mills murmurs. "I don't
like fantasies," the stressed-out Grace snaps, relying, instead, on her devout
Catholicism. By Spanish writer/director/composer Alejandro Amenabar ("Open Your
Eyes"), this is a sinister, old-fashioned ghost story in which nothing is as it
seems. Suspense is created, not by special effects, but by the rising tension
and all-encompassing fog. Resembling a young Grace Kelly, Nicole Kidman captures
Kelly's combination of icy volatility and vulnerability which made her
irresistible to Alfred Hitchcock. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Others" is a shivery, spooky, scary 8, a suspenseful, brain-twisting
chiller-thriller, reminiscent of "The Sixth Sense."

Author
Jerry Saravia
I never thought anyone would care to make a haunted house movie with such
delicacy, vigor and intelligence as "The Others," but here it is and it is a
stunning classic in the tradition of ghost stories. Funny how two years ago we
were bombarded with a remake of "The Haunting" that threw all imagination to the
winds with its countless special-effects and histrionic performances, and now
comes a film of brooding menace and oodles of atmosphere and tension. Yes, it
can still be done with nary a CGI effect. 
The exquisite strength of Nicole Kidman continues with her latest role as a
near-hysterical, icy, religious woman named Grace. Set in 1945 after World War
II, Grace lives with her two children in an isolated mansion located in a foggy
English island known as Jersey (one of the Channel Islands). Grace needs
servants to look after the house and places an ad. Presto! The next day, a triad
of Irish servants arrive at her house and are given a tour of every door and
every room. Grace is adamant about keep each and every door closed and locked at
all times so as to not let the slighest amount of light enter the house. The
reason is because her two children, Anne (Alakina Mann) and Nicholas (James
Bentley), are allergic to the light to the point where it could kill them. The
servants seem to have another agenda though and, as it turns out, they were
formerly servants of the same house and know its deepest secrets that Grace can
hardly prepare for. Yes, indeed, it is haunted, or is it!
? 
"The Others" is in the fine tradition of excellent ghost stories such as the
original "The Haunting" and the nervy "The Changeling," both dealing with
haunted manors or mansions where pianos seem to play by themselves, floors seem
to creak, attics are full of mysterious items, and so on. There is absolutely
nothing in "The Others" that you have not seen before but rarely is it done with
this much skill or panache. Spanish writer-director Alejandro Amenabar ("Open
Your Eyes") understands that subtlety and imagination pay off in this kind of
genre, and he does a superb job of creating an ominous atmospheric pull that
builds the tension incredibly until the surprising ending. 
Kidman helps to build the tension with her shrieking fits and her frequent
hysterical episodes - her Grace is no ordinary heroine. She is fearful but
always in control and it is a delicate balance brought on beautifully by Kidman,
an actress who continues to surprise and engage me in each and every
performance. What is also rendered is Kidman's genuine pathos, uncovering a
gentle, human, loving woman who fights to protect her kids. Just look at her
mania episodes and contrast them with her vulnerable, sunnier side when her
husband (Christopher Eccleston) returns from the war looking like a famished
zombie. It is an amazing performance by Kidman that I hope is remembered at
Oscar time.
Alakina Mann and James Bentley are both excellent as the mature kids who love to
read but are also afraid of the dark - they can't seem to get used to it enough,
particularly the frightened Nicholas. They are kids who seem more mature than
their years, a rare find in this day and age of cute, cuddly tots with no
personality who never seem to mature (Olsen twins, anyone?). 
The enigmatic servants are also well-portrayed. Fionnula Flanagan is the dear
old Mrs. Mills who caters to Grace's needs though she does question Grace's
behavior to her own children (still, Mrs. Mills makes a helluva good cup of
tea). Elaine Cassidy is the mute Lydia, showing more expressions of sadness than
I have seen in some time (she was the fabulous lead in Atom Egoyan's "Felicia's
Journey"). Eric Sykes is Mr. Tuttle, the loyal gardener. 
"The Others" is not per se a scary film (though there are a couple of requisite
shocks) but it is an eerie, often frightening psychological drama, showcasing
Kidman to full effect as a tormented woman who will do anything to protect her
kids from the evils of the sunlit world. As she slowly becomes emotionally
unbalanced in her fears and anxieties, you also sense the house itself has taken
its toll on her.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Homer Yen
During the carefree school days of the 5th grade, we
had a gothic teacher named Mr. Hunt.  I secretly
called him "Mr. Haunt" because he had skin that made
him look somewhat charred, a box-like head and a
hairstyle that made him look like a distant cousin of
Frankenstein, and a gaze that might make you shiver. 
While his presence occasionally gave me (and some of
the other classmates) a few goose bumps, he was
beloved by all.  He knew how to keep us entertained. 
But most of all, he really knew how to tell a good
ghost story.
He would dim the lights, draw the curtains, bring out
a set of eerie noisemakers, and direct a flashlight
unto his face from under his chin to give himself a
spectral glow.  As he told his story, I would
sometimes cover my ears just to calm myself down.  
That kind of spine-tingling sensation has been
resurrected in "The Others," a wonderfully tense,
thoroughly haunting, old-fashioned ghost story.  The
film literally starts off with a scream.   Set just
after WWII, Grace (icy Nicole Kidman) lives in a
palatial yet isolated English mansion where eerie
things start to happen.  Enshrouded by fog and a
moribund stillness, this imposing estate would howl
itself if it could.
Grace is already a tormented soul who negotiates an
almost unbearable existence.  Her two children, Anne
(Alakina Mann) and Nicholas (James Bentley), who look
to be lifted from an Edgar Allen Poe tale, suffer from
a rare condition that renders them fatally allergic to
the light.  As such, the curtains must be drawn to
keep out the warmth of the sun.  She's also waiting
for the return of her husband (Christopher Eccleston)
from the war front.  Likely, however, he is already
dead.  She would easily succumb to insanity if not for
her devout faith.  
She relies on her religious grounding to combat the
unexplained and spooky things that eventually happen. 
For example, Anne claims to have conversations with an
unseen boy; strange noises emanate from a never-used
room; voices can be heard in the distance.  While
Grace doesn't believe in the supernatural, doubt and
fear slowly and creep in.  The chill of the unknown
not only eventually affects the stoic mother, but
slowly envelops the audience as well.
Writer-director Alejandro Amenabar ably plays upon our
inherent fear of the dark to create an edgy and moody
atmosphere that's sure to increase your heartbeat.  He
utilizes unsettling caterwaul-like music, shadows in
corridors, white sheets draped over furniture, and a
particularly effective camera trick -- whenever Grace
would slowly open a door, the camera would be
positioned behind our tragic heroine.  Like a child
who hides behind her mother when frightened, we also
want to hide, but agonize over what's behind that
door.  So chilling at times is this tale that the
scariest scene actually happens in broad daylight!
I can go on lauding Kidman's steely performance and
the tone of unbridled fear established by the
wonderful child actors.  But I scare easily anyway. 
So, what did the audience think?  Throughout the film,
there was mostly dead silence and the occasional
scream from the intimidated.  Where did all the
popcorn munchers go?  Perhaps there were only 20
people in the audience.  Surprisingly, when the lights
went up, there were 200!  They were all riveted by
what they saw, too afraid to move, completely
entranced by "The Others."

Author
Laura Clifford
Grace (Nicole Kidman) lives alone in a rambling mansion on the Isle of Jersey 
with her two light-allergic children Anne (Alakina Mann) and Nicholas (James
Bentley) after her servants mysteriously disappeared one night.  The year is 
1945 and her soldier husband Charles (Christopher Eccleston, "Elizabeth") 
hasn't been heard from in over a year.  After three servants arrive looking
for work, strange things begin to happen in writer/director Alejandro
Amenabar's "The Others."
Grace is very religious and becomes angered when her daughter Anne upsets
Nicholas with tales of a young boy whom she says comes into their
room at night.  Grace doesn't believe in the supernatural and brands Anne
a liar, making her read the bible aloud in the hallway until the girl admits
her sin.  The new housekeeper Mrs. Mills (Fionnula Flanagan, "Waking
Ned Devine"), is more receptive to Anne's stories, though, and questions
the harshness of Grace's punishment, especially when Anne hasn't relented after
three days.  After all, Anne has hinted to Mrs. Mills that her mother
may have once gone mad.
Grace accuses Mrs. Mills and the mute Lydia (Elaine Cassidy, "Felicia's 
Journey") of leaving doors open (they must be locked so as not to allow 
potentially life-threatening light to enter the room) and says Lydia makes a 
racket upstairs.  But when Grace hears thuds that set the chandelier to 
swinging while she can see the two women outside, she's forced to investigate. 
Anne tells her that 'the others' are in an attic room, and Grace discovers 
shrouded furniture, whispering voices and even a 'book of the dead' that panic 
her.
Things take stranger turns and it's unclear what agenda the three servants,
who showed up unbidden claiming to know the house, have, if any.  Grace asks
the gardener, Mr. Tuttle (Eric Sykes, "Those Magnificent Men in Their
Flying Machines") to search for a graveyard on the grounds and sets 
out to fetch the parish priest.  But she becomes enveloped in blanketing 
fog and instead finds her shell shocked husband dazedly coming up the road.
Alejandro Amenabar ("Open Your Eyes") has taken a page from "The Innocents"
and created a spooky, psychological, gothic ghost story of a time gone by.
The children's odd ailment gives him the opportunity to create an eerie
mood with dark, shadowy rooms and corridors lit only by the candles and 
lanterns carried by his characters.  Religious symbols, from a covered
status of Jesus to Anne's communion dress, become sinister.  Creaking doors, 
whooshing drapes and unexpected footfalls make one shiver.  Amenabar's score 
is also effectively old-fashioned.
Kidman walks a line between being overly strict and warmly maternal.
Mounting fear shines from her ever-widening eyes.  The performance tends 
toward brittleness, however.  Young newcomers Alakina Mann and James
Bentley are both superb, childlike and innocent on the one hand, almost
eerily pale and borderline creepy on the other.  Anne is willful and
rebellious while Nicholas is terrified and trusting.  Fionnula Flanagan
keeps us off balance with her caring housekeeper who just might know more
about the strange goings on that she's letting on.
While anyone who's seen a lot of movies should have no trouble at least
partially figuring out the 'surprise' twist ending, "The Others" is still an 
enjoyable, well made thriller for those who like things that go bump in
the night.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
It is difficult to think of something new to do with a ghost 
story.  Just creating atmosphere is really not enough.  Once the 
ghosts start throwing things around and doing physical damage, as 
they did in POLTERGEIST, a ghost story no longer is a ghost story 
as much as it is a monster movie.  On the other hand just leaving 
around clues that something from beyond is around, maybe the 
sound of a woman crying or bloody footprints on the carpet, very 
quickly becomes tiresome.  Even some of the best ghost stories 
diversify.  They function as a ghost story and something else. 
Frequently it is a ghost story and a simple murder mystery as was 
done with THE UNINVITED, THE CHANGELING, and THE LADY IN WHITE. 
WHAT LIES BENEATH was a ghost story that turned into a murder 
mystery that turned into a stalker movie.  (And none of them was 
very good.)  Some of the best just mix character portraits with 
ghost story.  THE INNOCENTS and the original THE HAUNTING do 
that nicely.  Into the latter category comes THE OTHERS.  This is 
a very good ghost story with some very tricky things going on. 
Watching it I think I must have come up with about eight 
different theories to explain what I was seeing.  In the end I 
gave myself about one-third credit for having solved part of the 
puzzle. 
It is late 1945 and Grace (played by Nicole Kidman) lives on one 
of the Channel Islands that the Germans occupied during the war 
that so recently ended.  On this island good weather is just a 
thick gray cloud cover, but sometimes the fog is so thick it 
seeps into the house and seemingly into Grace's soul.  Grace 
lives in a brooding mansion with her two children, both allergic 
to light.   The Germans cut off the electricity and, partially 
for the sake of the children, Grace never restored it. 
To protect the children from light, Grace has very strict rules 
about keeping all but very faint light out of rooms.  This is a 
house that has befriended the darkness and shuns the light. 
These inflexible rules have to be explained in detail to the 
newly arrived hired help.  The old hired help just disappeared 
one day not long ago.  Adding to the mystery is that one of the 
children has been hearing a crying boy at night.  That is just 
the set-up for this story written as well as directed and 
musically scored by Alejandro Amenabar.  And the story he has 
created is tightly written.  Amenabar leaves a lot of details to 
be explained in this puzzle of a script and every mystery is 
explained by the denouement. 
This is a film that in large part is built around the Kidman 
performance.  From the beginning she plays it as an authoritarian 
with many idiosyncratic rules of how to run her house.  Meanwhile 
she traumatizes her children with her matter-of-fact, hellfire- 
and-brimstone religious interpretations.  Amenabar has her made 
up to look very much the way Alfred Hitchcock would have made up 
Grace Kelly, whom she even seems to resemble in this film. 
This is a film sculpted from darkness.  Interior shots are nearly 
almost always half-dark, obscuring part of the picture.  The 
lighting frequently gives the effect of being solely from 
candles.   Exteriors are little brighter with figures receding 
into the thick fog.  The visuals and the story line remain half- 
hidden and enigmatic to the viewer.  The characters are uniformly 
dressed in dark colors or in black. 
THE OTHERS is a stylistically well-controlled and effective ghost 
story.  It relies on mood rather than special effects and 
succeeds admirably.  I rate it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 
on the -4 to +4 scale. 

Author
Dennis Schwartz
OTHERS, THE (director/writer: Alejandro Amenábar; cinematographer: Javier
Aguirresarobe; cast: Nicole Kidman (Grace), Fionnula Flanagan (Mrs. Bertha
Mills), Christopher Eccleston (Charles), Elaine Cassidy (Lydia), Eric Sykes (Mr.
Tuttle), Alakina Mann (Anne), James Bentley (Nicholas), Renée Asherson (Old
Lady); Runtime: 104; Dimension Films; 2001-USA/Spain) 
A Gothic mom-in-distress thriller for those who might believe in ghosts or at
least are open-minded, or for those who like a scary puzzler story to be
grounded in those old-fashioned techniques of getting at the human emotions
rather than being a computerized technical special-effects production of the
supernatural. It most closely takes after a Henry James story, "Turn of the
Screw," as that one was filmed by Jack Clayton and was called "The Innocents,"
whose premise is also of a woman desperately trying to save the two children in
her care from invisible invaders in their house. 
The 29-year-old acclaimed Chilean-born, Spanish-based director, Alejandro
Amenábar (Open Your Eyes/Thesis), provides a surprise ending to this chiller,
which the clever viewer might guess since there are enough clues laid down.
That's something "The Sixth Sense" did, but there it worked better because the
story was more plausible and less artsy, so when the surprise ending resulted it
seemed more satisfactory than in Amenábar's film. 
The dark and somber tone of Amenábar's film lingers for too long to make it seem
anything more than an atmospheric and stylish mumbo jumbo scare film. It creeps
along at a gruelingly slow pace, belaboring its point that ghosts can live among
the living. 
The film is set in 1945, just as WW11 ended, in a remote house on the isle of 
Jersey, in the English Channel. But time seems irrelevant here, as it could be
set at any time, though the story fits most readily into the Victorian period.
The mansion is inhabited by a stern, bossy, high-strung, Bible fundamentalist
Catholic mother, Grace (Nicole Kidman-looking like Grace Kelly in the 1940s),
her two vulnerable children, Ann (Alakina) and Nicholas (Bentley), and three odd
servants who mysteriously show up and offer their services when the other
servants fled for no apparent reason not even bothering to collect their wages.
The servants include: the head housekeeper, Bertha Mills (Fionnula Flanagan- a
noted Irish actress), the gardener, Mr. Tuttle (Sykes), and a young cleaning
lady who is mute, Lydia (Cassidy). The house is not only creepy and filled with
ghost sounds, but is enveloped in darkness because all the windows must be
covered with thick curtains as the children are mysteriously allergic to the
light and if exposed it could be fatal to them. 
Grace is the household head because her husband Charles (Eccleston) has not
returned from the war and has been reported as a MIA, though she still has some
hope that he will return. She coldly explains to the new servants who seem eager
to please her and who it turns out were previously employed in the house, that
there is no telephone, no radio and no electricity. Also, "no door must be
opened unless the one before is closed." There are 50 doors, 15 keys, and enough
dark corners and creaky floorboards to even scare a dead person. When those
clichéd scary formula effects don't work enough scares, the background music
goes into a high crescendo to add more chills. Another scare tactic used is when
the scene shifts outside to the house covered in fog and surrounded by a dense
woods. 
There are strange things happening in the house: doors being opened
mysteriously, a piano playing, strange sounds of both sobbing and screams, and
curtains being mysteriously removed from the windows. The question becomes are
the new servants to blame? Or, as the inquisitive Ann claims, are there ghosts
in the house? 
It's a scary movie because it takes on a number of different themes; such as,
madness, ghosts haunting a house, religious dogma, sexual repressions, and
hysteria. Nicole Kidman is quite adept to pull off those hyper moods that leave
her as an overbearing mother who feels trapped in her own house and doesn't know
what to believe except what she learned while growing up and being taught from
the Bible. 
The film was heading in the right direction until the surprise ending left me
less pleased with it. The striking performance by Ms. Kidman, who carries this
pic, and the feeling of loneliness it had established, make it a film that has
much to recommend it despite its shortcomings. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Alejandro Amenábar's new film, The Others, begins with a scream and ends
with the best goosebump-inducing finale since The Sixth Sense.  The shriek
comes from Grace (Nicole Kidman, Moulin Rouge), the mother of two children
living on a giant, fog-shrouded estate on the Isle of Jersey, just off the
coast of England.  The year is 1945, and although World War II has ended,
Grace's husband Charles (Christopher Eccleston, Gone in 60 Seconds) hasn't
returned home, or even sent word regarding his whereabouts.
A missing husband is one thing, but migraine-prone Grace has plenty of other
things to worry about.  Her two kids, Anne (Alakina Mann) and Nicholas
(James Bentley), are both allergic to sunlight, and the small group of
servants that used to tend to the house have all mysteriously vanished.
It's no surprise the children make references to a recent nervous breakdown
suffered by their mother.  You try living in a house with no electricity, no
radio and no phone, with sickly kids and each passing day reducing the odds
that your spouse is still alive.
After placing an ad for new help, Grace takes on a group of three servants -
Mrs. Mills (Fionnula Flanagan, Waking Ned Devine), Mr. Tuttle (Eric Sykes)
and the mute Lydia (Elaine Cassidy, Felicia's Journey) - nd instructs them
about the importance of locking every door in the house. "No door is to be
opened before the previous one is closed," Grace tells them, explaining that
the beams of sunlight must be contained to protect her children (like
sunlight could possibly make its way through the thick, choking fog.)
Then the typical horror-movie stuff starts - footsteps, voices and the like.
Anne even swears she's seen other people in the house, but the deeply
religious Grace doesn't believe any of it, pointing an accusatory finger at
Mrs. Mills and her sidekicks, thinking they're trying to run her and her
children out of the mansion.  In a way, The Others is a little like The
Shining, with a family of three trying to contend with complete isolation
and each other.  But, as we learn time and time again, things are never what
they seem in the movies.  There are enough red herrings in The Others to
keep you guessing until the very end.
Mad props must be given to Amenábar (Open Your Eyes), who, in his
English-language debut, serves as writer, director and even provides some
creepy music, to boot (he also scored The Butterfly, which was directed by
Others producer José Luis Cuerda).  Amenábar's manipulation of light (or,
more precisely, the lack thereof) is nothing short of genius, as
demonstrated in the film's opening credits.  He uses the darkness to make
you feel claustrophobic, and with the deliberately slow, tension-building
pace, you begin to grow accustomed to the shadows, just like Grace.  You
don't realize how enveloping it is until a curtain is thrown back, revealing
colors previously blanketed by the gloom.  This is practically a
black-and-white film; it legitimately looks 40 or 50 years old.
Adding to the aged feel of The Others is Kidman, who may give her greatest
performance here (it's easily her best since To Die For).  She's doing her
finest Grace Kelly impression, and she does it wonderfully.  The Others,
which was produced by Kidman's soon-to-be-ex-hubby Tom Cruise (the star of
Cameron Crowe's American adaptation of Amenábar's Open Your Eyes), would
have been the perfect Halloween flick, but, unfortunately, must cut a wide
path around hokey monster movies like the remake of William Castle's 13
Ghosts as well as teen slasher flicks like Jeepers Creepers and the new
Halloween installment.  This isn't the kind of thing you want to see in a
big, heartless chain theatre, where the barely audible whispering on screen
will be lost in the stadium seating and cup holders.  It's an arthouse
summer popcorn flick that will have the misfortune of landing in megaplexes.
1:40 - PG-13 for thematic elements and frightening moments

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE OTHERS, brilliantly written and directed by Alejandro Amenábar, is the
quietest movie of the year, with characters who rarely talk much above a whisper
and with background sounds that are only a couple of decibels higher than dead
silence.  But don't worry, you won't miss anything since you'll be on the edge
of your seat throughout the most spell-binding mystery since THE SIXTH SENSE. 
For the longest time, Amenábar keeps us unsure not only as to what actually is
happening but also as to what kind of mystery it is.  Perhaps it's a ghost
story.  But it could be a psychological drama.  Then again, it might be
something else entirely.  As you watch it, don't get cocky.  Even if you think
you have figured it out, you may be wrong in more ways than one.  As one
character remarks prophetically, "There are going to be some big surprises."
The central character in this fascinating thriller is Nicole Kidman in a great
and creepily intensive performance.  She, however, is constantly upstaged by two
amazing child actors, Alakina Mann and James Bentley, who are stunning and
chillingly effective.  This is reminiscent of the way that Haley Joel Osment
managed to outdo Bruce Willis in THE SIXTH SENSE.
The story, set towards the end of World War II, happens mainly inside a large,
fog covered manor house on the British island of Jersey.  Grace (Kidman) lives
there with her two children, Anne (Mann) and Nickolas (Bentley).  As the story
starts, Grace's husband, Charles (Christopher Eccleston), is off fighting in the
war.  
The children have a severe disease that makes them unable to handle any sunlight
whatsoever.   Grace carefully instructs the new servants -- the last ones
disappeared without even bothering to collect their wages -- that all doors are
to be kept closed and locked and all curtains drawn.  Fionnula Flanagan, Eric
Sykes and Elaine Cassidy play the new servants.  Even in their minor roles, they
contribute immensely to enhancing the mystery.
Grace is a high-strung woman who is used to maintaining military-like control of
her household and her children.  The events that unfold completely shake her
confidence.  It starts off when the mischievous Anne begins to torment her young
brother, Nickolas.  Anne scares the wits out of Nickolas with tales of a kid
named Victor, whom she claims to see.  Needless to say, her mother tells her to
stop it.  And that is only the setup for this intriguing story.  That's all I am
going to tell you, which isn't much.  This much I can guarantee, as you keep
trying to guess where the story is headed, you will not be disappointed when it
gets there.  
THE OTHERS runs 1:44.  It is rated PG-13 for thematic elements and frightening
moments and would be fine for kids around 12 and up, depending entirely on how
well they can handle fear of the unknown.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 10, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters. 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
`The Others' is an old-fashioned ghost story that aims not to slash the
jugular but to constrict the throat, designed not so much for screams as for
raising the little hairs on the back of the neck.  Writer/director Alejandro
Amenabar (Abres los Ojos (Open Your Eyes) simmers his atmospheric broth with a
slow, sure relish over a low heat, with help immeasurable from the rich, darkly
textured visual flavors supplied by cinematographer Javier Aguirresarobe.  The
terrors Amenabar treats us to are terrors of the mind, terrors of the soul,
terrors of the unknown and unseen, terrors of darkness and repression, terrors
of isolation, terrors of a religion designed to put the fear of God into little
children.   
There is very little that can be said about this movie without giving too
much away.  Not much happens for long stretches, but it builds its web strand by
strand, and its pleasures are in the buildup of little discoveries.  It is
probably safe to reveal that this is a haunted house yarn set in the formerly
Nazi-occupied  Isle of Jersey in the English Channel, just after WWII.  Nicole
Kidman plays Grace, whose husband has gone off to war and never returned.  She
lives in an isolated mansion with her two young children, who are afflicted with
a strange and terrible malady that makes it essential that they never be exposed
to daylight.  There is precious little daylight to be had in this dark-paneled
mansion at best; it is perpetually shrouded in a dense fog, and even to go out
for a walk beyond the great iron gate is to risk getting hopelessly and
terrifyingly lost in the swirling, changing mists.   Nevertheless, all the
windows are swathed in thick drawn curtains, and as Grace moves from room to
room she carries a heavy ring of keys with which she unlocks each door and locks
it again behind her to insure against one being carelessly opened or left ajar
to let in lethal daylight.  
A trio of servants  a middle-aged housekeeper (Fionnula Flanagan), an old
gardener (Eric Sykes) and a young maid (Elaine Cassidy) arrive on the doorstep
on the cold, misty morning on which the story begins.  They are quickly
employed, and set to work to replace the previous staff, which has left without
notice, and who's to blame them?  Days pass, there are strange noises, strange
happenings.
It is surely no coincidence that Amenabar has named his heroine Grace. 
With her post-war hairdo, her cool control and her exquisite patrician beauty,
Nicole Kidman bears a startling resemblance to Grace Kelly.  It's a nicely
calculated touch, lending an instant Hitchcockian classicism (and an eerie
reminder of her bizarre and shocking death) to the atmosphere of the film. 
Kidman delivers a skilled performance as a woman walking a shaky tightrope
between self-control and neurosis.  Her religious fanaticism as she home-schools
her children with warnings of `The Children's Limbo' and eternal torment
delivers some of the movie's most disturbing moments.  There is something very
fragile rattling beneath Grace's competent exterior, and something very wrong.
Fionnula Flanagan makes Mrs. Mills, the new housekeeper, a nurturing yet
vaguely malevolent presence, a sort of dark-side Mrs. Piggle Wiggle.  The
children are excellent, both the frightened, trembling little Nicholas (James
Bentley) and his almost preternaturally self-possessed older sister, Anne
(Alakina Mann).  Christopher Eccleston adds a haunting cameo.
There are holes in the story and gaps in its logic, and these can be mildly
troublesome in the last third of the picture.  But Amenabar recovers for an
ending that falls squarely within the traditions of the ghost story genre, like
a tale well told around the campfire.
And now, children, crawl into your tents and try to go to sleep.

Author
Pete Croatto
The Others has a great ending -- one that will be spoofed in Scary Movie
4 and referred to in Entertainment Weekly for years to come.  It's the
reason why people will rush to the theater this summer, spurred on by
the word of mouth from friends and co-workers.
What people will forget to tell you is that there's more than 90 minutes
of an OK horror movie to watch before a glorious 10 minutes.  Take away
the ending--which ties the script's agnostic themes together too
perfectly--and you get The Haunting, just with superior acting and
production values.
The latest horrorfest brings us to 1945 England, where the repressed,
icy Grace, played by Nicole Kidman (Note: Tom Cruise served as an
executive producer on the film), cares for her kids Ann and Nicholas
(Alakina Mann and James Bentley) in a colossal house, where things are
in turmoil.  Grace has been told that her husband (Christopher
Eccleston), who's fighting in World War II, is missing and unlikely to
return.  The house's staff has simply vanished.  And to top it all off,
Ann repeatedly sees visions of another family who she says used to live
in the house.
Ann tries to explain what she sees to her dubious mother, who drums
Christian doctrine into her children's heads and has an impatient
streak.  At first, Grace doubts her daughter.  But when doors fly open
and unknown screams are unleashed, Grace strives (unsuccessfully) to
gain control of the situation.  Meanwhile, the new housekeeping staff
led by the friendly Mrs. Mills (Fionnula Flanagan), acts peculiar. Mrs.
Mills tells Ann that she has seen the same visions, and that their
presence will lead to some changes in the house.
The movie is propelled by a few highlights, most notably its look.  The
house is devoid of natural light (the kids are allergic to it), which
gives the movie a continually creepy feel.  Fog swirls in and out,
creating a dreamlike environment.  Throughout the movie, Kidman dresses
in long, uncomfortable dresses, which scream her repression and cool
demeanor.  The kids talk in sing-songy English accents, giving the false
impression that everything is fine.
The one nuisance is director/screenwriter/composer Alejandro Amenábar's
pacing.  Amenábar (directing his first English language feature) spends
so much time establishing mood and religious symbolism that the movie
simmers, instead of boils.  There are very few chills until the finale. 
However, the ending still falls a bit flat because it's so much livelier
than the material before it.
Writing this review, I'm reminded of when I first saw The Blair Witch
Project two years ago.  I loved the idea, but I left the theater feeling
a little disappointed.  It just wasn't scary enough.  I feel the same
way about The Others.  The film geek inside of me is satisfied, but the
Scaredy Cat in me isn't.
Director: Alejandro Amenábar 
Producer: Fernando Bovaira, José Luis Cuerda, Park Sunmin
Writer: Alejandro Amenábar
Starring: Nicole Kidman, Fionnula Flanagan, Alakina Mann, James Bentley,
Eric Sykes, Elaine Cassidy, Christopher Eccleston   
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  CHARLIE CHAN IN THE SECRET SERVICE (director: Phil Rosen; screenwriter: George
Callahan; cinematographer: Ira Morgan; editor: Martin Cohen; cast: Sidney Toler
(Charlie Chan), George J. Lewis (Paul Arranto), Arthur Loft (Inspector Jones ),
Gwen Kenyon (Inez Arranto), Gene Roth ( Luis Philipe Vega/Philip Von Vega), Muni
Seroff (Peter Laska), Marianne Quon (Iris Chan), Benson Fong (Tommie Chan, #3
Son), Lelah Tyler (Mrs. Winters/Fraulein Manlich), Sarah Edwards (Mrs. Hargue,
Housekeeper), Mantan Moreland (Birmingham Brown); Runtime: 63; Monogram; 1944)
A fairly entertaining Charlie Chan mystery, but with the new studio Monogram
taking over for 20th Century Fox the production values were much cheaper. When
an inventor of an important torpedo plan is murdered in his home while being
guarded by Secret Service agents, Charlie Chan (Toler), who is made an agent of
the United States government, is called in to investigate. He's aided, without
requesting them, by his Number Three Daughter, Iris (Quon), and Number Two Son,
Tommie (Fong). 
When the inventor opens a closet door, he's electrocuted and his valuable
torpedo plans are stolen by a spy. All the house guests and the housekeeper,
Mrs. Hargue (Edwards), become suspects. Paul Arranto (Lewis) is in a wheelchair,
but it's soon evident he can walk. His sister Inez (Kenyon), was the first to
find the body and the housekeeper says she was going through the vic's pockets.
Peter Laska is employed by Paul, and is very nervous. David Blake works for the
Department of Economics, and is arrogant. Mrs. Winters (Tyler) pretends she's a
scatter-brain ditzy woman. She brings a gift of a minature Statue of Liberty, as
she keeps asking to leave because she wants to feed her pet dog. Luis Philipe
Vega is a refugee from Smyrna who says he's a salesman, but his real name is
Philip Von Vega and he's an electrical engineer. 
Charlie becomes the killer's target twice, but he is able to use those failed
attempts to get more clues to pin the murder of the inventor on Vega. But when
Vega is killed by a gun mounted on the wall that is fired by a magnet releasing
the trigger from another part of the room, Charlie deduces who his killer is and
who has the torpedo plans on them. 
Birmingham Brown (Moreland) is the wisecracking chauffeur of Mrs. Winters who
helps Charlie's kids in their investigation, while Inspector Jones (Loft) is
also able to be of some mild assistance to Charlie. It wasn't too difficult to
pick out the spy, but nevertheless the film was still pleasing in spots. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Alejandro Amenabar, based on his screenplay. Starring Nicole
Kidman, Fionnula Flanagan, Alakina Mann. Running time: 101 minutes. Rated
AA by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 13th, 2001.
Synopsis: Grace (Kidman) lives with her young son and daughter on an 
isolated estate in the Channel Islands. Her children are photosensitive, 
and hence cannot be exposed to direct sunlight. The arrival of new 
servants precipitates strange noises and unexplained occurrences in the 
darkness-shrouded house. Is someone trying to drive Grace mad, or are 
unquiet spirits haunting her family?
Review: Haunted houses are a familiar staple of horror films, and "The 
Others" hardly reinvents the wheel. What it does offer, though, is a 
classy, gripping example of the genre: an unusually spooky and 
spine-tingling experience. Amenabar, making his first English-language 
movie, demonstrates his profound understanding of sound: his self-composed 
incidental music is effective, and silence plays an equally important role 
in building the suspense. Although Amenabar does spend a little too much 
time at the beginning of the picture laying his groundwork, things pick up 
noticeably through the final hour. The director makes judicious use of all 
the tricks in his toolbox of terror; there are enough frights to keep 
audiences on the edge of their seats, but not so many that they become 
commonplace. The inclusion of a nineteenth-century "Book of the Dead" is 
one of several particularly eerie moments. Kidman boosts the script's 
credibility with a terrific performance, playing Grace (think "Kelly") as 
a sympathetic woman who nonetheless possesses a singularly ruthless 
streak. Mann is notable as her creepy, strong-willed daughter. The film 
ends, "Sixth Sense"-style, with a surprise ending which Amenabar is wise 
not to overplay; his more subdued approach is likely to haunt even the 
steeliest of viewers.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/
