Title
Review for Nostradamus (1994/I)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Raymond Johnston
Starring- Tcheky Kayro, F. Murray Abraham, Amanda Plummer, Rutger Hauer.
Directed by- Roger Christian
Distributed by Orion Classics
     Sometime during the plague of the mid 1500s a doctor named Michel
de Nostradame wrote a few volumes of strange prophetic poems.  Whether
one considers him a gifted seer or a charlatan, he is a character whose
life is brimming with cinematic and narrative possibilities.
     None of those possibilities are realized in the current film
bearing his name.
     The filmmakers wholeheartedly embrace the gifted seer theory of
his life.  They create a laughably inept story out of the few known
facts of his life.  If it wasn't for world-class bad RAPA NUI, this
would be the worst film of the year.
     Almost all the actors somnambulate through their scenes, seemingly
ashamed that somebody in the audience will recognize them.  Tcheky
Kayro, who bears some resemblance to sketches of Nostradamus, gives the
tired cliches of his awkward and unnatural dialogue a shot, but there
is no way to make his lines credible.  His first scene is the dreadful
medical student who knows more than his teacher scene, complete with
dissected cadaver.  Nostradamus contradicts his teacher and recites
near-modern medical theories.  The teacher promptly dies of the plague,
right in the middle of class.  Luckily Nostradamus, the new medical
student, has a theory on curing the plague as well.  Luckily everything
he needs is right at hand.
     The rest of the story continues with the usual mish-mash of narrow
minded witch hunters, dark torture chambers, oppressed would be
scholars, forbidden manuscripts, oppressed modern feminist women, inept
dandy monarchs and a little coveting thy neighbor's wife; all this plus
stock footage of the Second World War.
     The filmmakers take a grave sense of doom to the project.  They
pretend that there is an urgent need for the audience to embrace these
predictions.  They greatly inflate the clarity of Nostradamus's almost
unreadable allegorical poems.  The result is something resembling Sunn
Classics films like IN SEARCH OF HISTORIC JESUS or IN SEARCH OF NOAH'S
ARK.  They credit Nostradamus with everything from predicting the
Kennedy assassination to inventing musk oil perfume and aroma therapy.
     While the cast includes an Oscar winner, the whole production is
amateurish.  The film is exceedingly washed out and grainy, with even
more grainy special effects.  All the sound is noticeably post synched.
The lighting scheme is dark and muddy.  Romanian landmarks are palmed
off as Renaissance France.
     Continuing his near-suicidal career choices since his triumph in
AMADEUS is F. Murray Abraham.  He plays a the leader of some
ill-defined esoteric cult that possesses a hallucinogenic drug
resembling LSD.  Nostradamus takes lots of this, and has nightmarish
visions.  Later, having a flashback no doubt, he imagines himself
surrounded by Nazi soldiers and Panzer tanks.  The soldiers run around
him, but don't seem to see him.
     The manner of his visions is not consistent.  At other times he
just looks in a bowl of water to see stock footage of Hitler, Kennedy,
and others.  To make his prediction of three global wars seem true, the
filmmakers elevate the Gulf War to the standing of World Wars I and
II.  This stock footage technique might be amusing on an I Dream of
Jeannie episode but can hardly pass for special effects in the wake of
JURASSIC PARK.
    Then the filmmakers show that none of them can even count.  They
have character say repeatedly that his visions are for five hundred
years in the future, the end of the twentieth century.  From the mid
16th Century when the film takes place, it is only four hundred
years.
     What Rutger Hauer is doing in this mess is anybody's guess.  His
bizarre role is so small that he at least spares himself from complete
embarrassment.  The only actor to be able to count this as a career
plus is Amanda Plummer.  She manages to squeeze a semblance of
character out of Catherine de Medici.  Her few scenes are a stray
reminder that this could have been a decent historical drama.  One of
Amanda Plummer's scenes is the horror highlight of the film, such as it
is.  It rips off both CARRIE and THE SHINING.  The few horror scenes in
the film are the ones that are most effective.
     If Nostradamus could have looked into the future and seen this
film, he would have burned his books to spare himself this future
indignity.
     For no real reason I saw NOSTRADAMUS and MARY SHELLEY'S
FRANKENSTEIN on the same day.  There are a few similarities between the
two films.  Both are costume dramas concerning medical students and
their unscientific experiments.  Both films had their heroes neglect
their families.  Both had their heroes doggedly pursued across Europe.
Both had a star from AMADEUS.  The complete cinematic poverty of
NOSTRADAMUS made me appreciate the lush gothic excess and outlandish
visual style of the underrated FRANKENSTEIN.

Author
Eric Mankin
     In a tower, we see the Sixteenth Century physician/prophet
Nostradamus (Tcheky Karyo) staring into space, his face filled with
alarm at a vision of the future he is seeing, his lips mouthing an
unspoken "No!"  Clearly, he is looking into the late Twentieth Century
and seeing the film Roger Christian has made on his life, a sickly
sweet dose of mystical mouthwash.
     The guy couldn't have been this dull.  Screenwriters, Knut Boeser
and Piers Ashworth have stamped out his story with two cookie cutters.
One formats the "misunderstood ahead-of-his-time genius confronts
fathead mediocrities" scene.  The other limns the "seer sees woman; she
makes cow eyes at him" encounter.
     Both of these are bad, but the prophecies are worse.  Watch Karyo
rolling his eyes and struggling to pronounce an unfamiliar word:
"Hister ... Hilzer ..." and finally picking up a brush and painting a
red swastika on the wall.  Even believers impressed by this
unforgettable dramatic moment will be frustrated, though: the visions
of the future the film makers have the master seeing are concrete up to
1989 (Saddam Hussein's face floats in the sage's magic water basin),
and then ... abruptly cease, except for brief glimpses of what look
like Deep Space 9 outtakes.
     Amanda Plummer, for once playing a character with an IQ above 50,
generates a little energy near the end as Catherine de Medici.
Otherwise, the prophet penning the words you now read foresees much
greater happiness for those who spend their ticket money on other
films.
