Title
Review for God Told Me To (1977)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Larry Cohen || Screenplay: Larry Cohen || Stars: Tony Lo Bianco (Peter
Nicholas), Deborah Raffin (Casey Forster), Sandy Dennis (Martha Nicholas),
Sylvia Sidney (Elizabeth Mullin), Sam Levene (Everett Lukas), Robert Drivas
(David Morten), Mike Kellin (Deputy Commissioner) || MPAA Rating: R
B-movie monster auteur Larry Cohen was really on a roll when he wrote, produced,
and directed his 1977 fanatic-religion-meets-alien-abduction thriller "God Told
Me To." Cohen, who openly embraces the low-rent traditions of cheapie horror
flicks and sleazy exposés, has made some of the clumsiest and most entertaining
schlock of the last twenty years.
A television screenwriter who graduated to the motion picture director's chair
during the blaxploitation era of the early seventies, Cohen first made himself
known with "It's Alive," the classic 1974 cult horror film about man-eating
babies. Since then, he has polished his technique and raised his production
levels, but subsequent efforts, including two "It's Alive" sequels, "Q" (1982),
"The Stuff" (1985), and his screenplay for "Maniac Cop" (1988), are all schlocky
drive-in movie material at heart.
"God Told Me To" is certainly one of his most ambitious movies because it takes
to task the very existence of God, as well as the nature of religion and
deification in the modern world. The movie can be seen as cynical at best, and
sacrilegious at worst, considering that the explanation of the particular God in
this film would fit nicely in an episode of "The X-Files." However, only those
who are intensely religious will be offended; the rest of us can just smile at
the film's simple and entertaining absurdity.
The movie opens with a series of randomly violent incidents in New York City - a
sniper perched on a water tower shoots and kills fourteen people; a police
officer (an early role for Andy Kaufman of TV's "Taxi" fame) walking in a St.
Patrick's Day parade suddenly opens fire on the crowd; a man in a supermarket
begins attacking people with a knife and so on. When police detective Peter
Nicholas (Tony Lo Bianco) begins investigating the incidents, he quickly
discovers a link connecting all the violence: whenever asked what made them do
it, the attackers, in calm rational voices, always respond, "God told me to."
This deeply affects Nicholas because of his own strong religious background. He
never misses confession and he won't divorce his wife Martha (Sandy Dennis) even
though they haven't slept in the same house for four years and he is actively
courting another girlfriend (Deborah Raffin). Nicholas is convinced that there
is someone or something controlling the actions of these people, all of whom
have no criminal histories to suggest they are capable of violence.
Why else would they be so serene and collected after their atrocious killing
sprees, especially a husband who sits in his own living room , gentling
explaining how he massacred his entire family, all because God told him to.
"He's done so much for us," the husband says. "I just thought it was time I did
something for Him." There is little doubt that something supernatural is at
work. For instance, the sniper, a 22-year-old man who had never held a gun
before, managed to shoot with deadly perfect aim, even though his gun was old,
cheap, and calibrated incorrectly.
Nicholas's pursuit of the case takes a turn when he finds out that a young man
with long blond hair was seen talking to each of the men before they erupted in
unexplained violence. As he tracks down this man, Nicholas begins to learn
things about himself while answering questions he never thought to ask. The case
involves many people who are somehow connected, including several women who gave
mysterious "virgin" births.
As kooky and confusing as the movie is, "God Told Me To" can actually be quite
entertaining and even absorbing. Cohen elicits good performances from all his
actors, especially tough character actor Tony Lo Bianco in the lead role and
Sylvia Sidney, who plays a mysterious old woman who holds an important key to
Nicholas' past.
As the explanation of the film's strange events begins to take shape, the action
becomes more and more incoherent, until it climaxes in an other-worldly
fist-fight bathed in visceral golden light. This ending, with all its
hyperkinetic violence, is something of a let-down, despite Cohen's success at
setting up an interesting mystery worthy of attention. The limited special
effects are often distracting, although they seem to fit nicely into the
ridiculous overall tone of the film.
Like many of Cohen's films, "God Told Me To" is cemented in an interesting idea,
but the final product seems more like a hastily thrown-together mosaic of
scenes, rather than a satisfying whole. Cohen seems to have the right ideas, but
he lacks the patience and drive to bring it all together. Other directors,
including Paul Morrissey ("Flesh For Frankenstein") and David Cronenberg ("The
Fly"), have shown that well-worn and admittedly cheap horror conventions can be
successfully reworked to explore deeper issues. Although Cohen strives for the
same territory, he never quite manages to get there.


Author
Jerry Saravia
Along with the king of low-budget horror Roger Corman, Larry Cohen has made some of the cheesiest horror pictures imaginable. There is the absurdity of "It's Alive" and the pointlessness of "The Stuff," one of the worst films of the 1980's. "God Told Me To" (also known as "Demon") is one of those rarities, a crude but continually engaging thriller that remains original in conception, if silly in overall execution. 
A series of unmotivated and unrelated killings have been occurring in New York City. The killings involve either a sniper randomly shooting people on the streets, a cop who suddenly smiles and starts shooting passerby in a parade, a family man who quietly shoots his entire family, and so on. The connection between all these killers is their motivation: God told them to do it. This raises the ire of Peter Nicholas (Tony Lo Bianco), a cop with religious beliefs who goes to church every Sunday. How could God tell these people to kill? Is this God's way of letting the world know He exists? Or did these sudden killers just snap?
Nicholas is convinced that something weird is going on in New York but the police force does not support his harebrained theory (though he is able to predict a killing in a parade from a tip). His wife (Sandy Dennis) fears for him, though they do not live together. His supportive girlfriend (Deborah Raffin) fears for Nicholas as well. And then Nicholas discovers that a blonde-haired, Christ-like figure had appeared to each of the killers prior to the actual murders. Is this mysterious figure the Son of God, or an alien force? 
"God Told Me To" has lots of surprises in store, and its documentary-like staginess, a hand-held camera is used in almost every scene at street level, enhances the plausibility. Perhaps due to a meager budget, Larry Cohen does not show special-effects of any kind (though one FX sequence has been reportedly stolen from the television show "Space:1999"). Cohen's strength lies in the superb, formidable cast, including Sylvia Sydney as a formerly abducted woman who bore a child though she was a virgin,  Richard Lynch as the soft-spoken Christ-like figure, Andy Kaufman brief turn as a smiling cop, Deborah Raffin's compassionate girlfriend of Nicholas, and finally, Lo Bianco's slow burn as a frazzled cop who is shaken by the religious implications of these murders. 
There is a lot to admire in "God Told Me To" but it does conclude with a fire-and-brimstone finale, echoing "Carrie's" similar ending, that does little to stir the imagination. And some of the scenes where Lo Bianco seems to go nutty inside apartment corridors and noirish-lit pool rooms also jettisons the philosophical nature of the material. Often thrilling, funny, exciting and tense, "God Told Me To" is one hell of a ride for a B movie. It's just that its aspirations seemed to be emanating from an A movie.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com
