Title
Review for Funny Games (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
FUNNY GAMES ( director: Michael Haneke; cast: Susanne Lothar (Anna),
Ulrich Muhe (Georg), Arno Frisch (Paul), Frank Giering (Peter), Stefan
Clapczynski (Georg jr.), 1997-Austria)
A cold thriller, exploring the exploitation of  violence by heaping up a
huge quantity of exploitive violence itself to make some points about
what is the public's attitude and tolerance level for the random
violence that is present in society. In other words, this is an
exploitive violent film railing against exploitive violent films, if
that makes sense. It holds to the so-called philosophy, of fighting fire
with fire. By crafting an intelligent screenplay and not going for the
unnecessary showing of gore, much of this is done off-screen, which
might be almost as horrific as seeing the actual mayhem, the director is
able to keep the film arty. But, by playing with the public's prurient
interest in violence as a way of life, something they have been numbed
into accepting as part of their television and MTV inheritance, this
powerful story has a chilling affect on rationality, questioning the
viewing habits and the responses to violence the public has.
This film is about a wealthy, well-educated couple, Georg and Anna
(Ulrich and Suzanne) and their young son, Georg jr. (Stefan), going to
their isolated luxurious, lakeside summer resort home, to do some
boating, golfing and escape from the summer heat. A polite, clean-cut
intruder, Peter (Frank), comes in to borrow eggs from them for their
neighbor and won't leave, turning rude, as his partner, also clean-cut,
Paul (Arno), soon arrives to torment the couple, smacking Georg's knee
with a golf club so that he is disabled for the remainder of this
hostage situation and is unable to properly defend his family. There is
also the most riveting scene in the movie, where Anna is forced to
strip, subject to possible rape, while her son is blindfolded and her
husband is forced to answer ridiculous questions. The hostage situation
is barely watchable, the mental torture the couple is put through is
sickening, these psychologically sadistic murderers offer no true
explanation for their actions, using mockery and cynical responses to
mask the power trip they are on. They have no redeeming human features,
and their cruel intent is played up for the camera's benefit, Paul even
winks at the camera, as if the audience is in on this game they are
playing. In one of the scenes, the camera is rewound when the audience
is given the gratuitous pleasure in seeing one of the sadists killed,
but even this is not granted to the audience when the scene is finally
rewound.
What remains to be comprehended, is how a family trying to survive and
hold onto to their dignity, can manage in the best way they can, as
these misfits play games with them, pretending to give them choices in
choosing their suffering, but always telling them that they will kill
them before they leave. These thugs are complete fakes, even their names
are fictitious, as they keep referring to themselves with different
names, such as Tom and Jerry, Beavis and Butt-head. Paul calls Peter
Fatty several times to the mock displeasure of Peter, Tom, Beavis, or
whoever this obese, snide monster really is. Everything about these two
is a facade, their phony stories of who they are and how they were
brought up, their pretenses at politeness add up to zero for an audience
that is left dismayed, realizing that it is only their evil that is real
in this film, despite the director's aim to fictionalize the reality of
this fictitious situation, to reduce everyone to a cartoon image, to
make it appear that we can grow to expect violence as a natural part of
life. That part doesn't work as well as the director might think it
does. The family is real to the audience. Georg's lack of courage and
quiet in the face of danger, leaves him distraught, unable to face
himself. Anna's resolute behavior and her human foibles make us
sympathize with her, even more so, even if we are not particularly
enamored by the way she deports herself when she is in control of
things; and the son's confusion touches us deeply, as we see him look
for direction to his now helpless parents, a nightmare for any parent,
to be in a situation where you can't protect your child.
I am left with the choice of how to rate the movie, knowing full well
that the sophist argument
is, if you don't like what you are seeing, then don't see the rest of
it. That's well and good. And if that is your philosophy on how to how
to handle exploitive material, I can't condemn you for it. I would think
that many people of sound mind would feel this way and will walk out of
the theater. But I don't think, as the director thinks, in an interview
he gave, that people who stay to see the entire movie, really need the
movie. I don't, necessarily, need this movie. I stayed to see if this
sadistic film works its point of view out, and I was disappointed that
with all its novelty and games and pretenses to high art, it offered
nothing much in the way of seeing things differently. The film is
successful not because of its message, but because it is a well-crafted
film, from a filmmaker who knows how to make films, even if he pretends
to be doing more than he is capable of. This film succeeds with the
small share of the  audience it can garner, because it is, surprisingly
enough, an entertaining film, and it broaches a subject that is very
difficult to understand, that tweaks our interest in seeing if there is
anything new to say about violence. And the hope is, that we might be
able to understand violence a little bit better, even if, it  has to
come to us by way of an unorthodox position; and, that maybe, since
violent films are so universally popular, we can somehow see the human
condition on film and not be anesthetized by the reality of violence.
As far as the critical success of this film goes, I think it is merely a
better version of all those Halloween grizzly killing pictures we are
subjected to--- if you want, a high class TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE film.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Richard Scheib
Austria 1997. Director/Screenplay - Michael Haneke, Producer - Veit 
Heiduschka, Photography - Jurgen Jurges, Music - Pietro Mascagni & John 
Zorn, Special Effects - Danny Bellens, Willi Neuner & Mac Steinmaier, 
Production Design - Christoph Kanter. Production Company - Wega-Film.
Susanne Lothar (Anne Schober), Ulrich Muhe (Georg Schober), Arno Frisch 
(Paul), Frank Giering (Peter), Stefan Clapczynski (Schorschi/Georgie 
Schorber)
Plot: A husband and wife and their young son head off to their lakeside 
holiday home. They are visited by two polite teenage boys, friends of 
their lakeside neighbours, initially come to borrow some eggs, but whose 
initial friendliness suddenly explodes into torture and sadistic games.
>From the film's opening credits where a family of three, on a placid 
drive to their holiday home change tapes on the car stereo and the 
gentle sounds of Mozart are suddenly replaced by a loud and raucous 
blast of death metal, director Michael Haneke signals his intent. And 
sure to his word `Funny Games' quickly shapes to be a film in the mold 
of `Straw Dogs', `The Last House on the Left' and `The Texas Chainsaw 
Massacre' wherein the idyll of a middle-class family is savagely 
overturned by outsiders and descends into a gruelling assault of sadism 
and torture.
It all begins innocently enough, with the introduction of the two boys, 
both dressed in white jerseys, shorts and plimsolls as though they were 
preppies returned from a day at the beach. An incident, which is comical 
in its gaucheness, where Frank Giering comes to borrow some eggs but 
keeps dropping them suddenly, unexpectedly turns violent. And from that 
point on `Funny Games' becomes a harrowing, psychologically gripping 
work of terror. (And one that not unfavourably compares to the 
aforementioned works above). The scenes of violence come with quite 
disturbingly casual regard - the dog and the child are blown away 
without any of the taboo reticence that affects Hollywood models. The 
casualness of the violence never comes more coolly understated than the 
shot focused on tormentor Arno Frisch who hears a gunshot ringing out 
from the next room while he is out in the kitchen making a sandwich and 
then calmly completes his sandwich before going to investigate. But 
director Haneke also propels home the full effect of the assault with 
emotionally gruelling regard - in one shot the camera remains in a 
single wide-angle for several minutes focused on a room with a body in 
one corner shot through the head, its blood splattering the tv, while 
wife Lothar sobs in the middle of the room and at the same time tries to 
drag herself past her grief to make an escape before the boys return. 
The prolonged effect of the shot is remarkably harrowing. The film is 
all the more effective for the performances of the two boys, especially 
Arno Frisch who manages quite unnervingly to swing between a perfect 
mannered politeness and casual sadism without the slightest change in 
expression - one moment insisting his tormentees stop screaming and 
start referring to everybody by their first name, the next breaking 
people's legs with golf clubs.
Haneke also manages to be surprisingly playful. At several points he 
starts to engage in meta-fictional (or should one say meta-filmic ?) 
play and has Frisch directly address the audience - turning to the 
camera to ask if the audience really thinks him as bad as his victims  
do; or offering a bet to his tormentees to see if they can stay alive 
until morning and then turning to ask the audience who they would bet 
on. At another point he decides that he will prolong the torture in 
order to pad the film out to feature length. And in the most amusing 
moment Lothar manages to get ahold of the gun and blow Giering away 
whereupon Frisch decides that things can't be allowed to happen that 
way, scrabbles for a remote control and rewinds the film to just before 
she got ahold of the gun so he can disarm her. Juggling between raw, 
disturbing violence and this sort of playful humour is extremely 
difficult a balancing act to get right without allowing the film to 
descend to bad taste or campiness, but it is to Haneke's credit that he 
succeeds.
Reviewed at the 1998 Wellington International Film Festival
Copyright Richard Scheib 1998

