Title
Review for Little Voice (1998)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Pierce Dalton
 Little Voice is a dramedy about the rise, and fast fall, of LV (Little Voice),
a painfully shy girl who rarely speaks, but mostly imitates her favorite
musicians, notably Judy Garland.
 A small, UK feature, Little Voice is a mostly enjoyable film, with a grand
cast, including the mighty Brenda Blethyn, who's performance in 1996's Secrets
& Lies was phenomenal.
 She plays, basically, the same role in this movie:  a druken, chain-smoking
fool who is very distant from her daughter.
 Jane Horrocks plays LV.  She is most notable for Bubble on the BBC's fab show
Absolutely Fabulous.  In Little Voice, she is also good.
 Ewan McGregor and Michael Cain round out the top cast.
 The basic plot is Cain "discovering" LV and trying to make her a star.
 But, the real reason to see this film is Blethyn and Cain.  They both feature
remarkable performances, especially Cain, who, in the film's last reel, has a
show-stopping scene in which he drukenly sings about his career.
 Little Voice could have used that extra zing, but, as an acting feature, it is
a masterpiece.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Author
Luke Buckmaster
LITTLE VOICE
Cast: Brenda Blethyn, Jane Horrocks, Michael Caine, Jim Broadbent, Ewan
McGregor, Annette Badland, Philip Jackson
Director: Mark Herman
Screenplay: Mark Herman based on the play "The Rise and Fall of Little
Voice" by Jim Cartwright
Running time: 96 minutes
Australian theatrical release: January 14, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 and a half stars
If taken in its most simplistic form, Little Voice examines the life
surrounding an incredible singer who wishes to keep her talents to
herself, with diversions along the way.  But if you can swallow what
director Mark Herman (Brassed Off) squashes into the package, Little
Voice suddenly becomes much more. No longer is it just about a woman
with a unique gift; it is about an innocent soul surrounded by a world
full of greed and selfishness.  In the last half of the film Herman
changes its tone into something much darker, and Little Voice advances
from passable entertainment to wild and uncouth insights into characters
and life.
Mark Herman adapted the screenplay of Little Voice from Jim Cartwright's
play, and that shows because the film is melodramatic and relies heavily
on strong performances.  Fortunately, the three or four key characters
have talented actors bringing them to life.   Michael Caine is the best
of the lot, delivering a show stopping performance in a difficult part.
In the hardest and most important role, Jane Horrocks proves she is
better as a singer/impersonator than she is as an actor, but is good
enough to handle the pressure when so many others would have bombed out.
A couple of other fine performances from Brenda Blethyn and Ewan
McGregor make Little Voice a good example of a simplistic story given
meaning by its performances.  In comparison to the many other
screenplays that are smarter, more meaningful and more accessible,
Little Voice probably shouldn't have been the very good film that it is.
LV (Jana Horrocks) is a shy and reserved woman with a troubled past.
After the death of her much loved father LV has lived with her loud,
vulgar mother Mari Hoff (Brenda Blethyn).  LV finds a sanctuary from the
crazy world around her in a collection of old records, featuring Billie
Holiday, Shirley Bassey, Judy Garland, Marilyn Monroe, Marlena Dietrich,
and others.  She has an extraordinary talent for impersonating these
artists, and when Mari's sex partner Ray Say (Michael Caine) hears her
singing, he sees dollar signs.  But much to Say's horror, LV does not
want to become the star he wishes her to be.
It is always a hard task to portray socially inept characters without
allowing them to appear as freaks. The fundamental attraction of 1997's
As Good as it Gets was Jack Nicholson's portrayal of one of societie's
oddballs, but the attraction to Little Voice lies in its supporting
characters. Brenda Blethyn gives an appropriately over the top
performance which carries more weight than you might at first presume.
She is imperative to the story, serving as a contrast to LV's timid
personality.  But the true appeal of Little Voice is Michael Caine, who
caught my eye as an expert performer ever since he purposely made The
World's Great Detective look like The World's Greatest Idiot in 1988's
Without a Clue.  Caine is a definite scene-stealer, and is fortunate
enough to star in the best moment of Little Voice - a fiery and moving
scene in which he recites Roy Orbison's "It's Over."
With so much retrospective appeal, it's surprising that Mark Herman
rarely creates scenes of straight entertainment.  Instead he pretty much
goes nowhere for the first half of Little Voice, prolonging the dramatic
scenes until he decides which characters should voice them.  The most
moving and emotional performance should have been Jana Horrocks', but
the film's supporting cast overshadows her with roles that generate more
entertainment and interest.
As Little Voice begins to wind up, Herman satisfies his audience by
providing enough reason for sitting through his peculiar creation.
Although it takes a while to get there, Little Voice eventually
reassures us that the strongest people are not always the loudest, and
that when one manages to finds happiness there are many others who get
lost along the way.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or for any inquiries or feedback

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     A big personality can push out of the way all personalities around
it.  Mari Hoff (played by Brenda Blethyn) is a woman with a big
personality and a big voice.  When she enters a room she squeezes out
just about everybody else.  Both her best friend and her daughter are
nearly mute in her overpowering and frequently vulgar presence.  It is
not that she has any intelligence to spread around but she dominates
all about her by verbally overpowering them.  One of the few people who
can get a word in when talking to Mari is Ray Say (Michael Caine).  He
is an entertainment promoter well past his prime, but who denies the
truth even to himself.  He promotes pointless acts that are more
pitiful than entertaining.  Still, Ray has big plans that obviously are
of little value even to Ray.  He is convinced he can still strike it
big if only he can find some great talent right here in his own
neighborhood.
     Mari's daughter Laura (Jane Horrocks), living with Mari, has
almost given up the struggle to talk.  On the rare occasions when she
even bothers to speak it comes out at a squeaky tiny voice that has
earned her the nickname "Little Voice."  Laura has retreated from the
world dominated by her mother and into a world of daydreaming of her
dead father, now nearly elevated to the status of saint in her own
mind.  She listens over and over to his records of Marilyn Monroe,
Shirley Bassey, and especially Judy Garland.  Unknown to anyone while
Laura has almost no voice of her own she can borrow and even sing in
voices of Garland, Monroe, and Bassey in perfect voice impressions.
     One night when Laura is listening to the beloved Judy Garland
records and Ray is visiting Mari the power goes out.  Ray hears the
music stop, but strangely Judy Garland's voice continues to sing.
Suddenly Ray realizes that "Little Voice" may have real talent that he
can exploit to find some real success.  But can he get Laura to come
out of her shell?  And if she does come out, can Mari stand to see
someone else in the family getting attention?
     Jim Herman wrote the screenplay and directs a film based on the
play "The Rise and Fall of Little Voice" by Jim Cartwright.  Blethyn
and Caine each give performances so earthy one almost feels dirty just
watching them.  Each is totally self-absorbed.  Caine at least is aware
enough of how he is perceived that he can control himself.  Blethyn's
character is so self-absorbed that she does not even think of
appearances.  Horrocks is so victimized that she seems to be retreating
into autism.  Ewan McGregor is present as a young telephone installer
who is the first person since the death of Mari's husband who really
cares for Laura.  While reminding the viewer that there are still
normal and decent people in the world, he is a little too good to be
true.  It is never clear what he sees in Laura whose personality
qualifies her for the walking wounded.
     LITTLE VOICE is a downbeat look at English lower-middle class
standards.  The little neighborhood nightclub, Boo's, is seamy and
tawdry, even if there is little that we see that is explicit.  If
LITTLE VOICE really is a comedy, it is a dark one and one full of
people whom one is happy to be rid of at the end of its 100 minutes.
Much of the plotting of LITTLE VOICE is predictable, but the
performances are raw and realistic.  This is a side of England most of
us would rather do without.  I rate the film 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and
a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films
 Director:  Mark Herman
 Writer:  Mark Herman, play "The Rise and Fall of Little
Voice" by Jim Cartwright
 Cast: Brenda Blethyn, Jane Horrocks, Michael Caine, Jim
Broadbent, Ewan McGregor, Annette Badland, Philip Jackson
   Here is yet another example of a play which has not been
successfully transported to the screen.  In this case, though,
the drama itself--which unaccountably had a run on
Broadway--is so minor that one questions why the adaptation
was attmepted at all.  It features a shy, agoraphobic young
woman who rarely leaves her neat but downscale home in a
small English town, who has a fine voice but can do little
more than imitate some of the greats she listens to from her
record collection.  Brenda Blethyn, who is cast as the girl's
mother and who turned in an Oscar-nomination performance
in the multi-textured, award-winning film "Secrets and Lies," is
a motormouth whose personality this time is so
irritating that it's a wonder that half the audience does not
walk out in disgust and embarrassment.  It's even more
amazing that Mark Herman, who directs the insignificant
fiasco, expects anyone to believe that even a failed talent
agent is willing to be seen in his pimpmobile, much less to
apply his lips to hers.  While Laura, the Little Voice of the title
(so named because when she is not singing you can scarcely
hear a sound from her mouth), is not unattractive, we wonder
why a telephone repairman named Bill has romantic feelings
toward her--unless this pigeon-fancier imagines himself to be
a Mother Theresa getting his kicks from nursing a sick bird
like the eponymous L.V.
   The chief disaster of the movie is Mari Hoff (Brenda
Blethyn), a widow who looks like hell and who has a mouth
that should repel anyone with a pulse and two legs to get
himself out of her way.  While she cares only about
booze and bonking, her daughter Laura (Jane Horrocks, of
TV fame), spends all her time in the attic listening to her late
father's record favorites--the songs of Billie Holiday, Shirley
Bassey, Marilyn Monroe and Judy Garland).  When a night
club owner known as Boo (Jim Broadbent) hears her sing, he
agrees to sign her into his two-bit club, while Little Voice's
new agent, Ray Say (Michael Caine) sees her as the
discovery that will re-launch his failed career.
   The movie features one scene designed as a show-
stopper.  Laura, seeing her father's ghost in the audience of
the night club, belts out valid imitations of the great singers
who were her dad's favorites, only to fade away in a
succeeding act like a Virgil Adamson losing his regained sight
or Algernon's adult friend Charly's losing his gray matter. 
While some critics have interpreted Michael Caine's role as
that of a man who is exploiting the young chanteuse, he is guilty 
only of bringing the wallflower out into the open as
though she were one of telephone repairman Bill's birds flying
out for exercise.  James Berardinelli, a noted internet critic,
concluded his review by saying that the movie offers
"opportunities to laugh, cry and cheer."  Yes, it's a movie to
laugh at, to cry that you're not elsewhere, and to cheer the
conclusion which comes at a mercifully reasonable time.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 4 December 1998 with Laura at the UA Union Square East for $8.75.
Little Voice is a young introverted woman living on the edge. Perhaps just
living edgily. The home she shares with her mother is a powder keg: every
outlet is taxed with extension cords and outlet multipliers; her mother's
baudy, brassy bravado has the nervous young thing unhinged and hiding.
Either way, you can hear the sparks crackling dangerously in the air.
What Little Voice (Jane Horrocks; best known as "Bubble" from the TV
series *Absolutely Fabulous*) can do to liberate herself is listen to the
music her deceased father loved--Judy Garland, Billie Holliday, Marilyn
Monroe, Marlene Dietrich, etc.--and mimic the singers perfectly. This is
not just an obsession, but a matter of survival, as her mother, Mari
(Brenda Blethyn), never stops talking. Whether she's talking sex or making
fun of LV in front of the telephone man, the woman does not shut up. So LV
turns up Judy Garland while her Mum turns up Tom Jones's "It's Not
Unusual."
Enter Ray Say (Michael Caine), a dubious "show biz" agent, but who does
know talent when he hears it in LV. No, he's never met Shirley Bassey, but
he has heard of acts almost completely unknown to civilization.
LV represents a ticket out. Out of debt is where Ray wants to go. Out of
their depressed Northern English town is where Mari wants to go. Yes, LV
represents their escape to worthier locales, like Las Vegas.
Meanwhile, managing to look mousey, telephone repair assistant Billy (Ewan
McGregor) is only slightly obsessed with his missing homing pigeon Duane,
and his growing interest in mutual introvert LV.
If there is a problem with *Little Voice* it's the premise that someone
can be this socially and emotionally stunted without being
institutionalized. But two elements overpower this deficiency--acting and
writing. All the performances are first rate, from Blethyn's raucousness
to Horrocks's wide-eyed terror and talent for mimicry. Viewers find it
hard to believe that Horrocks sings all of her own songs. The highlight of
the film is LV's debut at the decrepit club, the "RendezBoo", where she
sings a full roster of songs, imitating the original stars perfectly down
to the way they cocked their heads.
As Ray Say, Michael Caine has never looked so horrible. It's a departure
from the usual erudite sophistication we expect, but perfect for his role 
as the opportunistic loser. Also noteworthy is Annette Badland as
Mari's only friend, Sadie; she says even less than LV, but her face is so
expressive, she often steals the show. You can tell exactly what she's
thinking, from concern to anger to humor.
Director Mark Herman (*Brassed Off*) takes advantage of more than just the
actors' talents. The sleepy little northern town offers some dramatic
backdrops for the action here. While some viewers might find the harsh,
serious denouement a departure from the more frothy tone of the film,
Little Voice is still a very satisfying experience. Despite the humor, the
movie will strike a chord with anyone who has ever felt awkward, isolated,
lonely, or crushed by an insensitive parent. The music is pretty
sensational, and of course there's a segment of particular community that
will go for that alone.
The film was based on Jim Cartwright's play *The Rise and Fall of Little
Voice*), which was written specifically for Jane Horrocks to showcase her
singing and mimicry talents.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
Painfully shy but with an amazing ability to mimic the songs and voices
of classic entertainers, including Judy Garland, Marilyn Monroe and
Billie Holliday, LV appears at first to be a mute.  Her mother says that
LV, short for Little Voice, is called that "on account of being
soft-spoken like."  LV eventually speaks in her own, whispery voice in
the film LITTLE VOICE, but her preferred means of expression is to belt
out some old song like "Over the Rainbow."
As LV, Jane Horrocks, in a stunning performance, is so completely unlike
the anorexic she played in LIFE IS SWEET that most viewers will have
trouble believing it is the same actress.
The movie begins with Michael Caine playing a promoter who is known as
the "king of cabaret" and the "manager of miracles."  He dresses in
gaudy shirts and tons of gold jewelry in a failed attempt to recapture
his long-lost youth.  The agent is currently managing a topless dancer
without much talent, but he's dating LV's obnoxious mother, played by
Brenda Blethyn from SECRETS & LIES.
The mother is as crude and unlikable as LV is delicate and winsome.  The
mother hates and resents LV, calling her "dumb and selfish" and claiming
that all she does is "whimper and whine."
LV developed her considerable talent through endless sessions listening
to the old phonograph records once owned by her revered, deceased
father.  His picture hangs on the wall over her bed in the spot reserved
frequently for crucifixes.
When Cain's character hears LV sing, he sees her as his gold mine in the
making.  He books her into the local club, where, after a disastrous
first appearance, she eventually becomes a big hit.  The long, energetic
scene of her bravado performance is the movie at its best.  Great period
songs are belted out by Horrocks herself -- no lip syncing in this
movie.
The story contains many needless extra characters and subplots.  One
involves a telephone installer who has a wayward homing pigeon, and
another concerns a standup comic who isn't funny.
The movie, written and directed by Mark Herman, is based on the play
"The Rise and Fall of Little Voice" by Jim Cartwright, in which Horrocks
also starred.  Although Horrocks's characterization is phenomenal, the
rest of the story is not as strong or as fresh.  The film's ending is a
manipulative tearjerker that it is an unbelievable plot device better
suited for some other movie.
LITTLE VOICE has many magical sequences, but it never quite lives up to
the promise of its premise.  Stripped away of the uninteresting
supporting characters and refocused on LV, the film would be infinitely
better.  And rather than one big singing number, give her two or three.
Horrocks deserves them.
LITTLE VOICE runs 1:39.  It is rated R for mature themes, brief nudity
and profanity and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Homer Yen
`Little Voice' is one of those many offbeat comedies that depicts and
odd slice of British life and those that inhabit its strange little
world.   At the center is LV (Jane Horrocks), short for her nickname
of Little Voice, which was given to her by her mom.  LV is a very shy
and almost reclusive girl who seems to always stare at the ground and
bites her bottom lip in fear whenever someone talks to her.  When she
speaks, she emits a wavering, mousy voice.  It seems that the only
thing that makes her comfortable are the pleasant thoughts of her
now-deceased father and listening to a large record collection that he
had left to her.  When she feels threatened, which seems to be a
majority of the time, she drowns herself in the music that was left to
her by her dad, which she blares over the phonograph. 
Any chance that she has of becoming a normal girl who can interact
freely and confidently with others is constantly being challenged. 
Her mom, Mari (Brenda Blethyn), is her biggest obstacle.  Her wild
ways, LV believes, led to her father's early death.  She constantly
puts LV down and is openly annoyed with her.  The mom is also reckless
in her ways and promiscuous in her actions.  To get the attention of
men, she gleefully says, `let's roll about.'  One of the men that she
winds up with is Ray Say (Michael Caine).  He was a once-respected
talent agent who is now relegated to scouting for strippers in a
not-so-nice part of the city.  
As in most situations where the only way is up, everyone is looking
for that frequently elusive route that will allow them to leave their
dismal lives behind.  For LV, it might be a young telephone repairman
(an underutilized Ewan McGregor) that she recently met.  He has a fond
interest in pigeons, and somewhat understands LV's situation, for she
is similarly caged up from the rest of the world.  For Mari, it might
be Ray Say.  Sure, he's no longer the force that he used to be, but he
still has a way with words, and those words speak volumes to the
star-struck Mari.  And for Ray Say, his ticket back to his previous
stature might be LV.  Say makes the startling discovery that under
certain conditions, LV can magically transform herself, enabling her
to sing uncannily like some of the greatest divas of yesteryear,
whether it's the breathy Marilyn Monroe or the brash Shirley Bassey or
the wistful Judy Garland.  She is a singer/impressionist
extraordinaire.  `You're sitting on a gold mine,' Say says to Mari. 
`Dreams that you dare to dreamshe can make them come true.'  The
focus of the film now shifts to a test of wills between Say's and
Mari's desire to exploit her versus LV's simple wish to find normalcy.
In the end, I felt that the story was uneven at times (the implied
romance was unnecessary) and the resolution seemed unrealistically
quick.  But Horrocks is a real gem.  It's incredible how a fearful
child can completely and believably transform herself into a singing
dynamo that slinks and shimmies on stage.  She's real fun to watch and
is a great singer too.  In fact, she sings all of the songs that you
hear in the movie.  Caine effectively lends his talents as an oily
huckster, although in the end his character turns very mean for no
apparently good reason.  Also, Blethyn is an unexpected comic force as
a maddening, wench-like mum.  Several nice performances from the cast
make this odd slice of British life something to be heard and seen.


Author
Edwin Jahiel
LITTLE VOICE (UK,1998) ** 1/2. Directed and written by Mark Herman, based
on the play łThe Rise and Fall of Little Voice˛ by Jim Cartwright.
Photography,   Andy Collins. Editing, Michael Ellis. Production design, Don
Taylor.Music and arrangements, John Altman. Produced by Elizabeth Karlsen.
Executive producers, Stephen Woolley, Nik Powell. Co-executive producers,
Harvey Weinstein, Bob Weinstein, Paul Webster. Co-producer, Laurie Borg.
Cast: Jane Horrocks ( Little Voice), Michael Caine (Ray Say), Brenda
Blethyn (Mari), Jim Broadbent (Mr. Boo), Ewan McGregor  (Billy), et al.. A
Miramax release. 96 minutes. R (language)
Wasn't it George Bernard Shaw who said that "America and England are two
nations separated by a common language"?  Little Voice, set entirely in a
seaside town of Northern England (Scarborough was used) and among working
class people (even if they don't work) is linguistically one more addition
to the UK. filmmakers' passion for cockney, regional, plebeian and other
accents that are a far cry from BBC or Oxbridge English.
American ears strain, viewers ask their neighbors "What did she say?" and
much of the dialogue is lost. That's why some films have had re-recorded
sound tracks for export, or, in the case of the great Ken Loach's Riff-Raff
and his current My Name is Joe, were subtitled--in English.
It's not all that bad with LV (Little Voice) because the speeches are not
deathless. One also gradually gets over some of the talk hurdles as the
movie unreels.
The film is based on a much-liked play especially written for Jane Horrocks
(of TV's Absolutely Fabulous), specifically to showcase her unquestionable
talent for voice and above all song imitations.
Brenda Blethyn plays widow Mari, a motor-mouth tarty tippler with a
piggly-wiggly neighbor for best friend and colleague at the fish market.
Mari's daughter is a young woman, LV, a kind of recluse in the modest
home's attic. She's modern only in one respect, being--what
else?--dysfunctional in an odd way. Since the death of her dad (when, I
cannot tell), she has inherited his collection of recordings, mostly of
American pop and Hollywood songs. She plays them by the hour, looks up at
Daddy's photograph, puts more records on the player.
One would think she is a mute, until incidents such as the electricity
(hence the machine) going out, make her burst out in amazing vocal copies
of Judy Garland, Edith Piaf, Shirley Bassey, Billie Holiday, Marilyn
Monroe, Ethel Merman, Marlene Dietrich, Barbra Streisand and more.
A small-time promoter named Ray Say (Michael Caine at his Cockney best) who
seems to have hit bottom, in spite of his big, red, American convertible,
has been among the many lovers of Mari. He comes to town on business,
engages in carnal preliminaries with the ardent Mari, but gets distracted
by hearing LV's voice. "Eureka!" he exclaims, "we all got it made!" (Not
his specific words but that's the general drift).
He sets out to convince and cajole the more-than-reluctant LV to sing in
public. This, of course, is what we're all waiting for. But it takes about
the first 45-50 minutes of the movie to get there. Even then, it's just a
try-out that panics the shy girl. It will be another 20 minutes until she
appears on a stage, doing a beautiful, impressive selection and, in an
unlikely way, having already mastered showbiz garb (a clinging sequined
dress), manners, gestures, body-English.
The rest of the story is just a frame for LV. Generic, with a number of
nice or interesting or semi-eye catching or indifferent bits, by and large
it's nothing to sing about.
The performers are very good. Michael Caine cannot be otherwise.   Brenda
Blethyn, that-woman-you'd-like-to-shut-up, shows a new aspect of her
talent. A notable UK stage and TV actress, she came to films in The Witches
(1990), played the Rev.Maclean's wife in A River Runs Through It (1992),
zoomed to fame and prizes for Secrets and Lies (1996). She's been in
movie-demand ever since.
Rising young star Ewan McGregor (Shallow Grave, A Life Less Ordinary, The
Pillow Book, etc.) was a lead in LV director-adapter's Mark Herman second
feature (this is his third), the charming Brassed Off.
Here McGregor has a smallish role as a telephone repairman who falls, for
whatever reason (shyness in common?) for the girl. At the end, in the Fall
of LV (not tragic) he takes her up where he keeps pigeons. These fly way,
symbolizing freedom, just as Marlon Brando's did in On The Waterfront.
The singing is the main reason to see the picture. I am also pleased by the
British affection for old songs, mostly American. This places LV marginally
in the line of Terence Davies's splendid, moving autobiographical movies
about songs and films bringing solace to otherwise hard, somber
working-class existences: Distant Voices, Still Lives (1988) and The Long
Day Closes (1992)
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
David N. Butterworth
Watching "Little Voice," the motivations of dramatist Jim Cartwright 
become perfectly clear.  After witnessing Jane Horrocks performing 
spot-on vocal impersonations of some of this century's most expressive 
pop divas--Judy Garland, Marilyn Monroe, and Billie Holiday to name a 
few--Cartwright wrote a stage extravaganza specifically for the 
bantamweight British actress.
Five years after its run on the London stage, "The Rise and Fall of 
Little Voice" has been adapted for the big screen, albeit with an 
abbreviated title.
Not surprisingly, the best thing about "Little Voice" is what caught 
Cartwright's ear and imagination all those years ago--Horrocks doing 
Garland, Monroe, Bassey, and Dietrich to such intimate perfection you'd 
swear her vocalizations were dubbed (necessitating the film's closing 
statement to the contrary).  She's pretty amazing, and my main regret on 
leaving the theater was that I wanted to see and hear more of her.  Does 
she do Streisand too?
In fact, the film's "plot" often feels like padding, a thinly-veiled 
attempt to bridge the gaps surrounding the moments when LV (Horrocks) 
gets up on stage and belts out production numbers like Shirley Bassey's 
"Big Spender."
Following the death of her beloved father, LV (the initials stand for 
'little voice' on account of her limited capacity to express herself 
verbally) takes to her room, where she listens to her father's 
collection of long-playing phonograph records almost exclusively.  She 
mimics the performers as a tribute to her late father, and also to 
distance herself from her loutish and vulgar mother ("Secrets & Lies"' 
Brenda Blethyn), whose attempts to attract men would put a promiscuous 
teenager to shame.
Blethyn and Michael Caine, as a loan shark-avoiding talent agent, lend 
the film some added color with their loud, outrageous characterizations 
(and in Caine's case, loud, outrageous shirts).  Blethyn's role recalls 
something Julie Walters ("Educating Rita," "Intimate Relations") might 
have done for a laugh, and Caine is perfectly cast and loving every 
minute of it, including the moment when his Ray Say "discovers" LV and 
persuades her to perform at the local nightclub with the unfortunate 
name of Mr. Boo's.
Less in your face is Ewan McGregor, who has a subdued role as Billy, a 
telephone repairman's apprentice who races homing pigeons.  His hobby 
leads to some pretty obvious metaphors about caged birds being set free, 
but provides an opportunity for LV to ask Billy an amusing question 
about his prized pigeon, Duane: "What's he doin' in France?"
The film was shot (and presumably set, although nobody bothers to 
mention it) in Scarborough, a seaside town on the east coast of 
Yorkshire which could lay claim to being the Las Vegas of Northern 
England if it wasn't for Blackpool on the opposite coast.  These are the 
kind of places that make Atlantic City look glamorous.
But sometimes talent emerges from the crummiest of places.
"Little Voice," an ugly duckling tale about a little mynah bird that 
could, showcases a remarkable talent in Jane Horrocks.  Previously 
regarded for her nervous, withdrawn portrayals in working-class social 
dramas, or as Bubble in the British sitcom "Absolutely Fabulous," 
"Little Voice" allows another side of Horrocks' star to shine.


Author
Joy Wyse
Jane Horrocks, who stars as L.V. or `Little Voice', is unknown to most
filmgoers but this movie wouldn't have been the same without her.  It was
written specifically for her and her ability to duplicate the incredible
voices of various singing legends.
L.V. lives with her mother, Mari Hoff, played by Brenda Blethyn, in rooms
over their former record store.  Music had been her father's love and when
he died, the store, his records and memories were all that remained.  The
mother longs for romance and excitement.  She's not ready to be a weeping
widow.   She is attracted to a man, Ray Say, who is a talent agent of
sorts, portrayed by Michael Caine.  He puts up a flashy front while hoping
to find that one performer who will establish him and make him rich.
A telephone installer named George [Philip Jackson] and his assistant,
Billy  [Ewan McGregor] meet the mother and daughter while connecting a new
phone line.  The lecherous and married George is hoping for a quick
interlude with  Mari but Billy is attracted to the taciturn L.V.  He is
the silent type who raises homing pigeons on the rooftop and who lacks the
wherewithal to pursue L.V.
One night when Ray overhears L.V., alone in her room, singing in a loud
voice reminiscent of Judy Garland, he knows that he's finally found his
star, his meal ticket.
It isn't easy convincing L.V. to agree to sing in front of a live
audience.  The circumstances of the appearance and what follow are what
make this a truly memorable film.  There are numerous classic songs that
the older generation will appreciate.  They include: The Man That Got
Away, Hey, Big Spender,  Lover Boy, Get Happy, and many others.  
The three leads all give Oscar winning performances.  Hopefully, they'll
be nominated.  Brenda Blethyn is just tawdry enough as a love-hungry but
vulnerable older woman.  Michael Caine totally conveys the depths of this
likeable/unlikable usurious man.   Jane Horrocks is in a class by herself.
Mr. Boo [Jim Broadbent], the club owner where L.V. performs is another
little person  clinging to his pseudo-importance.  Annette Badland as
Sadie, the Hoff's neighbor across the street, delivers a small but classic
role.

Author
Walter Frith
Good things come in small packages.  And that is a perfect description
for the film 'Little Voice'.  Set in England, this film is a triumph of
the spirit but is also a little sad at the same time, but only if you
consider the materialistic side of life and how it is denied to a small
group of people.  And the one in the centre of it all that can make
dreams come true for those around her is more concerned with the memory
of her deceased father and the visions she often has of him.
Laura (Jane Horrocks) or lv ("little voice") as she's nicknamed by those
around her, is a genteel, young little woman with a mousy voice who is
so shy that she's afraid of her own shadow and she rarely speaks.  She
sits in her room all day listening to vinyl records of Judy Garland,
Marilyn Monroe and Shirley Bassey left to her by her father who has
passed away and who used to run a record shop with her mother Mari
(Brenda Blethyn). Mari is a dastardly vain woman who wears tight
clothes, is overweight, wears too much make-up and is way past her prime
but still describes herself as having an a** to die for.  She curses,
stirs a hail storm of criticism at people, drinks heavily and lives like
a slob.  She's the perfect candidate for tabloid television and would be
referred to as trailer park trash if she lived in America.   
The old record shop has now been turned into a flat for residential
purposes where lv and her mother live.  As the film opens, lv and her
mother are having their phone repaired and the telephone repairman's
helper (Ewan McGregor) is attracted to lv.  He often comes by to see her
and on one occasion he propels the ladder bucket of his truck, you know
the kind used by hydro and telephone workers, up to lv's room to pay her
an intimate visit.  He also raises pigeons as a hobby which makes for
some of the film's more humourous scenes.
Lv and her mother come into contact with Ray (Michael Caine).  He's a
sleazy, small time talent agent (but is a pretty decent guy all around)
who helps the local night club find new acts and lv is his latest
discovery. He hears her singing from her room one night and gets her new
clothes, polishes up her appearance and wheels her out on cue.  The only
problem is that lv doesn't want to sing for an audience, only for
herself as a tribute to her deceased father.  She often looks at his
picture on the wall of her bedroom as she's singing.  Her debut at the
nightclub is made successful only when she imagines her father is
sitting in one of the chairs at the club watching her sing.  Lv sort of
reminded me of that old Looney Toons cartoon about the frog who would
only sing for the construction worker that found him and for no one
else.  Ditto here.  Lv only wants to sing when she's around or imagines
the appearance of her late father.
The film is written and directed by Mark Herman based on the stage play
by Jim Cartwright.  It's an excellent form of original movie
entertainment made superb by a cast of characters so different from each
other that real life couldn't be reflected more credibly than by this
film.  Jane Horrocks does her own singing in the film and is dynamite at
it.  Brenda Blethyn is totally convincing as her mother and does a
complete 180 degree turn from her role in 'Secrets and Lies' which
brought her an Oscar nomination in 1996.  What a pleasure it is to see
Michael Caine in top form this time around. One of my favourite British
actors, Caine appeared in 1997 with Jack Nicholson in 'Blood and Wine'
but had a secondary and rather forgettable role.  He's astoundingly good
in this movie by combining his knowledge of show business and his desire
to feather his own nest by using lv's talent.  He's the kind of guy you
should dislike but Caine finds a way to make his character likable.
The climax of the film is a little bizarre given the tempo of the rest
of the movie but 'Little Voice' will become a buried treasure that I
hope audiences will embrace long after its limited theatrical run which
is a shame because this film deserves to be seen by as many people as
possible.  It's just that good.  I hope in some small way, it is
remembered somewhat at Oscar time.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
John Smyth
In a drab English seaside town, Mari Hoff (Brenda Blethyn) whiles
away her middle-aged widowhood in her chaotic home (a closed up
record shop) in the local pub. However, she is the last to admit
that age is overtaking her, as she totters about in high heels,
gaudy make-up and low-cut, tight-fitting tops. She blatantly
flirts with the two phone engineers who install her phone, making
fun of the shy younger Billy (Ewan McGregor) and his hobby (he
keeps homing pigeons). She also screams constantly at her painfully
shy daughter, LV (Jane Horrocks). LV (which stands for Little Voice
because she is so shy) spends every day in her bedroom which is
the only neat room in an otherwise slovenly house. There, she listens
to records by Edith Piaf, Shirley Bassey, Judy Garland and others,
that her dead father had given to her.
One night, when Mari lurches home from the pub with a washed-up
showbiz promoter called Ray Say (Michael Caine) for a bit of slap
and tickle, LV breaks into song. She can imitate any of the singers
whose records she has listened to for years. Ray sees her as a way
of establishing his showbiz credentials and a means of escape from
the grotty venues and third-rate acts that he normally peddles. He
cajoles her into performing in public (by persuading her that her
dead father would approve), and begins to plot her (and his future)
career. Meanwhile, Billy (who glimpsed her while installing her
mother's phone) tries to meet with her again - since both of them
are so shy, the relationship develops very slowly indeed.
The screenplay by Jim Cartwright is based on his own play The
Rise and Fall of Little Voice, which also starred Jane Horrocks.
The leitmotif of a caged bird is firmly established and relentlessly
re-affirmed throughout the movie. Both LV and Billy are too shy to
fly free of their shackles - Billy's pigeons are an obvious reminder
of their straitened circumstances. However, the film itself never
flutters free from its stage origins. Cartwright and director (and
co-writer) Mark Herman don't make use of the extra possibilities by
transferring the story from stage to screen. The result is that some
of the performances are a little too theatrical - dialogue delivered
to a live audience requires a more subtle touch for cinema. Brenda
Blethyn's performance garnered her a Golden Globe nomination and an
Academy Award nomination for a performance which teeters between
overwrought and over-the-top, and lapses into parody on several
occasions. It's a pity because the character is well written. Michael
Caine fares better as the down-at-heel impresario, and deserves his
Golden Globe award. Ewan McGregor is quietly effective as a minor
character, but it is Jane Horrocks that grabs the attention.
Jane Horrocks has had a varied acting career - she captured headlines
for a hard-hitting version of Macbeth (which involved her character
urinating on stage nightly) but is probably best known as Bubbles,
the airhead assistant in Absolutely Fabulous. She performs all the
singing in Little Voice, and she is an excellent mimic as well as
singer. However, there isn't much singing in the film. There is,
however, a lot of screaming and shouting, courtesy of Blethyn, and
as the movie progresses, the story becomes ever more predictable.
It is also surprisingly grim, though there are nice flashes of comedy. 
Unfortunately, there are not enough of them, and the story is not 
sufficiently plausible or strong to work as a straight drama. Herman's 
previous directorial effort was Brassed Off, which shares many of the 
bittersweet, small-scale sensibilities of Little Voice (as well as Ewan 
McGregor). However, despite his best efforts, Little Voice never really 
escapes from its stage origins, and the film never really hits the high 
notes that Horrocks' talent could have delivered.
(c) Review of Film, Stockholm Film Review 1999


Author
Scott Renshaw
     Jane Horrocks delivers a show-stopping stage performance in LITTLE
VOICE, the kind worthy of the divas she honors.  In this adaptation of Jim
Cartwright's play "The Rise and Fall of Little Voice," Horrocks reprises
her stage role as L. V. (for Little Voice) Hoff, a timid young woman
living in a small seaside town in the north of England.  Still living with
her brash, bawdy mother Mari (Brenda Blethyn), L. V. rarely speaks a word
and even more rarely leaves the house.  But when she sings, tearing into
the classic Judy Garland, Shirley Bassey and Edith Piaf tunes beloved by
her late father, she is transformed, taking on the pipes and the
personality of whichever chanteuse she happens to be channeling at the
moment.
     The most astonishing element of Horrocks' performance is that she
gets no assistance from the original vocalists.  The actress truly can do
frighteningly dead-on recreations of Garland, Dietrich, Holliday, Monroe
and half a dozen others, and its a wonder to behold.  The showcase for
both Horrocks and her character is a performance at a run-down cabaret,
set up by Mari's current flame, small-time talent scout Ray Say (Michael
Caine).  Recognizing L. V. as his ticket to the Big Time, Ray sinks
everything he has into a one-night performance he finally coaxes out of
the reluctant girl.  And once she spots the visage of her dad in the
crowd, encouraging her, away she goes.
     In a live theater setting, you can imagine Horrocks' musical numbers 
being positively electrifying.  Even on-screen her transformation from
Minnie Mouse to mighty mouth is grand theater at its finest, and the
renditions of standards like "Get Happy" and "I Wanna Be Loved By You" are
extremely appealing.  It doesn't take long, however, to realize that
LITTLE VOICE is built entirely around Horrocks' admittedly impressive
party trick.  Once her centerpiece performance ends, the film starts
working desperately to tie up loose ends -- L. V.'s infatuation with her
father's memory, her relationships with her mother and an equally shy
telephone technician (Ewan McGregor), the frustrations of Ray as his one
shot at success seems about to pass him by.  As flawed as Ray and Mari 
are, they deserve better than to vanish after receiving a comeuppance.
It's frustrating watching them reduced to impediments to L. V.'s ability
finally to spread her wings (and it's not as though the bird metaphor
isn't beaten to an ugly death).
     It's all the more disappointing because, for most of its running
time, LITTLE VOICE doesn't seem headed that way at all.  Its eccentric
characters, while stagey, all have their goofy appeal, particularly Jim
Broadbent as the nightclub's cheesy owner/emcee.  Director Mark Herman
develops his small-town atmosphere nicely, and his adapted screenplay
keeps the humor fairly consistent.  It's actually nearly half an hour into
the film before L. V. breaks into song for the first time, allowing ample
time to build the significance of the characters and their relationships.
Then comes L. V.'s big debut, and it starts to seem that everyone else was
just part of the warm-up act.  L. V. emerges from her shell, she sings and
she changes, and about as abruptly as you can imagine, the credits begin
to roll.  LITTLE VOICE is largely diverting in its way, and Horrocks is
truly wonderful, but eventually it's somewhat disappointing.  I didn't
expect to leave the theater feeling that an ensemble story had been turned
into a one-woman show of Judymania.

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
Jane Horrocks, relatively unknown in the United States, has an
incredible talent.  She can mimic any number of famous vocalists-- Judy
Holiday, Ethel Murman, Marilyn Monroe--and she sounds exactly like them.
This one ups the talents of former HBO regular Rich Little; when she
sings, we have to pinch ourselves in recognizing that she doesn't just
mimic those famous voices, but sings with an extraordinary range,
remarkably on pitch.
It is a talent that prompted her friend to write a stage show, and now a
screenplay, just to show off her talents.  The story is how an extremely
timid person living under her mother's floozy shadow, is discovered.
It's rags to riches, a star is born, and then some.
I must emphasize, with a gloomy forboding,  "... and then some."  Start
trembling.
What's heartbreaking about a film like this is what the filmmakers, over
the guise of what can only be assumed as artistic "originality", did.
There are about ten minutes in this film where Horrocks takes the stage
with a confidence that matches the best performers.  To fully feel the
impact of this is to suffer, mildly, through the story, her overly shy
demeanor, her overly abrasive mother, the grating accents, and the
oddballs of a supporting cast that are given little to do except flaunt
their eccentricies, as if that would compensate for charm.  Only one
scene beforehand generated big laughs, but it's very clear that
particular scene was tagged on at the last minute, if anything as a
showcase for Brenda Blethyn.
But when that climactic scene arrives, its impact is so strong that it
qualifies as a genuine movie _moment_.  Had the film ended at that
moment, I would have liked it, and would have heartily recommended it.
It is that scene where Horrocks finally breaks through, and, with full
band, a full awe-struck screen-audience, delivers the goods.  It+s
magical.
Do yourself a favor.  If you see this film, once you come up to this
point, LEAVE.  Afterwards, a series of events occur of such a moronic
nature that it overshadows every bit of pleasure I had attained from
that one phenomenal, pivotal climactic scene.
I will not give away the truly awful ending, but I can+t help but
comment on the filmmakers+ apparently schitzophrenic intentions.  In one
minute, the filmmakers dictate: "isn't Jane Horrocks a wondrous talent!"
The next minute, the filmmakers slap our faces, as if we should be
guilt-ridden in enjoying her gift, as if we were the ones exploiting
her.   But then the credits come, finally, and then back to the
accolades; "Jane Horrocks used her own voice!"  Why bother trumpetting
the miracle, if we can+t fully enjoy it on its own merits?
Granted, this is different from a typical, feel-good "Star is Born"
vehicle.  It attempts to be original.  Believe me, I enjoyed it far
better the first time I saw it... the Warner Brothers+ cartoon starring
Michigan J. Frog.

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Mark Herman
Writer: Mark Herman (based on the play "The Rise and Fall of Little
Voice" by Jim Cartwright)
Starring: Jane Horrocks, Blenda Blethyn, Michael Caine, Ewan McGregor,
Jim Broadbent, Annette Badland, Philip Jackson, Graham Turner, Alex
Norton
About an hour or so into 'Little Voice,' there's the big concert
sequence, which in the olden days of Astaire and Rogers was what came
about every 20 minutes.  In this, the lead character, who's been nearly
silent and reserved for the entire movie, opens her eyes up wide, and
does wonderful, show-stopping impersonations of all the great female
singers, from Billie Holiday to Shirley Bassey, and man oh man is it
worth the price of admission.  We see snippets of only a couple of her
numbers, but during those few minutes, it's one of the best films of the
year: energetic and sit-up-in-your-seat entertaining.  In fact, through
the whole thing, I had this big silly grin plastered on my face, and low
and behold, the actress playing her (Jane Horrocks) is not at all faking
it.  This movie, and the play before it, is based on her actual ability
to do this mimics, and they are about the best mimics I've heard in,
well, decades.  They sound exactly like the actual artists, and when she
does them, she has so much energy that I nearly applauded right along
with the audience when she was finished.  Hands down, it's one of the
best sequences of last year.
Sadly enough, it's one of the only things I can recommend wholeheartedly
about the rest of 'Little Voice,' which is a film that builds up
entirely for this sequence and then goes downhill immediately
afterwards, drowning in clichés and half-assed themes (the final moment,
in fact, is so let's-just-end-here that the credits rolling made me jump
in my seat).  It's as if someone found out Horrocks has this great
talent, decided to write a film dealing with her ability, and leapt to a
pen and notepad at the first idea that went through their head, which
is, basically, about an agoraphobic who learns to open up over the
course of the film.  It's your basic charming Brit comedy, not a lot
unlike films like 'The Full Monty,' that win audiences over with their
own unique brand of self-depricating ethnic wit, or at least it's
supposed to be.  In fact, looking at the rough outline, it has all the
right ingredients for a terrific Brit import: a great cast (Michael
Caine, Brenda Blethyn, Jim Broadbent, Ewan McGregor, and, of course,
Horrocks), some great humor, a little bit of pathos, and a selling point
that's just superb (in fact, I'd still like to see it again, just for
the big number sequence).
The story is simple: LV (really Laura, but it stands for Little Voice)
lives in a run-down part of London with her loudmouth, boozing, horny
mum (Blethyn, which is pretty much perfect casting, after the whole
'Sweetheart' and 'Darling' spiel of 'Secrets and Lies') and never leaves
her room as she perpetually listens to her dad's old records of Garland,
Monroe, and the whole lot, of which she can do uncanny impersonations.
One night, mum brings home run-down talent agent, Ray Say (Caine,
basically playing him like an older, more decrepit version of Alfie),
who hears her when the electricity goes out and she starts singing to
replace the absence of music.  He feels he's struck gold after all these
years and plans a big event to be held at his friend's (Broadbent) seedy
pub.  Trouble is LV's, as I said, agoraphobic, so she basically has to
be literally forced to do it.  Meanwhile, she meets a shy electrician
(Ewan McGregor) who takes a shine to her, and tries his darndest to open
her up.
It's all great on paper, but there's something lost in the process.
Nothing really comes together.  Even the humor is all starts-and-stops
(although I just loved Blethyn's otherwise unprintable description of
Caine's convertible), and the actual structure sadly builds everything
up to the big scene, making everything your basic filler.  Throughout,
there are many a funny thing to gawk at, but most of the time, I was
just waiting for the promised show, and while I wasn't exactly let down,
I do like my filler to be of the interesting kind, not the half-assed
kind.  What it basically comes down to is a lack of actual material for
the story, and most of what happens prior to the show is entirely
predictable and only minutely interesting (it even goofs up the metaphor
of the McGregor character: see, he takes care of pigeons, and in a way,
I guess, LV is a caged pigeon...right?).  But it's still at least
watchable because the entire time, you know you're gonna get a great
show because, after all, if this is to showcase Horrocks' talents at
mimicry, it has to allow her to sing a couple numbers.
Afterwards is the worst though: the entire rest of the film gets bogged
down in what it perceives as drama, and it takes a questionable and
entirely unnecessary turn for the mean.  Ray becomes a total jerkoff,
for plot purposes; the mum becomes a bit of one herself, but is
subsequently told off by Ray; and LV becomes worse than ever.  'Little
Voice,' as it turns out, believes in the basic principle that a more
tragic streak a better movie makes, but here, this all seems horribly
out of place and mishandled.  In fact, LV The Character almost seems
like a terribly selfish character by the film's end: her refusal to do
her shtick has, by the end, ruined a couple people, and left her mother
the target of harsh accusations and character assassinations, which she
has, yes, brought on herself.  And the film ends on such a distasteful
note that I nearly wanted a short epilogue, just to see what happened to
Ray, his friend, and her mum, all of whom lie in ruins by the finale.
If this is supposed to be some kind of stark, Balsac-ish portrait of
these people as greedy and deserving of destruction, it's in the wrong
movie.  'Little Voice' needed to be more uplifting and more pleasant,
and the dark streak across it seems to come from a deadly sense of
self-importance on the part of the filmmakers, not from any real
artistic intentions.  It reduces Horrocks' shtick to merely a Vegas or
talk show act, since it doesn't get a whole lot of notice in this film.
If, however, it had a better story, a better character (really, is an
agoraphobic with a secret talent just about the most cliched idea or
what?), and a lack of that mean streak that plagues the final act, they
really would have something.  As it is, though, it's a weak Brit comedy,
which to me is almost refreshing as I have been chastised by several of
my friends for what seems like a predilection towards anything British,
whether it be Monty Python or William Shakespeare (or Kenneth Branagh
doing William Shakespeare).
But then again, there's Horrocks.  Known for her great performance in
Mike Leigh's wonderful 'Life is Sweet' (playing a similar character) and
her supporting work on 'Absolutely Fabulous,' she makes a terrific
leading woman despite the handicaps her character has infringed upon
her.  She's fragile but she can also come across with such strength,
especially during the big show number and a couple scenes towards the
end, and she's also instantly likable.  And her talent is still better
than a mere Vegas or talk show act; she could play Broadway and do
extremely well.  In fact, here's an idea for a show, or even a movie
later on: Jane Horrocks doing these impersonations.  No LV.  No story of
an agoraphobic in London, trying to deal with an overbearing mother.  No
run-down talent agent who turns asswholish.  No plot-requiring love
interest.  Just Jane.  In a dress. Singing like Bassey, Holiday, Monroe,
Garland, and whomever else she wants to impersonate.  She does it so
well that this film hardly deserves her.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
