Title
Review for Season of the Witch (1972)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by George A. Romero.
Cast: Jan White, Ray Laine, Bill Thunhurst, Joedida McClain, Virginia 
Greenwald.
1972 - 89 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sexual situations, and brief nudity).
Reviewed October 27, 1998.
"Season of the Witch," which was director George A. Romero's first film 
after making the groundbreaking 1968 horror classic, "Night of the 
Living Dead," is a creepy and unusual experience. It has a sort of a 
story, but is intercut frequently with on-going dream sequences, which, 
paired with a loud, bizarre music score, are admittedly very disturbing.
Joan Mitchell (Jan White), an unhappy housewife and mother of a teenage 
daughter, has been suffering from a terrible recurring nightmare that 
features a person in a demon mask trying to break into her house. Her 
husband, Jack (Ray Laine), is always away on business trips, it seems, 
and so with a lot of time on her hands, she becomes intrigued with a 
practicing witch who lives near her. Trying out her spells to see if 
they work, she first manages to seduce her daughter's older boyfriend 
(Bill Thunhurst), and then begins to sway towards a potential murder.
"Season of the Witch," is no ordinary horror film, that's for sure. It 
is in no way a slasher film, nor is it about the living dead, which 
Romero has made quite a few films about. It is deliberately paced, with 
lots of exposition sequences, and then there are the frightening dream 
scenes. It is a skillful, respectable picture, and is extremely 
effective.
Unfortunately, "Season of the Witch," comes as a disappointment by the 
film's end for several reasons. The plotline and motives of the 
characters are very muddled, and we never really understand why Joan is 
so taken aback by witchcraft, except that it is interesting to her. The 
characters are also not very tightly written. In one scene, Joan's 
husband will be kind and caring, and in the next he will be physically 
abusive and distant. A subplot involving Joan's daughter is never 
resolved in any way, and she is not given enough screen time for us to 
care either way. The last scene is anticlimactic, leaving almost every 
story thread hanging loose, and there is no payoff.
Romero has proven himself to be a masterful director, and it is clearly 
evident in, "Season of the Witch," that he was onto something that 
potentially would be horrifying. Maybe the answer to these problems lies 
in the fact that, prior to its release, the film was cut from 130 
minutes to a relatively short 89 minutes. By cutting 41 minutes of 
footage, almost half of the current running time, it seems that Romero 
edited out the elements that the film desperately needs more of, in 
order to be a satisfying experience, rather than an unfulfilling one. 
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Dustin Putman's
Film Haven >
