Title
Review for 3 Strikes (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
The problem with bad films like 3 STRIKES -- a laughless comedy -- isn't
just that they rob us of our entertainment dollars.  The most lamentable
aspect is what they teach us as a society.
Featuring African-American men who are almost all criminals and women
who are almost universally referred to and act like bitches and 'hos,
the film paints such a stereotyped world that it's easy to lose our
collective self-respect.
A microcosm of what's wrong with such movies occurred in our theater.
In front of me were a mother and her kindergarten-age daughter.  Why, in
a multiplex featuring 15 other movies, including some good family ones,
the mother would expose her daughter to such an abhorrent picture is a
mystery that's not worth solving.  But, how the daughter reacted is
instructive.
The daughter was full of questions for her mother about what the men and
women were saying and doing.  Only in a scene of oral sex was it too
much for her, as she buried her innocent eyes under her mother's arm.
Certainly, it was completely inappropriate for this young child to be in
such an R-rated movie, but think about those teenagers who see it.  And
make no mistake about it, teens and young adults are the movie's
intended demographics.  People in this age bracket are less likely to
ask the little girl's naive questions.  Inundated with such loathsome
material, it is easy for the teens to accept this celluloid version as
reality.
The plot of 3 STRIKES -- to the extent that there is any -- concerns a
prisoner, Rob Douglas (Brian Hooks), who is about to be released from
prison.  Under California's "3 strikes" law, if he's convicted one more
time, he'll be back for at least 25 more years in the slammer.  As his
mother points out, he was in trouble within 3 days of his last release,
so he has reason to worry that he'll be arrested again soon.
Immediately after his release from incarceration, he cruises down the
highway smoking dope with a friend.  This friend, it turns out, is
packing more than pot.  He's got a gun, which he uses in the shootout
with the cops who pull him over for driving a stolen car.  Rob manages
to run away during a hail of bullets, as the cops turn the car into an
imitation of Bonnie and Clyde's famous Swiss-cheese automobile.
Written and directed by D.J. Pooh, who shared the writing credits for
FRIDAY and NEXT FRIDAY, 3 STRIKES might as well have been written by a
computer, as it has the word "nigger" and the same obscenities appearing
in random order at the rate of about 3 to 4 times per sentence.  The
script has the coherence of a racist who has hit his finger with a
hammer and starts spewing a slew of expletives.
Even the successful African-Americans in the film are not spared from
ridicule.  A black co-host of the evening television news is so
obnoxious that he smokes and talks on his cell phone as his white
companion tries his best to deliver the news.  Another embarrassing
moment in a completely disgusting movie.
3 STRIKES runs 1:22.  It is rated R for pervasive language, strong
sexual content, some drug use and a brief scene of violence.  I'd hate
to see kids of any age go to this movie.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "3 STRIKES" (MGM release)
        Referring to California's controversial ordinance that
requires a mandatory sentence of 25 years to life for anyone convicted
of a third felony, the title tells it all - and this inept movie is
definitely out. Written and directed by D.J. Pooh, the rap-record
producer who co-wrote Friday (1995) with Ice Cube, it adds little to
the urban comedy genre. Brian Hooks plays a hapless twice-jailed loser
who has every intention of going straight when he's released from the
Los Angeles County Jail. "I'm going to do whatever it takes not to go
back," he vows. But when his pal, De'Aundre Bonds, picks him up in a
stolen car, they smoke a little weed and get involved in freeway
gunplay with the LAPD.  He's innocent but his image is caught on
videotape. Immediately, he finds he's once again on the lam - with no
one willing to help him. So where does he hide? The Ritz Carlton
Hotel, where else? Who would think to look for him there in the midst
of a citywide manhunt? On the screen, just about everything goes
wrong. The crude script is inane, the characters little more than
racial stereotypes, the rude dialogue filled with cliches, and
flatulence propels the toxic humor. Even the car chases are
boring. N'Bushe Wright doesn't stand a chance as Hooks' remarkably
tolerant girl-friend, and David Alan Grier is wasted as a
trigger-happy detective on his trail. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, 3 Strikes barely musters a 2. This is a truly dismal cinematic
experience!
