Title
Review for Qiu Ju da guan si (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     What starts as a simple village squabble gets escalated rapidly in
THE STORY OF QUI JU.  The movie starts with Qui (Gong Li) taking her
injured husband Qailing (Liu Pei Qi) to see the doctor.  He has just
had a fight with the village chief (Lei Lao Sheng), who beat him up.
When Qui goes to the authorities to seek recompense for her husband's
injury, she receives little in the way of satisfaction.  While they are
willing to grant Qailing monetary compensation, they will not compel
the chief to apologize, which is what Qui really wants.  So, despite an
advanced pregnancy, she begins a series of long treks to distant
districts and cities in an attempt to attain justice.
     At times, THE STORY OF QUI JU is a bitingly amusing satire on the
process commonly known as the "bureaucratic runaround".  This film goes
to new extremes to lampoon a process that can make righteous
satisfaction a difficult thing to come by.  Throughout the film, all
Qui wants is a simple apology, but the lengths that she has to go to,
and the money that she has to spend, in an attempt to secure it, is
astonishing.  In the end, we're treated to the most bitter irony of
all.
     Unfortunately, while QUI JU is sporadically funny, it is also
slow-moving to the point of distraction.  There is too much
back-and-forth, and the story begins to drag well before the halfway
point.  Boring is too extreme a term for the film since there are a
number of memorable highlights, but there are occasions when THE STORY
OF QUI JU may lose the attention of some of its viewers.
     If there was no other reason to see this picture, at least it can
be cited as a good lesson in some of the cultural distinctions of rural
mainland China.  It's refreshing to get an insider's view in a film not
specifically intended for outsiders.  This way, we see things in a
normal, natural setting, not as staged moments designed to impress
foreigners.  There are times when this aspect of the film almost makes
up for the plodding pace.
     Director Zhang Yimou and actress Gong Li have been reunited for
the third time (they previously worked together in JU DOU and RAISE THE
RED LANTERN).  Li's style of acting is marvelously fresh and entirely
different from anything originating in a Western country.  Her
performance is understated, and effective because of it.  There is
never any sense of melodrama, and Qui's subtle displays of exasperation
at the lengths to which she must go to get a fair hearing are
completely believable.
     Not only does QUI JU tackle the issue of bureaucracy, but it also
takes pains to point out the dangers of pride.  Whatever ego Qui has is
minimal.  She doesn't want revenge; she wants justice; and she's
willing to go to any lengths to obtain it.  The village chief, on the
other hand, is willing to do anything except apologize, and this is
where the crux of the conflict lies.  Were he a little less stubborn,
Qui's actions would be unnecessary.
     For those who enjoy pictures with little action, a minimalist
plot, decent characterization, and a good eye for small details, THE
STORY OF QUI JU may be worthwhile viewing.  Beware that this is a very
un-American movie--everything about it is distinctly foreign--and
perhaps its greatest value lies in what it can teach.  Nevertheless,
the pace of QUI JU borders on ponderous, so a reasonable attention span
is requisite.  There are rewards to be had from a viewing of Zhang
Yimou's latest, but they don't come without a price.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     Qiu Ju (Gong Li) is of the stubborn stuff that some heroes or
saints are made of.  She is a farmer in an advanced state of pregnancy.
During a mild argument her husband was kicked in the groin by the
village Chief.  Qiu Ju, although worried that the kick may have made
her man infertile, is much more concerned by issues of ethics,
rationality and wounded pride.  From the Chief she wants to exact
"shuata," a word that the subtitles and the movie reviewers interpret
as "apology"--but the true meaning of which is "an answer, an
explanation, a clarification."
     Seeking redress, Qiu Ju presents testicular testimony to the local
authority, Officer Li.  Li ruling is a fine, but no "shuata," since
this "will make the Chief lose face." The Chief does pay reparations,
but by throwing twenty bank notes to the ground so that, he tells Qiu,
"you'll bow down twenty times," he adds new insults to the injury.
     Defiant Qiu takes her case to the nearby town, then to the
unfamiliar city,and finally to court.  The case of private parts
becomes one of public hearings.  Qiu's repeated peregrinations to
various localities become an odyssey through bureaucracy, hierarchies,
and arcane procedures.  In short, "Chinoiseries," a term that in art
parlance meant elaborate ornamentation in the Chinese style but later
came to also mean extravagant and useless complications.
     Zhang Yimou's previous movies were set in the past.  THE STORY OF
QUI JU is contemporary--not that you would know from its first
section:  it is set in rural China and could be taking place ten,
twenty, or forty years ago.
     THE STORY OF QUI JU, over and above its personal tale is a
fascinatingly realistic primer on Chinese life, ways, means and
interpersonal relations.  And it is also a discreetly handled metaphor
of the Chinese system of justice.
     Filmmaker Zhang Yimou treats his characters with a light and
kindly hand.Except for city dwellers overcharging the country folks,
there are no villains around.  If anything, the officials Qiu Ju
encounters are warm and friendly. They mean to do the right thing.
     But as Zhang has declared: "If you don't ask a question, nobody
will ever give you an answer.  You always have to fight in order that
something be done.  In China, you have to try twenty times, spend years
in order to solve the most minor problems.  To request that something
be done is the beginning of democracy.  With this film I wanted to say
that every Chinese should do the same: to fight for one's right and
discover oneself in the process."
     Zhang Yimou could have added that what makes his message a mixed
one and adds complexity to it is the notion that once you set something
in motion you never know how far it will take you.
     THE STORY OF QUI JU is an extremely Chinese movie, and a
marvelously ironical illustration of the famous Oriental "saving
face."  Yet go beyond the exoticism and you will find that the theme of
a man or a woman up against the administration is of all times and all
places.
     The movie manages to show, as for example in the opening scenes,
individuals standing out in the anonymous crowd, but without any tricks
of staging, camera placement or editing.  Yimou used only three or four
professional actors.  To his credit, you can hardly tell who is what.
He shot the many street scenes with a hidden camera - something that's
impossible in countries where release forms must be obtained from
anyone who just happens to get in he picture and is recognizable.
     The quiet techniques of THE STORY OF QUI JU are sophisticated.  I
am sure that Zhang Yimou knows his film history.  Like Jean-Luc Godard
he can delve on long takes but also use naturalistic ambient sound and
filmic shorthand.  He endows his movie with a special blend of humor
and pathos, but no bathos.  And when, at the end, he opts for the
Hollywood-style twist of reconciliation, he modifies it with a second,
original twist.
     The life of Zhang Yimou, China's leading filmmaker, reads like a
movie.  At 16, the Cultural Revolution put him to work as a farm hand
and as a laborer.  Photography-loving Zhang sold his blood to buy a
camera.  When the Beijing Film Academy reopened in 1978, he was 27.
Although he passed the entrance examinations, he was rejected as too
old.
     Like Qiu Ju, Zhang kept appealing, on the grounds that he had
waited and wasted 10 years during the Cultural Revolution.  Finally
accepted, he graduated in 1982.
     After that, the rise of his career justifies the much-abused
adjective "meteoric."  He made his mark immediately as an award-winning
cinematographer of major films, and also acted in movies.
     In 1988 he began to direct.  His first film, RED SORGHUM, won the
top prize at the Berlin Festival.  More awards, plus Oscar nominations,
followed for his third and fourth films, JU DOU and RAISE THE RED
LANTERN.
     THE STORY OF QUI JU won the Golden Lion (Best Picture) at the 1992
Venice Festival.  Gong Li, also the star of Zhang Yimou's earlier
films, won for Best Actress.
