Title
Review for Plump Fiction (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
As with "Scary Movie" parodying "Scream," it is simply a real effort to sit
through "Plump Fiction," a parody of "Pulp Fiction" and "Reservoir Dogs." Why?
Well, the jokes are simply recycling dialogue bits and other gags from "Pulp
Fiction" without the finesse or pungent wit Tarantino brought to his own work.
The concept behind "Plump Fiction" just can't possibly work anyway. 
The filmmakers of this film forget that satire and parody search for the sublime
and the ridiculous in other notable films that may have unintentionally funny
scenes or that have material ripe for parody. Keenan Ivory Wayans might have
done better satirizing "Nightmare on Elm Street" and the "Friday the 13th" films
more so than "Scream" when making "Scary Movie." The reason is because "Scream"
was a postmodern slasher flick that actually winked at the audience already,
providing the humorous ambition of actually satirizing and deconstructing the
slasher genre. Say what you will about "Scream" but I never took it seriously as
a modern horror film, at least not in the same breadth as "Halloween" or "The
Exorcist." 
The same problem plagues "Plump Fiction." There is a scene in the horrendous
"Spy Hard" where Leslie Nielsen and a female lead dance at a club mimicking the
expressions of John Travolta and Uma Thurman's famous dance sequence from "Pulp
Fiction." The problem is that the sequence from "Pulp" was a riff on Travolta's
dance numbers from "Saturday Night Fever" and a riff on the Batdance from the
pulpy "Batman" TV series. It was already mocking and satirizing those
pop-culture icons. So how can you possibly spoof or satirize something that is
already a spoof? It goes without saying that "Plump Fiction" has a similar dance
sequence that is actually funny but not at the same level as "Pulp" was. 
"Plump" basically reiterates most scenes from "Pulp" and Reservoir." Scenes
involving Sandra Bernhard and some Reservoir Nuns, not to mention Forrest Gump
and Nell, hardly elicit much of a smile. Best bits involve Pamela Segall and
Matthew Glave as the Coxes, riffing on "Natural Born Killers" which is certainly
ripe for parody. Segall does an excellent impersonation of Juliette Lewis and
her body language - the difference is that she is in on the joke and it is
well-executed. Tommy Davidson is also terrific as Julius, the Samuel L. Jackson
character, and at least he brings his own persona to the proceedings. I also
enjoyed a clever scene that parodied "Clerks" and "Reality Bites." But many of
these gags seem desperate at best. 
The Zucker brothers have made spoofing a household name but consider the sources
they were spoofing. "Airplane" spoofed all disaster films in general. "Top
Secret" spoofed all spy films and Elvis pictures. And so on. Their targets were
films that were not aiming to be funny at all. "Pulp Fiction" was a black comedy
that was riffing and deconstructing all of film noir in general. That is what
the filmmakers of "Plump Fiction" have forgotten.   
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com
