Title
Review for Rhapsody in Blue (1945)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jude Wanniski
Memo To: Website browsers, fans & clients
Author: Jude Wanniski   http://www.polyconomics.com
Re: #10 "Rhapsody in Blue"
These are not my favorite films They are the movies I've seen that
have had the greatest influence on my thinking, my character, my
life. Some are favorites that I enjoy watching over and over again,
which you can tell by reading on. Try and think of your own
experiences with films and how they influenced the course of your
life. It makes life more interesting to be aware, as you live it, to
know how things like books and films and magazine articles alter your
path in significant ways. Sometime last year the NYTimes Sunday "Arts
and Leisure" section had a piece on how difficult it was to think of a
movie that may have changed history. How silly. Each of the ten films
listed here changed my history, and if I had not seen them, I would
not have helped change history in the ways that I have. Films don't
move masses. They move individuals who move masses.
10. "Rhapsody in Blue" (1945) My mother also took me to see this film
at the Boro Park Theatre, when I was nine. Robert Alda plays George
Gershwin and Oscar Levant (of American in Paris) plays himself. I only
saw this film once, but it was enough. I fell in love with the music
and also with the story of George Gershwin. When I was a few years
older, I asked for Rhapsody in Blue for Christmas, and my father by
mistake bought me Gershwin's Concerto in F for piano and
orchestra. After I sulked over the mistake for several weeks, the
music propelled me toward a deep love of classical music that has
never ended. I also attribute to the movie an awareness of how young
Gershwin was when he died, in full flower. For the next 20 years, I
carried around a secret belief that I would die of a brain tumor at
age 36, like Gershwin. This encouraged me to work as hard as I could
to make my contribution before my number came up. I got into the
habit.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
