Title
Review for Strangolatore di Vienna, Lo (1971)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Odds are, you'll never find this one in any video store, 
but even if you do, don't let the hilarious cover fool you. Yes, it 
looks like high camp comedy, with Victor "King Tut" Buono 
wearing a blood-stained apron and wielding a menacing meat 
cleaver while an innocent woman holds her arms out defensively, 
but THE MAD BUTCHER doesn't live up to the legend of other 
cut-rate horror movies where inadvertent laughs abound.
        The back cover reads "Meat is meat but this sausage is 
special!" which sounds like third-rate porno copy. THE MAD 
BUTCHER is far below third-rate, and you know from the 
beginning where the movie is heading. As with SOYLENT GREEN 
and TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE, the special sausage everyone 
is raving about is made out of people. That's all Mad Butcher 
Buono can do when they raise the price of pork to five dollars 
a pound wholesale, and his bitchy wife is the first to go.
        But that's not until about thirty minutes into the movie. 
First we have to hear the story of how Buono went crazy a few 
years ago and beat an old lady senseless with "two pounds of 
liver." (He also assaulted her with some fava beans and a nice 
chianti but that part was cleverly concealed from the press.)
        Now he's out of the sanitarium and back into the meat 
game, in more ways than one. You see, he also regularly ogles 
the beautiful woman across the street as she undresses. He gets 
caught after awhile, when a woman comes up behind him, sees 
him watching the woman, and yells out, "Pig!" but a confused 
Buono, thinking she's just a customer, asks her what cut of pig 
she wants.
        Buono eventually assaults the beautiful woman, but the 
next victim is a hooker who had sex with his assistant (one of those 
Victor Lorre look- and sound-alikes). As Buono leads her up to his 
room, she tells him, "This is gonna cost you fifty bucks," to which 
he cleverly replies, "And it'll cost my customers five bucks a pound," 
before choking her to death.
        No, of course he doesn't cleverly reply anything. If 
this movie had a sense of humor it wouldn't get a zero-star rating. 
Instead it just goes for a surreal kind of look while playing the same 
bizarre player piano theme over and over again. The music sounds 
so intrusive I was waiting for Buono to break into song ("I'm the 
ma-a-a-a-a-a-a-a-ad butcher!"). But there's no MAD BUTCHER: 
BROADWAY STYLE, although the movie is dubbed from German 
to English, with the exception of Buono.
        It's not scary, it's not funny (intentionally or 
unintentionally), it's probably not even a real movie. It's not 
listed in the Leonard Maltin movie guide, so I'm starting to think 
I might have dreamed it, except that my dreams are more 
entertaining and coherent than THE MAD BUTCHER, the 
movie that proves once and for all that the 60's "Batman" show 
was a career-killer for everyone involved. I don't think Burt 
"Robin" Ward's stint in ASSAULT OF THE PARTY NERDS 2 
was a step up the career ladder.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
