Title
Review for Idle Hands (1999)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Mr. Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
There have been many classic films that provide a nearly flawless balance
between comedy and horror. Two of the most successful, EVIL DEAD 2 and AN
AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON, seem to have been the biggest inspirations for the
new attempted black comedy IDLE HANDS. Unfortunately, the new film is neither
as funny or as scary as its predecessors.
Devon Sawa plays a teenage stoner who finds his right hand possessed by an
evil force that causes him to go on a killing spree. His victims include his
two best friends (Seth Green and Eldon Henson) who come back as zombies because
they are too lazy to move on to the afterlife. There is plenty of mildly
amusing humor involving pot smoking and severed heads, but a lot of it is stuff
we've seen done better before in films like REANIMATOR. 
The stoner stuff is generally more successful than the mutilation slapstick:
Sawa one-ups Sarah Michelle Gellar's cocaine-spoon crucifix in CRUEL INTENTIONS
by wearing a pipe disguised as an asthma inhaler. I also like the scene where
Sawa recognizes two police officers -- "You were seniors when I was a freshman"
- and asks them if they're "holding." The two cops are outraged not so much at
the illegality as at the brazen stupidity of asking cops for weed. Another good
example of the type of humor they're going for is the scene where a horrified
Sawa brings the pre-zombified Green and Henson into his house to show them that
his parents are dead. They don't notice the corpses and assume that their
friend has brought them in to watch the 2 Live Crew video playing on TV. I
myself am always up for a joke involving corpses and 2 Live Crew, and this is a
good one, but it doesn't have good enough timing to come off as anything more
than a cheesy throwaway joke.
There's not a whole lot more to the story. There's not even a full explanation
of where the hand-possession curse came from, why Sawa's character received it
or why he was able to kill his parents without knowing it. What little
explanation there is comes from Vivica A. Fox, who plays a voodoo priestess who
(in the tradition of the bounty hunter guy in JASON GOES TO HELL: THE FINAL
FRIDAY) lives to stab the possessed killer with one of them all powerful magic
dagger things. Jack Noseworthy (star of DEAD AT 21, MTV's embarrassing mid-'90s
attempt at a sci-fi series) plays a local heavy metal enthusiast who drives a
souped-up truck that seems to play Motley Crue's "Shout At the Devil" 24 hours
a day. His funniest moment is when he and Fox (two actors who, I feel compelled
to note, have always bothered me) meet and have an overacting duel.
None of the characters are really fleshed out enough to be likeable or to be
really funny. Most of the leads generate a few laughs, but it's easy to lose
interest in their plight since it's all so lazily sketched out. Particularly
useless is the buxom neighbor chick who Sawa is supposed to have long had a
crush on. You're told that she writes lyrics and plays bass in a band, and that
that's cool, and I guess that's supposed to give her a personality. Although
she is later portrayed as intelligent and heroic, she is instantly charmed by
Sawa, who is frantically wiggling his hand around, making bizarre statements,
drenched in what he claims is cat blood, repeatedly attempting to strangle her.
It's not the most believable teen relationship I've ever seen portrayed on
screen - perhaps it's meant to give hope to today's generation of Last American
Virgins. If this guy can get laid, so can you. And knowing is half the battle.
Although possessed hands had certainly been done before, it seems certain that
the creators of IDLE HANDS were conscious of their film's similarities to the
legendary EVIL DEAD 2 scene in which Ash has a fight with his own hand, then
cuts it off, chases it into a mousehole and hunts it down like Elmer Fudd on
speed. IDLE HANDS never matches the dark looniness of Ash stabbing his own
hand, gleefully shouting "Who's laughing now!?" as the blood sprays on his
face, nor does it have any lowbrow gags as goofily inspired as the severed hand
taunting Ash by giving him the finger. Perhaps Sam Raimi would have known how
to extend the premise to 90 minutes, but these filmmakers don't. While the hand
is only one of many demonic villains in EVIL DEAD 2, it's the only one in IDLE
HANDS, and as the story progresses it becomes increasingly difficult to think
of as a genuine threat. 
While watching the CHILD'S PLAY movies (even the first one, which I am able to
take seriously) I often wonder if Chucky could really be such a threat to these
people. I mean yeah, the little bastard might stab you in the knee or
something. But it shouldn't be too hard to fake him out with a little foot tap
on one side of his head and then punt him hard out the window with the other
foot. (If only little Andy had been on the soccer team Chucky never would have
made it to the third act.) The hand in IDLE HANDS is much less menacing than
Chucky, but of course it is able to defy gravity and many other physical laws
and somehow manages to kill a lot of people. (I was thankful for its magic
fighting powers in one of the film's best moments, when it single-evil-handedly
scalps the lead singer of The Offspring.) 
IDLE HANDS actually has a very similar feel to parts of BRIDE OF CHUCKY. Both
films seem to be primarily lowbrow comedies, but occasionally there are
humorless murder scenes that make you wonder whether the movie is actually
supposed to be scary. BRIDE OF CHUCKY, however, is the far better film - its
berserk puppet mayhem is enjoyably surreal, despite the many jokes that fall
flat. I like movies where hands crawl around on their own and decapitated guys
walk around carrying their own heads, but I've seen them before. BRIDE OF
CHUCKY is only one of two movies I've seen where murderous puppets have sex,
and it's the best of the two. (So how about that - if you're choosing between
BRIDE OF CHUCKY, IDLE HANDS and MEET THE FEEBLES tonight, you have my
recommendation.)
At one point, NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS director Henry Selick was attached to
this script. It makes you wonder what kind of exquisitely designed imagery and
stop motion severed hand action he had planned. The Selick-less film isn't much
to look at, although to their credit the filmmakers mostly stick to old
fashioned makeup effects rather than trendy CGI techniques (which so far tend
to look out of place in horror films). 
As the title implies, the film tries to preach a little bit about laziness
leading to evil. For a while, the story links the hand problem with Sawa's
empty pot-and-television lifestyle. But then it turns out that keeping his
hands occupied really doesn't help, and our heroes smoke up to regain their
strength when it really counts. This is typical of the film - too lazy to
follow through with its theme, too lazy to work as a comedy or as a horror film
or especially as a smooth combination of the two. I didn't hate IDLE HANDS, but
I'd be too lazy to ever go watch it again.
Important note: IDLE HANDS contains the Rob Zombie song "Dragula," which also
appeared recently in THE MATRIX. Another Rob Zombie song, "Living Dead Girl,"
appeared in URBAN LEGEND, BRIDE OF CHUCKY and PSYCHO. And I mean, I like Rob
Zombie. But I think it's time for his movie-soundtrack-hooker-uppers to take a
holiday.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Author
Bob Bloom
 "Idle Hands" is distasteful, crass and derivative.
 If an original thought found its way into this horror-comedy it would die
of loneliness.
 Plus, you have to question the judgment and sensitivity of studio
executives who would green light the release of a movie dealing with the
slaughter of innocent teen-agers the week after the tragedy in Littleton,
Colo.
 The movie is insulting to horror film fans and teen-agers. The plot, what
little there is, deals with Anton (Devon Sawa), a high-school slacker who's
hand goes on a murderous rampage after becoming possessed.
 Along the way the hand kills Anton's parents and his two best friends. The
friends, also slackers, are so lazy that they return from the dead because
the walk into the light was too far for them. That is the level of this's
atrocity's humor.
 "Idle Hands" is gruesome and morbid. The performances are stereotypical
and cartoonish.
 I realize this is supposed to pass for comedy, but recent events have
surpassed what is on the screen.
 It is not the fault of the filmmakers that real life has overtaken reel
life. And I can only presume that the writers of "Idle Hands," Terri Hughes
and Ron Milbauer, were trying to make some statement about today's young
people and their values in a satiric vein.
 However, it's hard to laugh at death these days, especially ones involving
young people. With the real horrors of the world put before us on
television, a stale pastry such as "Idle Hands" should be held from release
for a few weeks or months to give us time to catch our collective breaths.
 "Idle Hands" is bad, no matter the circumstances in the world outside. But
the context of recent events only heightens its shortcomings. The time is
not right for this type of movie.
 And as far as "Idle Hands" goes, the time may never be right. This is a
movie that shoud be consigned to the trash bin of cinema.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Steve Rhodes
If it's Halloween, if there's a serial killer on the loose and if you
realize that you haven't seen your parents around the house for a few
days, worry.  Even if you're a stoner like Anton (Devon Sawa), who
spends his time smoking pot and watching TV with his fellow wastrels and
who isn't used to getting excited about anything, now is the time to be
concerned.
And if you're screenwriters like Terri Hughes and Ron Milbauer who think
a movie full of old fashioned buckets of gore is still fun so long as
it's another parody like SCREAM, worry.  Genres can be so run into the
ground that each one becomes more tedious than the last.  IDLE HANDS,
yet another teen horror comedy, has all the old jokes you've seen
before, recycled one more time.
Let's do a horror movie check list to make sure that Hughes and Milbauer
covered all their bases.  Severed head?  Check.  Severed hand?  Check.
Sex interrupted by death?  Check, check, and check.  Blood splattering
the walls in every other scene?  Check.  Stupid parents who are quickly
eliminated?  Check.  Romantic female lead who never realizes that she's
in jeopardy?  Check.  Etc., ad nauseam.
The basic set up for this horror flick involves Anton's possessed hand
that kills and kills again.  With slapstick worthy of a vaudeville
routine, we watch his good and bad hands fight.  Besides saving damsels
in distress, what else does his good hand fight for?  Possession of the
television remote control.
Trying its best to gross out the audience, the film runs through all of
the old horror tricks and tries a few new ones.  The best -- or worst of
these depending on your point of view -- is microwaving the bad hand as
we watch its skin slowly explode, spewing blood all over the microwave.
Anton's friends, Mick (Seth Green) and Pnub (Jack Noseworthy), who at
that point in the story are part of the undead, see no problem in
putting a package of popcorn right on top of the residual blood.  No way
are they going to clean house now that they're walking corpses.
So what will pacify Anton's evil hand?  "Idle hands are the devil's
playpen," he is advised.  He turns with brief success to knitting in
front of the ubiquitous television.  This works until the police ask him
to drop the knitting needles.  You can probably guess where the knitting
needles will end up.
The story's gore quickly becomes tiresome.  Worse is the piece of advice
that Pnub offers what will undoubtedly be a heavily teen audience, the
prime market for these horror flicks.  "As usual, marijuana saves
another disastrous day," he boasts in the story's conclusion after their
favorite weed enables them to gain control of the nefarious hand.  Now,
there's a message more insidious than the movie's massive violence.
IDLE HANDS runs 1:40.  It is rated R for massive gore, drug usage, sex,
nudity and profanity and would be acceptable only for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1999. Director - Rodman Flender, Screenplay - Terri Hughes & Ron 
Milbauer, Producers - Jennifer & Suzanne Todd, Photography - Christopher 
Baffa, Music - Graeme Revell, Music Supervisor - John Houlihan, Visual 
Effects - VCE (Supervisors - Peter Kuran & Ted Rae), Special Effects 
Supervisor - Lou Carlucci, Makeup Effects - Cannom Creations (Supervisors - 
Greg Cannom, Brian Swipe & Todd Tucker), Makeup Effects Designed & Produced 
by Keith Vanderlaan, Production Design - Greg Melton. Production Company - 
Licht-Mueller Film Corp/Team Todd.
Devon Sawa (Anton Tobias), Seth Green (Mick), Eldon Henson (Pnub), Jessica 
Alba (Molly), Jack Noseworthy (Randy), Vivica A. Fox (Sister Debi Liquer)
Plot: The town of Bolan is being terrorized by a killer. Teenage slacker and 
dopehead Anton Tobias makes the discovery, after finding his parents bodies, 
that he is the killer and that his right hand is possessed by a demonic 
spirit that always takes over the laziest person it can find. His murderous 
hand kills his two best friends who return as zombies. But the three of them 
find that not even severing his hand manages to stop it.
In the last couple of years, the teen horror film has made a major revival. 
It was all begun with 1996's ‘Scream' which nostalgiacally looked back to 
slasher films of the mid-1980s while wittily parodying the conventions of 
the genre. Its success was followed by the likes of the ‘I Know What You Did 
Last Summer' films, ‘Urban Legend' (1998), ‘Disturbing Behavior' (1998) and 
‘The Faculty' (1998), as well as the cult success of tv's ‘Buffy the Vampire 
Slayer' (1997- ). If ‘Halloween', ‘Friday the 13th' and their copious 
imitators were horror films of the early 1980s Me Generation leftovers, then 
these are Generation X horror films. Here the anonymous teens that filled 
the mid-1980s equivalents have been replaced by a more savvy, cynical teens 
who come wittily post-informed by the conventions of the genre and who will 
compare and paraphrase their situation with in-referents to other horror 
films at the drop of a hat. At their best - the likes of ‘Scream and ‘The 
Faculty' - these films are witty and intelligent genre deconstructions; at 
their least, the likes of ‘I Still Know What You Did Last Summer' and ‘Urban 
Legend', these are sad copies of films that lack the werewithal to see they 
are jumping on a bandwagon that roots itself in media self-awareness and end 
up in a case of the Emperor's New Clothes, of merely being slasher film 
imitators made on an A-budget.
If the ‘Scream' films et al are Generation X horror films, then ‘Idle Hands' 
is surely the first slacker horror film -one of its continuing comic riff 
concerns itself with the three principal teens' dope-smoking habits. But 
sadly there isn't a great deal to the film more than half a concept. (And 
most of its ideas are stolen from other films - the possessed and severed 
hand idea seems a feature-length expansion of the comic sequence that was 
done with far greater sophistry in ‘The Evil Dead II', the two undead 
friends are a blatant steal from ‘An American Werewolf in London'). The 
overall idea of a possessed hand is fairly lame - and in terms of horror the 
hand holds so little threat as to border on the laughable. And nothing on 
screen has any inspiration that transforms the film anywhat either - the 
scenes with Sawa contorting about as he fights his hand come out as 
singularly unfunny. A good comic performer and mime artist could have made 
this work but Sawa's performance abilities are thoroughly unexceptional. 
There's one mildly amusing sequence where Sawa's hand makes aggressive moves 
on Jessica Alba leaving him torn between its aggression and his natural 
introversion but which she decides she rather likes, even taking him tying 
his hand up to the bed as something kinky. The whole film gives the 
impression of wanting to open up into something much more raucous and 
vulgar, but director Flender does the criminal thing for this type of film - 
he is too tame, his vulgarity lacks imagination. At least it's a better film 
than Flender's debut feature ‘Leprechaun 2' (1994).


Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Finally, a teen flick that deals with the real issues that conflict our
generation of Xers from day to day: kids smoking pot, watching TV all day,
getting horny, getting their hand possessed by the devil, listening to heavy
rock music, killing folks in the gruesomest of manners, and oh yeah, smoking
more pot.
PLOT:
Young man with nothing but time on his hands, suddenly finds one of his
hands possessed by the devil, and looking for murder. After his hand kills
two of his good friends, they return as the undead and try to help their
buddy solve his little hand problem, and save the girl of his dreams from
the wrath of his five fingers.
CRITIQUE:
A poor man's rehash of two true horror/comedy classics: Sam Raimi's EVIL
DEAD 2 (8/10) and John Landis' AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON (8/10), this
film features a lot of hit-and-miss black humor, some overly disgusting
killings, a beautiful damsel in distress, and a lot of head-banging music,
that will have you momentarily amnesia-ing its lame plot and overall weak
impact. This movie is easy enough to watch if you enjoy this type of gore
and humor, but nothing to brag about to your horror-fiend buddies. Weak
believability is another detriment to this film, as his right hand's
"possession" is never really explained, and his love interest, for reasons
unknown to anyone, never ever notices one little thing about his major
problem. Hello?!? McFly? Anybody home? In its defense, the film actually
does pull off the delicate balance of comedy and horror, but somehow lacks
the conviction or originality in either of the two arenas to score as a
complete hit.
Some cinematic newbies might enjoy it because of its original premise
(Unoriginal to me, having seen the themes covered better in earlier films),
the loud and hip music (The punk-band-de-la-jour "The Offspring" actually
make an appearance in the movie, and officially staple themselves as
sell-outs, or horror movie aficionados?) and the T&A sprinkled here and
there (Well actually, there is only some T, but unfortunately for all of us,
no A whatsoever). The actors are all very good with Devon Sawa pulling off a
great performance as the Mary-Jane-slacker-kid with the possessed hand, and
Seth Green continuing his streak of solid comedic showings as one of the
lively undead. All in all, a passable horror/comedy time for those looking
for exactly this type of gruesome action (Potheads also more than welcome!),
but a definite skip-me to all others who might be looking for something
original, all-out funny and/or terrifying. Recommended slightly higher on
video.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Devon Sawa was born in Vancouver, Canada. You may remember him from his
title role of CASPER as the ghost's human persona, opposite the lovely
Christina Ricci.
Seth Green made his film debut at the tender age of eight in THE HOTEL NEW
HAMPSHIRE and starred in Woody Allen's RADIO DAYS four years later. He was
born in Philadelphia, and might be best remembered of late as the son of Dr.
Evil in Mike Myers' AUSTIN POWERS movies.
In love with the idea of becoming an actress from the age of five, Jessica
Alba was twelve before she took her first acting class. Nine months later,
she was signed by an agent.
Vivica A. Fox hasn't stopped working ever since she was discovered in a
Sunset Boulevard restaurant more than ten years ago. Her big break came in
1996's INDEPENDENCE DAY (6/10).
Director Rodman Flender cut his teeth on the horror genre under the watchful
eye of film legend Roger Corman. A Harvard grad, Flender was made
Vice-President of Worldwide Marketing and Distribution at Corman's company,
and eventually, VP of production, after having sent his student film BLOODY
MUTILATORS to Corman himself. He also directed LEPRECHAUN 2.
This is the first produced screenplay for writers Terri Hughes and Ron
Milbauer.
Producers Suzanne Todd and Jennifer Todd are sisters.

Author
Scott Renshaw
IDLE HANDS
(Columbia)
Starring:  Devon Sawa, Seth Green, Elden Henson, Jessica Alba, Jack
Noseworthy, Vivica A. Fox.
Screenplay:  Terri Hughes & Ron Milbauer.
Producers:  Andrew Licht & Jeffrey A. Mueller and Suzanne Todd & Jennifer
Todd.
Director:  Rodman Flender.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, drug use, nudity, sexual situations)
Running Time:  92 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I don't think there's a time IDLE HANDS could have been released that
would have made it a good film, but its unfortunate release at this 
particular time makes it seem even more rancid.  In the wake of the April
21st shootings at Littleton, Colorado's Columbine High School, pundits and
politicians have been holding forth on the desensitizing effects of 
violence in our popular culture, particularly that which is aimed at
teenagers.  The hard-core First Amendment advocate in me has approached
most of this talk as conservative rabble rousing, but there's no defending
something as brutally wrong-headed as IDLE HANDS.  If this is what
contemporary adolescents want to see in the movies, we really are in
trouble.
     The plot, such as it is, centers on a 17-year-old named Anton Tobias
(Devon Sawa), whose life's goal is to lay around watching T. V. and
getting stoned with his buddies Mick (Seth Green) and Pnub (Elden Henson).
Unfortunately for Anton, the devil will find work for idle hands to do, as
a malevolent spirit takes possession of his right hand and forces him to
kill his parents, Mick and Pnub.  Then Mick and Pnub return from the dead
to provide wacky comic relief, convincing a freaked-out Anton that extreme
measures are required.  That involves removing the offending appendage,
leaving five demonic digits free to wreak havoc at Anton's high school
Halloween dance.
     Even on its most basic level, IDLE HANDS is either idiotic or
pandering, when it isn't both.  Vivica A. Fox appears as a druid priestess
following the hand-possessing spirit's trail of mayhem, perhaps as some
sort of misguided spoof of "Buffy the Vampire Slayer."  The nubile lead
actress (Jessica Alba) falls instantly for the slackerly Anton, naturally
even finding his wayward hand kinky.  Naked breasts appear because, well,
that's what naked breasts do in teen-oriented films.  The problem-solving
powers of marijuana are lauded to the heavens.  Mick and Pnub are the only
two victims of Anton's to return from the grave -- even the internal logic
of the film's supernatural universe is fuzzy -- only to invite comparisons
to another horror comedy, John Landis' AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON.
And the gore, it raineth down like waters from the heavens.  Only Seth
Green, with his wry delivery, offers a moment's entertainment amidst the
stupidity.
     I'll head off the rebuttals of the "dude, relax, it's just a movie"
contingent at the proverbial pass:  yes, it's supposed to be a horror
comedy, with its absurd excesses probably intentional to a certain extent.
The problem is that the horror and the comedy are not combined with a
knowing wink, but sequenced in a disconcerting fashion.  First, someone is
killed in a horrific manner; then, someone makes a joke about the murder.
The numbing nonchalance of the commentary lends credence to the harshest
condemnations of media violence -- in this film, the ridicule isn't
directed at the conventions of horror films, but at the deaths of
teenagers.  When characters in the film gather at a makeshift memorial to
two of Anton's victims, it's hard to suppress a shudder when images of
Columbine High School are still so fresh in our minds.
     Of course it's a freakish coincidence that IDLE HANDS appears as it
does in the wake of that tragedy, and that any of the film's images bring
it to mind.  It's harder to ignore turning straightforward carnage into
comedy.  I'm not sure whether IDLE HANDS could have redeemed itself if it
actually had made a statement about the potential destructiveness of its
protagonists' lives of sloth instead of celebrating same, but at least
that would have been a nod to something beyond its audience's most
anti-social tendencies.  This film is a bad idea at an even worse time,
little more than fuel for the fires of righteous indignation which,
unfortunately, are seeming a bit more righteous all the time.

Author
Dustin Putman
 Directed by Rodman Flender.
 Cast: Devon Sawa, Seth Green, Elden Henson, Jessica Alba, Vivica A. Fox, 
 Jack Noseworthy, Katie Wright, Connie Ray, Fred Willard.
 1999 - 92 minutes
 Rated R (for violence, gore, profanity, nudity, and sexual situations).
 Reviewed May 1, 1999.
 If "Idle Hands," the new horror-comedy directed with devilish glee by 
 Rodman Flender ("Leprechaun 2"), has it's fair share of problems, which 
 it does, you'll just have to excuse me for not mentioning some of them. 
 First and foremost, this film was an extremely nostalgic experience for 
 me, a fun and twisted throwback to the goofy slasher films of the '80s. 
 Last year's crummy "I Still Know What You Did Last Summer" was also 
 exactly like '80s horror, but was tiresome and had no true entertainment 
 value. In other words, "I Still Know..." took itself way too seriously, 
 and therefore suffered the consequences, while "Idle Hands" knows 
 exactly how to have a good time, be damned. 
 The film gets off to a fabulous start, as a kooky middle-aged married 
 couple (Fred Willard, Connie Ray) have just settled down for the night. 
 Seeing the words, "I'm under the bed," sprawled on the ceiling, they 
 immediately hear a noise downstairs. The husband goes down to check it 
 out, and never returns. Then she goes down to see where he is. You know 
 the procedure, but instead of feeling cliched, the scene is both 
 genuinely suspenseful and had me rolling in the aisles at its already 
 over-the-top, sick humor. 
 The next morning, we meet 17-year-old slacker Anton Tobias (Devon Sawa), 
 a clueless teenager who spends his days loafing on the couch watching 
 television and smoking marijuana. After not seeing his parents for a 
 couple days, he tells his friends, Mick (Seth Green) and Pnub (Elden 
 Henson), but doesn't really think anything of it. After accidentally 
 discovering their bodies (whose location in the house will remain unsaid 
 so the surprise will be kept), Anton quickly discovers that his right 
 hand is possessed by Satan, and is starting to control him, killing 
 anybody in its path, including Mick and Pnub. When Anton confronts him 
 about his unfortunate situation, his dark, brooding neighbor (Jack 
 Noseworthy) remarks that, "Idle hands are the devil's playground. Just 
 keep them busy." Ultimately, the violent proceedings lead up to the 
 school's Halloween dance, in which the now-severed hand goes on a 
 murderous rampage.
 "Idle Hands" is a delirious, no-holds-barred attempt at creating a 
 slasher movie with lots of campy and outrageous humor. While some of it 
 fails (including the whole subplot dealing with Mick and Pnub, who 
 return from the grave), much of it really is funny, and I couldn't help 
 but be reminded of the so-bad-they're-great '80s horror flicks that this 
 film obviously gets its inspiration from. Back in those days, there were 
 very few redeeming qualities, just gory killing after gore killing, 
 intermingled with a helpful dosage of gratuitous nudity. In the '90s, 
 however, things have matured a bit, there isn't quite as much blood to 
 be had in these types of movies, and there is never any t&a. With "Idle 
 Hands," this has all changed, and you would not believe how much 
 enjoyment is to be had at seeing a film like that once again, and on the 
 big screen.
 For one thing, this film does a much better job at portraying Halloween 
 (my favorite holiday) than the self-titled "Halloween: H20," and the 
 very first shot in the film is an instant classic (at least for me), as 
 the camera starts on a brightly-lit pumpkin and then pans through a 
 heavily Halloween-decorated yard, and into an upstairs window. Due to 
 this example and several other impressively-shot scenes, the 
 cinematography is distinctive and well-done, as is the memorable music 
 score by composer Graeme Revell.
 Once Anton's hand is possessed, "Idle Hands" unfortunately begins to 
 meander with an overemphasis on slapstick, but once the hands is cut off 
 and it sets out for the dance in the last thirty minutes, the movie 
 returns to its high-energy mode and is a treat from there on. The rock 
 band, "Offspring," makes an appropriate cameo at the dance as they sing 
 the Ramones songs, "I Wanna Be Sedated," while nubile teens are 
 dispatched of in gruesome ways, and two particular girls, one of which 
 is Anton's new girlfriend, Molly (Jessica Alba), must escape through the 
 ventilation system and crawl through a sharp, spinning fan that has been 
 stopped up (but for how long?) by a shoe. 
 In the central roles, Devon Sawa is an adequate protagonist who is given 
 plenty of opportunity to show off his talent (or lack thereof) of 
 physical comedy. Seth Green and Elden Henson have some fun with their 
 respective roles, especially after they have been killed (with Mick 
 having a beer bottle engouged in his forehead, and Pnub actually 
 carrying around his severed head). Jessica Alba is nice eye candy, in a 
 ditsy female sort of way, but as was so evident in the older slasher 
 movies, is a one-dimensional damsel-in-distress. Finally, Vivica A. Fox 
 is hysterical in the smallish role of Deb, a spicy Druid priestess who 
 sets out to find the possessed hand.
 "Idle Hands" is bloody, violent, dumb, and shallow, but it also boosts 
 some clever ideas amidst the rising body count. It may not be a great 
 movie, but it's one of the most amusing times I've had at the multiplex 
 this whole year.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "IDLE HANDS" (Columbia Pictures/Sony Releasing)
        In the light of the tragic high-school massacre in Littleton,
Colorado, this ill-timed horror-comedy is so ghoulish and repulsive
that there's no excuse for it. Frankly, I think it should be
voluntarily withdrawn by the studio. But, since it's on the screen in
local theaters, here goes. Devon Sawa plays a vapid, pot-smoking 17
year-old whose hand becomes possessed by a murderous evil
spirit. "Idle hands are the devil's playpen" is the explanation he's
given. He kills his parents and many of those unlucky enough to be
around him until he cuts off the homicidal appendage with a meat
cleaver and microwaves it. First-time screenwriters Teri Hughes and
Ron Milbauer and director Rodman Flender (TV's "Dawson's Creek,"
"Chicago Hope") devise numerous grisly, blood-drenched deaths and
manage to have greenish corpses rise from the dead to become devilish,
wise-cracking zombies. Then there's Viveca A. Fox, supposedly
descended from a long line of Druid priestesses, who arrives in town
with her sacred dagger. Plus Sawa's girl-friend, Jessica Alba, and the
other freaked-out guests at a Halloween costume party who are doomed
for disaster. The most offensive scene, however, pokes fun at the
mourners at the funeral of two youngsters. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Idle Hands" is barely a distasteful, disgusting 1 - and
definitely not for the squeamish. If this is what teenagers want as
entertainment, as a society, we're in deeper trouble than we realize.
