Title
Review for Ghosts of Mississippi (1996)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    The second stinker and potential career-sinker for Rob Reiner
(remember NORTH?) is an odd one.  Here's an earnest, star-studded
docudrama about slain Sixties civil rights activist Medgar Evers that
all but ignores him!  Well, to be fair, GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI is really
about the decades-later retrial of Evers' assassin, white supremacist
Byron De La Beckwith, played here by a cackling James Woods in old-age
make-up.  (Calm down.  Though a scene-stealer-- and arguably the only
character who comes to life in this dreadful feature-- Beckwith is
on-screen for all of twenty minutes.  Maybe thirty.) At the center of
the story, instead, is Alec Baldwin's character, an Assistant D.A. who
spends years rebuilding the case against Beckwith and at the cost of his
marriage, reputation, and personal safety.  Yawn.  While it's always a
treat to see the one- time Jack Ryan front *any* film, his liberal-
white-legal-guy-with-guilt has been done before, and better, and most
recently by Mr. McConaughey in A TIME TO KILL.  You've already seen this
movie, so why bother?
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
John Schuurman
"You are dealing with the past in Mississippi. That is not
where you want to be," so says State's Attorney Ed Peters
(Craig T. Nelson) to his assistant, Bobby DeLaughter (Alec
Baldwin). The utterance expresses the agony of both this story
and that of the "New South": You don't want to go back, because
it is shameful and painful back there, but sometimes you have
to go back; things change and if you don't go back, sometimes
you can't go anywhere. 
One such time was years 1989-1994 when the Medgar Evers murder
case of 1963 was revisited by the States Attorney's office of
Mississippi. THE GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI is the story of that
revisitation. 
Medgar Evers was a civil rights worker in Mississippi in the
early 1960's. He was shot in the back by a white supremacist,
Byron De La Beckwith (played with chilling accuracy by James
Woods). Beckwith had been tried before two all-white, all-male
juries in the 60's but both juries were divided and he went
free. 
Now, 30 years later, Evers' widow, (Whoopi Goldberg), after a
nearly solitary struggle to get the case reopened, has finally
managed to get a little bit of action out of the State's
Attorney's office. Bobby DeLaughter, assistant S.A., is
assigned to look into it again. DeLaughter, is a perfect
character to pick up this cross. He is a son of the Old South,
married to DIXIE De Laughter ("the daughter of the most racist
judge in Mississippi"), he puts his kids to bed by singing,
"Dixie," and he loves his home, his life and his state. 
According to this partly fictionalized movie, (some scenes and
dialogue were invented for dramatic effect), De Laughter's
looking into it and his developing passion for the case are
occasioned not so much by the facts that he uncovers -- the
evidence that Beckwith killed Evers was beyond dispute -- but
more by his reflection on the fact that a man, (like himself), 
with young children, (like his), was violently taken away from
those children. His moral outrage at the violation of those
children's right to their father is the engine that drives him
to stick with the case in spite of the hate mail, threats,
vandalism, and the  disapproval of his own family. When tempted
to abandon the painful old case that only the very few still
care about, he goes to the scene of the crime. He plays it over
in his mind and always there are the children. "No man has the
right to take a man away from his children." 
While flawed with energy lapses, and some writing that is more
than a little contrived, the film works pretty well on the
premise that we finally seek justice and redress of wrongs for
the sake of succeeding generations. All of our logic says, "Let
it go. No one cares anymore. Why stir up painful things?" A
glance at the trusting, upturned faces says, "Go back. Try
again. This is not about what is easy; it is about what is
right."
This movie is a great lesson in history and a Biblical
understanding of hope. We see the sinful past -- in this case
the sad and violent story of the Old South -- a South that
still can hurt and still thrashes around as if in death throws.
And then we see the future: there are the children and the
promise of the New South -- a New South that is already
blossoming and coming to life. As one character says, "This
whole case is one big resurrection." And --  as always -- we
stand at the crossroads with a burden on our shoulders and
decisions to make. 
Biblical hope is exactly like that: Fully (painfully) aware of
a shocking and shameful past, the hopeful one returns to it on
occasion for the sake of repentance. As De Laughter says, "We
never get even for the wrong we do." And then, having grown,
the hopeful, turns and starts living in a future that has
already begun. 
The ghosts of Mississippi will still come around -- there are more
defeats they have yet to suffer. But the future belongs to the
resurrection, to healing and to peace.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Columbia/Castle Rock)
Starring:  Alec Baldwin, Whoopi Goldberg, James Woods, Craig T. Nelson.
Screenplay:  Lewis Colick.
Producers:  Nicholas Palelogos, Andrew Scheinman, Frederick Zollo, Rob
Reiner.
Director:  Rob Reiner.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  130 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It took watching A TIME TO KILL for the second time in less than a
year for me to realize that I had been too easy on it the first time
around.  Actually, it wasn't A TIME TO KILL I saw the second time -- it
was GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI -- but that's merely a technicality.  One film
per year about a white Mississippi lawyer struggling to Do the Right Thing
in the face of familial protest, racist threats and an intransigent
justice system should be the legal limit, and the second such film is
bound to feel like the end of a marathon session of multi-cultural
sensitivity training.  The premise is simplistic and obvious, but at least
A TIME TO KILL featured some strong performances.  GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI
is a plodding, ridiculously earnest film in which any potential drama gets
water-logged in a big puddle of white liberal guilt.
     The fact-based GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI opens in 1963, with the murder
of civil rights leader Medgar Evers (James Pickens Jr.) by white
supremacist Byron De La Beckwith (James Woods).  Though the evidence
against Beckwith is strong, the presence of more than a few similarly
minded witnesses and jurors results in two hung juries in 1964.
Fast-forward to 1989, where assistant D.A. Bobby DeLaughter (Alec Baldwin)
finds the Evers case brought to public attention again by Evers' widow
Myrlie (Whoopi Goldberg) and a newspaper article about jury tampering in
the 1964 trials.  Bobby begins to re-open the case against Beckwith, but
finds little which promises any success:  evidence has disappeared,
witnesses have died, and plenty of people feel the past is best left
undisturbed.  But the case becomes a personal quest for Bobby, who finally
brings Beckwith to trial again in 1994 only to discover that his mission
of healing still has a long way to go.
     The first images in GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI are icons of the fight for
racial equity -- segregated drinking fountains, Jackie Robinson, Martin
Luther King -- underlined by Marc Shaiman's spiritual-influenced score,
and you need no further information to figure out where Rob Reiner plans
to take the story.  This is a film which wants you to leave with the
message "Racism is bad" tattooed across your backbrain, and I suppose
you'd have to say that it succeeds.  Unfortunately, Reiner and writer
Lewis Colick spoon-feed that message to the audience like it was cough
syrup; they are so concerned with making GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI good for
you that they don't take the time to make it good.
     Many of the same problems were evident in A TIME TO KILL, along with
more than a few of the same specific plot details.  The hero's wife
admonishes him for his irresponsibility, anonymous racists vandalize his
property, and a threat to his family merely serves to stiffen his resolve
-- all familiar elements in serious-minded social dramas.  At lest A TIME
TO KILL had the benefit of some strong performances to give the stock
scenarios some spark, though.  Alec Baldwin plays Bobby DeLaughter as an
inscrutable portrait in solemn determination, tempered with patient
parenting; Whoopi Goldberg plays Myrlie Evers as an inscrutable portrait
in solemn determination, tempered with dignified grief.  As rabble-rousing
as A TIME TO KILL managed to be at times, at least there appeared to be a
few characters in it who were passionate about the incendiary issues
involved.  William H. Macy, on hand for comic relief as Bobby's nervous
investigator, often seems to be the only person in GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI
with a pulse.
     You might expect some energy from James Woods as the unrepentant
bigot, and to a certain extent you get it.  Smothered in old age make-up,
Woods works up a thespian sweat to make Beckwith an easy-to-hate villain.
His arrogance that no one would possibly convict a white man for killing a
black man is the only genuine emotion in GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI, but he
obscures it with mannerisms:  pursed lips, sniffs of disdain, bits of
background business.  There is such an obvious build-up toward a big
courtroom confrontation between Beckwith and Bobby that you can almost
hear Rob Reiner in the background coaching Woods on his "You can't handle
the truth" speech, yet that moment never comes.  And I found myself
missing it, as melodramatic and historically inaccurate as it might have
been, because at least it would have given GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI a fire to
match its sincerity.  I'm sure everyone involved felt they had made an
important film, and in one sense they have:  it is important to remember
that even sentiments this honorable needs to have an interesting story to
tell.  This MISSISSIPPI isn't burning...it's boring.

Author
Noel Wood
The following review is property of MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED and cannot
be quoted or referenced without proper credit. For more information, go to the
homepage at http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr
A couple of months ago, I remember some customer telling me that they liked
FARGO because it was based on a true story. And I was like, yeah, that's kind
of cool that that's a true story. When people ask me about DONNIE BRASCO,
People say "another gangster movie?" and I'll be like "Yeah, but this one is
based on a true story." I thought that it being a true story somehow made it a
better movie.
For every GOODFELLAS or FARGO, there are FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND made-for-TV
shitfests that are based on every single goddamn true story that ever happened.
Life itself is boring as shit. That's why we need movies. But every once in a
while something hapens in real life that is worthy of a movie. Quite simply, a
movie is a movie, whether its source is reality or or the mind of Yahoo Serious
or a best-selling pulp novel. 
This all brings me to Rob Reiner's GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI. This movie was
virtually ignored at the box office and by critics (except for James Woods'
performance, and rightfully so) but it really isn't all that bad. Alec Baldwin
was a little stiff and Whoopi Goldberg has been better. The supporting cast was
good and Reiner's directing is solid. But I was watching this movie and
thinking, "This is boring." Why was it boring? Because I had seen it all
before. It was familiar ground. There wasn't anything original about it. 
What bothered me about these observations is that it was a true story.
GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI tells the story of a civil rights leader named Medgar
Evars who was shot in his driveway by an assassin in the early sixties. Thirty
years after the crime, the killer is finally brought to justice by the
Mississippi DA. Alec Baldwin plays the Great White Hope lawyer who loses his
wife and his respectability and gets his life threatened because of his
dedication to the case. He gets called a "nigger lover" and cries a lot and
shit. At the end, they get the conviction and everybody's happy. 
Before seeing this movie, I did not know anything about Medgar Evars. I still
do not. A daring movie to make would have been a biography of Medgar Evars, but
they didn't do that. Instead, they reduced the film in to the generic courtroom
drama that we've seen a million times in Grisham adaptations and the like. The
white DA gets the case, and dedicates himself to it against the advice of his
wife and other people involved. He goes around gathering evidence with the help
of a few loyal friends (one of which plays comic relief) and then goes to court
and gets death threats and learns something about himself and then makes a
heart-stirring closing argument and justice is served and everything is okay in
the end. A TIME TO KILL and A FEW GOOD MEN (also by Reiner) are the same exact
thing. That's just off the top of my head. I'm sure there are more. 
The Great White Hope thing didn't bother me as much as others because of the
way it happened and and also because, well, I'm white, and we've been taught to
feel that we are the world's only saviors. It was the fact that this TRUE story
was presented in such an unoriginal way. But how else could they have presented
it?
The dream racial courtroom drama would take the cast of A TIME TO KILL and and
have them play the parts in GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI because it's a true story. I
dunno. Everything's been done I guess. Even stories that have never been done
before have been done before. That sucks.
"If Al Gore invented the internet, then I invented the spell-check."
-Danforth Quayle
HEY! Check out MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED:
http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr

Author
Chris Webb
Cast: Alec Baldwin (Bobby De Laughter), Whoopi Goldberg (Myrlie Evers), 
James Woods (Byron De La Beckwith).
Directed by Rob Reiner
        "Ghosts of Mississippi" begins with a montage akin to very few 
other films.  It is a movie with a purpose: we want Oscars.  So, how to 
start a weak movie with high aspirations than to send up chilling images 
of the civil rights struggle in the United States with a gospel 
soundtrack.  Very chilling, indeed.
        Once you get to the meat of the movie though, it is hard not to 
notice the misguided storyline.  I credit Rob Reiner, who said that he 
would never attempt to approach the story through the eyes of a black 
person, since he cannot portray those emotions as a white man.  So, what 
we wind up with is a mildly entertaining, somewhat powerful, newsmagazine 
account of the trial lawyer who brings Medgar Evers' killer to justice 
after more than thirty years.
        Alec Baldwin portrays Bobby DeLaughter (fresh off his deep 
Southerner in "Heaven's Prisoners") who, as a white man, undertook the 
unpopular task of imprisoning Byron De la Beckwith (James Woods) after he 
went free from numerous mistrials.  We search for his reasoning to do 
this, since he is financially stable as a result of his father-in-law, a 
racist judge.  Is it for poilitical aspirations or because it is the 
decent and right thing to do?
        These are questions that Myrlie Evers (Whoopi Goldberg) seeks to 
have answered, as well.  She doesn't trust Bobby as much as she trusts 
any white man, since those are the people who have let Beckwith run free 
for so long.  Unfortunately, here is where Reiner loses the reins.
        If he cannot make a movie about the black experience, he could at 
least make Myrlie a more central figure.  Scenes between Goldberg and 
Baldwin are surprisingly intense, as we watch the progression from wariness 
to trust.  Instead, the movie chooses to focus on Bobby's home life and 
the fact that his wife is as much of a racist as her father.  She leaves 
him for a while, and Bobby makes a mistake while taking care of the kids 
alone.  Instead of telling him that racism is out-an-out wrongdoing, he 
skirts the issue.  This shows a fear to make a statement.
        Maybe, now, its true, as Beckwith states, that "[y]ou'll never 
get a jury in the state of Mississippi to convict a white man for 
killing" a black man.  Its because no white man, not even our heroes, can 
face up to the idea that racism is bad.  So, Woods prevails in the end, 
even though his character is convicted.  He remains the one memorable 
character in the movie, yet doesn't he always make his scenes great?  His 
nomination was well earned.
        I would have liked "Ghosts of Mississippi" to have been the 
Myrlie Evers story.  It would have been more compelling and hit home much 
harder.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 12/25/96 (limited); 1/97 (wide)
Running Length: 2:10
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, profanity, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Alec Baldwin, Whoopi Goldberg, James Woods, Craig T. Nelson, 
      Diane Ladd, Bonnie Bartlet, Bill Cobbs, William H. Macy, 
      Virginia Madsen, Michael O'Keefe, Susannah Thompson
Director: Rob Reiner
Producers: Frederick Zollo, Nicholas Paleologos, Andrew Sheinman, 
      and Rob Reiner
Screenplay: Lewis Collick
Cinematography: John Seale
Music: Marc Shaiman
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     Shortly after midnight on a steamy June evening in 1963, civil 
rights activist Medgar Evers was shot to death outside his home in 
Jackson, Mississippi.  One shot, fired from a high-power rifle, exploded 
through his chest, ripped through the nearby wall of his house, 
ricocheted off a refrigerator, and broke a coffee pot.  The assassin was 
white supremacist Byron De La Beckwith, a man with such an intimidating 
personality that even the KKK feared him.  De La Beckwith was captured, 
but, after two trials ended in hung juries, he went free.  When, 30 
years later, at the behest of Evers' widow, Myrlie, Assistant DA Bobby 
DeLaughter re-opened the case, he had no idea of the difficulties he 
would face in obtaining a new indictment.  Evidence was missing, 
witnesses had died, and even the official court transcripts of the 
original trials could not be located.  On top of that, DeLaughter's own 
wife turned against him and his life was threatened.  Undaunted, he 
pursued the case, determined to see it through to the end.
     GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI, director Rob Reiner's 1996 Academy Award 
contender and his follow-up to last year's THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT, tells 
this compelling story using a solid, if somewhat unconventional, cast.  
The lead, Bobby DeLaughter, goes to Alec Baldwin, the most "serious" 
actor in his family.  Baldwin is fine in the role, although far from 
Oscar material.  Whoopi Goldberg gives an uneven performance as Myrlie 
Evers, starting out rather unconvincingly, but finishing strong.  James 
Woods, who almost always plays bad guys these days, is creepy and 
unsettling as the despicably cock-sure De La Beckwith.  The supporting 
cast functions admirably, and includes Craig T. Nelson (TV's "Coach") as 
DeLaughter's boss, Diane Ladd (RAMBLING ROSE) as his mother-in-law, 
William H. Macy (FARGO) as his assistant, and Virginia Madsen (THE 
PROPHECY) as his racist wife.
     As a courtroom drama, GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI is reasonably 
successful.  The trial, which carefully follows the actual transcript 
from 1994, avoids the contrived, theatrical twists that mar many similar 
films.  There are no surprise witnesses or unexpected moves by either 
the prosecution or the defense.  Each side presents its case, then 
leaves the final decision in the hands of the jury.  As a result of this 
verisimilitude, the courtroom aspects of GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI are 
intelligent rather than over-the-top.  We care about the characters and 
what happens to them.
     As an examination of how the Civil Rights movement has changed 
lifestyles and attitudes in Mississippi (and, by extension, across the 
entire country) during the last 30 years, GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI is less 
effective.  One problem, which at least makes one wonder about the 
film's intentions, is fairly obvious:  this is yet another example of a 
story where a white hero enters the Civil Rights fray and becomes the 
lead player.  Even though this is the way events actually happened (the 
real DeLaughter is Caucasian), there's little doubt that setting up a 
white man (Alec Baldwin) as the central figure makes the film more 
"accessible" and appealing to the predominantly-white, mainstream crowds 
who frequent multiplexes. 
     Even though none of this material is groundbreaking, it is 
presented in an interesting manner.  Reiner uses this situation to 
investigate two prevalent, albeit contradictory, views of how the Civil 
Rights movement has changed the nation.  Either we are making slow 
progress, step by step, to a better future, or, "emotionally, we will 
always be segregated."  DeLaughter's conscience becomes the battleground 
for these viewpoints.  But, although the script is tightly-written for 
the most part, there are times when it lapses into sermonizing (such as 
when DeLaughter tries to explain to his young children why Evers was a 
great man).  
     Whatever its faults, GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI is certainly an 
involving drama.  However, while I have no doubt that Reiner meant for 
this to be an indictment against racist attitudes and a survey of some 
of the successes and failures of the Civil Rights movement, it succeeds 
only sporadically at those goals.  At times, GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI 
resembles nothing more lofty than a toned-down, historically-grounded 
version of A TIME TO KILL.  (A white man in the "new" South faces racism 
and personal danger for defending the "black" perspective.)  So, 
although I recommend GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI and believe that it deserves 
to find a wide audience, I am cognizant that this is not a perfect 
motion picture.  It is occasionally thought-provoking, but rarely 
haunting.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Phil Curtolo
This summer, one of the most racially charged novels in John Grisham's
series, A Time to Kill, was made into a major motion picture. On January
3 of this year, director Rob Reiner basically re-released the film under
the title of Ghosts of Mississippi.
Based on the true story of 1963 civil rights leader Medgar Evars'
assassination, Ghosts of Mississippi revolves around the 25-year legal
battle faced by Myrlie Evars (Whoopi Goldberg, Sister Act) and her quest
to have her husband's obvious assassin and racist Byron De La Beckwith
(James Woods, Casino) jailed. So she turns to Assistant District
Attorney and prosecutor Bobby DeLaughter (Alec Baldwin, Heaven's
Prisoners) to imprison the former KKK member.
Ghosts sets its tone with an opening montage of images from
African-American history, from slave-ship miseries to life in the racist
South of the 1960's. But all too soon, the white folks take over,
intoning lines like "What's America got to do with anything? This is
Mississippi!"
As Beckwith, James Woods, with his head larded with latex most of the
time as an old man, teeters between portraying evil and its character.
Meanwhile, Goldberg turns in a very serious and weepy performance as the
wife who wouldn't let her husband's death rest until she got the
conviction. Both deserve serious Oscar-consideration.
This brings us to the dull performance of Baldwin. Let's face it,
trying to match Matthew McConaughey's wonderful acting in A Time to Kill
is basically impossible. And Baldwin is living proof of this, as no
emotions could be felt. It seemed as if he actually had to struggle to
shed a single tear. Either poor acting or poor directing, but something
definitely went wrong.
Another strange mishap was the fact that Goldberg's facial features
didn't change, as she looked the same in the courtroom as she did
holding her husband's dead body 25-years earlier. Yet Woods' was
plastered with enough make up to make him look like Goldberg's father.
At least the make-up was realistic.
With some emotional moments in the poorly written script, Ghosts of
Mississippi lacked in heart, when its predecessor, A Time to Kill,
brought tears to everyone's eyes. Don't get me wrong, the movie wasn't
all that bad, but if you've seen Grisham's masterpiece, then don't
expect this one to be an excellent film.
Grade: B-, ***˝ out of *****

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Is it ever too late to do the right thing?" asks Alec Baldwin in
his summation as Mississippi Prosecutor Bobby DeLaughter.  After thirty
years, he is retrying notorious and unrepentant racist Byron de la
Beckwith.  Beckwith is played with chilling realism by James Woods.  He
spews epithets like, "All of those other races, colors, and creeds and
sissies, they're the anti-Christ."  And this is one of his mildest
statements in GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI.
     In 1963, Beckwith shot Medgar Evers in the back.  After two all
white juries could not reach a verdict, the state abandoned its case.
Beckwith came back home to a flag waving parade.  He was the local
hero.
     In contrast to Woods's intensity, Whoopi Goldberg renders Medgar's
wife, Myrlie Evers, as a persistent, but highly controlled woman who
seeks justice.  She underplays the role, which contributes to the
film's palatability.  I expected Myrlie to be obsessed and emotional,
but Whoopi sees her as pleasantly assertive.  Even on the witness stand
describing the crime, she neither sheds a tear nor raises her voice.
     Rob Reiner's direction gives the movie the same smooth tone of his
last film, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT.  GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI is quite a
funny film, but it should have been more disturbing.  Reiner
concentrates on making the film easy to accept.  Only Woods understands
what should be the purpose of the picture which is to make us angry at
Beckwith and at the system of discrimination and hatred that he
represents.
     The film is Baldwin's.  He has the vast majority of the screen
time, and the script by Lewis Colick has the case revolving around
him -- will the prosecutor find the evidence, how will he handle the
trial, and so on.  His performance is earnest and solid.  There is
nothing to fault and little to praise.
     Other than the Oscar worthy role by Woods, the supporting cast is
the best part of the film.  Craig T. Nelson is Bobby's boss Ed Peters.
Ed does not back Bobby exactly, but he permits Bobby to let his other
cases slide while he pursues what looks certain to be a wild goose
chase.  Afterall, most of the witnesses are dead, the gun is strangely
now missing, and the transcript of the trial has been removed.  There
is almost nothing left on which to begin the investigation again.
     Joining Bobby in what looks to be a quixotic endeavor is an
investigator played by William H. Macy (from FARGO).  His lines keep
the audience laughing.  Bobby has a secretary that does nothing but
comedic lines and her delivery is perfect.
     The script starts at Medgar Evers's death and never tells us who
he was and why his murder was more important than other civil rights
deaths.  Even his brother says in the film that nobody really remembers
Medgar.  The movie is slowly paced, and material could have easily been
cut so that we could have learned something of Medgar, the man.
     GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI is feel good movie about catching the bad
guy.  I would rather have been more challenged and outraged.  Reiner
makes it all too simple and straight-forward.  Luckily Woods, with a
relatively modest number of lines, is there to remind us of how
diabolical were the man and his deeds.  His acting, together with a
strong supporting cast, makes for a good film.  It could and should
have been a great one.
     GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI runs 2:10.  It is rated R for some
profanity, a realistic shooting, and mature themes.  There is no sex or
nudity.  The film would be fine for any teenager, and I hope many will
see the picture.  I recommend the film to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Frankie Paiva
The creepy Byron de la Beckwith (played extremely well by James Woods who got
an Oscar nomination) kills civil rights leader Medger Evers in his own
driveway, that was in 1963. When he is put on trial he faces an all white, all
male jury, of course he doesn't get convicted (he was put on trial twice)
because the judge is the toughest and most racist judge in all of Mississippi.
Then, for some reason, his widow Myrlie Evers (Goldberg) decides that she wants
to re-open the case after all this time, it's 1989 now, and most people could
care less. But she soon forms a bond with Bobby DeLaughter (Baldwin) a lawyer
who pursues the case for over five years. His job is to track down witnesses
(most of them dead) and keep the case going even if no real evidence is found.
When he first views the case as, "the case we'll work on in his spare time" is
soon grows to become his obsession because "is it ever too late to do the right
thing?" He eventually gathers up enough evidence (with the help of William H.
Macy, god, is he like in every movie ever made or what?) and conjures up a new
trial.
The movie stretches on for too long, do you really need to see him find the KKK
members from long ago sitting in denim on a huge bale of hay? What about the
uneeded romance between him and a hospital worker? I suppose that this is
essential to painting a picture for what it was like long ago, but after a
while it gets boring. It could have easily been cute to about 95 or 105
minutes, which would have made it much more of a pleasureable experience. 
This isn't to say the movie isn't great. I was chilled and disgusted every time
Woods appeared on the screen. I would have loved to see more of his
performance. Goldberg is also good, it's amazing that she can still act after
appearing in so many stupid, screwball comedies. Plus the film is rated PG-13
so younger teens can see it, yes they will be bored out of their minds, but I
hope some parents force it upon their children to see this movie. It's a great
movie (and like the back of the video says) "that every American should see."
Overall, the movie is a long (but moving) experience, and I give it *** stars.

Author
Walter Frith
As we move closer to the 21st century we are reminded that racial tensions
still remain high around the world.  'Ghosts of Mississippi' is a story
dealing with the aftermath of assassinated American Civil Rights leader
Medgar Evers who was shot in the back with a high powered rifle in the
driveway of his home as he arrived from work late one evening in June of
1963.  Byron De la Beckwith, the man accused of the crime (portrayed
chillingly and absorbingly by James Woods) was given two trials and both
ended in hung juries.  Twenty five years later the case is re-opened through
the persistance of Evers' widow (Whoopi Goldberg) with the help of civil
rights organizations seeking a conviction and De la Beckwith is again tried
by the District Attorney's office in the hands of Alec Baldwin and Craig T.
Nelson.  This is a low key and very sedated picture to be admired for its
attempt rather than for its execution as most of the scenes are quite subtle
and director Rob Reiner ('Misery,' 'A Few Good Men,' 'The American
President') demonstrates his diversity with the courtroom by making the
scenes appear realistic with little or no outbursts of fiery dialogue and
sometimes pretentious emotion as was the case in 'A Few Good Men' which
featured a harrowing courtroom climax.  Reiner chooses to tell the story in
'Ghosts of Mississippi' as one of truth since it is based on an actual event
and Reiner does a good job with the characterizations but could have drained
a bit more from Alec Baldwin and Whoopi Goldberg and it's James Woods who
steals the show as an unrepentant racist convinced he will never be convicted
of killing a black man in the state of Mississippi.  Perhaps 'Ghosts of
Mississippi' will play better on home video as it could easily pass for a
television movie of the week.  For a different look at how courtroom
procedures are usually undertaken and for reasonably satisfying entertainment
which unfortunately for some may leave them a bit flat, 'Ghosts of
Mississippi' is a movie which will seem different than most others of its
type.  I suppose in some ways that's a good thing.
