Title
Review for Once Upon a Time... When We Were Colored (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 1/12/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:55
MPAA Classification: PG (Violence, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Charles Earl Taylor Jr., Willis Norwood Jr., Damon Hines, 
      Al Freeman Jr., Richard Roundtree, Phylicia Rashad, Paula Kelly, 
      Leon, Isaac Hayes, Bernie Casey, Polly Bergen
Director: Tim Reid
Producers: Michael Bennett and Tim Reid
Screenplay: Paul W. Cooper based on the novel by Clifton Taulbert
Cinematography: John Simmons
Music: Steve Tyrell
U.S. Distributor: Republic Pictures
     In a time when intelligent family pictures are at a premium, 
intelligent African American family pictures are virtually nonexistent.  
Into that void has come ONCE UPON A TIME... WHEN WE WERE COLORED, Tim 
Reid's feature adaptation of Clifton Taulbert's memoirs.  Blending 
sepia-toned nostalgia with harder-hitting, passionate themes, Reid has 
crafted a portrait of growing up in the middle-of-the-century South the 
likes of which is rarely found in any medium.
     In ONCE UPON A TIME, a sense of quiet dignity has replaced the rage 
that often typifies films targeted for black audiences.  Yet this movie 
is no less emotive or potent because of it.  Issues of equality, 
fairness, and self-respect form the cornerstones of the defining subtext 
for this coming-of-age story.  Although ONCE UPON A TIME is rooted in a 
setting that will have greater resonance for black Americans, much of 
what this film says has universal scope and intent.
     ONCE UPON A TIME... WHEN WE WERE COLORED opens in 1946 in Colored 
Town, the black companion community to Glen Allen, Mississippi -- the 
year and place of Clifton Taulbert's birth.  The film traces his first 
sixteen years, ending in 1962 when Cliff decides to leave his home, 
family, and work in the cotton fields for the promise of the North.  
Although ONCE UPON A TIME is occasionally disjointed, and some of the 
transitions are abrupt, it nevertheless offers a compelling chronicle of 
one man's growth into adulthood during volatile times, when courageous 
men and women began challenging an unjust system.
     As with most episodic movies, certain segments leave a more lasting 
impression than others.  One of the most memorable occurs early in the 
film, when Cliff's great-grandfather (Al Freeman Jr.) gives the young 
boy a lesson about the differences between "White" and "Colored" 
facilities.  This is immediately followed by a KKK march, one of the 
film's few grim, tense scenes.  On another occasion, friends and family 
gather around Cliff's great-grandfather's radio, listening to the play-
by-play of a Joe Lewis fight ("Colored folks had so few heroes...").  
There's a wonderfully festive Sunday picnic characterized by food, 
games, and good times.  Then, towards the end, we are privy to a church 
meeting where the men and women of Colored Town debate whether the 
community should send someone to an NAACP meeting up North.
     The film is highlighted by a pair of strong performances.  Al 
Freeman Jr. (as Poppa, Cliff's great-grandfather) and Richard Roundtree 
(as Cleve, a local ice salesman who becomes embroiled in an "ice war" 
with a white-owned company) take supporting roles and turn them into 
memorable portrayals.  The three young actors who play Cliff -- Charles 
Earl Taylor Jr. (age 5), Willis Norwood Jr. (age 12), and Damon Hines 
(age 16) -- are solid, if not spectacular.  The rest of the cast varies 
from effective (Polly Bergen, Paula Kelly) to adequate (Leon, Phylicia 
Rashad).  Technically, ONCE UPON A TIME rarely shows its monetary 
constraints, although, considering Tim Reid's struggle to put together 
the film's budget, it's amazing how good it looks.
    ONCE UPON A TIME... WHEN WE WERE COLORED is about growing up and 
breaking free, both as an individual and as a community.  It's about 
standing up for denied rights and not backing down in the face of 
pressure.  Moreover, it's an intimate odyssey through the kind of 
childhood that is forever lost in the not-so-distant-past, when, despite 
the plague of legal racism throughout the South, the closeness of a 
community still offered support, comfort, and love.  In Cliff's words, 
"All that I am or ever will be comes from growing up with my extended 
family in...Colored Town."  That simple statement embodies the core of 
the film's message to viewers of all races and generations.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     It is one of the more cumbersome pieces of baggage which goes along
with being a film critic that, every once in a while, a film comes along
which you are _supposed_ to like on general principle.  Critics are
sometimes placed in the uncomfortable position of being expected to
champion small, ennobling films simply because, like cinematic castor oil,
they are good for us.  ONCE UPON A TIME...WHEN WE WERE COLORED is a film
which wears its earnestness proudly on its sleeve; it means well, and it
tries hard.  But a film has to have something more going for it than
principle, and ONCE UPON A TIME... is a well-acted but extremely
fragmented story which can't quite get its tone down straight.
     Based on the autobiographical writings of Clifton Taulbert, ONCE UPON
A TIME...WHEN WE WERE COLORED opens in Glen Allan, Mississippi in 1946,
with the birth of Cliff to an unmarried farm girl named Mary (Karen Malina
White).  When his mother eventually becomes a teacher in a nearby town,
Cliff is raised primarily by his great-grandfather Poppa (Al Freeman Jr.)
and great-grandmother Mama Pearl (Paula Kelly).  Under Poppa's care Cliff
gradually begins to understand the facts of life in the segregated South.
Mama Pearl's growing infirmity forces Cliff to live with yet another
caregiver, his aunt known as Ma Ponk (Phylicia Rashad).  Cliff observes as
prejudice affects several friends including an iceman named Cleve (Richard
Roundtree), and how the allure of the more integrated North draws away
many members of his family.
     ONCE UPON A TIME...WHEN WE WERE COLORED is not particularly
interested in detailing the day-to-day ugliness of life in the segregated
South; it is a film about a kind of community which no longer exists, and
as such it is occasionally quite touching.  It is difficult not to watch
scenes of 4th of July barbecues for which the whole town turns out, or to
notice how the people of Glen Allan look out for each other, without
feeling a sense of sadness that that unity had to disappear with the
passing years.  This is more of a love letter to a time when Southern
blacks realized that all they had was each other, and treated their
community with reverence and respect, than it is a remembrance of
cruelties past.
     The main problem with ONCE UPON A TIME is that it makes frequent side
trips to episodic stories which don't resonate, despite insistent
voice-over narration (provided by screenwriter Paul W. Cooper) that tries
to convince us that they should.  There is a sub-plot involving the return
of Ma Ponk's son Melvin (Leon) to visit from his new home in Detroit, and
his attempt to convince an old girlfriend to come with him.  The story
allows for a scene in a backwater juke joint which adds a bit of
atmosphere, but the relationship doesn't really matter, because there's a
history there we haven't had a chance to see.  The same is true of an
episode involving a traveling chorus girl (Iona Morris) who stays with
Cliff and Ma Ponk, and the result of Ma Ponk's visit to see the show, or
Cliff's relationship with a kindly white woman (Polly Bergen) who gets
library books for him to read.  There is an incompleteness to many of the
individual episodes, and a lack of emotion to scenes which seem designed
to provoke an emotional response.
     When ONCE UPON A TIME...WHEN WE WERE COLORED spends time with Cliff
and his family, there is a lot to recommend it.  Al Freeman Jr. gives a
subtle but commanding performance as the proud Poppa, who has the
unpleasant task of teaching his great-grandson why there are certain
restrooms he cannot use; a scene in which he reacts to Cliff proudly using
the correct, "colored" drinking fountain is a fine piece of non-verbal
acting.  Too often, however, the film drifts away from Cliff's
point-of-view, or injects an obligatory bit of racial violence almost
because it seems to be expected.  First-time feature director Tim Reid
maintains a steady pace and evokes the atmosphere of his setting
skillfully, but he doesn't find a narrative in the many stories he is
trying to put on the screen.  If its story and its characters had been as
consistent as its good intentions, it might have been a great film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     ONCE UPON A TIME ... WHEN WE WERE COLORED is based on the best
selling memoirs of Clifton Taulbert.  It tells of a time and a people
in the south that is rarely dealt with on film.  It starts in Colored
Town  which is the name of the black community on the wrong side of the
railroad tracks in Glen Allan, Mississippi.  The film starts in the
year is 1946 when segregation is in full force.
     Wait a minute, you are probably saying.  I have seen a lot of
movies about racial discrimination in the south.  As you start to tick
off the movies (MISSISSIPPI BURNING, etc.), ask yourself how many of
these focus on the black community itself.  If you examine most of the
films, you will see that they are more about whites and what bad things
the whites do to the blacks.  You see a lot of blacks as victims, but
rarely do you see the blacks coming together for community, for
support, and for fun as you do in ONCE UPON A TIME ... WHEN WE WERE
COLORED.
     Here the whites appear periodically and serve to remind the
audience of why the blacks suffered.  Even the whites are more
realistically drawn than normal.  You see how uncomfortable some of
them are with the system they feel trapped in, but go along with
anyway.  Other whites rebel and try to help.  All of this
notwithstanding, the whites play a minor role in the picture, which I
found totally refreshing and much more involving.  Other than "Roots,"
which was set in a different era, I do not remember a film that taught
so much of what it is to be part of the black community.  Massive
discrimination is shown certainly, but the great script adaptation
(Paul W. Cooper) keeps the focus on the blacks themselves.
     Like the marvelous film TO LIVE from a couple of years ago, the
show is told in small segments.  It starts when Cliff is born and then
skips to age 5 (Charles Earl Taylor Jr.), 12 (Willis Norwood Jr.), and
finally 16 (Damon Hines).  This means the films spans the turbulent era
of 1946-1962.  Since I was born in 1946 and grew up in the south, the
discrimination presented here from the separate water fountains to the
rest rooms labeled "whites" and "colored," I can remember all too well.
Repugnant as it was, it did happen; I remember. I was there.
     In one of the most poignant, but simple scenes from the show,
Cliff's grandfather "Pappa" (Al Freeman Jr.) asks 5 year old Cliff
several times before they leave to make the big trip to an adjoining
town if he needs to go to the bathroom again, and Cliff says no.  When
Pappa stops for gas, the child announces he has to go, but Pappa shakes
his head pointing out that the service station is small so it just has
a white's restroom.  The child, in pain, must wait until he can go in
the woods later.
     Much of the show is devoted to the milieu of the blacks' lives:
their fishing along the river, their one room school house for all
eight grades, their large picnics, and their worship of God ("If you
call Jesus, his line is never busy").  You relive their smaller
tragedies too as when Joe Louis, "The Brown Bomber", loses the heavy
weight championship after holding the crown for 12 years.
     The blacks are shown as a hopeful lot, and as the narrator (Paul
W. Cooper) says, "Everyone clung to the idea that if you worked hard,
you get a piece of the American dream."  They are also defiant against
injustice, as when one of the women cotton pickers says of the field
boss, "He ain't nothing but a redneck trying to be a white man."
     The only white person that comes off well in the film is Miss
Maybry (Polly Bergen) who gets Cliff books, but warns him, "Books are
like eggs.  You got to crack 'em open to get anything out of them."
     Eventually the seeds of revolution are set.  Even Pappa moves from
passive aggression to active defiance.  As he sums up his anger, "we
got peace with the white man as long as we do what he says."
     The acting is good all round, but the star of the show has to be
Al Freeman Jr. He shows great inner strength, bravery, and
intelligence.  You may remember him from his forceful performance as
Elijah Muhammad in MALCOLM X.  I liked the other actors and actresses,
but none stood out for me the way his performance did.
     The cinematography by John Simmons has the perfect nostalgic sepia
look to it.  The direction by Tim Reid has good pacing except in the
middle where the show loses energy.  Some of the incidents chosen for
illustration work much better than others so, although I really liked
the film, I found it uneven.
     ONCE UPON A TIME ... WHEN WE WERE COLORED runs 1:55.  It is
correctly rated PG.  There is no sex, no nudity, mild violence and only
a few bad words.  It would be fine for any kid old enough to be
interested in the subject.  I liked the show a lot, although I wish it
were more even and had a stronger middle.  I recommend this excellent
show to you and award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Television actor Tim Reid makes his directorial debut in this 
pleasant, but s-l-o-w story of a black baby born in the cotton 
fields of 1946 Mississippi.  Reid has created a gentle giant of  
period detail that deserves praise for, among other things, such 
remarkable restraint.  (There's no gratuitous racism or violence, 
here.  Given the potentially incendiary nature of the subject 
material, I call that an accomplishment.)  Some have labeled this 
film as "sanitized," which I don't agree with.  ONCE UPON A TIME... 
is very real and, unfortunately, very slow.  The lack of narrative 
focus makes for a particularly long sit.  Stick with it, though, 
and the second hour gets (a bit) better.  Filmed in North Carolina, 
from the book by Clifton L. Taulbert, and with the exceptional cast 
of Al Freeman Jr., Phylicia Rashad, Leon, Paula Kelly, Bernie 
Casey, Isaac Hayes, Polly Bergen, Taj Mahal, Richard Roundtree, and 
many others.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>
