Title
Review for Bandits (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Athan Bezaitis
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/a699f00b68ee75968825680400043b03?OpenDocument
Foreign films have a unique and powerful way of facing controversial
issues.  The most recent example comes from Germany, which has created
a movie so audacious in its statement of women's liberation, that it
makes the much-scrutinized themes of THELMA AND LOUISE feel like
child's play.  Despite subtitles, unfamiliar faces, and a somewhat
taboo motif, BANDITS is sure to have tremendous crossover appeal with
American audiences.
Directed by Katja von Garier,BANDITS chronicles four German fugitives
and their passion for rock n' roll as they attempt to evade the law
and flee the country. Their odyssey takes this all girls rock band
(hence The Bandits) from rehearsal at the prison church to performing
in front of thousands as they garner Mickey and Mallory-esque
attention through their adventures as outlaws on the run. Their
experiences and emotions are conveyed in their music, which serves as
a link between their depraved sense of humanity and newfound freedom.
The less you know about the film going into it the more enjoyable it
will be, so if you hear anyone talking about it, do yourself a favor
and cover your ears.
The cast is fabulous and the best part is that you've never seen these
actors in any other roles, unless of course, you're from Germany. How
often can you say that about an American film?  For all I knew it was
the German Sharon Stone and Tom Cruise on screen, but none of that
mattered because I was focusing solely upon characters rather than
well-publicized canned images.
Don't let the fact that this is a women's lib film deter you.  The
excellent soundtrack is all in English.  The cinematography and the
action are fantastic, and trust me when I say that the themes of
female autonomy are not at all overbearing and only add to the
nostalgia of the movie.
Find out which small theater in your neighborhood is playing this film
and check it out.  It's well worth the effort.
Director/Writer: Katja von Garnier
Starring:  Katja Riemann, Jasmin Tabatabai, Nicolette Krebitz, Jutta
Hoffman, Hannes Jaenicke, Werner Schreyer, Andrea Sawaski
Producer: Harry Kugler, Molly von Furstenberg, Elvira Senft
MPAA rating: R
Year of Release:  1999
**** Four Stars
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   One of the ironies of fame is that you spend your life trying
to achieve it and then, once you've got it, you have to wear
shades in the street for fear of being mobbed.  Your privacy is
gone.  Katja von Garnier's film "Bandits" underscores the
paradox.  Four women, losers all, spend their spare time
dreaming of fame but gain it at the oddest time.  Just as they
succeed in pulling a daring escape from jail, their pictures are
plastered all over town and on compact discs in all the music
stores.  At the very moment they need anonymity, to blend in
with the crowd and avoid capture, they become the best
known women in the city of Hamburg. Their fifteen minutes of
fame could easily turn into several additional years of prison
once caught by the polizei.
   The title bandits of the picture are four women who are
serving time for a variety of offenses.  Prettiest is Angel
(Nicolette Krebitz), a 23-year-old robber who develops a crush
on a strikingly handsome young man during her days on the
lam.  Luna (Jasmin Tabatabai) is the most volatile, a short-
fuse dynamo who is the lead singer of the group.  Emma
(Katja Reimann) is the most alienated, a red-head whose
rimless glasses add to her severity, while the oldest of the
group, Marie (Jtta Hoffmann), is a suicidal convict who
arsenic-poisoned her husband and who falls under the
protection of the women who love her.
   The narrative gets under way when a nun who serves as
the jailhouse counselor recommends the girls to play a gig at
a policeman's ball.  (The women pick the name bandits as a
combination of the words "band" and "tits.") On the way to the
event, the women escape from the van and are pursued by
an obsessed cop, Schwarz, a Javert-like character who insists
that he has always captured runaways before he can finish
his box of cigarillos.  When the newly freed women send a
tape of their music to a greedy distributor, they gain instant
fame, their CDs on sale everywhere.  With the mere 50,000
marks which the profiteer hands them, they await a boat
which will take them to a life of freedom in sunny Guyana.
   The plot is banal enough, serving as mere excuse for a
throbbing soundtrack featuring the women in actual
performances of their songs.  As the four continue to elude
the police, they become fast friends, one of them enjoying a
brief affair with a handsome American tourist (Werner
Schreyer) who goes along with them reluctantly as a hostage. 
The final scene is both imaginative and appallingly drawn-out,
a choppily edited MTV extravaganza in which the band,
eschewing a quick getaway to the steamship, first delivers a
rollicking impromptu concert by the waterfront to a crowd of
cheering young men and women, all of whom wish the best
for them and seek to block their capture by the police.  
   Essentially the whole work is an elongated piece of music
TV which can try the patience of the adults, though the
women are good to look at as they strum their guitars and
smash their drums.  This is a minor work by a director who
was responsible for the documentary on the making of Clint
Eastwood's "In the Line of Fire" and the surprise German
success, "Making Up!" in 1992.  Not Rated.  Running time:
109 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998
