Title
Review for Dong (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David Dalgleish
"We are grateful that we have the songs of Grace Chan to comfort us."
Taiwan, 24/12/99.  The millenium approaches.  An incessant downpour 
batters an unnamed city.  Sectors of the city are being sealed, 
quarantined due to the onset of a mysterious virus.  The virus causes 
people to act like insects: they crawl about on all fours, hide from 
bright lights, huddle in damp corners.  The water supply to the 
quarantined zones will be cut off in a week's time.  Residents are 
advised to evacuate the area, ASAP.
This premise--Kafka by way of Cronenberg--is the background for THE 
HOLE, which could have been a great movie, but, sadly, ends up as a 
waste of good ideas.  The quick sketch above suggests a dark, absurd, 
hallucinatory near-future parable of life in the late 20th century; in 
execution, however, it is nothing like that.
 The virus, the evacuation, the visual possiblities of the deluge: 
these are all relegated to the background.  Instead, THE HOLE focuses 
on the lives--for want of a better word--of a man (Lee Kang-Sheng) and 
a woman (Yang Kuei-Mei) who live in the same apartment building, and 
who have no personalities.  The entire movie taks place in settings 
that are uniformly ugly and sterile: the charmless rooms and corridors 
of a post-industrial apartment complex, photographed to look as dim 
and dingy as possible.  It's a vivid setting, but an unappealing one, 
especially with the monotonous hiss of falling rain and the gurgle of 
drainage pipes in the background.
The man lives in the apartment directly above the woman's.  One day, 
a repairman investigating a leak leaves a small hole in the floor of 
the man's living room, opening into the ceiling of the woman's living 
room.  This hole--symbol of the solitary opening in the character's 
lonely, compartmented lives--allows them to interact in unusual (and 
mostly non-verbal) ways.
Example: the man, suffering from the onset of the virus (or so I 
assume--everything is obscure in this movie) vomits through the hole.  
The woman, wandering around in the dark, accidentally puts her hand on 
his vomit, and then cleans it up.  This is what passes for meaningful 
communication.  And they say romance is dead.
Much of the film does not even focus on their interactions, such as 
they are.  There is almost no dialogue and we learn next to nothing 
about these people.  They are ciphers.  Instead, we are treated to 
long takes in which we witness their miserable lives; we watch, for 
instance, as the woman boils some water, pours it onto some noodles, 
then eats the noodles.  (This is as fascinating as it sounds.)
Offered as counterpoint--or perhaps relief--to these dreary sequences 
are a series of musical numbers, fantasies in which the woman 
lip-synchs to pop songs by Grace Chan (popular, so I'm told, in 1950s' 
China).  She prances around in grimy hallways and grungy stairwells, 
incronguously lit by cheerfully bright spotlights.  Sometimes, in 
these fantasies, she is joined by the man.  These scenes are 
presumably intended to be bright and fanciful, sharply contrasting the 
dreariness of reality, but they fail.  When the man and the woman 
dance, it seems half-hearted and listless.  Astaire and Rogers this is 
not.  Even in imagination, these people are numb, weary, boring.
THE HOLE is part of the 'Collection 2000' series, a group of films 
commissioned by French TV station La Sept ARTE on the subject of the 
millenium.  Others include Canada's LAST NIGHT, Brazil's MIDNIGHT, and 
American Hal Hartley's THE BOOK OF LIFE.  THE BOOK OF LIFE is the only 
other one that I have seen, and it is infinitely superior to the 
Taiwanese entry.  Witty, energetic, humane, it makes the THE HOLE seem 
(ahem) empty.
American movies with nothing to say try to disguise their lack of 
content with flashy movements, quick cuts, superficial emotions.  
Foreign movies with nothing to say do what THE HOLE does: they point 
the camera at something of minimal interest for unbelievably long 
periods of time, and call it art.  THE HOLE is self-evidently a film 
about alienation, and perhaps director Tsai Ming-Liang wants the 
audience to share in his characters' alienation.  If so, he succeeds.  
Perhaps it is a challenge: he dares us to enjoy this movie, despite 
his best attempts to ensure that we don't.  If it was a challenge, I 
wasn't up for it.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 LAST DANCE (DONG) (THE HOLE) (director/writer: Tsai Ming-Liang;
 screenwriter: Yang Ping-ying; cinematographer: Liao Peng-Jung; editor:
 Hsiao Ju-kuan; cast: Lee Kang-Sheng (The Man Upstairs), Yang Kuei-Mei
 (The Woman Downstairs), Lin Hui-Chu (Neighbor), Tong Hsiang-chu (The
 Plumber); Runtime: 70; La Sept Arte; 1998-Taiwan / France)
A minimal story that is too thin for a feature film. It is about urban
deterioration and alienation in Taiwan as seen just seven days before
2000 and leading up to the 'new millennium.' A nameless, boyish
appearing young man, dressed most of the time in his underwear, who runs
a vegetable market, Lee Kang-Sheng, lives in a dingy building that has
bad plumbing and lots of leaks. He lives above Yang Kuei-Mei, the
nameless woman, who is upset that there is a hole in her ceiling. It is
one that a plumber made and never returned to repair. The upstairs
neighbor now looks down at her as she prances around in her black slip
and he leeringly watches as her discomfort grows as conditions worsen.
We even get to watch her pee while she's on the cell phone. The hole
will become their means of getting to know each other, for better or
worse, as he comically tries to communicate with her by placing a black
umbrella in the hole.
A radio report mentions that the city water is contaminated and the
water supply will be cut off by the end of the week in the quarantined
sections. There's also a citywide garbage strike and a constant downpour
outside. To make matters even worst, there is a deadly Taiwan virus
going around caused by the cockroach. It makes one act like a bug,
crawling on all fours and so on, as the victim first shows flu-like
symptoms. These two tenants are living in the quarantined part of the
city because of the virus emergency and their only solace might be in
getting to know each other and offering comfort to one another, an
opportunity afforded by the hole, as their physical barrier that
separates them is removed.
At the 1998 Cannes Film Festival, this Taiwanese-French drama won a
Fipresci Award, given by international critics. What I liked best about
it were the half dozen musical numbers sung by Grace Chang, as the two
tenants lip-synch and dance along to the tunes. The film would be
interrupted by the fantasy scenes, where the dressed-up protagonists
would go into their lively cabaret-like song and dance routine. Some of
the lively songs to counter the non-action scenes were: 'Oh Calypso,'
'Go away don't come back,' 'I want you to-what I want is your love,'
'Gesundheit,' and 'I don't care who you are.'
This film was initiated as part of the French TV series of one-hour
end-of-millennium dramas. Its appeal will probably be most appreciated
by the music lovers of those old Hong Kong films (Grace Chang was a
popular singer in the China of the 1950s), and those admirers of French
directors Rivette and Demy, whose musicals are also followed by strange
stories and a dead-pan humor. It also should appeal to those who want to
see the unusual, and their reward might be that this is a film that
makes them think they have something to think about. For me, nothing
much happened in this intriguing Kafka-like idea for a film to rise
above its leaky promises. It needed more of a story and protagonists
with more personality, in order for it to feel more alive.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: A science fiction allegory.  At the Millennium a lethal
contagious virus has hit Taiwan.  Officials have cut off water and
other services to the center of contagion.  Life there devolves and
degenerates.  A man in an apartment has a hole in his floor and with it
harasses his downstairs neighbor.  A slow but harrowing film to be
missed if possible.  Rating:  2 (0 to 10), low -1 (-4 to +4)
   - The Taiwan Virus is ravaging Taiwan and the part of the city that
     is the center of the contagion has been evacuated of anyone who
     will go.  One apartment building still houses people.  A woman,
     formerly an office worker, (Yang Kuei-mei) is tormented by her
     upstairs neighbor (Lee Kang-sheng) who has a hole cut by a plumber
     in the floor and is using it as a drain.  Neighbor runs a small
     failing grocery store.
   - To make things more depressing, it is constantly raining hard.
   - Upstairs neighbor vomits through, pours water, etc.  A small and
     almost entirely one-sided war starts.  Allegory about callousness
     and selfishness.
   - Woman is living on a pile of rolls of toilet tissue.
   - Incongruous songs added to show downstairs neighbors dreams.
     These are the songs of popular Taiwanese singer Grace Chang.
   - Apartment is falling apart.  Wallpaper is separating from walls.
     Plumbing is failing.
   - Boredom shown by long cuts in which nothing happens.  A lot of
     film seems to be used up.
   - This story might have been done much better as a ten-minute
     animated film.
   - Stars are considered to be great dramatic actors by one reviewer.
   - This film seems longer at 95 minutes most two-hour films.
