Title
Review for Kaze no na wa amunejia (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is San Francisco some time in the 1990s.  The human race has
somehow been reduced to a brutal, animalistic state.  The cities are
full of animal-people looking for what food they can find.  One unnamed
wanderer about twenty years old seems still have his mental faculties.
He encounters the mysterious Sophia who also seems to be immune to the
mindlessness.  The wanderer remembers living in Arizona when a strange
wind came blowing across the land.  The wind seems to have blown away
the memories and minds of everybody.  Humans become snarling animals.
The big take from the small, the strong take from the weak.  Most
victimized are children.
     The wanderer tells Sophia that he remembers the coming of the wind
and the loss of all his intelligence and memory.  He remembers fighting
to wrest sausages from some young children.  Then he stumbled onto a
government defense facility where a dying scientist, Johnny, had been
working on memory enhancement.  He is able to restore the wanderer's
ability to remember and even some of the memory.  But Johnny dies
shortly after the wanderer finds him.  Sophia listens to the wanderer's
story and dubs him Wataru, literally the wanderer.  Wataru and Sophia
set off on a road trip to see the country and the devastation that has
resulted from the amnesia.  Meanwhile we see what they so not, that
government satellites are tracking their progress.
     The story naturally breaks into episodes, but after the opening in
San Francisco there is one episode in Los Angeles and one in the
desert, perhaps Utah.  Suddenly our characters are on the East Coast.
One scene is in front of a pillared building, perhaps Washington, and
then New York.  It feels like there should be more episodes as they
come across the country.  We are not cheated of the climactic fight,
but we are cheated of a lot of understanding of why the battle is being
fought and what is going on.  The filmmakers had some impressive scenes
that they wanted to include but they did not care to sweat the details
that would have made this a real story.  Instead it is just a
collection of related incidents.  This problem is not uncommon in
Japanese animated films.
     The biggest problem with the plot is that it raises so many
questions and then answers so few of them.  Who brought the wind?  Why
did they do it? How does it work?  How widespread are the effects?  Is
there a cure?  How long will it last?  Who is Sophia?  Why is she here?
Why is Wataru being tracked by the government?  To be a decent story
most if not all of these questions should have been answered in the
writer's mind.  Only one of those questions is answered and not really
very well.  At under ninety minutes the film does not seem to have time
for explanations.  Leaving so much unanswered should bother the
audience, but in the age of THE X-FILES the bar seems to have been
lowered on that expectation.
     General opinion is that the actual animation techniques in
Japanese animation is very good.  That very simply is not true.  It is
a lot better than bad Saturday morning animation.  I think what people
are responding to is not the animation techniques, which are primitive,
but the art direction which actually is quite nice, though it does not
stand out from other anime films.
     A WIND NAMED AMNESIA has really only one good idea and it is used
up in the first fifteen minutes of the film and it still feels
incomplete.  Oddly, the song over the end-credits begins in Japanese
and then lapses into English. I rate it a 5 on the 0 to 10 scale and a
low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jon Lawrence
THE WIND OF AMNESIA is a Japanaimation. It about in the year 1999, a
wind swept across the world erasing every one's memory, hense Amnesia.
Every one forgot every thing, the could not even remeber how to speak
even. The mains story is about this guy, Wataru (not is real name, he
forgot that one) who learns everything again,. He was helped by Johnny,
a kiddy with cybernetic brain that the wind did not affect. After John
died, Wataru starts his quest in to rebuild humanity. They first thing
he come along is a Guardian Robot, which he piss's off, so for the rest
of the movie, the robto whats Wataru's head. Then he means Sophia, a
woman who can talk, but will not tell Wataru why. Sophia need to get to
new york. So the rest of the movie is about these 2 making it across
american, meeting other people, and doing what they can to help. In the
end, the reasons for the following are resolved-
        * Why Sophia can speak when ever you else can't.
        * Why the wind happened?
        * Who cause the wind?
        * The guardian robot, who keeps on repairing itself, finally get
                destroyed.
THE WIND OF AMNESIA reminded me of Steven King's The STand becuace the
place was a waiste land, but still alot of civalisation was still
standing, unlike in those after the bomb moives. I was very obvious
that the orginal story was a lot longer (Like some other japanimations)
because it took most of the film to get From L.A. to Los Vegas, and
after that, every thing most very quickly.
