Title
Review for Medicine Man (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MEDICINE MAN (1992) ** 1/4 Cast: Sean Connery, Lorraine Bracco, et al.
Directed by John McTiernan. Written by Tom Schulman and Sally Robinson.
Photography, Donald McAlpine. A Hollywood Pictures release. 104 min. Rated
PG-13.
Another entry in the ecological-rain forest sweepstakes, MEDICINE MAN is
also one of those movies that get trounced by the critics but supported by
the public. Both extremes are, well... extreme. The film is obvious and
so-so.  It is about as ambitious as a TV movie, except for its elaborate
production values and high budget. On the other hand, it is neither
pretentious nor irritating : at worst you can be bored, but without feeling
like pelting the screen with ripe tropical fruit ; at best you may get some
passing pleasure from watching it, especially at matinee prices.
For six years, biochemist Dr. Robert Campbell (Connery), has been living in
an Indian village of Venezuela's Amazonian rain forest. He has found a cure
for cancer -- but there are complications: a lost formula to be
reconstituted, healing flowers way up at treetop level, an Indian medicine
man upset at the competition, encroaching bulldozers that bring down the
trees, healing plants, and native culture.
In the movie's Stanley-Livingstone start, the pharmaceutical company
sponsoring  Dr. Campbell research dispatches Dr. Rae Crane (Bracco) to
check up on Campbell. Here come the formulas too!  Not only new, scientific
ones, but the old movie-movie Hollywood cliches,all phony : the odd
encounter, the initial antagonisms, the battle of the sexes, the taming of
the shrill, Bracco's gradual appreciation  of Connery and the  Amazonian
natives, the collaboration between the two doctors, the rise of  affection
and (need it be said?) the birth of love.
The script is by Tom Schulman (the writer of DEAD POETS SOCIETY) with many
rewrites by Sally Robinson and, 'tis said, an uncredited Tom Stoppard.  It
is a dumb, dull  scenario that is beyond the curative powers of script
doctors. And as it has no real shape or energy, it tries to make up for
this with bit, lots of bits: bits of likable natives; bits of Tarzan-Jane
swinging ; bits of levity (a caffeine-loaded plant gives Bracco a high);
bits of hysterics; bits of social consciousness (Stop the Bulldozers!).
Disjointed bits cannot a good mainstream movie make, but at least, they
vary, except for the many, tedious wisecracks during verbal fencing. (But
how come they missed a cheap gag about Connery's computer? It functions in
a humid, insect-ridden environment, yet nobody talks about computer bugs.)
It all adds up to a shaggy doctor story. That Connery is a great scientist
is guaranteed by movie road-signs: he is eccentric, white-bearded,  pony
tailed, curmudgeonly. Of course, this gruff exterior barely conceals a
huge, loving heart. An additional proof of his brilliance may be the fact
that his wife had left him --whether before the jungle stint or during it,
I forget.  ( Memo to students of sexism: In fiction, brainy, dedicated and
workaholic men often have wives who,  feeling neglected or bored, quit. But
we almost never get husbands leaving their genius spouses).
Dr. Campbell is so perfectly at home in the rain forest that had the movie
been made in the 1930s, it would have included the line :"He's gone
native." But this is a modern film. It avoids condescension toward the
Amazon Indians and dodges the opposite temptation of romanticizing or
mysticizing them.
That's OK. But the movie is also slow paced , has some pretty awful lines
of dialogue, and cannot escape the Hollywood corniness of the
white-couple-in-brown-land syndrome. Worse yet, there is no electricity
between Connery and Bracco. Connery, suffering from a recession in his
latest films (Family Business, The Russia House, Highlander 2) is still
good to watch but he seems more dutiful than convinced.
Bracco, who did so very well as the Mob wife in GoodFellas, is no great
shakes but still does not deserve the flailing she's getting from
reviewers. They reproach her character for her New York accent (Dr.
Campbell nicknames her "Bronx"), for abrasiveness, shrillness and griping.
Horrors ! they seem to say, that's  not what a "real" female scientist is
or ought to be! (Second Memo to students of sexism: have the critics have
ever seen a  woman scientist in the flesh or are they operating from movie
creations?)
To its mild credit, Medicine Man keeps the developing love affair verbal
and un-titillating.  Non-titillating too is the natural, careful dosage of
topless natives.  (The critics make cracks but note that the rating is
PG-13)
For the Venezuelan jungle Mexican locations were used. Some Indians were
imported from Brazil. Footage from other South American locations was
nserted. .Technically this is good, thorough and painstaking work. The
settings and their photography  are impressive .Jerry Goldsmith's score
sounds inauthentic, like a mix of Mexican and Peruvian music, but it is
pleasant.
Finally, a solid plus in this undistinguished but quite watchable movie is
that even though the protagonists are on the boring side, there is
something human and ordinary about them. They look their age and seem
neither glamorized nor heavily cosmeticized.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Frank Maloney
     MEDICINE MAN is a film directed by John McTiernan, from a script by
Tom Schulman and Sally Robinson.  The film stars Sean Connery, Lorraine
Bracco.  Cinematography is by Donald McAlpine and musical score by Jerry
Goldsmith.  Rated PG-13 for strong language, nudity.
     MEDICINE MAN suffers from two slight weaknesses: clumsy,
heavy-handed direction by John McTiernan, who has made his reputation
with thrillers like DIE HARD and THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER; and the
brainless script by Tom Schulman and Sally Robinson.  Schulman, who
wrote the script for DEAD POETS SOCIETY, reportedly got $3 million for
the story idea.  The film overall cost around $40 million dollars.  And
except for the beautiful location photography, Andrew Vajna, the
producer, and Hollywood Pictures, the Disney unit that released it, did
not get much for their money.
     There is an enormous hole in the plot.  The only people who don't
see the obvious solution half-way through the film are the two
principals, who are supposed the Great Scientists.  Instead, they are
the Great Clueless.  Also, I found the idea that anything could cause
tumors to vanish overnight entering the realm of science fiction of a
very decidedly non-hardcore type.
     Lorraine Bracco, as Dr. Rae Crane and who was an interesting
character actress in GOODFELLAS, fails to connect with Sean Connery.
Her character is alternately abrasively independent or anachronistically
spoiled, withering, a city girl-scientist who screams at snakes and who
won't share the swimming hole with the village children.  One minute
she's demanding to be accepted as Connery's new research assistant, and
the next she's demanding to be allow to return to the City.  I read that
Vajna explicitly said the idea behind the film was to recreate the
unique chemistry of the 1951 classic THE AFRICAN QUEEN -- comedy, jungle
adventure, and the attraction of opposites.  In view of the results, we
can safely conclude that Bracco is no Katherine Hepburn.
     As for Connery, in the role of Dr. Robert Campbell, this may be
his worst film since the 1979 METEOR.  It is obvious that he is having
no fun with his role, and even more obvious that he is trying to Act.  I
note that he is credited with being executive producer for this film.
Mind you, bad Connery is still pretty good, and he has his moments.  But
the set-up, grumpy, misogynistic, anti-social, out-of-touch, and
over-the-hill boy-genius with an excessive taste for native hootch and
angst, is hackneyed and uninspired at best.
     The best part of the movie is the work of the cinematographer
McAlpine, especially a voyage through the canopy of the rain forest by
rope and pulley.  Goldsmith's music is pleasant -- a hint of samba
played on steel drum.
     Overall, I'd recommend that unless you have to see Sean Connery's
every movie you would be just as well off to give MEDICINE MAN a miss.
Maybe as a cheap video rental, but it is only marginally worth the price
of a matinee ticket.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Cancer. Rainforests. Woman's Lib. Wow! What a socially-aware movie all those
elements would make, eh? Socially-aware? *Maybe* . . . but also boring.
MEDICINE MAN stars Sean Connery as Dr. Robert Campbell, a scientist who has
spent quite a few years in the Amazon rainforest trying to re-discover a cure
for cancer. That's right, he *did* discover a cure, but due to one lacking
ingredient that he just can't place, he has been unable to duplicate his
initial result. Enter Lorraine Braco as Dr. Rae Crane. Uh oh. A woman.
Campbell sure wasn't expecting this, and naturally the two do anything but hit
it off.
With a trivial amount of effort, the two make the best of things and set out
to determine what's missing from Campbell's concoction. No, it's not
Campbell's Cream of Cancer soup, but rather a remedy derived from a particular
flower native to the region; a region which, by the obvious way, is being torn
down minute by minute.
MEDICINE MAN is actually quite predictable and routine, leaving one bored and
unimpressed. At best, you'll likely find this movie tolerable. There is no
real tension, no real romance, and no real freshness to the film. The only
thing it has going for it are some nice shots of the Amazon, but nothing at
all besides that. Even Sean Connery is predominantly mundane!
It's Lorraine Braco's performance that stands out . . . in an all but positive
way! Braco is downright awful as the whiny, always complaining, "independent"
woman of the 90's. In fact, everyone in this film seems apt to arguing. Every
conversation turns into a shouting match without warning. It's very hokey and
very annoying. What is the purpose here? Oh, that's right . . . every good
"love" story starts off with a seemingly hateful couple that will inevitably
fall in love.
A social-issue cliche, MEDICINE MAN is much too much what we've already seen.
When blasé performances are the *best* thing you can expect from a movie, you
know it's a bad sign. Not completely unwatchable, it's still comparable to a
glass of warm milk. Don't waste your time.

Author
greg@cpsc.UCalgary.ca (greg)
     It has been said on the net that the Sean Connery movie HIGHLANDER
2 was better than a sucking chest wound.  Well, Bond has done it again,
and his new movie, MEDICINE MAN, is better than a double root canal.
I've had one.  I know.
     MEDICINE MAN is essentially a two-person show.  Sean Connery (a
bagful of James Bond movies, THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, HIGHLANDER) plays
Dr. Robert Campbell, a biochemist working for a drug company in the
deepest Brazilian Amazon rain forest.  He's been there for six years,
and the drug company wants to know what he's up to, so they send
Dr. Rae Crane (Lorraine Bracco -- GOODFELLAS) to find.  It turns out
that he's found a cure for cancer.  The only problem is, he can't
remember how he did it.
     The rest of the film is classic buddy-film material -- the two
protagonists can't stand each other, but are unified in their struggle
to recover the formulation process before the deforestation takes away
their laboratory.  Drunken bonding scene, humanistic bonding scene,
hair-raising scenes of peril and bonding, eventual respect and climax
resolution.  Ho hum.
     It boggles my mind how badly this film was done.  The script is so
inane, it should have been condensed into a one-hour made-for-TV-movie
with commercials instead of being a two-hour slog.  Tom Schulman, who is
capable of much better work (DEAD POET'S SOCIETY) gets the blame for
this one.  The natives are reduced to pidgin English, and then we're
given subtitles for even this.  The dialogue is forced, stilted and
clipped, and I remain unconvinced that two people ever talk to each
other like this.  Who wrote the dialogue, Sylvester Stallone?
     The acting couldn't have saved this movie even if it was good,
which it isn't.  Connery plays the same grizzled stubborn old veteran he
always plays, and Bracco gives us nothing but a lacklustre hard-line
scientist front, even when she's supposed to be experiencing
bone-crushing exhaustion or numbing self-doubt.  On the other hand,
Bracco is given a number of peek-a-boo body shots: Dr. Crane in a bra,
Dr. Crane bathing nude underwater, Dr. Crane splayed against a rock,
Dr. Crane's leg in a hammock.  These cheap attempts at sex appeal are
so artificial as to be laughable if they weren't so blatantly so
exploitive.
     The direction is appallingly bad in places.  There are cuts in the
action which leave the audience wondering whether the camera operator
suddenly took a restroom break.  There is dialogue where, when the scene
switches to the other person, the original speaker doesn't move her
mouth with the end of her line.  The scenery is nice, though that's only
due to the lush Mexican rain forest location as opposed to any inspired
camera work.
     MEDICINE MAN is shoddy and sloppy.  If it weren't for my role as a
reviewer, I would have left early.  Your eight bucks would be better
spent on Lotto 6/49 tickets.  Sean Connery should take this film, bundle
it with HIGHLANDER 2: THE QUICKENING, throw them into a volcano and hope
that everyone soon forgets they ever existed.
