Title
Review for Traveller (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TRAVELLER (1997) *** Directed and photographed by Jack Green. Written by
Jim McGlynn. Produced by Bill Paxton, Brian Swardstrom, Mickey Liddell and
David Blocker.Editing, Michael Ruscio. Production design, Michael Helmy.
Music,  Andy Paley. Cast:  Bill Paxton (Bokky), Mark Wahlberg (Pat),
Julianna Margulies (Jean), James Gammon (Double D), Luke Askew (Boss Jack),
et al.  An October Films release. 100 minutes. Rated R (violence).
One of the most exclusive private clubs in London is The Travellers. At the
opposite social pole, Travellers  are what Irish Tinkers call themselves.
They are like clans who for ages have had a single vocation and avocation:
scams, frauds, confidence games.
Like gypsies, they're always on the move --hence their name, -- live
together, marry exclusively within the clan, feel and keep apart from the
outside world. In the mid-19th Century, the Great Potato Famine brought
huge numbers of Irish to America, including Travellers who kept exercising
their scams (mostly horse trading) almost as a birthright, generally in the
rural South.
In the film, a tribe of such Irish-Americans live (temporarily?) in their
own trailer park in the woods of North Carolina. Twentyish Pat (Mark
Wahlberg) shows up for his father's funeral. As the deceased was persona
non grata  (he had committed the sin of marrying an outsider) Pat's request
to join the clan is rebuffed until Bokky (Bill Paxton), the star scam
artist, takes him on as an apprentice.
With implausible rapidity Pat becomes skilled at the tricks of the trade.
The frauds shown are the purchase of run-down trailers resold as good, and
the sealing of roofs and driveways with what is crankcase oil that runs
with the first rain. More imaginative is the fraud of a "lost and found"
family jewel. The victim is pretty waitress-in-the-sticks Jean (Julianna
Margulies), a divorced mother.
Before you can say "I'll Love You a Thousand Ways" (heard on the
soundtrack) Bokky gets second thoughts about, and first feelings for, Jean.
He makes restitution. Before you can say "Searching For Someone Like You,"
Jean and Bokky are in bed and in love. Later, when he finds out that Jean's
daughter needs expensive ear surgery, Bokky embarks on most ambitious plan
to get money.
This is perhaps a cliche situation, but it is nicely papered over by
Paxton's solid, likable presence. The deja vu is also mitigated by Ms.
Margulies being simpatica in a Sandra Bullock way and doing for her lover a
wickedly sexy striptease, strong on tease yet merely PG-rated on strip.
Colorful Double D, a grizzled, canny old-timer, becomes the duo's partner
in a mega-scam operation that takes them to Louisville. They go to work,
with and on, a sinister operator.  The mechanics of this plot are too
complex to be related without spoiling the surprises. These lead both to
success and to the only violence in the film.
Traveller is the directorial debut of Jack Green, the cinematographer for
many Clint Eastwood movies.  Recently he shot director Jan De Bont's
Twister, a vehicle for special effects. It starred Bill Paxton.
Here Mr. Green does double duty as cinematographer too. He gives the movie
the right realistic look, keeps photography and sets appropriately simple,
functional and un-gimmicky. He avoids excessive Hollywood sentimentality or
grunginess.
The script has some unclarities and holes but good touches predominate.
Among them, the casting. Irish-faced Luke Askew is  Boss Jack, the center
and anchor of operations. He gets his cut each time. Askew reminded me of
Limerick-born actor Richard Harris in his youthful years.
The Boss has a ravishingly Irish young daughter. Her quick-starting romance
with Pat is not elaborated. This is not a case of story underdevelopment
but rather a move to keep the main subject (the companions' modus operandi)
on track with minimal distractions.
The dialogue is credibly simple. One of the best bits has Jean asking
Bokky, back with his loot: "How did you do it?" His reply is a formula of
Method Acting for crooks: " You look someone right in the eyes, You lie to
yourself. You lie so good that you believe it."
That the players have no Southern accents might raise eyebrows, but I see
it as stressing that those Irish-Americans live their own, separate tribal
life in a society that comes into contact with outsiders only when
necessary.
The film has two novel aspects: our introduction to an unfamiliar
subculture within our homogenized nation; and the rather movie-neglected
subject of fraud. Traveller stakes its modest domain within the
multi-billion industry of scams with millions of victims, especially naive,
uneducated, gullible people symbolized by the little old ladies who lose
their life-savings.
Frauds are all around us, from boiler-room telephone operations to official
looking mail : "you have won this or that-- just verify by sending us $30."
" There's cheap land in Florida" (for sure, but in the swamps).
People all over the world get pleasure from films and books about con-men
and their clever ways. The majority of scam-movies allow us to enjoy them
not because we approve of dishonesty but because many scams are victimless
crimes (cf. "Paper Moon") or at the expense of other cheats: "The Sting"
stings a gangster. Hustler movies hustle hustlers. "The Grifters" shows
dishonor among thieves.
Better yet, most con-jobs are comedies: the screwball classic "The Lady
Eve," "The Flim-Flam Man," "Trading Places," "Dirty Rotten Scoundrels."
True, in Traveller we cannot feel sympathy for the cheats of little people.
But things change with the Big Plan which is both at the expense of a
dislikable character and fraught with danger for the protagonists.
The movie has an unusually good and rich (29) selection of songs, some
heard in toto, including the opener, King of the Road (sung by Randy
Travis) and the closer, "Young Love."

Author
Chuck Dowling
Traveller (1997) ** out of ***** - Cast: Bill Paxton, Mark Wahlberg,
Julianna Margulies, James Gammon, Rance Howard. Written by: Jim McGlynn.
Directed by: Jack Green. Running Time: 103 minutes.
I've read that Bill Paxton searched a long time for a project that he could
both produce and star in. He finally found what he was looking for in
"Traveller". I have no idea what was appealing to him about it.
"Traveller" is an odd story about a large family of Irish-Americans who live
in the woods of North Carolina. Their only means of financial support
involves driving around to various surrounding towns and ripping off hard
working men and women. The head of this family is a man by the name of Boss
Jack, a respected and feared man who never goes out on the cons.
Once, a "traveller" married outside the family (the horror!) and produced a
son (Wahlberg). When that man dies, Wahlberg journeys to North Carolina to
attend the funeral. He finds that he is not welcome, but insists on learning
what the family is all about. Bokky (Paxton), one of the highly regarded
members of the clan, agrees to give him a shot and takes him along on his
next scamming trip.
My main problem with the film is this: who cares about any of these people?
You can make con men compelling characters, mainly by having them involved
in cons which they are ripping off other con men. But not innocent people.
This film treats the people who are getting conned with such contempt, as
the scenes showing them actually getting ripped off are done with an odd
sense of whimsy, like its fun to break the law. Its a good ol' time, as
Randy Travis music plays on the soundtrack and we watch the silly people
lose their money and hopelessly chase after the laughing con men. Yeehaa!
Now, Paxton's character is supposed to undergo a change in the film after he
feels bad about ripping off a bartender (Margulies). In the con (which I
don't know if it's a common one or not, but if it isn't, then it's stolen
from the 1994 movie "Deadfall"), Marguiles ends up losing her job. When
Paxton comes later to apoligize, she gets all gooey and they fall in love.
That would be my reaction to someone who ripped me off and caused me to lose
my job. And so what that Paxton's character feels remorse? You'll notice he
feels remorse for the sexy woman, I don't see him going back and apoligizing
the the poor farmers he's scammed, or anyone else for that matter. And I
could see women not caring for this film, seeing it as just yet another
instance where the man has to come to the rescue of the airhead girl who
can't think for herself. This seemed blatently obvious to me, and I NEVER
think along those lines. So who does it appeal to? Most likely Bill Paxton's
family, and mythical gangs of con men who live in the woods, if they ever
get the chance to catch a movie.
Wahlberg also has his own subplot going, about being accepted into the
criminal clan, but I really can't care about that either. And I still can't
buy Wahlberg as an actor, as I keep expecting him to drop his pants and yell
"Damn! Yeah baby! Come on come on!" Ron Howard's parents both have roles
here as well, even though Ron Howard has no credited association with the
film. [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) BEWARE! THIS REVIEW CONTAINS ONE (AND A HALF) OF THOSE
WORDS THAT SOME PEOPLE DON'T WANT OTHER PEOPLE TO READ.
The Travellers are this country's gypsies. They live in the south and
travel around, conning and scamming people (and sometimes big companies)
for whatever they can get. As my brother said, this is uncharted
territory, entertaining in and of itself because it shows something we
don't see in our pop culture.
He's right, but he's too generous. There are a lot of mistakes that keep
TRAVELLER from being a very good film. They are minor, but they are
pervasive.
The movie introduces us first to the scamming life, then to "the
family." They are not the mafia, but they are a close-knit clan, and
outsiders are not welcome. Pat (Mark Wahlberg), the son of a former
Traveller returns with his father's body to be buried on family ground.
His father was kicked out of the family because he married an outsider.
Now Pat wants to join the family and stick to it like his father
couldn't.
At first, the family patriarch Boss Jack (Luke Askew) doesn't want to
allow Pat into the clan, but Bokky (Bill Paxton) takes him under his
wing. The two leave home base and travel around together, scamming
farmers, homeowners, and bartenders. At one bar, the scam goes just as
planned, but afterwards, Bokky realizes that he has fallen in love with
Jean, the bartender (Juliana Margulies).
Bokky finds out that Jean has lost her job because of him, so he goes to
her house to return the money. He's developing a guilty conscience about
what he does for a living, and he sees a better life with Jean as a real
possibility.
Wahlberg (as Pat) starts to shine as Pat becomes more annoyed at Bokky
for falling in love with an outsider. His surrogate father is making the
same mistake his real father made. Here is Pat, working very hard to win
respect with "the family," frustrated, as he watches Bokky dissolve his
own ties "over a fucking woman."
Meanwhile, Double D (James Gammon), a fellow Traveller, starts hounding
Bokky in an attempt to convince him to help with a very big swindle that
he has planned.
All three see Double D's plan as their way to get what they want: Bokky
can make one last big score (both to start his new life and to soften
Boss Jack over his leaving), Pat can win respect, and Double D can
finally put his plan into action.
A movie like this is fun in the same way that Penn & Teller are fun.
(Penn & Teller are magicians known for giving away SOME of the tricks of
their trade.) It's easy to get caught up in the trick because it goes so
smoothly. Then you see how much work went in to making it look easy, and
you develop a new respect for the man pulling the strings. There are
some of these tricks in TRAVELLER, but not enough to really work your
brain.
I also have some reservations about the subject of the movie. I wouldn't
say that TRAVELLER glamorizes the life of a con artist, but it does
present it as the norm. Bokky does develop a conscience, but there are
spots in the movie where the con is sometimes cruel. When Jean realizes
she's been had, there is a scene of her reacting in anger and disbelief.
Another time, the victims are a young man and his pregnant wife.
These scenes are in the movie so that we can understand Bokky's desire
to get out of the business, but they are hard to watch because of their
cruelty. I suppose that doesn't have to be a criticism, though.
But there are grounds for criticism in TRAVELLER, which is a sloppily
made movie.
First, Paxton and Margulies lack screen chemistry. There's lots of sex,
but no chemistry. This wouldn't be a problem in another movie, but Bokky
is willing to change his life for this woman. Presumably, if the
relationship were "just" sex, he wouldn't go to the trouble of leaving
the clan. Then again, maybe that's why the cruel scenes mentioned
earlier are so important -- maybe it's Bokky's conscience and not his
heart that is pulling him away from the family.
Second, Green and screenwriter Jim McGlynn made the movie too blunt. The
setup has different characters repeating how the family ain't like the
outside world. Then,  After an early run-in with Boss Jack, Pat gets a
crush on a pretty girl. He follows her home and realizes that she is the
daughter of -- you guessed it -- Boss Jack. (To add irrelevance to insult,
this relationship is tossed aside and forgotten.) Worst of all, the
movie has a DEUS EX MACHINA ending. It appears that McGlynn wrote
himself into a corner and ran out of clever ideas.
Finally, the editing of the movie was clumsy. Most people don't notice
the editing, even when it's bad, so if you want to see this movie, skip
this paragraph. There are abrupt shifts of location and mood that reveal
either a novice director or a mediocre editor. This movie appears to
have both. Green, who has been a renowned cinematographer for a long
time, makes his directorial debut (he also acted as cinematographer).
Michael Ruscio, with only five movies under his belt edited TRAVELLER.
An example is a montage of Bokky crying over his wife's and daughter's
graves. Then, rather suddenly, we cut to him taking care of business
with Boss Jack. Another example is when Bokky learns that his
grandmother is ill. He reacts, then we cut to his car, then we quickly
cut to his grandmother's trailer. All three shots play as part of the
same scene. There is nothing to indicate the passage of time or
distance. (And, as my brother says, this is particularly jarring since
the characters seem to move about in such a large world.)
I think many people, including my brother, can see past technical flaws
and enjoy a movie because of an interesting story or setting or
character. I admit that I tend to be picky about the quality of the
filmmaking. If you're like me, you might want to skip this one. If
you're like him, by all means you should go see it.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
David Nusair
Starring Bill Paxton, Mark Wahlberg, Julianna Margulies
There's something about watching con men at work that never fails
to fascinate me.  Likely, it's because I know that I would never
be able to pull off a con, no matter how small.  I just don't have
what it takes to look a man straight in the eyes and lie to him.
Many of the characters in "Traveller" have the ability to do that, 
and much more.
The movie stars Bill Paxton as a con man at the top of his game,
and Mark Wahlberg as his young protoge.  They are teamed up when
Paxton sticks up for Wahlberg in front of his people, who refuse to
accept him.  His "people" are gypsies, who rely on con men like 
Paxton to keep the money flowing in.  The movie starts off predictably
with Paxton showing Wahlberg the ropes, but then veers off into 
totally unexpected territory.
"Traveller" is an odd movie in that you never quite know what it's
going to do next.  For a while, you think it's a movie along the
lines of "The Sting", with the older man showing the naive kid the
ropes.  But then it becomes something different, and I think that's
what I liked most about the film.  Too many films today have 
predictable outcomes, and a five year old can usually guess at how
the movie's going to end.  "Traveller" never quite settles into a 
niche, and I was happy to be watching a film that I couldn't quite
put my finger on.
The performances are first rate, with Paxton redeeming himself for
"Twister".  At the outset of the film, we're not too sure if we like
him.  He's taking advantage of innocent people and generally acting
like a bad-ass.  But as the movie progresses, and as he falls in love
with the Julianna Margules character, we start to see a different
side to him emerge.  And to me, this is the sign of a good actor.  
Someone who can make you think one thing, but later on, force you
to re-evaluate what you originally thought.  Wahlberg is good, too,
as a natural-born grifter.
"Traveller" is the type of movie that, after you watch it, you will
likely be suspecting everyone around you of ripping you off for the
next week.  Hey, it beats thinking an asteroid is going to destroy
the earth.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 4/18/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:43
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, sex, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     TRAVELLER, the directorial debut of veteran cinematographer Jack 
Green, takes us into the world of blood-related grifters who pull two-
bit cons as a way of life.  They are the "Travellers", a close-knit band 
of Irish-American nomads who survive by preying on the gullibility and 
greed of others.  This movie tells the story of one such Traveller and 
the forces that lead him to question his position within the society.
     Bokky (Bill Paxton) is near the top of the North Carolina Traveller 
hierarchy.  He is respected by his peers, and the local leader, Boss 
Jack (Luke Askew), regards him as the son he never had.  One Fall day, a 
young man, Pat (Mark Wahlberg), arrives to bury his exiled Traveller 
father in a Traveller cemetery, and is met with cold stares and harsh 
words.  As an outsider, he is regarded with suspicion, but the Traveller 
blood in his veins runs true and Bokky agrees to take Pat under his 
wing.  Soon, the two have become a team and are pulling off some pretty 
profitable schemes.  Everything is going smoothly until Bokky falls for 
Jean (Julianna Margulies), one of his intended victims, and his 
loyalties become confused.  
     The plot of TRAVELLER, credited to Jim McGlynn, isn't all that 
complex or hard to follow.  It's episodic in nature, with each new scam 
representing another chapter.  The cons are fun to watch unfold.  
Sometimes, it's possible to see where they're going, sometimes not.  The 
script is smart and sneaky -- by never telling the audience more than is 
necessary, it develops a keen sense of suspense that persists until the 
gritty final reel. 
     The great strength of the film, however, is character development.  
The two leads, Bokky and Pat, both have clearly-defined arcs.  Pat, 
desperate to prove himself to Boss Jack, works hard to learn the tricks 
of the trade.  Meanwhile, Bokky, even while teaching Pat how to scam 
people, is starting to see his marks as human beings, and his resolve to 
rip them off is beginning to waver.  He is suddenly reluctant to swindle 
a young couple out of their life's savings.
     For the most part, the acting is top-notch.  Bill Paxton, taking a 
brief hiatus from blockbusters like TWISTER to do a serious role in a 
low-budget feature, brings charm, depth, and feeling to a part that 
could have come across as cold and amoral.  Julianna Margulies (PARADISE 
ROAD, TV's ER) smolders in this low-key performance.  Character actor 
James Gammon is delightful as a fellow scam artist who turns Pat and 
Bokky's duo into a trio.  Even Mark Wahlberg (the former Marky Mark), 
not known for his acting, is competent. 
     Here and there, TRAVELLER takes a wrong turn.  The culture of the 
band, which is arguably the most absorbing feature of the film, is 
worthy of a more thorough exploration than is offered.  We're teased 
with a possible romantic relationship between Pat and the Boss' daughter 
(Nikki DeLoach), which might have uncovered another dimension of 
Traveller society, but this subplot is abruptly dropped during the 
movie's second half.  Indeed, there are several occasions when TRAVELLER 
glosses over things that cry out for greater investigation (such as 
Bokky's lessons about how to pull a successful scam).  Still, these are 
mostly small gripes, and their impact upon the viewing experience as a 
whole is minimal.  TRAVELLER, the latest in a sub-genre that's becoming 
known as "Southern Gothic" (and includes the likes of ONE FALSE MOVE and 
SLING BLADE), is a fine film, and worth a trip to a theater.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Bill Paxton, who is one of today's better character actors, has
wanted all 22 years of his professional life to produce a movie in
which he could also star.  TRAVELLER is the realization of that dream
and a perfect vehicle to showcase his acting skills.
     Bill Paxton is a hard working actor who has had parts in almost
fifty movies.  Although he has only recently been able to receive star
billing, as he did in TWISTER, he, nevertheless, generally raises the
quality of any movie with which he is associated.  (The main exception
was has part in THE EVENING STAR.  But, everyone was terrible in it.)
His role in ONE FALSE MOVE and in ALIENS are the first ones that
brought his talents to my attention.  Since then I have seen him in
numerous pictures with his small role in THE LAST SUPPER being my most
recent favorite.
     The travellers of the title belong to a close knit but large
family whose members intermarry and who make their livelihood scamming
the public.  The movie TRAVELLERS is a character study set within the
context of this semi-mythical group.  (The press kit gives their
history as people known in Ireland as Tinkers, but who call themselves
Travellers.  It then goes on to relate them to the gypsies.  To what
extent this group really exists in the United States is unclear, but
the accuracy of the story has no bearing on the movie's appeal.)
     As the story opens, honest faced Bokky (Bill Paxton) goes up to a
house in a working class neighborhood in the South.  He tells them that
he has this top quality load of driveway sealer left over from a job up
the street.  He says he saw the holes in their driveway so he thought
he would give them the sealer if they would pay just him a couple of
hundred for his time.  After he finishes and drives away, the rains
come and begin to wash off all of the worthless recycled motor oil he
has spread on their driveway.
     After one of the travellers dies, the rest of that family of
travellers take their trailers back to their home camp in the backwoods
of North Carolina.  The wise Boss Jack (Luke Askew) runs the base camp
and arranges the marriages, usually at age sixteen.  The traveller who
died was an outcast because he had married outside the family.  His son
Pat, played by Mark Wahlberg, who was the creepy killer in FEAR, comes
back with his father's corpse but wants to stay after the funeral so he
can learn to be a traveller too.  The travellers consider Pat a
half-breed and therefore unwelcome, but Bokky takes pity on him and
decides to mentor him.
     As Bokky teaches Pat the trade, they run into Double D (James
Gammon), who is a traveller from a different family.  Double D wants
them to pull off a big con, but Bokky says his little jobs are making
him plenty of money.
     Gammon plays a grizzled guy who looks like a skid row bum.
Gammon, who has played small parts in over fifty films, gives a
carefully understated performance, as does the rest of the cast.
TRAVELLER moves slowly, but never drags.  It just takes its time.
     Eventually, Bokky loses his heart to a bartender named Jean
(Julianna Margulies from PARADISE ROAD), but I'll not give away where
that leads or what becomes of Bokky's and Pat's careers.  Actually,
none of that is important.  This is a story not about what happens but
about the characters themselves and with Paxton's marvelous
performance, a story worth paying attention to.
     Cinematographer Jack Green from THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY
takes his first hand at directing in TRAVELLER as well as doing the
cinematography -- both are easy going.  Nothing harsh, well not much
anyway.
     My favorite minor character was Danielle Wiener as Pat's would-be
girlfriend Shane.  Since Boss Jack doesn't like Pat and since Shane is
his daughter, Pat's chances with her are not promising.  Wiener has
this sweet and innocent smile and twinkling eyes that make her part
compelling without many spoken lines.
     The honky-tonk music of the film is pure fun.  Producer Paxton
describes the music as a variety of styles of the type you would hear
on your radio while driving through the South.  When he finished
filming his movie, he knew the kinds of music he wanted, but he was
completely out of money by then.  His old friend Seymour Stein, a
record producer, liked the raw film footage so much that he arranged to
have a bunch of great young acts record the songs for the movie.  The
result adds energy, poignancy, and humor to the picture.
     Come on in and sit a spell, for TRAVELLER is a slow moving but
entertaining yarn.  Without any special effects or computer
enhancements, the movie contents itself with weaving a tale full of
characters worth caring about.  A small picture certainly, but a
delightful one.
     TRAVELLER runs 1:41.  It is rated R for sexual situations,
language and a couple of violent scenes.  The film would be fine for
teenagers, but not any younger.  I recommend this simple story to you
and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(October)
Starring:  Bill Paxton, Julianna Margulies, Mark Wahlberg, James Gammon.
Screenplay:  Jim McGlynn.
Producers:  Bill Paxton, Brian Swardstrom, Mickey Liddell and David
Blocker.
Director:  Jack Green.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw
     Most films about con artists treat the Big Con as the only reason the
story exists; once it's clear who's been had and who's done the having,
it's time to strike the set and call it a wrap.  Not so for TRAVELLER, a
frisky and well-crafted drama which takes the time to develop its
characters and its atmosphere.  Bill Paxton (who also produced) stars as
Bokky, a member of an intensely insular band of small-time grifters
descended from the Travellers of Ireland.  Bokky's simple, solitary life
running short cons through the Carolinas is complicated by two coinciding
events: the arrival of Pat O'Hara (Mark Wahlberg), the son of an outcast
Traveller who wants to return to the fold, and Bokky's romantic interest
in a single mother named Jean (Julianna Margulies) who falls for one of
his scams.  
     Bokky becomes Pat's mentor in the family business, creating plenty of
entertaining opportunities for the audience to watch the development of
their cons.  Screenwriter Jim McGlynn wisely avoids turning those scenes
into the foundation of TRAVELLER, instead allowing them to act as comic
flavoring for a nicely observed character study.  Paxton, Wahlberg,
Margulies and James Gammon (as a veteran con man who tries to pull Bokky
into one of his schemes) all turn in solid performances, with Paxton and
Margulies showing a particular chemistry in their sexy scenes together.
The actors make TRAVELLER consistently interesting to watch while McGlynn
and director Jack Green (the gifted cinematographer of UNFORGIVEN and THE
BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, making his directing debut) slowly explore
their relationships.
     And there are plenty of relationships to explore.  One of TRAVELLER's
most noticeable short-comings is that it feels crowded with characters and
sub-plots:  the medical problems of Jean's daughter, Pat's flirtation with
the daughter of the Travellers' leader, the appearance of vengeance-minded 
Romany gypsies.  These tangents push the film's most unique element -- the
culture of the Travellers -- into the background; the production notes
provide more sense of who the Travellers are than the film itself.  As the
climax of the film turns into a violent hostage drama, TRAVELLER begins to
feel rather generic, as though its unique spirit has been compromised for
manufactured conflict.  Still, there is plenty to like about TRAVELLER,
from its casually confident pacing to its evocative soundtrack of blues
and country classics.  Thanks to rich characterizations and a strong cast,
this is one story of con men in which the "men" are more important than
the "con."
