Title
Review for Bonnie & Clyde: The True Story (1992) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
104 min., not rated, Drama/Action, 1992, made for television
Director: Gary Hoffman
Cast: Tracey Needham, Dana Ashbrook, Doug Savant, Betty Buckley,
      Billy Morrisette, Michael Bowen, Michelle Joyner,
      Louanne Stephens
     In the 1930's Clyde Barrow (Dana Ashbrook) meets Bonnie Parker
(Tracey Needham) in a small town.  The two join together with
W. D. Jones, Billy Morrisette.  They go around robbing stores and banks
becoming three of the most famous criminals in U. S. history.
     BONNIE AND CLYDE: THE TRUE STORY is a remake of the 1968 film
BONNIE AND CLYDE, starring Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway.  I didn't
think that it would be possible to make a television film that would be
as good as the '68 film, but FOX did.  I highly recommend that if you
missed this film that you try to see it if it comes on television again
or if it is released on video cassette.  On a scale of zero to five, I
give BONNIE AND CLYDE: THE TRUE STORY a five.  BONNIE AND CLYDE is
unrated and made for television but contains scenes not appropriate for
small children.
     I think that this is one of the best television films that I have
ever seen.  This film is based on a true story of the infamous
criminals.  I have always felt that the film has had a sad ending.  The
acting in this film is great, which raises it above standard televison
films.  The story is well written, which I have found to be rare in the
majority of television films that I have seen.
     Hopefully this film will be released on video cassette so that more
people can see it.  While television films that are useless, like
HARDHAT AND LEGS, have been released on video that haven't been worth
watching off television, it is a shame when good television films, like
BLOOD TIES (1991), are not.  I feel that this film would have done well
in the theaters, and, I feel, should have been released in the theaters
instead, then it could have gotten more exposure.
     For those of you who have seen the '68 version, some of the film
has been changed, so it is not like re-watching the original.  This
makes the film better, I feel, because then you don't know exactly what
is going to happen next.
     The biggest let down in the film is the ending.  In the '68
version, you got to see the car shot up, which I thought was rather
cool.  In this film you don't see the car get shot up, and if I remember
correctly, you don't even hear a gun shot.  I just found this to be a
small disappointment.  Otherwise this the film is great.
