Title
Review for Gungun hongchen (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
The story of two women and their romantic affairs in China during the
period 1938-1949.  A romantic drama set against the history of China
during the period: the Japanese occupation of World War II, and the
Nationalist-Communist civil war.  Extremely well made, the film is an
excellent romantic melodrama.
Hong Kong (English subtitles), color, 1990, 94 minutes.
Director/Writer: Yim Ho
     The film centers on a beautiful writer, Shen Shaohua, who falls in
love with one of her readers, Zhang Nengcai.  The time is 1938; they are
in a part of China that is occupied by Japanese forces.  Nengcai works
for the Japanese-controlled occupation government, so he is seen as a
traitor and collaborator by many Chinese.
     Soon Shaohua's best friend, Yuefeng, returns for a visit.  Yuefeng
is in a romantic relationship with a resistance fighter, hence she is
harshly critical of Nengcai, even though he affirms that "There is no
blood on my hands," i.e., he is not involved in the atrocities and
cruelties of the Japanese occupation force.  However, social disapproval
doesn't deter Shaohua, for she is in love.  The two women maintain their
friendship through the political complications and turmoil of the time.
     The film flashes forward to 1945, the eve of Japan's surrender in
World War II.  Nengcai must go into hiding to avoid retribution after
the fall of the occupation government.  The story continues with the
separation of the lovers....
     This film manages to neatly blend the story of Shaohua's romance,
Yuefeng's romance, and a dramatization of one of Shaohua's stories (the
romance of two peasants, Jade Flower and Spring Hope), with the historic
events of the period: the Japanese occupation during World War II, and
their eventual defeat; the economic collapse of the Nationalist
government in 1947; the civil war, and the eventual Communist victory in
1949.  The result is a "classy," very well made romantic melodrama.
     The photography is superb and the acting is excellent.  Elaborate
sets and location scenes (including mass crowd scenes) reflect a large
budget for the film.  The story moves slowly at first, then picks up in
the middle of the film as the plot is moved along by the historical
events of the period.
     As I was watching the film, I was concerned for a while that it was
just another soap opera.  Alas, the slow pace of the first half of the
film seemed to confirm this.  However, be patient -- the second half of
the film is extremely dramatic and will definitely hold your attention.
Indeed, the second half can be accurately described as riveting and
compelling!
     I must admit that I am not much of a fan of romantic melodrama.
However, this film succeeds both as romantic melodrama and as standard
drama.  It is certainly one of the best romantic melodramas that I have
ever seen!  Because of this, I strongly recommend the film to fans of
melodrama, and it is also worth seeing by a general audience.  Overall,
the film rates in the excellent/very good range.
Print Source: Creative Workshop; Flat F, 18/F; Tonnochy Tower A; 272
Jaffe Road; Wanchai, Hong Kong
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
