Title
Review for Broken Hearts Club: A Romantic Comedy, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE BROKEN HEARTS CLUB - A ROMANTIC COMEDY
(Sony Classics)
Starring:  Timothy Olyphant, Dean Cain, Andrew Keegan, Matt McGrath, Ben
Weber, Zach Braff, Billy Porter, John Mahoney, Mary McCormack, Nia Long.
Screenplay:  Greg Berlanti.
Producers:  Mickey Liddell and Joseph Middleton.
Director:  Greg Berlanti.
MPAA Rating:  R (adult themes, profanity, drug use)
Running Time:  94 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The helpful sub-title tagged on to THE BROKEN HEARTS CLUB is not the
only time you'll be instructed exactly what you're supposed to understand
about the film. Throughout this tale of a group of gay West Hollywood
friends, rookie writer/director Greg Berlanti includes title cards
defining key words and phrases in the characters' lingo. "Meanwhile" is
code to draw attention to an attractive guy nearby; a "newbie" is a
recently-out young man; "gym bunnies" are the muscle-bound hunks desirable
primarily (if not exclusively for sex). It's more than a movie, it's an
anthropology class. Welcome to "Intro to Gay 101."
     THE BROKEN HEARTS CLUB clearly has its broken heart in the right
place, but it's too concerned with making statements about its milieu to
let the narrative work organically as a character study. And there are
lots of characters to study in this ensemble dramedy. Dennis (Timothy
Olyphant) is a nice guy trying to make the transition from sex to
relationships. Cole (Dean Cain), Dennis's roommate, is an aspiring actor
who loves 'em and leaves 'em. Howie (Matt McGrath) has trouble admitting
when he loves someone. Patrick (Ben Weber) has trouble loving himself.
Taylor (Billy Porter) is the only one in a long-term relationship, though
perhaps not for much longer. Benji (Zach Braff) looks for a more
party-filled lifestyle. And Jack (John Mahoney) is their collective
father-figure, the older restaurateur whose softball team brings them all
together.
     Those are just the members of the core group of pals, not even
counting Patrick's lesbian sister (Mary McCormack) and her partner (Nia
Long), or the sweet "newbie" (Andrew Keegan) Dennis takes under his wing.
That's a whole heap of humanity to which Berlanti must be attentive, and
he's not quite up to the task. Most of his characters remain types
throughout, particularly the more effeminate Benji and Taylor. Olyphant
(the menacing drug dealer in GO) is surprisingly good as Dennis, the most
fully-developed of the characters, and Cain does a nice job of
under-playing the philandering Cole. The rest of the actors just don't
have enough to work with. In 94 minutes, THE BROKEN HEARTS CLUB just can't
support a half-dozen major characters.
     It's a shame, too, because Berlanti actually has an intriguing
concept at the core of his film. Unlike most gay-themed films, this one
isn't about coming out, or dealing with the straight world, or AIDS. It's
a fairly risky statement about the complications when members of a
minority group become so insular that their entire frame of reference
becomes their other-ness. Berlanti's portrays his characters alternately
coping effectively with their lives and dealing with the constant
disappointment of not yet being able to define who they are or what they
want. This is a film that's ready to acknowledge that sometimes gay
men -- even after they've said, "We're here, we're queer" -- haven't quite
gotten used to it.
     An idea, unfortunately, isn't enough to sustain a film. While the
characters struggle to emerge as individuals from Berlanti's broad thesis,
the film struggles to avoid basic miscalculations in structure (case in
point: After one character comments about rumors that a famous actor is
gay, and another character responds, "Just because he's every gay man's
fantasy doesn't mean he's gay," several seconds of idle banter commence
before the cutaway to the famous actor in a clinch with another man).
There is plenty of tart dialogue, and not all of it is of the bitchy-queen
variety. The individual moments of humor and discovery are nice, but they
don't add up to enough. THE BROKEN HEARTS CLUB is a movie determined to
teach you something, rather than a movie about people whose experiences
teach you something. A lecture with romance and comedy is still a lecture.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Filmmakers seem to think that there's nothing better than a remake with 
a twist.  Writer/director Greg Berlanti's THE BROKEN HEARTS CLUB: A 
ROMANTIC COMEDY is an amalgamation of dozens of old television sitcoms.  
The twist, other than raunchier language, is that all of the characters 
are gay.  They spout the same nonsensical lines with television sitcoms' 
machine gun cadence.  But the rapid-fire elocution of clichéd lines 
isn't any funnier because the barbs are directed at the same sex.  
Rather than treating women as sex objects, the men in this story treat 
other men as sex objects.
Most of the characters appear to shop at the same clothing store and to 
get their hair done by the same stylist.  Uniformly handsome, they can 
sometimes be hard to tell apart just like contestants at a beauty 
contest, which is what the movie frequently approximates.  "I hate the 
city -- everybody is better looking than me," one is heard to say.  The 
film is set in Hollywood, well, West Hollywood, so one might expect the 
beauty quotient to be high.  "Gay men in LA are a bunch of 10s looking 
for 11s," Patrick (Ben Weber) complains.
In the film's defense, it is good-spirited and breezy.  A glossy 
picture, it wants badly to charm you with its debonair demeanor.  
Jack, played by veteran actor John Mahoney, the only guy much older than 
25, is the organizer of the "Broken Hearts" softball team that plays in 
the West Hollywood league.  Most of the guys, however, are more 
interested in hitting on other guys.  Jack kids Dennis (Timothy 
Olyphant) about having a "meaningless sexual experience every 10 
minutes."  Dennis corrects him.  It's only 15.
Among the many unbelievable scenes are the ones in which they stop 
strangers on the street to ask if one of them looks like a "fag."  
Inevitably, those surveyed vote in the affirmative.
The script's best line comes when Taylor's (Billy Porter) lover leaves 
him for a trainer named Dash.  "I was left for a punctuation mark!" 
Taylor whines.
The movie is just like Ted (Chris Wiehl), one of Dennis's many lovers.  
Ted is such a forgettable guy that Dennis and his friends can't even 
remember his name, so they just refer to him by his clothes -- J. Crew.  
The film is one big J. Crew.
THE BROKEN HEARTS CLUB: A ROMANTIC COMEDY runs long even at just 1:34.  
It is rated R for language, drug use and some sexual content and would 
be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   They say that adolescence is the most trying time in a
person's life--hormones raging, bodies changing, depressions
and elations intertwined. They say that the forties are a trying
time--midlife crisis, "is that all there is," no more career
advancement to look forward to.  Truth to tell, every time is
trying and the twenties are about as difficult a decade for
Americans as any other as proved by Greg Berlanti's "The
Broken Hearts Club"--which happens to deal strictly with
twenty-somethings in the West Hollywood gay community but
which Berlanti insists is a universal, cross-over story.  It's
isn't really.  The young men, mostly handsome, some
average, seem more self-absorbed than they should be, and
since "The Broken Hearts Club" purports to be a movie and
not a play or a cable TV program, Berlanti should have
opened it up more at least to dissipate this tedious immersion
in these me-generation bores.  The story could have taken
place in a studio easily enough for all the background he
gives us to the political or social aspects of the time and
while the film is tightly edited with a strong thematic focus,
the men yada yada yada so much that they could just as
soon be in one of the French talkathons that bore the blazes
out of most of us.
   The story's center is Dennis Timothy Olyphant) who, being
on the verge of celebrating his 28th birthday, is at the time of
life that he wonders whether he should stop switching
partners in favor of having a real relationship with someone
permanent.  His role model for this view is the group's father
figure, Jack (John Mahoney), who is a part-owner of a
successful restaurant together with some of the young ones
and who serves as the guys' coach each time they play their
middle-league baseball games.
   Most of the discussion ranges around the self-
consciousness and envies of the individuals, with average
looking Patrick (Ben Weber) wishing (like the others,
perhaps) that they were Cole (Dean Cain), who is the best
looking fellow in the group and has just landed a small role in
a movie.  Kevin (Andrew Keegan) is the youngest, just 23,
and he has just come out of the closet, or rather, he is
cautiously wandering out and stepping back in like a dog who
is bravely approaches and then judiciously backs away from
a stranger.  
  In a side plot that is the least convincing and seems to
come from another movie, Leslie (Nia Long) has a long-time
relationship with Anne (Mary McCormack) and tries to
convince Anne's brother Patrick to donate sperm so that she
can have a baby that looks something like the object of her
affection.  Berlanti tries to eke some humor out of the fact
that the donor center has no "Hustler" magazine on hand to
assist the men.
   "The Broken Hearts Club" says nothing fresh and has no
particular lines of great wit or particularly interesting
characters--given their incessant "look at me" or "I wish I
were" vocabularies.
Rated R.  Running time: 94 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Writer/director Greg Berlanti brings his experience as a gay man living
in West Hollywood to the screen in "The Broken Hearts Club."  That club
is where the ensemble cast gather to discuss their love lives or work
as waiters for the owner, mother hen Jack (John Mahoney, TV's "Frasier").
The film begins with the 28th birthday party of Dennis (Timothy Olyphant,
"Go"), a photographer who's trying to swear off casual sex and find a
meaningful relationship.  His roommate Cole (Dean Cain, TV's "Superman")
is Dennis' opposite, a shallow pretty boy aspiring actor who flits from one man
to the next carelessly breaking hearts.  He swoops in on Kevin (Andrew
Keegan, "10 Things I Hate About You"), a 'newbie' who's not yet out of
the closet.  This upsets Benji (Zach Braff, "Getting To Know You"), a
spiky haired blond who works with Kevin and had had his eye on him.
Marshall (Justin Theroux) is getting tired of being taken for granted by
Howie (Matt McGrath, "Boys Don't Cry"), who's too impressed with outward
beauty ('I want to be Cole!' he proclaims).  Taylor (Billy Porter), always
bragging about his long term relationship, is quickly upended when he
gets dumped long distance from Hawaii.  Patrick (Ben Weber, resembling
Tom Hanks) believes no one wants him because he's too ugly.  He's
also got a sister (Mary McCormack, "The Big Tease") who wants his sperm to 
impregnant her hostile girlfriend Leslie (Nia Long, "Boiler Room").
When they're not kibbitzing about their love lives, they're scoping out
potential partners, which they alert the others to check out using the
code word 'meanwhile.'  They all unsuccessfully avoid playing on Jack's
Broken Hearts softball team, where they're so spectacularly bad they
can barely tie a seniors group.  The central conflict is that of Dennis
in contrast to Cole.  When Cole dumps Kevin, Dennis steps in to comfort him,
denying his attraction to the younger man.  Cole, meanwhile, gets a 
shot at a Hollywood film and its long-rumorred-to-be-gay-but-married star
and a proverbial dose of his own medicine.
Berlani, who both rejects (no mention of Aids) and embraces (Taylor
demands Judy Garland to ease his upset) gay stereotypes has created
a pleasant ensemble comedy that plays like a gay 'Friends' crossed
with "Four Weddings and a Funeral."  Some of his writing is clever,
such as having Cole use a breakup to practice an audition script he's
written on his hand or when the group compare themselves to Somalian
monkeys who wait until mating season, then attack each other.
Berlani also captures naturally enjoyable performances from his cast, 
particularly Olyphant, Keegan, Cain and Mahoney.  Technically the film 
looks good, wisely keeping locations economical.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
