Title
Review for Wrecking Crew, The (1969)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Afterburner
Rating (out of 10):  N/A.  See review for further details.
        For those who haven't seen any of them, the Matt Helm movies answer
the question "What if Hugh Hefner (founder and publisher of Playboy
Magazine) had been a secret agent on the side?"  Dean Martin plays Matt
Helm, an affable, boozing photographer of scantily-clad women who works for
"Slaymate" magazine.  But that's just a cover!  The truth is that Helm is
*really* an affable, boozing, super-competent secret agent who works for
the Intelligence Counter Espionage (ICE) organization.
        Before we go further, I should point out that the Matt Helm movies
are all pretty bad.  But they're wonderfully bad, and they're great,
cheezy, campy fun.  I tend to speak glowingly of the Matt Helm movies
because I enjoy them for their over-the-top campiness, but more
serious-minded viewers will probably be turned off.
        In many ways, however, THE WRECKING CREW (1969) is the best of the
four Matt Helm movies.  While it still has a great deal of camp, the series
appeared to be maturing with this movie, and it's a shame that this one
ended up being the last of the series (despite a promise in the closing
credits for "The Ravagers," which was never made).  
        The movie begins with Count Massimo pilfering a few billion dollars
of gold bullion from a train.  The gold bullion belongs to the USA.  It was
on a train heading through Denmark on its way to London.  No, I don't know
why either.  It's a Matt Helm movie.  You just gotta accept it.
        Helm is assigned to find the gold and get it back before the press
finds out and before the world bankers repossess the USA.  And so he
travels to Denmark, meeting up with Lola Medina (a post-"Gilligan's Island"
Tina Louise), and with the accident prone Freya Carlson (Sharon Tate),
ostensibly a functionary for the Denmark Department of Tourism (but REALLY
a secret agent in her own right -- as if anybody didn't see *that* coming).
        There are several things which make this the best of the four Matt
Helm movies.  The villan, Count Massimo Contini (Nigel Green) is easily the
best of the series.  The fight scenes (choreographed by Bruce Lee) are
light-years ahead of the fight scenes in the other three.  And in several
scenes, Martin actually seems to *act*.  Incredible, but true.
        Of course, this is still a Matt Helm movie after all is said and
done with, and so we're also treated to the following:
        * The villanous plan being divided up into approximately 12
"phases," apparently for no other reason than to give Nigel Green an
opportunity to say things like "We're entering Phase 3 of the plan right on
schedule" or "We're precisely 10 seconds behind schedule."  This is because
Nigel Green pronounces "schedule" with a soft "sch," so it sounds like
"shed-ule."  My guess is the writers and the director thought this sounded
really cool and wanted to hear him say it 7 or 8 times during the movie.
        * A mini-helicopter which fits unassembled into the trunk of a car,
and can be assembled in a matter of two minutes.
        * A camera which shoots out a green fog.  This fog instantly blinds
people for 10 minutes unless they're wearing special goggles.  Even if
they're across the room and/or upwind.
        * Copenhagen police officers who sound suspiciously like they were
raised in the USA, and who know that a homicide has been committed even
though they haven't visited the crime scene and the only witness to the
incident is Helm.
        Yes, despite its good qualities, it's still a Matt Helm movie.  But
it's pretty good for all that, and it's a shame that "The Ravagers" never
saw the light of day.  Would have been interesting to see where they went
with the movie.  Hmmm...  Maybe we can convince Tarantino to do a Matt Helm
movie...
