Title
Review for Grosse Pointe Blank (1997)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Christopher Null
     John Cusack returns to film after a string of disappointments (CITY
HALL, MONEY FOR NOTHING) with... yet another disappointment!  GROSSE
POINTE BLANK is full of possibilities (a great hook, a sharp cast, and a
wry cynicism that is shamefully lacking from film these days) but comes
up short on all sides.  As Martin Blank, Cusack had the chance to
portray a hitman coming to terms with his own mortality on the eve of
his high school reunion.  And while he performs with characteristic
charm and sly sarcasm, as do his compatriots (including Joan Cusack,
Jeremy Piven, and the object of his affection Minnie Driver), it's the
blown opportunities for hit-it-home funniness that really make the whole
experience somewhat lackluster.  Apart from that, GROSSE POINTE BLANK is
really a poorly made movie on a technical level.  Editing,
cinematography, and continuity are all just plain bad, and together they
give the impression of an amateurish rush job, despite the fact that the
film is already dated (taking place in 1996).  Let's hope Romy and
Michele have more to offer next week....
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
James Brundage
Written by Tom Jankiewicz, D.V. DeVincentis, Steven Pink, and John Cusack
Starring John Cusack (The Thin Red Line), Minnie Driver (Good Will Hunting),
Dan Aykroyd (Antz), Jeremy Piven (Very Bad Things), Alan Arkin (Mother Night),
Hank Azaria (Mystery Men), Joan Cusack (Runaway Bride), and K. Todd Freeman
(The End of Violence)
I admit it: I have a dark sense of humor.  It may be treason in this day and
age but I have one and I really don't care what anyone else thinks about it. 
I'm one of those people who loved the ultra-weird cult film The Rocky Horror
Picture Show.  I loved Very Bad Things, and I loved Serial Mom.  As much as I
could debate the psychological healthiness inherent in having a sick sense of
humor, I won't.  It's not worth my time.  The only reason I say this is that,
if you don't have a sick sense of humor, you shouldn't even bother reading the
rest of this review.
Grosse Pointe Blank, one of the few studio dark comedies left, bombed in the
box office back in 1997.  However, I saw it then and liked it so much that I
bought the tape.  It is in my collection and will remain there for a long
time.  The film concerns Martin Blank (Cusack) a professional killer by trade.
 Blank is under pressure from another professional killer, Grocer (Aykroyd) to
join a union that they are creating.  Tending more towards his idealization of
the lone gunman scenario, Blank says no and that is where the trouble starts.
To add on to that, Blank has just been invited to his 10-year high school
reunion in Grosse Pointe, Michigan.  Injecting a little reality into the
review, I laud the reunion committee of Grosse Pointe High in being able to
track down a former spook, but that is beside the point.  Blank has been
obsessing over ex-girlfriend Debbie (Driver), who he stood up on prom night
when he freaked out and joined the Army.
When Blank is told that he must kill someone in Detroit, the gods seem to be
pushing him towards going to the reunion.  He consults his shrink on the
matter (Arkin) and, with heavy trepidation, returns to his hometown.
Now if I hear anyone spouting off because the film is unrealistic I will be
very displeased.  This is Hollywood we're talking about, and the point is not
realism.  The point is to provide the illusion of realism.  To draw you into a
story and have you ignore any holes that might exist.  And, as much as I will
not argue my dark sense of humor, I will not argue whether this film is
plausible or even possible.  I don't care.
What is great about Grosse Point Blank is that it ends up being one of the
smartest movies I have seen inn ages.  Passed over for a nomination for Best
Original Screenplay, GPB still manages smart dialogue, excellent characters, a
quick plot, and a seamless mixing of action, comedy, and romance.  Cusack, in
his first outing as a writer, handles the script with the brilliance of a pro.
 Armitage, long a semi-cultish director, finally finds his studio masterpiece
in this film.
I have seen this film probably a half dozen times, and never had the words to
review it before now.  What I can say about this is that it is the most
memorably studio dark comedy of recent years.  That it is seamlessly put
together, flawlessly executed, and not for the faint of heart, stomach, or
mind.
MovieKritic2000: Reviews for the Generation of a New Millenium
http://www.geocities.com/moviekritic2000/
Help support MK2K, become a member of http://www.epinions.com/.  It's free and
you can post opinions on books, movies, music, travel, software, and just
about anything else under the sun.
To subscribe, email MK2K-subscribe@listbot.com
To email the critic, email MK2K@usa.net


Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: John Cusack, Minnie Driver, Dan Aykroyd, Joan Cusack, Alan Arkin, 
      Jeremy Piven, Hank Azaria, Mitchell Ryan
Director: George Armitage
Producers: Roger Birnbaum, Susan Arnold, Donna Roth
Screenplay: Tom Jankewicz, D.V. DeVincentis, Steve Pink, and John Cusack 
      based on a story by Tom Jankewicz
Cinematography: Jamie Anderson
Music: Joe Strummer
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     GROSSE POINTE BLANK should come with a warning against 
advertisement-induced expectations which might diminish a viewer's 
appreciation of the film.  The previews and TV commercials make the 
movie look like a frothy romantic comedy.  In reality, GROSSE POINTE 
BLANK is a bleak, black satire that occasionally strays all the way into 
PULP FICTION territory.  That's certainly not a bad thing, but it isn't 
what the marketing people at Hollywood Pictures are selling the movie 
as.
     One of the strangest rituals of American life is the High School 
Reunion.  Even if you recall your teen years with a blissful sense of 
nostalgia, does it make sense to come back ten, twenty, or thirty years 
later to spend one evening with a bunch of people that you haven't 
thought about in decades?  Chances are, you've stayed in contact with 
anyone worth keeping in touch with, and the only reason for going to a 
reunion is to flash your newfound fame and wealth in front of everyone, 
all of whom are trying to do exactly the same thing.  It's a bizarre 
situation of twisted one-upmanship, and GROSSE POINTE BLANK's Martin 
Blank (John Cusack) finds himself enmeshed in such circumstances when he 
reunites with his graduating class of 1986.
     Martin's profession is a bit more exotic than that of any of his 
former schoolmates.  After joining the army and spending five years as a 
covert operative for the CIA (during this stint, he killed the President 
of Paraguay with a fork), he went into business for himself as a hit 
man.  Over the years, Martin has developed quite a reputation.  His 
latest job requires him to return to Grosse Pointe, Michigan during the 
weekend of his ten-year high school reunion.  So, on the advice of his 
reluctant therapist (Alan Arkin), he agrees to try to patch things up 
with his one true love, Debi (Minnie Driver), and attend the event.  
Things don't exactly go as planned, however.  A rival hit man (Dan 
Aykroyd) shows up, and soon bullets are flying all over Grosse Pointe.
     The script for GROSSE POINTE BLANK is laced with acid wit.  Its 
cynical observations about big business, as embodied by the formation of 
a "hit mens' union", are deliciously on-target.  The quirky dialogue is 
often clever, and the film as a whole contains its share of darkly funny 
moments.  There are also a number of subtle sight gags, such as a 
cardboard cut-out of the PULP FICTION cast that gets shot up during a 
gun fight.  GROSSE POINTE BLANK, directed by George Armitage (MIAMI 
BLUES), has an audacious edge, but, at times, the film's daring actually 
works against its success.  Take the case of one particularly gruesome 
murder.  While we expect this sort of graphic image in a violent action 
movie, it seems out of place here.
     There are other problems as well.  The pacing is choppy and 
erratic, possibly as the result of a poor editing job (the four credited 
screenwriters could also have something to do with it).  Sizable chunks 
of GROSSE POINTE BLANK may have ended up on the cutting room floor.  
There are subplots without beginnings or ends and characters that 
suddenly appear or disappear.  There are also occasions when the movie 
goes for inappropriately broad humor.  Take, for example, the minor 
characters who show up at the reunion.  They are the kind of silly, 
overblown types you might expect to find on a TV sit-com, but not in a 
reasonably sophisticated noir comedy.  
     John Cusack, one of America's most likable actors, plays a 
sympathetic anti-hero.  Cusack seems comfortable in the role of a loner 
who's not really as bad as everyone thinks he is.  Martin rationalizes 
his job by saying that everyone he kills deserves it.  He's starting to 
have doubts, though, partially as a result of a contract that someone 
put out on his life.  Apparently, the consequences of not joining the 
hit mens' union are rather drastic, but Martin just doesn't want to be 
bothered with having to go to the meetings.
     As much as I appreciated Minnie Driver's work in CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, 
SLEEPERS, and BIG NIGHT, she has been miscast here.  The statuesque 
actress is never especially convincing as Debi, and many of her scenes 
with Cusack seem strained (especially their first meeting at the radio 
station).  The lack of tangible chemistry between them nullifies any 
romantic tension.  Meanwhile, Dan Aykroyd, Alan Arkin, and Joan Cusack 
(as Martin's secretary) all have pleasantly comic supporting turns.  In 
fact, Aykroyd's performance here is one of his best in a long time.
     Even though Armitage's feature doesn't satisfy on all levels, it's 
offbeat enough to warrant at least a lukewarm recommendation.  
Ultimately, the film offers sufficient small pleasures to make it worth 
enduring the less effective elements.  As a result, while GROSSE POINTE 
BLANK fails to deliver a fullisade, at least the chamber's not empty, 
either.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Monika Huebner
Director: George Armitage
Cast: John Cusack, Minnie Driver, Dan Ackroyd and others
The nice but somewhat strange Martin Blank (John Cusack) has  an
uncommon profession. His nice clean office with secretary soon turns
out to be a flourishing killer agency. But although the hitman
business is going well Martin has problems. They are of a more
personal nature and he regularly stretches out on a therapist's couch
to solve them. The therapy comes to an abrupt end when he finds out
that all his therapist's book that he admired so much where written by
a ghost writer. Nevertheless he lets this psychoterrorist who has
severe problems himself talk him into attending his high school
reunion at Grosse Pointe, Michigan. By doing this he combines business
and pleasure for his next contract is taking him there anyway.
Moreover a visit to his hometown gives him the opportunity to meet his
high school sweetheart Debi (Minnie Driver) whom he left without
saying good-bye ten years ago. Unfortunately things don't go according
to plan because there's a hitman going after Martin as well. The
sleepy little town is in for one hell of a ride.
John Cusack who wasn't able to show his talent in this year's
blockbuster 'Con Air' can do so now. He is very convincing as the
troubled killer who justifies his deeds by pointing out that he never
kills innocent people. His methods are just as extravagant as his
personality. It doesn't always have to be a gun, does it? The
president of Paraguay e. g. was killed with a fork. You have to be
creative in a job that doesn't require a college degree, much less a
Ph. D. 
Tom Jankewicz seasoned the script with a healthy dose of black humor
to prevent it from being just another big gunfight and thus defuses
the more brutal scenes. He doesn't quite reach the skillfullness of
the Coen brothers but the dialogues and the funny situations stop the
viewers from thinking about the fact that many people are killed in
this movie. E. g. in the scene when Martin has to kill one of the
hitmen that try to kill him in a corridor of his old high school
during the reunion dance. With the help of a friend he wraps the body
in a piece of decoration and burns it in the school's furnace. The
attentive viewer asks him- or herself where the big bloodstain in the
corridor has gone and why there are no other bloody marks. The Coens
wouldn't have let this happen.
On the down side are - once again - the female parts. They remain
one-dimensional as usual. Here they are secretaries (Joan Cusack) or
ex-sweethearts (Minnie Driver). Especially Debi's part could have been
better. Debi who is a DJ with her own call-in radio show doesn't
hesitate to embarass her former lover in public asking her audience
whether she should give him a second chance after ten years. Martin
watches this in horror and can't believe the punishments the callers
suggest. Unfortunately that's Minnie Driver's only good scene.
A big plus is Dan Ackroyd as professional killer Grocer whose job it
is to kill Martin. Their exchanges are a joy to watch for every lover
of bizarre humor.
GROSSE POINTe BLANK  has too many loose ends and boring parts to be a
masterpiece, but it makes a nice change to watch it in between
blockbusters. Sense of (very) black humor required.
Homepage: Book and movie reviews
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin/indexalt.html

Author
Chuck Dowling
Grosse Pointe Blank (1997) ***1/2 out of ***** - Cast: John Cusack, Minnie
Driver, Alan Arkin, Dan Aykroyd, Hank Azaria, Jeremy Piven, Joan Cusack.
Written by: Tom Jankiewicz, D. V. DeVincentis, Steve Pink, and John Cusack.
Directed by: George Armitage. Running Time: 106 minutes.
Director George Armitage's previous film, 1989's "Miami Blues", had a huge
amount of potential which it only slightly capitalized on. "Grosse Pointe
Blank" is exactly the same way.
Cusack plays hit-man Martin Q. Blank (honestly, why are hit-men in movies
born with hit-man names? Why not Herbert Schmedling? Anyway, I digress...)
He returns to his hometown to do a job, and it just so happens that his
10-year high school reunion is also the same weekend. He uses that as his
cover, but also uses it as an opportunity to reunite with his former
girlfriend (Driver), whom he dumped on prom night and then promptly vanished
from town.
"Grosse Pointe Blank" is a funny movie, with many humorous lines, scenes,
and ideas. However, the main flaw of this film is the romantic subplot,
which unfortunately overcomes the real plot and by the end of the film has
become the main story. Minnie Driver seems to be a competent actress, but
not once did I ever believe that these two characters EVER knew each other
in the past, let alone that they were ever romantically involved with each
other. There is ZERO chemistry between the two, and each scene Cusack and
Driver spend with each other brings the film to a grinding halt.
Alan Arkin, without a doubt one of my favorite actors, is on hand to play
Martin's psychiatrist, who doesn't really want the job upon learning what
Martin does for a living. His first scene is great, the second is brief, yet
humorous. And his remaining appearances are too quick to be anything. The
real surprise here is the return of Dan Aykroyd, who hasn't been funny in a
movie since 1989's "Ghostbusters II", and there are even people who would
argue with that, saying he hasn't been funny since a long time before. The
supporting cast is equally fine, with Piven and Azaria as standouts.
"Grosse Pointe Blank" has all the makings of a great film. A great story,
great cast, and great potential. But as I've stated it just falls short of
"great" status. Cusack however, proves that he can carry a movie with ease.
If this is even a minor success at the box office, combined with the money
this summer's actioner "Con-Air" (which co-stars Cusack) is expected to
bring in, he could very well find himself to be on the way to major stardom.
Time will tell. [R]
--Chuck Dowling  
--Chuck's Movie Reviews -- http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "What am I going to say?"  wonders 28-year-old hit man Martin
Blank (John Cusack.)  "I killed the President of Paraguay with a fork."
Going back to your tenth high school reunion is hard, particularly for
those with difficult-to-explain professions.
     Poor Martin tries the truth on the people, but they will not take
him seriously.  "I'm a professional killer," he tells David, his
ex-classmate and now real estate salesmen.  "Do you have to do
post-graduate work for that?" asks David.  When Mr. Newberry, his
ex-girlfriend's dad, asks "What have you been doing with yourself?" he
retorts, "Uh, professional killer."  Beaming, the dad compliments him,
"Good for you -- growth industry."
     After a while Martin gives up and starts inventing occupations.
When a soused ex-classmate named Amy (his sister Ann Cusack) asks him
the canonical, "What do you do?", he flippantly tells her, "I work at
Kentucky Fried Chicken.  I sell biscuits all over the Southlands."
     As you can see, the strength of the new film GROSSE POINTE BLANK
lies in its intelligent and funny script by John Cusack and Tom
Jankiewicz, which they based on a story by Jankiewicz.  Equally good is
the casting, the acting, and the directing.  Director George Armitage,
who last did the excellent, but underappreciated, MIAMI BLUES, brings a
perfect sense of comedic timing and an ability to orchestrate action
sequences perfectly to blend in with the humor.  The ending montage,
for example, is pure spaghetti Western, but Armitage's approach is
fresh and funny.  Although the film has a surfeit of cartoonish
violence, it remains good spirited and charming throughout.
     John Cusack sets the comedic pace for the film by approaching his
position of hired gun with total sincerity.  Complementing him is his
secretary Marcella, played by his sister Joan Cusack.  Marcella, who
stays on the phone in most of her scenes, alternates between ordering
major weapons caches and giving culinary advice.  She is the one who
encourages Martin to go to his reunion although she warns him that
everyone looked "swelled" at hers.
     A great subplot has a rival killer named Grocer (Dan Aykroyd)
trying to get Martin to join an assassins' union, which Martin rejects
because he hates meetings.  (Don't we all.)  The casting of Aykroyd as
a paid killer is so unlikely that it ends up being a perfect choice.
     In a scene that starts off like the bar scene in STAR WARS, the
rival murderers go with hidden guns into a coffee shop.  "Whoa Chatty
Cathy!" Grocer tells Martin as Martin starts to talk.  "Clip your
string."
     The scene quickly changes to a homage to the classic scene from
FIVE EASY PIECES.  "What do you want in your omelet?"  the incessantly
perky waitress demands.  "Nothing," replies a tense Martin.  "Well,
that's not technically an omelet," corrects the waitress.
     The film bursts at the seams with great minor characters,
including the security guard with not much upstairs who scares the
people he is hired to protect and the drunk car dealer who sounds like
mister tough guy but is actually a poetry-reciting Pillsbury Dough Boy
look-alike.  The oddest choice is Alan Arkin as a doctor named Oatman
who is Martin's reluctant therapist.  ("Don't kill anybody for a few
days," advises the doctor.  "See what it feels like."  Martin assures
him, "I'll give it a shot."  But the doctor corrects him, "No, don't
shoot anybody.")
     I have left out one of my favorite actresses, Minnie Driver, who
plays  Debi Newberry, the high school flame whom Martin stood up ten
years ago for the prom.  They rekindle their romance in the film, and
it almost works, but gets lost in the direction.  Armitage can not
decide if he wants to go for the romantic angle or the comedic with the
result that neither is fully satisfying.  He should have approached it
with complete earnestness as he did the whole assassin part.
     There is only one part of the story where our hero Martin is
frightened, the reunion.  The people at it are so weird that he becomes
the sanest person there.  As someone who has been to all of my high
school reunions, I can vouch for the fact that some strange people do
show up.  One of my favorite films, SOMETHING WILD, also deals with the
high school reunion venue.   (At the Grosse Pointe reunion, one could
quibble with hairdos from 60s and 70s being on women who went to high
school in the mid-80s, but in the context of a reunion spoof it was
funny.)
     A film with several big laughs, but my best time was with all of
the inventive, smaller snippets of dialog.  An unapologetically funny
film that was happy to have no message other than laughter and no
intention other than making a well deserved profit -- just like Martin.
("You're a psychopath," said Debi.  "No, psychopaths do it for no
reason," said Martin.  "I do it for money.")
     GROSSE POINTE BLANK runs 1:46.  It is rated R for cartoonish
violence, one gory scene, a drug usage scene, and some profanity.
Teenagers and adults alike will love the show, and the film should be
fine for any kid over twelve.  I recommend this fast paced and good
spirited comedy to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Walter Frith
The comparisons to 1994's 'Pulp Fiction are becoming absurd.  That film was
in a class by itself and will be recognizable in nostalgic flashbacks years
from now.  'Two Days in the Valley' (1996) and a few other 'Pulp Fiction'
wannabes are a waste of time and conversation.  
'Grosse Pointe Blank' is being compared to 'Pulp Fiction' and that is the
most ludicrous insult of them all.  Martin Blank (John Cusack) is a freelance
hitman and former government assassin who returns to his Michigan hometown
for his ten year high school reunion.  Along the way he finds some time to
spend with his psychiatrist (Alan Arkin) and rubs elbows with a fellow hitman
(Dan Aykroyd) whose trying to recruit Cusack into joining him in business as
a partner.  Upon returning to the place where he grew up, he visits his
mother living in a mental institution, visits his father's grave and stops by
to view the place his old house used to be and he is stunned to see it is now
the site of a convenience store. 
Throughout the course of the picture he is tailed by two government watchdogs
and another assassin working in tow with Aykroyd to eventually kill him and
he finally meets his high school sweetheart, the girl he stood up on prom
night (Minnie Driver).  She is stunned to see him again and plays hard to get
in a lovable fashion which brings back the good old days for the two of them.
'Grosse Pointe Blank' starts off in a most quirky and unusual fashion with a
likable tone and feel to it but as soon as Cusack and Driver meet, this
motion picture takes a sharp turn in the direction of being unbearably
abysmal; full of dialogue that has no coherent structure and has situations
and characters straight from the mannequins reject pile.  
It's such a disappointment to see John Cusack in a role that undercuts his
value as an actor and Cusack is an extremely respectable star who has made a
name for himself by wanting a low but noticeable profile in Hollywood since
most of his films are critical rather than financial successes.  'Grosse
Pointe Blank' leaves a bad taste in your mouth after you view it and revels
in its own imagined glory as it builds itself up to be more than it really is
and in the final payoff it falls flat on its face being full of meandering
dark humour and heartless characters, some of whom redeem themselves too late
and others who are unnecessary in the film's attempt to entertain.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
GROSSE POINTE BLANK (1997) *** 1/2 . Directed by George Armitage.Written by
Tom Jankiewicz,D.V. DeVincentis, Steve Pink and John Cusack, from on a
story by Jankiewicz.Photography, Jamie Anderson. Editing, Brian Berdan.
Production design, Stephen Altman. Music, Joe Strummer. Cast: John Cusack
(Martin Q. Blank), Minnie Driver (Debi Newberry), Alan Arkin (Dr. Oatman),
Dan Aykroyd (Grocer), Joan Cusack (Marcella), Jeremy Piven (Paul), Hank
Azaria (Lardner), et al.  A Hollywood Pictures release. 106 minutes. Rated
R (cartoonish violence)
John Cusack was about one-year old when the now-cultish gangster and
revenge thriller "Point Blank" was released. It starred that fine vulgarian
Lee Marvin.
The title "Grosse Pointe Blank" is a clever passepartout game of movie
references. Grosse Pointe is a luxurious suburb of Detroit; the protagonist
is a professional killer; he is played by polite, quiet  and "civilized"
John Cusack (a kid of anti-Lee Marvin); his nom-de-film is Martin Q. Blank,
"blank" as in bullet and as in "faceless and unseen hitman." The full name
echoes John Q. Public.
I was predisposed to enjoy that film, as a fan of the Evanston, Illinois
siblings John and Joan Cusack, great performers with opposite styles, his
calm and thoughtful, hers  ebullient and funny.
In my University of Michigan days, Grosse Pointe impressed me with its
wealthy lifestyle, mansions of automobile executives, yards full of
luxurious cars. It remained in my memory as a mythical place, like a
creation by F.Scott Fitzgerald. What an uncanny suprise it was when, in the
course of the movie, a cafe waitress recites a menu which contains a "West
Egg" omelet, a name straight from "The Great Gatsby"!
Big and small pleasures abound in the picture. Its weird action and
dialogue take off immediately with an outrageous sequence of cartoon-like
shootingss that itself is a takeoff  of movies about killers.The parody is
so smartly handled that it does not play for broad laughs nor in any way
feel like deja vu.
This is a  genuinely maverick film. Among its many early inventions is the
meeting of rival killers Martin and Grocer (Aykroyd), arranged via their
cellular phones. Their cars stop next to each other, but the cellular
conversation continues at a distance of five feet.  As the two men embrace
they keep one hand on their guns. Grocer's has the off-the-wall plan to
form a hitmen's union. When Martin refuses, Grocer decides to eliminate him.
Next comes the parody of advanced technology and movies where all the
electronics and gizmos work like magic. But a new hit fizzles and now
Martin also has after him the hitman of a dissatisfied client.
Parodying private-eye movies, delicious Joan Cusack plays Martin's goofy,
kinetic yet super-capable secretary and Girl Friday. When she dresses in a
jacket full of metal buttons, Martin addresses her as Sergeant Pepper. She
practically forces reluctant Martin to attend a tenth high-school class
reunion in Grosse Pointe.
The tempo is fast yet all the characters get a full treatment that, with
just canny, economical sketches,gives them essence, existence and novelty.
Martin visits his shrink Dr. Oatman (Alan Arkin). This sequence, and
subsequent phone calls, are models of efficacious playing and probably
Arkin's finest moment since his Captain Yossarian in that absurdist classic
"Catch-22."
The psychiatrist  has been told by his patient about his real profession.
Arkin is nervous, worried and subdued. Martin tells him he's going to
Detroit. The doctor sends him off with "Don't kill anybody for a few days.
See how it feels."  Martin: "I'll give it a shot."  The doctor: " No, don't
do that. Don't do ANYTHING."
By now we know that Martin is undergoing a psychological crisis and
questioning his "raison d'etre."  And that he will kill two birds with one
stone (not Oliver) by going to Detroit for a hit, and to Grosse Pointe for
the school reunion.
Why M.Q. Blank disappeared from circulation ten years ago, and why he will
attend the affair, are not spelled out. True to its wild and woolly nature,
the movie always either goes squarely for the absurd or else flirts with
it. We learn, however, that he is obsessed with Debi (Minnie Driver), and
that she was his sweetheart whom he inexplicably stood up at the senior
prom, leaving her stranded in her $700 dress.
The most satisfying side of this movie is that absolutely everything
happens in odd, different and amusing ways down to the killings or to
Martin being stalked by enemies: weird Government men acting illegally, Mr.
Grocer, plus another terminator.
Inventiveness is a principle but not a formula. It extends to the meeting
of Martin and Debi. She is the phone-in disc-jockey (apparently the whole
staff) of the alternative Radio Free Grosse Pointe (cf. Radio Free Europe).
For the class reunion she promises "an all-80s, all-vinyl weekend."
There are more setups, encounters and absurdisms in scene after scene.
Seldom underlined, they operate through strange little, eccentric,
off-kilter slants. Each situation is different from its equivalent in other
films. Like Martin in a mini-mart grandiosely called Ultimart, where he
befuddles the sole, young employee. (It turns out that this was where
Martin's house once stood). Like the store shootout where concealed weapons
exceed the firing capacity of military machine-guns. Parody here parodies
other parodies--something that is bound to fail, yet does not.
Many of Martin's meetings are low-key but keep the audience in stitches. He
encounters an old classmate who sells real-estate and has sold his
principles to the devil Money. He gives this man's clients an
out-of-nowhere sales pitch. He runs into a former teacher. The school bell
rings. "I must go now" says she, "They're playing my song."  His visit to
his dotty Mom in a retirement home is memorable in its do-almost-nothing
simplicity. At the class reunion, the former schoolmates have short, funny
and unforced lines. Cusack's timing and cool are letter- perfect.
The instant resumption of the affair with Debi is a charmer helped by her
broadcasting her feelings to all listeners, taking the initiative, sitting
an embarrassed Martin next to live microphones. This follows the familiar
structure of movies or TV episodes where two threads are used, in this case
the killer and the romance. But it is done with such novelty and
delightfully un-telegraphed moments that they take the edge off the
familiar, such as the  traumatisms of school reunions or the bloody
killings -- the latter always done with comic-book violence akin to the
surrealism of Jean-Luc Godard.
Between vigorous actions "GPB" takes potshots, throws darts at or suavely
mocks an array of people, values and situations, without any traces of
rancor. The tangled web of the plot has no major, logical guiding lines for
the audience, yet it piles smoothly joke upon witty line upon gag.
True, past the brilliantly clever first part, it is impossible to keep up
the level of interest,  pace and inventions. Inevitably, there comes the
time of "where do we go from here?" I was conscious of this, but even so,
it is no fatal illness. There's also a small problem with the dialogue.
Intelligently written, fast and often overlapping in cinema-verite style,
it  becomes sometimes hard to catch -- unlike the clear sound of the
Debi-Martin wet  kissess.
In the end-credits, a song keeps the faith with the movie's spirit. It is
"Matador," sung with Latin brio by, appropriately, Los Fabulosos Cadillacs.
John Cusack wrote the script with several Evanston buddies and cast at
least one old pal in the film. It is said that a camel is a horse made by a
committee, yet this movie breaks the rule and comes up with a Pegasus.

Author
Frank Ochieng
GROSSE POINTE BLANK review ***1/2
starring: John Cusack, Minnie Driver, Dan Aykroyd, Alan Arkin, Jeremy 
Piven, Joan Cusack
directed by: George Armitage
   
There is something so sardonic and humorously delightful about movie 
hitmen that the big movie screen cannot seem to get enough of them. 
These hitmen seem to invade our cinema psyche. Let's see, there was 
PRIZZI'S HONOR, PULP FICTION, GET SHORTY, and now another twisted 
spin on the "hitmen-are-hip" circuit with GROSSE POINTE BLANK, a quirky
high-caliber dark comedy that is bound to send your cynicism and
funnybone to the same repair shop. GROSSE POINTE BLANK is so effortless
in its relentless send-up of everyday drivel that this film shamelessly
makes a sympathetic point out of becoming a hitman just to spite the
ordinary contrivances of lackluster life.
Martin Q. Blank (John Cusack) is a suburbanite who is sick and tired 
of his life, specifically his run-of-the-mill office job. Everything
seems so bleak to him. On top of all that is incredibly dull for him, he
has to seek professional help from his shrink (a funny Alan Arkin) who
cannot stand Blank and is constantly trying to avoid him at all costs.
Then there's Grocer (Dan Aykroyd), another hitman who is constantly
after Blank because, get this, Blank won't commit to joining a hitman's
union he is trying to establish. As a result, Grocer spends his time
trying to "off" Blank for his defiance. There is even a hilarious
shoot-out scene between Blank and Grocer in close proximity involving a
kitchen counter. This is all very humorous stuff. After awhile, Blank is
convinced by his employee Marcella (Joan Cusack) to take some time off
and go back to his Detroit suburb of Gross Pointe to attend a ten year
high school reunion. The advantage to this would be the pleasure of
reuniting with an old high school sweetie named Debbie (Minnie Driver),
an
ex-girlfriend Blank has never quite gotten over emotionally.
GROSSE POINTE BLANK is so offbeat and uniquely flagrant that one cannot
help wondering why this cunning comedy seems so lofty despite its
touching and tepid appeal at times. Well, for obvious reasons, credit
needs to go to a superb cast led by John Cusack (he helped contribute to
the screenplay). Cusack is such an underrated actor (for proof, witness
THE GRIFTERS) that 
audiences tend to take his acting ability for granted. And the
supporting players, all Oscar-nominated previously, are no slouches
either in the talent pool of Aykroyd, Arkin, and Cusack's sister Joan.
Director Armitage, whose underappreciated film MIAMI BLUES was another
off-kilter study of an individual's intolerance with predictable rut,
manages to assemble a caustic comedic tone in Cusack's performance. Even
the protagonist's last name Blank has a double meaning: emptiness
looking for something to take its place 
desperately. Besides, having a hitman named Blank must present some sort
of prankish paradox. Yes, Martin's life may be "blank" in terms of
fulfillment, but one thing definitely not lacking in this dead-pan funny
film is a sizzling screenplay by writers who know how to deliver a witty
and whooping movie.
Frank rates this film: ***1/2 stars

Author
Steve Kong
I saw the trailers for Grosse Pointe Blank and wondered what this movie could 
possible be about. And I think most people felt the same. The trailer does the 
movie no good. Grosse Pointe Blank is a movie that cannot be easily 
categorized. There is no a single genre that can describe Grosse Pointe Blank.
Martin Q. Blank (John Cusack) is a professional hitman. He is going through a 
life crisis. He is tired of his profession and is unsure of what he really is. 
By coincident, his next hit job is in his hometown and this tenth high school 
reunion also being held. Blank insists that he not go to the reunion. But with 
a little convincing from his office manager (Joan Cusack) and his fearful 
therapist (Alan Arkin), he agrees to do the hit job and to attend the reunion. 
Blank's hesitation to go to the reunion stems from what happened ten years ago 
during his senior prom. He left his girlfriend, Debi stranded, and unable to 
go go to the prom. Debi is played by the beautiful Minnie Driver. A funny 
subplot about a competing hitman trying to start a Union for hitmen unfolds 
during the movie.
The meat of Grosse Pointe Blank is a love story, and to a point, redemption 
story. Blank wants to get redemption from that one night when he stood Debi 
up. But she wants him to earn it. Along with this love story is a comedy that 
includes Dan Aykroyd as the opposing hitman trying to start the Hitmen's 
Union, two FBI guys, a therapist who feels threatened by Blank, and all of the 
people of Grosse Pointe. At one point Blank tells Debi's father that he is a 
professional hitman, the reply he gets is, "Good for you, growth industry." 
Then there is the action, and at times highly violent, portion of the film. I 
found this portion to be as well done as the previous two, but some may find 
this portion to be a turn off. With all of these different genres in the same 
film, the obvious question would be: Do the work together well? Yes, they work 
really well.
John Cusack, who is one of the four writers of this movie, gives a good 
performance of Martin Q Blank. Blank, who is the only sane character in this 
movie. Minnie Driver, although good in the movie, gives a flat dull 
performance as Debi.  I enjoyed the performances of Dan Aykroyd as the 
opposing hitman, and Alan Arkin as the threatened therapist.  Dan Aykroyd 
looks to be having the time of his life in this movie.  Arkin gives a 
wonderfully off-beat performance.
A special mention for Grosse Pointe Blank is it's soundtrack. The soundtrack 
is filled with 80's music and is a real joy. The soundtrack fits in well with 
the movie.
Grosse Pointe Blank is a quirky movie the defies categorization. It has a 
great mix of attitude and quirky dialog.  This makes for a fun movie that is 
enjoyable and well worth the money to see.


Author
Andrew Hicks
        The movie hitman always exhibits several common traits. 
Like the Schwarzeneggerian action hero, he is a calm, collected killer 
who manages to crack one-liners about that most morbid of topics: 
death. And he seems to get away with -- if you'll excuse the expression 
-- murder, without anyone ever realizing that, when he says he's a 
professional killer, he's not kidding. The hitman this time is played by 
John Cusack and the main difference between this and other hitman 
films is that GROSSE POINT BLANK is a high-minded satire centered 
around Cusack's visit to his 10-year high school reunion.
        Cusack has disappeared from the town in which he grew up, 
leaving everyone to wonder what's become of him, especially his bitter 
ex-girlfriend (Minnie Driver). He stood her up for prom and she 
hasn't seen him since. Now all she has to her name is a low-rent radio 
show on 79.5, a frequency which doesn't even exist on radio receivers. 
When Cusack shows up after all that time away, Driver can't talk to 
him in private. She puts him on the air instead, more interested in 
entertaining the listeners than working out her personal problems with 
Cusack. It serves as a buffer between her public and private lives. See, 
I know the psychology of entertainment -- I _live_ the psychology of 
entertainment.
        Cusack, like Romy and Michelle, doesn't want to go to his 
high school reunion, but his secretary forces him to go. The secretary, 
played by Cusack's sister Joan (in her perpetual comic supporting 
roles), is one of the enjoyable characters that lend GROSSE POINT 
BLANK its comic charm. Another is Dan Aykroyd, who is in his first 
decent movie since MY GIRL, and even that one is debatable to most 
film buffs. He plays the villain of the film, a rival hitman who wants 
Cusack to join his union of professional killers. They've gone without 
benefits for too long. So has Aykroyd, actually.
        Cusack finally agrees to head for his reunion because he'll be 
in the area for a job anyway. So he stops in and has a few bizarre 
scenes with Driver before those two become hot and heavy again. He 
also meets a few old friends, including another of the great comic 
supporters, Jeremy Piven. All the while, a few mysterious men are 
following Cusack for reasons that become clear later. This subplot 
takes away from the comedic intelligence in favor of the traditional 
gunfight ending.
        The main trip-up of GROSSE POINT BLANK is that, despite 
its great cast and interesting premise, it has too much convention. The 
Cusack-Driver romance is predictable, and so is the Cusack-Aykroyd 
conflict. Whenever any of that plays out onscreen, the movie turns 
mediocre. GROSSE POINT BLANK works when it gives us the biting 
satire on the politics of murder show and how pathetic all the high 
school people are 10 years after graduation. And you thought your 
high school classmates couldn't get any more pathetic...
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!

Author
Michael Redman
Heading to his 10-year high school reunion, Martin Blank (John Cusack)
is having something of an early mid-life career crisis. It seems that
his chosen profession of hitman-for-hire just isn't as emotionally
rewarding as he would like for it to be. He's even seeing therapist Dr.
Oatman (Alan Arkin) who's so afraid of him that the sessions are
monologues.
At the urging of his office manager Marcella (sister Joan Cusack) and
Oatman, Blank decides to attend the reunion and patch things up with his
high-school sweetheart that he stood up for the prom just before he
disappeared from sight for a decade. Conveniently he also has a hit
scheduled nearby.
Once back in town, he discovers that you really can't go home again;
especially if they've built a Stop And Rob on the site. He does find his
ex though. Suspicious Debi (Minnie Driver) appropriately keeps him at
arm's length as she perfects her "Don't! Stop! Don't! Stop! Don't stop!
Don't stop!" routine. Odd chemistry that works well on occasion.
To further complicate matters there are several uninvited guests in
town. Rival assassin Grocer (Dan Aykroyd) is attempting to start a
hitman union and Blank doesn't want to join. Grocer decides to
exterminate the scab in the time-honored tradition of the vocation.
Another killer is hanging out to eliminate Blank. Two G-Men are trailing
our hero waiting for him to strike. It's a crowded little rich suburb.
The film milks the most out of every situation. High school reunions are
inherently ripe with comedic possibilities. People who knew each other
for a few years as kids and haven't been in touch for years are
desperate to impress. As everyone else is bragging about their adult
careers, Blank is upfront about his and receives remarkably blase'
responses: "Good for you. Growth industry." 
The dialog is thickly layered. You have to pay attention to catch
everything that is going on as often more than one character is talking
at the same time. When that's not happening, the retorts come fast and
furious. Much of the subtle humor is easy to miss if you're careless.
Despite the commercials promising a light romantic comedy, there's a
very dark tint to the story. At the same time that Cusack's murderer has
us rolling in the aisles, he's killing a gunman by stabbing him with a
ball point pen. Grocer and Blank shoot at each other with a gun in each
hand in a scene (unfortunately, more than one) straight out of a Clint
Eastwood western while blasting away others. The extreme violence goes
hand in hand with the extreme wit.
Although the humor is of the highest level, the movie doesn't provoke
much psychological involvement. Even with her standoffishness, there
isn't much guesswork involved in figuring out if Martin and Debi will
get together. Will Blank survive? You can probably figure it out. Cusack
is a tad too cool for me to care much about him.
But it doesn't matter very much. The comedy is king here and the
characters secondary. Check it out. Watch and listen closely and you'll
be entertained. And that's what you're going to this film for.
[This appeared in the 4/17/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: John Cusack, Minnie Driver, Dan Aykroyd, Joan Cusack, Alan Arkin,
Jeremy Piven, Hank Azaria, Mitchell Ryan Director: George Armitage
Screenplay: Tom Jankewicz, D.V. DeVincentis, Steve Pink, and John Cusack
based on a story by Tom Jankewicz
Ever wanted to know what happened to Martin Blank (John Cusack), that
otherwise pleasant young man who disappeared ten years ago leaving his
girlfriend (Minnie Driver) in a $ 700 prom dress. From the class of 86
Grosse Pointe High some will become wealthy real estate agents, others
lowly security guards. There will be a lonely radio talk show host, and
most, if lucky, will get married once or twice; but sometimes, on that
rare occasion of inspirational spontaneity, somebody will decide that
they have the psychological profile of a killer and become a
professional hitman. Three cheers for Martin Blank.
This movie made me laugh and laugh I did. It carries a free flowing
audacity and lack of respect for everything and anything considered
usual. Like when lovers meet again, under the tense circumstance of
separation ten years earlier – first a thick big fat kiss (instead of a
slap) before discussing the issues of hurt and betrayal over the local
airways. This is followed by a heart warming scene of lovers reminiscing
over old times by playing ‘aeroplane' on the bed – you know when
somebody lifts your whole body up with their legs, and you pretend you
can fly. God I love doing that, just don't do it on a full stomach.
So Martin has come back to Grosse Pointe to resolve the past, and also
to find his future. When he holds a baby in his arms we get the feeling
that it's time for him to put the gun down and start picking up the
nappies. After years of assassinating presidents, officials, dogs and
the odd other, there comes a time to settle and lead a more ordinary
life. So in order to be forgiven his past, Martin needs to save the girl
of his dreams and also her father. Only then can he properly proclaim
his love for the darling one he should have married a very long time
ago.
This is by far one of the most original, hilarious, quirky, well written
comedies I've seen this year. It by far outshines that other high school
reunion known simply as ‘Romy and Michelle', and is well worth watching
again.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The last film I saw with such hip yet unrealistic dialog had
Kenneth Branagh looking for revenge on his own uncle for the murder of
his father.  This is another smoothly written but violent tale of a man
in his twenties dressed in black who is seeking something different in
his life, but there the resemblance ends.  John Cusack is Martin Blank,
who has been out of high school for ten years, the last five of which
he has been a professional assassin.  Like Sam Spade he works out of a
dingy office where he is tended by a mothering secretary.  It might
have been fun to see a steamy relationship between him and his
secretary, but I think that the American public might not have been
ready for that given that his secretary was played by sister Joan
Cusack.  Martin's profession throughout is treated almost as just
another job.  His chief competitor is Mr. Grocer (Dan Aykroyd) a
cheerful killer who is trying to organize all the assassins and hit men
into a sort of a union so they could do less work for more money, but
would have to attend meetings.
     At the near insistence of his secretary he decides to attend his
ten-year class reunion in the posh Detroit suburb of Grosse Pointe.
Reticent at first, he decides he will combine questionable business
with dubious pleasure by performing a contract hit in the same area.
So off he goes to the reunion, but one of his first stops is to see his
old girl friend Debi Newberry (Minnie Driver) who now is best known in
Grosse Pointe as the host of a local radio program, making strange
elliptical comments on the music.  When the two of them get together,
it is going to be a bizarre weekend.
     Of course, bizarre is the word for Martin and just about everybody
he knows.  To anybody who asks what he does for a living, Martin very
openly admits he kills people.  The response is always a quip and at
first it seems that nobody is taking him very seriously.  However, when
he kills somebody late in the film, a high school buddy very matter-
of-factly helps him dispose of the body apparently without giving it a
second thought, as if he was helping Martin change a tire.  Often there
seems to be logic missing in the plot, but then plot frequently seems
to be only a vessel for the clever dialogue.  Not that what people say
makes sense all the time either.  The dialogue, like that in PULP
FICTION, is stylized, but somehow it never has the same spark and
sometimes just seems to be forced filler.  "What do you want in your
omelet?"  "Nothing." "Well, that technically is not an omelet."  The
line is neither accurate, realistic, nor funny.  But what can we expect
from a production company called "Caravan Pictures," and whose logo is
a solitary man walking down a road?  Unlike in PULP FICTION we feel we
are listening in on people who are all style and no substance.
     Some of the films better moments occur when the two Cusacks (John
and Joan--actually there are at least two more in the credits) play off
of each other.  It perhaps gives us a feel for what it must have been
like in the Cusack household.  The screenplay credits John for some of
the writing, though it might well be for ad libbed quips.  Minnie
Driver has a little less of the likable quality she generally exudes
due to being just a bit too smooth, much like her father, played by
Mitchell Ryan.  (Ryan, incidentally, has the distinction of playing in
three unrelated major films showing at the same time--THE DEVIL'S OWN
and LIAR LIAR.) Alan Arkin has a small part as Martin's analyst, but
comes off the most humane as the only person who seems really disturbed
by the fact that Martin kills people.
     Like most its characters GROSSE POINT BLANK is uneven, hard to
believe, occasionally funny, but has too much style and not enough
substance.  These are people who are thinking more about their next
clever comment than they are about killing.  The film is entertaining,
but its flippant attitude toward murder leaves a bad taste.  The film
gets a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Eric G. Scharf
Director: George Armitage 
Cast: John Cusack, Minnie Driver, Dan Aykroyd, Joan Cusack, Alan Arkin, 
      Jeremy Piven, Hank Azaria, Mitchell Ryan
Producers: Roger Birnbaum, Susan Arnold, Donna Roth
Screenplay: Tom Jankewicz, D.V. DeVincentis, Steve Pink, and John Cusack, 
            based on a story by Tom Jankewicz
Cinematography: Jamie Anderson
Music: Joe Strummer
Running Length: 1:47 
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, violence)
What if Lloyd Dobler from "Say Anything" lost his nerve, ran out on Diane,
and became a hit man instead? That's just one of many ways to look at this
very complex, very funny movie. The first time I heard a critic pan a film
because "the script doesn't know what it wants to be" was in reference to
Joe Dante's delicious "Gremlins", and since then I have always translated
that particular criticism as "I don't know how to pigeon-hole this movie
and against which boilerplate genre-standards I should compare it".
Stepping off from a premise that would not have been out of place in a
conversation from "The Player": "a professional assassin (John Cusack)
goes to his ten-year high school reunion", Grosse Pointe Blank makes
non-chalant transitions from Action Comedy (Grocer (Aykroyd) shouting
"Workers of the world, unite!" as he plugs two gunmen who interrupt his
attempt to recruit Martin Blank (Cusack) into his nascent Assassin's
Guild) to Romantic Comedy (Debi (Driver) forcing Blank into an on-air
interrogation when he drops by her radio station to apologize for standing
her up at the prom ten years previously) to Action Thriller (Blank in a
surprisingly well-choreographed fight scene when a Basque mercenary
surprises him searching his old locker for that joint that's still there
after ten years) to Shameless Nostalgia (Blank discovering, to his
delight, that his old English teacher still has the advantage over him, a
professional killer) to Suburban Angst (Blank in a not-brief-enough visit
with his lithium-ridden mother, followed by a libation of Glenlivet at his
father's grave) to Understated Ironic Satire (Blank leaving solipsistic
rationalizations on the answering machine of Dr. Oatman (Arkin), a
therapist whom he doesn't pay but instead extorts into weekly
confessionals) to Existential Maunderings (Blank finally explaining to
Debi (and to us) how he came to the point where killing for money was
acceptable (and enjoyable)). 
All these shifts cannot help but break any mood that might have been
established, but I suspect director George Armitage accepted them (had the
film been by Lynch, they would have been deliberate (and tiresome)) as
necessary to showing the world of fractured relationships Blank lives
with. Dramatic manifestations of high school reunions have always featured
the theme of the gap between expectations and reality, and attempts to
contrive fictions to fill that gap. Unlike Romy & Michele, however, Blank
is well-practiced in self-examination and justifying himself, whether to
his secretary Marcella, his colleague Grocer, his "therapist" Oatman, or
to himself. I was quite bemused to note that with no important character
back in Grosse Pointe (nor with many unimportant ones) does Blank
embellish or obscure his personal history of the past ten years; he tells
them he is a contract killer, but no one takes him at his word.
Nevertheless, even though he is presented with example after absurd
example of fellow "Pointers" failing to live up to their expectations,
Blank still feels the sting of having stood Debi up, and he realizes that
neither the cynicism of his last ten years nor the disillusionment to
which he has returned relieves him of his obligation to make amends for
his original sin (sic). 
That it requires plot developments ranging from the treacly to the
homicidal for Blank to make this realization might say something about the
age demographic the film hopes to snare with its nostalgic trappings. I'm
always the first to sneer at age-based generalizations (read: market
strategies), but I'm not at all confident that my wholesale acceptance of
Blank's character, dialogue, and behavior has nothing to do with being
from the Class of 1986 myself (although I still didn't recognize half the
songs in the soundtrack). I didn't go to my ten-year high school reunion.
Had I known that Martin Blank would have been there, I still wouldn't have
gone because guys like Blank never talked to me anyway. 
--
Eric G. Scharf                               escharf@seattleu.edu
http://www.seattleu.edu/~escharf/film/gpb.html
http://www.seattleu.edu/~escharf/film/
http://www.seattleu.edu/~escharf/

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) GROSSE POINTE BLANK is a concept-driven movie with just a
single gimmick: that hired killers are "normal" people outside of work.
Surprisingly, it works well.
John Cusack plays Martin Q. Blank, a professional killer. He is very
businesslike: he has clients, agreements, a secretary, appointments,
expenses, and a therapist. If one didn't know that his specialty was
murder, he could be a real estate agent.
Lately, his work has been getting him down, so his secretary (Joan
Cusack, John's sister) suggests that he attend his 10-year high school
reunion. He eventually agrees to go back home for the weekend and see
all the old faces. He hopes to see one face in particular.
Ten years ago, Martin stood up Debi (Minnie Driver) on prom night. He's
been thinking about her all these years and hopes to make amends with
her. He's even willing to give up his career for her, if she'll let him.
He finds her working at the local radio station, single, and willing to
talk . . . .
With this type of concept movie, the screenwriter(s) must be careful not
to tell the same joke too many times. Many of the jokes are Martin
talking about the pressures of his job like everyone else does, but the
screenwriters (Tom Jankiewicz, D.V. DeVincentis, Steve Pink, and John
Cusack) keep the jokes fresh and funny.
It is inspired comedy to make Martin a hired killer. I was reminded of a
comedy called THE DREAM TEAM, about a group of inmates from a mental
institution. That movie was funny, but some critics thought it unfairly
stereotyped mental patients. It was the wrong group to portray, so they
said. By making Martin an assassin, the movie can take all sorts of
liberties with Martin's profession without worrying about offending the
assassins of the world. And also, it's a funny idea.
As a counterexample, there is a therapist in this movie, lightly played
by Alan Arkin. There are some jokes involving psychobabble between
therapist and patient. Though better than usual (compare THAT OLD
FEELING, for example), these jokes border on condescending. In order for
the therapist's dialog to be funny, he has to be a caricature, a
stereotype. Nobody complains about the stereotype when the character is
a professional killer.
In spite of having a little too much screen time, Arkin was funny as the
therapist. Both Cusacks were good in their roles. Dan Aykroyd was funny,
if unmemorable. Minnie Driver was okay as Debi, but her role was a
little shallow.
Debi serves as the object of another character's desire. In Chasing Amy,
the female lead had an identity of her own. She wasn't just "the love
interest." In GROSSE POINTE BLANK, Debi is just the love interest. She
is a little more fun than most, but she's still mostly an object.
The movie's worst flaw is its ending -- not the outcome of events, but
the specific events that take place. Throughout the rest of the movie,
Martin, though an assassin, is not very bloody or violent. Near the end
there are two episodes of bloody violence. The first episode is treated
as black comedy, and it SORT OF fits into the movie. But the last
episode introduces a level of serious violence that not only doesn't fit
with the rest of the movie, it detracts from it.
If I hadn't liked this movie, I would have said that it was just an
excuse for an 80s soundtrack, (which it was). But the movie was more
than just a soundtrack, and it was quite entertaining. It's a bit of
fluff, but it's a lot of fun.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Gerard Foley
John Cusack, Minnie Driver, Alan Arkin and Dan Aykroyd
Directed by George Armitage 
Story by Tom Jankiewicz 
Screenplay by Tom Jankiewicz, D.V.DiVincentis, Steve Pink and John Cusack 
    My memory must be getting worse, because I thought I recalled
someone's review of "Grosse Pointe Blank" made the movie sound
interesting.  It's not.  Seeing that the screeplay is credited to four
people, it is easy to understand why a Hollywood committee would write a
Hollywood movie. 
   A large number of cliches have been whipped out to fill the hour and a
half or so going on to all day that this movie takes.  The trailers tip
you off to the premise:  a professional killer goes to his high school
reunion.  (It seems a good year for high school reunions - see Lisa Kudrow
of "Friends" is in another one opening soon). 
   I find myself depressed by the assumption that the U.S.Government is in
the assassination business, and further depressed by the concept that
automatic weapons hardly ever kill anyone, no matter how close the range
or how many times they are fired.  I was not struck by the attraction
bwtween John Cusack and Minnie Driver, nor much impressed by the idea that
Minnie spent 10 years mourning John's inexplicable and unexplained
disappearance.  It would have been ok with me if he had stayed away. 
The dialog, if that is the correct term for the lines spoken by the
actors, is straight from the Hollywood book.
Gerry - gfoley@freenet.columbus.oh.us

Author
Frankie Paiva
Receiving recomendations from friends is always a risky thing. You know that
they really want you to see the film, but somewhere in the back of your mind
you brush them off because they liked Wild Wild West or got hyped up about
Detroit Rock City. This is the place where Grosse Point Blank rested for such a
long time. I however did finally rent it. Now I'm not quite sure how to
describe this movie, it's pretty strange, a unique experience, but I'll try.
Martin Blank (Cusack) goes to his high school reunion to relieve stress that's
caused by him being a professional hitman. He wants to go back to the town of
Grosse Point (hence the film's title) to try and regain the affections of the
girl he stood up on prom night (Driver.) He doesn't really want to go (his
psychiatrist told him too) and begins to suspect something when a man place a
bomb in an Utlimart to try and kill him.  
Another big hitman (Dan Aykroyd) has come to town to try and convince Martin to
join a hitman's union. When he refuses he becomes angered and hires someone to
kill him. Not to mention that Martin has someone that he's assigned to kill
that lives in the town. As for the reunion, it's pretty dull, at least until
Martin goes and checks his locker.
Quite an interesting plotline and quite an interesting experience. Cusack and
Driver made a cute couple, there both very good. An interesting mix in
supporting cast as well, especially Joan Cusack (the movie is all in the
family) as Martin's secretary. There are plenty of sharp hits and pokes that go
to all sorts of people, especially jabs at professional killers and high school
reunions. The end was a little strange and I didn't really feel that what
happened resolved the conflicts brought up in the picutre. There is also a lot
of un-needed scenes which add to the film's running time. A little too violent
and a little too witty for it's own good, Grosse Point Blank gets *** stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains strong (often bloody) violence, a recurring
theme of killing people, and language. Good Age: 14 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Hollywood)
Starring:  John Cusack, Minnie Driver, Alan Arkin, Dan Aykroyd, Joan
Cusack, Jeremy Piven.
Screenplay:  Tom Jankewicz and D. V. DeVincentis & Steve Pink and John
Cusack.
Producers:  Susan Arnold, Donna Arkoff Roth and Roger Birnbaum.
Director:  George Armitage.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, drug use)
Running Time:  107 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     GROSSE POINTE BLANK has been bumped from Hollywood Pictures' release
schedule a couple of times, but for once it appears that the delays had
nothing to do with production over-runs or shabby quality.  My guess is
that the marketing people just kept asking for more time to figure out how
in the world to sell this thing.  When John Cusack is your biggest star,
the director's previous film (MIAMI BLUES) was seen by next to no one 
seven years ago and the tone defies even its cute high-concept premise,
you'd probably be stumped too.  And no matter how they try to sell GROSSE
POINTE BLANK, they won't do it justice.  GROSSE POINTE BLANK is wildly
unpredictable, wonderfully detailed and unapologetically intelligent, a
comedy which takes the time to do the little things right and gets big
laughs in the process.
     Cusack plays Martin Blank, a killer-for-hire facing an existential
crisis.  Troubled by old regrets and doubts about his chosen profession,
Martin decides to confront issues from his past by attending his 10-year
high school reunion in the Detroit suburb of Grosse Pointe, Michigan, a
trip which conveniently matches up with an "assignment" in the area. One
piece of unfinished business involves Debi Newberry (Minnie Driver), the
high school sweetheart Martin stood up on prom night ten years earlier and
who still occupies his dreams, but the road to redemption and true love
won't be an easy one.  Two NSA agents (Hank Azaria and K. Todd Freeman) 
have been tipped off to Martin's presence in town, a rival assassin (Benny
Urquidez) has been hired to kill Martin himself, and yet another rival,
called Grocer (Dan Aykroyd) is taking Martin's refusal to join a proposed
hit man's union _very_ personally.
     John Cusack is one of four credited writers for a script which boasts
one of the characteristics of the best screen comedies:  every minor 
character is a fully-realized comic creation.  The supporting cast features
gifted performers like Alan Arkin (as the therapist whose fear of Martin
renders him incapable of offering the slightest help) and Cusack's sister
Joan (as Martin's intense but effective office manager/personal assistant)
doing hilarious work, but their excellence isn't surprising.  It is when
you get big laughs out of bit parts like an oblivious convenience store
clerk (Duffy Taylor) or an edgy but dim-witted neighborhood security cop
(Michael Cudlitz) that you know you're dealing with writers who aren't
content to get lazy once they get past the two or three lead characters.
The exchanges between these characters are sharp and clever, rich with
sometimes overlapping dialogue which actually requires the audience to pay
attention.  The punch lines never come quite when or how you expect them,  
taking deadly satirical aim at targets like organized labor, suburbia,
assassin etiquette and that strange American ritual called the high school
reunion.
     At the relatively calm center of this colorful comic hurricane is
John Cusack, who adds GROSSE POINTE BLANK to an impressive resume of smart
projects like SAY ANYTHING, THE GRIFTERS, and BULLETS OVER BROADWAY.  His
self-deprecating wit and baby-faced, sad-eyed attractiveness make him an
instantly sympathetic screen presence, and Cusack has to fight against his
persona a bit to give Martin the killer instinct he requires.  The script
gradually reveals bits of Martin's history which explain how he became who
he is, without sacrificing the comedy for an unnecessarily serious
character study.  It's a deft piece of acting by Cusack, who has an easy
chemistry with Minnie Driver (in perhaps the least well-developed role)
which convincingly evokes a sense of history and familiarity.  As absurd
as the situations get in GROSSE POINTE BLANK, the film never becomes a
farce because Cusack plays Martin's quest for enlightenment as honest and
honorable...even if he has to stab someone in the throat with a ball point
pen along the way.
     Oh, yes...GROSSE POINTE BLANK could catch you off guard if you are
unfamiliar with the aforementioned MIAMI BLUES, director George Armitage's
under-appreciated 1990 thriller which wasn't timid about mixing comedy,
quirky characters and occasionally graphic violence.  GROSSE POINT BLANK
is a much better, much funnier film, but it does include moments of
violence which are sometimes jarring in an otherwise playful film; Martin
is a killer, and we see him at work as well as at play.  Hollywood
Pictures isn't doing much to warn the squeamish about those elements,
preferring instead to emphasize the comedy and a Gen-X-nostalgic 
soundtrack heavy on 1980s punk and new wave tunes by The Jam, The Clash
and others.  A bit deceptive, perhaps, but for once I'm willing to forgive
the marketing folks their trespasses if they get people into theaters to
see GROSSE POINTE BLANK.  Something this disarmingly unique needs all the
creative salesmanship it can get.
