Title
Review for Blast from the Past (1999)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Every once in a while, a movie comes along that makes me wish it had
less of a plot.  Blast from the Past, for instance, is a film with some
great acting and a few truly funny moments, but is often compromised by
a really silly story that is neither believable nor terribly original. 
That's too bad, because the heart of Blast from the Past features a
funny, touching relationship between two young people who are made for
each other.
The film begins in 1962; Calvin and Helen Webber (Christopher Walken
and Sissy Spacek) find themselves frightened that the Cold War is going
to end in a nuclear holocaust, so they retreat to a fallout shelter for
thirty-five years.  Calvin assumes that the world above has been
annihilated, but he's wrong -- the only thing that blows up is their
house, due to an unexpected (and very convenient) plane crash.  Helen,
at this time, is pregnant, and gives birth to Adam within fifteen
minutes of entering the shelter.
Jump ahead thirty-five years; Adam has grown into a man (Brendan
Fraser).  Calvin has taught Adam the ways of the world -- how to box,
speak French, and verbalize thoughts clearly.  (Helen, by comparison,
has taught him how to dance.)  Adam decides he wants to meet a girl
("I've only been thinking about it for the last fifteen years," he
assures his mother).  So, he goes to the surface, and what ensues is
pretty obvious:  he falls for the first attractive girl he meets, Eve
(Alicia Silverstone).  Eve is your typical 90s-girl; she lives in LA,
and finds it hard to keep a job longer than six hours.  She likes to
date, but finds that most of her boyfriends feature good hair and nice
posteriors, but lack in cognitive abilities.  
This kind of story has been done a few times.  I suppose there are
people out there who would assert that the fish-out-of-water comedy has
an infinite capacity to entertain.  I agree to an extent -- there are
countless possible formulas for the fish-out-of-water comedy, and the
makers of Blast from the Past have chosen The Walking Anachronism -- the
man who doesn't fit in because he's a product of another era.  Brendan
Fraser makes the perfect outsider; with the crew-cut, gleaming teeth,
and bulging eyes, Fraser seems to be straight out of the 60s (I'm sure
his pastel clothing helps the image, too).  
Silverstone is also at her comic best; with this role, she proves to me
that she can escape the ditsy plague that hangs over her head like a
rain cloud.  She and Fraser complement each other with silky smoothness;
they do it so well that every scene they share is a mass of enjoyment,
hilarious and affecting.  It's one of those stories where you want the
characters to get together, and you know they will, but you fret over it
anyway.  Walken and Spacek are both very funny, but Dave Foley, as Eve's
gay friend, steals all of his scenes.
But the dopey plots frequently overtake the film like a wave of
nausea.  I was willing to suspend my disbelief of the premise:  I mean,
come on, it's not like the Webbers fallout would have gone unnoticed for
thirty-five years (even if they did build something on top of it).  And
I really doubt that a middle-class family of the 60s would have enough
resources to survive for thirty-five years underground.  The problem is
that this goofy background story takes up far too much of the film
(almost forty-five minutes, to be exact).  When Adam finally reaches the
surface, the picture takes itself a little more seriously.
Until, that is, the rest of the story is introduced.  The main focus is
the relationship between Adam and Eve (and yes, they do recognize the
significance of their names).  But why do we need a dumb subplot in
which Adam and Eve sell baseball cards to acquire frozen poultry?  And
why is there an annoying scene in which Eve sends a psychiatrist at
Adam?  Blast from the Past is far more effective when it concentrates on
its characters, and lets the actors do the work.  It's often funny, yes,
but it's inconsistent.  Perhaps the fish-out-of-water template can only
yield a silly plot like this.  I just wish someone had put more faith in
Fraser and Silverstone:  I'd rather have watched them talk for 90
minutes then ever have seen the inside of that ridiculous fallout
shelter.

Author
Steve Rhodes
It was during the movie's hilarious and frenzied big dance number that I
came to the full realization that I had grown to love BLAST FROM THE
PAST, a movie that starts off as slow as molasses.  The movie is a
delightful romantic comedy starring Brendan Fraser, a gifted actor from
movies as widely varied as GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE and GODS AND MONSTERS,
and Alicia Silverstone, a talented actress whose only notable success
was in CLUELESS.  As directed by THE FIRST WIVES CLUB's Hugh Wilson and
written by Bill Kelly, BLAST FROM THE PAST manages to use low-key,
subtle humor to come up with big laughs, no small feat.
We meet the Webbers 35 years ago at a party at their Ozzie-and-Harriet
style house during the height of the Cuban missile crisis.  A very
pregnant Helen Webber busies herself in the kitchen while her husband,
Calvin, plies the guests with bad jokes and cocktails.  Calvin is an
avowed anti-Communist with a tidy net worth, thanks to his many
inventions.  He has plowed his investments into creating a copy of his
house in his backyard bomb shelter and has his own Costco-sized supply
store within it.
Looking like a wild-eyed idiot, Christopher Walken, as Calvin, takes the
only broadly comedic approach of the leads and is the least successful
because of it.  Stealing all of her scenes with him is Sissy Spacek as
his mousy wife, Helen.  Ever-obedient Helen, protests in private with
screams in locked rooms and the ingestion of lots of cooking sherry and
other inebriates.
The party's plastic festivities are interrupted when a presidential
address comes on television.  A gleeful Calvin booms, "Kennedy is going
toe to toe with Khrushchev now on television."  Calvin's jubilant mood
turns somber, however, when Kennedy informs the nation that the Russian
missiles are pointed at us and "are capable of striking most cities in
the Western Hemisphere."  After that, Calvin sends the guests home and
takes his wife down into the bomb shelter.  Thinking, by mistake, that
the big one had struck their LA home, Calvin sets the locks on the
shelter to 35 years -- the half-life of nuclear radiation.
It is with the growth of their son Adam (Brendan Fraser) into an adult
that the movie finally gets its legs.  Adult is completely the wrong
term, however.  The strength of Fraser's performance is that he plays
Adam as a 35-year-old "boy," a lumbering and lovable hunk of a boy, who
knows his geography and Latin but has never had to mature.  With his
impeccable manners, he is every girl's parent's dream date.
The time approaches for them to venture above ground to survey the
damage and see if the area is habitable - their old neighborhood is now
LA at its worst, very uninhabitable.  Helen asks her son if he has been
thinking about meeting a girl.  "I've been thinking about that a little,
just the last 15 years," he smiles in reply.
His mom, as mom's do, gives Adam a laundry list of do's and don'ts after
he has to go alone on the first trip to the wasteland above.  One of
these instructions is to look for a Holiday Inn to spend the night.
Typical of the delicious subtly of the script is his reaction to the
fancy touch-tone, room phone.  The bellboy explains that he just needs
to dial 9 to get out.  "Get out of what?" Adam asks.  "The hotel," the
nonplussed bellboy says as he stares in disbelief.
After Adam meets a cute and sassy young woman named Eve Rustikov (Alicia
Silverstone), he enlists her help in procuring enough supplies for
another decade or so.  He also asks her assistance in finding a
non-mutant woman from Pasadena so he can get married.  Eve takes Adam
under her wing like a big sister might take care of her mentally
deficient little brother.  With their marvelous chemistry together, the
two begin to fall for each other without either of them admitting it.
Both actors give sweet and compelling performances, but Fraser dominates
the movie with his striking comedic grace.  In a wonderful supporting
role, Dave Foley, from A BUG'S LIFE, plays Troy, a gay man who is Eve's
best friend.  He provides the glue that makes many of the scenes between
the leads work.
The movie hits its comedic zenith in the scene in which Eve and Troy go
in search of the entrance to the bomb shelter.  It is the reaction shots
of those around them that will have you doubling over in laughter.  The
mark of a good comedy is whether you like to see it again.  A couple
more times would be just fine with me.
BLAST FROM THE PAST runs 1:46.  It is rated PG-13 for brief profanity
and sexuality and would be appropriate for kids around 11 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Greg King
BLAST FROM THE PAST (M).  
(New Line Cinema/Village Roadshow)
Director: Hugh Wilson
Stars: Brendan Fraser, Alicia Silverstone, Dave Foley, Christopher 
Walken, Sissy Spacek, Jenifer Lewis
Running time: 112 minutes.
A 35 year old man, raised in a bomb shelter, emerges into the
real world, and experiences life on the outside for the first time.
Rather than the uncomfortable black humour of Bad Boy Bubby though,
Blast From The Past is a genial enough comedy about the clash of
cultures.  Essentially a one-joke film, Blast From The Past gets a
little nostalgic as it contrasts the innocence of the '60's with the
more cynical, selfish, and mercenary life style of the '90's.
During the height of the Cold War, Adam Webber's father Calvin
(Christopher Walken), a brilliant but paranoid scientist, built a
state of the art bomb shelter under the family home.  When the Cuban
Missile Crisis erupted in 1962, he took his heavily pregnant wife
(Sissy Spacek) underground to live for 35 years, hoping to wait out
nuclear poisoning.  Their son Adam (Brendan Fraser) has grown up in
the shelter, educated by his parents and shaped by their somewhat old
fashioned values.
Oblivious to the changes on the surface, the family prepares
to emerge from their shelter as the 20th century draws to a close.
Calvin journeys to the surface, but finds Los Angeles at night a hell
hole, full of transvestite prostitutes, destitute beggars, mutants,
scary street scapes, and, worst of all, dangerous adult book stores.
He decides to keep the family in the safety of their bomb shelter for
another decade.
Adam is chosen to go to the surface and bring back the
necessary supplies, but he becomes hopelessly lost in the sprawl of
Los Angeles.  Enter Eve (Alicia Silverstone) and her gay house mate
Troy (Dave Foley), who temporarily help Adam adjust to life in the
'90's.  Slowly, Eve finds herself attracted to Adam's old world
manners and unaffected innocence.
Direction from Hugh Wilson (Police Academy, The First Wives'
Club, etc) is at times pedestrian and laboured, and the script rarely
reaches any dizzy heights of originality.  The symbolism of the
characters' names is obvious.  Many of the film's prime targets are
also quite familiar, as this sort of idea has been done before, albeit
with more style and humour.
Fraser has played this sort of fish out of water role before
(Encino Man, etc), and his performance carries the film.  His fresh
faced charm and goof ball naiveté adds to the movie's appeal.
Foley gets most of the good lines, and his bitchy observations add to
the film's camp humour.  Silverstone pouts a lot and adds some sex
appeal, but her role is otherwise fairly shallow.  Walken tempers his
usual edgy persona, while Spacek is given little to do as Adam's
alcoholic mother.
Blast From The Past would normally have disappeared straight
to video, but Fraser's recent string of solid movie roles (The Mummy,
Gods And Monsters, etc) has ensured a brief cinematic run.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        "Blast From the Past" is the sort of film which makes
me pine for the bygone days of Hollywood, when studio-made
comedies were actually funny-- when wit and creativity, rather
than pratfalls and profanity, were the ingredients of
laughter.  "Blast From the Past" isn't the worst IQ offender
I've seen in recent months, although it may be the most
disheartening; after all, if a director is able to assemble
such a first-rate cast, why can't he give them a more
interesting story to tell?  Or at the very least, a more
interesting way in which to tell it?
        The tale itself certainly had potential.  In 1962,
as the Cold War continues to drag on, devoted family man
Calvin Webber (Christopher Walken) builds a luxurious,
self-sustaining fallout shelter beneath his modest California
home.  When the Cuban Missile Crisis hits its apex, Calvin
whisks his pregnant wife Helen (Sissy Spacek) into the
ground.  At that moment, a plane crashes into their house.
Calvin, detecting the flames and heat outside the shelter
door, naturally assumes that a nuclear bomb has been dropped
on the town.  Since the half-life of nuclear fallout is
thirty-five years, the couple begin their long wait...
unaware that the world above is perfectly habitable.
        Their son Adam is born almost immediately.  Lovingly
raised in this closed society and governed by his parents'
1962 morals and values, of which placing one's elbows on the
dinner table is the severest offense, Adam eventually grows
into an intelligent, polite young man (played by Brandan
Fraser), who, although happy, feels a sense of longing and
loneliness.  On his thirty-fifth birthday, he admits to his
mother that he's been thinking about girls "just these last
fifteen years or so."  And with these words, Adam is sent
out into the great big world to find his fortune.
        The problems begin with the story's pacing.  The film's
first-act is excruciatingly slow, due to the unnecessary amount
of exposition it thrusts upon us at the outset; indeed,
Brandan Fraser, the star of film, doesn't appear until nearly
30 minutes into the tale.  And the second-billed Alicia
Silverstone, who plays an unpleasant and unlikeable young
woman named Eve (the tale's requisite love interest), doesn't
appear until nearly a half-hour beyond *that*.
        Although Adam's adventures and interactions are
occasionally amusing, the story focuses on the wrong thing.
Rather than giving us insight into what he must be going
through psychologically, the film repeatedly tosses cheap
gags at the audience.  (An example: Adam has never heard a
certain four-letter expletive before, so his dad helpfully
explains that it's an archaic French word meaning "good."
Immediately we know that Adam will misunderstand and misuse
this word... not just once, but over and over.)
        There are a couple of excellent moments, where
Adam sees the sky (and later, the ocean) for the first
time; his sense of joy and wonder are contagious in these
scenes.  Had the film concentrated more on his feelings
and experiences rather than lame humor, it might have
been something special.  But these details are glossed
over: we don't feel a sense of awe when Adam meets another
human being for the first time.  After he gets lost in
the big city, we don't feel any sense of panic or terror
from him.  And when he sleeps at a hotel for the first
time, why don't we get a better sense of what he's feeling?
After all, this is his first night away from home!  (In its
defense, the film does mention this... but then it
immediately cuts to a scene required by the uninteresting
romance subplot, rendering Adam's emotions invalid.)
        The names of the characters (Adam and Eve) effectively
remove any suspicion about whether they will fall in love by
the end of the movie (and in case you miss it, one minor
character makes an observation that Adam's new home resembles
"the Garden of Eden").  But even without these clues, the
romance is foreordained: the film possesses neither the sense
of daring or originality needed to deviate from trite formula;
therefore, no matter how obvious it is to us that Eve is
completely wrong for Adam, she will eventually fall for the
big lug.  Cue the "happily ever after" music.
        "Blast From the Past" does succeed in generating a few
laughs, thanks to Fraser's effortless performance as Adam.
(Fraser has experience playing amiable goofballs, including
the title role in Disney's "George of the Jungle.")  His
effervescent charm is enough to make the movie bearable, but
only just.  That the film is as entertaining as it despite its
horrid screenplay is a powerful testament to Fraser's screen
presence.  The always entertaining Christopher Walken gives a
fun turn as Adam's quirky but well-meaning father.  But Sissy
Spacek feels miscast: at no time does she seem like anything
more than basic window dressing.  Come to think of it, that
criticism could be leveled at the entire film.
        It's a shame that this story wasn't handled with more
care, as it could've been fascinating.  A character study about
a family shut off from society for over three decades has the
potential for both humor and drama, though both are sacrificed
here for a formula romance that's neither involving or
convincing.  This story deserved better.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing
list.  Or, you can subscribe directly from my web page.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When I taught high-school social studies during the ealry
sixties, we followed the curriculum, which mandated that we
teach a unit on fifth-century B.C. Greece.  Each term we
asked our 15-year-olds whether they would have preferred to
live in Athens (a center of intellectual ferment) or Sparta (a
military dictatorship), and each term we got the same knee-
jerk answer, "Athens."  Perhaps the kids were giving us what
they thought we wanted to hear.  After all we were college-
educated, and the Athens of the time was chock full of
philosophers, playwrights and artists.  One youngster
impressed me, though.  His answer: "Sparta--because I
would not have to think."  Good one!  The choice is not such
a no-brainer, after all, since we remember that Athens had a
large population of slaves and of women who had no political
rights, while Sparta's lifestyle was suited to the love that
Americans still had for the military during the Kennedy
administration.
   Sharp teachers now propose a more contemporary
question: would you rather live in America during the early
1960s or now?  Eyes would roll as youngsters who have
seen New Line Cinema's "Pleasantville," would recall a
preceding population of repressed women and rigidly
conformist males, liberated by hip siblings David and
Jennifer.  No problem guessing their response.  But think
again.  Remember that during the repressed sixties
small-town America was safer, more secure, more
predictable, and comparatively free of drugs, crime, and
AIDS.  How does that take us to New Line's current offering? 
"Blast from the Past" is "Pleasantville" turned topsy-turvy. 
Instead of a couple of 90's kids freeing the psyches of the
folks from the 50s and 60s, this time a fellow from the
innocent 60s shows up our contemporary society by his
superior manners, education, and morality.
   "Blast from the Past," whose title comes from an
expression by a celebrated deejay who'd introduce rock-and-
roll classics with that expression, has a double-meaning.  It
stands in for the nuclear devastation which one family
believes occurred in 1962, and also for the emergence of a
35-year-old man who wiled away his youth with just his mom
and dad for company and had about as much idea of what
was going on in the real world as did the Val Kilmer character
in "Sight Unseen."   When Calvin Webber (Christopher
Walken) and his wife Helen (Sissy Spacek) hear JFK's TV
address pitting the U.S. toe-to-toe against the Soviet Union
over the Cuban mssiles, they take to their California
underground bomb shelter, a spacious abode boasting a
thirty-five year stockpile of food and other needs.  Because
(incredibly enough) they did not have a radio or TV in the
shelter, they could not have known that the Soviets backed
down.  Hearing a devastating explosion just above their
shelter (actually a crashing plane which levels their home),
they assume it to be a nuclear discharge.  Helen gives birth
to a baby boy, and the threesome settle in for a thirty-five
year span, expecting to emerge when California would
become safe from radioactive fallout.  The highly educated
Calvin and his wife teach the boy languages, math, science,
dancing, and the art of self-defense, so that when he
ultimately emerges above ground, he would be prepared for
life among society.  What happens when the 35-year-old
Adam (Brendan Fraser) ascends and meets the modern
world--especially Eve (Alicia Silverstone) with whom he falls
in love--is the source of great fun and no
small amount of social satire.  
   Adam compares the people he meets with his own family
and decides that they have become mutated from the bomb. 
And no wonder.  One man shifts through garbage while
another throws up in the street.  What was once a fruit
orchard is now the home of a porn parlor.  The community is
full of strip malls and boarded-up stores.  He overcomes his
repulsion for post-nuclear humankind when he falls in love
and, as is the custom in any good romantic comedy, the
ardent couple must be kept apart until the end of the movie. 
This feat is accomplished by Eve's unwillingness to believe
that a guy so polite, so caring, so well-mannered can be real,
and by her inability to accept his naively boyish behavior.  
   Director Hugh Wilson milks the story for social
commentary, indicating the decline and fall of Western
civilization from 1962 to 1999.  As a microcosm of history, he
centers on Mom's Malt Shop which during the seventies turns
into a disco bar and ultimately into a bikers' saloon.  But
"Blast from the Past" is, fortunately, no exercise in cerebral
inquiry but a wonderfully inventive, original comedy with good
acting all around. Christopher Walken shines as the eccentric
Cal Tech professor-turned-inventor who has the foresight to
lock his family into the underground shelter for over three
decades, with Sissy Spacek his hand-wringing and not
altogether accepting wife.  The thirty-one-year old Brendan
Fraser continues to surprise his public with his breadth,
having turned in a crackerjack performance as a Neanderthal
youth in modern society in "Encino Man" and recently as a
guest in the home of horror-meister James Whaley in "Gods
and Monsters," knocking out a fine appearance as straight-
man to Ian McKellen's idiosyncratic gay director.  There's a
neat side role by Dave Foley as Troy, Eve's gay brother, who
is particularly sympathetic to Adam's fish-out-of-water
predicament and serves as Cupid to coax her sister into
Adam's arms.  The showstopping scene occurs on the dance
floor of the Club 40, where Adam naturally stands out,
vigorously and expertly taking on a couple of beautiful women
in some exuberant period steps.  "Blast from the Past" is
solid entertainment without a dull moment, good fun, and 
an effective rejoinder to "Pleasantville"'s championing of
modern times.

Author
Aaron Michaels
Directed by Hugh Wilson. Written by Bill Kelly & Wilson. Running time:
106 minutes. Rated PG-13 (for brief language, sex and drug references).
Brendan Fraser has always seemed as a twenty-something actor who the
studios want to be their next vehicle. Early in his career studios
showered him with good roles. The career spawning School Ties was one
of his first big films. Later on he started to head downward. He made
films like Mrs.  Winterbourne and Airheads both of which bombed
critical and commercialy.  Fraser last couple of films have helped his
career a lot though. George of the Jungle was a huge hit and his
latest movie Blast From the Past deserves the same.
Blast From the Past starts out in 1962. We are introduced to the
Webber family which is made of the brilliant scientist Calvin
(Christopher Walken) and the housewife (Sissy Spacek) with her baby on
board. John F.  Kennedy releases his speech on the Soviet missiles in
Cuba aimed at the U.S. and Calvin knows what to do. You see he has
been secretly building a fall-out shelter under his lawn which is full
of all the needed resources (e.g. beef roast, roller skates,
Dr. Pepper). He takes his wife and unborn baby underground and waits
for the big boom. An airplane crashes into his house which he takes as
missile fire. He locks the fall-out shelter door and sets a timer for
35 years which he says would give the world enough time to be able to
support life again.
The baby son (cleverly named Adam) of the family is born underground
by Calvin and he lives a normal life only blocked off from the nuclear
world. Adam grows up into Brendan Fraser and on his 35th birthday he
makes a wish to meet a girl. His parents soon give him the chance and
this begins this fish-out-of-water.
Adam is amazed at how the world is since he has never been on the
surface. He meets up with a streetwise girl name Eve (Alica
Silverstone). Adam turns out to be a lady's man. While underground he
learned perfect manners, dance steps, and several languages. He uses
all of the above to woo Eve. Together the two get supplies for the
fall-out shelter and maybe Adam will meet the girl of his dreams.
Almost ever actor in Blast From the Past does a great job. Christopher
Walken has always been the psycho villain in almost all his movies and
I've never really developed a taste for him. This movie changed it. He
is funny and is a great choice as Calvin. Both Fraser and Silverstone
are both very good. I'm glad Silverstone found a good movie after her
disappointing films Excess Baggage and Batman and Robin.
Blast From the Past is unexpectedly a very well produced movie. It has
a good script by Bill Kelly and Wilson with funny lines and clever
scenes.  Also I'd like to highly praise the set decorator, Michael
Taylor, who makes each shot look great. A nostalgic nightclub The 40s
which Adam and Eve go to is beautifully constructed. It reminded me a
lot of The Mask with it's great design of the nightclub.
Blast From the Past is almost without cliché. EVERYONE knows that
at the end Adam and Eve are going to get together and Eve will find
out about Adam's underground family. The ending 20 minutes in which
this happens is unexpectedly slow and doesn't provide any effective
laughs. It's basically just used to finish off the movie. It really
set me off course.
Of course the ending doesn't take away from the earlier 80 minutes
which show how to make a good romantic comedy for the teenage set. The
studio that made Blast also made last year's underrated The Wedding
Singer have hit a way to make a smart and goofy romantic comedy that
pleases audiences. I hope they continue their tradition in the future.

Author
Dustin Putman
"Blast From the Past" is a sunny, good-natured romantic comedy that is 
as light as the air, but almost always charming, and is helped 
immeasurably by the occasionally sharp screenplay, written by Bill Kelly 
and Hugh Wilson (also posing as the director), and the uniformly strong 
cast of relatively fresh, young talents and veteran actors.
The film starts out in Los Angeles in 1962 at a party being held by the 
Webbers, scientist Calvin (Christopher Walken) and the 9 months pregnant 
Helen (Sissy Spacek), when they hear word about the oncoming Cuban 
missile crisis. Quickly getting rid of their guests, Calvin and Helen 
desperately make their way down into their own personal fallout shelter 
just as a plane crashes in to their house. Thinking the Big One hit, 
Calvin sets the locks for 35 years because, as he says, by that time the 
radiation will have faded. Equipped with every possible thing they could 
need, Calvin loves the life down in the shelter and as the years fly by, 
teaches his son, Adam, as if he were in a real school. Helen, however, 
eventually begins to go stir-crazy, turning to any alcohol she can find, 
even her cooking sherry. Ultimately, 35 years finally pass and the 
Webbers decide to send Adam, now a grown man (Brendan Fraser), up into 
the world for the first time. Losing his way back to the fallout 
shelter, which a slummy restuarant run by a hippie has been built on top 
of, all Adam really wants is a girl, which he finds in the form of Eve 
(Alicia Silverstone), a cute, but cynical, young woman who is at first 
distant with him, but agrees to help him in his quest of buying and 
storing as much food as possible, thanks to selling his nearly priceless 
35-year-old baseball cards. Eve is not really sure why he is doing such 
a thing, but doesn't bother to ask since, after all, he is so unlike all 
of the men she has known before, and is more like an innocent boy, 
albeit one that is not used to the '90s world. 
Although "Blast From the Past" often feels somewhat like "Pleasantville" 
in reverse, "Blast" mostly avoids the latter's serious commentary on the 
world and so it is inevitably not nearly as deep, but because of this, 
also does not fall into the trap of laying the emotions on too thick. 
Undoubtedly a romance at heart, the film was therefore surprising how, 
in the first half-hour, the characters of Calvin and Helen were the main 
focus, and it had a wonderful start, thanks to Walken's and, especially, 
Spacek's bright performances. Spacek is usually seen in more dramatic 
pictures (as in the remarkable recent "Affliction"), but shows that she 
is also a wonderful comedian, and a standout in every one of her scenes 
as the loving wife and mother who happens to also be going into a 
hilarious descent into booze.
Once the now-grown Adam takes over the film, "Blast Fom the Past" is 
transformed into an entertaining "fish-out-of-water" story, as he starts 
to discover the world, including the sky and ocean, which he has never 
even seen before. One small, but sweet sequence shows Adam sitting at a 
window and intently watching the sunrise for the first time in his life. 
As a budding romantic comedy, the film is also a success, due to the 
charming rapport between Fraser, who seems to recently be switching from 
indies ("Gods and Monsters") to the mainstream ("George of the Jungle"), 
and Silverstone, who has made her first good film since she appeared in 
1995 in one of the best comedies of the decade, "Clueless." Although 
certainly nowhere near that level, it is a clear improvement from her 
last two failed excursions, the embarrassing "Batman & Robin" and the 
misguided "Excess Baggage."
For all of its many engaging elements, "Blast From the Past" is in no 
way anything more than merely good. The film is slight, but in a fun 
way, and makes no excuses for being anything more than what it sets out 
to be, a winsome, frothy comedy. Throughout the film, I laughed out 
loudly quite a few times, and was won over by the pleasant two lead 
characters whom I wanted to both be happy. The movie delves no further 
down than this, but that was quite enough for it to be an entertaining 
diversion for 106 minutes.
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Michael Dequina
_Blast_from_the_Past_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
It's a terrible premise: believing that America would be bombed by the
Russians in 1962, an eccentric but brilliant scientist (Christopher Walken)
and his pregnant wife (Sissy Spacek) lock themselves in a homey underground
fallout shelter.  After the timed locks open after 35 years, their son,
Adam (Brendan Fraser) is ready to go up to the surface to get more
supplies.  There he meets the oh-so-conveniently named Eve (Alicia
Silverstone), who schools the '60s-era-bred Adam in the ways of the '90s
L.A....and, of course, in love.
Surprisingly, however, _Blast_from_the_Past_ does have its charms, chief
among them being some good comic character work from Walken and Dave Foley,
who plays Eve's gay brother.  Fraser and Silverstone also have a sweet,
unforced romantic rapport.  But it's not enough to overcome the thudding
weight of the premise, which serves as the springboard for too many lame
gags, the lamest of all being a bar owner (Joey Slotnick) who thinks Adam
is God (don't ask).  In the end, the charm of _Blast_from_the_Past_ cannot
overpower the cheese.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Bill Kelly and Hugh Wilson
Starring: Brendan Fraser, Alicia Silverstone, Christopher Walken, Sissy
Spacek, and Dave Foley
Synopsis:
BLAST FROM THE PAST is a romantic comedy that explores what might happen
if a polite, young suitor raised with the boundless idealism and
homespun LEAVE IT TO BEAVER values of early 1960s TV sitcoms falls in
love with a disbelieving 1990s gal.
In 1964 when Mr. and Mrs. Webber (Christopher Walken and Sissy Spacek)
mistake a plane crash for an atomic bomb attack, they sequester
themselves in a large underground fallout shelter which is automatically
locked for 35 years. Through their misunderstanding their child Adam is
raised completely oblivious of the world above and all its changes as
the family waits for the "fallout" to clear. When 35-year-old Adam
(Brendan Fraser) at last emerges from the shelter in search of a
possible wife, he may be the only completely innocent gentleman left in
a crowded and raucous, modern world of traffic, adult bookstores, dirt,
and superficial relationships. Adam is literally a BLAST FROM THE PAST.
Luckily he befriends Eve (Alicia Silverstone), who helps him navigate
the new world. Will Adam's un-hip good nature and childlike faith in Eve
prevail in the jaded 1990s?
Opinion:
Brendan Fraser (from GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE) is credible as an awestruck
35-year-old who is still pure and naďve, and Alicia Silverstone as his
love interest displays just the right combination of world-weariness and
heart. Meanwhile Sissy Spacek and Christopher Walken as the two old
fashioned parents are able to stay funny and keep a straight face at the
same time.
BLAST FROM THE PAST also has interesting undercurrents. While chuckling
at the real paranoia of the early Cold War, the film resounds with a
bigger theme: earnestness versus cynicism. In the story, years of
accidental isolation have enabled main character Adam to grow up
unspoiled, retaining community and family values amidst a selfish world.
In real life it's not so easy. Isolationist dictatorships can perhaps
hold technological and cultural evolution in stasis, but for the rest of
us, the juggernaut of "progress" seems inevitable. BLAST FROM THE PAST
shows how technology has progressed as expected, but a more humane
society has not.
Sweet, romantic, funny, intelligent. I like it.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Susan Granger
What would the world look like to you if you had grown up in a plush,
multi-room suburban bomb fallout shelter that was supposed to be a
refuge from the 1962 Cuban Missile crisis? That's the premise of this
genial comedy that begins underground.  Raised with only his paranoid
parents - dutiful yet frustrated Sissy Spacek and brilliant
scientist/inventor Christopher Walken - as role models and completely
isolated from outside information, Brendan Fraser ("George of the
Jungle") has a decidedly wholesome '60s value system. When he comes to
the surface of modern-day Los Angeles for supplies - and, perhaps, a
bride - he must keep his history a secret, which causes lots of
complications when he meets beautiful but hard-edged Alicia
Silverstone, who doesn't know what to make of this gentle, impossibly
well-mannered and archaically dressed hunk of adorable naivete.  Nor
does her platonic room-mate, David Foley, whose overt homosexuality
Fraser never quite picks up on. Directed and co-written by Hugh Wilson
with Bill Kelly, it's conceptually the opposite of "Pleasantville,"
which threw two contemporary teens into the monochromatic world of a
'50s sitcom. But, while "Pleasantville" addressed some serious issues,
this frothy fluff is heavy into sheer silliness - and far too much
time is clumsily wasted on the elaborate set-up for the actual
story. Once again, Brendan Fraser proves his adroitness as a lovable,
innocent goofball in a fish-out-of-water situation and, if you're
intrigued by this young actor, I highly recommend you see him spar
with Ian McKellen in "Gods and Monsters." On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Blast from the Past" is a sweetly satirical 7. Frothy
fun.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The conventional three-act film storytelling structure may not be
sacrosanct, but if you're telling a conventional story, it's a really good
idea to use it.  Marketing sets up the audience to expect a specific
conflict for the second act, and to expect that certain characters and
relationships will be the focal points; familiarity with other films tells
them those elements will appear before they've finished their bags of
popcorn.  If you give the people what they expect when they're expecting
it, you're going to satisfy them nine times out of ten.
     BLAST FROM THE PAST is set up as a romance and a fish-out-of-water
comedy, and eventually it is both.  It simply takes foooorrreeeeevvveerr
to get there.  The prologue begins in October 1962 in Los Angeles, where
brilliant, highly paranoid scientist/inventor Calvin Webber (Christopher
Walken) and his nine-months-pregnant wife Helen (Sissy Spacek) are
well-prepared for the Cold War to turn hot.  The Cuban Missile Crisis and
a nearby plane crash conspire to convince the Webbers that nuclear war has
begun, so they lock themselves into their plush multi-room fallout shelter
to wait out the radiation.  Thirty-five years later the door opens, and
the Webbers' son Adam (Brendan Fraser) -- who has spent his whole life
sealed away with Mom and Dad in 1962 -- emerges for supplies and, perhaps,
to find a wife.
     A sensible film-maker would have realized that the Webbers' life in
the shelter was the set-up for the story, not the story itself.  Director
Hugh Wilson, working from his own re-write of Bill Kelly's original story,
decides that those thirty-five years will take up the first thirty-five
minutes of the film.  He juxtaposes details of their day-to-day lives with
developments in the world above -- the latter centered around an employee
(Joey Slotnik) in a malt shop-turned-singles' bar-turned-punk dive --
betraying his sitcom roots by spending infinitely too much time on wacky
peripheral characters. Helen becomes an alcoholic while slowly going stir
crazy, Calvin revels in his role as teacher-lord of his domain, the malt
shop/bar employee becomes a burnout, and who really cares?  Get Adam into
the real world let him cope with it.
     At long last he does get into the real world, and befriends a cynical
young woman named Eve (Alicia Silverstone).  Naturally he reacts strangely
to new-to-him phenomena like riding on a bus and looking at the sky, and
naturally other people react strangely to his anachronistic politeness and
friendliness.  The whole business is handled clumsily, though; like Adam
himself, the film waits so long to begin doing the things it should have
been doing much earlier, it appears unsure how to do them.  The
relationship with Eve develops with inevitability, but without making
sense of her softening towards Adam.  How much better spent that first
half hour might have been if the real world juxtaposition had been Eve's
childhood rather than the pointless Slotnik character, both for comedic
social commentary potential and for plot development purposes.  But no
such luck -- BLAST FROM THE PAST often feels like an assembly-line product
made by people who've never seen an assembly line.
     BLAST FROM THE PAST does have its charms, enough not to make the
experience completely frustrating.  Brendan Fraser does have the naif in a
strange land thing nailed -- he should, after ENCINO MAN and GEORGE OF THE
JUNGLE -- with his big lug build and goofy kid grin; Dave Foley gets the
already tired role of the gay best friend, but delivers his lines with
zest.  Wilson brings a silly energy to the second half of the film, giving
it enough cute moments to make it watchable, but he never pulls it all
together in a way that's completely satisfying.  BLAST FROM THE PAST is a
pretty lousy execution of a fairly simple idea, a textbook case of a
by-the-numbers plot that just doesn't add up.

Author
Homer Yen
If you meet Adam Webber (Brendan Frasier), you'll notice something
wonderfully appealing about him.   He's extremely well-mannered,
displays a generous amount of social grace and etiquette, exhibits
almost-forgotten codes of chivalrous conduct, and really knows how to
swing dance.  But you'll also notice something strangely odd about him
as well.  He's surprised to see black people (upon seeing one, he
exclaims, `oh my lucky starts  a Negro!').  He's not very familiar
with riding mass transit.  And when someone states that they are
gay', Adam thinks that they are just extremely happy.  Exhibiting a
Kennedy-era look and attitude, you might think that he was holed up
somewhere for the last 30 years.  Well, that's close.
"Blast from the Past" looks at the Webber family(Dad played by
Christopher Walken; Mom played by Sissy Spacek) who, thirtysome years
ago during the height of the cold war, retreated underground into
their elaborate fallout shelter believing that nuclear war was at
hand.  While underground, Adam was born, and he was raised in a vacuum
of time that featured stubby haircuts, endless Honeymooners reruns and
knowledge dispensed by his Dad that only went up to the mid-60s.  But
now, it is present day and any residual radiation from the nuclear
fallout should have dissipated.  And in a funny sequence, the father
takes a peek at the outside world for the first time in thirty years. 
He has no idea that what has sprung up is a crime- and litter
-infested neighborhood.  After running into a transvestite prostitute,
which he diagnosis as a mutant dual-sexual, he retreats back
underground.  But supplies are running low, and Adam will be needed to
go out and find more.  He's armed with cash, valuable baseball cards,
and stock certificates.  But on a more personal note, he hopes to meet
up with a girl that isn't a mutant and that doesn't glow in the dark.
During his supply run, he meets up with unlucky-in-love Eve (Alicia
Silverstone).  Adam definitely needs some help.  Not at all familiar
with today's society, he hires Eve to help him track down the lengthy
list of supplies as well as be his guide and to keep him out of
trouble.  But he has some girl hunting to do too.  Eve agrees to help
him, and the film focuses on more than a few cute moments where
yesteryear's Adam has to insert himself into the world of today.  Most
of this material will elicit a grin or two, which is mostly because of
Frasier's affability.  He's cute and has an infectious smile.  But
there are some scenes that are really funny such as when they go to a
club to meet girls (called Club 40s where the music is nothing but
swing).  Watch as Adam uses his innocence to meet two gorgeous and
talented dancers.  They trip the lights fantastic while shivers of
jealously begin to run up and down Eve's spine.  Of course, the two
will eventually fall in love (with the names Adam and Eve, how could
they not?), and it's just a matter of time as they both try to
understand each other's world.  It's the standard fish out of water
story with some silliness, sweetness and some clever bits of
originality mixed in.  I was surprised by how likeable this film was.


Author
Tom Ripley
While watching "Blast from the Past", a song by trip-hop maestro
Tricky came to mind: "Brand New, You're Retro".  Things end up being
too much retro, too little new, though Blast remains an enjoyable, if
familiar, fish out of water tale.
Blast opens with a poorly-conceived credit sequence in which we see a
newspaper montage as the classic "Accentuate the Positive" plays.
It's a great song, and a great opening... except that we've seen this
before, notably in one of 1997's best films, "L.A. Confidential", and
in the sadly defunt ABC series, "Homefront".
Fortunately, things pick up from there, as we're introduced to
paranoid husband Calvin Webber (Christopher Walken) and his pregnant
wife Helen (Sissy Spacek).  Heading into their state-of-the-art bomb
shelter as Kennedy lashes out against Cuba on tv, they're startled as
a fighter jet on routine manuevers has engine trouble and crashes into
their house.  Mistaking this for "the big one", Walken hurriedly slams
the locks, sealing them in for thirty-five years, the amount of time
it will take for the radiation to clear.  A few days later, their son
-- appropriately, predictably named Adam -- is born, and the movie
spends nearly a third of its time showing us vignettes from Adam's
child- and eventually adult-hood.
We finally get to the main part of the story just after Adam's
thirty-fifth birthday.  Dad has broken the seal and gone to the
surface to see how the recovery is going, and is dumbfounded at the
"mutants" he encounters:  transvestite hookers, drunken bums, and gang
bangers.  (Hookers & bums & guns, oh my!)  Safe underground again, he
decides that they should wait another ten years before attempting to
return to the surface.
But there's a problem: they're running out of supplies.  After Dad has
an attack (heart, anxiety or panic, it's never made clear), it's up to
Adam to go out for food, batteries... and perhaps a wife.  Enter Eve
(Silverstone) & Troy (Foley) as that '90's staple, the bombshell with
the gay best friend ("My Best Friend's Wedding", tv's "Will & Grace",
etc.).
What follows is fairly entertaining, though wholly predictable.  It's
never in doubt that the square Adam will turn out to be the hippest
guy on the dance floor (both in a swing club number and in the
funniest YMCA bit since "Wayne's World"), or that Adam will fall for
Eve (duh), or that Adam will ultimately find his cloistered world to
be preferable in many ways to Eve's world.  (It's like an odd role
reversal on H. G. Wells' "The Time Machine": Adam is the bright &
sunny Eloi, while most of the surface-dwellers come across as hideous,
mutated Morlocks.)
The performances are solid all-around, especially Fraser who wipes out
any doubts about his ability to carry a film.  Though obviously not up
to par with his masterful performance in "Gods & Monsters", Fraser
here demonstrates an incredible screen presence, dominating his every
scene, even when paired with veterans like Walken & Spacek.  This
won't be the film that makes him a mega-star, but it's a step in the
right direction, and bodes well for his next, "The Mummy", due out May
7th.
Blast treads some of the same ground as another New Line Cinema
project, last fall's "Pleasantville", but doesn't bother itself with
any seriousness or social commentary;  Blast is a comedy, and knows
it.
What it doesn't know is when to quit, overstaying it's welcome by
about ten minutes.  We've been entertained, and are ready for the film
to be over, and it just keeps going.  The finale draws out far too
long, though it might not have mattered had the entire film been
tightened up a bit.  Many of the scenes with young Adam aren't
necessary, and a continuing sub-plot featuring Joey Slotnick as a bar
owner turned cult leader could have been excised with virtually no
impact on the narrative.  
Also, the film isn't quite sure when it takes place.  Pointedly
starting in 1962 in the thick of the Cuban missle crisis, it then
abandons concrete dates in favor of the nebulous "The Present Day".
Fine, except that Adam later tells us that he's 35, meaning the action
takes place in 1997... which is not the present day.  A minor point,
to be sure, but this coupled with the draggy pacing suggests the need
for a more hands-on producer.  Blast ain't bad, but it could've been
far better.
"Blast from the Past" runs approximately 1:45, and is rated PG-13,
presumably for the few scenes of '90's nastiness we're exposed to.
(Reviews available by email; send a message with "subscribe" in the
header to prisoner7@usa.net.)

Author
Mac VerStandig
Blast From the Past is the type of totally innocuous film where the 
viewer is neither better nor worse for having watched. The movie is
about a family that locks itself in a fallout shelter in 1962, fearing 
that the Cuban Missile Crisis will lead to nuclear holocaust. 35 years
later, the doors unlock and out comes the son that was born underground. 
His experiences of Los Angeles are equally humorous and telling of the 
times. Don't worry if you miss this one; I doubt anyone other than the 
guy who programs the HBO marathons will remember it in a few years.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Brendan Fraser revisits his role as the "fish out of water" from his famous
ENCINO MAN (7/10) hit back in 1992, while Alicia Silverstone continues to
don her title as the Queen of the cuties, in this romantic comedy released
just in time for the big Valentine's weekend.
PLOT:
It's 1962, and an extremely paranoid man suddenly fears the launch of a
nuclear war. He locks himself and his wife in a bomb shelter underground for
the next 35 years (until the radiation clears away), where they raise a baby
from birth. When the time comes, the boy, now a man, has to go "up" and get
more supplies, and if possible, meet a nice, healthy girl to love as a
companion.
CRITIQUE:
Utterly predictable, this movie touches upon a cute little love story while
sprinkling itself with some jokes that work, others that don't, an overly
emphasized soundtrack and a nice chemistry between the two main leads. And
this is despite the fact that Brendan Fraser does seem to have played this
endearing dimwitted role once too often, and Silverstone yet to have
conquered her puppy-eye and droopy face acting chops (Darn all that, cause
she's still damn cute, and that's notwithstanding the slo-mo shot of her
triple chin chugging up and down near the end of the movie). Their cutesy
but highly foretold love story is one reason that I barely recommend this
film, but the goofy performances of the two seasoned actors, Christopher
Walken and Sissy Spacek, is yet another. Mind you, if you don't like either
one of these actors, skip this flick altogether, cause there ain't much here
that you haven't seen before.
I actually thought that the script could've been much, much funnier, and the
story a hunka-hunka more original, with most of the semi-funny scenes having
been covered in the TV adverts anyway. This film is obviously geared towards
those film-loving teens again, and I guess that in their respect, it might
just be a hit, with the presence of two charismatic actors, an overly slick
soundtrack and a Valentine's weekend love connection release date. But as
for the rest of us, I doubt that it will register any higher than a late
summer Saturday night video rental night tied to some nachos. Maybe even a
Sunday night rental. All in all, a brainless revisited concept done with a
hip 90's soundtrack, a couple of solid veteran actors playing funny,
charming leads, and an overall unmemorable time.
Oh yeah, and their characters are named Adam & Eve. Cute or corny? You
decide.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Brendan Fraser was raised in Holland, Switzerland, and Canada. He was
educated at the Upper Canada College in Toronto, the Actor's Conservatory
and the Cornish College of the Arts in Seattle. He stands 6'3".
Alicia Silverstone became legally emancipated at the tender age of 15 in
order to work the hours required for the shooting schedule of THE CRUSH. She
was turned down for the role of Juliet in 1996's ROMEO & JULIET (6.5/10), a
part that later went to Claire Danes. Her first ever acting role was on TV's
"The Wonder Years" in 1988. She was 12 at the time. She is also well-known
for her starring role in three of Aerosmith's coolest music videos "Cryin",
"Crazy" and "Amazing".
Sissy Spacek is cousins with actor Rip Torn, the man who played the
wonderful role of the producer "Arty" on TV's "The Larry Sanders Show".
Actor Christopher Walken was assaulted in a street in New York in 1980 when
he asked two men to turn down their music. His nose was broken in the
incident. He also worked briefly as a lion tamer in a circus at age 15, and
has a phobia of going too fast in cars.
Director Hugh Wilson's big-screen directorial and writing debut was on the
infamous 1984 POLICE ACADEMY. He's best known for having created, written,
produced, directed and even guest starred in the slick TV sitcom "WKRP in
Cincinnati".
Renny Harlin, the producer of this movie, is also a director in his own
right. He's done THE LONG KISS GOODNIGHT (7.5/10), DIE HARD 2 (7.5/10) and
CLIFFHANGER (7.5/10), amongst others. He was married to actress Geena Davis
for about four years.
Review Date:  February 11, 1999
Director:          Hugh Wilson
Writers:           Hugh Wilson and Bill Kelly
Producers:      Hugh Wilson and Renny Harlin
Actors:             Brendan Fraser as Adam Webber, Alicia Silverstone as Eve
Rustikov, Christopher Walken as Calvin Webber, Sissy Spacek as Helen Webber
Genre:             Comedy
Year of Release:  1999

Author
David E. Smith
"Blast From The Past" (1999) - Brendan Fraser, Alicia Silverstone, ...
        Last year's underrated "Pleasantville" tossed a couple of modern
teens into the 1950s, and occasionally went so far as to touch on social
issues. This year's "Blast From The Past" is its conceptual opposite,
launching a young man from the early 1960s into the eerie modern world
with a much lighter touch.
The story is one that could only happen in the movies. Convinced
that the Cold War is about to turn hot, Calvin and Helen Webber
(Christopher Walken and Sissy Spacek) lock themselves up in their bomb
shelter. 35 years later, they send their son, optimistically named Adam,
to the dreaded outside world for much-needed supplies. Adam (Brendan
Fraser) has never seen the sun, or wacky religious cults, or public
transportation, and so promptly gets lost.
Enter Eve (Alicia Silverstone), the consummate 90s girl from L.A.
Adam needs a guide to this post-Apocalyptic wasteland. She knows what a
liquor store is, and she even knows how to drive. Over the next hour and a
half, Adam gets a practical education in the modern world... and, of
course, in love, while Eve realizes this may be the one man left who won't
try to ruin her life.
Yes, it's a romantic comedy, and it's utterly predictable. So
what? Fraser, with goofy charm, is already well-versed at the "fish out of
water" routine, having done it before in "Encino Man" and "George Of The
Jungle." Once again, he pulls it off with subdued flair. The
always-lovely Silverstone, complete with puppy-dog eyes, is equally
charming in her role. And Dave Foley, in the cliched role of the gay best
friend (as Eve's brother Troy), steals a few scenes too.
Back in the 1960s, Walken and Spacek do their jobs as well.
Christopher Walken has always been good at doing "spooky-cool," but like
Spacek, rarely gets a chance to do pure comedy. While Walken raises his
son as a Renaissance man, Spacek goes stir crazy, and they generate more
than a few chuckles in the process.
Visually, "Blast From The Past" is serviceable. Aurally, though,
it's outstanding. The soundtrack is nearly a copy of the Billboard charts,
if you splice together this week's chart with one from 1964. And those
tunes are used to good effect, but rarely over-used. Pardon the pun, but
musically it hits almost all the right notes.
There's only one major flaw in this otherwise sparkling romantic
comedy. The first half-hour is spent underground, showing Adam's
childhood; while it may help build the character, it waffles between
almost-funny and almost-tedious. But that's what the fast-forward button
is for, right? Blast through the first few minutes of "Blast From The
Past" and what's left is thoroughly charming.
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Author
Christian Pyle
It's 1962, and the Cuban Missile Crisis has everyone worried that nuclear war
is imminent.  But inventor Calvin Webber (Christopher Walken) is ready.  He's
got an elaborate fallout shelter under his backyard.  Just as Calvin takes his
pregnant wife Helen (Sissy Spacek) underground, a fighter jet crashes into
their house.  Thinking that the Bomb has dropped, Calvin seals the door with a
timelock that will open in 35 years, when the radioactivity will have
dissipated.  The shelter has a complete house and a warehouse full of supplies.
Adam Webber (Brendan Fraser) is born down there and grows to manhood in a
sanitized 1950's fantasy.
Up top, a malt shop is built over the ruins of the Webber home.  Eventually it
becomes a bar, and the neighborhood goes to hell.  In 1997 when Calvin comes up
to take a look, he finds weirdoes, lunatics, transsexual prostitutes, and adult
video stores.  Horrified, he decides that his family should continue to live in
the shelter, but Adam has to go out to restock their supplies.  Raised in an
artificial world, Adam is ill equipped to deal with modern day Los Angeles and
quickly finds himself lost and confused.  But Adam meets Eve (Alicia
Silverstone).  Eve and her gay best friend Troy (Dave Foley) adopt the manchild
and introduce him to the pleasures and perils of life outside the shelter. 
Adam and Eve fall in love, of course, with the usual
"boy-meets-girl/boy-loses-girl" complications.
Brendan Fraser seems to be type-cast as the "dopey good guy."  This project
could just have easily been "George of the Jungle Takes L. A."  "Blast" tries
to get a lot of mileage out of Adam's wide-eyed innocent response to all the
things he's never seen or done.  For example, when he sees his first black
person, he shouts, "Oh my lucky stars! A Negro!"  Fraser's amiability carries
such jokes.  The funniest moments, though, come from Christopher Walken and
Sissy Spacek.  In the scenes showing the passage of time in the shelter, Calvin
prefers his orderly underground world while Helen becomes an alcoholic, a fact
to which Calvin and Adam are oblivious.  These extremely conflicting reactions
are played for comedy and have more bite than anything else in the movie.
This premise could have been used for effective satire on the 90's or the 50's
or both.  However, screenwriters Bill Kelly and Hugh Wilson ignore that
potential and opt instead for light comedy in the fish-out-of-water vein. 
Pity.
Bottom line:  Pleasant distraction that neither taxes nor stimulates the mind.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: February 12, 1999
Starring: Brendan Fraser, Alicia Silverstone, Christopher Walken, Sissy
Spacek, Dave Foley
Directed by: Hugh Wilson
Distributed by: New Line Cinema
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (brief language, sex and drug references) 
Everyday life has a certain odd humor to it, especially to the
uninformed viewer. Many of us have grown accustomed to it, having been
frequent observers of "everyday life" for most of our lives. But pop
sitcoms like "Seinfeld" have made millions by showing us how funny life
really is, and now cinema has taken up that task as well. Like last
year's HOLY MAN, which took a character unfamiliar with modern society
and dropped him into pop culture, BLAST FROM THE PAST gives us a fresh
and envigorating look at what society really is. 
This brand new perspective of the ordinary is accompanied by quite a few
laughs, too. Aided by Brendan Fraser's innocent countenance, which he
used to great effect in 1997's GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE, and the
straight-faced humor which Christopher Walken has mastered, the script
manages to engage the audience in a charming manner. Although the jokes
are rough on the edges early on, by the middle of the movie's 110-minute
running time the comedy is very polished. 
Directed by Hugh Wilson, who helmed the first POLICE ACADEMY movie,
there's no reason it shouldn't be polished. Wilson also wrote the script
with rookie scribe Bill Kelly, and it tells the story of the
quentessential 60's family, the Webbers. Although perhaps a bit
eccentric, everything appears normal until we learn that Calvin Webber
(Walken) has been constructing a fallout shelter underneath his garage,
and when news of the Cuban Missile Crisis breaks, Calvin and his wife
Helen (Sissy Spacek) go underground for thirty years. It's there that
Helen gives birth to Adam (Fraser), whom the Webbers raise on their own
for nearly thirty years. Only then does Adam return to the surface to
give us the AUSTIN POWERS-esque situation of a man from the sixties
stuck in the nineties. 
While on the surface, Adam unwittingly meets and charms Eve Rustikov
(Alicia Silverstone), with the help of her gay friend Troy (David
Foley). Both Silverstone and Foley play these roles perfectly, with
Silverstone developing excellent romantic chemistry and Foley doing
humorous asides. They make the movie a joy to watch, and the script,
which takes a nearly implausible premise and makes it happen, is also in
good form. Boiled down, BLAST FROM THE PAST is simply a bread-and-butter
romantic comedy -- the narrative cop-out of an ending gives this away --
but it's good, clean, fun and that's all that counts. For those not
looking for the serious drama of weepy love affairs, this is the ticket.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
BLAST FROM THE PAST by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: B
Brendan Fraser is the star of this nutty new comedy, which tries to be like the
1997 smash, Austin Powers.  Fraser plays Adam, a boy who has lived underground
with his parents, played by Sissy Spacek and Christopher Walken, all of his
life.  His dad built a world underground in case a nuclear strike were to
occur, and he believes that the strike has occurred and they must go
underground for the next thirty years.  While underground, their son Adam is
born.  He must live in a limited world, not knowing what the sky or other
people looked like.  Now, after a long thirty years, it is time for Adam to see
the world.
The scenes underground with Adam's parents are very nicely done and are
absolutely hysterical.  Unfortunately, they don't last for long, and Spacek and
Walken's performances are extremely limited.  Unlike Austin Powers, Adam has
never been out in the real world before, so it will be a total surprise to him.
 Before setting foot in the real world, he makes a wish that he could meet a
girl.  His wish is about to come true.  When Adam was finally able to come out
of the underground cell, the movie goes downhill.  Once Adam comes above
ground, Alicia Silverstone is the only thing saving the film from completely
collapsing.  A corny plot line withing the plot is the shop above where the
cell has been built.  When the workers in the shop above see Adam, they think
he is from a different race, which I thought could have been cut from the film
entirely.  To make some money, Adam decides to sell some of his father's
baseball cards.  At the baseball card shop he meets Eve, played by Alicia
Silverstone.  She is very confused about the ignorance of Adam.
Following the tradition of romantic comedies, Adam and Eve fall in love and
then when everything is going just right, something bad happens.  Luckily in
Blast From The Past, there are a few more twists to make the same old plot line
a little more fun to watch.  Spacek and Walken as the parents were the best
part of the film, and the stole the show.  Silverstone gives a lot better
performance than in her latest films, but she doesn't surpass her outstanding,
one of a kind performance in Clueless.  Fraser's character of Adam is a little
overdone, and quite annoying at times.  He is still a pretty likable character
though.
The relationship between Adam and Eve doesn't go anywhere, and it doesn't seem
like the two characters bond well.  As Eve takes Adam out to more and more
places, he becomes interested in more things, including other girls.  Eve is
very disappointed, but she won't give up Adam.  After Adam tells her the story
about how he lives underground, she thinks he is crazy and she tries to admit
him to the mental institution.  This is probably the most humorous part of the
film.  A very predictable ending occurrs, which is very disappointing to me. 
It would be nice for once for a film to have a funny, surprising ending, but
Blast From The Past disappoints me once again.
The scenes in Blast From The Past are a little humorous, but nothing more than
that.  That's pretty much how the whole film is.  It isn't great or a classic,
but it isn't meant to be.  It is a feel good, enjoyable movie that is fun to
watch.  It could have been taken further, to a higher level of comedy.  The key
to that would have been to add more scenes with Spacek and Walken.
The Bottom Line- Just your average romantic comedy.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Blast From The Past (1999)  
Brendan Fraser, Alicia Silverstone, Christopher Walken, Sissy Spacek, 
Dave Foley, Joey Slotnik, Rex Linn, Deborah Kellner, Nathan Fillion, 
Jenifer Lewis, Cynthia Mace, Don Yesso, Carmen More, Dale Raoul, Jazzmun. 
Screenplay by Bill Kelly and Hugh Wilson; story by Bill Kelly. Directed 
by Hugh Wilson. 106 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Unpolished and ungainly, but thoroughly likable, "Blast From The Past" is 
the conceptual opposite of last year's magnificent "Pleasantville." Where 
"Pleasantville" magically threw two contemporary teens into the 
monochromatic world of a "Father Knows Best" style '50s sitcom, "Blast 
>From The Past" takes a young man raised in complete isolation with 
wholesome early '60s values and thrusts him into modern-day Los Angeles. 
But while "Pleasantville" addressed a variety of serious issues, "Blast 
>From The Past" makes only passing glances at social commentary, instead 
keeping the focus on silliness. Due to some inspired casting choices, the 
fish-out-of-water comedy succeeds more often than not.
It begins in 1962, at a cocktail party held by affluent suburbanite 
Calvin Webber (Christopher Walken) and his pregnant wife Helen (Sissy 
Spacek). Moments after friends in another room remark that Calvin, while 
a brilliant scientist and wonderful husband, is more than a little 
paranoid, President Kennedy appears on TV with grim news about the Cuban 
Missile Crisis. Fearing the worst, Webber sends his guests home, then 
retreats to the family's incredibly elaborate bomb shelter, hidden 
beneath the house. Just as he is closing the hatch, a small plane crashes 
into his roof. Mistakenly convinced that the Big One has decimated the 
planet, Webber sets the shelter release timer for 35 years, his estimate 
of when it will be safe to return to the surface.
With their radio destroyed by the plane crash, the Webbers are completely 
isolated from the outside, sealed into a 1962 mindset. When Helen gives 
birth, the couple optimistically christen the child Adam and devote 
themselves to raising the consummate Renaissance man. Adam grows into 
adulthood with dreams of seeing the sky, while Dad teaches him about 
science, sports and the art of avoiding both Communists and post-war 
mutants. Meanwhile, Mom schools the boy in manners, dance and proper 
courtship of young ladies. Finally, the day comes for the now-grown Adam 
(Brendan Fraser) to venture forth onto the surface, which, on a drizzly 
night in urban L.A., bears a remarkable resemblance to the post-Atomic 
world his father anticipated.
"Blast From The Past" is divided into two sections. The first, a portrait 
of the Webbers' life underground, works because it offers the rare 
opportunity to watch Christopher Walken and Sissy Spacek do comedy. 
Walken takes his standard slightly-demented persona and gives it a benign 
twist, with delightful results. While bemoaning the destruction of 
humanity, Calvin thrives in the bomb shelter, quite pleased with himself 
for having the foresight and resourcefulness to have sealed his family 
safely from the devastation. Walken makes Calvin an appealing anachronism,
 a deliciously geeky spin on Ward Cleaver. Meanwhile, Spacek plays Helen 
as June Cleaver quietly coming apart at the seams. Ever the dutiful wife 
and mother, she nonetheless succumbs to a massive case of cabin fever, 
seeking solace by taking slugs of any available liquor. The desperate 
character could have become cartoonish or tragic, but Spacek maintains 
just the right tone to keep Helen believable and funny.
The second part of the film chronicles Adam's adventures on the surface, 
with a nifty performance from Brendan Fraser making up for numerous weak 
spots. Fraser is an exceptional serious actor, most recently evidenced by 
his outstanding work in "Gods and Monsters," but he also possesses a real 
gift for comedy, particularly when playing lovable, innocent goofballs. 
Fraser shined in "George of the Jungle" because, instead of being overly 
cautious about protecting his leading man image, he threw himself into 
the role completely, and his gusto was irresistible. He is particularly 
adroit here, beginning his journey as a total babe-in-the-woods, then, 
using a series of subtle stylistic moves, transforming Adam into a 
romantic hero, without ever betraying the character.
I wish more of Fraser's portion of the film had shown such subtlety. A 
running gag about a group of burn-outs who build a cult around the 
Webbers would have been funnier if it had been toned down. As a cynical 
young woman who reluctantly serves as mentor for Adam (guess what her 
first name is), Alicia Silverstone must act excessively wary of him 
solely because that's how romantic comedies are structured. Silverstone 
displays ample energy, but her suspicious shtick grows old quickly. 
On a brighter note, "NewsRadio" star Dave Foley takes one of contemporary 
film's most tiresome character clichés, the gay best friend, and makes 
him sparkle, using his limpid eyes and sharp phrasing to maximum effect. 
For fans of Foley's "The Kids in the Hall" days, he plays Troy as an 
smart, sincere cross between Hecubus and the "Steps" guy. For everybody 
else, well... he's damn good.   
Despite being structurally sloppy and going for the obvious jokes too 
often, "Blast From The Past" is a lot of fun, thanks to some ingenious 
moments and the efforts of its exceptional cast. No one will mistake this 
for comic gold, but it's an amusing, affable way to spend 106 minutes, 
and sometimes that's enough.

Author
Christopher Null
     A great score never hurt anybody, and with its hoppin' swing tunes,
BLAST FROM THE PAST gets quite a boost from a jumping swing soundtrack!
     Oh... wait a sec... the movie, right?  Well, what are you
expecting?  Maybe: "BLAST FROM THE PAST is a thoughtful analysis of Cold
War posturing and American paranoia in the 1960's?"  I don't think so. 
Let's try: "BLAST FROM THE PAST is a feel-good romp about a fish out of
water who tries to make sense out of a world gone wacky!"
     That'll do just fine.  Adam (Fraser) is the fish.  The world is
late 1990's Los Angeles.  The uber-hokey plot builds upon a jet
crash-landing in the unborn Adam's backyard on the eve of the Bay of
Pigs, sending the folks (Walken and Spacek) down into the enormous
fallout shelter below.  Convinced it's Armageddon, they hole up for 35
years, and Adam is born -- and raised -- with only his 1960's-mentality
folks to guide him.
     Then it's time to hit the surface.  Naturally, wacky hijinx ensue,
including a panicky bus ride, a gay baseball game, a hip dance number, a
cult formation, numerous car accidents, and many many many wry
observations likening modern life to a post-Apocalyptic wasteland.  But
not so Apocalyptic that a boy can't find himself a girl (Silverstone)!
     Okay, it's funny.  I even laughed out loud.  More than once.  Dave
Foley (of course) steals the show as Silverstone's hysterical
confidant.  Walken as the paranoid, anti-Commie father is also a treat
to watch.  Fraser isn't bad... very over the top, but not bad.  Of
course, Silverstone has the acting ability of a can of beets, but hey,
nothing's perfect.
Director: Hugh Wilson
Producer: Renny Harlin, Hugh Wilson
Writer: Bill Kelly, Hugh Wilson
Starring: Brendan Fraser, Christopher Walken, Sissy Spacek, Alicia
Silverstone, Dave Foley
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jamie Peck
Rating: *** (out of ****)
New Line / 1:46 / 1999 / PG-13 (sex jokes, language)
Cast: Brendan Fraser; Alicia Silverstone; Christopher Walken; Sissy
Spacek; Dave Foley; Scott Thomson
Director: Hugh Wilson
Screenplay: Bill Kelly; Hugh Wilson
Last October's "Pleasantville" found the innocent 1950s going up against
the liberal '90s and getting creamed, with teens from modern times
reforming the pristine and pure "Father Knows Best"-esque universe they
found themselves trapped in. The new comedy "Blast From the Past," then,
covers similar terrain in reverse, featuring a hero whose life-long
experience with early-'60s society and mores throws him into mass
culture shock when he's suddenly thrust into a contemporary setting. The
story, once set up, sounds incredibly goofy, but "Blast From the Past"
is somehow a blast for the present that fondly recalls the bygone era
with cozy warmth and comfortable affection.
In shying away from "Pleasantville"'s progressive preachiness - it's one
big flaw - "Past" has frothy charm to spare, and a lot of it comes from
the impeccable actors. That Brendan Fraser and Alicia Silverstone are
given the movie's romantic leads virtually promises a strong turnout of
loyal young fans, but the big surprise is how good they are - both apart
and together. He, too often cast as cartoonish lunkheads, radiates
nice-guy appeal in a performance guaranteed to induce smiles and grins;
she, who followed her stellar "Clueless" debut with less-than-stellar
turns in tripe like "Hideaway" and "Excess Baggage," gets terrific
mileage out of a smallish role.
Christopher Walken and Sissy Spacek show up as Fraser's good-natured but
jaded parents, and their too-fun work here is the movie's equivalent of
a bonus prize. Writer Bill Kelly and co-scribe/director Hugh Wilson
("The First Wives Club") play all their best ideas first, resulting in a
terrific first hour that then begins to drag as it nears its conclusion;
after an inspired sequence set in a swing club, some frustrating
plotting takes place (that interlude with social services - huh?). But
the cast is the real blast in "Past," and they're alive and shining even
when the film isn't.
Š 1999 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit The Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
"Now you'd think that Karla the roommate would figure out that since
Julia has been living for two years with terrifying nightmares, and
since most of her friends and neighbors have been filleted by the
Fisherman, it would be unwise to sneak into her room in the dark, make
suspicious noises and hide in the closet. Roommates do not think like
this in slasher movies." -Roger Ebert on "I Still Know What You Did Last
Summer"

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
I suppose people who wear rose-tinted glasses see the world in shades of 
pink, as pink as the fabrics that covered the walls and chairs of 
American houses in Life magazine ads, circa 1960.  Yes, pink is the 
color of nostalgia.
And we are reminded of the importance of nostalgia by Hugh Wilson's 
'Blast from the Past'.  Its story begins outside of Los Angeles in a 
neighborhood of picture-perfect tract houses.  Professor Calvin Weber 
(Christopher Walken) is an eccentric and rich scientist who has secretly 
built a fallout shelter large enough to contain a replica of his house.  
As the Cuban missile crisis reaches its worst moments and nuclear war 
seems imminent, Dr. Weber drags his pregnant wife (Sissy Spacek) down 
into the shelter, which is equipped to sustain a family of three for 35 
years.  The plot gimmick that causes the family to stay underground for 
the entire time is a plane crash:  just as the Webers are safe in the 
shelter, a military plane plows into the back yard, and the bespectacled 
schlump sets the irreversible locks.  Convinced a holocaust has 
destroyed the city and perhaps the greater part of the world, the Webers 
recreate a polite and perfect microcosm with their new son Adam (Brendan 
Fraser, when the boy reaches adulthood).
Of course we have seen all this before.  Think of Marty McFly in 
reverse, transported into the future.  Even Brendan Fraser has been 
there, in 'Encino Man' and, in the same fish-out-of-water sense, 'George 
of the Jungle' (itself a text from the 1960's).  But the filmmakers know 
how we love to gaze longingly at our history.  In its own way, the film 
manages to serve as a history lesson, imparting a good deal of cultural 
as well as political knowledge.  What is puzzling about fondness for the 
past is the blind faith that those years were better than these, that 
people were happier, in every important way, than we are.(It's ironic 
that we would look through those lenses of distorting pinkness at a time 
that engendered a near-nuclear confrontation.)  Yet the formula works, 
and 'Blast from the Past' supplies us with laughs and a romantic 
relationship that is at times witty and original.  When Adam must 
venture into what he thinks is a post-nuclear, mutated world, he takes 
up with a rather rootless woman (Alicia Silverstone), who is conscious 
of her lack of depth, but who is also oddly principled.
Brendan Fraser turns in a solid performance as the walking anachronism.  
Indeed the movie milks his out-of-place experiences for all it can;  
Fraser for the most part plays along with a dry and naďve humor, though 
at times he does look blank or even stunned.  We know that his character 
is in love with Alicia Silverstone's Eve, but he is simply too polite 
and mild to pursue her affections meaningfully.  Fraser is at his best 
when Adam shows sudden inspired bits of accomplishment - when he speaks 
French and later swing-dances skillfully at a dance club.  He's likable 
all the time, but especially when he displays his tenderness toward his 
parents and his would-be girlfriend.  
Alicia Silverstone is very watchable as well, although our early 
impressions of Eve approach a stereotype:  she's the cynical and spoiled 
girl-woman, street-smart and smart-mouthed, a darker version of the 
shallow Cher from 'Clueless.'  Why is her performance good?  Because 
Silverstone knows her way around the camera, seeming very comfortable 
and assured as she commands Adam's attention during the ups and downs of 
their relationship.  This young actress has denounced phoniness in her 
everyday life, and seems to be applying the same credo to her acting.
Christopher Walken can appear in any movie I pay for, especially in his 
quirky characterizations.  We care about Calvin Weber the loving father 
and husband, and we're willing to laugh at his paranoid, commie-hating 
craziness.  Sissy Spacek is underused, but in her short scenes dominates 
in the dry humor department.  Mrs. Weber walks outside the "house" to 
scream, and imbibes the cooking sherry in her advertisement-perfect 
kitchen.
Set design is tricky in this film.  Most memorable is the interior 
decoration of the Webers' houses, both above and below the ground, 
meccas of post-war pastel luxuries, kitchens full of wondrous modern 
appliances, living rooms packed with fringed furniture.  A hilarious 
sight gag involves the land above the fallout shelter, a block that 
undergoes massive change in the decades following the plane crash.  
Directly above the Webers' elevator are a sleazy bar and its owner, who 
thinks the beings crashing through his floor are three incarnations of 
supreme beings.  The mantra the grungy bar owner adopts is "Leave my 
elevator alone," and his cult of the homeless in one of the funnier 
running gags.
The score brims with period songs, the rhythm of the vintage music 
helping to move the narrative along.  Over the closing credits we hear a 
song by written and sung by Randy Newman, a piece of cutesy doggerel 
relating to the film's premise.  Aren't we getting a bit over-exposed, 
Randy?
'Blast from the Past' is certainly a good date movie, and it has enough 
laughs to recommend it for theater viewing.  Unfortunately it has one 
'f-word' and a slew of 's-word' jokes, as well as a few seconds of the 
characters' visiting adult video stores: hence the PG-13 rating.  Why, 
Mr. Wilson, couldn't a few seconds be excised in pursuit of a plain PG?  
It's not a must-see, but it is a pleasant way to pass two hours, the 
haze of nostalgia simmering like dry ice along the theater floor.

