Title
Review for Under Hellgate Bridge (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
We all know bad stuff happens under bridges.  It is, after all, where
Anthony Kiedis drew some blood because he felt like he didn't have a
partner.  Hellgate Bridge in Astoria, Queens, which marks the place where
Long Island Sound becomes the Atlantic Ocean, isn't much different, as
evidenced by the opening scene of the film that shares its name.  We don't
know who Jimmy is when Under Hellgate Bridge reveals he's died of a heroin
overdose, but his passing sets off a tragic chain of events that, 90 minutes
later, seems to be cut from the same cloth as almost every low-budget
mobster film (save Reservoir Dogs) made either in an attempt to ride the
coattails of The Sopranos to success or as a creative outlets for artistic
gangster-wannabes.
Jimmy, it turns out, is the younger brother of Bridge's protagonist, Ryan
(Another World's Michael Rodrick), who has just been released from prison in
time to show up for the funeral.  He's been in the clink for two years, sent
up for a crime he never committed.  We learn the ex-junkie Ryan was set up
by an aspiring gangster named Vincent (Jonathan LaPaglia), who, in addition
to being "brought along" by the neighborhood heavy (Frank Vincent), has also
married Ryan's old girlfriend Carla (Jordan Bayne), fathered her child, and,
at least indirectly, killed Jimmy.  Vincent also has his fingers into Ryan's
other brother - another junkie named Eddie (Brian Vincent).
What follows is a predictable battle between Ryan and Vincent, culminating
in a very stylish shootout, which is, by far, Bridge's highlight.  The film,
full of heavy-handed music and a strong religious push, is also exceedingly
dark and contains a surprising lack of humor for something that aspires to
be Goodfellas.  The no-name acting, which includes two players from The
Sopranos (Vincent "Big Pussy" Pastore and Dominic "Uncle Jew" Chianese,
Jr.), is pretty decent, while cinematographer Leland Krane makes Bridge look
like a film with more than a $1 million budget.
The problem is with writer/director Michael Sergio's been-there/done-that
script.  Other than the finale, most of the story is as predictable as they
come (and the climax was only surprising because it was so much better than
the rest of the somber picture).  Could I have done better with a tiny
budget? Probably not, but don't be snowed into thinking it's the second
coming of Mean Streets.
If Sergio has done one thing well, it's his sales pitch for Bridge.  I
screened the film as part of the Sarasota Film Festival and stuck around for
a Q&A session with Sergio and a few members of his cast when the film was
over (mostly because I was in the back row and hate trying to sneak out in
front of the people who poured their time and money into a film I didn't
particularly care for).  When the Q&A thing was finished, Sergio and the
Bridge's other talent strategically placed themselves at the theatre's
exits, so that nobody would be able to get out of the place without being
personally thanked and/or touched in some friendly way by somebody
associated with the film (believe me - I tried).  Something seems really
wrong with that sort of thing.
1:30 - R for language, violence and strong sexual content, including rape
