Title
Review for Held Up (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
 http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/05ec58085b38da99882568dd0006ac9e?OpenDocument
 Jamie Foxx and Nia Long are far too well established for screwball
comedies like Held Up.  Coming off the success of Any Given Sunday, the
gifted Foxx should be commanding some serious cash, and I'd like to see
him in more serious roles.  The same goes for Nia Long, whose portrayal
of an overachieving news producer desperate for love in The Best Man
earned rave reviews.  Unfortunately for these two young actors, Held Up
takes a big step back as far as resume building is concerned.
Regrettably, it makes no pretense about being a legitimate romantic
comedy at all; rather it's slapstick in a sort of Cheech and Chong meets
Friday in the setting of Deliverance type of story.
 The film's plot is downright fickle and it might as well have been
written in less than the hour and a half it took to watch the film.
Foxx plays Michael Dawson, a successful Chicago businessman on a trip to
the Grand Canyon with his beautiful fiancée Rae (Long).  When she finds
out that he's spent 15 thousand bucks on his newly purchased classic
roadster with the money that was meant to be for their new home, she
dumps him on the spot and hitches a ride to the airport.  So Mike is
stuck in the middle of the Grand Canyon at a Sip and Zip gas station
with fifty bucks and a blaring 8-track.  Before long he gets duped by
some kid who ends up stealing the car, while all he wants to do is get
to the airport so he can catch Rae before she gets on that plane.
 To Foxx's credit, the guy is hilarious, and somehow he hoists this
picture on his shoulders to make it halfway bearable, even after some
horribly played out jokes about his being mistaken for Puff Daddy and
Mike Tyson(???).  The film's sequencing is basically a series of pot
shots at the ethnic stereotypes of its cast, one after another.  Any
semblance of plot is invariably just fodder for the next gag.
 But the truth is that I did laugh.  I'm not saying that it's worth
$8.50, or that I'd take a date to see it, but I'll wager it becomes an
instant classic on the shelves of college students across the country,
right next to movies like Dumb and Dumber, Tommy Boy, and Don't be a
Menace to South Central While You're Drinking Your Juice in the Hood.
This is one that could only be enjoyed over many beers, late at night
with some good company.  But the saner among you should stay away.
Director: Steve Rash
Starring: Jamie Foxx, Nia Long, Ian Black III, Grant Bolton, Jake Busey
Writing Credits: Jeff Eastin, Erik Fleming
Producer: Stokely Chaffin, Kevin DeWalt, Jay Heit, Jamie Rucker King,
Neil H. Moritz
Editor: Jonathan Chibnall
MPAA Rating: PG-13
Year of Release: 2000
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Steve Rash's slapstick comedy, HELD UP, an amateur robber named
Rodrigo, played charmingly by Eduardo Yanez, holds up the Sip & Zip
convenience store in the middle of the Arizona desert.  Almost
accidentally, Rodrigo takes all of the store's occupants hostage.
The local, good ol' boy sheriff assembles a rag-tag group of
trigger-happy hunters to guard the store while he negotiates the release
of the hostages.  For his instruction manual, the sheriff breaks the
plastic seal on his shrink-wrapped copy of the FBI's official hostage
situation manual.
In the story's opening, Michael Dawson (Jamie Foxx) and his fiancée Rae
(Nia Long) are tooling down the highway when Rae announces that she has
to go to the bathroom immediately, and it's not number one.  We then
have several disgusting scenes in which the lovely, mini-skirted Rae
waddles around holding her rear as they search for a place for her to
defecate.  After she finally locates a restroom at the Sip & Zip, the
story picks up some.  Of course, after such an inauspicious beginning,
it would be hard for it get any worse.
After an argument, Rae leaves Michael behind at the store, where he
shortly becomes one of the hostages.  And not just any hostage, but the
chief negotiator for the stickup man.
Typical of the lame incidents in the story is the one about the killer
Dorito.  After a hail of bullets following the explosion of a hot dog in
the microwave, Michael believes he has been hit in the face by a big
piece of flying glass.  It turns out, instead, to be a shallow cut from
a Dorito propelled by the hot dog.  The hostages want to know whether it
is "BBQ or Cool Ranch."
Another subplot has Michael being mistaken for the singer Puff Daddy by
a local videogame jock at the store.  Most of the others believe him to
be Mike Tyson.
The town, for a variety of reasons, is close to bankruptcy, which means
they have to keep reneging on their agreements about the hostage
situation.  Although Michael negotiates their sending his fiancée two
dozen roses, the town can only afford one left-over bereavement bouquet
from a funeral.
Even if it isn't much of a comedy, at least it's a good-spirited one.
The cast gives it their all, but the material is hopeless.
The movie even fails my Grand Canyon test.  When a film, as HELD UP
does, throws in some footage of a beautiful place like the Grand Canyon
in the hopes of giving the production a little class and then makes the
site look dull with ugly, washed-out colors, you know the picture is in
trouble.
HELD UP runs 1:29.  It is rated PG-13 for mild profanity and comic
violence and would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
When asked about his latest big screen vehicle, _Held_Up_, by a radio DJ
at a recent movie premiere, Jamie Foxx urged the crowd, "Don't see that
shit."  I can't blame him.  "Held up" is more than just what happens to
his character in this laugh-free comedy--it's also what happens to Foxx's
promising career with this creaky vehicle.
Foxx is a versatile talent; he more than held his dramatic own in Oliver
Stone's _Any_Given_Sunday_, whose soundtrack also gave him an opportunity
to show off his impressive singing chops.  First and foremost, though,
he's known for his skill as a comedian, as displayed on his eponymous WB
sitcom or, better yet, his stint on _In_Living_Color_.  And there are
moments in _Held_Up_ where his gift shines through.  As his Michael
Dawson and a few others are held hostage by a robber (Eduardo Yańez) in a
middle-of-nowhere convenience store, Foxx has his moments, such as when a
spontaneous rendition of Earth, Wind and Fire's "Reasons" spurs on a mass
singalong.
Maybe that example isn't exactly a gutbuster, but, sadly, is one of the
more inspired moments of Jeff Eastin's weak script.  Michael, who had
been on a long road trip from Chicago with his girlfriend Rae (Nia Long),
ends up at the convenience store after she leaves him there after
learning that the vintage car in which they've been traveling cost much
more than he said.  Not long after she hitches a ride to the nearby Las
Vegas airport, Michael's beloved car is stolen, and he's stuck in the
convenience store with a typically eccentric bunch--one that grows even
moreso with the arrival of the robber.
Eastin's idea of comedy is playing to racial stereotypes.  The small
desert town in which the store is located is a haven for bumbling
rednecks.  Those in law enforcement, such as Sheriff Pembry (Barry
Corbin) and Deputy Beaumont (Jake Busey) are not much more intelligent,
if not even less so.  Michael, being the only black man in town, is
mistaken for famous African-Americans such as Puff Daddy and--in a
particularly weak joke--Mike Tyson since "Dawson" sounds oh so much like
"Tyson."
With director Steve Rash focusing on the less-than-scintillating hostage
crisis--which is made even more tedious by the real-time
storytelling--Long is left with nothing to do.  Every so often Rash cuts
to Rae waiting in an airport bar for her flight back home to Chicago,
telling the bartender (Julie Hagerty) about her relationship with
Michael.  Since there are no attempts at humor, strained or otherwise, in
these passages they are somewhat easier to tolerate than the
groan-inducing would-be hijinks at the convenience store.  That fact, of
course, doesn't necessarily mean that these scenes aren't boring, which
they are.
That, in a nutshell, is what's wrong with _Held_Up_: it's boring.  It
takes some doing to make performers as magnetic and energetic as Foxx and
Long uninteresting to watch, and that's exactly what Rash and Eastin have
managed to accomplish here.  Foxx and Long will easily recover from this
career misstep, but one has to wonder just how they got held up with
_Held_Up_ in the first place.    
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

