Title
Review for Seunlau ngaklau (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If you're fortunate enough to live near a theater
that features movies from the Far East, try this
experiment.  First sit through Shinji Aoyama's new
film "Eureka."  That one is three hours and thirty-
seven minutes long, is in black-and-white with sepia
overlay, has two major characters who barely talk
at all, and the pace is glacial, about a swift as
molasses climbing up a tree in January.  Next, take
in Hark Tsui's Hong Kong martial arts drama "Time
and Tide," which is in color, is half the length of
"Eureka," and features tumbling bodies, flying glass,
machine gun blasts and almost nonstop action
throughout.  Which picture seems longer?  Perhaps
this depends on your age, but I'd not be surprised if
an intelligent adult would look at his watch during
the most energetic rat-tat-tats of "Time and Tide,"
mystified by the utter complexity of the story--
astonishing when you consider that action and not
parable is the name of the game here.  The same
mature person would likely be awed by "Eureka." 
The reason?  There are millions of stories out there
and the public is forever hungering to hear them.  
"Eureka" has such a story, a gripping one, one for
which director Aoyama respects the audience
enough to let every aspect of the tale sink in
through his shots of the landscape of southern
Japan and the terrain of his characters' faces. 
"Time and Tide" for all its motion bears a yarn so
convoluted you might reach for your James Joyce if
you want to make more sense of the world.  In
short, Tsui Hark's venture is (literally) a crashing
bore.
   A kind of Cain and Abel motif seeps through in
the saga of two good young men who become pals,
Tyler (Hong Kong singing sensation Nicholas Tse)
and Jack (Wu Bai)--who have a falling out only to
get a chance a reconciliation and redemption in the
final moments.  Tyler is a 21-year-old kid who takes
a job as a bodyguard to a shady loan shark known
as Uncle Ji (Anthony Wong), whose band of
watchmen use unlicensed guns and who are like
indentured servants who work for Ji because they
owe him money.  Jack, on the other hand, is 14
years older and has just returned from a stint as a
mercenary fighting rebels in a South American
country which--contrary to Tyler's fantasies--is not
paradise. When some of Jack's cohorts from Brazil
(who, oddly enough, speak Spanish instead of
Portuguese) return for the purpose of assassinating
a honcho of a Hong Kong triad, Tyler finds himself
on the opposite side seeking to protect Hong.
  The story is further complicated by the plight of
two women, one, Ah Hui (Candy Lo), who has been
made pregnant by Jack; the other, Ah Jo (Cathy
Tsui), a policewoman made pregnant by young
Tyler.  Though the men can be quite energetic in
their warfare with one another, Jack and Tyler
prove most chivalrous in their dealings with their
respective primigravidas, but who's listening? 
"Seunlau ngaklau," as the film is titled in its original
language (English and Mandarin subtitles provided
throughout while characters speak some Spanish
and English as well), looks every bit like the work of
a director who grinds out one of two dramas
annually--50 in his career so far.  Where does the
title come from?  Maybe from the fact that the action
is so dizzying that, from the viewpoint of the audience,
time and tide wait for no man (or woman).
Not Rated.  Running time: 113 minutes. (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
