Title
Review for Romper Stomper (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jason Overbeck
Romper Stomper, like Trainspotting, is compared to the great A Clockwork
Orange, plots of both resemble it, yet both lack the scathing satire of
Orange electing instead to tell another slice of life.  This film
portrays the skinheads of Australia, they party, they fight, and they
flee.  Not all of the fighting is against other races, the selective
hatred is selecting a broader group.  What you end up withis one of the
most interesting and compelling foreign films of recent years.
Russell Crowe stars as the evil, leader of the skinhead group we
follow.  They beat two Orientals whom had the badluck of crossing the
path of the men.  The point is made early: Women or Children they're
still not as pure as I.  Watching the scenes of beating in the beginning
and around twenty minutes in are quite tough to stomach.  They are
violent, fast and uncompromising.
Those three words describe not only that scene but infact the entire
film which contains material that will affend most.  This film reminded
me of the great Henry: Portrit of a Serial Killer in the way both show
hainous villians and don't stoop to cliches or sentiment.  The action is
unbiased, not trying to steer you but show you.  Pay close attention to
the scenes of fast paced violence and you will notice teens who have
passed the degree of hatte that most humans never achieve.

Author
Dragan Antulov
In today's world, where movies are entertainment before
anything else, there are fewer and fewer directors who dare
to tackle unpleasant subjects. However, the real test of
filmmaker's courage comes when unpleasant issues are
approached from even less pleasant perspectives. Such
efforts, especially in the climate of "political
correctness", can often create public misunderstanding and
controversies. One of such examples is ROMPER STOMPER,
Australian drama directed by Geoffrey Wright in 1992. Simply
because it dealt certain form of social pathology from
rather unconventional angle, this film was accused of being
too sympathetic towards it and it took festival awards to
silence the critics. These days the film is less known for
its controversies and more because of its principal actor,
Russell Crowe, whose role in it was probably the most
impressive before his future Hollywood triumphs in L.A.
CONFIDENTIAL and GLADIATOR.
The plot begins in Melbourne, town towards which flow the
endless river of Asian, mostly Vietnamese, immigrants who
gradually take over entire neighbourhoods. For many
impoverished and unemployed white youths Asians are
convenient explanation for their own misery, so some
accepted the most extreme form of xenophobic racism and
became skinheads. The small group led by charismatic Hando
(played by Russell Crowe) is just one of many that fight a
war for racial purity by mercilessly beating any Asian
unfortunate to be in their proximity. After a while,
Vietnamese decide that they had enough so they organise and
start fighting back. Hando's group is suddenly faced with
superior numbers and starts to fall apart. Hando and his
lieutenant Davey (played by John Pollock) are forced to run
from Melbourne in order to save their lives. The only
assistance comes in the form of Gabe (played by Jacqueline
Mackenzie), epileptic young woman from well-to-do family,
but her presence would turn out to be the reason of Hando's
final downfall.
While people usually associate skinheads with Germany, the
phenomenon is more widespread. Even Serbia, the country that
tends to boast with its anti-Nazi past, has witnessed
emergence of local skinheads and Great Britain, another
country that was often cited as example of racial harmony,
has recently seen explosion of racial violence and increased
popularity of far right political options. This obviously
global phenomenon receives somewhat unusual and rather risky
treatment in ROMPER STOMPER - instead of taking the easy
route and showing skinheads as brainless and worthless
losers who embraced racism as a way to give some kind of
importance to their sorry existence, Wright takes the hard
route and shows skinheads through their own eyes. In the
process the viewer is not only in position to be acquainted
with very authentic-looking subculture of skinheads and
their way of life (that may be quite seductive for
unemployed and impoverished urban youths), but also with the
whole philosophy preached by Hando and their ilk. While
doing this, Wright nevertheless manages not to romanticise
skinheads - the violence in film is extremely graphic and in
the end skinheads are presented as nothing more than thugs
while powerful yet ironic finale might be viewed as their
final condemnation.
ROMPER STOMPER is at times very powerful and
thought-provoking film, but this impression might be diluted
with some of less fortunate creative decisions. Whole
character of Gabe and the subplot involving her father looks
like an unnecessary diversion from the main story.
Furthermore, otherwise impressive musical score by John
Clifford White doesn't fit well with punk songs that often
play at the wrong scenes. However, Wright was fortunate
enough to have extremely good cast led by Russell Crowe who
is brilliant in playing the character who is charismatic
leader and violent simpleton in the same time. However,
Crowe's performance is outshined by Jacqueline Mackenzie,
one of the most talented Australian actresses, here playing
the complex role of the character that is sexually
attractive and emotionally repulsive in the same time. Her
partner Daniel Pollock (who committed suicide before the
release of the film) is also very impressive in the role of
Hando's lieutenant Davey. All in all, ROMPER STOMPER,
through its naturalistic and unrelenting portrayal of modern
society's darker side, represents one of the most
interesting and most impressive films made in previous
decade.
Review written on September 22nd 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
