Title
Review for Presque rien (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Sébastien Lifshitz's Come Undone is a real challenge to watch - not because
of its content (although there are lots of penis shots), but because of its
structure.  It could take viewers a good 30 to 40 minutes to finally settle
into Lifshitz's story, which almost haphazardly flops around using
flashbacks and flashforwards like they're going out of style.  But if you
can claw your way through it all, Undone becomes increasingly interesting as
it approaches its finale.
Lifshitz's story (co-written by Stéphane Bouquet) focuses on the first love
of college-bound 18-year-old Matthieu (Jérémie Elkaďm), who is vacationing
with his family near Nantes.  Well, most of his family, anyway.  Matthieu's
father is back in Paris because he has too much work, and his mother
(Dominique Reymond), a clinically depressed pill-popper, is only there in
form.  His sister Sarah (Laetitia Legrix) is sarcastic and full of spite,
while Annick (Marie Matheron), a friend of the family, seems to be the glue
that holds the whole dysfunctional bunch together.
One day while at the beach with Sarah, Matthieu locks eyes with a hunky
local lad named Cédric (Stéphane Rideau), a more experienced boy (and
ex-hustler, to boot) who works at a local waffle vendor.  Sparks fly and a
physical relationship quickly follows, despite the fact Matthieu has
apparently had no previous sexual experience, gay or otherwise.  Passionate
trysts turn to ugly spats, and Matthieu becomes somewhat unhinged, leading
up to Undone's gut-wrenching finale...which you kind of see at the beginning
because of the film's screwy construction.
The high point here is the acting, which never once seems like acting.  But
the story is essentially about a shy, quiet boy falling for a rough partner
from the other side of the tracks.  It's nothing new, but worth a viewing if
only for the performances of Elkaďm and Rideau.
