Title
Review for Die xue jie tou (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
Three young street punks flee Hong Kong in 1967, to avoid arrest.  They
go to Vietnam (Saigon), where they plan on becoming "big-time"
smugglers.  Instead, they become petty criminals, until they steal a
gold shipment and are chased by the South Vietnamese Army, the criminals
they stole the gold from, and the Vietcong!  A male "buddy" film, loaded
with the shootouts and extreme violence that characterize John Woo's
films.
Hong Kong (English subtitles), color, 1990, 125 minutes.
Producer/Director/Editor: John Woo
     This is the latest film from Hong Kong's John Woo, whose films
include the stylish THE KILLER, and the film series A BETTER TOMORROW.
Like these films, BULLET IN THE HEAD is a psychological crime story,
loaded with hyper-kinetic mayhem and violence.  The major difference is
that the current film is set in Vietnam during the war, resulting in a
cross between a "gangster film" and a "war film."
     The story concerns three young street hoodlums in 1967 Hong Kong.
Together, they are a small gang, warring against other, larger gangs.
As a result of battling with another gang, they are wanted by the
police.  To escape arrest, and to start over in life, they go to Saigon,
with dreams of becoming rich smugglers.
     In Saigon things don't go as planned.  Instead of becoming big
smugglers, they end up as small-time hoodlums and thieves.  They get
involved with a beautiful singer from Hong Kong, who is being held
captive (and sold as a prostitute) by the owner of a night-club.  They
befriend a local gunman, who is also in love with the singer, and who
has worked for the night club owner.
     Together with the local gunman, they raid the night club in a
massive shootout (using dynamite, machine guns, shotguns, etc.) to free
the singer and steal a gold shipment from the nightclub owner.  They get
the gold, but must then try to keep it, and somehow stay alive, as they
are chased by the South Vietnamese Army, the criminals they stole the
gold from, and the Vietcong as well.
     The major themes of the film are the friendships between the young
hoodlums, and the loosely defined code of honor they observe.  As in THE
KILLER, these themes are explored against a backdrop of violence.
However, where THE KILLER was limited to small-arms fire, the current
film has the Vietnam war as its background, and the violence includes
high explosives, bazookas, mortars, and helicopter gunships.  Although
the scale of violence has increased, it is also rather impersonal and
mechanical.
     Taken in its entirety, the film does make an interesting contrast
between the small-scale violence of the criminals, and the large-scale
violence of the war.  However, this topic is not directly addressed, as
the primary focus of the film is on the male bonding and relationships
between the criminals.
     Comparing BULLET IN THE HEAD to THE KILLER, John Woo's previous
film, I prefer THE KILLER.  Reasons: 1) the plot of THE KILLER is much
tighter, as it deals with only two major relationships.  BULLET has a
much looser, more diffused plot.  2) Chow Yun Fat, the great actor and
Hong Kong "superstar" who had the lead role in THE KILLER, is not in
BULLET.  His presence is indeed missed!  Also, because of the difference
in scale of violence (war versus criminal gunfights), the viewer may
react to the films differently.  Since much of the violence in BULLET is
mechanized and impersonal, the viewer may not react as strongly as to
the personal violence of THE KILLER.  Some viewers may like the film
more (or less) because of that.
     Because of the extreme violence, I cannot recommend the film to a
general audience.  However, if you like war movies, or you enjoyed the
earlier films of John Woo, it is worth considering.
Distribution: now in its first U.S. theatrical release.  Currently
(7/30) showing in San Francisco at the Roxie Cinema.

Author
Jun Yan
        "Bullet in the Head" is an uneven and flawed film.  It's John
Woo's pet project, the one that he put most heart and soul into.
Comparing to his classic "A Better Tomorrow" and "The Killer", it is more
like a long and excruciating personal nightmare that haunts its creator 
and unexpectedly, has haunted the audience too.  
        The movie opens in the orange glow of a warm and cheerful Hong
Kong in 1967.  Three friends grow up together in the slum: Ben, Frank and
Paul.  On Ben's wedding night, Frank borrows from local gangs to pay for
the wedding's expenses and gets beat up by a rival gang.  In a heated
revenge attempt for his friend, Ben kills the gangster.  To escape jail
and disillusioned by the lack of prospects in Hong Kong, 3 friends decide
to run to Vietnam, at the time on the brink of war, in search of
opportunity to make it big.  
        The trio immediately encounter the brutal reality of Vietnam in a
student protest and bombing.  They nearly get killed.  This may be the
only politically relavent part of the film.  After the 1989 Beijing
massecre, any Chinese could recognize the image of a student protester
standing in front of an army tank.  However, it was never the focus of the
film.  
        They are soon involved in local gangsters' activity and meet Luke,
a hired gunman of Chinese-French origin played by Simon Yam.  It is never
clearly explained why Luke becomes an ally with Ben and co., except that
Ben joins his attempt to rescue his lover, a singer fallen to 
prostitution, from the powerful local gangsters.  A long and exhausting
gun battle follows.  This part of the film feels very much awkward and
detached from the rest of it.  It may be part of the original idea Woo
developed with ex-colleague and ex-pal Tsui Hark, since Tsui's own version
"A Better Tomorrow 3" has similar elements.  Woo might have been hestitant
to give up this idea, but it does not work within the context of the film,
which later grows far beyond this type of genre films.  The brief romantic
interaction also displays Woo's inability to present interesting and
convincing female roles.  
        On the way of escape, the singer dies and more horrible things
happen.  From here the film turns completely upside down to something
extremely disturbing and bleak.  Ben, Frank and Paul are captured by
North Viet army and tortured when mistaken as CIA spies.  In one of the
most horrid scenes, they are forced to execute American POW's.  When Luke
and American troops raid the POW camp and rescue them, Paul shoots the 
injured Frank in the head so that he can escape with a case of gold
alone.  
        Ben lives, and finally finds Luke in Saigon as well as Frank
with a bullet in his head, thanks to his childhood friend Paul.  He has
not died, but simply gone mad ...  Ben puts him out of his misery in a
heart-breaking scene.  And there isn't much left for him to do but go back
to Hong Kong and face up to the now big and powerful Paul.  
        In a rare case since "A Better Tomorrow" in 1986, Chow Yun-Fat is
not involved in Woo's film here.  Although this might be originated from
Woo's dispute with Tsui Hark, it feels an appropriate artistic
decision not to have Chow in this movie, because there is no
larger-than-life hero in this film, only a few small-time young men from
the bottom struggling hard.  Only Simon Yam is the "victim" of Woo's 
ultra-cool make-over. Tony Leung Chiu Wai, a critically acclaimed dramatic  
actor, plays the lead character Ben with vulnerability and credibility,
gives a convincing realism to the grim and brutal picture.  He has
a tender side more low-keyed than Chow's heroes.  Waise Lee again takes up  
the evil role for Woo, but his character Paul is weakly written and lacks 
complexity and smooth transition, more like a neurotic mad dog from early
on.  I never gave enough credit to Jacky Cheung, who started out as a
singer in Hong Kong.  He first surprised me in Tsui Hark's "Wong
Fei-Hung." (Once upon a Time in China)  Here he gives a very convincing
and adequate performance as the childish, good-natured Frank. He may have
overacted a bit here and there, but the POW camp part and madness scenes
are memorable, to say the least.   
        The portrait of Hong Kong in the late 60s to early 70s clearly
carries a sentiment on the director's part, as an era that is long gone
and his youth that is long lost, a past he spent in the slum like the
characters in this film, struggling upward in a seemingly hopeless
situation.  The frustration for a grim fate is so real, the tenderness
in shots of the poor neighborhood is so genuine, that no doubt there
has to be some autobiographical elements.  Such a semtiment has also
prevented Woo from neater and tighter editing, I suspect.  (He also did
the editing.)  The film could have been done better, but it requires
certain emotional detachment unavailable to himself. 
        The theme is the eternal topics of friendship, loyalty, betrayal
and revenge.  It may seem cheesy and corny sometimes, yet particularly
effective and convincing in Ben and Frank's bonding.  On the other hand,
Luke's motivation to help the three is not so persuasive (unless you're a
believer of the "homoerotic undertone" theory that's popular in western
critics).  Neither is the transformation of Paul.  
        The dialogues in Bullet in the Head is cut to minimal, barely
enough to string the story together.  Everything is told by images and
actions. Although Woo is never known for writing smooth dialogues, the
silence here is extraordinary even comparing to his other works. As if the
extreme anguish has muted him, Woo loads the depressing tension upon the
audience as the emotionally exhausting sequences go on and on to the
unbearable limits.
        It is obvious that the film has taken much inspiration from "The
Deer Hunters."  But it's ultimately not about wars, but about friendships
and brotherhood, loyalty and betrayal, memory and pain, and the
degradation of humanity.  It is Woo's usual tendency to push emotions to
the extremes, drag his characters through hell, and test his beliefs and
ideals under the most testing conditions, but it is far darker and more
devastating than any of his other films.  It does not have the energy and
uplifting idealism in his other films, but it focuses more on the
vulnerability of powerless small people.  His films are ruled by heart not
brain. I have a really hard time giving "Bullet in the Head" a grade.
Objectively, it's a B+, with much genuine conflict and high concept in the
second half of the film and an uneven 1st half.  But Woo's films are not
to be judged objectively, especially this one in which he put too much of
himself.  

Author
Will FitzHugh
This is the first John Woo movie I've seen (unless you count 'Hard
Target' which I've tried to erase from my memory) and for the most part
I was impressed.  It starts off weakly, though, as we follow three
friends through some character introduction sequences of sterile gang
fighting (set to the Monkees' 'I'm A Believer'), dancing, and general
goofiness.  I was reminded of some James Dean flick; this is painful
stuff.  One particularly odious scene shows Ben, Frank and Paul racing
bicycles towards the end of a pier in what might be some kind of homage
to the 'chickie run' in 'Rebel Without A Cause'.  Slow motion, overly
dramatic music; I was questioning my decision to go to the movies at
all.
Luckily the action picks up a little as Frank has to borrow money from
a loan shark to pay for Ben's wedding reception and gets bloodied by
some of Ringo's punks while carrying the money.  He and Ben later kill
Ringo and they and Paul hide out in the hills.  They get a job
smuggling penicillin to Saigon and we're off to Vietnam, where the
brutality really kicks in.
They almost immediately run into trouble as they get caught in a riot
caused by an assasination attempt, lose the contraband in an explosion
and get rounded up in the search for the bomber.  These kids are
obviously in over their heads.  After the bomber gets brutally executed
in front of them they go to a nightclub where they get involved with a
Hong Kong singing star who's been kidnapped, addicted to heroin and
forced into prostitution.  She's been enslaved by the gangster they
were supposed to deliver the goods to.  Ben (the married one) falls for
her.  They meet up with another man, Luke, who for some reason trusts
them, and together they set up a raid on the nightclub.  Massive
violence ensues (again set to the Monkees, changing the way I'll listen
to 'I'm A Believer' forever) as they get a chest full of gold and the
girl while wiping out the gangster's army of goons.  Paul begins to
show signs of being a weasel when he urges Luke to drive away with the
gold before Ben and Frank escape.
They escape on a boat but Paul, Frank and Ben are captured by the North
Vietnamese army.  Prison camp.  Forced to shoot Americans.  Torture.
Luke joins Americans in rescue.  Paul and Frank escape with the gold
again but Paul puts a bullet in the wounded Frank's brain when his
screams threaten to give them away.  Paul then shoots Ben while
escaping on a boat with the gold.  All four survive somehow in various
states of mutilation.
Later, Ben and Luke meet up in Saigon and find Frank, a virtual
vegetable, who they put out of his misery.  Ben joins the trail of
refugees to Hong Kong and finds his wife and child.  He also tracks
down Paul, who is now head of a shady corporation devoted to money
laundering.  They fight to the death, eventually ending up by the docks
amid explosions, Paul face down with Frank's skull beside him.  Yow.
It's not too original to compare Woo to Peckinpah.  The action
sequences use lots of angles and slow motion to drag out the violence
to almost unbearable length.  Woo also shows Peckinpah's inability to
realistically portray scenes of normal human interaction; the character
development early in the film is torturous.  But Woo's scenes of the
Vietnam war are chilling compared to American versions.  Never would a
Hollywood director be able to show prisoner killing prisoner.  I hope
his next Hollywood project works out better than... what was the name
of that film?  I can't remember.
