Title
Review for Hoffa (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Frank Maloney
     HOFFA is a film directed by Danny DeVito, from a script by David
Mamet.  It stars Jack Nicholson, DeVito, Armand Assante.  Rated R for
violence.
     HOFFA is quite simply an amazing achievement.  It marks the
emergence of Danny DeVito as a director of the first rank.  It also
marks the reemergence of Jack Nicholson as a major actor, instead of
merely a major ham.  However, HOFFA is a tricky film to take in insofar
as DeVito and David Mamet, the writer, take no moral positions vis-a-vis
Jimmy Hoffa.  They provide us with a few texts to guide us, especially
when Hoffa tells a reporter, "You have to weigh what is lost and what is
gained."  Hoffa was the brilliant leader of the Teamsters Union who also
enmeshed his union with organized crime.  I should say that I am not
neutral myself on this subject, even if I am of two minds.  My father
was an associate of Hoffa and Dave Beck, his predecessor as president of
the Teamsters.  I actually met Hoffa when I was a child.  My father was
subpoenaed to appear before the McClellan Senate Labor Rackets Committee
and earned the undying enmity of Bobby Kennedy.  I am not neutral, be
warned.
     The story is a series of flashbacks, memories as Hoffa and his
longtime (and composite) sidekick (DeVito) wait for a rendezvous with
his secret Mafia partner.  We see how they met in the days when a driver
would be fired and blackballed for being pro-union; we witness an
exciting, bloody, brilliantly directed, horrible battle between
Teamsters and management goons.  We see the secret deal with the mob
that established the union's ascendency.  We see Hoffa's long and very
personal feud with Bobby Kennedy.  All of these scenes and the others
are filtered through the sidekick's eyes and loyalties.  The structure
ensures that DeVito gets at least as much screen time as Nicholson.  But
it also makes it possible to make a film that need not pretend
neutrality or to make judgments.  What we do see through DeVito's eyes
is a complex, tragically flawed, remote and enigmatic leader of
brilliance and a radical devotion to his cause.
     As Hoffa, Jack Nicholson is brilliant, perfect, inspiring.  He
becomes Hoffa.  Nicholson recedes until he is lost entirely.  It is the
performance of a lifetime.  He fully captures the drive and devils that
propelled Hoffa.  It is a performance of nuance and self-effacement.
And it is exciting to watch.
     DeVito does his usual job of being DeVito in his role as the
sidekick, venal, amoral, shy only the dirty laugh of most of his parts.
It's acceptable and it in no way competes with Nicholson.  
     However, as director, DeVito is a brilliant chance-taker and
problem-solver, producing a far less conventional biopic than
"non-Hollywood" Spike Lee's MALCOM X.  We have no childhood prologue, no
family life.  All we have is what the sidekick knows and sees of his
idol.  DeVito employs successfully split screens, creative transitional
devices, and other unconventional story-telling techniques.
     This, I should warn the squeamish, is a rough film: violence,
blood.  The f-word is just about the first one you hear.  There is
worse, too.
     I recommend HOFFA to the rest of you in the strongest of terms.
This is a masterpiece.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Something is missing in Danny DeVito's HOFFA.  It is not the budget and
it is not that the budget seems wasted.  There is a lot of money on the
screen in HOFFA.  The film has an expensive star with a terrific make-up job
(when I first saw the trailer and saw the face on the screen, I though
"Hoffa" first and it took a beat to two to recognize it was Jack Nicholson I
was looking at).  The film also has spectacular action scenes of an acre of
strikers in a melee with an acre of strike breakers.  But what is missing
and what is missed is a human behind the public face of Hoffa.  What this
film says about Hoffa, the man, is that he cusses and drinks coffee.  Just
about everything else about him in this film you could find in a good
encyclopedia.  That is, everything that is true in the film.  In an
afterword to this review I will give a few facts that do not square with
this fictionalized version of the professional life of Jimmy Hoffa.  There
are probably other major deviations from the truth in this film.
     As the film opens, Hoffa (played by Nicholson) is at a roadside diner
with his longtime friend Bobby Ciaro (played by Danny DeVito outdoing the
major role Spike Lee gave himself in MALCOLM X).  Together they are waiting
for the arrival of a third party.  As they wait Ciaro remembers their long
career together.  They meet when Hoffa is a young man preaching the evangel
of the union.  Ciaro soon learns that his new acquaintance is happily
willing to break the law and to hurt whomever he has to for the sake of
organizing labor.  While DeVito's character never finds love and looks for
one-night stands, DeVito the director here finds his own true love--the
overhead shot.  Through much of the rest of the film DeVito carries on his
torrid love affair with overhead shots.  DeVito and overhead shots seem
inseparable until in the last third he has a quick affair with artistic
scene transitions.
     DeVito's infatuation with overhead shots and artistic scene transitions
notwithstanding, he does show some nice visual sense.  One gets the
impression that Hoffa (like the other enigmatic anti-hero of this film
season, Dracula) rarely ventures forth in the daytime and then only when it
is heavily overcast.  This gives us a dismal recreation of Detroit.  Hoffa
comes off as a creature of the night more than willing to deal with the
underworld if it suits the purposes of the union.  Since we see almost none
of Hoffa's personal life and little positive in his professional life, we
are understandably ambivalent as to the fate of the union leader.  Hoffa
seems likable only when he is verbally tying knots in Robert Kennedy (played
by Kevin Anderson).  Kennedy, as you might guess, comes off less than
favorably in this film.
     DeVito's HOFFA is sometimes well-photographed and sometimes not.  But
its biggest failure is in getting us to care what happens to Jimmy Hoffa.
My rating is a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Afterword (with minor spoiler):  Jimmy Hoffa disappeared on Wednesday,
July 30, 1975.  He expected a meeting at the somewhat fancy restaurant, the
Manchus Red Fox.  It is thought he was meeting a local crime figure.  He
arrived at the restaurant at about 2 PM.  After a half hour, he called his
wife to tell her that the others had failed to appear.  At 2:45 PM or so he
was seen in the parking lot getting into a car with some other men.  This is
clearly not events as shown in the film.  Also, one might wonder why in the
film Bobby Ciaro chooses this day to remember his whole past with Hoffa.

Author
Andrew Hall
     Picture the life of controversial Teamsters leader Jimmy Hoffa
through the eyes of Louie DePalma from TV's TAXI and you have HOFFA,
Danny DeVito's new film starring himself and Jack Nicholson.
     DeVito tells us Hoffa's story through the eyes of Bobby (DeVito),
Hoffa's right-hand man, who watches with admiration the labor leader's
rise from union agitator to president of the Teamsters.  They are close;
Bobby even goes to jail with Hoffa.
     While Jack Nicholson is absolutely amazing as Hoffa (if you've ever
seen newsreel footage of Jimmy Hoffa, you'd swear Nicholson *was*
Hoffa), DeVito has miscast himself terribly as Bobby.  Unfortunately,
DeVito has not established that he can play any character other than
himself, a character too familiar to moviegoers.  In a historical drama,
with Nicholson so convincing, DeVito as himself just stands out and
ruins the effect.  Nicholson's performance is diminished.
     Aside from his own miscasting, DeVito's Bobby is also far too big a
role in the film.  We see *every* shot of Hoffa through Bobby's eyes; in
fact, there are some scenes with Bobby *without* Hoffa.  Actually, if you
didn't know who Hoffa was (my non-American companion didn't), you might
have guessed that this was a film about Hoffa *and* Bobby.
     Sadly, this storytelling device just doesn't work in HOFFA.  A more
traditional "omniscient director" approach probably would have worked
much better.  Nicholson is so good, why not just let him run with it?
     Another plot device that is even worse is the flashback.  The
*whole movie* is a flashback from just before Hoffa disappears, the
"present" time of the film.  Unfortunately, DeVito keeps cutting back
from the "present" (which has it's own little subplot)  to Hoffa's life
as it unfolds.  These cuts disrupt the entire flow of the film.  DeVito
used this same approach in THE WAR OF THE ROSES, a comedy, where it
seemed to work better.  Again, the more traditional approach of just
letting the drama unfold from start to finish might have helped.  Or,
just making Hoffa's life one big flashback (with no disruptive subplot)
could have worked better, too.
     So what really happened to Jimmy Hoffa when he disappeared in 1975?
We still don't know, but DeVito gives us his best guess at the end of
the film.  Since we don't know, I would have preferred to have the film
end without this speculation.
     Some have complained that DeVito's film is far too sympathetic to
Jimmy Hoffa.  Hogwash!  These are the probably the same people who
condemned Oliver Stone for not making JFK a documentary.  A director
should be able to say whatever he wants in a film.  It's JUST a movie
for crying out loud!  It's entertainment.  We don't have to go see it.
     Despite it's flaws, HOFFA is certainly worth seeing just for
Nicholson's performance (although it helps to know a little about Hoffa
first).  And there are some neat camera moves and edits in the film that
make it hardly dull.  Still, Nicholson's acting could have been the
thread of a masterpiece instead of a disappointment.

Author
Craig Good
     This weekend turned into a Jack Nicholson/J. T. Walsh Film Festival
for me.  I saw HOFFA on Christmas night, and I just got back from seeing
A FEW GOOD MEN.  If all you want is a horse race, then it's A FEW GOOD
MEN by a length.
     I'm ambivalent about HOFFA.  I'm still impressed with DeVito the
director, and all the performances are good.  It's obvious that Jaaaack
relished his role.  The production is well mounted, and the scope is
broad.  Mamet's dialogue is his usual combination of genius and
expletives.  But HOFFA faces the same challenge as films such as THE
GODFATHER and GOODFELLAS: to make us care about people who are
criminals and creeps.  The Godfather films all succeeded.  For me,
GOODFELLAS failed.  I put HOFFA somewhere in the middle.  I came away
with the feeling that I was now fairly knowledgeable about someone who is
still somewhat of an enigma.
     The film is told in flashbacks and has a mostly chronological
structure.  The mere chronicling of Jimmy Hoffa's career is almost
enough enough structure for a story.  Almost.  HOFFA isn't so much a
story as it is a biography.  And while the film didn't try to whitewash
the man, I sensed some sort of misplaced admiration for him.  Perhaps
that was simply the primary symptom of its failure.  But it is a good
movie, and people who liked BUGSY and GOODFELLAS will probably enjoy
it.
     I'm happy to report after seeing his latest that Rob Reiner's
stunning track record as a director is unsullied.  Everybody connected
with A FEW GOOD MEN delivers, and nobody disappoints.  The performances
by Cruise, Moore, and Nicholson reminded me just why they are big name
stars.  Cruise's disarming performance allows us to watch an
intelligent, if at first slothful, character in the process of thinking,
and Moore proves that she's not just the pretty girl who can cry on cue.
Jack's part in A FEW GOOD MEN is smaller in screen time than in HOFFA,
but he practically *is* the third act.  This is a solid *story*, and
Cruise's character walks away a much different man than the one at the
start of the film.  
     If you still haven't figured out the J. T. Walsh reference, it's
because he has supporting roles in both films.

Author
Ron Hogan
1)  Readers of my review of GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS know about how I took to
a description of David Mamet as our "goombah Pinter."  We're somewhat
fortunate to have two Mamet-scripted films released so closely together,
but even a Mamet fan such as myself has to admit that this isn't his
strongest work.  Though I think that part of the reason that this is the
case is that Mamet is either writing against his best qualities or that
those qualities were ignored during the transformation from script to
screen.  As I noted before, one of Mamet's best assets is the ability to
show character not through grand action, but naturalistic dialogue.  And
while some scenes of HOFFA display that asset, most notably the framing
sequence outside the diner on the last day of Hoffa's life, there are
many other cases in which characters prove themselves through speaking
not as a natural outflow of the situation, but as mouthpieces for some
position or standpoint.
2)  In his book ON DIRECTING FILM, Mamet calls for the same minimalism
is film technique that he does in writing.  He describes film as "a
succession of images juxtaposed so that the contrast between these
images moves the story forward in the mind of the audience," and argues
that "you should always be striving to make a silent movie."  He
directly acknowledges his debt to Eisenstein for this notion of film
art.  Which becomes relevant to the discussion of HOFFA not only because
of Mamet, but because HOFFA, like Einsenstein's best films, is about the
politics of labor and class struggle (which I'll address more fully in
#7).  On the stylistic level, Danny DeVito does seem to borrow some
visual tropes from Eisenstein, especially in the strike scenes.  I'm
thinking of the trial sequence in particular, told primarily through
overlapping close-ups and other purely cinematic flairs: dissolves et
al.  Getting the story told through the way that the shots are
connected, rather than having everything explained.  As Mamet says, "the
audience requires not *information* but *drama*," and HOFFA provides
more of the latter than the former.
3)  But since this is a biographical film, information is required.  I
have noticed a very strong resurgence in the biographical film within
the last few months.  Early in the fall, of course, we had the Columbus
films, then MALCOLM X, now HOFFA and CHAPLIN.  As these films, and the
biographical films of Oliver Stone (to pick another recent example)
show, a biographical film is *always* a political film.  Of course, any
film is a political film in that it presents an ideological position,
but this is especially true of films that make a claim to represent
history.  They are equivalent to saying "this *is* the way the world
is."  Because of film's powerful mimetic qualities, the images in
historical/biographical films attain a certain level of reality within
our culture.
4)  In my review of MALCOLM X, I mentioned that the film was positioning
Malcolm as a role model, a positioning that is fairly standard within
the biographical film.  If a film doesn't call for direct emulation of
its biographical subject, it generally calls for appreciation.  I caught
some flak for this from one reader, on the argument that Malcolm X isn't
his idea of a great role model.  I imagine that if I were to make the
same claim in the same way for Jimmy Hoffa, I would receive the same
kind of complaints.  So I'll have to say that while the historical Jimmy
Hoffa leaves a lot to be desired as a role model, the protagonist of
HOFFA is clearly meant to have heroic qualities that the audience is
intended to appreciate.  He's a tough guy, a nobler version of the
characters I was talking about in earlier reviews--capitalist warriors.
5)  And not just a warrior, but a general, an organizer of the army of
workers.  In this respect, I see a very strong parallel with MALCOLM X:
both protagonists organize a disenfranchised group in the struggle to,
as Hoffa puts it, "get what we came down here for."  The scene in which
Hoffa makes his, "In every conflict there are casualties" speech feels a
lot like the scene in MALCOLM X in which Malcolm organizes the show of
force outside the police station and the march to the hospital.  In both
cases, it's an issue of "what has been lost?  what has been gained?"
And, as the police officer says of Malcolm, Hoffa is dangerous precisely
because of the amount of power he holds--"that's too much power for one
man."  Odd that both men had to be deposed from their positions of
power, and then silenced by assassination.
6)  The thing about Hoffa is that he "a man who isn't afraid to get his
hands dirty."  His particular claim to power in HOFFA is that he is a
working man, like the working men that he represents.  But even more so.
"I'm gonna do what I gotta do"--takin' care of business isn't just a
job for Hoffa, it's the core of his being.  Arguably, he is not only the
leader of the forces of labor, but the archetype of Labor itself.  As I
said, though, this point is open to a lot of debate.
7)  Now, on to the issue of class struggle.  The banquet speech in which
Hoffa claims that the Teamsters have brought the workers into the middle
class is one of the most telling of the film.  It starts with the riot
outside the factory, where the capitalist overlords look down on the
rabble from the top floors of their "castle."  (By the way, one of the
most classically Eisensteinian sequences of the entire movie)  At that
point, the workers *are* just the rabble, but Hoffa and the Teamsters
struggle to raise the class level of labor.  Pensions for laborers and
so on, culminating in visions such as retirement villages for Teamsters.
8)  Robert Kennedy makes a very interesting statement with regard to
this point: the statement that there is a danger of "co-option of the
field of labor" by Hoffa and his cronies.  So what Hoffa sees, and the
audience is supposed to see, as the liberation of the working class, is
characterized by its opponents as a "co-option."  RFK becomes a figure
representing the "ruling classes" holding the workers in ideological
bondage, and becomes a quasi-"bad guy" within HOFFA because of his
opposition to the methods in which Hoffa attempts to liberate the
working class--or is that opposition not just to the methods, but to
the very concept of a liberated field of labor?
9)  Politics enters into play again with Hoffa's pardon by Nixon, and
the special deal worked out between Teamster leaders and Charles
Coulson, Nixon's special counsel.  I don't have enough of a background
in Nixon history to comment too much on this, but the power dynamics--
further connection between government and labor--point in interesting
directions.
10) I've saved the ending of the film for the end.  Since this is a 
biographical film, and everybody knows Hoffa is dead, I don't consider
that revelation a spoiler, though I will refrain from revealing the
means posited within the film.  I will say, however, that any historical
film has to deal with the issue of portraying that which is known and
that which is not known about its subject, and the creation of an
effective (i.e., narratively seamless, in the Classical Hollywood Cinema
tradition) union of the two.  By that nature, all historical films are
conjectural, as is all history for that matter.  Interesting historical
criticism on these points includes Hayden White, Michel de Certau, Simon
Schama, and Carlo Ginzburg.  As for specific discussion of biographical
film, I'd recommend George Custen's BIOPICS.  A useful introduction to
the issues at stake in biographical motion pictures, though it limits
itself to the heyday of the studio system, and makes the (in my humble
opinion) mistaken claim that the biographical film has since diminished
in importance.  As I said in point #3, it's very strong now, and I feel
it's here to stay.
