Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
Number of Reviews
22

Author
Walter Frith
Tom Cruise recently won the Best Actor prize bestowed by The National
Society of Film Critics for his frenzied and poignant portrayl of a
sports agent who develops a conscience in a very unethical business
where the almighty dollar is sometimes put above the health and well
being of professional athletes and where kids are turned away from
receiving autographs from their sports icons because the icons are
under contract to only sign specified merchandise.  After distributing
a manual venting his frustration with the business he is dropped like a
hot potato by his boss at the agency where he works and manages to
retain only one client who's a second string wide receiver with hopes
of a big NFL contract.  The wide receiver is played in a supporting
role by Cuba Gooding Jr. who along with lead actor Cruise should be
Oscar bound for his selfish portrayal of a man with an enormous chip on
his shoulder and whose attitude is keeping him from fitting in with the
big leagues.  After losing his job Cruise is dumped by his girlfriend
and soon to be wife from hell (Kelly Preston) and becomes involved with
a young widow (Renee Zellweger) who has an adorable six year old son.
Director Cameron Crowe ('Say Anything') has crafted a special film with
touching aspects suited for both men and women.  The balance found in
the sports and the relationship aspects of the film make this a great
date movie and in particular a great first date movie.  Tom Cruise
gives his most uplifting performance to date and no one can argue about
Cruise's diversity and talent as an actor after seeing this movie.
>From his roles in 'The Color of Money' (1986) to 'Rain Man' (1988) to
'A Few Good Men' (1992) where fellow actors Paul Newman, Dustin Hoffman
and Jack Nicholson have all praised Cruise for his ability.  Jerry
Maguire paints a very real picture of present day sports where
integrity and ethics do have a place and where hard work and
determination can make a difference.  It's all in the desperation and
Cruise convinces us of that.

Author
John Schuurman
Written and Directed by Cameron Crowe.
This film has a lot going for it. First, it is going to do
well commercially. It has all the right stuff. For starters,
it has Tom Cruise who is pretty AND he can act. (He is smart
too -- look for him to direct in a couple of years.) This
film is his finest achievement yet. Additionally, it is a
sports movie that actually works. (Most don't -- this one
does because it only incidentally includes sports.) Plus it
is a delightful love story and has an adorable kid.
But then this: it is also a serious and biting expose of one
of America's powerful sub-cultures. Like Robert Altman's
NASHVILLE, this film swoops in on a little fragment of
American life -- one  that has power far beyond itself --
and lays bare its inner workings, its cynicism, its greed,
and above all, its shameless exploitation of the ones about
whom it purports to care the most. This movie says to our
entertainment and sports crazed society, "Deceive yourselves
no longer. Your cherished notion of innocuous entertainment
is rubbish. This world is controlled by sharks." 
NASHVILLE and JERRY MAGUIRE are also alike in that neither
are content to confine their scrutiny to the sub-culture in
question. Both make searing commentary on the broad stream
of American culture that has made the aberrant sub-culture
possible in the first place. The movies are both about the
morally bereft society that has made gods (with clay feet)
out of a small handful of talented but otherwise mediocre
individuals.
In this regard, JERRY MAGUIRE is not nearly so cynical as
NASHVILLE and that is doubtless why it will succeed
commercially but also why it could be charged with naivete.
Given the world of power and cut-throat dealing in human
flesh that the film exposes, it is perhaps silly for
writer/director Crowe to suggest that a higher and better
way is possible in the sports management industry. But the
whole film is built on such a premise: Although greed and
exploitation have a lock on big time sports, there are rare
and precious occasions when  conscience awakes, truth means
something, commitments are kept, and something other than
power and money can win the day. It is a nice film that way.
If you like following professional sports, it lets you hope
some. (But watch yourself.)
The film also has a great device that runs throughout.
Jerry's mentor, an aging salesman, an old warrior of the
deal -- all smiles, all positive-thinking hype -- sits at
his desk and gives salesmanship lessons right out of the
latest self-help and motivational pap from the empowerment
circuit. You think of it as a running gag until his last bit
of advice: "Love your wife. Love your life. Be true. Be a
good person." This last bit hijacks the movie out of the
cynical and into the hopeful. 
Crowe has pulled off a substantial trick here. From within a
sub-culture very like the one he is examining, he has provided a
vehicle that will enjoy a successful run and will also (hopefully)
cause some much needed self-examination. 
for other reviews by John Schuurman see:
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html

Author
Steve Kong
I hardly cry during movies, the last one that made me really shed tears was
The Joy Luck Club. Jerry Maguire joins the ranks of a few films that have
been able to make me shed a tear.
As the film opens we find out about Jerry Maguire (Tom Cruise). Jerry is a
cocky sports agent who is on top of everything. He sounds like a happy guy
until he starts to see that he hates himself and hates the place in the
world that he occupies. So, during one raining night in a hotel room, Jerry
begins to write about everything that should be done in the sport agency
business. He writes a 25-page mission statement and distributes it to
everyone in the office.
Expecting the worse, he walks into the hotel lobby the find everyone
clapping and cheering him for such a candid look at the business. A few
days later Jerry is fired.
The story goes from here to see Jerry and his fiancee, Avery (Kelly
Preston), Jerry and his only client Rod Tidwell (Cuba Gooding Jr.), and
Jerry and office assistant Dorthy Boyd (Renee Zellweger). Jerry soon breaks
off his relationship with Avery, and starts one with Dorthy.
The story follows Jerry as he changes from a man who has all heart put into
his work and no heart at home, to a man who learns to balance the two. To
contrast this, we also follow Rod Tidwell, who has all his heart at home
but none at work. We see through the movie how these two men change and
learn to change from each other.
Tom Cruise, coming off his Mission:Impossible movie, does a great job as
Jerry Maguire. I think that Cruise is better suited for this sort of role
more than the testosterone-laden role in Mission:Impossible. Cuba Gooding
Jr. puts on screen one of the best performances of the film. And is well
worth the Academy Award that he won. But the true standout performance is
from the new comer, Renee Zellweger as Dorthy Boyd. Her Dorthy is one that
pulled me into the film. Dorthy is a 26-year-old single mother, who has
"had three lovers in the last four years. All coming in second to a warm
bath and a good book." If anything watch Jerry Maguire for Zellweger.
Other performances that stick out are Regina King as Rod Tidwell's loving
wife and Bonnie Hunt as Dorthy's overprotective sister. Also worth
mentioning is Jonathan Lipnicki as Dorthy's (sometimes too) cute son, Ray.
The only complaint that I have is that Zellweger is not one screen as much
as she should been.
Bruce Springsteen has a beautifully serene song, Secret Garden, the plays
twice during the film.
Jerry Maguire is a film that proves that not all films coming out of
Hollywood are completely mindless. Jerry Maguire is a smart funny romantic
comedy. It is populated by character's that are not flat, but well rounded
and make you truly care for them. Jerry Maguire is the perfect film to see
with your significant other.

Author
ismailp@removethiscapsure.net
JERRY MAGUIRE: Why is it that in every Tom Cruise movie of late, he has
to show the entire range of his acting abilities?  Going from primal
rage to a sensitive 90's man in under 120 minutes seems to be his
specialty.  Leaving that aside, I found the movie rather disjointed.  It
had a jerky start & stop feel, instead of flowing effortlessly from one
scene to the next.
There was only one good scene which stuck in my mind: Cruise & his wife
were talking about the failure of their marriage and how his weekly
trips have become a "welcome break" from the daily drudgery of polite
conversations which epitomized their relationship.
The worse scene in the movie was when he came back to her, ready to pour
out his heart in front of the bitter old maids club.  Instead, he
rambles on about nothing, and just as he was about to continue, his
teary eyed wife says: "Shut up, you had me from the word Hello."  WHAT
THE %&*@ IS GOING ON HERE????!!!!!  This is completely inconsistent with
her character.  She's been blaming him for lack of intimacy, but just as
he was ready to spill the beans, she effectively says "Nevermind."
There were also numerous annoying & cliched "Hollywood" touches which I
won't bother going into.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 12/13/96 (wide)
Running Length: 2:18
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, sexual situations, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Tom Cruise, Cuba Gooding Jr., Renee Zellweger, Regina King, 
      Bonnie Hunt, Jay Mohr, Jonathan Lipnicki, Kelly Preston
Director: Cameron Crowe
Producer: James L. Brooks
Screenplay: Cameron Crowe
Cinematography: Janusz Kaminski
Music: Nancy Wilson
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     Every time I think Hollywood has slipped beyond redemption, someone 
in the system produces a film like JERRY MAGUIRE that renews my faith.  
Apparently, creativity is not dead in the mainstream movie market -- not 
entirely, at least.  This is the kind of movie that reminds me why I 
started reviewing in the first place.  JERRY MAGUIRE is magic on 
celluloid -- fresh, funny, romantic, and upbeat.  You'll leave the 
theater with a smile on your face and perhaps a tear in your eye.
     Personally, I never really bought Tom Cruise as the action lead in 
MISSION IMPOSSIBLE.  Here, however, the actor is playing to his 
strength, which lies in an arena that demands less testosterone.  Leave 
the stunts and explosions to Schwarzenegger and Stallone.  Cruise is 
best when he stays low key and flashes the occasional smile.  And, in 
this picture, surrounded by a superlative supporting cast, his ability 
shines.  JERRY MAGUIRE works because we root for the title character, 
and it's Cruise's performance that forges the link between his screen 
personae and the audience.
     As the movie opens, super sports agent Jerry Maguire is facing a 
crisis of conscience (that he still possesses one after working in such 
a cynical, materialistic business is something of a miracle).   He 
wonders what he has become -- "Just another shark in a suit?"  He 
realizes that he hates himself and his place in the world, and laments 
that, although he has a lot to say, no one will listen.  So, late one 
night, he writes a Mission Statement called "The Things We Think and Do 
Not Say: The Future of Our Business".  The essay attacks the sports 
agency business, advocating a more humane approach.  The next day, a 
copy is distributed to everyone in the office.  And, although Jerry's 
co-workers applaud his courage ("Somebody finally said what had to be 
said"), his bosses are offended, and he loses his job.  Only one client, 
unremarkable Arizona Cardinals tight end Rod Tidwell (Cuba Gooding Jr.), 
elects to remain with Jerry as he strikes out on his own.  Also joining 
him is a 26-year old single mother, Dorothy Boyd (Renee Zellweger), who 
is so moved by Jerry's Mission Statement that she's willing to throw 
away a safe job to be part of his new venture.  
     In an era of downsizing and force reductions, it's easy to 
understand what happens to Jerry.  He speaks his mind, crying out for 
compassion and caring, only to be slapped down.  He is branded as a 
loser because he dares to swim against the heartless, prevalent business 
currents.  Jerry finds himself in deep, uncertain waters, but his 
indefatigable spirit, bolstered by tireless support from Rod and 
Dorothy, helps him navigate the most dangerous eddys.
     JERRY MAGUIRE is about redemption and love.  It's about finding 
one's heart and soul in a business climate that attempts to rip both 
away.  Writer/director Cameron Crowe, who previously helmed SAY ANYTHING 
and SINGLES (in addition to scripting FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH) 
brings both a strong sense of verisimilitude and a lively wit to his 
film.  Even as JERRY MAGUIRE reaches out to the heart, it tickles the 
funny bone.  Not only does Crowe have a knack for creating multi-
dimensional personalities for secondary characters with minimal screen 
time, but he uses traditional formulas in unique ways to serve his 
themes.  For example, a common sports cliche is integrated into JERRY 
MAGUIRE in such a way that it doesn't seem cheap or overdone.  It's not 
the point of the movie; it's just another piece in the overall puzzle.
     Cruise, always a popular box-office draw, shows why he got to the 
top.  With a fine performance, he forms the glue that holds the 
production together.  Of course, it helps that the cast includes three 
stupendous supporting actors, not to mention a child performer (Jonathan 
Lipnicki, playing Dorothy's son) who threatens to steal several scenes 
on cuteness alone.  
     Cuba Gooding Jr., who was excellent years ago in his BOYZ 'N THE 
HOOD debut, but hasn't done much since, invests Rod with a remarkable 
level of energy and enthusiasm.  And, although his favorite phrase is 
"Show me the money!", we recognize quickly that a love of family, not 
greed, is what motivates this athlete.  Regina King (CLOCKERS) is 
wonderful as Rod's fanatically supportive wife.  With a standout 
performance, she transforms what could have been an minor role into 
something noteworthy.
     Then there's Renee Zellweger (THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD), who will 
undoubtedly receive raves for her portrayal of Dorothy, a determined 
woman following her own vision of the yellow brick road.  Zellweger 
displays an appealing blend of strength and vulnerability, and her 
chemistry with Cruise is nearly perfect.  Their first romantic scene is 
charged with a playful, but undeniable, eroticism.  If there's one 
downside to the actress' appearance in JERRY MAGUIRE, it's that she's 
not on screen enough.  And, even if Jerry isn't immediately smitten,  we 
are.
     While the budding romance between Jerry and Dorothy is JERRY 
MAGUIRE's most enchanting element, the remainder of the film has the 
necessary appeal to keep our attention when Zellweger isn't around 
(Cruise, on the other hand, is in just about every scene).  Crowe, who 
doesn't have a subpar entry on his short resume, has crafted another 
winner here.  In fact, with its attention to detail, top-notch 
performances, and universal themes, JERRY MAGUIRE marks his most 
successful movie to date.  For anyone who has forgotten the feelings 
that a wonderful movie can trigger, JERRY MAGUIRE provides a welcome 
reminder.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Cameron Crowe
Starring: Tom Cruise, Renee Zellweger, Cuba Gooding Jr, Bonnie Hunt,
Kelly Preston, Jonathan Lipnicki, Regina King, Jay Mohr, Jerry
O'Connell, Beau Bridges, Todd Louiso, Glenn Frey, Eric Stoltz
About a year ago, this film came out, and everyone went gaga.  Reviewers
crowned it as one of the best big budget/big production company films of
the year, and it grossed well over 100 million bucks.  A couple months
later, it was the only big-brand film to do any kind of respectable
business at the Oscars (garnering a supporting nod towards Cuba Gooding
Jr, who needed the career boost).  And Tom Cruise proved that he can
actually act so well that he pretty much becomes the character.  It's
the movie everyone loves...well, except for little old me.
I saw "Jerry Maguire" a couple weeks after it came out with very high
expectations.  As you can tell, it had a lot to live up to.  And for the
first third (a little over a half hour), it was really, really good.  I
mean, I was into the story, I cared about the characters, and the
direction and writing were fantastic.  But then at some point, the film
dove into hokey, corny-as-hell, and bizarre waters, and eventually
seemed to collapse under its own weight.  I couldn't believe that the
film that had started off so good had turned into a mess.
But anyway.  The story is all about a sports agent named Jerry Maguire
(Cruise).  Jerry's a rat, but a likable rat, and he explains all about
himself and his work in the great beginning of this film, using
voice-over narration by Maguire himself, and some great montages linked
together to create a seductive, engulfing, and totally intriguing
opener.  Jerry, who's job requires him to lie through his teeth and use
people right and left, has gained a concious after a long time.  We're
not exactly sure why, but when a young son of one of his clients cusses
at him, it seems to be the catalyst for his awakening, although it seems
that it has been a gradual decent into goodness.
In a sweat-full insomniac night at a hotel, Jerry writes a long,
heart-felt "mission statement," where he pours out how he thinks the
agenting business should be more human, and better to their clients.  He
sends this out to everyone in his office who's at the hotel, and pretty
soon he's gotten recognition for saying what they all wanted to say, but
didn't have the guts.  Then he gets fired.  Quickly, he tries to go out
independently, and grabs only one client out of his bunch: Rod Tidwell
(Cuba), a cocky, self-absorbed, but loving husband/football player.  He
also gets only one person from his office to go with him to be his
secretary or something: single mom Dorothy Boyd (Renee Zellweger), who
has a bit of a crush on him.  Then he leaves with Renee, Cuba as his
client, and a fish.  I re-watched it a couple times, to give it more of
a chance, and I pinpoint that the time the film goes painfully downhill
is once he walks out the door.
Jerry has already gone through the business awakening, but he also has
that whole love awakening to go through.  Earlier at a big party thrown
for him, a bunch of his previous girlfriends diss him on a special video
for him (nice gift).  And he begins falling in love with his secretary,
Dorothy, which is way too hokey and unoriginal to do, in my humble
opinion.  If he could have fallen in love with someone else, maybe.  But
soon he and Dorothy are falling in love, having some sex, getting
married, and soon this subplot falls totally apart.
And the subplot with Cuba also falls apart.  The thing that this movie
wants to do with this is to draw a paralellism between the two, how
Jerry has trouble with love, and Cuba has trouble with giving his all
sportswise.  It goes okay for a while, although it seems to be highly
edited in contrast to the Dorothy subplot.  But then its concluded with
a bit of luck.  Cuba goes through no awakening, and is therefore there
for no apparent reason, other than to give Jerry a client.
The screenplay is kind of half and half.  Crowe has a definite knack for
dialogue (there's this one very long line that Jerry says in the
beginning that is definitely classic).  But while there are some great
lines and some very good dialogue, there is way too many stupid/corny
lines that are almost guaranteed to make you vomit (i.e. "YOU...COMPLETE
ME!" and all the other lines featured in that crap "Secret Garden"
Maguire-edit).
On a plus side, the acting is excellent.  Zellweger, who I don't really
like, gives a very good performance, although there's this one scene
where she looks absolutely stupid trying to get mad at Tidwell.  Preston
proves herself a lovely scene-stealer as Jerry's girlfriend at the
beginning of the film (her first line is indeed classic).  Bonnie Hunt
is fantastic as Dorothy's sister.  I can't really grade Jonathan
Lipnicki, who's Dorothy's very young son, but let's just say he's
"cute," and leave it at that.  Gooding is amazing, but I'm still not
sure if he should have won that Oscar (I still think it should have been
either Edward Norton or William H. Macy).  In smaller roles, Jay Mohr,
Regina King, and Todd Louiso are great.
But the most amazing part of this film is Tom Cruise.  We all knew he
could act (look at "Rainman" and "Born on the Fourth of July"), but here
he's absolutely incredible.  He becomes the role, gets all his quirks
and little neuroses, and nabbed a well-deserved Oscar nomination.  He's
the best part of the film.
"Jerry Maguire" is, ultimately, a failed idealism.  It tries to be the
emergence of indie fare into big budget fare, but just fails in the
end.  But it's just my opinion, and since everyone else seems to love
it, I could be wrong.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     It's a talented filmmaker who can turn off the Cruise control, but
writer/director Cameron Crowe (SAY ANYTHING, SINGLES) does just that in
this funny and refreshingly frank romantic comedy.  In one of the better
roles of his career, Tom Cruise plays Jerry Maguire, a high-powered
sports agent who has a change of heart, gets fired, and is forced to
practice what he now preaches as his own employee.  (One night, after
spontaneously developing a conscience, Jerry drafts a 27-page Mission
Statement on the subject of integrity.  His employer thinks his Mission
impossible and, one week later, Jerry Maguire is toast.) He leaves the
agency with an accountant, a young, single mother (the charming, but
rather one-dimensional Renee Zellweger) who is so inspired by Jerry's
principles that she walks out the door with him.  Together, they set up
shop and begin directing their energies on a couple remaining clients,
while, of course, falling in love.  Or so we think.
     One of the strengths of Cameron Crowe's writing is that his script
is populated with real, believable people in real, believable
relationships.  Thus, and like life itself, the story takes several
unusual and unexpected turns, one of which explores the reality of what
happens when a lonely guy meets a desperate girl.  Not exactly your
standard formula for romance and that makes JERRY MAGUIRE all the more
rewarding.  Sure, there are other reasons to appreciate this movie:
Crowe's offbeat direction, a hilarious morning-after sequence that's one
of many big laughs, Bonnie Hunt as the cynical older sister/divorcee,
Cruise's chemistry with child actor Jonathan Lipnicki, screen sex that's
actually sexy, and a scene-stealing Cuba Gooding, Jr. (OUTBREAK, BOYZ N
THE HOOD) as the sassy, second-tier football player who helps Jerry get
back in the game.  Go see it.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Phil Curtolo
Tom Cruise emotionally portrays the title character, Jerry Maguire, in
a story of a sports agent who develops a conscience. Maguire is a guy
who has everything to lose, and nothing to gain. So he decides to make a
difference, and types up a mission statement voicing his opinion about
his profession, and distributing them to his co-workers. He gets fired
from his agency and has to attempt to make it on his own.
With the help of Dorothy Boyd (Renee Zellweger) and his only client,
wide receiver Rod Tidwell (Cuba Gooding, Jr.), Maguire sets out on a
mission to get back on top. 
This is definitely another great film for Cruise, as he turns in a
heart-felt performance. Jerry Maguire is up there with some of Cruise's
most memorable characters, including Cocktail's Brian Flannagan, and
Born on the 4th of July's Ron Kovic. His character continually develops
as the film goes on, as Maguire's emotions continue on a windy
roller-coaster ride. 
Jerry Maguire features some cameos and supporting roles by big stars,
both athletes and actors. The Dallas Cowboy's Troy Aikman, the New
England Patriot's Drew Bledsoe and figure skater Katarina Witt are only
a few of the sports stars in the film. Beau Bridges (The Fabulous Baker
Boys), Jerry O'Connell (Joe's Apartment), Bonnie Hunt (Jumanji) and Eric
Stoltz (Pulp Fiction) are a few of Hollywood's stars.
This film is definitely a drama, and it was about 2 hours and fifteen
minutes. Unlike The English Patient, however, Jerry Maguire's audience
was constantly interested, with comedic scenes involving Gooding singing
at a wedding, Hunt blabbing at a women-against-men meeting, and
Dorothy's son, Ray (the adorable Jonathan Lipnicki), who was probably
the funniest part of the movie. He added a child's point of view, as
Jerry confided in him with what was on his mind.
It's hard not to say that all the character's were well developed,
because they were. There hasn't been a film in a while that the audience
felt some thing towards every character in the movie.
This film is very witty, combining hilarious comedy with
heart-wrenching drama. Tom Cruise's performance is definitely
Oscar-worthy and Jerry Maguire should be considered, too.
Grade: A, ***** out of *****

Author
Derek Miner
JERRY MAGUIRE begins where most movies would build up to. Sports agent
Jerry Maguire (Tom Cruise) is one of the most successful agents in the
business. He's got big clients, he's engaged to a beautiful woman (Kelly
Preston), but he's disgusted with who he's become. So, one fateful night
at a convention, he drafts a "mission proposal" for the business,
emphasizing ideals, integrity and personal attention. Needless to say, the
powers that be are not happy with Jerry's sudden realization.
Enter single mother Dorothy Boyd (Renee Zellweger), who is an accountant
in the same agency Jerry works for. Dorothy is so inspired by Jerry's
ideals, she makes the spontaneous decision to join him when he's booted
from the agency. It's a Tom Cruise movie, so there's inevitably a romance
developing here, but it's a very well-paced one. Jerry and Dorothy embark
on a mission to succeed on their own with Jerry's only remaining client,
Ron Tidwell (Cuba Gooding, Jr.), a second-tier football player with an
outrageous personality and a big chip on his shoulder. Tidwell implores
Jerry to "show me the money."
Writer/Director Cameron Crowe has built his reputation slowly, directing
only three features in the last seven years. Each time, though, he
progresses to the next level. SAY ANYTHING (1989) was about young love and
leaving high school. SINGLES (1992) went out into the real world, with
characters who just want to meet people they can be happy with. JERRY
MAGUIRE is by far Crowe's most assured work, with excellent characters and
real heart (and another director-trademark Eric Stoltz cameo). The focus
is not as narrow as in his previous films, however. Instead of
concentrating a few situations and filling the rest out with humorous
asides, he expands the characters, letting _them_ fill out the film. Crowe
balances the comedy and drama effortlessly, allowing his characters to
drive the humor.
Cruise turns in a great performance as Jerry Maguire. The character still
fits the mold of a "Tom Cruise" part, but he doesn't drag it down to the
level of early Tom-Cruise-charm driven characters. Cuba Gooding, Jr.
starts off in what could have been a one-note, over the top performance,
but eventually brings it down to earth for some great moments. Most of the
attention has been focused on the male characters, however. Zellweger is
an attractive young actress, but she is not given a great deal of
substance here, which could move the audience past the initial impression.
It's not that her performance is bad, or that the film suffers because she
isn't as well defined,  but she is only given a few scenes where she could
shine. Regina King, on the other hand, makes a great impression in her few
scenes as Tidwell's wife. Again, the character is not given a great deal
to do, but we can sense how important she is in her husband's life.
JERRY MAGUIRE is one of the best movies of 1996, but probably not "Oscar"
material. The Academy tends to ignore audience-targeted films like this,
and this year saw few "commercial" films that attempted any sort of depth
with their characters anyway (two divergent films, THE FRIGHTNERS and
SWINGERS only stand out in my mind). Cameron Crowe's charcters develop in
a way that has a measure of predictability, but feels real, because
they're likable. JERRY MAGUIRE has a handful of truly great scenes, and a
very engaging story, making it's two-hour-plus running time feel
comfortable rather than dragging. JERRY MAGUIRE should please a wide-range
of audiences, and hopefully, they'll all come out feeling better about
themselves and their ideals.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
JERRY MAGUIRE (1996)
Tom Cruise, Renee Zellweger, Cuba Gooding Jr. Directed by Cameron Crowe
*** and one half stars (out of *****)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
In 1983, Tom Cruise became a star in the brash comedy "Risky Business." 
In the ensuing years, he has made films that ranged from the sublime 
("Rainman") to the...well, to "Days Of Thunder." In the exuberant "Jerry 
Maguire," Cruise's outstanding performance is a powerful reminder that 
beneath that dazzling smile lies one hell of an actor.
Jerry Maguire is an extremely powerful sports agent, a shark who 
manipulates his superstar clients with a combination of ass-kissing and 
motivational seminar babble, while securing them obscene amounts of money 
from team-owners and endorsement packages. One night, in a crisis of 
conscience, he pounds out an inspirational  "mission statement", 
encouraging his company to shift their attitude and focus on fewer 
clients (which, of course, means less money.) Shortly after distributing 
his manifesto, he recognizes that he has committed corporate suicide, but 
the damage is done. Within days, he is fired, and finds himself starting 
over, with one client (Gooding), one employee (Zellweger), and a strong 
sense of desperation.
Jerry Maguire isn't a simple story of redemption. Director Cameron Crowe 
("Say Anything", "Singles") is far more clever. Maguire doesn't 
necessarily want to stop being a shark. He still thrives on the 
adrenaline-charged lifestyle, on being a power player. What he wants is a 
home base, a safe place where he can connect with others on a more human 
level. The joy of the film comes from the unexpected twists in his 
personal journey, and the extremely rich supporting cast.
Cuba Gooding Jr. Is electric as Rod Tidwell, a wide receiver for the 
Arizona Cardinals. He yearns to be a spoiled superstar; for the sheer 
thrill of it, to be sure, but also to build a secure future for his 
loving family. Gooding's outbursts, both of temperament and exhilaration, 
provide some of the film's most satisfying moments.
Playing Maguire's assistant, Renee Zellweger gives a subtle and rich 
performance. As an idealistic single mother, she initially seems 
painfully naďve, but as her relationship with Maguire builds, the 
strength and inherent decency beneath her wide-eyes emerges. The love 
story between her, Maguire and her young son (six year old charmer 
Jonathan Lipnicki, with a beatific smile that lights up the theater) is 
compelling and absolutely credible, a rarity in contemporary films.
After its frenetic start, Jerry Maguire leads viewers on a funny and 
moving tale of love and growth. The combination of Crowe's exceptional 
script and the superior cast, highlighted by Cruise's flawless 
performance, results in one of the years most substantial movies. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I'm sorry little boy.  I can't this sign this kind of card," says
the superrich athlete.  He makes the big money through product
endorsements, not athletic feats, and he can not jeopardize his income
stream by signing anything other than what he has been paid to sign.
Certainly not for some kid, no matter how much the kid idolizes him.
     Athletics is big business -- entertainment business.  That the
athlete is obligated to flex his muscles once a week is secondary.  The
big bucks comes from the advertisers and for them, you need a top notch
agent.  Enter Jerry Maguire.
     Tom Cruise is Jerry Maguire in JERRY MAGUIRE.  Poor Jerry.  His
life is full of problems.  As he puts it, he is "great at friendship,
bad at intimacy.  That's my theme song."  But it gets worse.  One
night, he says, "I had two pieces of bad pizza, went to bed and grew a
conscience."  After that, he writes a twenty-five page mission
statement for the large sports management company for which he works.
In it, he proposes "fewer clients, less money."  This does not endear
him to management.
     In a crowded restaurant, his boss, Bob Suger (Jay Mohr), fires
him.  In the best scene in the movie, they both run back to the office
where they call all of Jerry's clients.  Each promises to kill for
them.  In the end, Jerry loses every one except Rod Tidwell (Cuba
Gooding Jr.).  Rod is a second rate football player with a huge chip on
his shoulder on the field, but a great father off the field.  Rod's
motto is that, "It's not about love.  It's about 'show me the money.'"
You see Rod and his wife Marcee (Regina King) think Rod is worth ten
million, but given his attitude and his mediocre playing, the club
feels that 1.7 million is all the club can offer.  The show has a scene
of the leaks in Rod's house -- he needs more money to make ends meet.
He can barely eke out an existence on his salary.  Such are the
headaches of single digit millionaires.
     The best acting in the show is by Mohr.  His character is so
ruthless, he would not only walk over his mother's grave, he would sell
tickets to it if he could make a buck off of it.  His performance is
frighteningly believable.
     Gooding gives a complex performance as an athlete trying to cope
with instant wealth.  Viewers worth less than a million may have
difficulty understanding Rod's predicament, but Gooding provides heart
and style to the role.
     Tom Cruise's movies inevitably have a love angle.  Someone has to
be there for the female members of the audience to identify with.  In
this film, relative unknown Renee Zellweger plays young widow Dorothy
Boyd.  She is the only one who leaves the agency to come to work for
Jerry's new company.  Although he is her boss and he fondles her, it is
okay since he is Tom Cruise.  He tries to make up for it by making lame
jokes about not wanting to be like Clarance Thomas.  She reassures him
that he is not.
     They have a romance where Jerry is "loyal" to her, and they both
agree that they love him.  Jerry, remember, does not do that intimacy
thing.  My favorite scene between the two of them has her trying to
flirt with him while her young son Ray (Jonathan Lipnicki) swings on
their arms yelling, "One, two, three, swing!"  Lipnicki is a cloyingly
sweet actor who began to get on my nerves.  He suffers from constant
excessive smiling.  The camera (Janusz Kaminski) kept in tight on him
lest we miss any of it.  I also have a problem with a show that has
young kids saying the F word even if it does get laughs.
     "I've had three lovers in four years and all run a distant second
to a good book and a warm bath," confesses Dorothy to her sister Laurel
Boyd (Bonnie Hunt).  She wants a man, and Jerry looks like the real
McCoy.  Dorothy breaks down in tears, but battle veteran Laurel
cautions her, "Take it easy.  Don't cry at the beginning of a date.
Cry at the end like I do."
     The story, written by the director, has many good lines and is
quite upbeat.  Although most of the twists are inevitable, the show
never loses the audience's interest.
     Easily the worst part of the picture is the divorced women's group
that meets regularly at Laurel's house.  This is a pointless subplot
that only serves to stop what is otherwise a high energy movie.  There
is not a single good actress among the group, and their lines are all
trite.  Kaminski even uses a handheld camera in documentary style in a
failed attempt to add authenticity to the scenes.
     My favorite small part of the film is the sound effects.  Listen
to the crushing blows delivered on the football field.  Each blow
sounds like a small car crash.
     Tom Cruise is a highly talented star with sex appeal and a large
group of fans.  I do not think he has ever given a boring performance
although too many of them have bordered on the superficial.  Like a
class of kindergartners after a party, his manic characters have all
the hyper-kinetic activity associated with sugar overload.  His
favorite role of mine remains his teenager with the raging hormones in
RISKY BUSINESS, but I have enjoyed his other work from RAIN MAN to
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  Only in INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE did I not like
his acting.  I am even one of the few people who liked him in FAR AND
AWAY.
     So how is Cruise's performance in JERRY MAGUIRE?  He skims over
the surface without ever touching the water.  His creates a character
that is enjoyable to watch, but one not worth caring about.  As the
star upon which the movie is build, the weakness of his work is the
major disappointment of the film.  His acting in the picture is
interesting, but never as involving as it should be.  Overall JERRY
MAGUIRE is an enjoyable film, but far from a memorable one.
     JERRY MAGUIRE runs too long at 2:15.  This is a comedy, not an
epic.  The film is rated R for sex, brief nudity, some profanity, dope
smoking, but no violence.  Some will call football inherently violent,
but I am not counting it as such.  I had a good time at JERRY MAGUIRE
so I am recommending it and giving it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jeremiah Rickert
Starring:  Tom Cruise, Rene Zellweger, Cuba Gooding Jr., Bonnie Hunt
Written and Directed by Cameron Crowe
     I waited until this one came to cable before watching it.  This time
it was a combination of hype AND Tom Cruise that steered me away.  On some
levels I'm glad I didn't have to fork out any money (not counting the cost
of cable TV) to see this film, on some others it may have been worth it.
     The film sucks us into the world of professional sports from an angle
that is a fairly fresh one:  From the inside of the sports management
business.  Jerry Maguire is a fast-talking, big-money, big-deal, sports
agent with a huge firm who lives and dies by his telephone.  Cruise
portrays him fairly well, not well enough to be nominated for an Oscar,
which he was, but with humor and a bit of genuine vulnerability amongst
that which seems to be simple method-acting with a big nose.  Maguire has
a catharsis and decides that his career lacks soul and his life lacks
purpose and he types out his memo, which flows not from his lust for cash
or his desire to close the deal, but from his heart which he thinks he has
lost along the way.  His fiance, played by Kelly Preston (um...what else
has she been in? Double Cross and SpaceCamp) is a well...psychotic
codependent-type who on the one hand craves honesty, but twists it into
brutality.  She and Maguire are basically in a loveless relationship,
which also seems to contribute to Jerry's "breakdown." (And after a
seemingly gratuitous sex-scene.)
     Jerry gets fired after drafting the memo because he stresses the need
to have less clients which allows for a more personal business
relationship.  He delcares that he's starting his own firm and asks
anyone who wants to come along to get up and follow him.  Only one does, a
soft-spoken accountant Dorothy Boyd played by Rene Zwelleger (Love and a
.45). She is inspired by his memo and decides that to give meaning to her
life, she needs to break off with Jerry.  She seems to have a crush on
Jerry from the beginning and of course, this leads to a love story,
although a basically un-cliched one.  Jerry calls all of his clients and
only one of them will still with him, Arizona Cardinal wide-receiver Rod
Tidwel, played by Cuba Gooding Jr. (Lightning Jack, A Few Good Men).
Gooding won a much deserved Oscar for this role.  Jerry's hole deepens
when he loses a big football prospect and he breaks up with his fiance.
     Thus being without clients, a job, and a fiance, Jerry finds himself
alone and apparently since he has this thing about being alone, he turns
to the only female in his life, Dorothy Boyd.  He shows up at her house
Drunk and after a few minutes of sexual tension he makes his move.  He
seems all the sorrier for it, however.  At the Boyd house we are
introduced to my favorite two characters in the film, Dorothy's sister
Laurel, played wonderfully by Bonnie Hunt (Jumanji, Beethoven) and
Dorothy's son Ray, played by Jonathan Lipnicki (The Jeff Foxworthy Show,
Meego).  Hunt's Laurel is an older, wiser, wry, Curmudgeony, woman who
takes everything with a grain of salt, and has to watch her younger,
skinnier sister go after some good-looking successful guy.  She does it
without actively seeking sympathy, to the point in reveling in her
situation.  There was a very moving (at least to me) scene of her sitting
in the dark eating the leftovers from Jerry and Dorothy's date-dinner
while the two are in bed together.  
     Lipnicki's Ray is a too-smart-for-his-own-good kid, but not all of
the time. To the writer's credit he still does things to remind you he's a
little boy and after a string of films with 8yr olds who talk like adults,
it was refreshing to see a kid be a kid as well as a clever smart-aleck.
     Ray and Jerry bond almost immediately, and that helps faciliate the
relationship between Dorothy and Jerry.  Despite his catharses, Jerry
still becomes a business-robot when on the job, and this slowly begins to
alienate Dorothy, so he proposes and it seems to patch things up for now,
but soon he finds himself taking more and more roadtrips with Rod and
spending less and less time at home.  They eventually separate.  Rod's
lack of stellar success on the field leads to a small contract offer from
the Cardinals.  Jerry eventually tries to convince Rod of the same thing
he had to convince himself of, that you need to play from the heart,
rather than from the wallet.  
     Enough of the plot, on to the criticism.  Crowe does a fine job
juggling three disasters...Jerry's Love Life, Jerry's Career, and Rod's
Contract. All of them are stories in themselves, that revolve around these
characters' lives and Crowe doesn't let any of them get out of hand, and
on the other side of the coin, none of them ends up getting token or
cliched treatment.  One of the thing that bugged me throughout the film,
however, was the casting of Rene Zwelleger as Dorothy.  Don't get me
wrong, she did a fine job, but at times she looks about 15 years old.
When she uttered the line "I am the oldest 26 year old in the world" I
laughed, not because it was funny, but because it was ironic.  She's
another in a long line of blonde waif-like, pouty-lipped women who are
supposed to be wives and mothers, but who look like they are
high-schoolers.  (Liar Liar's Maura Tierney and anything with Gwyneth
Paltrow).  Zwelleger is cute, she is at times even sexy, however, she
looks 15 or 16 and did not seem to fit the character she was playing.  It
bugged me throughout the film.  This certain body-type of woman seems to
be placed in films that evoke an almost Romantic (capital R) appeal, as
in, she's an incredibly cute, spunky, smart, sincere, extremely young
looking, slim, single lonely woman, she's wordly wise, but only looks
16...she'd be a great leading lady.  
Overall, the film was funny, Gooding Jr. and Bonnie Hunt made this film,
in my opinion, and Cruise did just fine.  Despite the fact that I didn't
think she looked the part, Zwelleger did a fine job as well.  Crowe's
directing and writing were top-notch as he kept three solid stories
seperate, equal, and then tied them up in the end.  
Of the $10 a month extra I paid for Showtime, Jerry Maguire was worth $5
(c) 1997 Jeremiah Rickert
--

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
Tom Cruise is Jerry Maguire, a hot shot sports agent with 72 clients
who's yanked back to humanity by the son of a hockey player suffering
his 4th concussion.  Jerry writes a mission statement for his company,
SMI, recommending providing more care for client's welfare by serving
fewer clients and bringing in less money.  This action, while secretly
admired by many, promptly gets him fired.  One accountant, single mom
Dorothy Boyd played by newcomer Rene Zellweger, is inspired to follow
him.  Only one client, Cuba Gooding Jr.'s Rod Tidwell, a second tier
wide receiver for the Arizona Cardinals, remains.
Simply put, "Jerry Maguire" is the best commercial Hollywood film I've
seen so far this year.  Cameron Crowe has written and directed a story
that operates on many levels and rings 100% true on every one of them.
"Jerry Maguire" is a romance, the story of a man going to the bottom
from the top professionally and back again, the story of a man finding
himself, a view into the building of a friendship and those friends
teaching each other life lessons and the story of a single mom
following her heart while raising a son.  It IS a comedy, but it's a
comedy based on real human emotion.
Tom Cruise gives his best performance to date here - he hasn't been
this appealing since "Risky Business" broke him into our
consciousness.  I haven't seen all his competition yet, but I hope he
gets Academy recognition for this role  - he really deserves it.  He's
sexy, charming, frustrated, caring, conflicted, passionate and
honorable.  Rene Zellweger is a find as Dorothy, the woman who
believes she's 'taken advantage' of Maguire at his low point.  The two
have real chemistry together.  Bonnie Hunt is fun as Laurel, Dorothy's
sister, who provides unwished for practical advice all the while
knowing that love is blind.  Cuba Gooding Jr. matches Cruise
toe-to-toe as the washed up footballer needing an attitude adjustment.
Regina King is wonderful as his loving (pregnant) wife Marcy - the two
have a great marriage and it shows (glows?).  Newcomer Jonathan
Lipnicki as Ray Boyd, Dorothy's son, is quirkily adorable, although
also responsible for one of the film's few shortfallings.  It's so
obvious that Lipnicki adores Tom Cruise that he's clearly not acting
and it draws one out of the film.
Technically, this is a quality production all around.  I particularly
liked the soundtrack, which uses snippets of many varied songs to good
effect.  When Cruise cruises the radio dial trying to find something
to
match his mood and settles in with and bellows along with "Free
Falling", it's infectious!
Cuba Gooding Jr.'s motto is 'Show me the money!'.  Well, I've been
shown - I've seen "Jerry Maguire."
It stuns me that I'm saying that "Jerry Maguire" is the best thing to
come out of Hollywood (with the exception of my personal favorite "The
Hunchback of Notre Dame") in 1996. There. I said that about a film
starrung Tom Cruise.
Cameron Crowe has written a first-class screenplay and couple it with
a professional and talented cast and crew. His "Jerry Maguire" is an
old-fashioned romantic and sports comedy, with a multi-threaded story
that dovetails nicely in its several directions, coming nicely
together in the end. I haven't seen this kind of crafting, except from
the independent film arena, in a long, long time. Especially from
Hollywood.
Tom Cruise give his best performance, yet, as the sports agent who
develops a conscience and heart. Jerry Maguire learns the qualities of
loyalty, integrity, friendship and love and Cruise does an admirable
job of portraying this man. Both Maguire and Cruise are charmers.
Cuba Gooding JR., as pro footbal jock, Rod Tidwell, is funny and
flashy and is a major contributor to the humor and quality of "Jerry
Maguire". When he gets, finally, what he wants, you feel good for him
and his wife, played strongly and effectively by Regina King.
Newcomers Renee Zellweger and Jonathan Lipnicki as Cruise' romantic
interest, Dorothy and her little boy, Ray, are solid, if not
exceptional. Crowe uses little Jonathan Lipnicki to very good
advantage, while avoiding overwhelming you with overt cuteness. (For
example, one of the lines to come from the moppet is, "Do you know the
human head weighs eight pounds?" Not typical cute kid dialog.
The rest of the cast, led by Bonnie Hunt, do a good job of keeping the
background characters full and three dimensional. Like real people.
My only complaint is that, toward the end, as Jerry and Dorothy face
their romantic crisis, things drag a little. Fortunately, it picks
itself up quickly and finishes with a flourish.
"Jerry Maguire" is my first place recommendation for your holiday
movie going.

Author
Brian Koller
Tom Cruise struck gold again with this feel-good
romantic comedy, landing another Best Actor Oscar
nomination.  "Jerry Maguire" was one of the most
successful films of 1996, and "Show Me the Money"
became one of the most annoying catch phrases of
that year.  While the Oscar nomination for
Cameron Crowe's screenplay was undeserved, the
supporting performances by Cuba Gooding, Jr. and
Jonathan Lipnicki make the film worth seeing.
The first half of the film has the theme
'See the sports agent hit rock bottom'.
Jerry Maguire (Cruise) works for evil conglomerate
Sports Management International.  He writes a
memo condemning corporate greed, and soon is
fired. All his clients but one are stolen by
arch-rival Bob Sugar (Jay Mohr).  His sole remaining
athlete is wide receiver Rod Tidwell (Gooding),
who is talented but has an attitude problem.
Now broke, Cruise breaks up with his violent playmate
Kelly Preston.  On the rebound, he takes up with
single mother Dorothy (Renee Zellweger), who lives
with her son Ray (Lipnicki) and world-weary older
sister Laurel (Bonnie Hunt).  Cruise loves exuberant,
nerdy-looking Ray more than Dorothy, leading to
much pouting and trauma on her part.  But no worries,
a happy ending for all concerned is inevitable.
Maguire's career is initially destroyed by his manifesto,
which contains such blasphemy as 'less clients, less money'.
Writing the memo is perhaps the only moment his character
seems emotionally honest.  He clings to Tidwell out of
desperation, marries Dorothy out of guilt, and returns
to her apparently because Tidwell caught a touchdown pass.
While Cruise can convey frustration well, he is otherwise
flat, and is outperformed by his supporting cast.  Gooding
makes Cruise look stiff, while Zellweger makes him seem
obliging but disinterested.
The Academy Awards loved "Jerry Maguire", however,
nominating the film for Best Picture.  Joe Hutshing
was nominated for Best Film Editing, while Gooding won
the Oscar for Best Supporting Actor.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Stairwell Studios
GO LONG, TOM:  CROWE AND CRUISE COMBINE FOR PERFECT PLAY
        Ok, here's the deal. To me, Tom Cruise has always been like a
big chunk of apple pie after a steak dinner. Sometimes, it's just what
you want, sometimes it's just too much to swallow, and sometimes it's
perfect when it's covered in cheese.
        He's just what we wanted in Risky Business and The Firm. He
choked us senseless with crap in Legend and Days of Thunder. And, yes,
he showed us a glimpse or two of star quality in Mission Impossible,
confusing the bejesus out of us, but making such a show of catching
sweat droplets, who really cared? Indeed, it was smothered with the
finest of big-screen cheeses, but Tom's a star just the same.
        But, on the eighth day, the Hollywood gods created the biggest
miracle ever. They gave us Tom Cruise, the actor. Not the smilin'
bartender from Cocktail, not the clenching overachiever from A Few Good
Men, not the brazen award-ham from Rain Man, and, thank heaven, not the
curly-permed bloodsucker from Interview with the Vampire. Tom Cruise,
the actor, who amazes in Jerry Maguire.
        And, good giggly-wiggly, who knew this guy could act like
THIS?!? Simply put, Tom is brilliant as the only sports agent with a
troubled conscience, tired of allowing greed to rule his life. His role
is a meaty, conflicted, multidimensional one, a character study of a
guy at the top, his fall to the bottom, and his rise to fulfillment.
        A lot of the credit for this performance has to go to Cameron
Crowe, the writer/director of Jerry Maguire. Crowe's ability to write
with words that speak to an audience rather than at an audience has
always been his strong suit. He directs the same way.  He crafts the
moments, but does it so quietly that you don't notice it until much
later.  Remember that haunting image of John Cusack holding a boombox
in the rain from Say Anything? Simple, not cinematic or glamorous, but
silently powerful. The best leaders are those that command with a
whisper. Crowe whispers, and miracles occur.
        Crowe and Cruise make an excellent team, yes, but they are not
what make Jerry Maguire such a fantastic movie. The greatness comes
from the fact that Crowe's script did not need a superstar to carry it.
It needed an actor who was confident in his talent. It needed someone
who would show himself in the best and worst of his character's being.
And, most importantly, it needed an actor who could relax and let his
fellow actors guide his performance as he guides theirs.
        It is this last step that has always restricted The Cruiser. He
is the "star" and everyone else in the movie revolves around him. I
don't begrudge him this. I say it, though, so I can say this: by
allowing himself to leave his orbit in the "solar system" approach, he
has become the actor I'd hope he has always wanted to be. I offer him
this name to think about for future reference - Tom Hanks, who went
from "star" to "actor" in just a few years. If Tom Cruise can keep the
other Tom in mind, his career could last forever. Go back to the "solar
system," and, well, does the name "Burt Reynolds" come to mind?
        Crowe also gave Cruise two valuable gifts to make this movie
with, namely Cuba Gooding, Jr. and Renee Zellweger. If there is any
mental strength in the Academy this year, Cuba Gooding will be
nominated for and win the Best Supporting Actor award next march. His
performance as the fame-hungry philosopher and wide receiver Rod
Tidwell is the role Cuba has needed to make that last step to the level
of "star." He is not on the screen every second, but his presence is.
        Miss Zellweger is another story entirely. She manages her own
impossible mission and steals many scenes from Cruise, just by the
power of her silence.  With this one role, she has touched on the magic
of people like Barbara Stanwyck and Jean Arthur. She can say much by
saying nothing. Her eyes welling with joy is a thing of beauty. Her
lower lip quivering, trying to keep from crying, is a gesture so
touching, it brought tears to this crotchety man's ducts. She is
beautiful, yet common. She is reserved, yet lively. She is sexy, yet
proper. She is a find for the ages.
        Friends and patients, Jerry Maguire may well be the best film
        of the year. No funnelclouds, no golf clubs, no boogermen from
space. Just acting at the top of its form, and a script that should be
bronzed and given to new screenwriters as a playbook for perfection.
NOTE:  This review and more available at "Dr. Daniel's MOVIE
EMERGENCY" http://www.stairwell.com/doc/

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, R, 138 minutes [2 hours, 18 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Tom Cruise (Jerry Maguire), Renee Zellweger (Dorothy Boyd), Cuba
Gooding Jr. (Rod Tidwell), Bonnie Hunt (Laurel Boyd), produced by James L.
Brooks, Cameron Crowe, Richard Sakai, written and directed by Cameron Crowe.
Single mothers, "Scrooge"-like characters, cocky athletes, and love: what do
all these things have in common? They're all very difficult to work with in
the movies. "Jerry Maguire" is a funny and charming movie that not only uses
all of these tricky devices interchangeably, but uses them well. So well in
fact, it makes for a very serious story that, ironically, remains
lighthearted throughout.
Tom Cruise stars as Jerry Maguire, a successful sports agent who resembles a
modern day Ebeneezer Scrooge. He handles nearly 100 clients at SMI - a large
sports management firm, but it is obvious his vision has been blurred by
dollar signs. When one of his clients is injured, he tries to console his son
through the same hyperbole he uses to promote the child's father. After an
extremely rude response from the kid, Jerry is knocked off his ego cloud and
realizes what he has been missing: people. And so Jerry has a fantastic
revelation and writes a mission statement about how the business has been
corrupted by greed. 
What's so refreshing about this film is the fact that Cruise is able to
carry this character as well as he does. Of course characters this likable
can't be surrounded by sharks, and thus Jerry is fired because he dares have
a conscience.
 But this isn't a straight character drama, it's really a love story, and
this is blatantly foreshadowed, but in one of the sweetest and charming ways
I've ever seen. Renee Zellweger steals the show as the cute but lonely
Dorothy Boyd, a secretary at SMI who develops a secret crush on Jerry. She is
a single mother, but at no time does the film portray her as a victim because
she is hard working and dedicated. As Jerry gives a humorous goodbye speech
to the entire company, she risks everything and goes with him, not so much
out of attraction (because she knows he is engaged), but because she has been
hypnotized by his charm (as we also have been hypnotized by Crowe's story).
Jerry breaks up with his fiancee at the NFL draft, and everything starts to
head south. The only ray of sunshine is the fact that now he and Dorothy can
get together, but the film takes a longer route than necessary to make this
happen. There is a lot of awkward situations, but eventually the two realize
they're perfect for each other.
Although this is one of the most original movies I've seen, it makes a few
unnecessary errors during the last act. Jerry and Dorothy have great
chemistry and seem so right together, but they rush into marriage mostly to
prevent from breaking up. At the same time, Jerry's only client, Rod
Tidwell's (Gooding) contract becomes very important to the plot of the film,
and Jerry's success is riding on Tidwell. I can't believe Crowe uses the
sports cliffhanger and the poetic makeup speech in such close proximity (or
at all for that matter), but at least we get a happy ending.
Special mention must be made of Jonathon Lipnicki as 6-year-old Ray Boyd;
he is quite possibly the cutest and funniest kid I've ever seem.
"Jerry Maguire" could have been a perfect movie had it not become so serious
towards the end, but nevertheless it still remains in a high class for its
originality and charm.

Author
John Schuurman
This film has a lot going for it. First, it is going to do
well commercially. It has all the right stuff. For starters,
it has Tom Cruise who is pretty AND he can act. (He is smart
too -- look for him to direct in a couple of years.) This
film is his finest achievement yet. Additionally, it is a
sports movie that actually works. (Most don't -- this one
does because it only incidentally includes sports.) Plus it
is a delightful love story and has an adoreable kid.
But then this: it is also a serious and biting expose of one
of America's powerful sub-cultures. Like Robert Altman's
NASHVILLE, this film swoops in on a little fragment of
American life -- one  that has power far beyond itself -- and
lays bare its inner workings, its cynicism, its greed, and
above all, its shameless exploitation of the ones about whom
it purports to care the most. This movie says to our
entertainment and sports crazed society, "Deceive yourselves
no longer. Your cherished notion of innocuous entertainment
is rubbish. This world is controlled by sharks." 
NASHVILLE and JERRY MAGUIRE are also alike in that neither
are content to confine their scrutiny to the sub-culture in
question. Both make searing commentary on the broad stream of
American culture that has made the aberrant sub-culture
possilble in the first place. The movies are both about the
morally bereft society that has made gods (with clay feet)
out of a small handful of talented but otherwise mediocre
individuals.
In this regard, JERRY MAGUIRE is not nearly so cynical as
NASHVILLE and that is doubtless why it will succeed
commercially but also why it could be charged with naivete.
Given the world of power and cut-throat dealing in human
flesh that the film exposes, it is perhaps silly for
writer/director Crowe to suggest that a higher and better way
is possible in the sports management industry. But the whole
film is built on such a premise: Although greed and
exploitation have a lock on big time sports, there are rare
and precious occasions when  conscience awakes, truth means
something, committments are kept, and something other than
power and money can win the day. It is a nice film that way.
If you like following professional sports, it lets you hope
some. (But watch yourself.)
The film also has a great device that runs throughout.
Jerry's mentor, an aging salesman, an old warrior of the deal
-- all smiles, all positive-thinking hype -- sits at his desk
and gives salesmanship lessons right out of the latest
self-help and motivational pap from the empowerment circuit.
You think of it as a running gag until his last bit of
advice: "Love your wife. Love your life. Be true. Be a good
preson." This last bit hijacks the movie out of the cynical
and into the hopeful. 
Crowe has pulled off a substantil trick here. From within a
sub-culture very like the one he is examining, he has
provided a vehicle that will enjoy a successful run and will also
(hopefully) cause some much needed self-examination. 
for other reviews by John Schuurman see:
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Tom Cruise can act. Who knew? He's given passable 
performances in a lot of movies, but in JERRY MAGUIRE, for the 
first time, you don't consciously think of him as Tom Cruise during 
every scene. He actually becomes the character, a new concept for 
a Cruise film... Okay, so I'm exaggerating a bit. Cruise was great in 
RAINMAN back in '87, but in the almost ten years since, he hasn't 
shown us a whole lot in the way of talent, unless running down a 
street with briefcase in hand or yelling "DID YOU ORDER THAT 
CODE RED?!!!" at top volume is true talent.
        A lot of Cruise's performance comes courtesy of writer and 
director Cameron Crowe (SAY ANYTHING), who himself has said 
he tried to completely remold Cruise for the role of Jerry Maguire. 
It helped immensely that his script made Maguire and everyone else 
complex and likeable characters for the audience to care about. 
Under Crowe's direction, the rest of the cast holds their own with 
Cruise, especially relative-unknown Renee Zellweger as Maguire's 
assistant and eventual love interest.
        Cruise, as Jerry Maguire, is a hot-shot sports agent who 
lives a superficial life of money and inside connections until he 
reaches an epiphany one night and labors away at his laptop, 
churning out page after page of drivel for the masses, as I'm doing 
right now, only Maguire is drunk at the time and sticks a lot of hasty 
words in this "mission statement" that he later regrets writing. 
Among other things, he calls for the agency to which he belongs 
to spend more time with clients and make more personal sacrifices.
        He makes copies for every employee of the agency and, 
within a week, is fired by his former prot g  (Jay Mohr of "SNL" 
fame). Making a big speech upon his exit from the company, he 
calls for anyone with integrity to come with him and begin anew. 
The lone respondant to this request is Zellweger, a single parent 
risking everything because she believes in Cruise's integrity. That 
Cruise has the nicest ass in America probably has something to do 
with that decision.
        Mohr convinces every client Cruise has to drop Cruise and 
side with the organization that fired him -- every client but one, that 
is, a receiver with the Phoenix Cardinals. Played by Cuba Gooding 
Jr., this guy is obnoxious, flamboyant and greedy. I was wondering 
where the red hair, nose-rings, tattoos and appearances on "The 
RuPaul Show" were; that's how close Gooding's character is to 
Dennis Rodman. A big difference, though, is that Gooding is 
sensible, likeable and devoted to his wife (Regina "227" King) and 
children, as well as his longtime agent, Maguire. That Cruise has 
the nicest ass in America probably has something to do with that 
decision.
        Maguire's life is in the locker room crapper throughout 
most of JERRY MAGUIRE, as he loses his job, his clients and his 
fianc e (Kelly Preston, in her first movie this presidential 
administration), and has to decide whether or not he's really in love 
with Zellweger. Hell, after seeing this movie, everyone in Hollywood 
should be in love with Zellweger, whose down-to-earth appearance 
and acting ability will probably earn her several more big movie 
roles soon.
        JERRY MAGUIRE is definitely not short on talent. Cruise, 
Zellweger and Gooding are the movie's brightest stars, but the 
smaller roles from King, Mohr, Bonnie Hunt (as Zellweger's 
protective older sister) and, yes, even Preston contribute a lot to 
the film as well. It's Crowe's own genius that lend the most to 
JERRY MAGUIRE. It's rare these days to find a mainstream, big-
budget movie with a brain and a heart, but this one's got that and a 
warm sense of humor with which the laughs don't stem from bodily 
functions or vulgarities but sentimentality. I loved this movie and 
I'll probably see it again. That Cruise has the nicest ass in America 
probably has something to do with that decision... Sorry, I had to 
say that one last time.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!

Author
Nick Schaden
        I have to admit it: I'm a man who doesn't trust Tom Cruise movies
anymore.   With a few notable exceptions, it's tends to be either a
testosterone driven ego trip ("Top Gun", "Days Of Thunder") or an
utterly ridiculous role for Cruise's capability ("Interview With A
Vampire").   I'm sure many of you will be pleased to learn that my faith
in Tom Cruise has at least been moderately restored, "Jerry Maguire" is
a high quality film.   It's fresh, funny, and original, and for a movie
that doesn't attempt to be anything but a solid comedy, it's very
successful.
        Now the story: Jerry Maguire (Tom Cruise) is a sports agent of the 90s,
he lies, deals million dollar deals with no end, and is sleazy as
hell.   As you can probably guess, Maguire is thus a SUCCESSFUL agent,
with an attractive fiancee (Kelly Preston) , big career, big money, what
more could you want?   Part way through  the movie, Maguire doesn't by
into his lifestyle.   He wants sports agents to deal the old fashioned
way, with more attention to clients, less money, less sleaze.  Late at
night he types up his ideas, prints several copies and sends it to all
the agents in the firm.   Sure enough, Maguire's life soon falls apart,
his fiancee leaves him, he gets fired from his job and ends up with only
one client (Cuba Gooding Jr.).   However, soon things look better.   He
falls in love with his hired help (Renee Zellweger)...you get the
picture.   Thus lies one of the inherent strengths of the movie, it's
has a witty, invigorating, and wonderfully original plot.
        To boot, the acting is great by the supporting cast (we'll get to Mr.
Cruise later).   Cuba Gooding Jr. plays the perfect, ego-driven football
player.   Renee Zellweger is a fresh new love interest on the movie
scene.  Also worth a mention is Kelly Preston,  while having a very
under-developed and two dimensional character she plays a great role as
the gold-digging power driven ex fiancee of Maguire.
        Also, most importantly, the movie is funny and romantic.   Watching
that famous "show me the money" sequence is just a riot, and many other
scenes come off pretty well in the laughs department too.   To boot, as
much as I sometimes hate Tom Cruise, you really can feel the passion
between Cruise and Zellweger during the movie, and I really felt wanted
to see the couple together.
        However, the movie does has problems, the most notable being none other
than Tom Cruise himself.   Cruise gets a relatively easy role as Jerry
Maguire (being a power hungry sports agent) and for the first part of
the movie, where the sleaze and that trademark grin of Cruise's really
falls into play, Cruise works Maguire like a charm.   However, whenever
Cruise leaves the comfortable zone and tries playing more demanding
character roles (emotional, passionate, frustrated, etc.) he falls
apart, generally acting like retreads from his previous movies -
incredibly artificial on the surface.   Through much of the movie he
doesn't have HEART in the movie, you see that flashy grin, the man may
look cool on the outside, but Cruise just can't seem to touch me with
the right emotion.
        Overall, while every so often the movie does skip and stumble a bit,
the great acting and fresh plot make "Jerry Maguire" a big hit in this
reviewers' mind.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Tri-Star)
Starring:  Tom Cruise, Cuba Gooding Jr., Renee Zellweger, Kelly Preston,
Bonnie Hunt, Jonathan Lipnicki.
Screenplay:  Cameron Crowe.
Producers:  James L. Brooks, Richard Sakai, Laurence Mark, Cameron Crowe.
Director:  Cameron Crowe.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, brief nudity, sexual situations)
Running Time:  135 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
      There is an absolute poetry to the casting of Tom Cruise as JERRY
MAGUIRE which I do not think could have been matched by the casting of any
other actor.  Cruise has spent much of his career playing cocky young
go-getters, and when early scenes show him working a crowd as top-level
sports agent Maguire, pressing the flesh and charming all comers with that
blinding smile, you might think he's about to go on automatic TOP GUN
pilot.  Then Jerry describes his personal dilemma in voice-over, including
a simple phrase -- "I was 35 years old" -- which is like a temporal slap
in the face to anyone who finds it hard to reconcile Cruise's image with
the fact that "the kid" isn't a kid any more.  As the film explores a
man's search for real fulfillment over financial success, you wonder
whether Cruise might have cause to take the role personally.
      He certainly takes it seriously, turning in the funniest and most
confident performance of his career as Jerry Maguire, who finds himself
compelled after a crisis of conscience to draft an idealistic "mission
statement" for his sports management firm.  The firm thanks Jerry by
firing him, then systematically turning all of his former clients against
him except one:  Rod Tidwell (Cuba Gooding Jr.), a good-but-not-great wide
receiver looking for a guaranteed contract extension.  Jerry's only
support comes from Dorothy Boyd (Renee Zellweger), an accountant at the
firm who is inspired by Jerry's idealism and follows him out the door.
Unfortunately, Renee is also a single mother supporting a 6-year-old son
(Jonathan Lipnicki), and her financial dependence on Jerry and his one
client is further complicated by her growing emotional attachment to
Jerry.
     What is most impressive about Cameron Crowe's script is not just that
it is so rich and funny, but that it keeps so many balls in the air
without once feeling crowded or directionless.  There are half a dozen
intriguing relationships in JERRY MAGUIRE, and Crowe does justice to all
of them:  Jerry's complicated relationship with Dorothy; Jerry's
contentious friendship with Rod; Dorothy's relationship with her
protective older sister (the always wonderful Bonnie Hunt); Jerry's easy
rapport with Dorothy's son Ray; even Rod's relationship with his strong,
no-nonsense wife (Regina King).  Only Jerry's relationship with his
fiancee Avery (Kelly Preston) makes a kind of sit-com sense, because Avery
is only a sit-com character, an under-developed and superficial plot
device.  Every other bit of character interaction soars because the
characters are so carefully drawn.
     They also are acted with uniform excellence, beginning with Renee
Zellweger as the wistful Dorothy, who treats Jerry like an icon of a
better life.  The arc of her feelings for him -- from exhilaration to
painful realism -- is rendered beautifully by Zellweger, and the emotion
she can express with her face is sometimes enough to make you want to
burst into tears.  Cuba Gooding Jr. is an electrifying delight as Rod,
whose pride interferes with his chances for stardom.  He has a moment
during an end zone dance which by all rights should be ridiculous;
instead, Gooding makes it a glorious celebration.  There is also the
under-stated perfection of Bonnie Hunt's supporting work, and Jay Mohr in
a marvelously despicable turn has Jerry's conscience-impaired protege.
However, the most memorable cast member may be young Jonathan Lipnicki,
who virtually re-defines scene-stealing.  With his spiky hair, round
glasses and a smile which rivals that of his celebrated co-star, Lipnicki
brings a goofy energy to the screen, yet there is never a moment when he
seems aware of his own adorableness.  He is simply hilarious, and the
affection between him and Cruise makes for some priceless moments.
     Then there is Cruise himself, playing the terribly complicated role
of a man who just wants to improve himself a _little_.  JERRY MAGUIRE is a
film which doesn't appear to end far from where it started, because Jerry
is still a sports agent and still trying to make a good deal.  He is not
trying to turn his life upside-down, though it briefly ends up that way.
He simply wants to find balance, and Cruise takes us along on that
internal journey with skill and humor.  In fact, JERRY MAGUIRE is not just
about one man's journey -- Dorothy and Rod also make subtle changes in
their attitudes which help them discover what is really of value to them.
Cameron Crowe is not interested in some grand condemnation of yuppie
avarice which has his characters throwing off their pin-stripes and pads
for hair shirts and self-flagellation.  Jerry, Dorothy and Rod just want
to take small steps, to do what they do in life a bit better, and to be
proud of they way they conduct their lives.  JERRY MAGUIRE is a simple but
thoroughly uplifting story which is as funny as it is touching, and it
finds Tom Cruise no longer cruising on that famous smile...although he may
have cause to smile at his own efforts to do what he does in life a bit
better.

Author
Paul Miller
On the way to the theater today, I was in a huge rush and I almost
missed the coming attractions (something I hate to do.)  In fact, I
almost said "skip this movie" all together.  But I'm glad I didn't.
This movie started out with Mr. Cruise himself playing sports agent
Jerry Maguire. He's a hot shot and a hotdogger all the way.  Until one
seemingly normal night he's watching TV.  He thinks for a second, then
starts writing on his computer.  He keeps writing for 25 pages until he
finally comes up with his "mission proposal".  He makes copies for
everyone.  The one quote everybody see "Less Clients, More Attention".
For saying this, he's fired from SMI, an office of agents, (I bet they
have one heck of a Christmas party!) and consequently lose almost every
client he has.
This is something I stick to, no plot details.  I think many reviewers
go too far and give away most of the movie, but not me.
Anyway, here's why I enjoyed this movie.
The cast was super.  Everyone and I mean EVERYONE turns in great
performances.  Especially Johnathan Lipnicki, a small tot, that couldn't
have been more than about 3 or 4.
Also, excellent writing and direction.  The script showed Maguires
downfall with in-your-face force, you can't help but leave your seat
without thinking about what you just saw.
Excellent cameos.  Sports stars from Troy Aikman to Roy Firestone and a
great cameo by Eric Stoltz.
This overall was a super movie.  It shows Mr. Cruise in a new, fresh way
that everyone will appreciate.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Tom Cruise, Cuba Gooding Jr., Renee Zellweger, Regina King, Bonnie
Hunt, Jay Mohr, Jonathan Lipnicki, Kelly Preston Director: Cameron Crowe
Screenplay: Cameron Crowe
The business of sports star agencies has fallen into the disreputable
rubbles of mass clientele, money making, and non personal relationships.
(You've gone a million miles, how far to get.)
A man has the inspired vision of returning to the basic, honest, quality
'client first' attitude that the business once had.
(That place that you can't remember, and you can't forget.)
(If you paid a price, she'll let you deep inside.)
With only his principles to rebuild his dreams, and the heart of someone
who believes in him.
(She'll lead you down the path, there'll be tenderness in the air, she'll
let you come just far enough so you know she's really there.)
