Title
Review for What's the Worst That Could Happen? (2001)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
David N. Butterworth
WHAT'S THE WORST THAT COULD HAPPEN?
A film review by David N. Butterworth
Copyright 2001 David N. Butterworth
If you've been following William Fichtner's career (and there's absolutely
no reason why you should have), you might have noticed that he's played
some rather similar roles over the years.  Like Sully in "The Perfect
Storm"--tough, gruff, and a little bit scary.  Or Law in "Albino
Alligator"--tough, gruff, and little bit scarier.  Or Colonel William Sharp
in "Armageddon," or Dwayne Engelman in "Strange Days," or even his brief
appearance towards the beginning of "Pearl Harbor," as the abusive father
of Danny--here is an actor who gravitates towards tough, gruff,
hard-hitting roles.
Which is why his performance in "What's the Worst That Could Happen?" is
such a shock, such a delight.
In the film, Fichtner plays a blonde haired, meticulously dressed, overtly
effeminate, dog-loving detective.  As Alex Tardio, Fichtner's performance
borders on caricature but goes beyond it.  It borders on offensive but
doesn't really manage it.  And it borders on clichéd stereotype but doesn't
quite succumb to that definition either.
In a role so diametrically opposed to what the actor has played before we
should have seen it coming, Fichtner isn't perfect--you can see him
struggling a little at times, concentrating a little too hard on the look
as he swishes his hand through the air, or nuzzles a coiffed canine up
close and personal--but he's pretty damned good, and silly, and without
question the best thing in the film.  In fact, had it not been for
Fitchner's sudden and bizarre appearance, and his jarring screen presence
thereafter, I would have walked out, for "What's the Worst That Could
Happen?" is mesmerizing in its awfulness, a poorly written, haphazardly
edited, and totally unfunny (yes, it stars Martin Lawrence and Danny Devito
so how could that be possible?) moviegoing experience.
Fichtner's performance doesn't exactly save the film, and it's not like
I'm recommending "What's the Worst That Could Happen?" solely on the
strength of the actor's dramatic turnaround, but his contributions do raise
the film's rating from no stars to one-and-a-half.
Thumbs up to Fichtner then, and thumbs down--way, way, down--to everyone
else involved in this sorry mess, a movie so dull and pedestrian and
nonsensical it doesn't even warrant discussion.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Martin Lawrence, Danny De Vito, John
Leguizamo, Glenne Headly, Bernie Mac, Nora Dunn,
William Fichtner. Directed by Sam Weisman. Rated
PG-13.
What's the Worst That Could Happen? sneaks up on you.
It starts out direly, then unexpectedly gains
momentum, finally surviving on the charisma of star
Martin Lawrence and the experience of co-star Danny De
Vito. There's nothing brilliant here, but enough funny
throwaway gags for the film to just squeak by and pass
itself off as "entertaining." It strings together
conventions in an amusing way. Perhaps the best praise
I can give this movie is that I was rarely bored.
Martin Lawrence, who has starred as a criminal in four
out of his last five movies, plays Kevin Caffrey, a
professional thief. He and his partner-in-crime,
played by John Leguizamo, rob a house owned by Max
Fairbanks (Danny De Vito). Fairbanks was ordered to
stay away from the mansion by a bankrupcy judge, but,
never one to obey something as frivolous as a court
order, he goes there anyway with his Playboy
centerfold girl-toy. He catches Caffrey red-handed
and, as the thief is being handcuffed by the police,
he steals Caffrey's lucky ring simply by saying that
it's his. It's the millionaire's word against the
crook's, and who's kidding who?
Caffrey will do anything to get his ring back, but
Fairbanks is convinced that, since the ring
coincidentally has his company's old logo on it, it's
his lucky ring. Bernie Mac plays the stolen goods
dealer who tries to help him. Wildly inconsistent
chaos ensues.
Lawrence is an extremely talented comedian, who has
risen above his material and rescued his films from
the gutter on many occasions. But he can't seem to
carry this one, which may explain why the opening
scenes have a clunky feel. Whenever he is on screen by
himself or with his love interest, the movie up and
dies. But whenever De Vito, Bernie Mac or William
Fichtner are on screen -- the latter hysterical as
slightly feminine detective Alex Tardio -- What's the
Worst That Could Happen? suddenly picks up steam.
Perhaps this is because Kevin Caffrey isn't a terribly
interesting character. He's the stereotypical "thief
with a conscience" that we always see in sappy movies
like this; he falls in love with a girl who thinks
that he is a "businessman" and swears to reform, but
something happens and he has to continue on his
less-than-righteous path. That's really all there is
to him, which isn't much to laugh at.
The point at which I realized that I was enjoying
myself came when Max Fairbanks was testifying before
Congress. Provoked, he suddenly starts spouting
profanities at the distinguished lawmakers. A dumber
movie would have left it at that -- look, he's cursing
at stiff high-class types! -- but What's the Worst
That Could Happen?, in what may have been its single
stroke of near-brilliance, also includes a
sign-language interpreter who gets a little carried
away. That's Stephanie Clayman, by the way, as the
iterpreter; I've never seen her before, but will look
for her in the future.
What can I say about a movie like this? It's not
inspired, it's not consistent, it's doesn't have a
terribly good script. But it's well-acted, it has some
good gags, and it held my attention for 97 minutes. I
can't ask much more of a movie from which I expected
so much less. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
What's the worst that could happen?  Well, you could be watching FREDDIE 
GOT FINGERED, the worst movie of the year and perhaps the decade, rather 
than WHAT'S THE WORST THAT COULD HAPPEN?  The latter, while it isn't 
particularly funny, may not even be the worst comedy of the week.  (THE 
ANIMAL screens later this week.)
In this anti-buddy comedy, Martin Lawrence plays thief Kevin Caffery, a 
self-described "connoisseur of all things portable," and Danny DeVito 
plays Max Fairbanks, a shady billionaire who is currently running a big 
bankruptcy scam.  Max is the obnoxious sort who is currently shagging 
Miss September on the sly and who calls women a stream of endearments 
from "sugar cakes" to "snuggle bunny."  (What has happened to old 
reliable DeVito?  His previous 2 films, DROWNING MONA and the aptly 
named SCREWED, were perfectly awful.)
Their game of mutual payback begins when Max robs Kevin of the ring that 
his girlfriend, Amber Belhaven (Carmen Ejogo), has just given him.  Max 
feels no guilt since Kevin has just robbed one of Max's mansions.  
Kevin, his sidekick Berger (John Leguizamo) and the rest of Kevin's 
friends then set out to steal more from Max, all the while trying to 
retrieve Amber's ring.  
Typical of the story's gags is Kevin's inability to tell a lie without 
blinking.  Sam Weisman (THE OUT-OF-TOWNERS), who directs with ham handed 
obviousness, has Lawrence exaggerate his blinking like a stage actor who 
needs to make sure that even those audience members way back in the 
cheap seats can still see his gestures.
In a story full of bizarre characters, none is more so than Detective 
Alex Tardio (William Fichtner, THE PERFECT STORM).  Prissing around in 
shades of white from his big blonde hair to his light colored alligator 
boots, the detective is pulled along by his three snow white poodles.  
Just in case the visuals aren't enough to have you in stitches, the dogs 
turn out to have a major flatulence problem.
This juvenile comedy, with its recycled humor that seems always aimed 
squarely at kids around 12 or so, does have one truly funny scene.  As 
Max testifies before a Senate committee, Kevin calls him on his cell 
phone and begins to harass him.  This causes Max to unleash a stream of 
expletives.  The television camera bleeps it all out, but the sign 
language translator relishes her big opportunity to ad lib with some 
obvious but nonetheless hilarious gestures.  
WHAT'S THE WORST THAT COULD HAPPEN? runs 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for 
language and sexual content and would be acceptable for kids around 8 
and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, thought the picture was really funny and gave 
it *** 1/2.  His favorite scene was the same as mine, the Senate hearing.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 1, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century 
theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Bob Bloom

 What's the Worst That Could Happen (2001) 1 star out of 4. Starring
Martin Lawrence, Danny DeVito, John Leguizamo, Glenne Headly, Carmen
Ejogo, Bernie Mac, Larry Miller, Nora Dunn, Richard Schiff, William
Fichtner and Ana Gasteyer. Screenplay by Matthew Chapman. Based upon the
novel by Donald E. Westlake. Music by Tyler Bates. Directed by Sam
Weisman. Rated PG-13.
 Did the studio brain trust who approved a title such as Whatís the
Worst That Could Happen? pause to consider the potential fun critics
could have playing off those words if they disliked the film?
 You can be forced to sit through this nonsense a second time.
 You can find yourself locked in a theater holding a Martin Lawrence
film festival.
 The directorís cut on DVD could include an extra 30 minutes of footage.
 Whatís the Worst That Could Happen is a lame, cynical movie trying to
pass itself off as a comedy caper. The movie has its moments, but you
could do the Sunday New York Times crossword puzzle between them.
 Itís difficult enjoying a movie in which most of the characters are
thieves and crooks. Itís even harder to garner sympathy for people who
spend their lives thumbing their noses at the law.
 Of course you can say actors such as James Cagney and Humphrey Bogart
made careers playing such characters. The difference is the agents of
law and order generally prevailed, and the Cagneys and Bogarts usually
paid the ultimate price in the final reel.
 Whatís the Worst That Could Happen revolves around Kevin Caffery
(Lawrence), a high-class thief, and his battle with corrupt media tycoon
Max Fairbanks (Danny DeVito) to retrieve a ring Fairbanks took from
Caffery when the latter was caught burglarizing the mogulís summer home.
 The ring was given to Kevin by his girlfriend, Amber (Carmen Ejogo).
 Even taking into consideration that this feature is a comedy, the
plotting and storyline is preposterous. Though captured early in the
film in Fairbanksí mansion, Kevin escapes. Yet the police arenít looking
for him and he walks around in broad daylight without fear of seizure.
 Amber falls in love with Kevin because he steals back a painting she
was forced to sell. Even when he admits to her that he is crook, she is
unfazed. Why? Because, as she tells him, she had dated lawyers, so
dating a thief shouldnít be much different.
 In some ways the film is offensive. William Fichtner plays a police
detective who is a stereotyped gay directly from some homophobicís
handbook. He minces, swishes, carries a cane, dresses all in white, and
owns three cute little doggies to whom he speaks in baby talk.
 The mush-mouthed Lawrence is not credible as a high-classed thief. He
lacks the sophistication and suaveness called for in the part.
 DeVito merely seems to be reprising a role he has played many times
before ó most notably in Ruthless People ó that of the overbearing,
crooked tycoon who believes his wealth puts him above the law.
 A strong supporting cast, including John Leguizamo, Glenne Headley,
Bernie Mac, Richard Schiff, Larry Miller, Nora Dunn and Ana Gasteyer are
wasted in this weak effort.
 Whatís the worst that could happen? That this movie actually draws an
audience and takes up screen space that could be used for more deserving
fare.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database site: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
WHAT'S THE WORST THAT COULD HAPPEN? (2001)
Rated PG-13; running time 90 minutes
Genre: Comedy
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.mgm.com/whatstheworst/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0161083
Written by: Matthew Chapman, Barry Fanaro
Directed by: Sam Weisman
Cast: Martin Lawrence, Danny DeVito, John Leguizamo, Carmen Ejogo,
Larry Miller, Nora Dunn, William Fichtner, Glenne Headly, Bernie Mac
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamstheworst.html
Knowing my history of hating every TV show and movie Martin Lawrence has
ever done thus far (I liked him fine as a stand-up comedian, but cannot
stand anything else he's done), I was fully prepared to hate WHAT'S THE
WORST THAT COULD HAPPEN?.  And without having read her review before I saw
the flick, seeing that my partner The Diva already redlighted "The
Worst", I was sure that, given my even lower tolerance for Lawrence, I'd
finally reached my first double triple-redlight year.
Imagine my surprise when I found myself liking "The Worst".  Man, I
can't believe I just admitted that.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
At an art auction, Kevin Caffery (Martin Lawrence) notices a
damsel-in-distress, and gentleman that he is, introduces himself to her.
Faire Damsel Amber (Carmen Ejogo) is distraught over having to sell a
work of art her father willed to her; and, gentleman that he is, Kevin
rescues said art work for the Faire Damsel.  Just as in yon modern fairy
tale, they immediately hit the hay, and, after Kevin tells Amber he's a
high-end thief, they fall in love, she gives him her father's lucky
ring, and they live happily ever after.
Uh, where was I...oh yeah.  Kevin, with the full consent of his new lady
love, plots a big heist with his Trusty Sidekick, Tonto...uh, I mean,
Burger (John Leguizamo), with Kevin's uncle Jack (Bernie Mac) acting as
their Fence.  Their target is Max Fairbanks (Danny DeVito), a
billionaire about to lose the business that he and his wife Lutetia
(Nora Dunn) inherited from  her father; his impending bankruptcy somehow
makes Max attractive to high-end thieves [don't ask.  It involves Math.]
The problem is, Max just isn't ready to be robbed; and in retaliation
for Kevin's actions, Max very legally steals Amber's lucky ring from
Kevin's finger, a ring that Max - as a big I-Ching/tarot follower with
his own psychic assistant, Gloria (Glenne Headly) - is convinced is now
*his* lucky ring.
Wackiness, as you no doubt can guess, Ensues.
The Upshot:
As I implied above, all signs pointed toward me hating this movie.  I
only decided to see it because of Danny DeVito and the supporting cast;
to be sure, I went in spite of, not because of, Martin Lawrence.
Strangely enough, when Lawrence wasn't cheesing and playing the clown,
he was nearly likeable; and in fact, I tired of that over-large cast,
before I was ready to call it quits on this flick.
When Lawrence's trademark over-the-top behavior (see the last five or so
minutes of this movie for a perfect example of just that) was reined in,
he was fine, and so was "The Worst".  It'd never get any statues for
originality, subtlety, or much beyond the Obligatory NAACP/BET(Viacom)
Image Award [hey, don't EVEN sweat me.], but I've certainly seen worse
than "The Worst".
What killed WHAT'S THE WORST THAT COULD HAPPEN? for me was the inclusion
of WAAAAAY too many characters; what ultimately deflated "The Worst" was
its excess.  I won't get into Amber's patent stupidity in so easily
accepting Kevin's "profession"; that's a whole 'Nother Rant For Another
Time.  Here, I'll just ask "why", as in, why give Max an ObBallsBusting
wife, *and* a mistress, *and* a codependent assistant-cum-harpie-cum-
psychick?  Why have not one, not two, but *three* screechy
girlfriends/wives for the thieves to Suffer?  Why the fey cop *and* the
Goofy Security Chief?  Why wasn't the one sidekick thief enough; was
there *really* a perceived need for a Family Fence, plus Bebe Bickerson
and Wife? [and don't forget Bebe's Kids].  Didn't anyone ever teach
these filmmakers the maxim "less is more"?
And it wasn't just the characters who let me down.  Lawrence aside,
DeVito didn't really seem to have his heart in it here; his gruff act
seemed like textbook Louie DePalma, and I just wasn't feelin' him at
all.  John Leguizamo continues to work in vehicles that do nothing to
showcase his raw talent (check out any of his HBO specials, and you'll
see the sad truth in that).  I don't know *what* Glenne Headly was
thinking [other than "Hey, my cupboard is gettin' kinda bare; maybe it'd
be a good idea to go rustle up some vittles this month.  Let's see what
the balance is on yonder checkbook.  Oops."], and the sooner I can
forget the criminal waste of William Fichtner (as fey Detective Alex
Tardio) and Larry Miller (as Goofy Security Chief Earl), the happier
I'll be.
This flick, in the end, could've used better editing - starting with the
writers exercising some self-control and the director yelling "oh HELL
no!" a bit more from time to time.  And with that, I think I'll do some
self-editing, and stop there.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Yank my britches and slap me silly, but I had some liking for "The
Worst".  It exceeded my low expectations, provided a chuckle or two, and
almost made me forget the lack of regard I have for Martin Lawrence's
acting career to date.  For a few minutes, anyway.  Too bad the movie's
execs felt the need to pile on the characters; it overwhelmed what
could've been a Cute Popcorn Flick.  Still, it could've been worse, eh?
WHAT'S THE WORST THAT COULD HAPPEN? (rating: yellowlight):
I gotta wonder if the guys behind this one, *really* thought out that
title.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie games, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A thief who gets caught breaking into the house of a billionaire =
consequently gets his own ring stolen by the same man whose house he =
broke into. The robber then decides to make it his mission in life to =
get the ring back. Hilarity is supposed to ensue...=20
CRITIQUE:
Here's a movie that's just not very funny, entertaining, interesting or =
original in any way, shape or form. It's definitely not the worst movie =
that I've ever seen, in fact, it's probably not even the worst movie =
that I've seen this year (that honor is still holding firm at HEADS OVER =
HEELS), but it's one of those movies which has you coming out of the =
theatre and wondering why it was ever made in the first place. I mean, =
if it wasn't for the talent associated to the film (and boy, are there =
ever a lot of characters in this flick!), I wouldn't be surprised if =
this movie had gone straight-to-video. There just isn't much going on in =
here. Oh sure, maybe I'm a little jaded because I've seen my share of =
great comedies, but then again, haven't we all? Sure, we have. This one =
just feels like a retread of a retread of an idea that worked in a few =
good movies years ago, crunched through the generic meat-grinder =
numbered "Screenplay 101", packed with clich=E9 after clich=E9, =
ultimately resulting in little more than a couple of chuckles, a =
mediocre story-line and a lot of dead silence. Of course, comedies have =
always been subjective in nature and to be honest, there were quite a =
few people laughing their heads off during my screening (unless they =
were high, of course...yeah, yeah, that's it!), but keep in mind that =
these folks hadn't exactly "paid" to see the movie either. I was =
particularly un-entertained by the obvious setups to many of the "jokes" =
in this movie, like the one that has Lawrence blinking when he told a =
lie (hardy-har-har!) and a sign language translator woman who continued =
to translate certain curse words that DeVito (and then later, Lawrence) =
spurt out. Hahaha. Me crackie uppie.
I don't know, maybe I just wasn't in the "right mood" for this simple =
rehash of a film. The sad part about it all is that it really could have =
been something. Anybody who's seen TIN MEN or WHAT ABOUT BOB? knows that =
comedies based on guys vowing revenge on one another could definitely =
add up to some pretty funny times, but this one just blew it. Lawrence =
doesn't really offer much of his usual hilarity and DeVito seems to =
telegraph his role in while cashing his paycheck at the bank. And =
everybody else, well, they all just came across as obvious "filler" with =
little more to do than to stand around and play along with the goofiness =
happening around them. Granted, Larry Miller is always funny and he's =
probably the only person who comes off "okay" from this movie, but how's =
about getting more than three lines in your next film, Larry...you've =
got talent, dammit! And William Fichtner, a man who completely stole the =
show in 1999's GO, sort of works as an obviously gay detective here, but =
despite his character being fun to look at, not much laughs came from =
him either. Yeah, sure I smirked every now and then, but put me in any =
movie and I'm bound to do that anyway. Sorry fellas, this whole movie =
just felt like it was written over a weekend and shot over a week. A dud =
across the board.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Big Momma's House (3/10) - Blue Streak (7/10) - Dirty Work (5/10) - =
Ruthless People (7/10) - Tin Men (8/10) - The War of the Roses (8/10) - =
What about Bob? (7/10)

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Sam Weisman.
Cast: Martin Lawrence, Danny DeVito, John Leguizamo, Carmen Ejogo, Glenne 
Headly, Bernie Mac, Larry Miller, Nora Dunn, Richard Schiff, William 
Fichtner, Ana Gasteyer, Sascha Knopf, GQ.   
2001 - 94 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity, sexual innuendo, and violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 2, 2001.
What's the worst that could happen, you say? Well, for starters, getting 
locked in a theater showing this movie on a continuous, 24-hour loop. Seeing 
it once is bad enough. Sam Weisman's "What's the Worst That Could Happen?" is 
a comic dead-zone trying to pass itself off as a boisterous crime caper. As 
such, it is just about as dull as one could possibly fear, and the 
overflowing screenplay by Matthew Chapman is no help to the bright performers 
who understandably flounder here.
Kevin Caffery (Martin Lawrence) is a professional thief at the top of his 
game. While out on a heist one night with his partner (John Leguizamo), he 
makes the mistake of paying a visit to millionaire Max Fairbanks' (Danny 
DeVito) mansion. In a spontaneous attempt to beat him at his own game, Max 
steals Kevin's prized ring that his girlfriend, Amber (Carmen Ejogo), just 
gave him--right in front of the cops who have come to arrest Kevin. For 
Kevin, this means war, as he sets out to take back the ring that is 
rightfully his, and turn Max's gradually crumbling life upside down.
For such a nonsensical, forgettable little movie, the talent roster is 
surprisingly filled to the brim, and all of the actors more or less embarrass 
themselves. Martin Lawrence, who was a comic revelation in 2000's "Big 
Momma's House" is back in the type of role he always plays--a jewel thief. 
Lawrence can be so good that it amazes me to keep seeing him playing the same 
character over and over. As Kevin Caffery, he performs his usual shtick, and 
wins very few laughs in the process. Danny DeVito (1998's "Living Out Loud"), 
likewise, fits comfortably, but unspectacularly, in a role that he has played 
before, and is sure to play again. DeVito's Max Fairbanks is a nasty man with 
no true redeeming qualities, and so he neither captivates nor amuses us. One 
comedic scene--the only one--that does work has DeVito spitting off a 
rapid-fire stream of four-letter-words, only for it to be translated, 
verbatim, by a sign language interpreter.
The supporting cast list is quite impressive, which makes their appearances 
all the more unfortunate. Carmen Ejogo shows promise as Kevin's understanding 
girlfriend Amber, while William Fichtner (1999's "Go") has some fun as a 
police detective who is about as flaming as a neon sign. And SNL cast member 
Ana Gasteyer (2000's "What Women Want") manages to be fetching in only a 
handful of scenes, as John Leguizamo's wife. Meanwhile, Nora Dunn (1999's 
"Three Kings"), as Max's wife, Glenne Headly (1996's "2 Days in the Valley"), 
as his astrology-obsessed assistant, and Richard Schiff (2000's "Lucky 
Numbers"), as his long-suffering lawyer, are painfully wasted. How painful it 
is to watch good actors without a sign of worthwhile material to work off of.
In a week that has featured two comedy misfires, "What's the Worst That Could 
Happen?" pales even in comparison to the Rob Schneider flick, "The Animal," 
which was no great shake, either. And there's even less to say about this 
movie. Based on the novel by Donald Westlake (who also penned the smart "The 
Grifters"), "What's the Worst That Could Happen?" is the worst kind of poorly 
made film, because it is so very plain and mediocre it doesn't even inspire 
palpable hatred--the one fun thing about negative reviews. What I'm left 
with, then, is 94 minutes of wasted time and a dreary write-up that can't 
possibly do anything other than mirror how dreary the picture itself is.
    - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
      http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/dustinputman.htm
http://us.imdb.com/reviewsby?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Max Messier
Martin Lawrence is not funny.  For the proof just turn to his newest
film, What's The Worst That Could Happen? -- the answer to its own
question if ever there has been one.
I don't know how Martin Lawrence -- the former 1987 Star Search winner
with an arrest record that would make Tommy Lee envious -- has been able
to survive with all of the bad, bad films he has starred in during the
past 6 years.  [Two words: Bad Boys. -Ed.]  Big Momma's House, Blue
Streak, Life, and A Thin Line Between Love and Hate are all forgettable
movies which can be found in quantity on the clearance table at your
local video store.  But survive he has, and in Worst, Lawrence is a
mediocre Eddie Murphy stuck playing another jewel thief in another
run-of-the-mill studio comedy.
Worst revolves around a ridiculous cat-and-mouse game between a thief
named Kevin Caffery (Lawrence) who gets caught burglarizing media
conglomerate CEO Max Fairbanks (Danny DeVito), who in turn steals
Kevin's lucky ring given to him by his girlfriend.  Kevin then vows to
get the ring back at any cost -- thus setting up numerous comedic
situations to follow that play out like a homogenized sitcom.  The cast
is rounded out with an annoying Latino sidekick (John Leguizamo), a
one-dimensional girlfriend (Carmen Ejogo) who spends half the movie
whining about Kevin's numerous exploits in retrieving the ring, a
super-fly white guy hacker who uses more Apple products than Jeff
Goldblum to hack into Max's e-mail and surveillance system, and Kevin's
sharp-tongued mentor (Bernie Mac) -- who deserves much better roles than
bit parts in Martin Lawrence comedies.
The comedy plays out like a Henny Youngman joke.  Kevin and his cronies
break into Max's Miami penthouse dressed up like Arabic princes and
steal PAC contributions intended for shady Senate sub-committee
members.  Kevin calls Max on his cell phone -- he answers it during a
Senate sub-committee hearing! -- and Max then curses at Kevin via the
television cameras as the sign-language interpreter makes enough obscene
gestures to would make the Diceman blush.  Whoa ho!
Sam Weisman's (George of the Jungle) direction is lopsided and
uninteresting, and the film's pacing is worse than Betty White running
the Boston Marathon.  The jokes are cheap, predictable, and come solely
at the expense of others.   Every race and lifestyle -- gay, black,
German, Arabic, and white, to name but a few -- are used as easy
targets.  Danny DeVito walks through his role as Max Fairbanks as a
mini-Gordon Gekko crossed with his Louie De Palma character from Taxi. 
The biggest insult comes in the guise of underrated actor William
Fichtner -- playing a sexually ambiguous detective dressed up like a
1970's Bowie doll who is trying to nail (ahem) Max for all of his shady
business deals.
What's the Worse That Could Happen? ... besides the release of this
film?  Sadly, Blue Streak 2 is in pre-production, for which Lawrence
will receive a $20 million dollar paycheck.  Now, that's bad.
Director: Sam Weisman
Producer: Ashok Amritraj, Wendy Dytman
Writer: Matthew Chapman
Starring: Martin Lawrence, Danny DeVito, Glenne Headley, Carmen Ejogo,
John Leguizamo, William Fichtner, Nora Dunn, Larry Miller, Bernie Mac
http://www.mgm.com/whatstheworst/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
