Title
Review for Forbrydelsens element (1984)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Dalgleish
"The morality of the police is no different from that of society."
Starring Michael Elphick, Esmond Knight, Me Me Lai, Jerold Wells;
Directed by Lars von Trier;
Written by von Trier and Niels Vřrsen;
Cinematography by Michael Ellis
Sombre.  Enigmatic.  Brooding.  Opaque.  Ambitious.  THE ELEMENT OF 
CRIME, Lars von Trier's first film, inspires adjectives and defies 
explanation.  It is a sophisticated experiment in film noir, at once 
homage and update and critique.  It is the type of work that can only 
exist late in the life of a genre, when all the patterns are 
established and known, and so can be unstitched, picked apart, 
reworked.
It is similar, in many ways, to Paul Auster's "New York Trilogy," 
also written in the early 80s: both works take the building blocks of 
the detective story and rearrange them, turning them into the 
foundation for complex existential and epistemological explorations.  
We begin with detective Fisher (Michael Elphick), returning to England 
after years of exile in Cairo.  He meets his former boss and mentor, 
Osborne (Esmond Knight), who has written a book called "The Element of 
Crime," which outlines an investigative methodology based on 
identification with the criminal.  Fisher is then called to 
investigate the latest in a series of brutal child murders.  
Naturally, he applies Osborne's theories to the case.
He learns that the murders may or may not have been committed by a 
man named Harry Gray, who may or may not be dead, and who may or may 
not be preparing to kill again, to complete the (hypothetical) pattern 
he has begun.  Fisher retraces Gray's route from one murder scene to 
the next, trying to intuit the pattern and anticipate the next crime; 
as he does so, he begins to identify, on some level, with the 
(hypothetical) murderer.  It's complicated.
Superficially, much of what goes on follows the familiar routines of 
film noir: the detective is a loner with his own peculiar code of 
honour; he meets an elegant, sexy woman (Me Me Lai) who may be 
connected to the crime, and has an affair with her; his pursuit of the 
truth is haunted by a fatalistic sense of irrelevance.  But 
traditional detective stories expand: as the detective meets new 
suspects, finds new evidence, a larger pattern emerges. The story 
grows as it goes.  Here, the story contracts, shrinks, coils in on 
itself, becomes impacted and internal: Fisher becomes his own suspect, 
as he doubts his motivations, his capabilities, and perhaps his 
sanity.
Or maybe that's not what happens.  The film is ambiguous and 
non-literal to the point of being maddening.  It encourages many 
interpretations, but ratifies none of them.  Consider a scene in which 
we see Osborne on TV, answering questions about his theory-cum-book: 
"The element of crime," he says, "sets up a series of mental exercises 
designed to improve our understanding of the behavioural pattern of 
the criminal."  Of course, the title of his book is also the title of 
the movie, and so as we hear this the meaning is doubled: Osborne is 
explaining how his book is to be read, and von Trier is explaining how 
his film is to be understood. Or is he?  As we move on, the 
statement's usefulness diminishes, and soon we disregard it as overly 
simplistic.
This postmodern play of frames within frames, texts within texts, 
readings within readings, is typical of the movie as a whole, which 
contrives to be at once dense with import and thoroughly pointless.  
You can follow the ideas through, try to unravel the tangled knots of 
significance, but why bother?  Von Trier does not have a story of his 
own to tell: this a story about other stories.  It is art theory 
disguised as art.  There is no sense of engagement, of passion, of 
urgency: it is otiose and abstracted, and so its relationship to 
quotidian life is tangential at best.  You could easily write a 
compelling thesis on THE ELEMENT OF CRIME, but only with difficulty 
could you extract any practical wisdom, any human insight.
This is partly because the story does not take place in anything like 
the "real" world, but rather in an impressionistic refraction of 
post-war industrial Europe, a post-holocaust England where the place 
names are German, a rain-dark realm of derelict edifices and unsmiling 
citizens.  All is sepia-toned, slow-moving, shrouded in murk and 
shadow, seen from strange angles.  Von Trier uses silence and slow 
motion with subtlety and precision, deepening the vivid sense of the 
unreal, and he returns again and again to particular images--broken 
glass, a horse, blue light--so that they take on elusive, oneiric 
significance.  
It is a splendid piece of cinematic showmanship, a tour-de-force of 
atmosphere, and for ambience alone, the film has few equals--which is 
not surprising, given that von Trier is one of the finest directors 
at work today.  But THE ELEMENT OF CRIME is all ambience, all 
potential: it envisions a world in which memorable things might 
happen, but then they do not.  When he found his own stories to tell, 
in ZENTROPA and BREAKING THE WAVES and THE KINGDOM, von Trier came 
into his own.  In this, his debut, he shows that he knows what to do 
with a camera, but not what to say with it.  In the end, it's hard to 
say if it's a good film or a bad film.  It's complicated.
