Title
Review for Shattered Image (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
David Butterworth
        She was the femme in "La Femme Nikita."  He was the Baldwin in
"Backdraft," "Sliver," and "Fair Game" (with Cindy Crawford).  Together,
Anne Parillaud and William Baldwin conspire to make "Shattered Image" the
biggest piece of hooey since the Stallone/Stone "thriller" "The Specialist."
        The film poses the question "what if the life you're living now is
really a dream, and your dreams reality?"  It's either about a woman who's
haunted by a recurring (and recurring and recurring) nightmare that she's a
hired assassin, or it's about a hired assassin who's haunted by a recurring
(and recurring and recurring) nightmare that she's honeymooning with
William Baldwin in Jamaica.
        It doesn't much matter and believe me by the time "Shattered Image"
runs its painful and pedestrian course you won't care.
        These two lives, with Parillaud looking like Siouxsie Sioux with a
black wig, black emotionless eyes, and black leather clothing in the
Seattle-based assassin scenes, and moping around like Karen Carpenter in
the Jamaica scenes, play out endlessly throughout the film and the result
is it's now *twice* as boring as it might have been.
        It's not that complicated plots can't be entertaining.  Of course
it helps if you have interesting characters, crisp dialogue, and a modicum
of style.  "Shattered Image" isn't complex, it's just stupid.  And boring.
Parillaud and Baldwin, who aren't exactly Shakespearean material to begin
with, are saddled with such leaden dialogue that their characters have zero
chance of breaking free of their cardboard confines.  Lines like:
        "You're not the reason I couldn't care less about you."  Huh?  And
this wonderful bathroom interchange early in the film:
        Talking of pants, Parillaud has her clothes off faster than you can
say "Point of No Return."  We have come to expect this from Billy Baldwin,
but it might have been nice to have learned something about their
characters first.  But there's nothing to learn.  Karen is as interesting
as a cereal box, a someone's-out-to-get-me crybaby who imagines the voice
at the other end of the phone, the stranger who sends her flowers, maybe
even her husband himself, is her would-be killer.  Siouxsie is the chromium
cool, tough-as-nails crack killing machine who shoots out a couple of
mirrors in order to justify the film's meaningless stock title.
        Baldwin seems more interested in Parillaud's nest egg (so that he
can pave paradise and put up a parking lot) than he does in her.  Each time
Graham Greene shows up he gets killed.  Barbet Schroeder ("Reversal of
Fortune") co-produced and should be ashamed of himself.
        Every now and again it's fun to watch a really bad movie.  And
every now and again, as "Shattered Image" makes agonizingly clear, it isn't.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SHATTERED IMAGE (director: Raul Ruiz; screenwriter: Duane Poole;
cinematographer: Robby Muller; editor: Michael Duthie; cast: Anne
Parillaud (Jessie Markham), William Baldwin (Brian), Lisanne Falk
(Paula/Laura), Graham Greene (Conrad/Mike), Billy Wilmott (Lamond),
O'Neil Peart (Simon), Leonie Forbes (Isabel), Bulle Ogier (Mrs. Ford),
1998)
Raul Ruiz, the Chilean-born, France-based director of one hundred films
so far, who has been noted for his offbeat features and ambiguous works,
has made this American mainstream film in English that has all his pet
themes intact. For a Ruiz film, this one is about as accessible as he
gets. It is also one of the few he hasn't scripted himself.
If you ever wanted to know how it might feel for a person who is losing
their marbles, this film might be able to shed some light on that. It is
a tantalizing thriller that offers the viewer a chance to see if they
can separate fantasy from reality.
Shattered Image begins as an alluring assassin named Jessie (Anne
Parillaud) whacks a
handsome businessman in the men's room of a trendy Seattle night-club
and then goes to make a call, saying "It's done."
Afterwards she dreams that she is a nervous newlywed in Jamaica with her
overly protective husband Brian (William Baldwin) by her side, taking
her to a luxurious hotel. She is afraid because she's been having this
recurring dream that she's a hit lady killing only men in Seattle and
also that her attacker is following her to Jamaica. When she picks up a
ringing phone in her hotel room and there's no answer, she paranoically
says, "It's him."
Ruiz's films always seem to be about the multiple identities of
characters who might just be figments of one's imagination or might be
about someone who is leading a parallel life. There are two Jessies
here- the "Seattle Jessie" and the "Jamaica Jessie." Each Jessie has the
other Jessie as her alter ego. In her repressed Jamaican dreams, she is
having anonymous sex in public places, while in the man-hating Seattle
Jessie dreams, she is being rescued in tight romantic situations by
Brian. He plays an active part in both her dream places.
Shattered Image has its two stars struggle through some very awkward
dialogue and plot twists that keep coming unmercifully at the viewer.
Ruiz's experimental film style opts for the most he can get out of his
stylized settings, confusing but beautiful camera shots, and all the
kitsch he can muster in every mise-en-scčne.
Jessie imagines she has been attacked and the rapist is still at-large,
and after her. But she can't determine what he looks like. The dreams
themselves get confusing, as the Jamaican Jessie begins to suspect her
husband is after her money and that the other hotel guest she meets, the
chillingly suave blonde, Paula (Lisanne), is involved with her husband.
Paula also has an alter ego in Seattle, Laura, who has hired Jessie in
her dream to kill Brian, who in the dream is Laura's husband. The film's
ending is as blurred as Jessies' intermingled dreams are; but, at least,
the climax returns to the beginning of the film to try and clear things
up in the usual unhelpful way Ruiz solves his mysteries. By the end, who
could be sure if she killed a detective in room 214, or if someone was
really after her, or if she had attempted suicide before and then was
forced to take pills in Jamaica to make it look like another attempt at
suicide, or if those newspaper clippings of unsolved murders in the
Seattle area she collected can be attributed to her, and since the movie
continually switches back and forth between the two dream locations of
Jamaica and Seattle, it is unclear what really did happen. If you enjoy
this kind of pseudo intellectual puzzler, then you must be prepared to
be kept in suspense, not knowing more about the character than what Ruiz
wanted revealed.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: Anne Parillaud and William Baldwin star in a film that
has two story lines about the same two people.  In one the Parillaud is
a contract killer who meets Baldwin through her work.  In the other
story line the two are on honeymoon in Jamaica and there are mysterious
threats.  The viewer is watching not only to see how the story lines
work out, but what is the relation the story lines bear to each other.
Rating: 6 (0 to 10), 1 (-4 to +4)
   - Directed by Rual Ruiz, screenplay by Duane Poole.
   - We move back and forth between two story lines.  In one story line
     Jessie is an efficient emotionless assassin, In the other she is a
     frail newlywed, the victim of rape and later attempted suicide.
   - Point of film is to untangle what the two story lines have to do
     with each other.  How can these both be the same woman.
   - Graham Greene is oddly cast as Jamaican policeman.
   - Dreamy photography of Jamaica.
   - The ending leaves many questions unanswered.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   While I'm entering words into the computer, I know I'm not
dreaming.  How do I know?  I can ask myself, "Am I
dreaming?" and decide rationally that I am not.  But when I'm
dreaming, I rarely have the free will to ask myself this
question, and so I think I'm living in reality despite the illusion
of it all.  Illusion vs. reality is one of the great themes of
storytellers and in "The Shattered Image" director Raul Ruiz
pushes the envelope by having his principal character, Jessie
(Anne Parillaud), confused to the point of insanity about
which of her two sides is the real Jessie.  She dreams she is
a hard-featured hired killer who preys on men, a hit woman
doing her job for women who want to dispose of their
masculine baggage.  Or is the leathery-looking assassin the
real Jessie and the soft, vulnerable, victimized Jessie her
dream?  As the two sides of the same woman collide with
each other, a harsh sound like a gunshot or the ring of a
telephone or the shattering of glass brings one Jessie up
sharply and turns her into the other. 
   A major motif of "Shattered Image" is the absence of
dramatic irony.  The audience, instead of being a step or two
ahead of the characters (as in the "Oedipus" legend) is kept
as much in the dark as the principal character, the enigma
finally revealed in the concluding moments to Jessie and to
the movie audience simultaneously.
   This is not the conventional whodunit, as Agatha Christie
might have constructed the drama, but is done rather in the
French style, which compared to the American form is paced
more leisurely with greater emphasis on psychology than on
action.  It's quite an intriguing piece which might remind film
buffs of the late Kryzstof Kieslowski's even more cryptic "The
Double Life of Veronique," in which two women, one Polish
and one French, subtly affect each other's lives while
remaining total strangers.
   Duane Poole's script opens on the stony-faced contract
killer, Jessie (Anne Parillaud), who sits at a night-club table
ignoring the martini that a trio of businessmen have sent over
to her, but who follows one of them into the men's room to
complete her part of a contract.  Director Ruiz soon shifts to
another Jessie, a kinder and gentler woman, who has met a
handsome young man under strange conditions and is on an
expensive honeymoon in Jamaica with her new husband,
Brian (William Baldwin).  Brian is an understanding man
indeed, nursing his bride through some troubled, paranoid
times in which she obsesses over an incident in which she
was attacked by a rapist who was chased away by Brian--a
modern knight in shining armor.  Having survived several
suicide attempts, she lives through her traumatic experience
not by recalling the incident directly but via nightmares in
which she has become the femme fatale, the hired
executioner.  Or is it the other way around?
   You may remember Anne Parillaud as the title character of
Luc Besson's 1990 French-Italian film "La Femme Nikita"--
which was successfully remade American style starring
Bridget Fonda and which became a successful TV series. 
The Chilean-born director, Raul Ruiz, patterns his picture in
the European manner, allowing the plot to unwind ever-so-
slowly and tantalizingly in his second American-made, English
language feature.  (In 1990 he shot "The Golden Boat in New
York with a 16mm camera and black-and-white film).  The
prolific and gifted regisseur turned out "Genealogies of a
Crime" last year with a similar strain, highlighting Catherine
Deneuve in a dual role as the lawyer for and victim of a
strange young man who's accused of murdering his
psychiatrist aunt after she allegedly subjected him to radical
mind-control treatments.  Paired characters--a "which twin is
the phony"--is always a enticing motif.  Ruiz fruitfully utilizes
the concept to match polar opposites--concerned husband vs.
knavish cur; hard-hearted woman vs. unprotected prey; the
warm, tropical ambience of Jamaica with the foggy, cold and
rainy Seattle; sophisticated jazz with island reggae.  
   Shot in Port Antonio, Jamaica, and Vancouver, Raul Ruiz's
"Shattered Image" is likely to find its audience among
sophisticated moviegoers who relish the puzzlement raised by
the picture with each shift in focus.
