Title
Review for Bonnie and Clyde (1967)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
Thirty years after its release, the debate continues over Arthur Penn's
simple, truthful and hardcore look at American criminal violence.  When it
was released in 1967, 'Bonnie and Clyde' stirred up quite a debate over
whether or not it "glamourized" violence.  Quite simply, it was a straight
forward telling of two lonely, mixed up people, Clyde Barrow and Bonnie
Parker (yes, they were real figures in history) portrayed with poetic
brilliance by Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway and how they threw their lives
away in the pursuit of a criminal life.  They were a pair of lovers who
terrorized and robbed their way across the heartland of America in the
1930's.  
In fact, staggering performances were abound in this stylish film that would
receive 5 Oscar nominations for acting, Beatty and Dunaway for Best Actor and
Actress, Gene Hackman as Best Supporting Actor along with Michael J. Pollard
and someone who would win Best Supporting Actress, Estelle Parsons.  Hackman,
in one of his first films, plays Clyde's brother Buck Barrow and Michael J.
Pollard is C.W., the getaway driver in the mob and Estelle Parsons rounded
out the cast as the noisy and frumpy wife of Buck, a preacher's daughter
caught in the fight for her life from authorities as they closed in on Bonnie
and Clyde.  In recent memory, only a handful of films would receive 5 Oscar
nominations for acting.  Grasping cinematography by Burnett Guffey would also
cop an Oscar and 'Bonnie and Clyde' would be shut out for almost every major
Oscar it was nominated for including Best Picture and Best Director for
Arthur Penn.
Warren Beatty's film debut in 1961 with 'Splendor in the Grass' would prove
enormously successful and it wasn't long before Beatty would turn to
producing and he did so with 'Bonnie and Clyde'.  'Bonnie and Clyde' does
what its supposed to do like every other classic film; it draws the audience
in from the opening minutes as it centres on being a two character study for
the first several minutes.  Just moments after they meet and are immediately
attracted to each other, we find out that Clyde has just been released from
jail and to immediately impress Bonnie, he robs a grocery store and the story
continues from there all the way to its conclusion which was very
controversial in 1967 when audience's jaws dropped in view of it.  Certainly
a timely film in view of the social changes of the 1960's, 'Bonnie and Clyde'
will leave an impression on audiences for all time with its message of
anti-violence stemming from violence spawned by the poverty of the great
depression. 
