Title
Review for Quest, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1996) *** - C:Jean Claude Van Damme, Roger Moore.
I was fully prepared to hate this film. I haven't liked any Van Damme movie
in the past, so why would now be any different? And he directs the film as
well. I figured that this would be like Steven Seagal's "On Deadly Ground",
where an egomaniac was given too much control and wound up making a truly
awful film. But, I found "The Quest" to be pleasantly entertaining, and
worth an hour and thirty-five minutes of my life.
Van Damme isn't trying to do anything new with the kickboxing genre, and
that's good because there really isn't anything new that CAN be done with
it. He plays a pickpocket in the 1920s who, through a series of accidents,
ends up in the "Lost City" somewhere in Asia fighting in a worldwide
tournament to find out who is the world's best fighter. Along the way he
meets up with Roger Moore, who plays an suave ex-British Navy man who has
gone into business for himself, which includes pirating ships and stealing
anything valuable that he can get his hands on.
Van Damme as a director surprised me. The film looks and feels completely
authentic, and the fight scenes are well staged (he does use slow-motion
just a bit too much however). Also, he doesn't make his character the star
of the film. Whenever Moore is on screen, Moore is the center of the
camera's attention as Van Damme just stands in the background listening to
his every word. Also, his character doesn't even think he can win the
tournament until late in the film, so he's not cocky and arrogant which
would have easily become annoying.
"The Quest" is not a great film by any means. It's simple, it uses all the
cliches of the genre and offers nothing really new. But it doesn't try to be
anything different than that. It succeeds at what it wanted to succeed at,
which was to be mildly entertaining. Roger Moore (who IMO was the best Bond)
steals the film and I'm glad he did. He's fun to watch. Don't expect much
from "The Quest", and you just might find yourself being entertained.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     So Jean-Claude is now an auteur.  Well, why not?  Segal, Stallone,
and Schwarzenegger (in a TV movie) have all done it and emerged from
behind the camera with their careers still intact.  And, there's
certainly more to this martial arts (near) epic than one might expect.
In fact, the only particularly jarring moment occurs in the opening
scene, when Van Damme, wearing old-age make-up, bellies-up to a bar and
threatens to speak the word "rosebud." No, he never says *that* word,
but he does recount the entire story in flashback.
     Cut to a street scene in 1920's New York City, where Van Damme's
clown-faced, stilt-walking pickpocket (!) is about to run afoul of both
the law and the mob.  Making his escape, he hops a freighter bound for
(where else?) the Far East.  Eventually, he finds his way to Tibet, to
participate in a mountain-top martial arts competition between the
greatest fighters from sixteen counties.  Orphans, elephants, gun
runners, and Sumo wrestlers, it's *all* here. 
     The period detail and location photography is very nice, as is the
story's near-epic scope.  Unfortunately, THE QUEST suffers from several
fatal flaws, the most glaring of which is an absolute lack of dramatic
tension.  Nothing propels this movie.  And you can take it from there.
(Flaw #2 is the chemistry that the characters *don't* have.  I can't
decide who is less-animated:  Van Damme or co-star Roger Moore.  Phew.
Flaw #3: missing scenes...) Martial- arts fans and video-game junkies
might enjoy this one, but everyone else should save their money. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>
