Title
Review for Donnie Brasco (1997)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Edwin Jahiel
DONNIE BRASCO(1997) *** 1/4  Directed by Mike Newell. Screenplay by Paul
Attanasio, based on the book by Joseph D.Pistone with Richard Woodley.
Photography, Peter Sova. Production design, Donald Graham Burt. Editing,
Jon Gregory, Music, Patrick Doyle. Cast: Al Pacino, Johnny Depp, Michael
Madsen, Bruno Kirby, James Russo, Ann Heche, Zeljko Ivanek, et al. A
Tristar release. 131 minutes. Rated R (violence, gore, language)
The book this movie is based on is "Donnie Brasco, My Undercover Life In
The Mafia." Unlike many such memoirs, the text-to-screen dramatization
seems to be faithful, and uninflated by imaginary events or embellishments
that could add color and suspense.
FBI agent Joe Pistone, posing as Donnie Brasco, did infiltrate the Mob in
the 1970s and eventually this mole operation was hugely successful, brought
dozens to trial and recovered millions of dollars. The conduit for Pistone
was Lefty (Al Pacino), an older wiseguy with whom "Donnie" struck a
friendship that grew.
The relations between the two men were initially for their mutual
convenience. Donnie needed a sponsor. Lefty needed a protege that might get
him out of his low rank in the Mafia. He had been in the underworld for 30
years, had made 26 hits, yet had really nothing to show for all this.
I see the twosome as an ironic (but not so planned) version of new partners
in the police force. The younger man hopes to learn. The older one hopes
that the team will make an impression on their superiors.
"Donnie Brasco" takes an honorable place among gangsgter movies,
specifically within the Mafia sub-genre. The greatest of these are the
"Godfather" trilogy and "GoodFellas." But the differences between them and
the new work are numerous, beyond the crucial fact that the earlier films
were mostly fiction while the recent one is fact.  "The Godfather" was a
saga and a grand opera about "capi dei capi," the bosses of bosses, the top
echelons. "GoodFellas" was at a lower rung, but even so, its people feel
like capitalists compared to the grungy Mafiosi in "Donnie."
Here we have "soldiers," the day-by-day operators who do the actual,
physical dirty work, who have to struggle like laborers to meet their
quotas, who are constantly hustling, who fight other lowly Mafiosi over
territories and opportunities.  Whether among the high ups or the low
downs, there is no honor among thieves.  But when we watched the grand
plans of alliances and treacheries among the CEOs or even the Captains in
earlier films, here we see penny-ante activities, street fights instead of
championship bouts.
It's all a de-romanticizing, eye-opening and fascinating process. The film
is not exciting, since it keeps to a minimum "movie suspense." This
true-to-life nature also gives it a grayness that contrasts with the
rainbow colorfulness of its predecessors. Its low-class characters are
real, therefore uninteresting. There is no room left to play with the
expanded or full  personae we found among the Corleones, their subalterns
or their successors.
Where the new movie tries to score is with the relationship between Lefty
and Donnie. For Lefty, the biological father of an unworthy petty crook and
drug addict, Donnie becomes a surrogate son. For Donnie matters are more
complex. He starts out as the agent who hoodwinks Lefty and Co., but over a
long period he cannot help developing a weird (or is it, really?) affection
for Lefty. There are moral problems here that are unusual in Mafia stories.
The main difficulty, other than maintaining his cover, is that Donnie,
married, with children, has to disappear for long stretches and ignore his
family life. The effect on his wife and kids is thickly underlined in the
movie. So is the fact that after years of being someone else, it is natural
for the infiltrator to adopt many attitudes of his companions. Things do
rub off. When in one of his rare visits home Donnie-Joe uses the wrong
negative in a sentence, his wife reacts with "... and to think I married a
college man." From what I was able to find out, the "assimilation" of
Donnie is, in the film, made larger than in reality, but then a few
creative liberties are unavoidable.
"Donnie Brasco" has an elliptical structure, so that the passage of time
was none too clear for me, nor were some sections of the movie. On the
other hand, director Mike Newell does a fine job of empathy and of
understanding the hoods' mentality and the overall Mafia scene.
Newell is an Englishman who has worked in the UK, the US and New Zealand.
His  best-known films are "Four Weddings and a Funeral" and "Enchanted
April." Some eyebrows were raised when he was chosen to make this movie, so
different from his familiar, romantic works. The owners of those eyebrows
might be reminded that Newell has also directed somber dramas like "Dance
With A Stranger" or "The Good Father," and that many of the Hollywood
gangster classics were directed by European newcomers, like Fritz Lang.
Performances are what you would expect from the versatile Johnny Depp and
Al Pacino, meaning very good. All the trickier too as the protagonists have
to stick to just one basic expression. Throughout, Depp's is guarded and
Pacino's hangdog-unhappy.
There is violence in the film,  notably a startling sequence of pure gore.
Yet what, for me, turned out to be the most depressing scene  had to do
with the FBI. Throughout, the FBI people make trouble for Joe and look
villainous.  After Pistone's task was accomplished, in an anonymous
(hotel?) room and with only the Pistone family present, a couple of
bored-looking superiors coldly, perfunctorily award him an FBI medal plus a
check for $500, and quickly leave. It's devastating.

Author
Chad Polenz
 1997, R, 127 minutes [2 hours, 7 minutes]
 Starring: Johnny Depp (Joe Pistone/Donnie Brasco), Al Pacino (Lefty), Anne
 Heche (Maggie Pistone), Michael Madsen (Sonny); written by Paul Attanasio;
 produced by Louis DiGiaimo, Mark Johnson, Barry Levinson, Gail Mutrux;
 directed by Mike Newell; based on the book "Donnie Brasco: My Undercover Life
 in the Mafia" by Joseph D. Pistone, Richard Woodley.
 Seen February 15, 1998 on home video (borrowed from Chris Wessell).
        When it comes to modern gangster movies, it's really difficult to describe
 and review them without making comparisons to other films of the genre and/or
 just using the word "routine." I've always subscribed to the philosophy that
 any idea (no matter how many times it's been used before) can provide for a
 good story and "Donnie Brasco" clinches this idea. It's not unlike most of the
 great films of the genre, yet it never apes another's style as it has a good
 layer of authenticity, even if its core is a tad stale.
        The film starts off in typical fashion by defining its atmosphere of New York
 City in the late 1970s and the mobsters who inhibit it. We meet Lefty
 (Pacino), an aging wiseguy who can still walk the walk and talk the talk. He
 and his associates go through the generic motions you expect to see in crime
 films like this. Somehow he comes across Donnie Brasco (Depp), a younger guy
 with a lot of spunk who isn't afraid of Lefty and his rep, and even manages to
 befriend him after Lefty was ready to kill him. It's clear Donnie is new to
 the life and Lefty recognizes this immediately, telling him all the tricks of
 the trade. I have never seen this technique of actually revealing the Mafioso
 idiosyncrasies done before and for this the film deserves credit. However, we
 soon realize Donnie is actually Joe Pistone, an FBI agent working undercover -
 a character who symbolizes the viewer as he will soon be purged into the
 lifestyle and treated as a newcomer.
        The first act works as a guided to
ot of rhetoric about wiseguy honor, a brief history of the mob,
 definitions of their slang, and where their money comes from and who it goes
 to. The screenplay is rather sketchy on the details surrounding these
 elements, however, the fact they are mentioned at all is quite original. Most
 gangster movies seem to be made with the notion the viewer already knows how
 the mob works (probably from watching other gangster movies), and although
 this attitude comes across, the film tries to fill in all the holes where and
 when it can and the effort is appreciable.
        Thankfully the film doesn't become too caught up in the tedious details of
 organized crime, and instead opts for character development. Much of the story
 is told simply through the interaction between Lefty and Donnie. Pacino is
 outstanding here as the pathetic hood who speaks of his job in the same manner
 any blue collar worker would. He's old and exhausted but seems to enjoy what
 he does, just as anyone loyal to the same employer for over 30 years might be.
 We learn of his accomplishments, which are quite impressive within their
 context, and when he complains about not being made top boss, it's easy to
 sympathize with him. Newell constantly plays up this aspect, making it a major
 theme which works well in the long run. As Donnie is constantly impressing and
 even one-upping Lefty, it's hard to tell which emotion is more powerful: the
 fact Donnie is getting closer to nailing the mob; or the fact Lefty has once
 again been over shadowed.
        Most of the film tells the story of Donnie's life in Mafia, which creates for
 many sub-plots and individual conflicts, but doesn't always seem to come
 together as a whole. The storytelling is genuinely interesting throughout,
 even when the motions the characters go through seem familiar. The resonance
 to Donnie's actual assignment varies, he often reports back to the Feds with
 detail of his progress, but it doesn't always seem to have much meaning. Back
 home, his wife Maggie (Heche) is ready to divorce him because he's never
 a
 and the family is suffering. Since this is based on a true story I
 wouldn't doubt this would happen, although the way it is handled often borders
 on the melodramatic.
        My only major complaint is the film seems to have no final act, or at least
 any real sense of closure. A climax of sorts does occur, but there's little
 feeling of a payoff. We get a happy ending, which is good, but perhaps a sad
 ending would have been more powerful.        
        Aside from a few minor, general flaws, "Donnie Brasco" manages to be a solid
 piece of storytelling and character development. It may be routine, but it's
 good, and that's respectful.
 Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 190
 new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
 capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
 http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Andrew Hicks
     More than 20 years ago, Al Pacino gained his fame by starring in
the first two GODFATHER films. Now he's returned to those roots by
playing a thoroughly exhausted, much less successful Mafia man. Donnie
BRASCO, though, follows in the feet of Pacino's 1996 role in CITY HALL by
giving the lead to a younger, less experienced man in the field. In CITY
HALL it was John Cusack; here, it's Johnny Depp, who works his way
into Pacino's existence by telling Pacino the $8,000 diamond ring he just
bought is a fake. 
     Depp slowly earns Pacino's confidence as we learn he's really an
undercover FBI agent out to break up the Mafia ring. It would seem
contrived if they didn't tell us at the beginning that it's based on a
true story. From here, the movie can only go in three directions -- either
Depp sticks to his mission and all works out, the mobsters find out he's
an FBI agent and some other agent has to come in and rescue him, or
Depp gets Patti Hearst syndrome and begins to fraternize with the enemy
for real. 
     We get a mixture of options one and three. Depp starts to use the
f-word more than usual and say "Forget about it!" in different tones to
mean different things. One subplot focuses on this transformation as it
relates to Depp and his family. His wife is sick of never seeing him or
knowing what assignment he's working on and has several non-productive
fights with him. This plotline falls by the wayside toward the last reel,
though. 
     The main appeal of the film are the Mafia men themselves. Pacino
is great as a tired, washed-up gangster who's been in the business 30
years and still hasn't gotten anywhere. Bruno Kirby and Michael
Madsen, as the leader, aren't given much to do here, but exemplify the
fact that this crime ring is pretty small time. These underachievers are
so unlucky at their game that, when they finally get a successful gambling
party going, I was actually upset that the cops broke it up. 
     Because the criminals evoke this strange kind of sympathy, there
are no real antagonists in DONNIE BRASCO, only conflicts. Depp grows
attached to Pacino and realizes that if the other guys find out he's an
FBI man, Pacino will get whacked before he can say "Forget about it!" At
the same time, Depp is torn between his job and his wife and, on the same
token, his job and his attachment to the Mafia game. None of these are
resolved in a cinematic way, probably because nothing ever is in real
life. We never have soundtracks in our heads either. 
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Over 750 detailed reviews with a comedic flair.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Does the world need another mob movie?  Do we still have the blood
lust for Mafia minutia?  Are there any actors left who can carry on the
Godfather legacy?
     DONNIE BRASCO avoids answering these questions and contents itself
with being a true story.  Just the facts ma'am.  The mob in this movie
is neither glamorous nor particularly horrifying - just a bunch of
working-class stiffs out to make a living.  Some of their anxieties are
common ones we can identify with such as being passed over for
promotion (being "upped") or working hard for the company and not being
recognized.  Others, such as being "whacked," certainly exceed the fear
of being downsized.  At least if you lose your job, in most firms death
is not part of the severance package.
     Director Mike Newell, whose recent work has been with such
wonderful, lighthearted comedies as FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, sets a
factual tone from the beginning.  The script by Academy Award nominated
writer Paul Attanasio (QUIZ SHOW) lacks the gimmicks and sensationalism
of typical Mafia films.  (The script is based on the book "Donnie
Brasco: Undercover Life in the Mafia" by Joseph Pistone and Richard
Woodley.)  The gangsters in this film are much more human and
accessible characters.  They perform terrible deeds certainly, but none
are awarded the mythical and heroic status most such pictures bestow on
hoodlums.
     Johnny Depp, perhaps the best young actor in the business, gives
his usual outstanding performance as undercover agent Joe Pistone, who
was known to the mob as Donnie Brasco.  In 1978, after two years of
undercover work, Joe breaks into the mob through his connection to
wiseguy Lefty Ruggiero (Al Pacino).  Just as actors get into character
for a part and have trouble breaking out, so does Joe.  Joe is
transformed body and soul into a wiseguy wannabe.  The tight culture
and family of the Mafia draw him in so that he becomes increasing
estranged from the FBI and from his wife, Maggie (Anne Heche), and his
three lovely daughters.  It's difficult keeping the family together if
you can only see them sporadically.  All of this notwithstanding,
Pistone was one of the most important FBI plants ever.  Hundreds of
people were convicted because of his courage and tenacity.
     Pacino's Lefty looks at first like a consummate professional
crook.  He is the cock of the walk.  With Orwellian logic, he explains
to Donnie that, "A wiseguy is always right - even when he is wrong."
     With the power of a made man, he makes Donnie "connected," which
means that Lefty is his mentor and no one will dare touch Donnie.  If
Donnie plays his cards right, someday he too could join the inner
circle and become a wiseguy.  (As you watch their antics, you realize
that the moniker wiseguy has such great irony.  Wise they are not.
Their success comes solely from their position and the fear they
induce.  Lefty has trouble even breaking into a parking meter to steal
the change.)
     Lefty turns out to be a bitter second string player, who, although
he constantly boasts of 26 kills, secretly fears he will be whacked by
one of the more successful wiseguys.  "Thirty years I'm busting my
hump," complains Lefty.  "What have I got?"  He derives more pleasure
in cooking than trying to figure out the next job to pull.  "Who am I?"
he complains.  "Who am I?  I'm a spoke on a wheel."  Together Pacino
and Depp turn in two fascinating performances with believable macho
chemistry between the two of them.  Lefty becomes Donnie's surrogate
father, buddy, and constant companion.
     The richly textured story focuses on the day-to-day life and
schemes of the Mafia.  The story concentrates on relationships and
political intrigues rather than violence.
     A well developed subplot deals with the difficulties of Donnie's
home life and tells this part of the story with a realism I have not
seen before.  You empathize with the wife and kids, and yet Depp
transfers the feeling of being trapped so that you can understand both
sides.  Ultimately, Donnie recognizes and resents his transformations.
"I'm not becoming like them," he confesses to Maggie.  "I am them."
     A poignant, but funny vignette has Joe and Maggie seeking
counseling to avoid divorce.  Therapists lack training on dealing with
the stress caused by being an undercover cop.  Their inept therapist
gives them lectures full of jargon that are so far off base that they
border on parody.
     The script is highly polished.  In one beautifully written scene
Donnie explains to his FBI comrades the nuances of the five subtlety
different pronunciations of "Forget about it."
     Director Mike Newell's skill can be seen throughout.  He does not
excuse the horrors of Lefty's profession, but he has a deft sense of
when to back off.  This can be seen in potentially the most horrific
act of violence in the picture.  Newell shows just enough so that the
actions are clear, but he does not let his cameras linger.  The
resulting image possesses a humorously macabre feeling.
     Joe couldn't leave his work at the office like most of us.  This
unglamorized view of his travails as an undercover agent is
mesmerizing.  If you think you have seen it all when it comes to the
mob, think again.  Even if you could care less about organized crime,
DONNIE BRASCO is as interesting an exploration of the human spirit and
failings as it is a story about crime and moral turpitude.
     DONNIE BRASCO runs 2:06.  It is rated R for violence, profanity,
and sexuality.  It would be fine for most teenagers.  I highly
recommend the film to you and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
If you are going to make still another film about the mafia, there had
better be another angle.   DONNIE BRASCO, fortunately, has just that in
the relationship between an undercover FBI agent, Joe Pistone, alias
Donnie Brasco, and a mafia loser, "Lefty" Ruggiero.
Based on the true story of Joe Pistone who was responsible for some 200
mafia members being charged with criminal activity, the film shows us
what is necessary to be able to accomplish that. . .  total
dedication.   Wife, children, friends have to play second fiddle to the
dangerous work to which the agent has pledged himself.   Thus,
Pistone's wife, Maggie (Anne Heche) is torn between having to see him
infrequently and worried about his undercover life. Likewise, his
children are shortchanged because he cannot be a real father to them.
There we have one facet of Donnie's life.  The other is his
infiltration into the mafia by befriending Lefty.   Lefty has been a
mafia man ever since his teens but despite having taken part in some
killings, robberies, and assorted mafia doings he never gets the
recognition he feels he deserves; others get promoted but Lefty is
always overlooked. . . . and it rankles him.   When he meets Donnie he
feels this is his chance to show the mob that he can bring young,
bright, blood into the mafia . . . and he stakes whatever reputation he
has on Donnie coming through for him.   He vouches for Donnie to the
mafia chief.   This causes the great dilemma facing Donnie.
Having associated with Lefty for so long, having Lefty  depend on him
and befriending him, Pistone is torn about how he can turn in his
friend to the FBI. Not an easy decision, he finds.
The acting by Depp is a departure from most of his films and he is very
good. Pacino, who usually tears through a film with both guns
(figuratively) blazing, here has a subdued tone, the demeanor of a
loser trying to get out of the hole he has made for himself years ago
when he joined the mob.  Dressed in an adorably crazy (pork pie?) hat,
he is a delight to watch.
While Michael Madsen, Bruno Kirby and James Russo lend their talents as
various mafia members, the film suffers from a gratuitous scene of legs
being sawed and hacked, blood running, legs with skin torn off.   When
I see that, I have to knock off Bytes.  There was no need for the
graphic violence we are shown, however small a part it played in the
entire film.

Author
Walter Frith
The cinematic talents of Al Pacino have reached new heights with 'Donnie
Brasco'.  Pacino has played a criminal many times in his career and from the
high profile and diverse characterizations of Michael Corleone in both
'Godfather' movies to the lacerating and despicable thug he played in
'Scarface' (1983) to the hilarious over the top gangster under heavy make-up
in 'Dick Tracy' (1990), this legendary actor has managed to find new
dimensions every time he sets out to play the bad guy.  In many ways,
re-inventing yourself in a lot of films can be more difficult than anything
else you attempt in screen acting and I suspect Pacino enjoys living up to
the challenge.
In 'Donnie Brasco', which is based on a true story, Al Pacino plays a life
long member of the Mafia whose career in crime is marked with what he claims
are twenty six assassinations as a hit man and he praises himself on a level
of greatness that others in the organization aren't willing to recognize
since he has not managed to move up much all the years he's been involved in
his seedy and unrewarding lifestyle.  His character is really a pathetic
example of a life wasted.  His still lives in a second class ordinary
apartment with his junkie son and a female companion.
Enter an undercover FBI agent played sternly and completely in control at all
times by Johnny Depp.  His assignment is to get inside the life of Pacino and
the organization he associates with and break it up.  It's a job he performed
for almost three years from 1978 to 1981 and his work along with other agents
led to over two hundred indictments and one hundred convictions.
Having gotten close to Pacino's character leads to problems for him as he
develops conflicting loyalties since Pacino treats him like a son and
promises to make him a 'made' guy.  Depp's character encounters family
problems with his wife and children who feel shunned by his devotion to work
and commitment elsewhere.
Director Mike Newell has created a convincing and meaningful crime saga with
unpretentious characters and scenes of sorted detail combined with a
screenplay by Paul Attanasio ('Quiz Show') based on the novel 'Donnie Brasco'
by Joseph D. Pistone and Richard Woodley.  Pistone is the FBI agent Depp
plays in the film and while Pacino makes the film, Depp still proves he's one
of this generation's finest young actors.

Author
John Roberdeau
Director: Mike Newell
Writers: Paul Attanasio, based on the book by Joseph Pistone and Richard
         Woodley
Producers: Mark Johnson, Barry Levinson, Louis DiGiamo, and Gail Mutrux
This is a truly excellent film.  Everyone in the movie has a very good
showing, but for me Al Pacino's is most notable -- I tend to dislike his
characteristic repugnantly overblown performances, though they seem to
please most people.  That's why his role in this movie is so refreshing.
I read once that the director was "able to coax a subdued performance"
from him, and that is exactly what happened -- he is utterly believable
(not to mention touching) in this role as an aging gangster who has been
overlooked and underappreciated by his superiors.
Actually, "subdued" is a good word for the whole movie.  It's more of a
character study than anything else -- Donnie/Joe (Depp)'s relationships
with Lefty (Pacino) and Maggie (Heche), his wife, are the focus of the
film.  Though, as can be expected with a movie of this genre, there are
a few brief explosions of violence, they are perhaps less frequent and
appalling than those of "Casino" or "Goodfellas", two movies that I feel
are bettered by this film.
The basics of the plot are simple: Joe Pistone is an FBI agent posing as
a jeweller named Donnie Brasco.  He meets a mobster named Lefty Ruggiero,
who vouches for him and gains Donnie enterance to his crime family.
Through the course of the film, they form a strong relationship that
eventually threatens Joe's marriage as well as both of their lives.  Also
definitely worth noting: It's a true story, based on the book by Joe
Pistone.  I don't want to give away too much about the story -- I haven't
revealed anything that isn't printed on the back of the DVD.
I really think this movie is best experienced with little or no background.
I didn't know anything at all about it before I saw it, and I went in with
pretty low expectations (mostly        because I was afraid we were going to get
a Heat ("WhaddayaGOT?!") performance out of Pacino).  I had thought Depp's
performance might salvage the film, but really everyone in it is superb.
It's an excellent movie, and it really looks good, too.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Tri-Star)
Starring:  Al Pacino, Johnny Depp, Michael Madsen, Bruno Kirby, Anne
Heche.
Screenplay:  Paul Attanasio, based on the book by Joseph D. Pistone.
Producers:  Mark Johnson, Barry Levinson, Louis DiGiaimo, Gail Matrux.
Director:  Mike Newell.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, brief nudity, sexual situations)
Running Time:  125 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     At first glance, Lefty Ruggiero (Al Pacino) seems like a dozen movie
mobsters you have seen before, like a dozen movie mobsters Pacino has
played before.  He struts, he poses and he boasts in his first meeting
with jeweler Donnie Brasco (Johnny Depp); when Donnie appears ready to end
that meeting, Lefty announces "You don't walk away from Lefty...Lefty
walks away from you."  Don't judge Lefty, or DONNIE BRASCO, by that first
impression, though Lefty himself might have preferred it.  The fact is
that Lefty is a loser:  a thirty year mob veteran still working as a minor
lieutenant in Brooklyn, a compulsive gambler in debt to his own people, a
father with an addict for a son.  In his own mind, however, Lefty is a
winner because he is a wiseguy.  When Lefty takes Donnie under his wing as
a protege, he revels in describing the details of how a wiseguy talks, how
he dresses, how he carries his money and himself.  He fetishizes those
details, because his only sense of self-respect comes from being part of
that world, and he instantly takes to Donnie because Donnie seems to be
the only person who gives him any respect.
     Unfortunately for Lefty, he has picked the wrong protege.  Donnie
Brasco is actually FBI agent Joseph Pistone, working deep undercover to
gather evidence against the mob.  DONNIE BRASCO is based on a memoir by
the real-life Pistone, who spent six years collecting information which
would lead to hundreds of arrests and convictions.  He also spent those
years largely separated from his family and becoming ever more wrapped
up in the world he was supposed to be helping to bring down, and DONNIE
BRASCO spends a fair amount of time on how his work affected his personal
life.  We see his wife Maggie (Anne Heche) coping with raising their three
daughters alone, and arguments over how much Joseph/Donnie's personality
has changed.  As the time nears to draw the net around Donnie's crew, his
superiors in the FBI begin to worry that he has begun to think of his mob
life as his real life.
     As it turns out, the domestic drama in DONNIE BRASCO is actually the
least interesting aspect of the film.  Anne Heche is stuck with the
thankless "long-suffering wife" role, with predictable lines in
predictable scenes; it's hard to imagine anyone giving an interesting spin
to a line like "You're becoming like them."  Depp's performance is solid
and under-stated, a welcome shift from his string of saintly eccentrics.
Unfortunately, Joseph is already immersed in his undercover persona when
we first meet him, making it difficult to understand how much he is
supposed to have changed and why Maggie is still putting up with him.
     The reason those scenes are most frustrating, though, is that Lefty
is so much more fascinating a character than Joseph/Donnie.  Al Pacino has
often been prone to bigger-is-better style of acting, but in DONNIE BRASCO
he harnesses that impulse to turn in his best performance in at least
fifteen years.  There is a wonderful sequence during the second half of
the film in which Lefty and Donnie head down to Miami to investigate an
opportunity running a night club.  Lefty sees the club as his big chance
to strike out and accomplish something on his own, and he sets up a
meeting with Miami's local boss to get the necessary permission.  When the
Miami boss shows up for the meeting, however, he is accompanied by Lefty's
own boss Sonny Black (Michael Madsen), who has decided to take charge of
the enterprise himself.  As we watch Lefty fold in on himself in
disappointment -- compounded by the fact that he believes Donnie has
stabbed him in the back to earn Sonny's favor -- it is impossible not to
feel sympathy for him.  What makes the situation even more pathetic is
that the club is a front for yet another FBI undercover man, making
Lefty's lost dream an illusion from the start.  Pacino's performance is
sweet, crude, funny and haunted, and gives DONNIE BRASCO an unexpected
emotional pull.
     Lefty's hard life is made all the more tragic by the way organized
crime is portrayed.  Under the direction of Mike Newell (FOUR WEDDINGS AND
A FUNERAL), DONNIE BRASCO doesn't crackle with the same energy as films
set in this world made by Scorsese or DePalma, but it is a different
impression of mob life Newell and gifted screenwriter Paul Attanasio (QUIZ
SHOW) are after.  Where other films have made mob life seem terribly
attractive and glamorous, DONNIE BRASCO shows it as petty and tedious.
Sonny Black's crew is always looking for a decent new idea while making do
with hijacking trucks full of razor blades and breaking open sawed-off
parking meters, and their scramble to make the weekly payment to the big
boss makes them just as desperate as salesmen trying to meet a quota.
There is nothing Shakespearean about the power struggles in DONNIE BRASCO.
They are more like inter-office bickering gone haywire, and the rare (but
extremely graphic) moments of violence leave everyone's hands dirty.  The
beauty of Attanasio's script -- and Pacino's performance -- are that they
make Lefty's dedication to his role as lowest man in the lowest crew
something touching.  What begins as the story of a troubled undercover man
is someone else's story by the conclusion:  the story of the Willy Loman
of wiseguys.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Al Pacino, Johnny Depp, Michael Madsen, Bruno Kirby, James Russo, 
      Anne Heche
Director: Mike Newell
Producers: Mark Johnson, Barry Levinson, Louis DiGiaimo, Gail Mutrux
Screenplay: Paul Attanasio based on the book DONNIE BRASCO: 
      MY UNDERCOVER LIFE IN THE MAFIA by Joseph Pistone with 
      Richard Woodley
Cinematography: Peter Sova
Music: Patrick Doyle
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     Al Pacino in a Mafia movie feels as natural as peanut butter with 
jelly.  Mike Newell, the director of such popular British comedies as 
ENCHANTED APRIL and FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, is another matter 
altogether.  When you think of a director for New York-based, mob-
related motion pictures, names like Brian De Palma, Francis Ford 
Coppola, and Martin Scorsese leap to mind.  Unexpectedly, however, 
Newell slides effortlessly into the genre, fashioning a motion picture 
that is simultaneously like and unlike traditional wiseguy films.
     DONNIE BRASCO is based on the true story of FBI agent Joe Pistone 
(Johnny Depp), who went undercover and infiltrated the New York City mob 
during the late 1970s.  Joe, who went by the name of "Donnie Brasco", 
played his role so effectively that he rose to extraordinary heights 
within the organization, holding a place alongside his mentor, Lefty (Al 
Pacino), in the inner circle of boss Sonny Black (Michael Madsen).  But, 
the more time he spent with members of the Mafia, the more like them he 
became.  And, after a while, Joe could no longer tell where his true 
loyalties lay:  to his wife (Anne Heche), family, and government, or to 
the wiseguys who had adopted him into their exclusive club and 
lifestyle.
     Perhaps the most impressive thing that Newell has done with DONNIE 
BRASCO is to cull an atypically low-key and introspective performance 
from Al Pacino, an actor known for manic, scenery-chewing efforts.  
Lefty is a world-weary hit man with 26 kills under his belt and little 
to show for it.  "30 years, I'm bustin' my hump... for what?"  he 
laments when he is passed over for promotion within the mob.  His dream 
is to buy a boat and sail far away from civilization, but he doesn't 
have the money or the gumption to chase that golden fantasy.  Pacino 
presents Lefty as a tragic, and at times pathetic, character who earns 
our pity and understanding, if not our sympathy.  There's little hint of 
Michael Corleone here -- Lefty is an impotent doubter who knows how it 
will all end.  
     While not on Pacino's level, Johnny Depp is competent as the title 
character, a man who loses his perspective as he becomes seduced by the 
mobster's lifestyle.  Depp lets us see the conflict within Joe as his 
friendship with Lefty grows into something real and as his wife and 
children become little more than distant images.  Near the beginning of 
DONNIE BRASCO, Joe attempts to prevent a hit; by the end, he comes 
perilously close to taking part.  If there are times when Joe's 
character doesn't seem whole, the blame lies more with the script's 
failure to provide the needed background or motivation than with Depp's 
performance.
     Although DONNIE BRASCO is set against a backdrop of crime and 
violence (and Newell doesn't shrink from showing these elements, 
although he's more restrained than a Scorsese might be), it, like many 
better gangster films, is really about family and relationships.  Lefty 
and Joe have a surrogate father/son bond that gradually supersedes all 
other attachments in either of their lives.  As Lefty says at one point, 
"[The mob] is my family, even more than my [real] family."  It's because 
DONNIE BRASCO focuses on characters and relationships that it makes for 
compelling viewing.  
     Although the film contains many of the usual mob cliches and stock 
secondary characters, these don't detract much from the viewer's 
enjoyment.  Truth may be stranger than fiction, but many "based on real 
events" motion pictures aren't nearly as well-executed or involving as 
DONNIE BRASCO.  The film has all the right little touches to be 
believable, such as Lefty's fascinating lesson to his protege about how 
to dress, act, and speak to be respected in wiseguy circles.  DONNIE 
BRASCO takes us into a world that the movies frequently open to us, but 
somehow this trip seems more real and less glamorized than most.  The 
result is a satisfying film going experience.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Geoff Gloster
    There's no reason to doubt that DONNIE BRASCO is based, as its opening
credits proclaim, on a True Story. But if it's an accurate picture of life
on America's mean streets, than cinematic depictions of organised crime have
had a much stronger basis in reality than I would have previously thought.
For from the film's outset, when a group of hoods jocularly trade differing
opinions on the merits of various automobiles (not unlike a number of movie
lowlifes who recently gave a Madonna song a close reading) DONNIE BRASCO
resembles more than passingly a few gangster flicks once believed to be
works of fiction.
    Our eponymous hero (Johnny Depp) is not the cheap crook he first appears
to be. Brasco is Joseph Pistone, an undercover FBI agent who has the task of
chumming-up to Lefty (Al Pacino), a seasoned hood who tutors Pistone in the
art of being a "wiseguy". Regrettably, Pistone learns his lessons all too
well. His concern for Lefty, who is burdened with a heroin addicted son,
exacerbates his own family troubles: his children resent his lengthy
absences and his wife fears that her husband's gangster persona is becoming
a little too convincing.
    True, the focus on Pistone's family life does deviate from the typical
gangster-flick formula, but this subplot never rises above its television
drama origins. The unhappy couple trade predictable lines and engage in
drawn-out domestic squabbles – including an ill-advised marriage guidance
routine – that slow the film down unnecessarily. The biggest problem with
DONNIE BRASCO , however, is that its wiseguy attitude and style lacks the
flair of its many predecessors. The awkward use of an occasional disco tune
momentarily reminds us its the 70's, but not with the consistent and
blindingly tacky style – I loved those fluoro coloured suits – of Scorces'
costume drama CASINO. More importantly, Pacino's presence triggers memories
of his earlier movie triumphs in which similar territory was covered far
more effectively. DONNIE BRASCO's take on American values, for instance, is
feeble and obvious. Lefty rambles out dreams of material betterment to the
accompaniment of grating inspirational music. Inexplicably, Lefty's Horatio
Alger inspired gush is supposed to move us. It doesn't any more than his
family troubles do, which are dealt in the same saccharine and obvious
manner as Pistone's. Just think a minute on how these themes were explored
in the GODFATHER movies and SCARFACE. In these pictures Pacino's dedication
to a peculiar and bloody hyper-capitalism was twisted and confronting, while
his dogged application of macho wiseguy procedure meant that his relations
to friends and family was intriguingly dark – neither were spared bloody
retribution for breaching wiseguy regulations. DONNIE BRASCO's tawdry little
crime, therefore isn't so much its repetition of familiar gangster themes,
but the shameless way in which it sanitises them.
    (Oh and by the way, I forgot to mention that the script also sports a
startling subplot: Pipstone's superiors are obstructive incompetents who are
infuriated by his constant insubordination – is that a "Damn you McBain!" I
hear from Springfield way?)
    So the movie is cliched. Big deal, what do you expect from a
gangster-flick? Well you expect quality action sequences and bravado
performances in abundance if its going to be a decent example of the genre.
DONNIE BRASCO  fails on both counts. The action scenes never rise above the
ordinary and Depp's woeful performance tends to smother the good-work of his
comrades. Admittedly, Pacino does nothing new and Michael Madsen (Sonny)
simply smirks his way through the picture like a slightly subdued Mr. White,
but both possess an unmistakable sly charm. Depp usually exhibits a bit of
class himself, but regrettably, being in the presence of one of his betters
must have left him star-struck, for he is completely hell-bent on mimicking
Pacino's well-earned high style. The consequences are painful to watch. Its
no exaggeration to say that the film's credibility is seriously strained by
the sight of the Pistone family's uncanny ability to keep a straight face in
front of their breadwinner's phony Brooklyn accent.
    Perhaps we should take pity on the makers of DONNIE BRASCO . Maybe a
scrupulous adherence to pinpoint accuracy demanded tiered dialogue and
scenarios weakly reminiscent of classic gangster flicks. If this is indeed
the case, surely the makers of DONNIE BRASCO could have explored the
fascinating possibility that America's underworld is committed to emulating,
albeit in heavily attenuated form, their movie namesakes. Depp could have
poignantly played a simple cop who becomes a hideous parody once he is
forced to mimic big-screen gangster greats. Who knows what insights into the
criminal psyche could have arisen? But then again, perhaps Donnie Brasco
isn't so true after all.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The setting is New York City, 1978.  Lefty Ruggiero (played by Al
Pacino) is one of this country's countless semi-failures, able to get
by just acceptably in a dead end job, but he is never really going be
successful.  Lefty's job is working for the crime syndicate and
especially killing people now and then when the need arises.  He knows
he is well into the second half of his life, has a moderately okay home
life though his son is a drug addict and that bothers him.  His path
crosses that of Donnie Brasco (Johnny Depp), a young kid who seems to
have the horse sense that would make him do well in the Syndicate.
Lefty takes Donnie under his wing and helps him to make a name for
himself in the local mob.  Perhaps he sees in Donnie the son he does
not really feel he has at home.  What Lefty does not know is that
Donnie Brasco is really FBI agent Joe Pistone on assignment to go
undercover to collect information about the Organized Crime.  The two
men become close friends and in spite Lefty's having been a murderer
many times over, Donnie learns to like the older man.  Brasco knows
that if he is ever discovered, both he and Lefty will be killed.  At
the same time being Brasco is a full-time job and that means that his
Joe Pistone side must spend most of his life away from his family.
This puts a real strain on his marriage.  There just is not enough of
Joe Pistone to be two people.  The story, which is based on truth,
gives us an inside view of the workings of organized crime and at the
time shows how Joe handles his life that often calls for him to be away
from his family for months at a time.  There are signs that Joe will be
the same sort of failure working for the FBI that Lefty is for the Mob.
On the other hand, Donnie begins to discover that he could have been
fairly successful if he had sincerely gone in for organized crime.
Donnie's feigned drive seems to sell better than Lefty's more sincere
loyalty.
     DONNIE BRASCO is something of a departure for director Mike
Newell.  Newell directed ENCHANTED APRIL, INTO THE WEST, and FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL.  Making a film in GOODFELLAS territory is one
of the last things that would have been expected of him.  He gets the
dialog and the feel of the film just about right.  Part of how he does
this is filming on the streets of New York City.  The mentor/student
relationship between Lefty and Brasco and between Joe and the other
agents of the FBI allows the script to explain things reasonably
comfortably and allows the viewer to pick up nuances in the
conversation that would not otherwise be obvious.  Among other things
we learn is about six different, often contradictory, meanings for the
phrase "forget about it."  Under Newell's direction we learn just about
everything that there is to know about the voluble Lefty.  Pacino
rarely stops talking and when he does talk he uses low-class profanity
and candid vocabulary.  On the other hand, Johnny Depp plays his
character as quiet and unemotional so that we are rarely sure what his
is thinking and feeling--at least not from his performance.  It is
Pacino who holds our attention.  But the longer the two men are
together the more of Lefty's behavior and mannerisms Joe seems to pick
up and use even in his personal life.
     This film does give in to some prosaic touches.  Any film about
Italian gangsters seems to need a scene of cooking.  At .least if you
are Italian, what crime does not pay in money it pays in dividends that
show up on your waistline.  That is part of the genre and it has come
to an expected feature of Italian gangster films.  More irritating,
however, are the number of product placements that Newell has put into
his film.  It is not even particularly subtly done.  In the middle of a
dark warehouse neighborhood there will be a big company logo very
obviously placed in the picture.  Deep focus is used in a kitchen scene
so that the viewer can pick up the name on a cereal box.  Later much
the same is done with a scene at an airport in which the camera focus
lets us read clearly the company name on a plane.  If Newell has so
little respect for his own movie that he sells advertising space in it,
it is a lot harder for me as a viewer to respect it.
     The script seems to have been written with the emphasis on Brasco
balancing two very different lives, but in fact Pacino pulls our
attention toward his character and make him more of interest than
Depp's.  Overall I rate DONNIE BRASCO a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael Rizzo
        Anyone who has seen "The Godfather" can hardly deny the appeal of
mob movies; the intricacies, the shady deals, the horror, and the
explication of sheer machismo that is the legend of the Italian Mafia.  As
one who has seen more than a few of these films, it's usually a given that
mob movies chronicle life at the top.  "Donnie Brasco" takes a different
approach, and the result is one of the best films of the genre since
"Goodfellas".  Director Mike Newell's saga of the infiltration of the
lower-to-middle ranks of the mob by undercover FBI agent Joe Pistone is
vivid, intense, and littered with memorable performances.  Not the least
of which, certainly are those authored by the film's stars.
        Johnny Depp is Pistone, a family man with a lovely wife (media
darling and soon-to-be-superstar Anne Heche), beautiful children, and a
happy home.  Pistone, through his cover as jewelry appraiser Donnie
brasco, aka "Don the Jeweler", comes into contact with aging hitman Lefty
Ruggerio (Pacino).  Donnie manages to win Lefty's trust by doing him a
favor with an act of cunning and unexpected force.  Impressed, Lefty
decides to take "the Jeweler" under his wing.  Once inside, Donnie begins
a slow ascent through the ranks, encountering rising boss Sonny Black
(Michael Madsen), and eventually becoming an integral part of his
operation.  The most intriguing part of the story, though, is the
friendship which develops between Donnie and Lefty.  Donnie listens to
Lefty's gripes, he shares Christmas dinner with him, he visits him when
his drug-addicted son is in the hospital.  A very real bond is shared by
the two men, a bond that begins to make Pistone question his true duty.
He begins to feel the allure of the loyalty, honor, and blood ties which
connect members of the mafia.  As he and Lefty get closer, the characters
of Joe Pistone and Donnie Brasco become more and more intertwined.
        Interestingly, the mentor-student relationship of Lefty and Donnie
echoes somewhat in the pairing of Pacino and Depp.  Depp, who has long
been anointed Hollywood's next great dramatic actor, has up to this point
made a career playing interesting roles in unorthodox films, a la "Edward
Scissorhands", "Ed Wood", etc.  Here, under Pacino's watch, he graduates
to big-studio success.  Depp is excellent as Pistone/Brasco, as he slowly
loses the psychological boundary between the two.  The most intense
dramatic scenes inthe film are those between Depp and Heche, who is
equally good as a woman in love with, and enraged, with, a man whom she no
longer knows.  Good actors abound, some in accustomed roles, others not.
Madsen has got his trademark cocky-boy swagger in full effect as Sonny
Black, a man cleary in love with his increasing power.  Bruno Kirby,
hysterical as Billy Crystal's sidekick in "When Harry Met Sally" and "City
Slickers", exhibits some range as a mobster who isn't exactly on the
level.  The highest praise, though, should go to Pacino.  Yes, there are
reviews which have said, "We've seen this before".  I disagree.  Gone are
the quiet calculation of Michael Corleone and the self-destructive rage of
Tony Montana; Pacino's Lefty Ruggerio is a study in righteous indignation
and painful resignation.  In front of Donnie, he's all bluster,
complaining about his role in the organization, yet in front of his
superiors, he toes the line like a good soldier.  His increasing despair
with his lot in life - a son who doesn't respect him, a basically dead-end
job - is momentarily halted by the entrance of Donnie into his life,
giving him a brief pause of hope, which is finally crushed.  Pacino's
performance should resonate with anyone who has experienced similar
feelings.
        While the acting is first-rate across the board, I do have a few
minor quibbles.  The film's timeline is somewhat disjointed; long periods
of time tend to pass between scenes, and the audience isn't always
informed.  More scenes of the sinking Pistone/Brasco with his children
would have been nice as well, but that's somewhat picky.  Also, there are
a few elements of the plot which strain credibility just a little bit:
Donnie seems to advance to an awfully high position without having to do
too much that would get him sent to the gas chamber, if you know what I
mean.  Those are very minor points, and certainly no reason not to enjoy
the final product.  Paul Attanasio's screenplay is top-notch, and director
Mike Newell shows that he can tiptoe his way from scenes of utterly
abhorrent violence to very emotional drama with ease.  It probably won't
get him a trip to the Oscars, but after "Four Weddings and a Funeral", it
proves that he certainly has an abundance of range.  Speaking of Oscar,
hopefully the film's winter release won't plunge it off of the proverbial
radar screen; both Pacino and Depp are deserving of consideration.  As
Lefty would say, the Academy shouldn't "fuggedabowdit".

Author
Michael Redman
In the late seventies, the FBI was determined to bring down the mob and
sent one of their own into the middle of it, underground with little
support. Living with the crime bosses for six years, agent Joe Pistone
(code named "Donnie Brasco" and played by Johnny Depp) forms an
unexpected deep friendship with his mentor Lefty (Al Pacino).
Lefty is the opposite of the romantic vision of organized crime that we
have seen often on the big screen. His personal problems (cancer, a
junkie son) weigh heavy on his mind as does the fact that he is stuck in
a middle level mafioso job passed by for promotion. He's devoted his
life to his job and the family and knows that his career is going
nowhere. In many ways he is no different than any other aging work-a-day
stiff understanding that he is at a dead end. Of course, for Mafia
employees, "dead"end has an entirely different meaning.
It is no shock that Al Pacino is grand in his untypical downbeat
gangster role. And it has become apparent that it should no longer be
any surprise that Johnny Depp turns in a fine performance. Refusing to
be typecast in the pretty-boy role that was his in the throw-away
television series that was his public launching, Depp has given skilled
exhibitions in a wide variety of parts. Moving beyond the hip boy, here
he is a bit older and a bit wiser.
[This appeared in the 3/20/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Marty Mapes
Except for a superb performance by Al Pacino, Donnie Brasco is a
run-of-the mill gangster movie.
Donnie Brasco is the undercover name of Joe Pistone (Johnny Depp), an
FBI agent who goes undercover in the mob to gather information. His
sponsor is Lefty Ruggiero (Al Pacino), who personally vouches for
"Brasco." As the movie progress, Pistone becomes more and more like his
alter ego, distancing him from his family and endearing him to Lefty and
the other mob regulars.
Even though the movie is called "Donnie Brasco," the most interesting
character is Pacino's Lefty. Lefty is not your typical movie gangster.
Lefty has trouble at home: he loves his son, but cannot forgive him for
abusing drugs. Clearly, he had high hopes for him which are now
shattered. Lefty has trouble at work: when a superior is whacked and the
position opens up, Lefty is passed over for promotion by a young mob
go-getter (played by Michael Madsen). Early on, when Lefty is "called
in" (which almost always means certain death) he reacts not with hate or
anger or defiance, but with a dazed, fatalistic sense of fear and
resignation. Lefty is the Willy Loman of gangsters.
Pacino plays Lefty extremely well. At first, before we know he's a
loser, Pacino is a tough, hard-working gangster, but he is quickly
manipulated and misled by Brasco. Lefty is in such dire need for
companionship and respect that he takes Brasco under his wing a little
too hastily. Pacino beams when he's schooling young  Brasco in the ways
of mob life; when he finally has a son again. When problems arise at
work, Pacino conveys defeat and disbelief with his posture, his face,
his whole body. Lefty is a tragic figure and Pacino makes that figure
human.
Unfortunately, Donnie Brasco is not as much about Lefty as it is
about Brasco/Pistone. Johnny Depp is good, but not outstanding. There's
nothing wrong with the story, but it's nothing new. There are effective
moments of tension, claustrophobia, and fear, (like when the whole gang
knows there was a snitch in Florida) but there are also boring segments
that should have either been left out or given some importance (like
scenes of Brasco's troubled home life).
The movie raises interesting questions about trust and betrayal, about
children's needs for fathers (and vice-versa), and about balancing work
with family. These themes arise from the story and give it a more
interesting depth. Credit screenwriter Paul Attanasio for that. But
those themes don't resonate in the filmmaking. For example, Newell could
have paralleled the strife between Lefty and his son with the Pistone
family's loss of their father and husband -- and it seems that the story
might even imply such a parallel -- but the movie never tries to
makes any such connection.
In short, the movie is uneven. Pacino's performance is great and the
story seems to have an interesting take on human nature, but the bland,
mechanical direction make it not quite worthy of a full recommendation.
I should mention that most other reviewers have liked this movie better
than I did, so if you are interested in seeing Donnie Brasco, read some
more reviews for more positive hype.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes
