Title
Review for Father of the Bride Part II (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Fairall
Father of the Bride 2 (1995) ***1/2 (out of *****)
S: Steve Martin, Diane Keaton, Kimberly Williams, Martin Short, B.D. Wong,
   George Newbern, Kieran Culkin, Eugene Levy
D: Charles Shyer
     Steve Martin's 1991 version of Father of the Bride was one of the 
best comedies of recent years and it wasn't because the movie had big 
laughs (although it did) but because of the movies warm, likeable 
portrait of normal, everyday middle-class life. And Steve Martin isn't 
just a great comedian, he's also a great actor whose equally terrific 
in comic, heartwarming and dramatic scenes (see last years virtually 
unnoticed A Simple Twist of Fate).
     Father of the Bride 2 is a good sequel for many different reasons 
but he is the main one. While the movie mostly just requires his 
verbal and physical comic skills, he does get to display his dramatic reach 
here a couple times. One particularly beautiful scene comes near the 
end where he is holding two newborn babies. He doesn't say a word 
during the scene but it's a tribute to his acting skills that you know 
just what he's thinking.
     What's also good about this sequel is that it actually continues the
first movie instead of just repeating it, like we saw, for example, in
Home Alone 2. Martin's character, George Banks, has finally recovered from
his daughters wedding and is ready for some relaxation time when his
daughter (Kimberly Williams) now hits him with the news that she is
pregnant. And as if thats not enough, he soon finds out that his wife
(Diane Keaton) is also expecting.
     In an attempt to stay young and start fresh, George decides to sell
the familys beloved home much to the dismay of the rest of the family. 
This leads to the movies only (hardly major) flaw. The person who buys the
Banks home is a Middle Eastern caracture played by SCTV's Eugene Levy (who
also had a cameo in the first film playing a different character). That
kind of ethnic swipe seems like it would be more at home in a Jerky Boys
comedy than in this friendly, family oriented film. 
     Martin Short also returns as Franc Egglehoffer, the crazy wedding 
planner from the first film who speaks in an indecipherable accent that 
seems to be understood by everyone but George. This time he is both a 
decorator for the new babys nursery and as an aerobics instructor for the 
two pregnant women. He and Martin also have a funny "male bonding" moment 
near the end of the film.
     But still whats most appealing about both films is the way director 
Charles Shyer and writer Nancy Meyers seem to balance the warm moments 
and the comic ones. Its those moments, like the one with the two babies, 
that you will take home with you afterwards.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Steve Martin, Diane Keaton, Kimberly Williams, Martin Short, 
      George Newbern, Kieran Culkin, B.D. Wong, Jane Adams
Director: Charles Shyer
Producer: Nancy Meyers
Screenplay: Charles Shyer and Nancy Meyers based on the screenplay for 
      FATHER'S LITTLE DIVIDEND by Frances Goodrich and Albert Hackett
Cinematography: William A. Fraker
Music: Alan Silvestri
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     The curious thing about FATHER OF THE BRIDE II is that not only 
is it the sequel to a remake, but it's the remake of a sequel.  As such, 
it's a perfect illustration of stretching an idea too far.  Certain 
premises lack the necessary material for a multiple features, and this 
is one such example.  As FATHER'S LITTLE DIVIDEND (upon which this 
screenplay is based) paled in comparison to the original FATHER OF THE 
BRIDE, so this production is an uninspired follow-up to its immediate 
predecessor.
     FATHER OF THE BRIDE II is proof that there's a limit to how 
much life can be coaxed from a feel-good formula.  While the 1991 Steve 
Martin movie was good for ninety-plus minutes of undemanding fun, the 
second chapter is stale and overflowing with treacle.  Shot by 
cinematographer William Fraker with warm, golden tones, it's a 
celebration of suburbia as the ultimate culmination of the "American 
Dream."  
     The overriding theme of this film is identical to that of the first 
FATHER OF THE BRIDE:  letting go of a child.  Previously, Steve Martin's 
George Banks had trouble accepting that his daughter, Annie (Kimberly 
Williams), was ready to enter into a marriage with nice guy Brian 
MacKenzie (George Newbern).  Here, when Annie announces that she's 
pregnant, George finds it difficult coming to grips with the realization 
that the baby will cement Brian and Annie's family, further distancing 
him from his beloved daughter.  A secondary issue is briefly raised 
about George coping with the approach of his fiftieth birthday, but it's 
quickly dropped after George learns that not only is he about to be a 
grandfather, but his wife Nina (Diane Keaton) is going to have their 
third child.
     I have often said that, in a comedy, much silliness and sappiness 
can be forgiven in the service of solid humor.  But, while FATHER OF THE 
BRIDE has a few genuinely funny moments, it spends entirely too much 
time trying to be dramatic.  The result is that the recycled sentiment 
becomes overwhelming -- so much so that Martin himself jokingly refers 
to his clan as the "schmaltz family."  Trite lines like "Thanks for 
marrying me, Nina" and "Life isn't gonna get much better than this" 
pepper the screenplay.
     Martin and Keaton are appealing separately and together, but their 
relationship got all the development it needed in part one; here, 
they're treading water, trying to keep the film afloat by sheer screen 
presence.  It's not enough.  Kimberly Williams all-but-fades into the 
background.  Outside of her scenes with Martin, she's pretty much 
invisible.  Would that the same could be said about the duo of Martin 
Short and B.D. Wong (reprising their roles from part one), whose 
exaggerated accents and mannerisms go far beyond being irritating -- and 
scenes with these two are supposed to be comic highlights...  To add 
insult to injury, Eugene Levy is on hand as a caricature of a greedy 
Arab who's almost as offensive as Short's Franck Eggelhoffer.  One 
bright spot is Jane Adams' on-target portrayal of a competent 
obstetrician.
     In the Age of Family Values, FATHER OF THE BRIDE II will be 
welcomed with open arms by the likes of Newt Gingrich and Bob Dole (who 
will probably praise it without seeing it).  There's nothing "morally 
indecent" about the film -- no profanity, no sex outside marriage, and a 
healthy dose of hugs and smiles.  That FATHER OF THE BRIDE II isn't 
a particularly engrossing motion picture won't make much difference to 
that crowd.  Or, judging by the enthusiastic audience response, to the 
portion of the American public that laps up whatever Hollywood puts out, 
regardless of how unoriginal and artistically empty the product is.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     FATHER OF THE BRIDE II follows the 1991 FATHER OF THE BRIDE,
itself a remake of the 1950 movie by the same title.  The original was
a nice, high-bourgeoisie, mainstream film.  The father was Spencer
Tracy--who could do no wrong in his roles.  The daughter was Elizabeth
Taylor.  That film was followed by FATHER'S LITTLE DIVIDEND (1951),
also with Tracy and Taylor.  It is that last movie that has been now
remade as FATHER OF THE BRIDE II.
     I have not seen the 1991 picture and my memory of FATHER'S LITTLE
DIVIDEND is hazy, so no comparisons will be made.  But I have seen
FATHER OF THE BRIDE II and I can tell you that if you want to see Steve
Martin in fine fettle in a good picture, find something else to watch.
There's ample choice, including four fine films that  for mysterious
reasons averaged poor-to-mediocre reviews: PENNIES FROM HEAVEN, THREE
AMIGOS, MY BLUE HEAVEN, and HOUSESITTER.
     The script of FATHER OF THE BRIDE II is based on that of FATHER'S
LITTLE DIVIDEND, but this time there are two pregnancies.  George Banks
(Martin) is a wealthy man approaching 50 contented with his life, kids,
wife and house.  He say so at the start of the movie, addressing the
audience.  There is more of this later too.  The uncreative way the
monologue is handled shows that it is used as a crutch.
     When his married daughter announces that she is pregnant, George
goes into a blue funk at the idea of aging and becoming a grandfather.
This too is handled lamely, opting for sentiment instead of having
Steve Martin do a manic-depressive turn.  George tries rejuvenating his
appearance by dyeing his white hair and other steps.  In a moment of
abandon he makes love to his wife Nina (Keaton) on the kitchen floor.
     Let's cut to the chase.  Some time later the  senior couple find
out that Nina is pregnant, to her delight and to his shock.  But he
comes around and everything goes swimmingly as mother and daughter both
produce babies next door to each other in the same hospital and at the
exact same time.
     If you can swallow that much coincidence you should see the
infinitely funnier (but naughty) "Micki + Maude," a 1984 farce by Blake
Edwards in which bigamist TV reporter Dudley Moore has two wives giving
birth at the same time and place.  Skip, however the 1995 pregnancy
movie "Nine Months" (with Hugh Grant), which is pretty poor, except for
Robin Wiliams's turn.
     FATHER OF THE BRIDE II is phony throughout and disconnected from
real life, or at least the life of the huge majority of viewers.  The
Banks live in a mansion that would make Cary Grant and Myrna Loy (in
MR. BLANDINGS BUILDS HIS DREAM HOUSE (1948) green with envy.  George's
profession and source of income are a mystery.  The only time we see
him in his work-place is when he crosses a large office while getting
from his secretary a list of famous people who are his seniors.
     FATHER OF THE BRDIE II is a Rich People's film.  When for reasons
I will not go into, George has sold his house then wants to buy it back
from Mr.  Habib (Eugene Levy) the entrepreneur, he thinks nothing of
returning Habib's check plus a bonus of $100,000.  With the help of
another entrepreneur, the family friend played by Martin Short, George
then gets going on building an addition, a "Baby Suite" that could
easily house a small family.  Then comes a luxurious two-babies-shower,
also orchestrated by Martin Short.  Wnna bet that George and Nina do
not clip grocery coupons?
     Very, very little is funny about this film, in spite of Martin's
unquestioned abilities.  Instead we get a lot of delighted squealing
(as when the daughter makes her announcement) and dumb, silly scenes
(as in the dog sequence).  We get oceans of glop and an overall
atmosphere that is like an updated or transplanted Eisenhower-era
mentality, when much of America was optimistic and thriving.
     The picture also wallows in corny sentiment, like a flashback of
George teaching basketball to his then-little girl to the sounds of
awful swelling music. (Normally composer Alan Silvestri does a lot
better than in this picture).
     What's even worse is that the film is so lethargic that a
sleeping-pills incident stands as a symbol of the whole.  At the same
time the movie manages to offend people right and left: Arabs (the
grasping, cold Mr. Habib), hospital staff (they make an initial
mistake) and doctors (there is mistrust of obstetrician Dr. Eisenberg
who is young and a woman).  Canines too.
     More irritating yet is the role of Martin Short as Frank
Eggelhoffer.  He is an unexplained friend (unless perhaps you know
FATHER OF THE BRIDE) who is now an interior decorator, now a
contractor, now a caterer.  Introduced as a flaming gay, in gestures
and speech he minces, flounces, overdoes everything so much that he is
an insult to both gays and straights.  With vague European origins, he
speaks with an accent that's neither German or anything else.  It
starts out highly exaggerated then ebbs, flows and changes as the movie
unreels.  His nom-de-film is taken, I bet, from the screwball classic
NOTHING SACRED (1937) where the great supporting actor Sig Ruman
played Dr. Eggelhoffer.
     The only four things I liked in FATHER OF THE BRIDE II were Jane
Adams in her small part as the  charming and most professional
Dr.Eisenberg; the two Dobermans; and George's beautiful two-seater
convertible.  Neither the end credits nor the body of the movie
identify the car.  For once, product placement would have been
welcome.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     FATHER OF THE BRIDE II is a surprisingly excellent and
touching comedy.  The director (Charles Shyer), the writers (Nancy
Meyers and Charles Shyer), and all of the cast are back from FATHER OF
THE BRIDE (1991) which is in turn a remake of the 1950 movie of the
same name.  Unlike the 1991 movie which is broadly written for maximum
laughs, the sequel is an even better movie that relies for its charm on
its poignancy although there are innumerable hilarious moments as well.
FATHER OF THE BRIDE II had me in tears twice.  On the other hand,
I rolled over in laughter so loud in one scene that I scared the woman
in front of me.  A very affecting and effective movie.
     The setup of FATHER OF THE BRIDE II is a simple one.  George
Banks (Steve Martin) and his wife Nina (Diane Keaton) are a happily
married couple.  Although they have one kid, Matty (Kieran Culkin), in
middle school, their daughter Annie Banks (Kimberly Williams) is now
married and living a mile away with her new husband, Bryan MacKenzie
(George Newbern).  One day the young couple invite both sets of
parents, the Banks and John (Peter Michael Goetz) and Joanna (Kate
McGregor-Stewart) MacKenzie, to the Banks's house for the big
announcement that they are expecting.
     The reaction ranges from rapture to being stunned.  As Matty puts
it, "I'm 4' 6", I don't shave, I don't have a job, and I'm going to be
an uncle.  Isn't there something weird about that?"  George flies into
a middle age panic, and he dies his beautiful flowing gray hair jet
black.  He thinks he is too young to be a grandfather.  He reminds us
that he is 31 days younger than Bill Clinton.  After he dies his hair,
a beautiful blonde in a red Ferrari convertible makes a pass at him at
a red light, but he sheepishly points to his wedding ring.
     One of the stars of the movie is the family home - a classic East
Coast style two story in a typical New England neighborhood full of
autumn trees which somehow manages to be located in Southern California
in this show.  George decides to sell it reasoning, "We could sell this
house in a second.  It's the Leave It to Beaver house everyone wants."
The sale of their home and its ramifications are both touching and
extremely funny.  The writers will really surprise you with what they
do with this one.
     Perhaps one of the reasons this movie works so well for me are all
of the similarities with my own life.  George is my age almost to the
day.  Like us, they are selling the house they have lived in for many
years, they have to vacate the house quickly, and their dishes, which
play a prominent role in the film, are exactly the same as ours.  We
are even older parents with a young child (6 in our case).  To be
honest though, I have had no problems with harassment by Ferraris.
     The movie is filled with touching scenes.  There is one of father
and daughter playing basketball.  It is filmed as a series of
flashbacks starting at age 4.  The cinematography (Elliot Davis) and
the editing (Stephen Rotter) are absolute perfection.  Kimberly
Williams does a wonderful job as a role model of what every parent
hopes their children turn into - sweet, smart, good looking, happy, and
successful.  The basketball scene forms a key part of her character's
development in the movie.
     The twist in the story that makes it click is that George and Nina
find that they too are expecting a baby which pleases Nina but scares
George.  While driving through town Nina sees idyllic families filmed
in sepia whereas George can only see families with little monsters.  He
tells Nina, "together we're almost a hundred!"  Eventually George tries
to put a good face on it all.  He reassures Nina with "Just because
we're older doesn't mean we're old.  It's the 90s.", and "Going to the
movies will be economical: one child and two seniors!"
     The movie deals straightforwardly and effectively with many
serious subjects.  The fear of your kids growing up and moving across
country is an emotional ones for most parents.  Our only son is just
six, but is already planning on leaving and moving to Montana to be a
paleontologist when he grows up, which is as freighting to me as the
possibility of Annie moving away is to George.
     The best part of the entire movie are the birthing scenes at the
end.  Times of major emotion and uproarious laughter in the theater.
Throughout the show Steve Martin is at the top of his form.  He can
deliver lines as well as facial expressions without speaking that
alternatively have you in stitches one minute and ready to cry the
next.  A brilliant performance.
     The rest of the cast is equally strong.  Keaton, who can be too
cutesy or quirky, is carefully directed and delivers her warmest
performance since REDS.  Martin Short again plays Franck Egglehoffer,
but in the sequel he is not so obnoxious.  In this film, he does not go
overboard as he so frequently does, and gives the only lovable and
touching as well as comedic role I have ever seen him in.  In a minor
but well cast role we have Jane Adams as Dr. Megan Eisenberg.
     FATHER OF THE BRIDE II is a joy to behold.  A life-affirming
film whose almost last line is "Life doesn't get much better than
this."  Amen.
     FATHER OF THE BRIDE II runs a brisk 1:46.  It is rated PG,
but it is a totally non-offensive show that should have been rated G.
There is no sex, nudity, violence, bad language, or smoking.  You could
take a kid of any age, but given the story, I suspect it will only
interest kids over say 8.  I recommend the movie to you strongly, and I
award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
