Title
Review for Memphis Belle (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Disappointing and undoubtedly
     fictionalized account of the twenty-fifth mission of the
     first B-17 crew to reach that number and be sent home.  Eight
     real B-17s were used and they deserve billing above the likes
     of Matthew Modine, Eric Stoltz, and John Lithgow.  Rating: low
     +1 (-4 to +4).
     Undeniably there is some truth to this story.  The Memphis Belle really
was the first B-17 Flying Fortress to complete twenty-five missions and
hence win its flight crew an opportunity to go home and sit out the rest of
the war in celebrity and with relatively cushy assignments.  Hence there
really was a twenty-fifth mission of the Memphis Belle.  Whether the first
twenty-four missions were as routine as suggested in the film and the
twenty-fifth was as dangerous ... that I am somewhat skeptical about.  I
take most of the film with more than one grain of salt.  The drama is pat;
the characters are stereotypes.  In fact, the script candidly tells you that
the characters are going to be stereotypes.  "There's always one guy who's
very religious, always one guy from Cleveland," we are told in the first
scene.  So of course we have these cliched characters here.  This is *not*
TWELVE O'CLOCK HIGH and it is not one of the great adventure films about
World War II.  It is, however, a very nice film to look at.  The music and
the decoration have a nice feel of 1943, even if one can argue that the
party is a bit lavish for a humble air base.  But the real visual splendor
is in seeing genuine B-17s taking off and flying together.  I think most
people get some sort of a charge out of seeing airplanes flying and there is
a lot of flying in this film.
     Basically Memphis Belle details for the viewer several of the more
common hazards of bombing runs over Germany.  You see air battles; you see
near-misses, light collisions, and heavy collisions.  You see flying through
a shower of flak.  You see people getting shot up and mid-air surgery.
Mostly you see a lot of scenes you have seen in other films.  Yet somehow
the film falls short of actually generating real excitement or tension.  We
know the Belle is going to get back and the characters are not real enough
and certainly not endearing enough for us really to worry about their
individual safety.  The film has a few too many contrived touches even to
have a feel of authenticity.  It has fliers mistaking tomato soup for blood.
It has a dog who recognizes the sound of his master's plane engines.
Touches like these get in the way of the audience taking the story very
seriously.
     This is a pretty film to watch but both too shallow in its drama and
too unexceptional in its action really to engage an audience.  I give it a
low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1990, PG-13, 107 minutes [1 hour, 47 minutes]
[war/lighthearted drama]
starring: Matthew Modine (Dennis), Tate Donovan (Luke), Eric Stoltz (Danny),
Sean Astin (Rascal), Billy Zane (Val), written by Monte Merrick, produced by
David Puttman, Catherine Wyler, directed by Michael Caton-Jones.
I don't have high praises for "Memphis Belle," but I don't have a complete
negative attitudes towards it either. It's a film that tries to present
itself as a World War II adventure, but it stumbles a bit by over-emphasizing
its drama.
Movies about gangs of buddies, especially military buddies, usually have a
great sense of paldom and the crew of the Memphis Belle certainly display
this. There is Dennis (Modine), an uptight Captain; Luke (Donovan), an
easy-going lady-killer; Rascal (Astin), a hyper wiseass; Danny (Stolz), a
tender Irish guy; Clay (Harry Connick Jr.), a singer;  Jack (Neil Giuntoli),
a tough guy; Eugene (Courtney Gains), a devout Catholic; Phil (D.B. Sweeny),
a scared loner; Val (Zane), a slick pseudo doctor; and Virge (Reed Diamond),
a generic suburban guy. 
Pairs of friendships within the group form, and it works pretty well here,
even though it is through the use of cliches. When you have so many
characters at the same time it's hard to get a good sense of each one's
personality, and this is the only problem with the film. It's hard to tell if
it's supposed to be a dramatic, moving story about these realistic men, or is
it an innocent adventure story? 
The story tells of the crew's twenty-fifth and final mission, which makes
almost the entire film seem like one long ending instead of a whole story.
The first act starts to define the characters, saying where they're from and
what they're going to do when they get home. But we learn little about their
actual combat missions, it's as if making it this far is a walk in the park. 
Most of the film takes place inside the plane while flying over Germany to
bomb a munitions factory. There are some pretty cool air battle scenes, but
they're not overly exciting or intense. It's not like "'Top Gun' set in
1943," although I think that's supposed to be the premise. There isn't much
to describe in terms of plot or events, it's basically a portrait of a
typical air raid during WWII.         
"Memphis Belle" is almost two hours, but it seems to go by rather quickly,
probably because it has such a simple plot. I liked what I saw but it could
have been better.We get a nice adventure, but that's it, something's missing
here. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
