Title
Review for My Family (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MY FAMILY (MI FAMILIA) tells the story of several generations of
Mexican Americans living in East LA.  Much like TO LIVE, it tells the
story by focusing on three decades of life.  In the case of MY FAMILY,
it is the 20s, 50s, and 80s.
     The story opens with Paco Sanchez (Edward James Olmos) toiling
away at an old typewriter that is on its last legs.  He is recording
the history of his family.  The movie then moves to the past and brings
us up to the present in a straight forward chronological sequence.
     Paco starts with the story of his father, Jose Sanchez (Jacob
Vargas in the 20s and Eduardo Lopez Rojas in the 50s and 80s) leaving
Mexico in the 20s and walking what must have been a thousand miles from
central Mexico to Los Angeles.  Once there he comes to stay with an old
cousin known by the nickname of El Californio (Leon Singer) since he
has been in California since it was part of Mexico.  This historical
footnote is an effect way of reminding American viewers that the real
California natives are Mexicans and the immigrants are the actually the
Americans who took over California and redefined the social structure.
     Jose marries Maria (Jennifer Lopez in the 20s and Jenny Gago in
the 50s and 80s), and they start a large family.  Among their children
are Jimmy (Jimmy Smits), Toni (Constance Marie), Chucho (Esai Morales),
Irene (Lupe Ontiveros), Memo (Enrique Castillo), and Paco, but I may
have forgotten some.  For political reasons, Jimmy marries Isabel
(Elpidia Carrillo) and starts his own branch of the family.  As someone
who grew up an only child, it is always a delight to live a vicarious
life with many siblings to know and love.  Here the family was
reminiscent of the large Italian families in the GODFATHER albeit the
Sanchez family's many brushes with the law were not near as dramatic or
as often.
     The acting by Esai Morales and Elpidia Carrillo was the best.
Morales gives a performance full of life.  The part he plays is much
like that of Tony in WEST SIDE STORY.  His performance was the most
interesting to me although Jimmy Smits had the character with the most
anger and potential.  For a small role, Elpidia Carrillo won over my
heart.  As you watch the show, you wanted to kick Jimmy for not liking
Isabel sooner.
     The best part of the show was the set decoration by Barry Robison.
He recreated East Los Angeles with careful attention to everything from
perfect condition old low riders to the cornfields the people had in
back of their homes.  The cinematography was of equal quality.  Every
scene appeared to be filmed in the last ten minute glow of sunset.
Many scenes were actually filmed then, you can tell by observing the
shadows.  Others, however, were filmed at noon so they must have used
filters.
     For a show so well constructed and which tries so hard to do for
Mexican Americans what films like TO LIVE did for the Chinese, I must
admit I was extremely frustrated by it.  My problem was with the script
by the director (Gregory Nava) and his wife Anna Thomas.  Like a rock
skimming across a pond but never getting wet, we meet, but only
briefly, numerous characters.  We are told innumerable stories some of
which they have little time to act out but feel compelled to tell us
anyway.
     Watching the movie it is as if your neighbor invites you over to
tell you the story of his vacation, flashes 800 slides in front of you
and then wishes you good-bye.  You leave knowing very little about a
lot of places, but not knowing anything in much depth.  Contrast this
script with that of TO LIVE which also spanned 3 decades.  In that
movie, the scenes lasted much longer, and we got to know the characters
much better.  Here the editor (Nancy Richardson) felt obligated to
leave in some of every possible scene.  She should have cut out more
scenes and gave the ones left more substance.
     Another, albeit smaller problem, is with the believability.  Were
this not being presented documentary style, one could ignore
plausibility, but not as presented.  As just two examples, I found it
hard to believe that a woman torn from her husband and who is trying
desperately to get back to him for years would never think about
writing him a letter.  Second, why did she have to walk so far carrying
a baby?  Surely she could have hitchhiked, earned money for bus fare or
something.
     MY FAMILY (MI FAMILIA) runs 2:08.  It is in English, but with the
first ten minutes in Spanish with English subtitles.  It is rated R for
knife fights, some blood, a little profanity, and brief nudity, but it
is a mild R.  This movie would be fine for teenagers to see on their
own, but I do not think it is appropriate for younger children.  I
found the picture too frustrating to recommend it, but I do award it **
for great intentions and partial success.  In the small theater where I
saw it, everyone left early except me.  I don't think they missed
anything since after a while the surface skimming got repetitious.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 5/3/95 
Running Length: 2:07 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, sex, nudity) 
Starring: Jimmy Smits, Eduardo Lopez Rojas, Jenny Gago,
          Edward James Olmos, Esai Morales, Constance Marie,
          Lupe Ontiveros, Jacob Vargas, Scott Bakula,
          Mary Steenburgen 
Director: Gregory Nava 
Producer: Anna Thomas 
Screenplay: Gregory Nava and Anna Thomas 
Cinematography: Edward Lachman 
Music: Mark McKenzie and Pepe Avila 
Released by New Line Cinema 
In English and Spanish with subtitles 
     MY FAMILY, the portrait of a Mexican-American family living in East 
Los Angeles, boasts a series of distinguished thematic antecedents, 
including Francis Ford Coppola's THE GODFATHER and Zhang Yimou's TO 
LIVE.  Here, as in the 1972 gangster saga, the significance of family is 
a central issue, although each movie chooses to explore this 
differently.  In THE GODFATHER, Vito and Michael Corleone struggled to 
hold their household together regardless of outside pressures; in MY 
FAMILY, family unity gives meaning to existence. 
     Although vastly different from THE GODFATHER, TO LIVE is also 
echoed by MY FAMILY.  The 1994 Chinese film followed two characters from 
early marriage to old age, observing keenly that though lives end, life 
continues.  Here, the setting is different, but the message is the same.  
MY FAMILY never shrinks from tragedy, but it doesn't wallow in it, 
either. 
     One highlighted truth is the commonality of the human experience.  
Though the focus is one specific family, every issue confronted by the 
characters is universal.  As is true in all good "ethnic" motion 
pictures, the central culture provides a rich and resonant backdrop to 
stories capable of touching anyone, regardless of heritage or 
upbringing.  Certain emotions, beliefs, and hopes cross racial lines, 
and it is through these that MY FAMILY finds its strength.  
     This film, which is epic in scale (although not in length--the 
running time is just over two hours), canvasses sixty years and three 
generations.  Major events take place in three periods:  the late 1920s 
and early 1930s, the late 1950s, and the 1980s.  The third era is the 
longest and most detailed, but valuable background is presented in the 
other two.  MY FAMILY requires the totality of its story for the 
climactic moments to attain their full dramatic impact, especially since 
writer/director Gregory Nava (EL NORTE) refuses cheap, theatrical 
methods of audience manipulation. 
     MY FAMILY opens in 1926 Mexico, as Jose Sanchez heads north to 
California to find a long-lost relative.  Once there, he meets and 
marries Maria, who bears him a son and daughter.  She is pregnant with 
their third child when immigration officials illegally deport her.  The 
rest of this segment concentrates on her attempts to return to her 
husband and family. 
     The 1958 and 1980s episodes present the fortunes of two of the 
Sanchez children:  Chucho (Esai Morales) and Jimmy (Jimmy Smits).  
Chucho is a brash youth who leads a gang, incurs the wrath of his father 
when he sells marijuana, and is constantly skirting trouble with the 
police.  Jimmy idolizes his older brother and eventually follows in his 
footsteps, but the underlying pain of one shared, tragic moment haunts 
Jimmy's future.  It is only during a watershed scene, when the anger and 
grief are released, that Jimmy is able to agree that "tomorrow matters." 
     Never before has Jimmy Smits shown the range and aptitude he 
displays here.  As the emotional fulcrum of MY FAMILY, he is consistent, 
with no evidence of over- or underacting.  Esai Morales and Constance 
Marie, who play two of Jimmy's siblings, bring fire, energy, and a touch 
of humor to their roles.  In the parts of the aging Jose and Maria, 
Eduardo Lopez Rojas and Jenny Gago offer unforced performances salted 
with joy and pathos.  Edward James Olmos as Paco, one of six Sanchez 
children, is the narrator (I could have done without the lengthy and 
intrusive voiceovers).  Other cast members include Scott Bakula and Mary 
Steenburgen. 
     MY FAMILY constantly builds upon itself.  Each scene has meaning 
not only because of what comes before it, but for what it adds to all 
that comes after.  The film runs the audience through a range of 
emotions from laughter to tears, but the tone retains a sense of 
hopefulness.  Nava has a clear vision that is achieved through the 
exceptional work of his cast and crew. 
     MY FAMILY is amazingly rich, with themes that are topical-yet-
timeless, a solidly-constructed story to give them vitality, and 
superlative production values.  Cinematographer Edward Lachman has 
photographed all three eras differently, and his visual flair adds 
another layer to this production.  MY FAMILY gives us culture shock and 
class distinctions, metaphors involving owls and bridges, and the 
struggle between traditional values and modern ethics.  It never dwells 
on gang violence, crime, or racism; but ignores none of these three.  
Above all, however, it is faithful to its title, presenting the newest 
portrait of an ancient truth--of all the ties that bind humans to each 
other, none is more lasting than that of birth and blood. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Alberto Castillo
     In the movie, MY FAMILY/MI FAMILIA, a milpa grows in East Los
Angeles; a cornfield where even that which dies--like fallen stalks of
corn--feeds the living.
     MY FAMILY, produced by Francis Ford Coppola, chronicles five
generations of a Mexican family's experience in the United States.  The
Sanchez family includes "El Californio," an old uncle who was born in
Los Angeles when it was still Mexico; Maria, the Mexican-American
mother who is deported during anti-immigrant sweeps in the '30s;
Isabel, a Salvadoran political refugee who marries into the family; and
Chuco, a pachuco who is pursued by a river spirit.  (In this movie,
even the chairs have spirits.)
     And unlike other Hollywood movies, Puerto Rican, Peruvian, Mexican
and Chicano actors play Latinos.
     Anyone from an immigrant family, or even a large family, should
see a part of their own lives in this film.  We did.
     We saw our families who were here in the United States long before
pilgrims or conquistadors: grandparents who crossed the border back and
forth when there no Border Patrol; an imprisoned uncle, who, like the
character Jimmy, seemed to bear all the wounds of being different for
the entire family like the fallen corn, so the rest of us could
flourish.  Our family grew milpas.
     We live in a society of divisions, of disintegrating families of
races, and people divided into legal and illegal populations. MY
FAMILY is about how one family withstands those divisions.  It is not
a Disney family.
     When we were young, we went to movie theaters and drive-ins in
Texas and California with names like the Isis and the Floral, where we
saw ourselves through Mexico's golden age of cinema.  We were complex.
We laughed, sang, danced an loved through Mexican movie stars Maria
Felix, Pedro Infante, Dolores del Rio, Tin Tan and Cantinflas.
     Then, we were heroes.  We imagined ourselves in Spanish.  But as
we relied more and more on the English-only films of Hollywood, we were
reduced to maids with thick accents, prostitutes and drug dealers.
Hollywood reduced us to caricatures.
     MY FAMILY is about a housekeeper and a gardener who, in the end,
live a good life.  At best in the mainstream media, these gardeners and
housekeeper are reduced to Nannygate problems or cameo roles in the
intrigues of the O. J. Simpson trial, and their sons appear handcuffed
regularly in the nightly news.
     For those of us who have grown up in the electronic village, films
such as JFK become the medium of truth and social memory.  It is not
lost on Latin youth that they are rendered as the fearfully romantic
antiheroes.  They don't get the happy ending or even a happy
continuum.  They always die in the end.
     Screenwriters Gregory Nava and Anna Thomas, the husband and wife
team who created EL NORTE, a movie about Guatemalan refugees,
envisioned MY FAMILY as a moving Diego Rivera mural.  Through his
palette of indigenous themes, Rivera restored dignity to the Indians of
Mexico.
     MY FAMILY is part of a larger effort by Latinos to recover that
dignity through film, documentaries and the written word.  Latinos
everywhere are recording a different memory of how we see ourselves,
how we narrate ourselves and our place in America.
     Other recently released films, such as AND THE EARTH DID NOT
SWALLOW HIM, based on the book by Tomas Rivera about a migrant family,
also speak to that collective memory of simply being human, rather than
an anonymous entity whose name to some Americans, translates into
"stranger" or "alien."  Both movies are to be released around Cinco de
Mayo (May 5).
     "Films like these are about inserting ourselves into American
history," say Rosa Linda Fregoso, a professor at the University of
California at Davis, who wrote THE BRONZE SCREEN (U of Minnesota
Press, 1993), a book on the Chicanas and Chincanos in film.
     Sadly, as we celebrate 100 years of Hollywood, MY FAMILY is one
of the few movies with a big-name backer.  Many in the industry are
looking at it as a screen test for future movies on Latinos.  As one
fan noted, it took 100 years to make.
     By the way, cornfields still grow in East L.A.  And the broken and
fallen corn still feed the new.
Chronicle Features, San Francisco
RELEASE DATE: On or After April 28,1995
LATINO SPECTRUM          by Roberto Rodriguez & Patrisia Gonzales
(Copyright Chronicle Features, 1995)
NOTE: LATINO SPECTRUM is a nationally syndicated column and 
is reproduced with the permission of the authors.  For more 
information, contact R.  Rodriguez at (915) 593-2387 e-mail 
XRoberto@aol.com  or your local newspaper.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Several films made for PBS's American Playhouse have been quality
motion pictures and beat most theatrical fare by a wide margin.
Eventually American Playhouse started giving theatrical release to some
of their productions before having them appear on television.  One of
their earlier and  definitely one of their better productions was EL
NORTE.  It was the story of a brother and sister who flee Guatemala and
its politics and illegally enter the United States.  That film was
written and directed by Gregory Nava.  With many of the same resonances
Nava has co-written and directed MY FAMILY.  Unfortunately, while this
film, also made in part for American Playhouse, is by no means a bad or
even a mediocre film, it fails to show the strength of EL NORTE.  MY
FAMILY is the story of three generations of the Mexican-American
Sanchez family told as a mosaic of individual stories.  The real
problem is that most of the individual stories are well-worn and
familiar.  The film tells how as a boy Jose Sanchez walked from his
home in Mexico to Los Angeles when the border was just a line drawn in
the sand.  Taking a gardening job at a wealthy home, he meets and
marries Maria (Jenny Gago).  He believes himself to be safe and secure
in the United States, but the hand of United States Immigration reaches
out and separates his family.  The bitterness of this injustice and the
rage it causes reaches out and destroys two of the Sanchez sons.  The
two boys are Chucho (played by Esai Morales) and Jimmy (played by Jimmy
Smits).  Almost a generation apart, young Jimmy idolizes Chucho.
Chucho becomes a likable and relatively benign Pachuco gang member,
just slightly on the shady side of the law.  He is severely punished
for legal offenses for which a richer man would have received a much
less harsh treatment.  Young Jimmy sees what happens to his beloved
older brother and grows to have an immense pent-up rage from the
injustices done to his family.  He is a rebel without any real cause
until time gives him something he wants to fight for.
     What is right with this film is that it is a moving look at a
community under-represented in film.  What is wrong is that the writing
is several notches below EL NORTE.  Too often the film tries to be
whimsical when a more serious approach would have been more effective.
Nava undercuts the realism of the drama scenes that are just a bit
funnier than they should have been, occasionally even unkindly turning
characters into caricatures.  And even the light dusting of the
supernatural does not help the credibility either.  And it seems to me
that when an old couple look at each other and sum up saying "It's been
a good life," it has to be because either they expect their lives or
the film to end in the next few minutes.
     Jimmy Smits has never been my favorite actor, but this is
certainly the closest he has ever come to being a powerful actor in a
serious dramatic role.  Esai Morales and Eduardo Lopez Rojas, the
latter as the adult Jose, coast through their roles without having to
show much emotional range.  Jenny Gago, on the other hand, carries much
more of the film than her low fourth-billing status would indicate.
Edward James Olmos and Mary Steenburgen have small parts.  The latter
seems to be present only to provide one of the film's two sympathetic
Anglos.
     I cannot say that there were not moments when MY FAMILY brought a
tear to my eye, so Nava must have been doing something right.  But as
epics about ethnic families go, other films have given us fresher and
more compelling material.  I give this a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
