Title
Review for Touch of Evil (1958)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Brian Koller
"Touch of Evil" is an excellent movie.  It is also one of
Universal Studio's strangest films from the 1950s.  It is
dark, lurid, and weird.
Charlton Heston plays a high-ranking Mexican law officer.
He is on his honeymoon with Janet Leigh.  On the American
side of the border with Mexico, a car explodes.  Heston
becomes involved in the case, to the annoyance of local
police celebrity Orson Welles (who also directed the film
and wrote the screenplay).  Heston accuses Welles of
framing a Mexican for the bombing.  Further complicating
matters, the Grande family has a grudge against Heston
for imprisoning their kingpin.  The Grande family seeks
revenge against Heston through Leigh, who has almost as
bad a time here as she would in "Psycho" two years later.
Heston's intense acting style suits his character well.
He is determined to seek justice, first for the framed
accused, then against Welles, then for his wife Leigh.
Welles just looks awful.  Corpulent, unshaven, slurring,
limping and corrupt, he is grossly overweight.  He is
practically worshipped by his fellow officers.  His
"game leg" gives him "hunches" which always prove correct.
This does not keep him from planting evidence to support
his hunches.  Welles' character grows increasingly
unstable throughout the movie.  This inconsistency does
not harm the film, however, but increases its tension.
Marlene Dietrich has a few scenes as the owner of a...
well, some kind of non-respectable establishment.  Her
only customer is Welles.  She may represent Death.
Dennis Weaver plays a hotel "night manager".  His character 
is so weird and quirky, it would never be credible in a
conventional film.  But "Touch of Evil" is not conventional,
and he fits right in.  His trademark expression is,
"If they think I'm gonna do that, they've got another
thing coming!"
"Touch of Evil" must be seen to be believed, and it
is remarkable that it is a 1958 product of Universal.
You would think some studio mogul would see it and say,
'What is the audience?  Who would go to see this film?
There's no love interest.  It's not a comedy or a drama.
It's not really even a mystery!'  I guess "film noir"
has claimed it, and we can only be thankful for its
existence.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Wallace Baine
Touch of Evil is a lurid, enjoyable B-movie thrill ride
It's a moment that still thrills film buffs. Near the end of 1958's `Touch
of Evil,' Orson Welles, corpulent and slurring, looks to Marlene Dietrich,
playing a seedy border-town fortune-teller. `Tell me my future,' he says.
She looks at him contemptuously, `You haven't got any. Your future's all
used up.'
That moment, of course, resonates far beyond the plot of this lurid,
gripping and satisfying B-reel film noir, newly re-released 40 years later.
>From that point, Welles himself had no future, at least not as the
filmmaker of importance he was destined to be after `Citizen Kane' in 1941.
>From the time he descends into a dark, dirty river in the last minutes of
`Touch of Evil,' it was a long slide into voice-over narration for someone
else's forgettable movies, embarrassing talk-show appearances and kitschy
wine commercials.
The re-release of `Touch of Evil' marks a redemption for Hollywood's most
famous fat man (Saturday marks the 13th anniversary of Welles's death).
This new artifact is not merely a 40th anniversary marketing ploy. It is,
subtly but fundamentally, a different movie. Bay Area sound man and film
editor Walter Murch, one of the most admired figures in the film industry,
actually re-cut the original `Touch of Evil' according to the wishes of its
long deceased director/writer who was denied a final cut on the original.
More on that later.
`Touch of Evil' is a pop culture landmark mainly because it remains one of
the finest examples of art emerging from trash. Using the streets of Venice
(that's LA; not Italy) to resemble a scuzzy, sinister Mexican border town
called Los Robles, Welles tells the story of Mike Vargas, an upright, newly
married Mexican law enforcement officer (Charlton Heston) dealing with a
double homicide, which compels him to lock horns with his opposite number
on the U.S. side of the border, a vicious, candy-bar-chomping,
turf-conscious autocrat named Hank Quinlan (Welles).
Vargas interrupts his honeymoon to investigate a fatal car-bombing. The car
explodes on American soil, but it's clear the bomb was planted on the
Mexican side, giving Vargas justification to claim jurisdiction. But
Quinlan and his cronies are interested in a quick frame-up to put the case
to rest. Vargas then turns his attention to Quinlan's corrupt methods (such
as routinely planting evidence) and as he seeks out allies to bring down
the embittered police captain, his comely young bride (Janet Leigh) is
sucked into a vortex of danger fueled by sex, drugs and organized crime.
Potentially delicious, certainly. But such a plot can also describe
boilerplate film noir, which is apparently what Universal had in mind when
the studio barred Welles from the set after seeing his first cut and then
released its own version, complete with re-shoots of added material. It was
harsh treatment for the one-time boy-wonder filmmaker and Welles responded
in kind with a 58-page memo to Universal, outlining to the smallest detail
what he had in mind for the film.
It is from that remarkable document that Murch (the editor of such films as
`Apocalypse Now' and `The English Patient') re-assembled the picture
according to Welles's wishes. Most notably restored is the famous opening
shot, the astounding, three-minute-20-second continuous shot that begins
with an anonymous figure planting the bomb in the trunk of the car, swoops
skyward to show the layout of Los Robles and to follow the ill-fated car as
it moves through the border checkpoint, finally settling on the startled
faces of Heston and Leigh, just about to kiss, the moment the car explodes.
(That technique has been copied several times over the years, most recently
in the opening to last year's `Boogie Nights'). The philistines at
Universal had slapped opening titles all over the shot much to Welles's
chagrin. The removal of the titles was the largest of about 50 changes
Murch made to the film -- the smallest included things such as adding
off-camera grunts to the soundtrack (Welles was nothing if not a
fetishist).
All that stuff is terrific, but what makes `Touch of Evil' such a kick is
how the characterizations blend so well with their murky, menacing
surroundings. Welles especially is transfixing as the toad-like, malignant
Quinlan. When we first see him, struggling out of his car at the site of
the car bombing, his bulk, his dyspeptic expression and the small, diseased
eyes that hint at a dead soul are striking. At the time, Welles wasn't the
eminence he was later in life and he needed considerable padding and
make-up to become such a monster. To underscore the fact that Quinlan has
slipped into an abyss of self-loathing, there's a scene near the beginning
when he walks into Marlene Dietrich's salon. The two obviously have a
history, but she doesn't recognize the man he's become. Pitifully sucking
on a candy bar, Quinlan explains away his size saying `It's the hooch
mostly,' then, almost tenderly, `I wish it was your chili I was getting fat
on.'
The other major change in the film has to do with intercutting Vargas's
struggles against Quinlan with his wife's desperate straits at a desert
hotel where she is threatened by a gang of toughs under the direction of a
sleazy crime boss out to intimidate Vargas. Previously, the plotlines were
offered separately, but here the stories are woven together to create
parallel suspense.
The scenes at the remote desert hotel, where Vargas had put his wife in the
mistaken belief she'd be safe there, are by today's explicit standards
almost corny. But they are also vividly surreal, like snatches from an
interrupted nightmare. Lounging in her hotel room in her unmentionables,
Janet Leigh, who just a few years later was to participate in cinema's most
famous shower scene, radiates a disturbingly sexual kind of vulnerability
who by her very ripeness seems to invite corruption (That corruption comes
in the form of drugs, not sex). Also unforgettable is a young Dennis Weaver
as the googly-eyed, maniacal hotel manager babbling incoherently from fear
and menace. All these characters tend toward the grotesque, reminding us
that `Touch of Evil' is after all a B-movie. Still, the manner in which
they are framed is low pleasure at its most intoxicating.
Only Heston, as the film's avenging hero, fails to connect. For one thing,
he's about as convincing as a Mexican as Garrison Keillor would be. He
seems to abandon a tentative Mexican accent half way through. He also seems
free of the demons that drive the characters around him. Even when Vargas
realizes that his wife has been kidnapped, his rage simply doesn't have the
same dimension as the dark emotions that run through the rest of the film.
Walter Murch, the man who carried out Welles's wishes from beyond the
grave, is a sound man at heart. And it is the sound innovations, coupled
with the director's dark, contrasty images, that give `Touch of Evil' such
a perverse vibe. In that famous opening shot, Henry Mancini's opening theme
is jettisoned in favor of an impressionistic swirl of street music,
squawking out of cheap tin speakers and swelling and fading as the
characters move through the set.
As any writer can tell you, what happened to Welles during `Touch of Evil'
can hardly be seen as merely a sad irony of history. It happens every day,
in TV and cinema, where writers routinely lose control over their
creations, eventually seeing the germ of their ideas warped and
misrepresented by non-writers with big money at stake. This is not always
the high crime against art that artists would have you believe. Some
auteurs could use some judicious collaboration (Have you seen Joel and
Ethan Coen's `The Big Lebowski'?).
But the larger-than-life Orson Welles gives screenwriters an example to
follow: write everything -- yes, everything -- down and leave it in a
prominent place where someone will find it 20 years after your death when
presumably your genius will finally be recognized. If this catches on, it
may spawn a whole generation of re-interpreters seeing in nearly every
finished movie a better one struggling to break free.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In 1958 Orson Wells turned his latest picture, TOUCH OF EVIL, over to
the studio and left the country to work on another movie.  The studio,
expecting a solid B movie did not know what to do with the print Wells
gave them.  Essentially a B movie with an avant-garde look, the film,
which was re-edited by the studio, got mixed reviews when it was
released.  After dying at the box office, it was later deemed a classic
even though the critics and the public at the time did not care much for
it.
Against this historical backdrop, Academy Award winning editor Walter
Murch (THE ENGLISH PATIENT) has used Wells's 58 page memo on how he
wanted to change the studio cut as the basis for a re-edit for the
film's re-release to the theaters on its fortieth anniversary.  Whether
TOUCH OF EVIL is a masterpiece as many have called it or just an
intriguing, confusing and avant-garde B movie is the question.  Probably
the movie's fans will be pleased with the new version, but those less
attached to the original film may find the redo an interesting movie
albeit far from a great one.
The major change to the picture occurs during the long opening sequence
of a moving car with a bomb in the trunk, which is the one of most
important scenes in the move.  In the original release the studio
obscured the images by overlaying them with the opening credits and
changing the natural street sounds Wells wanted to a heavy Henry Mancini
score.   Wells's vision for the opening is superior, this much is
certain.
Wells not only directed the film, he also completely rewrote Paul
Monash's original script, and he chose himself to star in the movie
opposite Charlton Heston, who had just finished his successful role in
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.
Welles plays Hank Quinlan, an American law enforcement officer in a
Mexican border town.  Hank, an "ex-lush," who is in such poor health
that he seems certain to die of a heart attack at any moment, has
trouble staying on the wagon.  His sweaty face chomps so hard at his
cigar that he almost pulverizes it, and his rumpled clothes look like
he's been wearing them for weeks.  The audience can almost smell him
coming.  Everyone has their specialties, and Hank's is planting evidence
in order to ensure convictions.
In complete contrast to Wells, Heston plays a Mexican narcotics agent
named Mike Vargas, who has "near cabinet level rank" within the Mexican
government.  Clean-cut and aristocratic looking, Mike is as honest as
the day is long.  Janet Leigh plays Mike's American-born wife, Susan,
who, quite unbelievably, knows basically no Spanish.  The purpose of her
character in the cliched plot is to be kidnapped and abused.  Whether
she is gang-raped or not is left ambiguous. Mercedes McCambridge plays a
leader of the young Mexican drug users, who look like actors you might
expect to find in REEFER MADNESS.
The script revels in ambiguities and oblique sexual references.  Trying
constantly to be more than just your average B movie, it throws in bits
of everything from westerns to Shakespeare.
The story has the two law officers join forces at first to find the
bomber, but they quickly become adversaries.  The movie is filled with
quirky characters from Dennis Weaver as an imbecilic motel manager to
Marlene Dietrich as a cliched madam named Tanya.
Filmed in black and white with heavy use of shadows to denote the
omnipresence of evil, the movie has a look popular in 1950's Saturday
matinee double features.  The difference is that TOUCH OF EVIL has a
stellar cast and a deliciously oblique script.
"He was some kind of man," Tanya says at the end.  "What does it matter
what you say about people?" She was speaking of Wells's character, but
the quote would be even more appropriately spoken of Wells himself.  His
brilliance shows in his greater works as well as his more modest ones.
Were the reviewers at the time of its initial release wrong?  Or was
this really an unrecognized masterpiece?  You can be your own judge.  As
for me, it wasn't even the best movie I saw this week.  Still, a Wells
movie is always something well worth savoring.
TOUCH OF EVIL runs 1:13.  It is not rated but probably would be PG-13
for adult themes and violence and would be fine for kids around 12 and
up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Orson Welles
Writers: Paul Monash and Orson Welles (based on the novel by Whit
Masterson)
Starring: Charlton Heston, Janet Leigh, Orson Welles, Joseph Calleia,
Akim Tamiroff, Mort Mills, Joanna Cook Moore, Ray Collins, Marleine
Dietrich, Keenan Wynn, Zsa Zsa Gabor, Joseph Cotten
Orson Welle's "Touch of Evil" and "Citizen Kane" are worlds apart as
films.  One's a hard-boiled old-school piece of pulp; the other is an
ingenius portrayal of a seriously flawed man and the deconstruction of
his myth.  Both are celebrated, but "Kane" has been dubbed the Greatest
Film of All Time by many critics (not believing I can rank any film as
the "Greatest," I refer to it as "possibly..."), while "Touch of Evil"'s
just celebrated.  One would almost feel inclined to diss it a bit, since
it is NOT "Kane," but if you, like me, are a believer in the critiquing
rule that a director's films are all measured on their own merits, you
won't.
Orson directed, co-wrote, and starred in this black and white, moody
little piece of pulp as an obligation to a studio (who first had him
co-starring, but then forced him to write and direct it against his
will), but, as John Travolta said in "Get Shorty" (where he watched it
for a scene), sometimes you do your best work when you have a gun
against your head.  It's another one of those films, like "Chinatown"
and "The Maltese Falcon," where all the elements of film storytelling
come into perfect or near-perfect balance with one another, creating a
satisfying and even rewarding film.  I mean, this is not JUST a piece of
pulp: it has some serious dramatic undertones to it that many pulp films
don't posess.
"Touch of Evil" takes place around the American/Mexican border and
centers around a mexican detective, Ramon Miguel "Mike" Vargas (get
this: Charlton Heston - yeah, HE looks mexican), who becomes involved in
the murder of a border town mayor who was blown up almost on the border
due to a bomb placed on his car in Mexico.  Vargas is merely an
"observer" to the detective work done by the area's celebritated
detective, Hank Quinlan (Orson - at his most obese), a beastly man with
a gimpy leg which he says gives him intuition, which he uses to solve
crimes.  When questioned how he thinks he solved the murder right away,
he says his leg told him.
Also in the story is Mike's new wife, an american gal named Susan (Janet
Leigh, three years before "Psycho"), a buxom but fiercely strong woman
who gets involved with a border town kinda mafia king, "Uncle Joe"
Grandi (Akim Tamiroff), who wants to screw over Mike due to some past
instances.  Although her opening scenes show a very strong will on her
part, she later becomes more essential to the film as an innocent
victim, and pawn in the screwing over of Mike.
Soon into the investigation, Mike discovers that Quinlan has set up a
boy to take the fall for the murder by planting evidence.  Knowing for
sure that he did it, Mike becomes enraged with Hank, and soon starts
spreading bad gossip as well as doing some little investigating of his
own, discovering that Hank, a major celebrity in the area, has been
planting evidence for his entire career.  Soon a desperate Hank joins up
with the weazel-like Grandi in setting up a scandal involving Susan and
some weed (which had to be kinda risque for the time).
What makes this film so great though?  Is it the story?  The plot is
very neat, with very little plot holes, and even some good old
characterization.  But, as the old saying goes, it's not what you tell
but how.  Welles has really created a wonderful little pot-boiler here,
setting up atmosphere, deepening the characters, touching on themes,
and, of course, doing some really nifty camerawork that's still
astounding.
A lot of this film takes place at night, and the cinematography deftly
captures the seedy world of a border town which thrives at night. 
Scenes are shot showing gorgeously ominous shadows lurking eveywhere,
and the darkness even conceals some parts of the town.  One of the best
scenes in the movie involves a murder shot in a room where a light
flashes up and down, creating tension throughout.  Even if the story
wasn't good, the film would still be great to look at.
The characters are very well-drawn, and surprisingly effectively
portrayed by the actors who play them.  While Mike, who is out to seek
the truth, but finds he has to do both while saving his wife, is the
lead character, he is not who the film is about (FYI, Charlton Heston
gives one of his best performances in this film - I was shocked to see
how good he was, as he is usually kinda hokey).  Hank is the target of
the film, as he is a fallen man who took the wrong course in life, has
lived happily with it, and has now found himself taking the plunge.  The
film shows his past life in the form of a woman he once knew (played in
a "guest appearance" by Marlene Dietrich), who symbolically mocks his
weight ("You shoulda laid off those candy bars").  Perhaps he was
tempted by the devil or at least by evil, and, as all evil deeds end up,
is finally learning the price of his choice.  In the film's final
moments, we see him contemplating his choice, but thinking about far too
late in his life to turn back.
The film not only touches on this, but on police corruption, and the
search for truth.  Throughout the latter part of the film, Hank's giddy
old buddy Pete (Joseph Calleia) tries to swade Mike from his exposing
Hank for what he is as he will destroy him as a man.  The film touches
on the question between truth or living with a lie, but says that in all
cases, truth must be told eventually, or all else that comes after will
be plagued.
And what would a Welles film be without cool camera tricks.  "Citizen
Kane" was one of the first films to use innovative camera tricks in such
large capacity which helps the storytelling, and "Touch of Evil" is no
different.  Every shot is brilliantly laid-out, and filled with all the
right atmosphere.  In fact, the opening shot is one of the top ten
greatest openings I've ever seen: a 3 1/2 minute long un-broken
steadicam shot which is one of the first of its kind (the latest
incarnations of this were in Altman's "The Player," and Anderson's
"Boogie Nights").  With a brilliant, pulsating, highly percussive scorse
by the great Henry Mancini, this film is not just brilliantly written
and acted, but brilliantly directed.
"Touch of Evil" may not be a "Citizen Kane" (it's deconstruction of Hank
is hardly up to the brilliance of the deconstruction of Charles Foster
Kane), but it's one of the best examples of film pulp/film noir of all
time, and an example of how directors CAN make brilliance under intense
studio pressure (in fact, in "Ed Wood," Welles - played by uncannily
Vincent D'Onofrio - bitches about how he has to make a film starring
Charlton Heston as a mexican).  "Touch of Evil" may not be a "Kane," but
on its own, it's still a work of a genius filmcraftsman.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Like "Touch of Evil," "L.A. Confidental" is a noir film pitting a
corrupt cop against an honest policeman who rises above the
muck.  Both have bleak world views, are richly detailed, and
are on the long side in running time.  Both feature Oscar-
worthy stars.  But if you liked Curtis Hanson's 1997
blockbuster, you will not necessarily go for Orson Welles's
1958 work, "Touch of Evil."  The Welles picture is re-released
at this time in a newly edited version, one in which production
editor Rick Schmidlin takes into account a 58-page set of
notes dashed off by its famed director to improve the final cut,
while Walter Murch does the actual polishing.  Looking at the
black-and-white detective story in today's eyes, you may well
find it too stagey (as I did), with a hackneyed, contrived
ending.  As such, "Touch of Evil" may be of value principally
to film scholars and buffs, fans of Welles who feel the great
man can do no wrong, and young people interested in seeing
what the Welles fuss is all about.  
   The story itself is nothing much, and we can see why
Universal-International, the studio which owned the film, felt it
would be accepted as a B-movie, and why American critics
were largely luke-warm about the production.  The narrative
opens with a bang, as a mysterious man photographed from
a distance places dynamite in the trunk of a large car on the
California side of the Mexican border.  Moments later, a guy
with his stripper girl friend hops in, and ust as he drives
across the frontier his car explodes.  By luck, Mike Vargas
(Charlton Heston), an honest Mexican narco who has just
walked over to the Mexican side with his new American bride
Susan (Janet Leigh), interrupts his honeymoon to investigate
the crime.  (Since Vargas had for a while been harassing a
drug dealer, Grandis, the Grandis clan are seeking revenge,
which they get by later kidnapping Vargas's new wife.)  But
Hank Quinlan (Orson Welles), an outrageously fat American
police chief, takes over the case determined to find the perp
even if a closing of the case requires that he frame some
seedy Mexican.    We have no idea how an American cop is
able to go beyond his jurisdiction and terrorize Mexicans into
confessing to a crime which has taken place on Mexican
territory, but simply must accept this flaw for the sake of the
tale.  
   "Touch of Evil" is in no way another "Citizen Kane," Orson
Welles' 1941 movie which some consider the greatest film of
all time.  This re-edited version conforms more to the
director's wishes than the original 1958 release.  For example,
the opening explosion is no longer marred by a show of the
film's credits and the sound track is replete with the tinny
sounds that Welles favored.  It's still a B-movie, though re-
released at a time in which our $8 no longer brings us a B-
movie as a double-feature.  The ado is based rather on some
thematic challenges which Welles devised for the 1958 screen
and for the inventive photography implemented at a time in
which special effects were still in a neolithic stage.
   Thematically, Welles dabbled with ideas considered daring
for its time.  The romantic couple are interracial, the blond,
sassy, all-American Susan taking her honeymoon with the
upright Mexican, Vargas.  The American cop is the
unscrupulous one; the Mexican, the ethical model.  Sexual
references are highlighted, as Vargas and Susan kiss
passionately from time to time only to have the consummation
of their marriage delayed by events which overtake them. 
Even here, the couple show signs of conflict in the midst of
their honeymoon, with Susan protesting her husband's choice
of venue and insisting on leaving the area, without him if
necessary.  The kidnap scene hints at a gang bang, as
smarmy members of the Mexican underworld, who have just
kidnapped Susan and shut her into a motel in the middle of
nowhere, approach her menacingly.  The film also has
engaging, even campy, portrays by actors like cigar-chomping
Marlene Dietrich who had once loved Quinlan and Dennis
Weaver as a nervous, seemingly retarded night man in the
desolate motel.  
  Cinematically, Welles dabbles in imagery with which he first
experimented in "Citizen Kane." Though this time around he
does not use the spinning tabloid-like replicas across the
screen as he did in 1941, his images are dark and disturbing,
an outward representation of the inner world of the dissolute
American cop.  Particularly murky are the canal waters which
appear in the film's climactic scene, actually filmed in Venice,
California--which substitutes for the seedy Mexican border
town.  The shot considered a technical master stroke does
not look like much today: while Quinlan third-degrees the
suspect in the latter's home, the single camera follows the two
on a crab dolly from room to room, the imagery captured in a
single set of frames.  Welles also putters with the cross-
cutting of scenes, displayed more readily in this re-edited
version, with activities of different locales photographed so
that the actions seem simultaneous.  The film also uses
sustained washes of sound rather than an operatic scoring,
the latter being the traditional choice of directors of such
stories.  Most of all, Welles has himself photographed from
low-angle shots, his already corpulent body made even
stockier by padding, his features becoming steadily more
repugnant as he descends deeper into his own mental
deterioration.
   All in all, though, the movie shows a simplistic conflict of
good vs. evil and even in its own time, its distribution was
scant and unprofitable.  "Touch of Evil" is still a B-movie.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TOUCH OF EVIL (director/writer: Orson Welles; screenwriter: from the
novel "Badge of Evil" by Whit Masterson; cinematographer: Russell Metty;
editors: Aaron Stell/Virgil Vogel; cast: Charlton Heston (Ramon Miguel
"Mike" Vargas), Janet Leigh (Susan Vargas), Orson Welles (Hank Quinlan),
Joseph Calleia (Pete Menzies), Akim Tamiroff (Uncle Joe Grandi),
Mercedes McCambridge (Butch Hoodlum), Marlene Dietrich (Tanya), Joanna
Moore (Marcia Linnekar), Mort Mills (Assistant D.A. Schwartz), Zsa Zsa
Gabor (Owner of a nightclub), Val de Vargas (Pancho), Harry Shannon
(Gould), Joseph Cotten (Police Doctor), Dennis Weaver (Motel Worker),
Victor Millan (Sanchez); Runtime: 111; Universal; 1958)
Truly one of the greatest films ever made, but one steeped in
controversy ever since cinema's boy genius Orson Welles, on his return
to Hollywood after being away for 10 years, was asked to play the part
of the film's corrupt police chief...but since the film didn't have a
director, the film's star, Charlton Heston, suggested to the people at
Universal that they get Orson to direct it (this is Heston's version).
And direct it he did, pouring into this fantastically shot
black-and-white classical noir film, a tale about murder, betrayal
between friends, the vile actions of a porcine sheriff, and many other
controversial themes for the 1950s including gang rape, racism, sexual
ambiguity, drugs, and wholesale police corruption. It was magnificently
photographed by emphasizing the contrasts between dark and light shades
as filmed by the great cinematographer Russell Metty, which abetted the
imaginative tale, whose main story is about the downfall of the sleazy,
obese lawman played with sheer brilliance by Orson.
It's a B-film more powerful and hard-boiled than the weak-minded
upper-studio heads at Universal could handle. So they did what dullards
seem to do when faced with a genius they don't comprehend, they tried to
ruin Orson's film by re-editing it, and one of their studio hack
directors, a man named Harry Keller, came in to redo parts of the film
after Orson left the country to try and get backing for the Don Quixote
project he was interested in doing next. Orson pleaded with the studio
to keep the film intact, he even sent them a 58-page memo telling them
exactly how he wanted the film presented and stood fast on any changes.
The studio kept the memo, but made three different versions and released
the film ignoring Orson's wishes. The video that came out in the '70s
was an interpretation of the three re-edited versions, which was far
removed from the way Orson wanted it seen. The film ended up as a box
office disappointment, giving ammo to those in Hollywood who said that
he could only make an art film and not a commercial one. Orson refused
to recognize the version that Universal sent to the movie theaters as
his film, in fact he called it an 'odious thing.'
Never fully receiving the recognition that the film should have gotten
for the masterpiece it was, it was even considered by some film critics
to be a disappointing Welles film, not comparable to his masterpiece of
"Citizen Kane." The film, nevertheless, got recognized abroad,
especially by the French New Wave directors and eventually the film was
starting to get a following among young intellectuals in this country
and started to get its just recognition for the poetically visionary and
original film it was. It was a film that did things films never did
before, both technically and as a hard-hitting Baroque thriller. It was
the first film to have natural dialogue in a moving car. It shot its now
famous opening scene in a long tracking shot without credits or titles,
that lasted 3-minutes without a cut and kept the background natural
sounds of the street, instead of the Henry Mancini soundtrack, as the
newlyweds strolled amidst the tawdry bars, strip clubs and sleaze of Los
Robles, the run-down town on the Mexican side of the border. It is
arguably the greatest opening shot in film history because of its visual
impact in setting up the feature's characters and the tenseness of the
story that was to follow. Orson used a hand-held camera and specialized
not only in wide-angle shots but by his constant intercutting, he was
able to keep the action flowing and the story suspenseful. The film had
been restored somewhat by 1978 for its video distribution and it picked
up some running time from how it was first shown at 96 minutes and now
it was back to its original time of 108 minutes. In the 1990s the film
was finally pieced together from the memo Orson sent the studio and the
hack director's scenes were cut, and it picked up an additional three
minutes. The effort to restore the film to the way Orson originally shot
it, allowed the story to become clearer and for the film to have the
shape the artist wanted it to have. This is about the closest we could
get to the way Orson filmed it, since he passed away in 1985 and we have
no other idea about what else he may have wanted to do with the film. He
never made a Hollywood film since, as the studio blackballed him.
The film opens in a Mexican border town in California; the actual
location of the film was in Venice, California, once a prosperous resort
town, but now is run-down, surrounded by oil wells and has a seedy look
to it, making it look just right for an unsavory border town. Mike
Vargas (Heston) is a Mexican police investigator coming back to his
country to be a witness at the trial of the narcotic dealers he
arrested, who are members of the Grandi family. Vargas is someone who is
well-educated, speaks a perfect English and has connections to the
powers in the Mexican government. His new bride is an American named
Susan (Leigh). She is a pretty blonde, who is accompanying her husband
to the trial in Mexico City and calling this trip their honeymoon. But
the story immediately has a strange twist to it, as someone plants a
ticking time bomb in the car of the wealthy businessman Mr. Linnekar,
who has just crossed over the border from Mexico when the bomb kills him
and the stripper who is in the car with him.
The crime takes place on the American side, so the notorious police
chief Harry Quinlan (Welles) is called in to investigate. Vargas is
worried that the bomb was planted on the Mexican side of the border and
is afraid that his country might be involved in some sort of
international incident, so he sticks around to watch over the
investigation. He foolishly leaves Susan alone on the Mexican side to
wait for him at their hotel, but she gets intercepted by a punk kid
named Pancho, who brings her to a big eared, toupee wearing character
called "Uncle Joe" Grandi (Akim Tamiroff), who schemes up a plan to
intimidate her and stop Vargas from testifying at the trial of his
mobster brother. To Susan's regrets, the Mexicans act as despicable as
she surmised they would, as she can't wait to get back to America.
The film gets more complex as the police immediately arrest a Mexican
shoe clerk named Sanchez, who has been dating Linnekar's daughter and
living off her money, against the wishes of her father. There is no
proof against him, but Quinlan catches criminals by using his intuition
and when he needs evidence, he is in the habit of planting it. He has a
vendetta against criminals ever since his wife was strangled and the
murderer was never found. Vargas knows that dynamite was planted in
Sanchez's apartment by Quinlan, and thereby cannot let the arrest of
Sanchez slide, as he goes on the hunt to gather evidence against Quinlan
to prove that he is someone who has a history of framing suspects.
Spoiler: For those who don't want to follow the rest of the story,
please stop reading at this point and resume reading the last paragraph,
which makes some further points about the film.
The film tells three stories at this point, as it intercuts between
Vargas working with the honest Assistant DA Schwartz (Mills) to get the
info on all of Quinlan's arrests, and it tells the other story of
Vargas's wife, who Vargas neglects because he gets too busy with
Quinlan. Susan is being intimidated by Grandi's relatives in the motel
she is alone at, who are threatening to gang rape her. Her only help can
be from someone who is not capable of helping, a nutty night clerk,
played by Dennis Weaver with manic craziness, who has more tics than a
dog with fleas. Vargas is unaware that the motel is owned by Uncle Joe,
at this point he is only interested in looking out for the interest of
Mexico and his career, forgetting for a moment about his wife until
guilty feelings creep up on him and thoughts of her alone with only
low-class Mexicans around her sends chills up his spine. But the main
story is about Quinlan, whose 30 year career as a crime fighter is about
to come falling down, as he is now forced to conspire with Uncle Joe to
frame Vargas's wife as a junkie and make out that Vargas is a narcotic
dealer, in order for him to ruin Vargas and stop him from exposing him.
All these three stories come together in a fantastically lively way.
Suzy is trapped in her room by Grandi's young punks, lesbians and
drug-induced thugs, and she is forcefully drugged and probably a victim
of a gang rape. She is then brought to a different hotel on the Mexican
side of the border, surrounded with drug paraphernalia to make it look
like she's a drug addict. Quinlan uses this opportunity to strangle
Uncle Joe in her room and make it look like Susan did it. But Quinlan's
best friend and most devoted follower, Sergeant Menzies (Calleia),
discovers Quinlan's cane in the room and realizes he can't look the
other way any more, since he also knows Vargas is hot on Quinlan's trail
and he wrestles with his conscience and decides to work with Vargas by
having a concealed microphone taped to his body while Vargas records
Quinlan's confession on a tape recorder from a short distance away. This
is the first time in 18 years that the once alcoholic Quinlan has gone
on a drinking binge and when he is confronted by Menzies, he is reeling
from drunkeness.
Before Quinlan meets with Menzies, there is an intriguing scene where
Quinlan goes to his old flame's apartment, where a player-piano cuts
into their conversational space. He hasn't seen her for a long time and
she barely recognizes him as he has become very fat (it's the padding)
and walks in a lumbering way. She's a gypsy fortune-teller tart called
Tanya (Dietrich), who reads the tarot cards to tell him that his future
is all used up. Upon meeting Menzies, he senses it's too late, that he
talked into the machine giving away his guilt and he thereby shoots
Menzies, still hoping to frame Vargas for that murder. But as his
confession is played back to Schwartz, who has just arrived on the scene
to tell Vargas that his wife is OK, Menzies manages to kill Quinlan
before he dies. The subtle beauty of this scene, is in the restored
version, where it looks as if the machine killed him. Then Tanya returns
to view Quinlan's body lying in the shallow ditch amid the strewn
garbage and Dietrich ends the film with the best film quote ever to end
a film on, when asked about him, she replies, "What does it matter what
you say about people... !"
Fans of the cinema should be pleased with this restored work and after
seeing it will have a chance to judge for themselves which version is
the masterpiece. There should be no doubt about what that choice should
be. For cinefiles, thanks must go out to those who put in such a
worthwhile effort to get this restoration accomplished. Jonathan
Rosenbaum, one of the finest film critics today, published a large
portion of Welles's memo in Film Quarterly a few years ago and thereby
got the ball rolling to restore the film. His article attracted the
attention of producer Rick Schmidlin, who interested both Universal and
the Oscar-winning editor Walter Murch ("The Conversation") to restore
the film according to Welles's memo, which they did and is the version I
reviewed.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are some great films that are considered to be great
for the wrong reasons, not always having something to do
with their quality. TOUCH OF EVIL, 1958 noir thriller
directed by Orson Welles, is one of such examples. Its good
reputation among film critics and aficionados comes from the
background, not from the film itself. Simple fact that it
was directed by great Orson Welles is reason for respect.
But the story behind cameras indicates "great" film. In the
early stages of production Welles was originally hired only
for the acting part. At the insistence of his colleague
Charlton Heston, Universal agreed to allow Welles not only
to direct, and he also re-wrote the original script by Paul
Monash. The result was unusual film that didn't particularly
impressed studio bosses, so they ordered TOUCH OF EVIL to be
re-edited. Welles was unsatisfied with their decision and
practically disowned the film, creating another myth about
great masterpiece ruined by shortsighted, conservative
studio establishment that didn't understand true Art.
The film was actually based on BADGE OF EVIL, obscure pulp
novel by Whit Masterson. Complicated plot takes place in Los
Robles, seedy town on U.S./Mexican border. Ramon Miguel
"Mike" Vargas (played by Heston) is top ranking Mexican
anti- narcotics policeman who has just dealt spectacular
blow to Grandis, powerful group of narcotic smugglers.
Before he testifies, he plans to enjoy honeymoon with his
beautiful American wife Susan (played by Janet Leigh). They
are monitored by "Uncle Joe" Grandi (played by Akim
Tamiroff) who wants to prevent Vargas' testimony by
intimidating his wife. Their plans are affected by unrelated
incident that happens on the border crossing - powerful
local businessman from US side of the border and his
girlfriend get killed by a car bomb. Vargas, who witnessed
the incident, volunteers to help the investigation because
he thinks that the bomb had been planted on Mexican soil.
Investigation is led by Captain Hank Quinlan (played by
Orson Welles), grotesquely obese policeman who became a
local legend because of his law enforcement abilities.
Quinlan doesn't need much time to find a suspect - young
Mexican shoe clerk Manelo Sanchez (played by Victor Millan)
was employee of the deceased and had affair with the bosses'
daughter. When Quinlan finds explosives in Sanchez' home,
diligent Vargas can't fail noticing that the evidence got
planted. When he confronts Quinlan about it and threatens
with exposure, the old lawman decides to get rid of the
overinquistive Mexican. He gets in touch with Grandi and two
of them are plotting diabolical scheme to discredit Vargas
through his wife.
Like many other cinema classics, TOUCH OF EVIL flopped
during original theatrical run and was generally viewed as
the failure. This opinion was shared by studio executives
and critics alike. The latter considered Welles' work to be
nothing more than B-film with A-actors shot in some
unconventional techniques. On the surface, their arguments
have some merit - story which is set in seedy border town
drowned in prostitution and narco-trafficking and featuring
lesbian biker (played by Mercedes McCambridge) as drug
lord's henchman can easily be viewed as pure pulp. Welles
also contributes to this impression by conveniently showing
Janet Leigh in revealing clothes and putting her character
through mock gang rape and similar ordeals suitable for
damsels in pulpy B movies. Because of that, many
contemporary critics failed to see that TOUCH OF EVIL also
happens to deal with some serious issues like racism or
endless conflict between police efficiency and civil rights.
Perhaps that, more serious, dimension of this film got
overlooked because Welles tried to break too many
stereotypes. His idea to invert Hollywood cliches by
confronting honest and civic minded Mexican lawman with his
violent and corrupt American colleague might have looked
appealing on paper, but with not sufficiently polished
characterisation it made TOUCH OF EVIL almost too surreal.
However, main reason why people got attracted to this film
lies in Welles' directorial mastery and less in its content.
The most legendary thing about this film is an excellent
opening - 3 minutes long and continuous crane shot that
follows various characters and reveals many important
details about them and town where plot takes place. This
scene is awesome, especially considering how difficult it
was to make it. Afterwards, only a handful of directors
actually bothered to shoot such elaborate, encompassing
scenes and the practice became fashionable only most
recently. Unfortunately, the opening scene is the best and
the rest of film can't surpass it. Welles used many
interesting shots in order to make elaborate and memorable
scenes, but none of them fulfils the promise of those three
opening minutes.
The most valuable segment of the film is acting. Orson
Welles the actor was as impressive as Orson Welles the
director. Few characters in history of cinema were as
well-written and superbly played as Captain Hank Quinlan.
Welles first used everything in his power to make him as
unappealing as possible - Welles, already a man with extra
weight in real life, used padded clothes and low camera
angles in order to make Quinlan obese to the point of
caricature. But physical unattractiveness pales in
comparison with Quinlan's cynicism, racism and immorality.
Yet the audience slowly becomes to find sympathies to
Quinlan, who is slowly but inevitably following the path of
self-destruction until melodramatic finale. Welles did truly
splendid job, but his strong performance only underlined the
weaknesses in the rest of casting. Studio-imposed decision
to cast Charlton Heston as Mexican (spoofed in Tim Burton's
1994 ED WOOD) turned ruinous because of the bad make up.
Same problems with make up turned another potentially strong
performance - Akim Tamiroff's drug lord - into caricature.
On the other hand, some supporting actors were more than up
to the task - Joseph Calleia as Quinlan's faithful partner
and friend; Marlene Diettrich as Quinlan's old flame and
Dennis Weaver as neurotic motel clerk that predates Norman
Bates in PSYCHO. Film also benefited from musical soundtrack
by Henry Mancini, although some critics claim that the
opening scene works better without music which interferes
with genuine atmosphere of border town.
TOUCH OF EVIL is definitely not the best film by Orson
Welles and it doesn't even belong among the best of the
1950s. But inferiority of this film is rather relative; even
in underachievement Welles showed the truly magnificent
scope of his talent and the excellent reputation of this
film is, after all, well deserved.
Review written on September 10th 2000
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Christopher Null
God, I love Charlton Heston movies.  He can always be relied on to give
an, er, square-jawed performance. He's appropriately square-jawed here,
with a pencil-thin moustache and a swaggering demeanor.  Yes, sir.  You
want to make a compulsively watchable movie, you throw old Chuck a bone
and cast him in the lead role.
On top of that, Touch of Evil makes him a Mexican!  I love it! Charlton
Heston plays a Mexican detective!
Now that I've got that out of my system, on with my review.
Everyone who has seen Touch of Evil justifiably remembers that one long
opening shot, the one that feels like it runs for twenty minutes.  It's
nothing short of exceptional.  Pure pulp.  A bomb is placed in the back
seat of a car, and we follow this car through the dilapidated city
streets of Los Robles, a rusty old town on the border of Mexico.
As the car cruises round, we see shifty locals in dirty t-shirts and
scarlet women lounging in doorways, second-rate clubs and seedy hotels.
E nter newlywed cop Mike Vargas (our man Heston) and his no-nonsense
wife, Susan (Janet Leigh), just in town on their honeymoon.  Why they've
chosen the armpit of the earth is anyone's guess.
We cut away to the car as it explodes.  The dramatic effect is
undeniable.  Moving from that hypnotic long take which went up and down
streets, allowing characters to move in and out of the camera's range,
to an abrupt cut to the explosion and flames is bold, exciting, and pure
Orson Welles.
Welles wound up directing this film when Heston made a big fuss over
it.  The studio originally intended him to only be involved as an actor,
playing the shady, overweight, degenerate junkie of a sheriff, Quinlan. 
He shows up on the scene shortly after the explosion, and he doesn't hit
it off with Vargas.  See, it's Quinlan's beat, and that's that.  He
gruffly considers it an open and shut case and when Vargas promises not
to cause any trouble, Quinlan chomps on his cigar and sneers, "You bet
your sweet life you won't."
It's mano a mano, shot in slightly canted close-ups that seem to bring
out their intense eyes and beads of sweat.  Immediately, we know where
this story is going.  Vargas, being a good man with an inherent sense of
decency, can't let it go (even though he's just married).  We know these
men will be involved in a battle, and that the local sheriff is clearly
in on the scheme.  The big question is, how far will they go?
Quinlan proceeds to work in cahoots with the local gangsters to frame
Vargas in a drug scandal and lure his wife to a remote hotel where she
will be drugged and held hostage.  Things move at a breakneck pace, with
Welles' trademark eye for strong visuals, unusual low-angle
cinematography, and impenetrable shadows.
Two versions of the film are available on video, but for the purposes
of this review let's discuss the director's cut, newly available on
video and DVD.  The studio had final cut of the project back in 1958,
and made changes based on what they felt was either too risqué or too
"intelligent" (to put it bluntly) for an audience to handle.  As always,
they assumed the worst from the masses.
The original cut is still a fine piece of work.  The opening shot
remains intact, you've got credible performances from the leads, and an
eclectic rogue's gallery in the supporting cast.  However, Welles felt
so passionate about some of the small (and cumulative) details within
the film that he wrote a 58-page memo to the studio heads begging for
crucial changes.
That famous opening shot no longer has the original music or credits
overlaid, instead using the sounds of the street and the distant club
music in the background.  During those scenes where poor Janet Leigh is
trapped in a hotel (she always seems to run into trouble in roadside
hotels) there are stronger implications that she was raped by those
blank-faced goons who terrorize her in the bedroom, merely by lingering
on each menacing shot a little longer.
There's also a moment between Quinlan and a gypsy woman who reads
fortunes (played in a cameo by Marlene Dietrich).  In the original cut,
lighthearted music treats her like a joke -- your standard comic relief
role.  In this new cut, that hokey music is removed and the lingering
close-ups show a quiet despair under the interactions over how Quinlan
is getting fat on her chili and "the pianola sure brings back memories."
It's subtle character shading which adds depth and meaning to Quinlan,
a small moment in his backstory which showed his aspiration for
something close to love.  In the studio cut, since the fortune teller is
treated like a fool to be laughed at, Quinlan remains a comic brute when
he's not an outright murderous villain.  In Welles' cut, he arouses some
small touch of pathos which pays off in the final confrontation with
Vargas.
Sadly, after the debacle over Touch of Evil, Orson Welles found his
directorial privileges revoked in Hollywood.  As a filmmaker, he never
worked in the town again.  (The fortune teller even says, in a prophetic
moment, "Your future is all used up.")
To his credit, Orson Welles made a class act potboiler which still
feels fresh and exciting over forty years later.  It's pure gritty
entertainment, like a fine Jim Thompson novel or a shot of tequila.  He
conjures up a vivid atmosphere and plants himself right in the center
opposite a formidable foe -- our favorite Mexican, Charlton Heston. 
What could be more exciting than that?
Director: Orson Welles
Producer: Albert Augsmith
Writer: Orson Welles
Starring: Orson Welles, Charlton Heston, Janet Leigh, Joseph Calleia,
Akim Tamiroff, Marlene Dietrich, Dennis Weaver
---
Jeremiah Kipp - kipp@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
