Title
Review for Fear of a Black Hat (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Max Hoffmann
World Premiere Jan 23/24 at Sundance Film Festival, UT
     FEAR OF A BLACK HAT presents a moral dilemma, in that it clearly
"steals" from SPINAL TAP.  But like an alchemist, black baby boomer
Rusty Cundieff has improved the content, and what he delivers is "solid
gold."  Members of the younger and more moral generation, beware.
     CONCEPT: "Nina Blackburn" follows a Rap group, "NWH" (Niggas with
Hats) across the country on their "Itchy Dick" tour to make a
documentary about this "art form".  The performers give deadpan
explanations for why songs like "Kill Whitey" aren't racist or
potentially an invitation to violence.  ("You see, man, we just meant
this *one* whitey, not all o' 'em.")  The actors are convincing in
taking themselves and the songs totally seriously, which creates high
camp comedy.  Though ludicrous explanations for why the "butt" is like
society cross the line on good taste, only the comfort level of
mainstreamers who avoid rap music like the plague would be violated.
(P.S.  If you were upset by my review of MAN BITES DOG, definitely do
*not* see this film!)
     Up-to-the-minute issues are exploited (e.g., the rappers being
interviewed with riot-ruined Central L.A. in the background, an
interview on MTV where the lead female backup singer is accused of
lipsynching in a CC Company "Everybody Dance" send-up.)  You'll savor
the video's images of her struggling with her out of control scarf,
sandwiched between bobbing fluorescent tubes.
     The entirely original soundtrack is sheer genius, and if you didn't
pay close attention to the lyrics, it could pass for the real article.
We can only hope that the soundtrack will soon be released, a la SPINAL
TAP.
     Though this film owes more than the national debt to SPINAL TAP, it
benefits from our intervening 10 years worth of exposure to MTV.  The
director/writer *knows* his target, and a half dozen take-offs on MTV
videos interspersed throughout the film will have you rolling in the
aisles.  Many a scene is a virtual xerox of SPINAL TAP, (for instance
when NWH is stalled from an entrance by an uninformed security guard,
props don't show up and they're expected to perform with*out* hats, one
member showing off his collection of assalt weapons instead of
amplifiers.)  Some of the steals are brilliant improvements, for
instance: instead of showing the audience the "Sniff the Glove" album
cover, as in SPINAL TAP, this film lets you deliciously create your own
depraved image of an unshown album cover that features 15 white cops in
highly submissive positions.
     The film is spray painted with non-stop profanities, and racy
images, hence almost anything quoted from the film will suffer being
taken out of context.
     One of the stronger moments in the film is when NWH appears in a
grammar school class room, with their hated rival rap group, as part of
the "Rappers Against Violence" program.  You can imagine the result.
One false move and this scene would have fizzled.  It didn't.
     Rusty Cundieff as writer/director/lead actor is clearly having the
time of his life making this film.  And the audience won't feel left
out.  Cundieff walks a fine line in that he runs the risk of magnifying
overplayed racial stereotypes.  However, with black actors and director,
fully in control of the film's content, slyly winking at the audience
through the ridiculous lyrics, the effect at Sundance was blacks and
whites laughing out of control, together.
     I don't know if a distributor has picked up this film or not, but
it'll probably at least make midnight shows in rep houses.  Judging by
the audience reaction at Sundance, it stood a fair chance to win
competition as the audience favorite.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Rusty Cundieff, Larry B. Scott, Mark Christopher
Lawrence, Kasi Lemmons.
Screenplay/Director:  Rusty Cundieff.
     Film reviewers, myself included, often obsess over originality.
Everything is derivative, we lament; everything is recycled.  Then,
periodically, I am reminded that given the choice between an original
film and a good one, I would much prefer the latter.  FEAR OF A BLACK
HAT has been referred to as THIS IS SPINAL RAP on more than one
occasion, and it is true that there is more than a passing similarity
between the two.  All right, there is a remarkable similarity.  But
ultimately, only one thing really matters: FEAR OF A BLACK HAT is
very, *very* funny, probably the funniest film of the year so far.
     FEAR OF A BLACK HAT is set up as a documentary being made by a
doctoral student (Kasi Lemmons) as her sociology thesis project.  Her
subject is on-the-rise rap gangsta rap group N.W.H. (Niggaz With Hats),
whose members are rappers Ice Cold (Rusty Cundieff) and Tasty Taste
(Larry B. Scott) and DJ Tone Def (Mark Christopher Lawrence).  The
documentary chronicles clashes between N.W.H. and their record company
over their controversial songs and videos, including their breakout hit
"Guerrillas in the Midst."  But inevitably egos and women conspire to
form a rift between the members, and each explores new avenues as a
solo artist.  Can N.W.H. patch up their differences and stage a big
comeback?
     In terms of plot structure, it often seems that writer/
director/star Rusty Cundieff decided simply to "colorize" SPINAL TAP.
It is not simply the framing device which is borrowed, but a multitude
of specific details: gigs with somewhat insulting billing on the
marquis; internal squabbles triggered by a domineering girlfriend;
Tap's series of ill-fated drummers replaced by N.W.H.'s series of
ill-fated managers.  Yet with all these borrowed elements, there are a
couple of other things Cundieff might have been well-served to
duplicate.  One is keeping the framing structure consistent.
Frequently the camera work breaks out of the verite style for shots a
single-camera documentary really couldn't be filming.  The other is
keeping the performances as deadpan as possible.  Kasi Lemmons in
particular dreadfully overplays her part, and Howie Gold is a cliche as
Manager #5.  If FEAR OF A BLACK HAT tends to stumble, it's when it
veers into campiness.
     Even then, there are some huge laughs to be had in BLACK HAT.
While some of the objects of satire are unnecessarily heavy-handed
(white rapper Vanilla Sherbet; Slammer, formerly known as M.C.
Slammer), others are dead on.  Tone Def's solo project is a hilarious
bit modeled after P.M. Dawn, and the rivalry between N.W.H. and other
rappers over who has the longest rap sheet sets up a great
confrontation at a grade school presentation.  But Cundieff is perhaps
most adept at skewering rap's self-important politics through Ice
Cold's wonderfully improbable explanations of how songs such as "Booty
Juice" actually contain an important social message.  Even the misogyny
in rap culture is nailed perfectly in a single line, perhaps the film's
funniest (be sure to stay through the credits or you'll miss it).  Also
worth noting are the numerous song parodies by Cundieff and John
Bautista, which range from the sublime (Tone Def's "I'm Just a Human
Being") to the obnoxious ("Come and Pet the P.U.S.S.Y.").
     There are a lot of great details in FEAR OF A BLACK HAT (my
favorite being Tasty Taste's massive bowling-trophy-on-a-chain
necklace), which makes it frustrating that Cundieff often plays up the
broader bits.  An obligatory scene in which Ice Cold is pulled over and
hassled by a rent-a-cop is dragged out far too long, and a parody of
NEW JACK CITY seems only to serve as a way to take a jab at black
filmmakers ("Jike Spingleton" is the director).  Still, I laughed
harder and more often at FEAR OF A BLACK HAT than at any other movie in
quite some time.  Make sure you're in the house when N.W.H. comes to
your town.

Author
James Berardinelli
     FEAR OF A BLACK HAT is the 1990s version of THIS IS SPINAL TAP,
skewering rap music on the same stake that Rob Reiner used to impale
heavy metal.  For three-quarter of its running length, this is a first-
rate parody of the most bawdy kind.  It is unapologetically politically
incorrect, and some of the biggest laughs come at the most off-color
jokes.  There's virtually no stone in the world of rap music left
unturned by BLACK HAT, which has something to say about everything from
drug dealing and gun violence to the new wave of black film directors.
     As was the case with SPINAL TAP, the premise behind FEAR OF A
BLACK HAT is that someone is doing a documentary.  In this case, the
filmmaker is a graduate student in sociology, Nina Blackburn (Kasi
Lemmons), whose has decided to focus her doctoral dissertation on the
rap musical culture.  The group she chooses is NWH (Niggaz With Hats),
comprised of the fast-talking leader Ice Cold (Rusty Cundieff), the
ultra-violent Tasty-Taste (Larry B. Scott), and the spiritual Tone Def
(Mark Christopher Lawrence).
     The film opens with a warning to the audience that FEAR OF A BLACK
HAT will make use of a number of potentially offensive terms, but does
not intend to do so gratuitously.  It then repeats each of those words
several times, and prints them on the screen for good measure.  From
this moment on, we know that we're in the hands of an accomplished
satirist, and the result is predictably better than other feeble
efforts such as CB4 and those elements of the WAYNE'S WORLD movies
which tried something similar.
     The documentary-within-the-movie starts by interviewing the
members of NWH.  These three, who come from "Tough Neighborhood, USA,"
give their views on why it's never a good idea to smile.  In the
process, we learn that Tasty-Taste was once a "pharmaceutical
distributor"--but they're not going to get into that.
     From that point on, the jokes come faster than the uses of the
word .  The parodies of rap videos are
inspired--writer/director Rusty Cundieff injects an MTV-like glamor,
but makes sure that each possesses all sorts of excesses.  With titles
like "Guerrillas in the Midst" and "My Peanuts" with lyrics that will
not be reprinted here, Cundieff has found rich ground to hoe.
     Almost every facet of the rap culture gets similar treatment.
Security guards at a concert are shown doing amazingly "thorough" gun
searches.  NWH becomes the target of an anti-obscenity campaign.  Their
first manager gets gunned down in a dispute between opposing rap
groups.  A marquee in Chicago refuses to use the word "Niggaz," so it
calls NWH "Negroes With Hats."
     Certain well-known personalities don't escape Cundieff's
attention, either.  There's a white rapper named Vanilla Sherbert and
an "M.C. Slammer" who wants to excise "M.C."  An all-girl group is
called Parsley, Sage, Rosemary, and Thyme. ("We have four spices.")
Then there's Jike Springleton (hmm ... I wonder which two prominent
directors he could represent?), the black filmmaker who gives Ice Cold
his feature film debut.
     The humor of FEAR OF A BLACK HAT rolls along nicely for about an
hour before beginning to sputter and fizzle.  The last quarter of the
movie is uneven, and seems like an attempt to stretch a concept beyond
its natural playing time.  There aren't many notable moments in the
final twenty minutes until the end credits start scrolling.
     Using parody as its means, FEAR OF A BLACK HAT has a lot to say
about the exploitation that surrounds the rap music business.  This
movie is not tightly-scripted or elegantly produced, but it is (for the
most part) highly entertaining.  For those who have been waiting for a
sequel to SPINAL TAP, this may be the best alternative.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
