Title
Review for Monty Python and the Holy Grail (1975)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Nizam Ahmed
A castle atop a windy hill. Silence. Then we hear the sound of horse hooves
approaching. Over the crest of the hill the figure of King Arthur appears.
But he is on foot, hopping along on an imaginary steed, with Patsy following 
behind banging two coconut shells together. This opening scene encapsulates
the whole tone of the Monty Python team's first venture into feature film
territory. Sheer nonsensical silliness, delighting in subverting our
preconceptions from the word go. Yet throughout all the idiocy, there is
a constant sense of skewed logic at work, giving the feeling that maybe
there is more to this than you think. In short, typical Monty Python.
Having read the first and final drafts of the script and seen the movie,
it is clear why this film was such a success. Originally conceived as 
basically a sketch show set half in medieval times and half in the present
day (notably in Harrods), the film would merely have been seen as a
footnote to MONTY PYTHON'S FLYING CIRCUS. But the decision to have (almost)
the entire movie as a full-blown 90-minute narrative was inspired. It
proved that the Pythons were credible writers, directors and performers
and paved the way for TIME BANDITS, BRAZIL, even A FISH CALLED WANDA.
Each scene is beautifully and carefully crafted: the tiny budget meant there
was no room for excess lines and flat jokes which plagued their TV series.
Yet the film still looks fantastic even today, peasants rolling in mud,
the harsh and desolate landscape, the fog, all contribute to give the
best impression of medieval times ever seen in film. Throughout it all, 
the Pythons perform exquisitly. The deadpan delivery and the improvised
pauses, "um"s and "ah"s, are spot on.
Monty Python are probably the only comedy team since the Marx Brothers
who are able to perform such clever material and yet remain so riotously
funny. The silliness will grab you, but it is the sense of logic behind
it that makes you come back for repeat viewings. For instance in the 
opening scene the castle guard is only interested in where Arthur and Patsy
got the coconuts ("In Mercia? But the coconut's tropical!"). In any other
comedy film, the coconuts would be a throwaway joke, yet here it is
pursued to its limit. Both self-referential and deconstructionist, it
succeeds on all levels.
There are minor flaws. The film suffers from an episodic quality, which
is unsurprising considering the sketch show background. It is easy to 
recite scenes by heart because they stand up so well outside of the film's
context, but as a result the narrative structure is weakened: scenes
could easily be interchanged at will without much disruption, and probably
were. Also, the Pythons could not totally compensate for the miniscule
budget, some of the pyrotechnics and special effects are less than 
successful. And finally, the deliberately anti-climactic ending as the
police round up the cast and crew is bound to annoy first-time viewers,
although it is a clear indication of how far the Pythons were prepared
to go to do things their way.
Nevertheless, MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL is a classic. Argument may
rage over how it compares with MONTY PYTHON'S LIFE OF BRIAN, but both
films are landmarks in comedy cinema, unique events that have rarely, if
ever, been equalled since.

Author
David N. Butterworth
With several Hollywood releases grounded in the wake of the September 11th
terrorist attacks on New York and Washington (one film in particular, "Big
Trouble," featured hijacking and carry-on nuclear weapons among its many
plot devices), it is indeed timely--yet purely coincidental--for an
inspired bit of lunacy known as "Monty Python and the Holy Grail" to be
reissued to theaters.  Well, just the one theater that is.
This 2001 re-release of the Python's first full-length feature film (if
you discount 1971's "And Now for Something Completely Different" which was,
after all, a loosely-edited series of television sketches) features a brand
new negative, stereo soundtrack, and 25 seconds of missing footage!
More focused than their future work (and looking less dated now than ever
before, surprisingly), "Monty Python and the Holy Grail" is a medieval romp
filled to the pink curly edges with your typically irreverent and extremely
silly Monty Python humor (if you've been in a time capsule these last few
decades, Monty Python was the collective name of a bunch of terribly
talented comedians--Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle,
Terry Jones, and Michael Palin--who got together in the summer of 1969 to
produce a ground-breaking (and terribly silly) TV series called "Monty
Python's Flying Circus" for the BBC).  Set in England 932 A.D. (but
actually filmed in Scotland), "Monty Python and the Holy Grail" follows
King Arthur of Camelot (Chapman) on a mission to round up his knights of
the round table.  In the process he is given a quest by God (courtesy Terry
Gilliam's typically outrageous cut-out animation) to seek out the Holy
Grail, that magical chalice that floats aloft over various
impressive-looking Scottish castles (one of which, we're told, is fake).
The silliness kicks in from the opening credits (with Swedish subtitles
and spurious moose references a plenty) and never lets up.  These knights
don't actually ride noble steeds, for example.  Instead, they prance around
as if on horseback with a long-suffering serf trotting behind them knocking
two coconut shells together.  Glancing down a list of some of the
characters our valiant fellows encounter upon their journey gives you a
pretty good idea as to what to expect: Second Soldier with a Keen Interest
in Birds; A Quite Extraordinarily Rude Frenchman; Sir Robin the
Not-Quite-So-Brave-as-Sir Launcelot; Roger the Shrubber (A Shrubber);
Leader of the Knights Who Say "Ni!"; The Page Crushed by a Rabbit; Patsy
(Arthur's Trusty Steed); and so on.
As with most of their work, the Pythons don't skimp of the details.  What
makes "'Holy Grail" such a delight is that not only is the humor thick and
fast but so is the medieval muck--the laughs are made even stronger by a
heightened level of authenticity (with, perhaps, the exception of the furry
keeper of the cave of Aaargh and all that blood spurting from severed
limbs--a black knight who stands in Arthur's way is reduced to a
name-calling torso, for example).  The writer/performers play multiple
roles, of course (to keep the costs down?), and it's great fun watching
each one show up as somebody sillier than the first.  Crammed with acres of
quotable dialogue, the film ploughs along from one inspired bit to the next.
To this day, "Monty Python and the Holy Grail" still "makes Ben Hur look
like an epic" (to quote one of the film's original tag lines) but in the 26
years that have elapsed since the film debuted, those lines seem to have
blurred considerably.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This movie is a long-running favorite of Internet nerds, 
many of which wrote me nasty e-mail letters asking why I'd never 
written a review of it. Well, here it is, Monty Python fans, so you 
can stop cursing me in the name of Bill Gates. And guess what, I 
liked MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL, although I had 
the added advantage of being able to read the script beforehand, 
which I found -- where else? -- on the Internet. Otherwise, I 
probably would have missed some of the key jokes because of 
that funny accent those English people have.
        As with the subsequent Python films, almost all the 
parts in the film are played by John Cleese, Graham Chapman, 
Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle, Terry Jones and Michael Palin, who also 
collectively wrote the script. The year is 787 and King Arthur is 
making a trek across England to attract knights for his round table. 
After a witch trial and fight with the Black Knight, who keeps 
issuing challenges to Arthur even after his arms and legs have 
been chopped off (probably the single funniest scene in the movie), 
Arthur and his knights are stopped by God Himself, who parts the 
clouds to tell them to go after the holy grail. So they do.
        Along the way comes a lot of episodic comedy, like the 
scene where a knight is trapped in a castle with over a hundred 
lonely women between the ages of 16 and 19 (reminiscent of the 
much less funny CASINO ROYALE) and run-ins with a three-headed 
knight and the knights who say "ni." Finally comes the final scenes, 
where the Python knights do battle with a ferocious rabbit and 
answer obscure questions to get across the bridge. The ending 
itself is bizarre and abrupt, but the rest of the movie has enough 
hilarity to make up for the few sequences that just don't work.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Max Scheinin
There isn't very much that the near classic comedy "Monty Python And The
Holy Grail" wants to  accomplish; it's so modest in it's procedures and
silly in it's meaning that it's altogether irresistable. What it wants to
do is: make you laugh. And it suceeds. Gloriously. It's not a great film
but it's funny. It looks like the result of a couple of school boys who
were given a camera and a couple hours to film around their premises.
Watching it my first time a few nights ago my friend Alex complained of the
lack of special effects. "But", I said, "the  joke is IN the lack of
special effects." Yes. The film accomplishes all it's biggest laughs by
showing off how badly it was made. For instance it's funniest moment  comes
along, perhaps only an hour in as a number of knights arrive, with King
Arthur at a castle.
A little while later, an awfully grumpy god sends them off on a quest to
find the holy grail. It's hard not to be amused by the following adventures
that eventually lead them to a creepy looking little freak who guards a
bridge to the cave that supposedly holds the grail. To cross you must
answer three questions; brave Lancelot is the first to approach.
It all looks deceptively easy, doesn't it? I won't spoil what follows by
describing it to you; rather I'll let the movie unspool before your eyes,
and let you savor the pleasures it has to offer.
Every line is a classic. ("She  turned me into a newt. Well I got
better...".) Every moment is bursting with inspiration ( there's a very
funny musical number inside a castle among other hilarious bits and pieces.
) The film is achingly funny; watching it is to experience delight as you
realize the filmmakers are pulling your strings, without allowing you to
see them. As directed by Terry Giliam ( Brazil ) and Terry Jones it's a
non-stop adventure/comedy that  takes  you on a wild ride and plunks you
back in your seat, utterly happy. It also features the most unique ending
I'VE ever seen. ( Nothing is resolved. ) It's as if we're being laughed at
by the knights of the, um, not-quite-sound table: "Oh, we're sorry - did we
waste your 2.5 hours?" Nope. You made a dead-pan comedy of, um, terrors.
