Title
Review for Wicker Man, The (1973)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher Null
It's difficult to shake the disquieting climax of The Wicker Man, where
pious Police Sgt. Howie (Edward Woodward) of the West Highland Police is
confronted by the secrets kept within the isolated Scottish island of
Summerisle.  Being a decent Christian, he finds himself repulsed by
their pagan rituals, open sexuality, and their unwavering devotion to
the Old Gods.  Much like the unwitting protagonists of Peter Weir's The
Last Wave and Nicolas Roeg's Don't Look Now, Howie is facing off against
powers much larger than himself (and anything that is dreamt of in his
narrow theology).
Called upon to investigate the disappearance of a young schoolgirl named
Rowan Morrison, Sgt. Howie finds stubborn, tight-lipped resistance from
the local islanders, who carry about their business unmindful of his
single-minded detective work.  More often than not, they treat him with
bemused detachment, laughing into their drinks or simply ignoring him
altogether as he marches through the rustic schoolyards, dingy inns, and
lush green hills.  The locations, filmed in the highlands of Scotland,
possess the eerie, musty, ever-haunted quality of an Old Country worn
down by time.  If there is a central character in The Wicker Man, it's
the timeless elements of rock and water, moss and faded wood that
comprise the town squares.  Sgt. Howie, a man from the city, is clearly
out of his depth.
As his search progresses, he begins to piece together an elaborate
mystery (that may be less complicated than he believes) where Rowan was
brutally sacrificed by a fanatical cult led by the calm, elegant,
progressive-thinking Lord Summerisle (Christopher Lee).  "I think I
could turn and live with animals," muses the vaguely sinister local
politician.  "They are so placid and self-contained.  They do not lie
awake in the dark and weep for their sins.  They do not make me sick
discussing their duty to God."
The Wicker Man sustains a mood of unspoken dread through Sgt. Howie's
interactions with the tight-lipped, poker faced islanders, as well as
the implied clues he reads between the lines as they evade his line of
questions.  There's also a charged eroticism that perhaps comes hand in
hand with his deeply religious suppression of carnal desire.  One of the
more memorable sequences involves Sgt. Howie's inability to sleep as a
lovely young barmaid, Willow (Britt Ekland), dances nude outside his
door.  Prim, straight-laced, and disciplined to a fault, Sgt. Howie
proves unable to deal with the pressures of a free lovin' modern age. 
(It is worth pointing out that this is a horror film that often takes
place during the light of day, where evil can lurk under a clear blue
sky.  There are no easy hiding places here.)
It's amusing to note that Christopher Lee cites The Wicker Man as the
finest movie he ever made, especially considering he only shows up for
two (memorable) scenes as Lord Summerisle.  He's clearly the heavy, but
handles the role with a particularly light touch, tossing off his
sarcastic commentary with unflappable charm.  Where else will you get
the chance to see this wonderfully charismatic actor sway back and forth
in a mad Celtic dance, his face ecstatic and mouth agape?  The
ever-charismatic Mr. Lee throws himself into the role with vigor,
playing beautifully off of Edward Woodward's lean, humorless Sgt. Howie.
Anthony Shaffer's fatalistic screenplay slowly, resolutely builds to the
cathartic moment where he is brought face to face with, what else, The
Wicker Man of the title.  His shriek into the bright shining day
("Christ! Christ! Oh, oh, Christ!") stands out as one of those indelible
screen moments that linger, much like Donald Sutherland's final howl in
the 1978 remake of Invasion of the Body Snatchers.  Hey, it was the 70s,
man.  A bleak time for screen protagonists struggling to endure in a
conspiratorial global environment.
Director: Robin Hardy
Producer: Peter Snell
Writer: Anthony Shaffer
Starring: Edward Hardwick, Christopher Lee, Britt Ekland, Diane Cilento
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dragan Antulov
When people are discussing the greatest horror films, they
often mention 1970s as the golden age of that particular
genre. Big studios were eager to spend their money on such
films and brand new talents earned the respect of mainstream
critics. As a result, many films from that period, like
Spielberg's JAWS, Friedkin's EXORCIST and Carpenter's
HALLOWEEN, became big commercial hits, critics' darlings and
their reputations through the later decades remained
untarnished, even after multitude of bad sequels or even
worse rip-offs. In the shadow of these big horror films lies
THE WICKER MAN, 1973 low-budget British film by Robin Hardy,
which remained almost unknown outside small circles of
horror genre aficionados.
Plot of the film begins when police sergeant Neil Howie
(played by Edward Woodward) comes to Summerisle, remote
island off the western shores of Scotland. His task is to
investigate mysterious disappearance of a local girl.
However, he finds out that the islanders are very
uncooperative - they claim that the girl actually doesn't
exist. Howie, who happens to be devout Christian, is even
more shocked to find out that all the islanders not only
tolerate open sexuality and similar un- Christian forms of
behaviour, but also practice ancient pagan religion. Despite
that, his zeal leads him to continue investigation and
islanders reluctantly admit that the girl has died few
months ago. Howie doesn't take their word for granted, and
the empty grave as the result of exhumation only validates
his suspicions. Howie is even more disturbed with the
prospect of girl being alive, presuming that the old pagan
tradition includes human sacrifice. He continues
investigation, this time racing against time, since the
great annual festivities are set for the next day.
One of the reasons why THE WICKER MAN remained in relative
obscurity until this day is in its unconventionality.
Hardy's film looks strange and unusual, not just by the
Hollywood standards, but also compared with horror genre as
a whole. Those who expect straight horror film would be
surprised with the way Hardy treats the story that would
otherwise belong to cheap exploitation territory. Instead of
shocking us with fear, or gradually building suspense and
terror, Hardy builds genuine drama by strong contrast
between two opposing worldviews. On one side we have Howie,
which is supposed to be conventional hero and embodiment of
all that is decent and righteous in the Western
civilisation, and we sympathise with his struggle to
establish law and order; on the other side, pagan islanders
are portrayed as bunch of depraved savages that show almost
sadistic pleasure in insulting our hero's deep religious
beliefs. But, through the course of the film, the picture
changes when we are introduced to the schoolteachers, postal
workers, and finally, local magistrates who share their
neighbour's pagan beliefs; the society of Summerisle is
shown to be as orderly as Christian societies on the
mainland, and the islanders are very serious about their
beliefs. Howie, on the other hand, proves to be ignorant
bigot whose presence might present danger to this utopian
community. This conflict, which in some ways reflects the
social turmoil between the Old and New in 1960s, gets
resolved in the emotional final scene, which might be seen
as some sort of reconciliation between those two conflicting
worldviews.
THE WICKER MAN, thus, must be praised as one of the rare
horror films that allow viewers to think about important
issues and make their own conclusions. Unfortunately,
interesting ideas and thought-provoking script is somewhat
downgraded with somewhat unpolished execution. Instead of
using conventional musical soundtrack, Hardy employed the
talents of Paul Giovanni and folk band Magnet (or
Lodestone). The songs, that might have been fashionable in
1970s, look extremely outdated now, and often cause
unintentional laughs, turning this film into black comedy.
Same effect is caused with faux documentary style of showing
islander's everyday life, including their religious
practices at the end - which corresponds with the BLAIR
WITCH style producers' note in the film's opening title. On
the other hand, thanks to the sloppy editing scenes that
feature (all female) nudity are not erotic at all. The most
noted is the scene featuring naked Britt Ekland singing "Say
How Do"; use of body double is painfully obvious.
Sloppy editing and corny music are, on the other hand,
compensated with the great acting talent of Edward Woodward,
who would later gain charisma by playing lead character in
THE EQUALIZER. The ordeal his character has to endure
provided him opportunity to express broad range of emotions
- from initial revulsion towards paganism, inner struggle
with his own sexual desires and final test of his beliefs at
the end. His screen personality has dwarfed everyone else,
including Christopher Lee who, when playing island's
unofficial leader, Lord Summerisle, uses more his already
established charisma of Dracula-like elegant villain than
some genuine acting effort. Britt Ekland and Ingrid Pitt, on
the other hand, are here just to provide adequate amount of
T&A (effort that failed, as noted above). Luckily, they
don't slow down the plot, which goes very neatly and leaves
the audience with unexpected, unconventional ending and
images that would remain long in their memory.
THE WICKER MAN is perhaps slightly flawed, but in its
essence very intelligent and engaging film that definitely
deserves more recognition. On the other hand, it might look
somewhat insulting to Christians and pagans alike; the other
viewers might be disturbed by its content (although
incredibly tame for cynical 1990s). For me, the most
disturbing thing about THE WICKER MAN is the distinct
possibility of this film being considered by some modern-day
Hollywood hack producer as a material for 1990s style remake
- the fate that gives new meaning to the word "horror".
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
