Title
Review for Little Mermaid, The (1989)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Jamie Peck
Disney / 1:23 / 1989 / G 
Vocal Cast: Jodi Benson; Christopher Daniel Barnes; Pat Carroll; Buddy 
Hackett; Samuel E. Wright; Jason Marin 
Directors: Ron Clements; John Musker 
Screenplay: Ron Clements; John Musker 
Disney's 17-day, special engagement re-release of "The Little Mermaid" 
proves that even their newer animated features can stand the test of 
time, even if only a scant eight years have passed since its original 
debut. Has it really been less than a decade? It certainly feels longer, 
because this 1989 hit made Mickey Mouse a mint and paved the 
crowd-pleasing way for such gems as "Aladdin" and "Beauty and the Beast" 
-- both of which, by the way, seem quite old themselves. 
This loose adaptation of the Hans Christian Andersen fable finds teenage 
mermaid Ariel (lovely voice of Jodi Benson) falling head over fins for 
land-lubber Prince Eric (Christopher Daniel Barnes, who has since gone 
on to play Greg in both of the "Brady Bunch" movies) from afar. Defying 
her father's wishes and ignoring the warnings of a chatty Jamaican crab 
named Sebastian (jovial Samuel E. Wright), she strikes up a deal with 
the evil sea witch Ursula (Pat Carroll) -- her voice for a pair of
legs. In makeshift human form, Ariel makes it on land but finds herself 
without a way to profess her love for Eric. 
Although the male lead isn't as interesting a character as the female, 
"The Little Mermaid" has much strength in telling its simple story with 
brilliant fanfare. The colors are vibrant, the supporting creatures 
charming (even if Buddy Hackett takes birdbrain to the max as a dopey 
seagull), and the songs landmarks on their own. Although I consider the 
recent "Hercules" and "The Hunchback of Notre Dame"to be majestic films, 
I walked out of neither humming like I did with "The Little Mermaid."
Sebastian's pro-ocean jamboree "Under the Sea" is a production number 
yet to be rivaled, and the doo-wop ballad "Kiss the Girl" (connection to 
the current Morgan Freeman rape thriller is purely coincidental) is 
another high point. 
But why "The Little Mermaid," and why now? Aside from a digital and 
audio clean-up, nothing has been changed or added -- no bonuses, no 
alternative ending (remember, Andersen's original was quite a downer), 
not even a cameo by Jabba the Hutt. The answer: Aside from the fact that 
it's a wonderful film, it's also the one movie that jumpstarted Disney's 
animated box office and made the public realize that cartoons aren't 
only for kids. "The Little Mermaid" deserves this kind of treatment. 
Of course, there are those who will say the studio has polished up 
"Mermaid" for this special holiday engagement because its opening date 
bests "Anastasia" -- 20th Century Fox's first tread into Disney's 
animated musical territory -- by a week. But in a year that has also 
seen the theatrical resurrection of such corny tripe as Dirty Dancing, 
perhaps the question is less "Why 'The Little Mermaid'?" than "Why not?" 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE LITTLE MERMAID (1989)
(Disney)
Voices:  Samuel E. Wright, Jodi Benson, Pat Carroll, Christopher Daniel
Barnes, Buddy Hackett, Kenneth Mars, Jason Marin.
Screenplay:  John Musker and Ron Clements, from the story by Hans
Christian Andersen.
Producers:  Howard Ashman and John Musker.
Directors:  John Musker and Ron Clements.
MPAA Rating:  G.
Running Time:  82 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It may be an exaggeration to say that THE LITTLE MERMAID saved
feature animation from extinction.  If so, it's not much of one.  In 1989,
when MERMAID was first released, only one man in Hollywood seemed to
believe that family films weren't inevitably box office poison:  Disney's
Jeffrey Katzenberg, who re-committed Disney to its historical life's-blood
after costly flops like THE BLACK CAULDRON.  His vision was rewarded with
$90 million in U.S. grosses, at the time the highest total ever for an
animated film.  And THE LITTLE MERMAID begat a feature animation
renaissance, which begat box office giants like BEAUTY AND THE BEAST,
ALADDIN and THE LION KING, which begat billions in merchandise and video
sales, which begat a desire in other studios to get their fingers in the
lucrative animation pie.
     The wonderful thing about THE LITTLE MERMAID is the wonderful thing
about most unwitting trend-setters:  it was made not to set trends, but to
be an entertaining film.  That's certainly what it turned out to be,
telling the story of a teenage mermaid named Ariel (voice of Jodi Benson)
fascinated with the surface world.  That fascination only intensifies one
day when she saves the life of a human prince named Eric (Christopher
Daniel Barnes), with whom whe instantly falls in love.  Determined to join
her true love despite the objections of her father King Triton (Kenneth
Mars), Ariel finds a willing assistant in the sea-witch Ursula (Pat
Carroll), who offers the Faustian trade of Ariel's voice for the chance to
become human.  Thus begins Ariel's quest to win Eric's heart, ably
assisted by her guardian crab Sebasian (Samuel E. Wright).
     To their everlasting credit, writer/directors John Musker and Ron
Clements weren't looking forward to LITTLE MERMAID coloring books or
sing-along tapes when they put together their narrative.  The were looking
_backward_, to the reasons Disney's classic cartoons endured, beginning
with a timeless story (Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tale, tweaked for
an appropriately happy ending).  Musker and Clements crafted THE LITTLE
MERMAID with attention to the fundamentals of storytelling, little things
like coherent plotting, charming characterizations and clever writing.
They made sure they had key elements like an appropriately loathsome
villain and sharp comic relief, applied the talents of a gifted group of
character animators and voice actors, and ended up with a minor gem on
their hands.
     They also realized the crucial role of music in the Disney animated
canon, so they made the smartest of all the decisions which went into THE
LITTLE MERMAID:  they got Alan Menken and Howard Ashman to score it.  The
talented composing team behind LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS turned the film into
a full-fledged musical, establishing the fundamental song requirements for
all the successful Disney features to come:  a song for the hero/heroine
("Part of Your World"), a song for the villain ("Poor Unfortunate Souls"),
a love theme ("Kiss the Girl") and a grand, show-stopping production
number ("Under the Sea").  The latter two proved to be among Disney's most
delightful tunes ever, adding the special spark which turned Samuel E.
Wright's already-exceptional vocal performance as Sebastian into the stuff
of classics.  In fact, even the minor numbers in THE LITTLE MERMAID were
strong enough to re-surface later (listen again to "Les Poissons," and
tell me you don't hear the beta version of BEAUTY AND THE BEAST's "Be Our
Guest").
     Disney has re-released many of its animated films to theaters in
recent years, but there's something special about the return of THE LITTLE
MERMAID.  It's not that it's the best of Disney's New Wave, not even with
digitally improved prints and multi-track sound.  BEAUTY AND THE BEAST
provided richer characters, ALADDIN was more energetic, and THE HUNCHBACK
OF NOTRE DAME was more emotionally resonant.  THE LITTLE MERMAID, however,
was the most innocent, and perhaps the most purely enchanting.  Its
exuberance and humor made animation hip again, which may be why THE LITTLE
MERMAID marked the turning point for feature animation as a viable
commercial entity.  20th Century Fox should consider that history in all
the release-date jockeying between MERMAID and their own ANASTASIA.  A
trail-blazer deserves some respect.

Author
James Sanford
         In 1988, Disney had enjoyed some degree of success luring
adults into seeing the animated feature "Oliver and Company" by hiring
Bette Midler, Billy Joel and Cheech Marin to provide character voices.
The following year, the company decided to aggressively market "The
Little Mermaid" to the over-18 audience, a group that generally shied
away from G-rated entertainment. Special screenings of the picture were
held in the evenings for adult audiences and an ad campaign was
developed to sell the film as a romantic fantasy rather than as a
children's picture.
 The strategy worked beyond anyone's expectations. "Mermaid"
grossed $85 million in the U.S. alone, making it the most successful
animated feature up to that time and paving the way for such future
smashes as "Aladdin," "Beauty and the Beast," "The Lion King" and
"Pocahontas," all of which would bring in grown-ups as well as
youngsters.
 Seen today, "Mermaid" lacks the visual splendor of those films,
although its best moments are certainly as delightful as anything the
Mouse Factory has ever produced. The movie's biggest flaw is its
tendency to lay on both the humor and the terror a little thick,
although the frequent musical numbers are so well-executed it's easy to
overlook the plot's missteps.
 As written by Hans Christian Andersen, "The Little Mermaid" was
a gloomy fable about the dangers of not knowing your place in society.
Disney's retelling turns that message inside out: The film heartily
advocates exploring new worlds, defying expectations and risking
everything in pursuit of your dreams. The title character Ariel (voice
of Jodi Benson) is a high-spirited 16-year-old sea princess who longs to
explore dry land, an idea her father King Triton (Kenneth Mars)
expressly forbids. "As long as you live under my ocean, you'll obey my
rules," he bellows when he learns she's been sneaking peeks at the
coastline.
 Since this is a Disney film, Ariel is required to sing about
her yearning, in this case the gorgeous anthem "Part of Your World," in
which she wonders "what would I give if I could live out of these
waters? What would I pay for just one day, warm on the sand?"
 That's what Ursula (Pat Carroll), a meddling sea witch, would
like to know. Part Cruella DeVil and part squid, she's willing to turn
Ariel into a human so that the girl can find the mortal prince she's
fallen in love with. But the witch's terms are severe: To pay for the
transformation, Ariel must give up her voice, and if she can't win her
sweetheart over within three days, she'll have to take her place in
Ursula's super-creepy garden of withered, lifeless "poor, unfortunate
souls."
 The Oscar-winning score by Alan Menken and Howard Ashman could
not be any better, featuring the delirious "Under the Sea" (later to be
spoofed in an unforgettable "Simpsons" episode) and the calypso-flavored
"Kiss the Girl," both of which develop into full-blown production
numbers. And "Les Poissons," sung by a demented chef as he tries to get
the unwilling crab Sebastian (Samuel E. Wright) onto the dinner table,
must be one of the strangest musical moments in Disney history.
 But what truly set "Mermaid" apart from its predecessors was
Ariel herself, a strong-willed young woman who set her own course in
life, unlike Cinderella and Snow White, whose destinies were determined
more by fate and chance than by their actions. In contrast, Ariel is the
kind of heroine certain to inspire little girls in the audience to think
for themselves -- and the little boys to spend a lot more time fishing.
James Sanford

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Disney Studios is clearly trying to
     create a classic for multiple re-releases by repeating the
     formula of some of Disney's most successful animated
     features.  They probably have succeeded.  Rating: high +1.
     Walt Disney Studios built their reputation on animation, first with
Mickey Mouse cartoons and later with their full-length animated features.
Even among their feature-length animated films some seem to be more
respected than others.  The real classics are SNOW WHITE, SLEEPING BEAUTY,
and CINDERELLA.  The second-ranked ones are those such as PINOCCHIO, BAMBI,
and PETER PAN.  Then there are the third-ranked ones such as THE JUNGLE
BOOK, THE FOX AND THE HOUND, and THE SWORD IN THE STONE.  The ones best
regarded are adaptations of well-known German and French fairy tales.  They
each seem to pit a young woman representing the forces of innocence and good
against an older woman who represents decadence and evil.  Often the older
woman also represents the forces of witchcraft.
     THE LITTLE MERMAID represents a return not just to the classic
tradition but also to the classic formula.  Disney Studios is faced with the
competition of Don Bluth--who was bred in the Disney Studios and who left to
form his own competitive animation studios (much as Walter Lantz did
previously).  Intentionally or not, in the holiday season of 1989 we are
having the showdown between Disney and Bluth.  I have not seen Bluth's ALL
DOGS GO TO HEAVEN, but general scuttlebutt is that Disney's classic formula
has resulted in a much better film than Bluth's source.
     THE LITTLE MERMAID is the story--very loosely based on the Hans
Christian Andersen fairy-tale--of Ariel, a mermaid who is fascinated by the
huge ship hulls she sees floating overhead.  She also has a large collection
of half-understood human artifacts salvaged from shipwrecks.  Ariel's
fascination with humans is in direct defiance of her father, King Triton,
who wants Ariel to be happy, but entirely within the confines of his
undersea kingdom.  He has no interest in the "fish-eaters" who walk on two
legs.  Ariel is a minor departure from the heroines of previous Disney fairy
tales in that she is strong-willed and intentionally disobedient.  The film
gives her more character than Snow White or Sleeping Beauty.  Present to
tempt Ariel is this film's villainess, the sea-witch Ursula.  As Ariel is
half girl and half fish, so Ursula is an octopus with a corpulent woman
growing out of its head ... one of Disney's oddest-looking creatures.
     The songs are by Howard Ashman and Alan Menken, who did the music and
lyrics for the musical LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS.  Their style in both works is
more verse-dialogue spoken to music than the usual song poetry.  It is still
perfectly pleasant but it is immediately recognizable as being in the same
style.  What is a slight disappointment is that the artwork in THE LITTLE
MERMAID is noticeably less detailed than in other Disney classics.  (Each
frame of film IS different.  This is unlike Japanese animation which has
very nice artwork but fairly jerky motion with drawings used for three or
four frames each.)  But the sketches have less detail so were more
economical to draw.
     The result of all this is that in some ways THE LITTLE MERMAID is
reminiscent of the best of Disney, in some ways in seems the victim of
cost-cutting.  It represents an investment in the future by Disney and will
probably be released to theaters several times before it is ever sold on
cassette.  This means if it sounds good you should go to see it in a
theater.  That is the only way to see it.  As for rating, I would give THE
LITTLE MERMAID a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Alex Fung

THE LITTLE MERMAID (Walt Disney Pictures - 1989)
Voices by Jodi Benson, Samuel E. Wright, Pat Carroll,
  Christopher Daniel Barnes, Buddy Hackett, Kenneth Mars, Jason Marin
Screenplay by Ron Clements & John Musker, based on the story by
  Hans Christian Andersen
Produced by Howard Ashman, John Musker
Directed by Ron Clements & John Musker
Running time: 82 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned.
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   It's startling to consider that it was only a few years ago that film
   distributors would worriedly rearrange their summer release schedules
   in order to give the annual Disney animated feature juggernaut a wide
   berth.  THE LION KING had just cracked $300 million domestic in gross
   to become one of the most profitable ventures in film history,
   continuing to build on a sturdy base left by prior flicks ALADDIN and
   BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  Since then, though, Disney's animated features
   have shown an unbroken string of diminishing returns, with
   POCAHONTAS, THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, and this year's HERCULES
   successively proving less and less potent.  With the once
   seemingly-impregnable Disney stranglehold on the market share
   suddenly looking mighty vulnerable, and faced with their first
   serious competition in the animated film market from Fox's ANASTASIA,
   Disney has brought Xmas home early by dusting off the feature which
   sparked the modern revival of feature animation, THE LITTLE MERMAID.
   While the animation for the film is, as is typically the case for
   Disney films, unquestionably top-notch, the magic in THE LITTLE
   MERMAID is not its animation, but the wonderful innocence of its
   story and its rousingly superb music.  The film's storyline is
   fairly straightforward -- young teen falls for handsome man, father
   disapproves and assigns hapless chaperone to his daughter, teen
   disobeys father and goes to desperate lengths to win her man --
   except in this case, the chaperone is a crab, the teen is a young
   mermaid, and the object of her desire is a human prince.  What makes
   THE LITTLE MERMAID so affecting and so emotionally resonant is the
   richness and charm of its characters and the sheer clarity and honest
   simplicity of their emotions.  From the moment mermaid Ariel lays her
   eyes on Prince Eric, she's resolutely smitten, and she's such a pure
   and endearing character that one can't help but invest their heart
   with her.  This simple but touching love story, coupled with a
   healthy dose of smart humour, makes THE LITTLE MERMAID a remarkably
   captivating picture.
   One of the interesting things about THE LITTLE MERMAID is something
   which now curiously dates it: the voices cast for its motley crew of
   characters.  This film was produced just before the distracting
   concept of using celebrity voices became in vogue, which started to a
   certain degree with BEAUTY AND THE BEAST and was irrevocably
   exacerbated by Robin Williams' much-heralded turn in ALADDIN; by the
   release of THE LION KING and henceforth, the majority of characters
   in the animated films were voiced by celebrities.  While it's
   understandable that animated features lacking the name-recognition or
   drawing power of Disney (say, BALTO's use of Kevin Bacon and Bridget
   Fonda, or even ANASTASIA's showcasing of Meg Ryan and John Cusack)
   would be forced to turn to this strategy in order to hype their
   products, it's unfortunate that even Disney has embraced this policy.
   Do we really need to hear, say, Demi Moore as Esmerelda in THE
   HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME?  Is the film's entertainment value really
   augmented by hearing a recognizable voice, rather than a voice which
   best suits the role?  (I'm not exactly on the edge of my seat for
   Eddie Murphy in the upcoming MULAN.)
   Fortunately, the performers who voice the characters in THE LITTLE
   MERMAID, although perhaps more obscure, are impeccably cast.  Chief
   among them is Jodi Benson, a 1992 Tony nominee for her stage work in
   CRAZY FOR YOU, who voices the film's heroine Ariel to perfection;
   with a wonderfully expressive speaking voice full of youthful vigor,
   and gorgeous singing voice, Ms. Benson provides a most engaging
   anchor for the film.  (She's the only reason I'd even consider
   catching FLUBBER.)  Similarly, Samuel E. Wright is terrific in the
   showy role of Sebastian, the weary guardian crab.  He easily milks
   his lovable character's comic moments for all they're worth, and his
   rendering of two of THE LITTLE MERMAID's big tunes -- "Under The Sea"
   and "Kiss The Girl" -- have become the stuff of legend.  Pat Carrol
   is deliciously villainous and vampy as the evil sea-witch Ursula,
   while Kenneth Mars' booming voice conveys the stern yet affectionate
   authority of Ariel's father, King Triton.  In large roles and small
   (Edie McClurg as dotting busybody Carlotta is ideal, and Rene
   Auberjonois has great fun with his exuberant French chef), THE LITTLE
   MERMAID is impeccably cast.
   Of course, THE LITTLE MERMAID will probably be best remembered for
   its remarkable collection of songs composed by the songwriting team
   of Alan Menken (music) and Howard Ashman (lyrics), who had created
   LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS and would go on to compose BEAUTY AND THE
   BEAST and ALADDIN for Disney before Mr. Ashman's untimely death.  Not
   only are Mr. Menken's tunes unbearably catchy, but Mr. Ashman's
   charming lyrics are fully integrated into the film's storyline so
   that the songs are a virtual extension of the character's dialogue,
   and consequently work wonderfully within the context of the film.
   Mr. Menken's score for the film is equally top-notch; the sequence
   where Eric (voiced by Christopher Daniel Barnes) and Ariel tour his
   kingdom in a horse-drawn carriage becomes magical and wondrous with
   Mr. Menken's fine score.
   It appears that most people prefer the delightfully colourful
   production number for the calypso-styled "Under The Sea" as joyfully
   crooned by Mr. Wright, which won the Academy Award and Golden Globe
   Awards for Best Song -- indeed, one of the many little joys in
   screening the film during its re-release was listening to children
   scattered throughout the audience singing along with the tune -- but
   my favourite is Ms. Benson's heartfelt rendition of the ballad "Part
   Of Your World", an achingly beautiful tune of yearning and hope
   (wonderfully lyricized by Mr. Ashman) which, accompanied by the
   film's most dazzlingly polished animation sequence, packs an
   emotional wallop which literally brought tears to my eyes.  During
   the song's reprise, which builds to a crescendo with Ariel arching on
   a rock as a wave crashes in, the cumulative effect is nothing short
   of breathtaking, and one becomes acutely aware that this single
   instance is one of the finest in animation history.
   As of this writing, November 1997 has come to an end, as has Disney's
   limited 17-day re-release of THE LITTLE MERMAID.  There's no question
   that the primary motivation for, if not the film's reissue itself, at
   least its timing, was to reinforce Disney's dominance in the
   animation market and provide direct competition to Fox's costly new
   upstart animation division and their first major venture, ANASTASIA.
   In every respect, the re-release of THE LITTLE MERMAID appears to be
   a success -- the film's 1997 grosses have pushed its cumulative
   domestic gross over the magic $100 million mark; THE LITTLE MERMAID
   proved to have remarkably strong drawing power for a film initially
   released only eight years ago and in many homes on video, pulling in
   close to $10 million in its opening weekend; and although nobody
   could possibly expect THE LITTLE MERMAID to possibly defeat the
   aggressively-marketed ANASTASIA in head-to-head competition, it
   siphoned enough from the Fox film's opening weekend totals to keep
   ANASTASIA from the coveted weekend leader spot, allowing for Disney's
   odious FLUBBER to sweep in on the subsequent week and wrestle the
   family demographic market share away.
   But although Disney's motives in the reissue of THE LITTLE MERMAID
   were self-serving and protectionist, the real winner is the public.
   Any reason to put this film back into theatres is a good one, and
   it's a true joy to see this heartwarming gem back on the silver
   screen.  THE LITTLE MERMAID is the best film to come out of the
   Disney's modern animation renaissance, and one of the greatest
   animated films ever made.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Don't leave this girl alone with any handsome deaf-mutes Marty, that's my
 advice to you." - Parker Posey, THE HOUSE OF YES

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Eight years after its release, Disney has decided to 
re-release THE LITTLE MERMAID theatrically for 17 days (and 17 
long nights) only. Coincidentally, it was reintroduced to theaters the 
same day Fox's animated film ANASTASIA was released. You know 
Disney, they can't deal with the threat of any other studio getting 
even a small piece of the crust of the kiddie entertainment pie, so 
when someone else wants to make a little money, they counter with 
an old "masterpiece" from their vault and, you know what, I went to 
see this 1989 cartoon rather than the brand new one from Fox. Let 
no one say Disney is losing its monopoly on the market. They still 
have hotels on Boardwalk _and_ Park Place.
        Believe it or not, today, November 25, 1997, at 5:05 p.m., I 
saw THE LITTLE MERMAID for the first time. It took me a few 
years to get over an aversion to this movie that was caused seven 
years ago, when I stayed with one of my mom's friends for a couple 
weeks. They had a young child who listened to the LITTLE 
MERMAID soundtrack constantly and, over that two week period, I 
heard every song from the movie probably a hundred times. By the 
time I got back home, I promised myself I'd never see the movie. But 
promises are made to be broken, especially when you're looking at a 
17-day, limited engagement. Damn those shrewd Disney marketers 
and their mind games.
        THE LITTLE MERMAID is based on a Hans Christian 
Anderson fairy tale, but it's Disney-ized, which means lots of talking 
animals and bursting into song. It also means the heroine is a total 
babe who shows off cleavage from a seashell bra at all times. I never 
wanted so much to be a pair of shells... The heroine, of course, is 
Ariel (voice of Jodi Benson), a 16-year-old mermaid who is going 
through that rebellious phase. She skips her concert to explore a 
wrecked ship and hang out with a seagull that talks like Buddy 
Hackett, who tries to orient her to the mysterious world of humans.
        She's also dealing with feelings she hasn't had before -- 
which comes when you get scales in places you didn't use to have 
them -- about a handsome prince (no Disney movie would be 
complete without one). Her father, King Triton of the merpeople, 
strictly forbids such lusting after the ways of the "savage" humans, 
in a condemnation that reads as a not-so-subtle analogy about old-
fashioned parents who forbid interracial dating. What's a king to do, 
though? The girl's in love and even total destruction of her little 
shrine to the human world doesn't deter her.
        Ariel saves the prince's life when a hurricane rises up, and 
just has to meet him. She makes a deal with Ursula, the sea witch 
(voice of Pat Carroll). You know she's evil because she has a huge 
potbelly and one of the worst asses in cartoon history. She also has 
octopus tentacles for feet (something those Dr. Scholl's corn pads 
will not fix) and offers to help Ariel out. She'll make her a human 
for three days if Ariel will give up her pretty voice; Ariel has three 
days to make that prince kiss her, or else she becomes a slave to the 
witch FOREVER. And if she pricks her finger on a sewing machine 
or eats an evil apple, she'll fall asleep FOREVER.
        It's a simplistic plot, yes, but THE LITTLE MERMAID was 
a revolution in the Disney world, coming after such lackluster efforts 
as THE BLACK CAULDRON and OLIVER AND COMPANY. It ranks as one of the 
best Disney cartoons, certainly since the '50s. All the elements are 
there -- memorable songs like "Under the Sea" and "Kiss the Girl," 
cartoon animals like Sebastian and Flounder, an evil villain who 
still has characterization and charm, and a fair amount of humor 
that caters to adults as well as children. THE LITTLE MERMAID is 
worth a big-screen ticket in 1997, so hurry up, you only have five 
days left.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America for more than 1/25th of a century!

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring the voices of: Jodi Benson, Samuel E. Wright, Pat Carroll,
      Christopher Daniel Barnes, Kenneth Mars, Ben Wright, Rene
Auberjonois, Jason Marin, Buddy Hackett
Directors: Ron Clements and John Musker
Producers: Howard Ashman and John Musker
Screenplay: Ron Clements and John Musker
Music: Alan Menken
Lyrics: Howard Ashman
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     It's hard to believe that it's only been eight years since THE
LITTLE MERMAID made its first appearance in movie theaters.  Since the
film's bow in 1989, when it introduced Disney's "new era", the studio
has released six animated features (plus one leftover from the previous
regime, 1990's THE RESCUERS DOWN UNDER).  Without exception, all of them
have taken their cue from THE LITTLE MERMAID:  a young, individualistic
protagonist proves himself/herself with the aid of a few cute sidekicks
while finding time to sing several songs along the way.  It's not a
terribly interesting premise, but, when done well, it makes for an
entertaining ninety minutes.  Lately, with movies like POCAHONTAS, THE
HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, and HERCULES, Disney has been getting stuck in
a rut, and the enjoyability quotient has been in a rapid decline.  The
re-issue of THE LITTLE MERMAID reminds us how agreeable the animated
releases were just a few years ago.
     If Disney was the genial, family-friendly corporation they pretend
to be, we could believe that it's just a coincidence that THE LITTLE
MERMAID's re-release coincides with 20th Century Fox's big push for what
could be the best non-Disney animated film ever, ANASTASIA.  The real
reason is less altruistic -- the Mouseketeers don't want any competition
in this arena, and they have taken the most effective steps available to
them to stifle it -- bring back one of the most beloved recent classics
and hope audiences spend their dollars on THE LITTLE MERMAID rather than
ANASTASIA.
     Despite revitalizing Disney's fortunes and introducing the present
wave of big-screen cartoons, THE LITTLE MERMAID was not a groundbreaking
motion picture, although it was the first animated movie to so
thoroughly incorporate songs into the narrative.  With big production
numbers like "Under the Sea" and "Kiss the Girl", and several other
hummable melodies, the film makers did their best to create the cartoon
equivalent of a musical.  Considering that the tunes are among the best
ever penned by the songwriting team of Alan Menken and Howard Ashman
(the creators of LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS, who went on to do BEAUTY AND
THE BEAST and ALADDIN for Disney), this move turned out to be a
fantastic success.  And, like all musicals, much of the enjoyment comes
as a result of simply enjoying the singing, rather than being carried
away by the relatively uncomplicated story.
     THE LITTLE MERMAID is loosely based on the Hans Christian Andersen
fable, albeit with a radically changed ending.  Ariel (voice of Jodi
Benson) is the rebellious teenage mer-daughter of Triton, King of the
Sea (Kenneth Mars).  She is obsessed with the culture of those who live
on land, and keeps a secret treasure trove of objects recovered from
shipwrecks.  One day, while swimming around with her fish pal, Flounder
(Jason Marin), and her chaperone, the crab Sebastian (Samuel E. Wright),
Ariel comes upon a sinking ship and saves a handsome young human, who
turns out to be a prince named Eric (Christopher Daniel Barnes), from
drowning.  Ariel is smitten, but when her father finds out about her
excursions to the surface, he is furious.  Hurt and desperate, the young
mermaid falls into the trap of the sea-witch Ursula (Pat Carroll), who
offers her a deal:  in return for being transformed into a human, Ariel
must cause Eric to fall in love with her in less than three days,
otherwise her soul will belong to Ursula.  To seal the bargain, Ariel
gives her voice to the witch.  What the mermaid doesn't know, however,
is that Ursula has stacked the deck so that Ariel can't possibly emerge
victorious.
     The animation in THE LITTLE MERMAID isn't quite as accomplished or
eye-popping as that of its successors, but it's still impressive, and
hurried or unfinished cels are almost impossible to spot.  What the film
does expertly is to weave together music, likable protagonists,
thoroughly nasty villains, and a fun plot into a cohesive whole, with a
result that is nothing short of magical.  And, although THE LITTLE
MERMAID isn't among Disney's most "mature" animated movies, it offers
enough entertainment, innocent romance, and low-key humor to keep adults
involved.  Children, of course, will love it.
     THE LITTLE MERMAID boasts a particularly strong vocal cast,
although, other than Buddy Hackett (who plays a seagull named Scuttle)
and Rene Auberjonois (a French cook), there are few recognizable names.
But Jodi Benson gives Ariel a clear, beautiful voice and a delightfully
silvery laugh; Pat Carroll brings Ursula to life with sultry gusto; and
Samuel E. Wright creates a crab with a penchant for reggae.  Other
voices include Christopher Daniel Barnes in the rather bland role of
Eric, Jason Marin as Flounder, and Ben Wright as Grimsby, Eric's
faithful manservant.
     The biggest obstacle for Disney is that many children have already
seen THE LITTLE MERMAID on videotape, and most kids don't care about the
differences between the theatrical presentation of a movie and one in
the living room.  Nevertheless, for those who haven't seen the film on
either the big or the small screen, or for anyone who wants a chance to
view it again after an eight-year absence, it's well worth a trip to the
local multiplex (and, according to the studio, this will be a limited,
two-week run).  For ninety minutes of pure escapism, it's difficult to
beat THE LITTLE MERMAID.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Jeff Meyer
     These days, the press likes to hype the comeback trail for just about
anyone: politicians, celebrities, musicians, and even companies.  Obviously
Disney has, over the last ten years, shown a mighty resurgence in the fiscal
arena, with the success of Touchstone Pictures and it's various amusement
parks.  However, those looking at the quality of Disney's recent films will
find even more hopeful signs, particularly those who fondly remember the
animated features of bygone days.  It appears that someone in the upper
echelons has taken the cuffs off the Disney animators and told them to knock
his or her socks off.  After seeing THE LITTLE MERMAID, I'd guess you'd find
have to hunt for their shoes somewhere in their secretary's office.
     A step back: I really sat up and took notice when THE GREAT MOUSE
DETECTIVE came out from Disney a couple of years ago.  It was an extremely
entertaining feature, with a good sense of visual ingenuity, a fine comic
sense, and a script that was enjoyable for both kids and adults.  Being a
Holmes fan, I realized bias, but it really was head-and-shoulders above the
fairly listless, cut-out animated features that started in the late sixties
(after, but not including, THE JUNGLE BOOK) and dominated the 70s and early
80s, right through the extremely over-hyped THE BLACK CAULDRON.  THE GREAT
MOUSE DETECTIVE wasn't as technically accomplished as anything in Disney's
Golden Age (PINOCCHIO, SNOW WHITE, FANTASIA, etc.), but it was a solid
production and something to keep one's eyes open for.
     Well, you won't have to squint to notice the quality to be found in THE
LITTLE MERMAID.  This is, I believe, the best Disney animated feature since THE
JUNGLE BOOK, certainly the best "animated musical adventure" since TJB;
technically, however, it's the best thing to come out of Disney's animations
studios in decades, showing a sense of visual imagination that I haven't seen
since Disney's pictures in the early 50s.  There are sequences that surprised
me, dazzled me, made me laugh with surprise (!)  in how the animators had
orchestrated the scene; and two of the musical numbers literally made me want
to applaud after they were over.  (The munchkins next to me would have taken it
as a sign of weakness, though, so *next* time I'm listening to A Voice of
Reason and seeing this at 9:30, past most of the little delinquents' bedtimes.)
The technical bits were damn impressive -- while not being up to the standards
of a PINOCCHIO, it did have sequences which stand out as way-above-average.
For the kids, for those who enjoy animated features or musicals, and for the
animation aficionado, THE LITTLE MERMAID is a treat.
VISUAL IMAGINATION:  The well just does NOT run dry.  The opening credits, the
introduction of the characters...  right down to the point-of-view of each
shot.  After THE LITTLE MERMAID, you'd think Disney Studios had forgotten how
to do a two-dimensional shot.  The intro of the Sea Witch is particularly good,
as is the opening credits of a ship at sea.  But the sparks really fly in the
musical numbers, particularly the very amusing "Kiss the Girl", and "Under the
Sea", which honest-to-God should be released as a music video -- it'd end the
glut of black-and-white monstrosities on MTV single-handedly.  And the old
tried-and-true cartoon humor is in full evidence, which is a welcome sight --
it seemed for a while that someone at Disney had forgotten that this was an art
form in itself.  (Looking at Saturday morning TV, perhaps a lost one.)
There is no single element more important to an animated film than the whimsy
to out-think the audience and surprise them with what the film-makers are about
to do.  The lights are apparently burning brightly at Disney Studios.
TECHNICAL:  In a phrase, Nothing Looks Cheap.  You'd be hard-pressed to
associate this film with the company that made THE ARISTOCATS, which brimmed
with single-dimension animation, static backgrounds and strictly
two-dimensional action.  There must have been a large sign up somewhere in THE
LITTLE MERMAID'S production studio: "USE THE Z AXIS."  And there are little
touches everywhere -- I particularly liked the light-waves against the sea
floor.  But more than that, this are several distinct styles in the artwork and
animated sequences in this film.  Many of the characters have the standard
Disney character "look", i.e.  the humans in 101 Dalmatians: The Prince, his
steward, etc.  But they have more texture, more distinctiveness; Ariel, the
mermaid, in particular comes of with a visual individuality.  Then there are
the early sequences, and the introduction of the Sea Witch; I want to see it
again, but I could swear that I was looking at SNOW WHITE-level animation --
almost cel painting.  Gorgeous stuff -- somebody opened their pocketbook for
this one.  Finally, as in THE GREAT MOUSE DETECTIVE, computer animation is
integrated into the film very smoothly (mostly the wooden ships, I think); I'd
be curious to know if it was used in other places.
Really, this is a technological milestone for Disney.  They've gained a lot of
ground back with THE LITTLE MERMAID, and I hope the box office on the film is
good enough for them to try it again.
CHARACTERIZATION:  Good, up-to-snuff, if not great.  I'm very partial to
Sebastian, the composer crab who is one of Ariel's companions, myself, but most
are standard roles, e.g.  Flounder, heroine's best friend; but there are
several other, smaller roles which come off very well.  Most of the voices,
while familiar to animated film fans, aren't "celebrity voices", with the
exception of Buddy Hackett, who's "animized" into a seagull.  (I half expected
him to be living in a beached, rusted Volkswagen Beetle.)  Rene Auberjonois was
also distinctive in his small role as the French chef during "Les Poissons",
probably the shows best comedy sequence.  (Though I kept thinking how much fun
it would have been if John Cleese had been doing his "Of course I'm French!
Why do you zink I have dis ouutraaaageous Frentch Ak-zant?!!"  voice for it.
Never satisfied...)  The Sea Witch has all the good lines and lyrics, but then,
Disney villainesses always do.  And Ariel herself is a strong central
character, a very pleasant (and long-overdue) change from those helpless Disney
females who cling to the hero's arm while he kills the villainess.  She's
certainly the most appealing heroine I've ever seen in a Disney film, though
she doesn't break any Disney Heroine Regulations, I think.  (The Prince is the
usual Disney good-looking, happy hunk; he basically plays with his dog and
battles sorceresses.  Looks like a pipe-smoker to me.)
MUSIC:  Pretty catchy stuff.  Upon walking out of THE JUNGLE BOOK (at age 7), I
immediately initiated a campaign to coerce my parents into buying me a record
with "The Bear Necessities" on it (remember Ralphie and the B-B gun in A
CHRISTMAS STORY?); after the inevitable success (I could whine with the best of
them back then), I played that song over and over again until everyone (except
me) was sick of it.  "Under the Sea" is just about as appealing, though the
lyrics are nothing special and I think a lot of the appeal rests in seeing the
animated sequence AND listening to the music at the same time.  Luckily for my
parents, I know have enough money to buy the CD.  (Pet gripe: they might list
the voice talents for the songs in the soundtrack brochure.  That's Disney
corporate policy all over: the credits say DISNEY first, and everyone else in a
2-point font.)
DIALOGUE AND PLOT:  Pretty standard stuff, though we have the heroine doing
most of the rescuing here.  Outside of that, nothing special; the one thing
this film doesn't surpass THE GREAT MOUSE DETECTIVE in is script, which had an
almost constant stream of good lines.
SO:  Damn good film, worth seeing once and (for people like me) twice.  Kids?
Well, there were some crying toddlers, as the villainess looks pretty nasty at
points, and there is a shark.  Nothing worse than the usual Disney Nasty Person
Trappings, though.  Besides, it's *good* for the little buggers!  Gets those
psychological complexes started early, so they can be in therapy by the time
they're in high school.  I mean, I saw the Wicked Queen's transformation scene
in SNOW WHITE, and it didn't screw me up any, did it?  Outside of possible,
subliminal pro-drug messages...
     Anyway, either use the kids as an excuse, or better yet, catch the late
show with your SO.  Good animated features can make anyone into either a kid or
a romantic, and THE LITTLE MERMAID is an express ride to either.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Although the Disney conglomerate may be known more today for its
theme parks, the heart of the organization, even if no longer the
largest revenue generator, is the production of animated motion
pictures.  Once a year, Disney delights young and old alike with some
colorful fantasy.  And periodically, Disney spruces up one of its old
films, and rereleases the fresh print to the theaters.
     For those of us who missed seeing, or weren't even alive, when THE
LITTLE MERMAID was first released in 1989, Disney plans on giving us a
special opportunity to see it during a short theatrical run in the last
part of November.  Yes, the film is already available on video, but
nothing compares with the experience of seeing the lush visuals on the
big screen and hearing the wonderfully happy songs in a real theater.
Even if you've seen it before, it's well worth enjoying again.
     In Disney's recent films, comedic antics (ALADDIN), striking
images (THE LION KING), and serious messages (THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE
DAME) have dominated.  In contrast, THE LITTLE MERMAID harks back to a
simpler time when Disney made many films and cartoons in which the
story took a backseat to the music.  Although THE LITTLE MERMAID
explores many traditional themes, such as selling your soul to the
devil, it never takes itself too seriously, contenting itself with
being a feel-good musical.
     Musicals are only as good as the songs and the singers, and,
thanks to the Academy Award winning songs by Alan Menken and the film's
talented cast, THE LITTLE MERMAID never disappoints.  If you don't
leave the theater humming, then you'd better check the adjustment on
your hearing aid.  The film is so infectiously happy that the only
possible criticism could come from some Scrooge who found the music too
saccharine.
     The sweet teenage mermaid named Ariel, done with the lovely voice
of Jodi Benson, lives in the sea.  As in all Disney films, she has some
wisecracking friends, with the funniest being her guardian, a little
red crab named Sebastian (Samuel E. Wright).  Full of advice, he keeps
the show from ever dragging.  "Teenagers," he complains. "They think
they know everything.  You give them an inch; they swim all over you."
Sebastian and Ariel share most of the singing duties although just
about everyone seems to get a chance to sing a little.  Benson's voice
is like honey, and Wright's has the richness of a Caribbean lilt.
     Ariel's father, Triton (Kenneth Mars), like most fathers, tries to
protect his daughter against the dangers of the outside world.  In
their case, this means the land-based world populated by monsters known
as humans.  "Will you get your head out of the clouds and in the water
where it belongs," admonishes Sebastian, Triton's right-hand
crustacean.
     Ariel's difficulties begin when she rescues her prince
(Christopher Daniel Barnes) from a sinking ship.  Going topside is
strictly forbidden for all merfolk so she gets in trouble when her
father finds out.  As always, Sebastian steps in with his judgment,
saying that "somebody's got to nail that girl's fins to the floor."
     All of this causes her to sell her soul and her voice to a fishy
devil, played by a large blue squid named Ursula (Pat Carroll).  Ursula
gives a mute Ariel three days on land to win a kiss from her Prince, or
Ariel will live forever in a hellish, briny deep.
     As the story transpires, we are treated to a long series of songs
including "Kiss the Girl" and "Under the Sea."  As our toes are tapping
-- careful not to make noise and disturb your fellow moviegoers -- the
animators dazzle us with their choice of colors.  Down below, the
palette is rich with the aquamarine colors of blues and greens with
Ariel's orangish red hair providing the perfect contrast.  The land is
differentiated by earth tones of peaches, browns, and golds.  And the
net result is a feast for the eyes and ears.
     THE LITTLE MERMAID runs just 1:22.  It is rated G with only
Ursula's sneer being anything that might trouble the youngest viewers.
My son Jeffrey's friend Kerry, both of them 8, said that she thought
the film was "great."  Jeffrey agreed and went on to mention "Under the
Sea" as his favorite song from the show.
