Title
Review for Educating Rita (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
This film, when it was first made, was essentially a re-union between Lewis
Gilbert and Michael Caine, who both came upon the scene fifteen years
earlier, with ALFIE.
And the main thrust of the film, then, was the character that Michael Caine
was playing, which came off a bit as a modern day Restoration play, complete
with asides.
EDUCATING RITA, is a bit of the same, but the story, this time is not  about
a guy picking up women, or the proverbial middle class ageing stud
philosophizing about his successes and failures.  The character is now a
professor of poetry and literature, who has become bored with his own
teaching and his students.  In comes along a new student, an irish lady in
her twenties, who wants to learn something else about
life, other than the usual thing, get married and have kids, which her
boyfriend is pushing for.
And the well meaning, but generally drunk professor, is starting to enjoy
his tutorship of this spirited lady.  She doesn't have all the knowledge and
studies that all students do, but she has verve and nerve.  And she has
original ideas, actually, fresh ideas, with
a point of view that is more often than not ignored.
Eventually the professor does himself in, and the film has a chance to turn
into a love story, but it does not do so. Rita, has not gotten this far to
stop her studies now, and the film is not going to stop her.
This film, today, is better remembered as one where both leads were
nominated for the Best Actor and Best Actress awards.  They didn't win, but
their work is well remembered, even if Julie Walters has never really hit
the big time as she did in that film.
Wonderful showcase of acting, for both leads.  This is a really  good film,
that shows what a director can do when he helps his actors do their thing,
instead of creating a film that is about the crass of entertainment and
money that Hollywood usually creates.
Internet Movie Critics Association
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.
