Title
Review for Little Buddha (1993)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I went with low expectations to see LITTLE BUDDHA but was quite
pleasantly surprised.  LITTLE BUDDHA is a fairy tale interwoven with a
cartoon like telling of the Buddha story.  The fairy tale is that a
great Buddhist teacher from Bhutan who died nine years ago may or may
not have been reincarnated into a nine year old boy who lives in
Seattle.  He is given a cartoon picture book of the story of Buddha,
and we have periodic long flash backs to the life of Buddha played much
like a cartoon but starring Keanu Reeves as Prince Siddhartha who later
became known as Buddha.
     Like most fairy tales, or operas for that matter, you must be able
to suspend disbelieve if you are to proceed.  Think about it.  If
someone comes to your doorstep claiming to be a Buddhist monk and says
he wants you to leave your young son at the local temple for
examination since your son might have been reincarnated, would you a)
slam the door, b) call the police, or c) leave your little boy at the
temple?  In the movie, they eventually pick c.
     This is a beautiful film written and directed by Bernardo
Bertolucci who did THE LAST EMPEROR.  It was easy to forget logic and
go with the story.  I am familiar with Western Judeo-Christian beliefs
but knew nothing of Buddha or any of the legend surrounding his life.
I found that part fascinating.  I do not know what liberties Bertolucci
took with the Buddha story, but I found it pretty bizarre besides being
fascinating, but then again, any religious story probably sounds
strange to someone who knows nothing about that religion.
     Bridget Fonda (most recently excellent in SINGLE WHITE FEMALE)
plays the mother and Chris Isaak (small part in Silence of the Lambs)
plays the father of the nine year old (Alex Wiesendanger - a new
actor).  Bridget Fonda's acting ranges from good to excellent.  She is
good here.  Isaak gives a blah performance.  The little boy is okay.  I
think Keanu Reeves (e.g., in MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING -  like his acting
abilities) is a terrible actor.  This movie confirmed my opinion.  It
is the monks (led by Ruocheng Ying) and the story itself that make this
movie come alive.
     The imaginative script is by Bernardo Bertolucci, Mark Peploe, and
Rudy Wurlitzer.  It shows the monks as real people who joke, fall
asleep accidentally, and have to be reminded to take their medicine yet
have almost a mystic quality about them nevertheless.
     LITTLE BUDDHA runs 2:03 and editing by Pietro Scalia should have
been tighter.  I give the movie ** 1/2 and recommend it to anyone with
an open mind.  It is correctly rated PG.  I think kids over say 8 would
enjoy it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
John Walker
My form of "rating": I don't believe in reincarnation.  I regard the
     philosophical foundations of Buddhism to be a fascinating
     impossibility: the embrace of absolute self-contradiction.  But
     sitting in the theater watching LITTLE BUDDHA, I could easily see
     myself saying, "Well -- maybe...."
     That, I think, is a pretty high rating -- even if it's a really a
     measure of how loosely held my own beliefs are, or how susceptible
     I am to the world around me (in this case, the film).  Even if
     it's merely a measure of my ability to get into a flick, then
     LITTLE BUDDHA got me to look at the fantasy/reality interface.
     It's one thing to get into, to appreciate, someone's world, but
     when that means getting ready to swallow their world-view, that's
     something else.
In brief: On one level, LITTLE BUDDHA is a very simple story -- almost
     a children's story.  On another, it's a fascinating study of how a
     filmmaker like Bernardo Bertolucci can communicate the "givens" of
     another universe.
     Will you like it?  I don't know.  But I don't think the dividing
     line will be what people's *beliefs* are.  (Religion,
     spirituality, class, culture, etc.)  I think one dividing line
     will be how people regard the use of naive, simple materials to
     make important statements; another will be how they regard the
     presentation of ideas of that are ultimately from an alien
     universe.
    The story is simple: Tibetan monks in exile in Bhutan have signs
that they have found the reincarnation of an important lama.  The
possible reincarnation is nine-year-old Jesse Conrad (Alex
Wiesendanger).  They make contact with the boy's parents, Lisa (Bridget
Fonda) and Dean (Chris Isaak)--of no apparent religion.  Led by Lama
Norbu (Ying Ruocheng), they introduce themselves and a bit of Buddhism
to the Conrads.  Although the Conrads don't really believe any of it,
they agree to let Jesse go to Bhutan for further examination.  Dean,
going through personal and professional problems, goes with them as a
time to sort things out.
    Alongside this, we see the story in a book that Lama Norbu gives to
Jesse.  The book is LITTLE BUDDHA and tells the story of Prince
Siddharta (Keanu Reeves).  We see it in fragments alternating with
Jesse's story.  The Prince, born attended by miracles, grows to manhood
sheltered from pain, age, and death.  When he sees them, his compassion
moves him to begin his journey of enlightenment.  He will become the
Buddha, the Awakened, or Enlightened, One.
    The screenplay of LITTLE BUDDHA is by Mark Peploe and Rudy
Wurlitzer--based on a story by director Bertolucci.  Bertolucci has
said that he wrote a story accessible to children because "In the West,
we are all children as far as Buddhism is concerned."
    Well, some of us may know "too much" about Buddhism.  What some of
us get in college is frequently the more philosophically "interesting":
Hinayana Buddhism, the lesser (smaller) vehicle in which only a select
few can ever ride.  Mahayana, the greater (larger) vehicle is one upon
which a society can be founded.  Westerners have frequently been
trapped between the two.  The one fits in with our individualism, with
following our own path--but therefore it can be just another
self-indulgent personal trip.  The other gives us a world, a universe
that is actually alive--but it's almost completely alien.
    One image in the film lasts only a few seconds, says a lot.  The
Dharma Center in Seattle is in an old building that might have been a
church.  Outside, it's a tacky turn-of-the-century or 1920s building
covered badly with aluminum siding.  Only the new porch announces
what's inside.  Inside, craftsmen are building something straight out
of the Himalayas.
    Another statement is the filming itself.  In Seattle, the world has
a blue cast to it, cold, grey, even in the sunlight.  In the Siddharta
story, things seem to have a gold hue.  Only modern-day Bhutan and
Nepal seemed to be what I expected as "normal" light.  (Cinematographer
Vittorio Storaro even used different film stocks for each.)
    Altogether, Bertolucci gives us the story in such a way that we
don't necessarily have to believe anything.  The newspapers have
reported similar suspected reincarnations in the West; this just gives
a story of what one case might have been like.  But the use of the
child's book lets Bertolucci give us the story of the Buddha as a
*given*.
    Again, we don't have to believe it.  But if we accept it as a child
might, it makes everything else hold together.  Our freedom of
interpretation permits LITTLE BUDDHA to be a sophisticated bit of
proselytizing.  By going through the process of acceptance in fantasy,
we may be more receptive in practice.
    It would be interesting to take a poll of audience reactions.  For
some, it would just look like "Buddhist cathedrals" and "Buddhist
bishops".  It would look oddly *familiar*.  Others are already shocked
by most of Roman Catholicism, High-Church Anglicanism, and Eastern
Orthodoxy.  Tibetan Buddhism would be even more alien.  Who would be
the more susceptible?  And what about whether or not they have a grasp
of basic Buddhist philosophy?
    I gather lots of reviews have begun with references to BILL AND
TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE.  Bertolucci's casting Keanu Reeves as
Siddharta has raised a lot of eyebrows.  In fact, one complaint--that
Reeves's style can be "wooden"--is actually a requirement here.
    Reeves is called to play an *icon*, and everyone around him (all
Indian actors) similarly behave in a stylized way.  The Siddharta parts
are written that way.
    Take, for instance, when Siddharta first sees *old* men and asks
his sidekick Chana (Santosh Bangera) about them.
    In fact, I found only two wrong notes in Reeves's Siddharta, and
neither were strictly his.  In one, he cuts off his long hair with a
knife--and comes away perfectly coifed!  In another, his expression
is simply unconvincing--but so noticeable that I assume it was
Bertolucci's decision.
    In dealing with the Siddharta story, the stylization, and American
notions of what a beautiful babe should look like, may be sticking
points for some.  But otherwise, everyone's performance should be very
easy to take.  Well, perhaps Wiesendanger may strike some as a bit
*too* cute to take seriously.  But his performance is natural and
believable.  And he's able to give a hint of knowing or suspecting more
than we'd expect from a nine-year-old.  If you wish to believe it,
he'll let you think that maybe he *is* a reincarnation--without
undermining his essential nine-year-old-ness.
    Similarly, Isaak and Fonda are believable as not believing, yet not
closing out these odd visitors from another continent, another planet.
    Much of the weight for that rests on Ruocheng as Lama Norbu, and on
Sogyal Rinpoche as Kempo Tenzin, who makes the first contact here in
the States.  They project both earnestness and innocence, cheerfulness
and concern.  It's easy to think that Jesse's parents would be willing
to give them a chance.
    Is LITTLE BUDDHA a charming, updated fairy tale?  With a little
religious-history thrown in?  Or is it a simple presentation of a
world-view?  An introduction to another belief system?  Or is it subtle
evangelizing?
    Or is it an indication that Western artists and audiences, having
lost their own faith, will wander around trying on the faith of
strangers?  (Get a faith buzz without the work that real belief might
call for.  Or get a mental aspirin for the pain of a world without
meaning--but without turning it into an addiction, the way believers
do.  Both believers and anti-believers can feel superior.)
    Remember that those alternatives are *not* exclusive.  Fairy tales
can communicate important values.  Simple photographs can be
persuasive.  We can do all sort of things from all sorts of motives.
    The meaning and purpose of LITTLE BUDDHA will, I think, depend on
you.  Whatever Bertolucci's intention, he has created something--like
many children's tales--whose meaning depends on its hearers.

Author
James Berardinelli
     At the core of LITTLE BUDDHA lie questions of belief.  Can you 
acknowledge reincarnation as a viable solution to what lies beyond death?  
Can you believe in the search for Cosmic Oneness as a central mystery of 
life?  And, most importantly, can you accept Keanu Reeves as the Buddha 
dude? 
     LITTLE BUDDHA has two stories to tell.  The first follows the quest 
of a group of monks, led by Lama Norbu (Ying Ruocheng) to seek out the 
reincarnated spirit of a great Buddhist teacher, Lama Dorje.  Norbu and 
his fellows believe they have found Dorje's spirit residing within a 
Seattle boy named Jesse Conrad (Alex Wiesendanger).  While Alex is 
enchanted with the monks and their way of life, his parents, Dean (Chris 
Isaak) and Lisa (Bridget Fonda) are wary, and that wariness turns into 
near-hostility when Norbu announces that he would like to take Jesse back 
with him to Bhutan to be tested. 
     The second tale is the fable of how a prince named Siddhartha (Keanu 
Reeves) became the great spiritual leader Buddha.  Framed within the 
modern-day portions of LITTLE BUDDHA, this segment is presented as a 
children's story told to Jesse, with the telling simple and fairytale-
like. 
     The strength of LITTLE BUDDHA is the ideals that it presents, and 
the way it forces us to confront questions of spirituality and existence.  
Director Bernardo Bertolucci (THE LAST EMPEROR, THE SHELTERING SKY) has 
never been one to avoid probing themes, and the subject matter of LITTLE 
BUDDHA is no different.  There's a fair amount of material in this film 
to stimulate the intellect. 
     Unfortunately, it's really just the intellect that is stimulated.  
As beautifully photographed and intelligently-written as the movie is, it 
has no emotional depth or appeal, and is often as cold and clinical as 
its gray depiction of Seattle.  Perhaps the problem is the twenty minutes 
cut from the final print (there's a sequence involving the bankruptcy and 
death of a friend of the Conrads that has been trimmed significantly).  
Or maybe it's the use of a wooden Chris Isaak in a key role.  Whatever 
the reason, however, the characters never connect with the audience, 
causing LITTLE BUDDHA to test the viewer's attention span when it should 
instead be soaring.
     There's also a question about LITTLE BUDDHA's intent.  At first, the 
center of the picture seems to be on young Jesse's spiritual 
enlightenment as he comes to understand the monks' way of life.  This, 
after all, is the whole point of his learning Siddhartha's story.  
However, as the film progresses, the focus wanders as Jesse's presence 
becomes less critical.  Dean's own crisis of the soul, which forms a 
minor subplot, is resolved in an oblique and unsatisfactory manner. 
     So what about Keanu Reeves?  Choosing one of today's least able (but 
most popular) actors in such a critical role might at first seem bizarre 
(to say the least), but in a weird way, it sort of works.  This isn't 
because Reeves has suddenly learned how to act, but with his part of the 
story nestled in the cozy frame of a fable, his stilted style isn't 
harmful.  All that he needs to do is look nice - which he does - and not 
flub his lines.  His failed attempt at an Indian accent is a bit 
distracting, however.
     With ragged transitions and a too-long running time, the editing of 
LITTLE BUDDHA is suspect.  Considering the otherwise-impeccable 
production standards, it's odd that this portion of the project should 
have been handled so imperfectly.  Conventional wisdom indicates that if 
you're aware of something, it's a problem, and that's the case with the 
cutting and pasting in LITTLE BUDDHA.
     For those who can get past Keanu Reeves and Chris Isaak, and who 
don't mind viewing a film that opens an emotional gulf between itself and 
its audience, LITTLE BUDDHA has themes and images worth exploring.  And 
while no one will debate the impressiveness of cinematographer Vittorio 
Storaro's work, as far as I'm concerned, there are too many problems for 
this film to be considered more than a mediocre attempt to present a 
multi-layered spiritual and temporal picture.  
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michel Hafner
     LITTLE BUDDHA is Bernardo Bertolucci's new movie (following THE
SHELTERING SKY and THE LAST EMPEROR).  The story is rather simple.  The
spiritual master of Tibetan Lama Norbu (Ying Ruocheng), Lama Dorje, has
died and ever since Lama Norbu is looking for his reincarnation.  Kenpo
Tensing, a Tibetan monk living in Seattle contacts him.  In dreams the
late Lama Dorje revealed him where he has been reborn.  It's in the
house of the Konrad's, Seattle, USA!  So a few days later the Konrads,
Lisa (Bridget Fonda) a math teacher, Dean (Chris Issak), an architect,
and their son Jesse (Alex Wiesendanger) get a visit from Lama Norbu,
his companions and Kenpo Tensing.  The idea that Jesse might be a
reincarnation of a late Lama is first hard to swallow for the sober
scientific minds of the parents.  Yet they allow the monks to introduce
Jesse with the help of an illustrated book for children to the story of
prince Siddhartha, who became known to the world as Buddha.  To be sure
the monks want to take Jesse back to their convent, but this is only
possible after Dean Konrad has an experience he wasn't prepared for.
He, Jesse and the monks leave for Bhutan....
     LITTLE BUDDHA consists of two "universes."  There is Seattle
standing for the western world, dominated by technology and presented
in sterile looking blueish shades.  And there is the world of prince
Siddhartha, 2500 years ago and today, colorful and juicy, a paradise,
but also a place of suffering, decrepitude and death.  The gorgeous
images by Vittorio Storaro, telling us the story of Siddhartha every
time Jesse looks into his book, are the main attraction of LITTLE
BUDDHA.  They have to be appreciated on a big cinema screen.  Don't
wait for the LD or tape.  Especially the scenes with Siddhartha leaving
his palace for the first time and Siddhartha fighting the demon Mara
before enlightenment are breathtaking.
     Keanu Reeves as Siddhartha gives an acceptable performance.
Physically he fits the role quite well with his exotic looks, enhanced
by suitable make up.  For the ascetic scenes he went on a strict diet
to become skinny enough.  Ying Ruocheng as Lama Norbu is the emotional
center of the story.  His fine performance helps the movie a great
deal.  Bridget Fonda is competent in her role, but there is really not
much she can sink her teeth into.  Chris Isaak's role offers more
possibilities, but the actor turned singer keeps his facial and other
expressions to a minimum.  Little Alex Wiesendanger looks a bit
uncomfortable at times, yet he pulls it off quite successfully at the
end.
     Bertolucci gave up the idea of a realistic and detailed Buddha
biography in favour of a more fairy tale like approach with "pretty"
pictures providing a crash course in Buddhism.  The movie is supposed
to be accessible to children and capture the attention of grown ups at
the same time.  I'd say it does, but at the cost of simplifying things
and, sometimes, even provoke laughter where laughter is not appropriate
(especially in the scene of Siddhartha's birth).
     Ryuichi Sakamoto's music is an asset to the movie.  There are two
main themes, one for Siddhartha (majesticly descending 12-note motive)
and one general theme standing for the movie as a whole (I guess, but
it's also related to Jesse).  Strings, Indian instruments and
synthesizer are the main ingredients.  Musical highlights are (again)
the scene of Siddhartha meeting "the world" and Siddhartha achieving
enlightenment.  The final scene features a soprano singing in a style
very reminding of Gorecki's third symphony.
     Bertolucci doesn't shy away from (ultra-modern) special effects
(morphing and other digital tricks ).  With varying success, going from
embarrassing (lotus flowers growing in baby Buddha's footsteps) to near
perfect (Siddhartha fighting Mara in the form of Siddhartha ).
     LITTLE BUDDHA is all in all a bit disappointing.  From Bertolucci
more can be expected.  This movie is no LAST EMPEROR and all it can
hope for at Oscar time is a nomination for best cinematography and
costumes/production design.  And for these a trip to the nearest big
screen cinema is worth its costs.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by Bernardo Bertolucci
Written by Mark Peploe and Rudy Wurlitzer, based on a story by Bertolucci
Cast Keanu Reeves, Chris Isaak, Bridget Fonda, Alex Wiesendanger, and
     Ying Ruocheng
MPAA Rating     PG
Running Time    123 minutes
     LITTLE BUDDHA is a *great* chaser to the Summer Movie Memorial Day
500.  Intriguing, entertaining, and ultimately relaxing, Bernardo
Bertolucci's primer on Tibetian Buddhism tells the story of a 9
year-old-son Seattle son (Wiesendanger) who may bear the spirit of a
great Tibetian lama.
     When confronted by visiting Lama Norbu (Ruocheng), the parents
(odd choices Fonda and Isaak) take the news surprisingly in stride.
They allow their son to learn from the Lama, who tells the boy the
storybook story of Prince Siddhartha (Reeves) and his search for
enlightment in ancient Nepal.  From this tale, the boy (and the
audience) learns about the Buddist fundamentals of compassion,
knowledge, and impermanence.
     LITTLE BUDDHA is a two-tiered tale and both sides of the story are
equally engaging.  Fonda and Issak are both a bit stiff, but
Wiesendanger is a find.  His foil, best of the bunch Ying Ruocheng, is
a calming presence if there ever was one.  The gimme-a-break casting of
Reeves is something to behold, though.  Bronze, buffed, and beautiful,
he makes a most excellent Enlightened Dude.  Somehow, he works.
     Of course, the *real* reason to watch this film is for
Bertolucci's dynamic direction and Vittorio Storaro's prodigious
photography.  Together, they open the eyes as well as the mind.  Best
surprise: the multi-million dollar special-effects sequence of Reeves
sitting under the spreading Bodhi tree.
     There are a *couple* bumps on the road to enlightment.  The plot
is confusing now and zen, and the dialogue is often overpowered by the
music.  (Courtesy of Ryuichi Sakamoto, whose sweeping score, oddly,
recalls the work of Vangelis in BLADE RUNNER.)

Author
Pedro Sena
It's hard to dislike this film.  It's also hard to say that it is a
masterpiece.  But it is easy to say that the film has a nice touch,
something that is endearing, and lovely, and is not a pushy political film,
or religious whatnot.  Slow at the start, but very vibrant and moving, and
enjoyable later. Bernardo is the David Lean of our time.
One can not help thinking that unlike many other religions, this story of
the Tibetan Buddhism monks, and their lineage, is a very interesting one.
Unlike many religions, their sacred ground has been taken away.  And they
have been forced to co-exist against tremendous odds, and have managed to
withstand a lot.  They still thrive, and will forever prove that having it
in the heart is more important than having a country for a home.  But above
all, they will teach something that most do not see.  They have learnt to be
flexible, and to be a part of other lives, and styles.  How these things
will develop in time, is really what this film is about.
The story is simple.  A monk, in Seattle, happens to come across a child
that appears to have all the indications that he is one of the incarnations
of the leader, who is dying.  And the monks, are excited enough to have to
try and bring this child to their temporary home, to see how the child will
behave next to the other candidates, and how things will develop.
The start of the film is awkward, and a bit slow, if not bland, which may
have been intentional.  Seattle is a modern city, with its modern
inhabitants, and its modern everything.  But it is STILL.  Nothing moves.
There is no action.  All is un-exciting.  The lifestyle appears to be
illusory, and not real.  The colors are bland.  And the two parents ( Chris
Isaac and Bridget Fonda ) are approached by one local monk, and eventually
they are introduced to a Lama, the high representative of the group.  The
child shows every notion that he is indeed a great candidate.  He is alive
and curious about the story of Buddha which the monk is telling him through
a few books.  And the story comes alive for us.  A great example of how our
minds can be ever so much more lively than the reality  surrounding us.
The monks finally convince the couple to allow the child to come to Tibet,
for a period of time, for all the monks to see him interacting with everyone
else.  And maybe some incidental training along the way, depending on how
the parents allow it.
The couple is having a hard time, their life is beginning to fall apart, and
Dean is losing his job, and has to figure out how to salvage it all into
another job.  Perfect time to take a breather. He decides to go to Bhutan
with the child.  And the film changes completely.  All of a sudden there is
breath, life, space, and time.  Everything moves.  The monks breathe and we
can hear them. The children play and we can enjoy it.  The story of Buddha
finishes and the new story takes over.
The child is placed with a couple of other candidates for lamahood, a young
boy and a small girl.  Unlike Jesse, Raju has a bit of the Hindu upper class
crust in him, and the little girl is very much brought up by the same class.
They were prepared for all this and are expected to fulfill that role.
Jesse is more independent, but also less manipulated.  He enjoys his
freedom. The father, in the meantime is just watching life all around him.
He has become a non-character, it seems, in search of himself. He is still t
he father, and never too far away, but he seems to have gained a trust and
faith that he didn't show before.
Jesse is indeed the apparent incarnation that the monks have been looking
for.  And he is treated and revered as such.  The little boy hardly
understands any of this, but he has an aptitude to connect with some of the
monks that is rather nice to watch. The father and son leave for Seattle,
and on the story continues. A few subtleties, which are un-important to the
life of the film are shown, but even the mother does not realize it.  Jesse
says that he can hear his new brother.  The mother does not know yet if it
is a boy or girl that she is carrying.  End of story.
The prettiest thing in this film, hands down, is the acting ( well unfair to
call it that, but ... ) of Sogyal Rinpoche, a renown Lama and emissary of
the Tibetan Buddhist movement.  His character, no matter how similar to his
own duties, is a treat to watch,
undoubtedly a pleasant person regardless.  He is gentle, never forceful,
respectful, and very lively to watch with the children. And he has mastered
the character's inner strength to lead himself into the Bardo layers as he
is in the final moments of his stay
in the earth.  The suggestion is that Jesse will be the one carrying on his
knowledge.
Another magnificent thing in this movie is RYUICHI SAKAMOTO's score for the
film.  Outstanding music, beautifully designed and blending into the colors
of the film, in some quiet and subtle ways that just slowly crop up, and
start to make you feel it
all.  Truly beautiful music.  Few soundtracks are written with such care,
and design in mind. One gets the feeling that the scenery was built to
match.
And the last great thing in this film, is the cinematography of Vittorio
Storaro.  There is some magic about the way this man colors a Bertolucci
film, but perhaps it is the director that helps design it all.  It is truly
beautiful to watch.
Chris Isaac is good.  Keanu Reeves as Siddartha is also good, even if many
people have had a hard time seeing an American actor in this kind of a role.
And the monks are extraordinary.  One could only hope that the Catholic
counterparts showed this much poise, character, and beauty.

Author
Jon A Webb
     LITTLE BUDDHA combines the legend of the life of Siddhartha with a
modern story of an American boy who is thought to be the reincarnation
of a Tibetan Lama.  It is an effective and touching introduction to
Buddhism and an illustration of how the teachings of Buddha can have
relevance in the modern world.
     I found myself deeply moved by his film, though it has a number of
flaws.  Bertolucci unnecessarily prolongs the story by tripling the
reincarnation candidates. His casting of Keanu Reeves as Siddhartha is
questionable, for although Reeves is remarkably good here, he has
established such a strong screen presence as a idiotic teenager it is
difficult to accept him as the Enlightened One.  (Although his
performance is easily the strongest in the film.)  I think Reeves is a
talented actor who will eventually overcome this limitation,
particularly if he continues to stretch himself by working with
talented and distinguished directors like Bertolucci, van Sant, and
Coppola.
     I also thought the casting of Chris Isaak as the father was
suspect; he simply doesn't have the technical ability to carry off this
role.  And Bridget Fonda was wasted as the mother.  The film would have
worked better if Fonda had traveled with her son, though I suppose the
parallel to the life of Siddhartha made the role assignment
inevitable.
     In spite of its flaws, this film works.  It is clear that
Bertolucci has a deep affection for the ideas of Buddhism, and he has
managed to integrate the legend seamlessly with the modern plot--so
much so that at the end one leaves with the image of Buddha still
meditating under the banyan tree, as one is meant to.
     The Tibetan priests are well cast; they are exactly as they should
be, particularly the round, jolly one. The young boy also performs
well, particularly at the end.
     By the way, this film is suitable for children in the same way
that THE SECRET GARDEN (to which it refers) was suitable for adults.
It contains no explicit violent or sexual imagery that would be
offensive, and tells the story on a level that children of say six or
more can understand.
