Title
Review for Clue (1985)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
John Beachem
It's the 1950's, the height of McCarthyism, and six strangers have been 
invited to a mansion in middle of nowhere, New England. The strangers are 
Colonel Mustard (Martin Mull), whose mother's health is questionable and who 
drives an expensive car for a man on a Colonel's pay; Mrs. White (Madeline 
Kahn), who has had many husbands, both her's and other womens'; Professor 
Plum (Christopher Lloyd), who works with the paranoid delusional folks at 
the UN; Mrs. Peacock (Eileen Brennan), who does her senator husband's dirty 
work; The timid, accident prone Mr. Green (Michael McKean); and Mis Scarlett 
(Lesley Ann Warren), who has helped men find the company of a young lady for 
a short while. These six strangers all have one thing in common, they're all 
being blackmailed. They have been invited to the mansion by Wadsworth (Tim 
Curry), the butler, to meet Mr. Boddy (Lee Ving), who knows something about 
each of them that they don't want made public. The plan is to confront Mr. 
Boddy and make him stop blackmailing them. Unfortunately, things don't go 
quite as planned, and Mr. Boddy is soon dead. With only the six guests, 
Wadsworth, and the maid, Yvette (Colleen Camp) in the house, they now have 
to determine who killed Mr. Boddy, where, and with what.
I have to admit, I'm a big fan of the "Clue" board game from Parker 
Brothers. It's probably because I love mysteries, and "Clue" is the closest 
I can get to solving one in real life without getting shot at. So, I'll get 
this out of the way right now. As a mystery film, director Jonathan Lynn's 
("The Whole Nine Yards") "Clue" fails miserably. I'll let your gasps of 
disbelief subside. Okay, how can a movie called "Clue" fail as a mystery? 
Because the writers thought up an interesting little idea where there are 
three endings. Since there are three different endings, and thus different 
killers, there is no way to guess who the killer is. Afterall, if you guess 
it right in one ending you're wrong in the other two. So if "Clue" fails as 
a mystery, why did I give it a four star rating? Because it succeeds on 
every level as a comedy. All the various types of comedy are used in the 
movie (except that irritating romantic kind) to full effect. We get a 
healthy dose of slapstick, with people running into each other and various 
objects. We also get some great banter, particularly in a scene where 
Colonel Mustard is grilling Wadsworth about who is in the house. We even get 
some satire in a scene which takes a jab at Agatha Christie's "Murder on the 
Orient Express".
Obviously a film like this is going to be entirely dependent on two factors: 
the script, and the actors. I'll get into the script in a minute, so let's 
cover the actors. Tim Curry ("Legend") leads the cast with a manic, 
over-the-top performance like you've never seen (unless you're a fan of John 
Lithgow). The performance is, in fact, so manic that Curry is sweating and 
out of breath during a few scenes. Sounds like a painful thing to watch, 
right? Strangely enough, it's not at all. His manic performance fits the 
part so well, you can't picture Wadsworth being played in any other way. The 
other cast members display great comic abilities, but two stick out in my 
mind as turning in really memorable performances. Martin Mull ("Mrs. 
Doubtfire"), playing the dim-witted Colonel Mustard, has some of the best 
comic timing I've ever seen. He even manages to pull some humor out of an 
otherwise stupid scene where Miss Scarlett says, "Search me" and he proceeds 
to frisk her. The other stand out is, obviously, the late, great Madeline 
Kahn ("Blazing Saddles"). This great woman could make anything funny, and 
when she gets truly funny dialogue she's a riot. My favorite scene with her 
is one where Colonel Mustard says, "There is only one admitted killer here 
and it is not me, it is her!" Madeline backs away, panic in her eyes, and 
says, "I've admitted nothing."
The biggest point in this movie's favor is certainly the hysterical script 
from Lynn and John Landis ("The Blues Brothers"). I'd say no more than three 
minutes go by at a time before we get hit between the eyes by another 
uproarious joke. Some of my favorites are Wadsworth re-creating the crime 
using Mr. Green as a prop; Mrs. Peacock expressing her fear that the brandy 
is poisoned; and the revelation of what each person is being blackmailed 
for. This is also the kind of movie you'll find yourself quoting for weeks, 
months, even years after you've seen it. For example, whenever anyone says 
"To make a long story short," I still say "Too late." What really makes the 
comedy work is that Lynn and Landis never re-use jokes till we're tired of 
them. Even the funniest lines and scenes are only used twice at the most. 
These are guys who know how to avoid wearing out their welcome. The other 
way the avoid wearing out their welcome is by changing the types of jokes. 
You'll seldom get several slapstick jokes in a row, you're more likely to 
get a couple slapstick jokes, a scene of great banter, a snappy one liner or 
two, and then maybe some really dark humor (watch for the singing telegram 
girl for a great example of that). I wish modern comic writers would try 
this approach rather than throwing ten gross-out jokes at us in a row.
The primary reason I've decided to go back and review a movie like "Clue" is 
because I recently got it on DVD. The disc's special features may be rather 
limited, but it does contain the theatrical trailer. Why do I point this 
out? Because for some reason there are a few scenes on the trailer not 
contained in the film. Normally these sorts of cuts make perfect sense since 
they aren't funny, but these scenes were really quite good. For example, Mr. 
Green is screaming and Colonel Mustard slaps him across the face. Colonel 
Mustard: "Why are you screaming?!" Mr. Green: "Because I'm frightened!" 
Colonel Mustard: "Of what?" Mr. Green: "Screaming!" Trust me, it sounds much 
funnier when Michael McKean says it. Clue's soundtrack is a pleasant 
combination of old, fifties songs ("Shake, Rattle, and Roll" for example) 
and a lively little musical number composed by John Morris ("Dirty 
Dancing"). "Clue" runs a nice, quick 97 minutes, and I actually wouldn't 
have minded it being a touch longer. I'd recommend the movie to those who 
enjoy eighties style comedies, and to fans of both Tim Curry and Madeline 
Kahn since both really shine here and give it four out of five stars. If you 
enjoy "Clue", I'd also recommend going back and checking out Neil Simon's 
"Murder by Death" from 1976.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad? or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Kevin Paterson
The 1985 movie "Clue," based on the popular Parker Brothers mystery board
game, follows the basic outline of the game pretty closely. Six suspects -
Mrs. Peacock (Eileen Brennan), Mrs. White (Madeline Kahn), Professor Plum
(Christopher Lloyd), Mr. Green (Michael McKean), Colonel Mustard (Martin
Mull), and Miss Scarlet (Lesley Ann Warren) - gather at a mansion, six
potential weapons are thrown into the mix, and Mr. Boddy (Lee Ving) is killed.
The premise that sets this in motion is fairly interesting: Mr. Boddy has been
blackmailing the six suspects for various reasons, and his former butler
Wadsworth (Tim Curry) has decided to report him to the police and has thus
invited the six in the hopes that they will provide evidence against him. Mr.
Boddy then tries to turn the tables on Wadsworth, but his plan goes awry and
he is killed. Soon others arrive at the mansion, for reasons I won't give away
in this review, and before long the body count is rising. Since Wadsworth has
called the police, the guests undertake to unmask the murderer(s) before they
arrive.
Still, "Clue" doesn't work very well as a mystery per se. The movie has three
separate endings, each revealing a different solution to the various murders.
Only one was shown at a time when the movie was released in theaters, but on
video we get all three of them, and as a result it becomes obvious to the
viewer that the solution is completely arbitrary and that the clues that had
accumulated thus far were ambiguous at best. Fortunately, it more than makes
up for it with a wicked sense of humor; it would be fair to say that the movie
is a comedy first and a mystery second. The script supplies some hilarious
one-liners, such as when Wadsworth reveals that Professor Plum used to
specialize in treating homicidal lunatics with delusions of grandeur. "Yes,
but now I work for the United Nations," Plum explains. "Well, your work has
not changed," Wadsworth replies.
Basically, "Clue" is a great example of a comedy that is hilariously
entertaining if you just turn your brain off long enough to let yourself laugh
at what's unfolding on the screen. The actors aren't quite on the same page,
for example: Curry plays his character like someone who knows he's in a murder
mystery spoof, while the rest of them play it fairly straightforward (with the
occasional exception of Lloyd, who sometimes slips into his "Dr. Emmet Brown"
persona from the Back To The Future  series). Still, all of them manage to
make their individual moments extremely funny; the other standouts besides
Curry and Lloyd are Warren, who plays a sleazy, sarcastic Washington, D.C.
madam, and McKean, whose Mr. Green is a hopeless clutz ("I'm a little accident
prone," he explains on several occasions) and is so naive and innocent that he
exclaims "I didn't do it!" with near-hysteria every time another body appears.
Similarly, the plotting is rather unfocused and illogical at times; a door-to-
door preacher draws big laughs in a scene in which he arrives to warn the
guests that "Armageddon is near!" ("It's already here, buddy!" Professor Plum
retorts), even though the character's behavior is almost inexplicable once it
becomes clear who he really is.
Why, then, does "Clue" get three stars, when this kind of movie normally would
only get two or two and a half from me? Well, for one thing, it's more
consistently funny than the average comedy; usually, in movies like this, some
of the jokes not only don't make that much sense in terms of plot and
character but also misfire or downright flop on occasion. "Clue" pretty much
hits the mark every time, no matter how little sense some of it makes. And to
be fair, some of the humor is also fairly original and unique. Writer/director
Jonathan Lynn's screenplay may be mediocre, but his handling of corpse-
disposal humor is more skilled and deadpan than similar attempts in otherwise
better films like "Fargo" and "Shallow Grave": a scene in which the guests
hide the deaths from a policeman by cuing up some music and dancing with the
bodies is one of the most hilariously twisted things ever to hit the silver
screen.
And, last but not least, I have a sentimental reason for this one: "Clue" was
my favorite movie when I was eight years old, loved any detective story I
could get my hands on, and played the board game constantly. In fact, young
sleuth wannabes with a weird sense of humor are perhaps the ideal audience for
this movie. Still, there's plenty of laughs for everyone, and I'd recommend
this movie to anyone willing to sit back and enjoy an hour and a half of pure
silliness.
Visit my Film Reviews page:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Eileen Brennan, Tim Curry, Madeline Kahn, Christopher Lloyd,
Michael McKean, Martin Mull, Lesley Ann Warren, Colleen Camp, Lee Ving,
Bill Henderson, Howard Hesseman 
Written by: John Landis and Jonathan Lynn 
Directed by: Jonathan Lynn 
Running Time: 96 minutes 
Clue is an unfairly ignored comedy, very similar to 1976's Murder by
Death.  This big screen version of the classic board game (what's
next... Chutes and Ladders:The Motion Picture?) is filled with slapstick
antics and silly dialogue.  The plot, for what it's worth, has all the
characters from the game (in this case, the names from the game are used
as aliases) meeting in an isolated mansion to confront Mr. Boddy (Lee
Ving), the man who's been blackmailing them all.  When he turns up dead,
everyone (including the audience) must figure out whodunnit... and in
what room, and with what object. 
While not as witty as Neil Simon's Murder By Death, Clue definitely has
it moments.  It has so many moments in fact that I use a lot of the
lines from the film when I'm joking around with my friends.  To this
day, whenever someone says the phrase "Well, to make a long story short"
I have the follow up phrase "Too late" ready to go.  The cast (all very
good comedic talents) play well off one another, while the late Madeline
Kahn (as the dark and sultry Mrs. White) sometimes steals the film away
from the rest.  And Colleen Camp, as the French maid Yvette, displays
some of her natural talents as well. 
Clue is available on DVD from Paramount Home Video.  It includes the
film in its original theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1 (and is enhanced
for 16x9 televisions) and features the original theatrical trailer.  A
French language audio track is also available. 
The trailer holds up well considering most previews from that time do
not, and it even includes a scene not in the film itself (a scene that
should have been in the film, as it's a good joke).  Also, the trailer
is scored to the music from Airplane!, which was an interesting choice. 
When Clue played in theaters, it ran with the gimmick of three different
endings.  If you wanted to see all three, you had to go to the movies
three separate times.  So when the film was released on home video,
rather than releasing three separate videos, all three endings were
included on one tape... the first two endings being "What If?" endings
and the third ending being the actual ending.  Now for the DVD release
you get two choices.  You can watch the film as it was presented on home
video or you can select to watch it with one of the three endings
randomly chosen for you.  (Note: there's an easter egg hidden in the
disc pertaining to this.  After watching the film with a randomly
selected ending, when you return to the menu screen you will be able to
highlight the large magnifying glass and select it.  When you do, a
secret menu opens, allowing you to watch any of the three endings by
themselves.) 
Now while I applaud the effort of Paramount here, as they clearly tried
to do something special with the disc, it just doesn't work well. 
First, why not give the VIEWER the choice of what ending we want to
watch?  Maybe someone like myself who's seen the movie hundreds of times
would like to sit down and show it to someone with the second ending
only.  I'm no technical DVD expert, but I can't imagine that being too
hard to accomplish.  Secondly, the delay between when the film itself
ends and one of the endings begins is too long and too obvious, thereby
becoming a distraction right when you definitely don't need a
distraction.  Finally, the back of the DVD case states "And now, with
this special DVD version, you can see all 3 surprise endings".  I have
no idea why they would word it that way, since that's not a special
feature in the slightest.  The video has been out for fifteen years now
(good lord, has it been that long?) and it's played on television with
all three endings all the time. 
These are merely minor complaints however, seeing that I've watched the
home video version hundreds of times and have no problem watching the
film as such on the DVD.  The picture and sound are wonderfully improved
over my worn out VHS copy, and I'm thrilled that Paramount agrees with
me that Clue is a film worthy of being preserved on this great digital
format. [PG]
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by Jonathan Lynn
Story by Jonathan Lynn and John Landis
Based on the board game by Anthony E. Pratt
Starring Eileen Brennan, Tim Curry, Madeline Kahn, Christopher Llyod,
Michael McKean, Martin Mull, Lesley Ann Warren, Colleen Camp, and Lee Ving
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 Yesterday I was in a chatroom.  This is the 90s, the information age, and
not at all an abnormal experience.  When inside chatrooms, as we all well
know, everyone talks past each other.  One could say that the chatroom is
the ultimate proof of Mark Twain's thesis "there are no conversations, only
intersecting monologues."
 My personal monologue concerned the nature of movies.  The people around me
persisted at chatting away on which movie was good or bad, as they normally
do, with no progress being made towards agreement.
 At about 7:40 EST, something inside me cracked.
 LOOK, I said, THE TRUTH OF THE MATTER IS THAT MOVIES SUCK.  THEY HAVE
ALWAYS SUCKED, THEY WILL ALWAYS SUCK, BUT EVERY ONCE IN A WHILE ALONG COMES
A GREAT MOVIE THAT GIVES US HOPE TO CONTINUE.
 I am not going to say that Clue is that movie.  No.  What I am going to say
is that this is an example of that fact that, no matter how predictable each
individual movie may be, movies as a whole are a completely wild and
unpredictable animal.
 A proof of this thesis is the movie Clue.  A studio movie by the two
producers that inspired the book "Hit & Run", Peter Guber and Jon Peters
(the ones so annoying that Barry Levinson's contract with Rain Man
explicitly said that they be barred from the set), Clue is something quite
different from what we associate with studios.  For one, it is a dark
comedy.  For two, it has a script with dialogue that jumps off the page.
For three, it's postmodern and satiric.
 Clue takes place during the McCarthy era of the 50s where the red scare was
in full effect and the Cold War was heating up in Korea.  Six people, all
under an alias, come to the house of Mr. Body (Lee Ving) at the behest of
the butler Wadsworth (Tim Curry).  In the bunch are a Senator's wife, Mrs.
Peacock (Eileen Brennan), a black widow killer, Mrs. White (Madeline Kahn),
a World Health Organization ex-psychiatrist who got friendly with his lady
patients, Professor Plum (Christopher Llyod), a homosexual, Mr. Green
(Michael McKean), a war profiteer, Colonel Mustard (Martin Mull), and a lady
pimp, Ms. Scarlet (Lesley Ann Warren).  All of them are locked in a mansion
and given the opportunity to stop the blackmailing or kill the blackmailer.
Thus because a series of murders and perhaps the funniest spoof of
parlor-mysteries ever done.
 As each of a bunch of supporting cast and visitors die (the maid, the cop,
the singing telegram girl, the cook, and the motorist), the seven become
increasingly paranoid and increasingly funny.  Sure, sometimes it resorts to
completely childish humor (i.e. the sexy woman says "search me", the man
proceeds to feel her up), but the film works incredibly well.  As repressed
as the McCarthy era was, several jokes are made at its expense as well as
using several plays on words and a heavy use of dramatic irony.  An example
is when a beatnik comes to the door and has a quick snippet of conversation
with the entire terrified bunch.
 "The time of Armageddon is near." he says.
 "You ain't just Whistilin' Dixie."  retorts the tart Miss Scarlet.
 "Our lives are in danger, ya beatnik!" yells Mrs. Peacock as she slams the
door on his face.
 Admittedly not the most intelligent movie of all time, Clue remains a bit
of childish fun.  A low-grade dark comedy and a high-grade spoof, it is
worthy spending a couple of hours with.
