Title
Review for Tortilla Soup (2001)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Samuel Goldwyn Films
 Director: Maria Ripoll
 Writer:  Tom Musca & Ramon Menendez, and Vera Blasi
 Cast: Hector Elizondo, Jacqueline Obradors, Tamara Mello,
Constance Marie, Nikolai Kinski, Elizabeth Pena, Raquel
Welch
   "Closure" is a fashionable word nowadays.  People want
closure, meaning, they want to avoid the tension of having
something hanging in the air, or, to be more specific, if you
shave one side of your face, you're not going to feel
comfortable until you finish the job.  Jerry Bruckheimer
believed that the audience would leave the theater tense after
"Pearl Harbor" unless he threw in a feel-good ending that had
nothing to do with the attack at Oahu.  But here's an
exception.  Watch "Tortilla Soup" and you won't get that
feeling of ahhhh.  You'll leave the theater hungry, and that
means the picture worked.  Featuring food and menus
created and designed by Mary Sue Milliken and Susan
Feniger of TV Food Network's "Too Hot Tamales," Maria
Ripoll's "Tortilla Soup," which was inspired and based closely
on Ang Lee's Oscar-nominated "Eat Drink Man Woman," stars
the delicious food which is brought virtually and enticingly to
our mouths by closeups from Lulu Zezza's food photography
(though the principal camerawork is by Marian Sanchez de
Antunano).  If this film were in IMAX 3-D you'd have the
added frustration of putting the gourmet morsels into your
mouth without tasting a thing.
   Without tasting a thing is the unusual plight of Hector
Elizondo, the human star, in the role of Martin, an
extraordinary chef who cannot taste what he prepares in his
successful L.A. Mexican restaurant.  He must rely on his
sense of smell to knock out dishes that, we are told, are
traditional to Mexican cuisine exclusively--but darned if I had
ever seen mouthfuls like these in any Tex-Mex, Cal-Mex, or
even the gourmet eateries in Mexico City's Zona Rosa.  When
we're not spending time watching Ms. Ripoll's version of The
Mexican Chef, we're absorbed by the tribulations of the three
daughters that Martin has brought up as a single parent, his
wife having died some 15 years earlier.  The three sisters are
Chekhovian in their own way.  While they have no desire to
go to Moscow, they do want to have their own lives but are
kept in tow by their traditional dad who uses food to glue the
family together.  The young women are so different from one
another you'd scarcely know they are family.
   Using a script by Tom Musca, Ramon Menendez and Vera
Blasi, Maria Ripoll displays for us some closely bound people
who, like a breakfast dish of chilaquiles can salsa roja look
festive on the outside but are simmering within.  A food movie
containing more romance than "The Big Night" and none of
the surrealism of "Like Water for Chocolate," "Tortilla Soup"
allows us to look in on the lives of the family beauty: Carmen
(Jacqueline Obradors), who must choose between taking a
well-paid high-tech job in Barcelona and remaining in L.A. to
serve as a chef in her dad's restaurant; Letitcia (Elizabeth
Pena), a chemistry teacher, whose love for Jesus seems to
exclude the possibility of men; and the flippant Maribel
(Tamara Mello), whose plans for college seem ready to
change after she meets the free-spirited Brazilian, Andy
(Nikolai Kinski).  The romantic interludes are mirrored in
Martin himself, who is being hit upon by his motormouth
neighbor, Hortensia (Raquel Welsh, who at 61 looks as good
as she ever did).
   "Tortilla Soup" is a family drama that's just made for
ensemble acting, and we are not disappointed by any of the
group who play so well together. Hector Elizondo, who has
been in eighty-five film and TV productions, stands out for his
ability to coax a thoroughly natural performance as patriarch
who is never really as stern as his girls make him out to be
and who must learn to hang loose and acquire some taste.  If
you'll excuse me now, I'm hungry.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
María Ripoll's TORTILLA SOUP wastes no time in getting to the star of the show,
the food.  In the opening credits, the father, like a Samurai, furiously slices
and dices the wonderfully colorful cuisine.  
Inspired by Ang Lee's EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN, the story has been moved to L.A. and
the ethnic cuisine switched to Mexican.  A chef, Martin Naranjo (Hector
Elizondo), who has lost his ability to taste and smell, lives with his three
grown daughters, school teacher Leticia (Elizabeth Peńa), young executive Carmen
(Jacqueline Obradors) and soon-to-be college student Maribel (Tamara Mello). 
The center of their life is the dinner table at which eating is regularly
interrupted by one of them saying, "I have an announcement."  This inevitably
sets off another sweet squabble.  
The dialog is uniformly cute.  Typical is the interchange between Maribel and
her father when she drops the bombshell that she's thinking of postponing
college.  He asks politely but firmly why she is considering the change.  "I
want to find myself," she replies.  "Well, you won't have to look far," he tells
her with a fatherly blend of sarcasm and concern.
When they're not feasting (their meals for four look like royal banquets for
twelve), the women bicker with each other.  They also love each other, and one
of the loveliest episodes has them in the kitchen, breaking dishes and singing. 
The casting of the four leads is terrific, and they're so close that you'd swear
that they were related in real life.  Every family should have such a loving
foundation.  
There's not much wrong with this carefully prepared confection.  Raquel Welch,
as the father's new girlfriend, can't keep up with the others' acting abilities.
 A more substantial problem is Xavier Pérez Grobet's grainy cinematography.  The
sumptuous food deserves a better presentation.  But you'll forget the flaws. 
You'll leave happy and hungry.  
TORTILLA SOUP runs a bit long at 1:40.  It is rated PG-13 for "sexual content"
and would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up.  
The film opens nationwide in the United States today, August 24, 2001.  It is
showing at the Camera Cinemas and the Century Theaters.  
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "TORTILLA SOUP" (Samuel Goldwyn Films)
   Based on the Taiwanese film "Eat Drink Man Woman," this is a savory
romantic comedy about the power of love and food in a middle-class
Mexican-American family in Los Angeles. As Martin, the patriarch and master chef
of the Naranjo family, Hector Elizondo whips up delectable concoctions,
including freshly made guacamole, roasted red and yellow peppers, and sizzling
plantains. "We honor dinner," he instructs his daughters. "We have good manners
and good conversation." Problem is: he can't taste food since his wife's death.
And each of the girls has her own angst. The eldest, Letitia, called Letty
(Elizabeth Pena), is a repressed schoolteacher who fears God and almost
everything else - until a baseball coach (Paul Rodriguez) convinces her that
love is, indeed, possible. Feisty Carmen (Jacqueline Obradors), a businesswoman,
is quick-tempered, perhaps because her heart is really in the kitchen, even
though her nouveau recipes jar her father's already-frayed nerves. And the
youngest, Maribel (Tamara Mello), is about to leave for college when she meets a
handsome Brazilian (Nikolai Kinski, son of Klaus Kinski).  Raquel Welch overdoes
the wacky neighbor routine but Julio Oscar Mechoso is memorable as Martin's
affectionate best-friend and catering business partner. Admittedly, writers Tom
Musca, Ramon Menendez & Vera Blasi and director Maria Ripoli don't achieve the
sublime success of Ang Lee's "Eat Drink Man Woman" - nominated as Best Foreign
Language Film of 1994 -  but this, nevertheless, is a tantalizing, tasty morsel,
extolling traditional family values with the context of the contemporary world.
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Tortilla Soup" is a zesty 7. You'll
consume this visual feast with gusto - and be ready for a Mexican meal
afterwards.
