Title
Review for Siunin Wong Fei-hung tsi titmalau (1993)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
The flying fighters in IRON MONKEY (SIUNIN WONG FEI-HUNG TSI TITMALAU) can leap
two-story buildings in a single bound.  If this death by twirling sounds
familiar, it should.  IRON MONKEY, a movie almost a decade old, is being
re-released to U.S. theaters in order to ride on the coattails of last year's
kung fu smash hit, CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON, since Yuen Woo-ping
choreographed the kung fu sequences for both films.  It might be pointed out
that few people, if any, actually die in IRON MONKEY although much pain is
inflicted.  It's also a PG-13 movie that pushes the limits of blood acceptable
in a film not rated R.
The basic plot concerns a Zorro-like masked legend who fights for the poor and
leaves behind a picture of a monkey rather than a "Z."  The evil and corrupt
government tries to apprehend him.  Rongguang Yu plays the Iron Monkey, also
known as Dr. Yang.  Jean Wang plays his fighting companion, Miss Orchid.  The
governor imprisons the son (Tsang Sze-Man) of kung fu warrior Kei-Ying Wong
(Donnie Yen) so that Wong will agree to attempt to capture the Iron Monkey.
Although the fights are performed with great technical proficiency, they are
quite repetitious.  Still, they are the best parts of the movie.  The rest is
slapstick that is overacted with a vengeance.  Many people find this brand of
silliness funny, but I am not one of them.  On their own, the characters are
kind of endearing, but the minimal plot gives them little to do but leap about. 
I found the film completely forgettable.  Still, if you're a fan of this genre,
you probably already have this movie on your don't miss list.  I hope you enjoy
it.  I tried, but I couldn't.   
IRON MONKEY runs too long even at 1:25.  The film is in Cantonese dubbed into
Mandarin -- or perhaps it's the other way around -- with English subtitles.  It
is rated PG-13 for "martial arts action/violence and brief sexuality" and would
be acceptable for kids around 12 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, who was pretty bored by the movie, gave it just * 1/2. 
He thought the action was creative, but he had problems with most of the rest of
the movie from the thin plot to the fact that unrealistically (almost) no one
died.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 5, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Joshua Tyler
The American action film has been slowly drowning to death in a sea of
Asian wire-fu copycats.  It's not a pretty death, and it's leaving the
likes of Schwartznager, Stallone, and Van Damme wearing cement galoshes
at the bottom of a kung fu sea.
Sometimes, the mix results in a mind-blowing spectacle unlike any
other.  Quality action with amazing and exciting stunt work, as in
1999's The Matrix, can be a real gem.  But too often Hollywood gets it
wrong, even when they pay off Chinese directors.  Flying ninjas and
floating karate masters have been replaced by soaring Bronx detectives
and slow motion kicking scientists.  Mostly it's laughable.  In
Hollywood's rush to emulate the success of The Matrix, trademark Asian
stunt choreography has become more of a joke than an art form.  But Iron
Monkey, the latest Asian import, shows us how to get it right.
Iron Monkey (actually a reissue of a 1993 film) is the story of a 19th
Chinese vigilante (Rongguang Yu), fighting with his own unique style of
Shaolin kung fu for the rights of the oppressed and the bellies of the
hungry.  But it is also a piece of the narrative of legendary Chinese
film hero Wong Fei-Hong, most recently seen in one of the most
overlooked, and possibly best films of 2000, Drunken Master 2 (released
in the U.S. as The Legend of Drunken Master).  Unlike Drunken Master 2,
which stars Jackie Chan as an adult Fei-Hong, Iron Monkey finds a much
younger Fei-Hong (Sze-Man Tsang) and his father Wong Kei-Ying (Yen Chi
Dan) thrust into the middle of Iron Monkey's fight against oppression.
Iron Monkey succeeds as no kung fu film since Drunken Master 2.  At
times, fighting styles, especially that of Monkey himself, do devolve
into the ridiculous twinkle-toed floating of films like Crouching Tiger,
Hidden Dragon, director Yuen Wo Ping eventually remembers to bring his
action scenes back to earth.
Iron Monkey is at its heart a hardcore, kung fu action film rather than
any kind of drama a la Crouching Tiger.  However, there are brief
moments of profoundness shared between characters, such as those that
pass between our outlaw hero and his good-hearted but misguided enemy,
Chief Fox.  In those moments, and in others, Iron Monkey manages to
transcend its mindless kung fu nature to touch the hearts and minds of
its audience.  While in no way the equal of a masterpiece like Drunken
Master 2, Iron Monkey dances quite nicely to the invading kung fu tune.
Aka Siunin Wong Fei-hung tsi titmalau.
Director: Yuen Wo Ping
Producer: Hark Tsui
Writer:  Hark Tsui, Cheung Tan, Pik-Yin Tang, Tai-Muk Lau
Starring: Rongguang Yu, Donnie Yen, Sze-Man Tsang, Jean Wang, Sai-Kun
Yam, James Wong, Yee Kwan Yan, Fai Li, Shun-Yee Yuen
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
IRON MONKEY (1993)
  aka "Siunin Wong Fei-hung tsi titmalau"
Rated PG-13; running time 89 minutes
Genre: Action/Martial Arts
Seen at: Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.iron-monkey.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0108148
Written by: Tsui Hark, Cheung Tan, Pik-Yin Tang, Tai-Muk Lau
Directed by: Yuen Woo-Ping
Cast: Donnie Yen, Sze-Man Tsang, Rongguang Yu, Jean Wang,
Shun-Yee Yuen, Yee Kwan Yan, James Wong, Hou Hsiao, Sai-kun Yam,
Fai Li
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsironmonkey.html
When I heard about the background of this movie, I thought of an African
fable I learned as a child, that of Anasi The Spider, told to me in many
variations.  I don't remember the details of it very well, but the
memory came to me as an analogy to the legend of Wong Fei-Hung.  When I
found out that the Fei-Hung I enjoyed so much in LEGEND OF DRUNKEN
MASTER was the grown-up version of the one in IRON MONKEY, I found
myself anticipating it, just as I had, years ago, anticipated hearing a
new version of the Anasi tale.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Legend has it that in 1800s China, warlords ruled the land, causing the
countryside peasants to flee and seek protecting as refugees in China's
big cities.  Unfortunately, greedy merchants and corrupt politicians
made the refugee's life a difficult one.  The good news was that in
Chekiang province, there were kind people like Dr. Yang (Rongguang Yu)
and Miss Orchid (Jean Wang) to help care for the mistreated peasants.
And that a man known as Iron Monkey was there to rob from the rich and
give back to the poor.
This, of course, doesn't sit well with the town's leading official,
Governor Cheng (James Wong), who wants to keep all his "hard-earned"
money to himself.  The Governor charges Chief Fox (Shun-Yee Yuen) with
hunting down the Robin Hood of China; but it soon becomes apparent that
Fox and the traitorous Shaolin monks in his employ, can't handle the job.
Paranoid about the Iron Monkey, the Governor orders anyone who even
*looks* like they have any monkey in them [Driving While Monkey?] to be
arrested.  Wong Kei-Ying (Donnie Yen), an innocent monk travelling
through town with his son Wong Fei-Hung (Sze-Man Tsang), is profiled and
arrested along with other innocent villagers.  The Governor, seeing
Kei-Ying's mighty kung-fu, uses Kei-Ying to track down Iron Monkey - by
holding his son Fei-Hung hostage.
The Upshot:
My wait was not in vain.  Though IRON MONKEY is new to the U.S., it
actually predates LEGEND OF DRUNKEN MASTER (itself a late U.S. release)
by one year: IRON MONKEY was released in Hong Kong in 1993, as SIUNIN
WONG FEI-HUNG TSI TITMALAU ("Iron Monkey: The Young Wong Fei-Hung").
Both films share a wonderful sense of wit, a grand display of martial
arts skill and artistry, and a warmth not found even in one of my
favorite films of all time, CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON (which shares
another datapoint in common with IM: director Yuen Woo-Ping
choreographed the CT/HD fight scenes - and it shows).
In fact, I have a hard time separating these three films in my Best Of
Genre sights.  Where CT/HD was more grandiose, IM, in its relative
simplicity, was easier to believe; its lack of out-and-out fantastical
mysticism made it more immediate, more human.   And though LODM was much
more out-and-out funny at times, IM's use of humor blended more
naturally with its storytelling.  IM may not have had a lead with the
overpowering presence of a Chow Yun-Fat, or the hilarious timing of a
Jackie Chan, but the team of Donnie Yen, Sze-Man Tsang, Rongguang Yu,
and Jean Wang, are no slouches either.
Yen and Tsang match beautifully, with Yen displaying a calm charisma
that did remind me of Li Mu Bai in CT/HD, but with less of that
character's standoffishness; and Fei-Hung's monkey-like mimicking of
father Kei-Ying made Tsang a joy to watch.  The other duo, Yu and Wang,
were also good, together and separately.  I was floored by one of their
first shared scenes - a "simple" act of picking up scattered paper - and
found myself wishing that the romance in CT/HD had been drawn nearly as
well as the story of Dr. Yang and Miss Orchid.  And needless to say,
this foursome can kick some serious booty.
I have mixed feelings about the supporting characters.  It was good to
see many of the characters I had seen in LODM - the witch (Fai Li), the
disfigured warrior (Hou Hsiao), and unless I'm mistaken, Hin Hung the
monk (Sai-kun Yam) - but it would've been nice to have had some idea
where those characters came from, rather than just seeing them show up
to kick some serious booty [not that there's anything wrong with that.]
Similarly, James Wong didn't add any real nuance to his ObIdiot
Governor; except for the necessity of twists in Chief Fox's story, the
Governor character could've been dropped altogether, with Chief Fox
being The Bad Guy in his place.  But I have no such Issues with Chief
Fox himself; Shun-Yee Yuen gave this character layers that I found
pleasantly interesting to watch.  And Hiu Hing, Shaolin Traitor (Yee
Kwan Yan) will always be My Boy if for no other reason than introducing
me to Flying Sleeve!
In a way, I wish I had seen them in chronological order: IRON MONKEY
first, then LEGEND OF DRUNKEN MASTER, and CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON
last.  I wasn't as wowed after seeing IM as I was after CT/HD, partially
because of advances in "wire-fu" technology since 1993, I think.  I just
hope that that advancement doesn't affect IM's box office success; it is
a film that should be seen on its own terms, not just as a predecessor
to a more technically-advanced chop-socky flick.  Meaning THE MATRIX, of
course.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Check out IRON MONKEY: a less polished, less mystical - but somehow
warmer and more pure rendering - of CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON-type
storytelling, with the humor (and shared storyline) of LEGEND OF DRUNKEN
MASTER.  Like those movies, IRON MONKEY (and its sequel, IRON MONKEY 2)
will most def become part of my DVD collection, once Amazon brings this
movie back to its virtual shelves.
IRON MONKEY (rating: greenlight):
I think I'll be spending a lot more time looking for legendary fables at
the library - and the video store - if they're told half as well as the
one in IRON MONKEY.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Iron Monkey director Yuen Woo-ping hasn't helmed a film in over six years,
and although he's hardly a household name in the U.S., many may know him as
the guy responsible for choreographing the incredible fight scenes in Oscar
winners The Matrix and Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon.  Thanks to Quentin
Tarantino, who has a more-than-decent track record when it comes to
releasing cooler-than-cool Asian films in the States (see Chungking Express,
Sonatine and Mighty Peking Man), people will finally understand why overseas
audiences yawned when they saw Crouching Tiger.
Monkey was originally released in 1993 (it's already available here on video
and DVD) and was such a big hit that its sequel is now five years old.  The
movie is somewhat of a prequel to the immensely popular and much revered
Once Upon a Time in China, the seven-film (and counting) series that
catapulted Jet Li to international stardom.  Monkey and China, not to
mention Jackie Chan's Drunken Master pictures, tell the story of a Chinese
folk legend named Wong Fei-Hung, who was something like the Davy Crockett of
that country during the mid 1800s.
Here, Fei-Hung is a child (and is played by a young girl named Tsang
Sze-Man), who, along with his father Wong Kei-Ying (Donnie Yen, Highlander:
Endgame), have just arrived in Zhejing, a city run by the crooked Governor
Cheng (James Wong).  With thousands of peasants seeking refuge in the city
courtesy of rural flooding and bloodthirsty warlords, Cheng keeps a huge
stockpile of food while his subjects dine on stone soup.  Their only hope is
Iron Monkey, a mysterious Robin Hood-type who liberates the Governor's gold
and gives it to the commoners.
As you might expect, Iron Monkey, who is really a mild-mannered local doctor
(Yu Rong-guang), is not very well-received by the Governor and the soldiers
who are paid to protect him.  When word arrives that the Royal Minister (Yen
Yee Kwan) is on his way to Zhejing to get to the bottom of the whole Iron
Monkey thing, the Governor panics and orders his soldiers to lock up anybody
who could possibly be the big I.M. (leading to a funny scene with dialogue
like "You sneezed like a monkey.  Now come with me").
Combining the nighttime rooftop air ballet of Crouching Tiger with the humor
and physical comedy of The Three Stooges, Monkey, which is both dubbed and
subtitled, has a jaw-dropping finale that takes place on the business ends
of a bunch of wooden poles.  And like Crouching Tiger, the film offers
strong female characters (the doctor's assistant, played by Jean Wang, kicks
as much ass as anybody in the film).  Monkey was written by, among others,
Hong Kong legend Tsui Hark, who directed four of the Once Upon a Time in
China pictures.  Oh, and you might not want to see Monkey on an empty
stomach because there are a bunch of scenes that revolve around
delicious-looking food and food preparation.
PG-13 for martial arts action/violence and brief sexuality

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
In the mid-19th century, thousands of peasants are being used and abused by the
tyrannical leader of Zhejing, a province in Eastern China. One man (no, not a
monkey) decides to take matters into his own hands by masking his identity and
kicking a lot of bad guy ass. He also steals from the rich and gives to the
poor. But another master fighter has now been hired to bring him to justice (and
to find him, for that matter- who is this Iron Monkey?) Lots of chop-chopping
later...we're breathless. 
CRITIQUE:
What more can I say other than...a whole lotta ass-kickin' fun! And coming from
the dude who choreographed THE MATRIX and the CROUCHING TIGER fight sequences,
what else did we expect, right? Yuen Wo Ping directed this movie back in 1993,
and now Miramax Films and Quentin Tarantino are bringing it back to the big
screen for all the "new" kung-fu movie fans to behold. Is it worth seeing?
Ooooooh, yeah! Especially if you were one of those people who was entranced by
the action scenes in CROUCHING TIGER last year, because this film has a lot of
that and well...a whole lot more of that! It's basically all about the fight
scenes and they do not disappoint. Stunt work like you wouldn't believe, people
flying through the air, kicking each other while falling off rooftops, punching
tables into others, crushing furniture into dust, using every and any means
possible to defeat the enemy. Very creative stuff and very fun to watch, that
is...if you like that kind of thing. The story here isn't the poetic, epic or
romantic one that CROUCHING was, so anyone looking for that kind of vibe, will
likely be disappointed. This movie is basically all about kicking a lot of
kung-fu butt and if you're into that, and don't mind watching it over and over
again, then this movie is just for you. The story is "okay" for the most part,
the IRON MONKEY character is basically like a Chinese version of ZORRO or ROBIN
HOOD, fighting for the poor and all that jazz, and it shouldn't be too difficult
to keep up with the basic plotline ("who is Iron Monkey? We must stop him!").
Although, I suppose that the subtitles might piss some people off, but I didn't
have much of a problem with it.
There are also a lot of different kinds of fights in this movie, a couple of
which include a woman at their center and another one with a kid crunching
bones. I personally could have done without each of the fighters chiming in with
the name of their specific combat stance as they were fighting, but maybe that's
just me. The film also has a few funny moments, like the cooking scene and
another one in which two of the film's lead characters dress up like politicians
and ham it up. But in the beginning, in the end and in the middle of all the
rest of this film, lies a whole lotta punchin', kickin', swingin', proddin',
shovin', jammin' and iron monkeyin', and that's what will keep your eyes open
for the film's quick 90 minute runtime. And just when you think that you've had
enough of the movie's elaborate fight sequences, they finish off with one of the
most amazing action scenes that I have seen in some time. Three men stand atop
poles, with fires flaming on all around them, and proceed to punch, kick and
jump at and over one another for minutes on end. This sequence will leave you
speechless and had me rubbing my eyes over and over again, to make sure that I
wasn't dreaming. Truly spectacular. But this film is not for everyone. It's very
cartoonish, a little cheesy, is packed with action (although there are very few
real deaths (if any?)) and doesn't really give you a lot of meat in which to
grind your mind. But then again, why bother with an intricate plotline when you
can see a man fighting another man with his sleeve?!? Yeah man...it's in
film...see for yourself!
PS: The character of the young kid in this movie is named Wong Fei-Hong, a
real-life, turn-of-the-century martial artist and patriot. He is the same
character as an adult in the ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA flicks (in that sense,
this film is like a prequel to that series) and Jackie Chan's DRUNKEN MASTER
movies. And even though very little was known about the real Wong Fei-Hong's
childhood, many legends were told, which is what drew writer Tsui Hark to write
this tale of the IRON MONKEY.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Black Mask (5/10) - Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (7/10) - Kiss of the Dragon
(7/10) - The Matrix (8/10) - The Musketeer (4/10) - Romeo Must Die (3/10) -
Shanghai Noon (6/10)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON was the most successful foreign-
language film ever released in the United States.  It combined a 
story of some sophistication with some historical spectacle and 
more than a little martial arts action including some incredibly 
graceful wirework.  While the market for martial arts films is 
still hot other distributors want to cash in.  Action films like 
THE MUSKETEER are throwing in wirework in places where it does not 
belong.  One previously released film featuring martial arts on 
and off a wire has gotten a new lease on life.  The film is IRON 
MONKEY.  It is a nice polished production from Tsui Hark, who 
produced the CHINESE GHOST STORY films and WICKED CITY.  
Superficially it looks like it is in the same class as CROUCHING 
TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON.  It has the acrobatics and the elegant 
photography.  But it lacks the plot subtlety.  In fact, the 
plotting bears no small resemblance to an episode from the 
adventures of that American hero from old California, El Zorro. 
In IRON MONKEY, a corrupt governor rules a village and oppresses 
the innocent peasants forcing high taxes on them.  The governor 
needs to tax the peasants mercilessly to support his expensive and 
selfish life style including gourmet food for himself and his nine 
beautiful wives.  The one thorn in the governor's side, beside his 
comically inept captain of the guards, is a masked bandit who, in 
classic tradition, steals from the rich and gives to the poor.  
Wherever there is injustice, Iron Monkey seems to know it and is 
there to flip into action and clobber evildoers with ultra-perfect 
kung fu style.  Nobody knows that Iron Monkey is in reality the 
timid-seeming village doctor and the Monkey's sidekick is the 
doctor's beautiful assistant.  Iron Monkey is put into danger when 
another medical man comes to the village with a son.  In addition 
to the healing arts, they are also secretly expert in the martial 
arts.  They can cure or clobber.  They seem to be good, but their 
loyalties give the impression of being with the evil governor. 
The screenplay, a product of four credited writers, has more than 
a few plot holes and contrivances.  A character only has to claim 
to be oppressed, truthfully or not, and immediately the Iron 
Monkey comes to her aid.  In one case a woman only utters the 
words and the Monkey is there.  To give the film a one-up on other 
martial arts films even the Shao-Lin monks whose heroic virtue is 
lauded in so many martial arts films have been turned to the dark 
side by this evil governor. 
Visually the film has a few problems.  The virtuosity of the 
martial artists is clearly excellent, but too often they rely 
rather obviously on wires to create an impressive appearance.  
Another frequent but too obvious effect is to run the film 
backwards.  Both of these effects are extremely detectable.  
Wooden poles and pillars when struck like with a karate kick seem 
to break in perfectly smooth saw cuts.  One more visual problem in 
a different vein: Orchid, the Iron Monkey's assistant, can dress 
as a man and even wear a fake mustache, but it still is hard to 
believe the evil governor is fooled. 
Director Woo-ping Yuen loses no opportunity to show off Chinese 
dishes.  The governor is fond of shark fin soup.  The guards like 
Dim Sum.  (Is this an anachronism?)  And Orchid likes to make 
piquant meat dishes.  They seem to have people as adept in the 
kitchen arts as others are in the martial arts. 
If distributors are looking for a way to capture the fire of 
CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON, they will probably have to make 
new film.  IRON MONKEY just is not in the same class.  It is, 
however, just about right for a Saturday matinee.  I rate it a 6 
on the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  FYI: A 
credit at the end says "Remembering Kevin Bartnof."  Who is that?  
Kevin Bartnof died June 30, 2001, at the age of 43.  He had been a 
foley artist (meaning he provided basic sound effects like 
footsteps, doors closing, etc.) on major films like THE ABYSS, 
SCHINDLER'S LIST, THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, and THE PERFECT STORM. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
IRON MONKEY (Siunin Wong Fei-hung tsi titmalau)
   As I watched these martial artists fly and get thrown across
whole rooms, I wondered whether I should have continued my
kung fu training past my current green-belt status.  After all, a couple of
years more, who knows?  I could have been a contender.  I could
have followed my new hero, Yu Rong Guang in the role of Dr.
Yang (the eponymous character), and launched a quest for
justice, taking from the rich and giving to the poor.  It's really not
that difficult to do all of this once you have the training and
discipline and to prove this, watch Tsang Sez Man in the role of
10-year-old Wong Fei Hong as he follows in the footsteps of his
father, Wong Kei-Ying (played by Donnie Yen), beating up
renegade monks--who are 19th Century China's equivalent of
today's rogue cops (think Alonzo Harris of the LAPD).  And get this:
not only are big guys by the score knocked through the
woodwork by this kid but the kid in real life is a girl!  Ah, but I was
too busy practicing piano to do what could have made me a hero.
   "Siunin Wong Fei-hung tsi titmalau" as "Iron Monkey" is called
in Cantonese, is available in DVD. but not this tightened version.
This time Miramax is releasing the 1993 movie newly restored
with better English subtitles and what director Yuen Wo Ping
("Drunken Master" and choreographer of the high-flying fight
sequences in "Crouching Tiger Hidden Dragon") considers
improved music.  This Hong Kong actioner doesn't have much of
a story: given its brief 90-minute run, Yuen is determined to show
his audience just about every cool move in the martial arts film
repertory, the most deadly being the Buddha's Palm which, when
imprinted on your enemy's back causes his death by poison
within a half hour.
   While the story is not told particularly from the POV of 10-year-
old Wong Fei Hung, we are to imagine that this forms his
background and will lead him (again: played by a her) to become
a real-life legend.  The tale takes place during the Qing Dynasty
in 1853 in the Eastern Chinese province of Zhejing.  A governor
(James Wong), corrupt of course, has been hoarding food while
others go hungry (think Saddam Hussein today, who makes
money exporting food while blaming national Iraqi starvation on a
U.S. embargo).  The Iron Monkey, seeking revenge for the
assassination of his father, appears out of nowhere, usually at
night, a mask covering the lower portion of his face, as he strikes
out against this corrupt government, taking their gold and dim
sum and distributing goodies to a worshipping populace of the
poor.  Occasionally he teams up with his sweetheart, the
unassuming Miss Orchid (Jean Wang), to do battle.  Little does
anyone know that in reality the Monkey is a doctor who
dispenses herbs without charge to the poor while charging
American-sized sums to those who can afford his medicine.
   Monkey meets his match when a traveler from the south, Wong
Kei-Ying (Donnie Yen), fights the simian-like champion to a draw
and leaves his 10-year-old boy to clean up the guys who are still
in the ring after a minute or two. When the governor captures the
kid, promising to release him only if Wong captures the Monkey,
Wong looks to pick a fight and save his little boy by collaring Dr.
Yang.
   Director Yuen takes a middle ground between the relatively
realistic fights that Jackie Chan regularly engages in and the
over-the-treetops fantasy ("Crouching Tiger") known as the wu
hsia school of Hong Kong actioner.  The concluding battle is a
doozy, featuring the Iron Monkey and Wong (who is now an ally)
fighting the rough-tough royal minister (Yen Yee Kwan) while
balancing on poles.  Now when we say "balancing on poles" we
don't mean the simple stuff done in the circus.  We're talking
maintaining our equilibrium on the top of the poles which are
standing up on edge, perhaps 25 feet high.  That's not all.  A fire
is blazing below.  (In the Hong Kong dramas of the 50s, the fires
were real but today's stunt people prefer the more modern
method of having a member of the crew turn the fake flames on
or off as if cooking with a gas stove.)  
   There's even some fancy cooking going on in this delightful
picture, including the tossing of assorted ingredients in a wok that
would make even a master pizza baker look with awe.  "The Iron
Monkey" is a high-flying, engaging, and in many parts downright
comical piece of choreographed  motion that could have given
our own Jerome Robbins some pointers for his Broadway
musicals.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 90 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
