Title
Review for Apollo 13 (1995)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This is a brilliant piece of filmmaking. The directorial style 
shown by Ron Howard comes a long way from the hooker/corpse 
comedy NIGHT SHIFT and deftly mixes new footage with old 
newsreel shots and computer-animated effects. And the performances 
from Tom Hanks, Kevin Bacon (in his best acting job since the 
original FIRDAY THE 13TH -- that's a joke, by the way), Gary Sinise, 
Ed Harris and the rest are great.
        So why's it only a three-star movie here? Well, it's in the 
same boat as QUIZ SHOW for me--a movie dramatization based on a 
true-life event from the distant past (distant meaning before I was 
born). It's good drama, but it has no personal meaning for me. I'm only 
17 years old. Now if it was based on an earth-shattering event from my 
lifetime, say the Gulf War or the tragic transition of "Saturday Night 
Live" from funny to godawful, I might be able to drum up some 
emotion. But for now, I see APOLLO 13 as a compelling yet flawed movie.
        For starters, the first thirty or more minutes of the film are 
way too boring and unnecessary. Do we really need to see the homelife 
of the astronauts and their three months of training and preparation 
for the Apollo 13 mission? No, just tell us they're astronauts and get 
to the actual flight. It's this early, expendable stuff I don't like. It's 
supposed to make us get to know and care for the characters, but what 
it does is make us get sick of them toward the end, when the movie's 
running long, and hope they'll get sucked into the vacuum of space so 
the movie will be over.
        If you're somehow ignorant of the movie's plot, Hanks, Bacon 
and some other guy are astronauts on a routine moon mission fraught 
with tragedy. (I think that was the first time in my life I ever used the 
word "fraught.") It's based on the actual week in 1969 when the nation 
held its breath for our Apollo 13 astronauts, stuck in space after a 
freak explosion screwed up their controls. The odds are infinitessimal 
that they'll make it back to earth alive, so each step of the journey is 
milked for all the suspense it can get. Then, when they finally do make 
it past that individual obstacle, a new obstacle arises to take it's place, 
obstacle after obstacle until the end of the movie.
        Forgive the skimpy plot summary, but everyone's already seen 
this movie. I, in fact, was the second-to-last person in America to see 
it. So if the other guy's out there, e-mail me and I'll send you a longer 
summary. Plus I'm writing this at two in the morning, which also 
explains the lapses in coherency from time to time. But don't allow my 
three paragraphs of criticism to keep you from seeing a good movie. 
I'm in a unique position as a movie reviewer who's too young to fully 
appreciate the historical context of some movies. Now, if they'd make 
that docudrama tracing the decline of "Saturday Night Live" I was 
talking about...

Author
Lewis Butler
     I can't help thinking of THE RIGHT STUFF when I start talking
about APOLLO 13, obviously the movies cover the same basic topic;
America's space program.  While THE RIGHT STUFF focused on the romance
and action and adventure and heroism, APOLLO 13 takes a different
tack.  THE RIGHT STUFF was an epic movie about a period of recent
history, APOLLO 13 is a smaller film in that sense, dealing only with
the events surrounding the near-fatal accident that was APOLLO 13.
     I haven't read LOST MOON, the book the film is based on, and I'm
just young enough that I don't remember the coverage first hand; so
this was all pretty much news to me.  The story, however, is gripping.
Fantastic.  Awe-inspiring.  All those adjectives that are overused so
often finally have something worthy of their use.
     Ron Howard directs a finely crafted film, carefully staging at
each step of the way so that the audience is instantly involved in the
action.  The inclusion of news footage from the time (Walter Cronkite
in horrid neon-esque colors!) serves to make the film almost a
documentary.
     The performers are all first rate, and I do mean all.  From Hanks
himself to the Will Wheaton look-a-like playing his son (sorry, I
missed the name, would not be at all surprised if he was WW's younger
brother, the resemblance to Wesley Crusher from "Next Generation"'s first
season is uncanny).  Gary Sinise and Kevin Bacon stand out in my mind
especially, and Ed Harris, of course, is in his element.
     What most surprised me is that even though I knew exactly how the
crisis turned out, there was a constant edge of suspense.  A remarkable
achievement, I think. I could hear the audience breath a collective
sigh of relief, right along with the crew at Mission Control.
     This movie has to be the early favorite for Best Picture, Best
Director, and certainly Best visual effects.  No, they're not as
spectacular as RETURN OF THE JEDI, but ILM had to recreate a *real*
environment, a rather more difficult task.  As far as a three-peat from
Mr. Hanks?  Well, if he doesn't get it it won't be from any failing in
this performance.  I wonder what Mr. Lovell thought?

Author
Chad Polenz
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1995, PG, 140 minutes [2 hours, 20 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Tom Hanks (Jim Lovell), Bill Paxton (Fred Haise), Kevin Bacon (Jack
Swigert), Gary Sinise (Ken Mattingly), written by William Broyles Jr., Al
Reinert, produced by Brian Grazer, directed by Ron Howard.
"Apollo 13" seems more like an experiment in suspense rather than a movie,
because it is so well crafted in every way that we care about everything that
happens.This film is based on a true story, and although Hollywood has the
tendency to exaggerate, this one stays realistic and believable the entire
time. 
Tom Hanks stars as Captain Jim Lovell, one of the earliest astronauts, who
is slated to command Apollo 14 in 1970, but is bumped up to 13 and to a more
important mission. We meet Lovell's family and really get a sense this is a
real man, not another movie character. 
The story revolves around the flight of Apollo 13 to the moon. It has only
been a little over six months since man first walked on the moon, and this
was considered a "routine" space flight, but as Lovell points out, "There's
nothing routine about going to the moon." We see the crew training in
simulators, sometimes failing and this really makes you wonder if they'll be
able to handle it in the real situation. 
Lovell, along with his crewmates Fred Haise (Paxton), and Ken Mattingly
(Sinise) make up the core team, while Jack Swigert (Bacon) leads a backup
team. Two days before launch it is discovered that Mattingly is coming down
with a case of the measles and will not be able to go into space so Swigert
is assigned to take his place. The team must practice continually to prepare
in such a small amount of time. We see them say goodbye to their families and
this gives a good sense of humanism and realism.
Everything seems to be running smoothly... at first. Down in Houston they
tell the Apollo to do some routine procedures. All of a sudden, an explosion
occurs in one of the oxygen tanks and the ship goes haywire. As if the film
wasn't already a great drama it becomes a fantastic suspense story as we see
the Houston ground controllers panic in a frenzy, trying to figure out what
is going on and how to help them out. It is amazing to watch this, especially
today as we have much more advanced technology than they did. In fact, this
computer I'm typing this critique on might be smarter or more powerful than
all the computers used on the Apollo!
The movie really picks up the pace and runs with it at this point, every
second is nail-biting, edge-of-your-seat storytelling. As one problem is
solved, two more pop up. At times it seems like all hope is lost, but somehow
they miraculously survive. Hanks delivers a pretty good performance, but I
was even more amazed by Paxton and Bacon, who prove they can handle high
pressure roles like these.
Not too many movies could make me cry, but this film's ending could. The
suspense is based in the unknown and no one knows if the crew will ultimately
survive. We see short clips of Walter Cronkite reporting the events, showing
the entire planet praying for them. Cronkite's voice alone can make anything
seem emotional and sensational. 
"Apollo 13" is filled to capacity with emotion and sensation, you can't help
but be caught up in the suspense and drama. The story of the Apollo 13 needed
to be told, and this film did it justice. (12/31/95) (12/9/96) (5/23/97)
[also by Howard: "The Paper," Ransom"]
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Brian Koller
"Apollo 13" is an intelligent and completely credible movie
about the troubled flight to the moon back in 1970.  There
is surprising tension, despite knowing from history books
(or for those old enough, actual memories) that the astronauts
all returned home safely.
The astronaut crew is Jim Lovell (Tom Hanks), crew leader
and all-around nice guy; Jack Swigert (Kevin Bacon), last 
minute substitute and skirt chaser who must prove himself 
to the crew; and Fred Haise (Bill Paxton), who promptly gets 
sick on the flight with a fever of 104 degrees.
The crew must deal with the disappointment of not landing
on the moon, with problems such as sleep deprivation and
carbon monoxide poisoning, and the knowledge that another
mistake could cost them their lives.
Kathleen Quinlan plays Hanks' wife.  Her role is to look
beautiful and to worry about her husband.  She suffers
throughout the film.  Jean Speegle Howard plays Hanks' 
grandmother.  She is a stereotype of an elderly person, 
is given the name Blanch, and her confusion is used to provide 
comic relief.
Ed Harris, who played John Glenn in "The Right Stuff" (1984),
shows up as head of mission control.  He gives a fine
performance, and has the honor of starring in both major
Hollywood films on the American space program.
There are many heroes in "Apollo 13."  The astronauts are
heroes, of course, but so is the staff of mission control.
They are seen sleeping on the floor by their desks and
passionately discussing the best methods of getting the
astronauts home.  As different obstacles present themselves,
mission control has to meet the challenge of overcoming
them.
"Apollo 13" runs over two hours, is slow-paced, and sometimes
technical.  These features do not detract from the film as
the story needs the length and technospeak to be properly
conveyed.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tom Hanks, Kevin Bacon, Bill Paxton, Gary Sinese, Ed Harris, 
      Kathleen Quinlan 
Director: Ron Howard 
Producer: Brian Grazer 
Screenplay: William Boyles Jr. and Al Reinert based on the book 
            "Lost Moon" by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger 
Cinematography: Dean Cundey 
Music: James Horner 
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures 
     For those too young to recall the tragic events of November 22, 
1963, one of the most stark and enduring images of a lifetime came on a 
frigid afternoon in February 1986 when the Space Shuttle Challenger blew 
up while skyrocketing heavenward.  By that time, shuttle flights had 
become routine, and few gave much thought to the possibility of 
something going wrong.  After the accident, NASA was forced to re-
evaluate its plans while everyone who had watched considered their own 
mortality.  Not since April of 1970 and Apollo 13 had the United States' 
space program encountered this kind of disaster -- except in that case, 
no lives were lost. 
     The Apollo program was first announced in 1961.  The climax came on 
July 20, 1969, when Neil Armstrong stepped out of Apollo 11's lunar 
module and issued his famous quote.  Nine months later, with astronauts 
Jim Lovell (Tom Hanks), Fred Haise (Bill Paxton), and Jack Swigert 
(Kevin Bacon) aboard, Apollo 13 left the launch pad.  Since moonshots 
were now regarded as commonplace, none of the three networks chose to 
air Lovell's first broadcast to Earth, preferring instead the likes of I 
DREAM OF JEANNIE (which, ironically, featured a strong fictional image 
of NASA).  However, when an explosion left the crew with a dwindling 
oxygen supply and failing power, television took notice, as did the 
entire world.  This is the story told by Ron Howard (PARENTHOOD, FAR AND 
AWAY) in APOLLO 13, his best movie to date. 
     Perhaps the most impressive feat of this film is sustaining white-
knuckle tension even though the chain of events is well-known.  The 
conclusion of the mission is a matter of recent historical record, yet 
recalling how it ends does nothing to lessen the excitement or dampen 
the emotional impact of several key moments.  Such deft film making is a 
prime reason why APOLLO 13 is an unqualified success. 
     It's not the only reason, however.  During the 140-minute running 
time, we are essentially given three stories:  the astronauts' struggle 
to stay alive, the controlled chaos at NASA as experts are forced to 
come up with unexpected solutions, and the trauma faced by the families 
of the men whose lives are in danger.  With inserts of news footage from 
the time (much of which features Walter Cronkite), APOLLO 13 attains a 
level of verisimilitude few current features can match.   
     Scientifically, APOLLO 13 is accurate, even though at times things 
seem more like science fiction.  Additionally, with a script that relies 
on Lovell's account, this movie takes fewer liberties with the facts 
than many other productions based on true events.  APOLLO 13 has 
tremendous appeal because the story is only 25 years removed from the 
nightly news, and many of the details still linger. 
     The effective, understated special effects never upstage any of the 
fine performances.  All three actors playing the astronauts -- Hanks, 
Paxton, and Bacon -- have gotten under their characters' skins.  Ed 
Harris exudes a palpable intensity in a supporting performance as 
Mission Controller Gene Kranz, the coordinator of the teamwork that goes 
into saving the space craft.  Gary Sinese, reunited here with FORREST 
GUMP co-star Tom Hanks, plays Ken Mattingly, the member of Lovell's team 
who, after being refused medical clearance to fly, plays a crucial role 
in the rescue. 
     Howard has a firm grasp on what he's attempting.  The little 
details are all right.  Among its many successes, APOLLO 13 offers the 
simple wonder of taking the audience to a strange place.  Many movies 
these days are content to tell a story mechanically, without actually 
transporting the viewer somewhere else.  Not so here.  We are with 
Lovell, Haise, and Swigert through every harrowing mile of their 
journey, and when Lovell dreams of setting foot on the moon, we 
understand his loss. 
     The villain here is the vastness of space -- an antagonist that 
refuses direct confrontation.  There isn't a traditional bad guy to be 
found, but APOLLO 13 needs no such useless embellishment.  The basic 
human drama of the situation raises the heartbeat far more than all the 
explosions of DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE or the contrived submarine 
warfare of CRIMSON TIDE.  Reality has a taste the likes of which fiction 
can rarely match.  Those who recall that week in April 1970 will enjoy 
seeing the full story unfold; those who are too young to remember will 
get a feeling not only of what the individuals endured, but how the 
country as a whole reacted.  While the events of this motion picture may 
depict NASA's finest hour, the release of APOLLO 13 represents Ron 
Howard's. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Deb Taylor
     I read LOST MOON just recently and found it to be fascinating, but
I wondered about the book's translation into film, whether or not the
truly hair-raising events of Apollo 13 would become entangled in the
engaging but smaller events in life of Jim Lovell, astronaut.
     Last night, at a sneak preview showing of APOLLO 13, I was pleased
to see that Director Ron Howard decided to concentrate on "America's
most successful failure" with outstanding results.  Not only was I
completely riveted by this excellent dramatization of real-life events,
but I was caught up in the concept that three men in a tiny capsule,
thousands of miles from Earth, can still make the whole world look up
to something much larger than themselves.  (Of course, sitting for over
an hour and a half in the cramped, hard seats of the University
auditorium gave APOLLO 13 more than a little sense of virtual reality
for me personally).
     The casting was near perfect.  Tom Hanks played Jim Lovell as a
smart, humorous, and truly brave individual who knows what leadership
means--no matter what the circumstances.  The supporting cast was a
treat, including Kathleen Quinlin as Mrs. Lovell.  ILM, which I
understand did most if not all of the space flight footage, should
probably get an Oscar.  The sound-track was powerful without being
obtrusive.
     This is a definite *must see* movie for 1995.  Go, even if you
witnessed the original harrowing Apollo 13 mission (like I did)
starring Walter Cronkite.   This movie is really about a phenomenal
rescue, a subject all us love.

Author
Eric Grossman
     APOLLO 13 is a movie that tries very hard.  It strives with great
fervor to remind us of the grandeur of the space program and of the
patriotism that accompanied it.  It tries desperately to make us sweat
and bite our nails as we wait to see what happens to its heroic
characters.  But for all of its good intentions, APOLLO 13 is much like
the mission it depicts, it is a successful failure.  Director Ron
Howard (PARENTHOOD, BACKDRAFT) and his ensemble cast lead by Tom Hanks
but which also includes Kevin Bacon, Bill Paxton, Gary Sinise and Ed
Harris, have made a number of both good and bad choices and the result
is a film that reaches for greatness but must settle for just being
good.
     Based on the book LOST MOON by Apollo 13 mission commander Jim
Lovell and co-writer Jeffrey Kluger, APOLLO 13 tells the story of
NASA's near tragic mission to the moon.  A malfunction that occurred
enroute left Lovell and his fellow crew members Fred Haise (Bill Paxton)
and Jack Swigert (Kevin Bacon) with very little chance of survival.
The astronauts and the mission control staff headed by Gene Kranz (Ed
Harris) had to overcome one horrific event after another in the face of
overwhelming odds.
     The story of APOLLO 13 is so miraculous that perhaps no movie can
do it justice, although Howard and his crew look like they gave it
their best shot.  They even went through the trouble of building sets
and shooting scenes in NASA's KC-135, an aircraft that flies in a
parabolic trajectory to create weightlessness for up to 25 seconds.
The lunar and command module sets as well as the mission control room
created by Michael Corenblith look like the real things and Dean
Cundey's cinematography combined with Howard's direction gives the
audience a real sense of being trapped inside with the astronauts.
     Hanks plays his part with a lot of enthusiasm and we like his
character because of his persona; we want to see him live.  However,
Hanks, like his co-stars Paxton and Bacon, never seems convincing as an
astronaut.  People in the military, especially pilots have a particular
bearing that none of these capable actors seemed to have hit upon.
Only Gary Sinise, who plays Ken Mattingly, the mission pilot who was
supposed to go with Lovell and Haise but was replaced at the last
minute because of a possible case of the measles, is able to find that
particular presence.
     Ed Harris does a fine job portraying Gene Kranz but seeing him
begs a comparison to the THE RIGHT STUFF, (Ed Harris played John Glenn
perfectly) a film that is everything APOLLO 13 wants to be and a whole
lot more.  Kathleen Quinlan overacts in her role as Marilyn Lovell.
Her character is a person you heart has to go out to but it doesn't
help when screenwriters William Broyles, Jr. and Al Reinert give her
lines such as when she says in a quivering voice, "you can discuss that
with my husband when he comes back on Friday."
     Other problems with the film include Digital Domain's computer
generated shots of the spaceship zooming through space like it was
something out of STAR WARS and James Horner's music, where he once
again cannibalizes parts of his old scores almost verbatim and tries to
pass it off as something new.
     While it may not have been all that it could of, APOLLO 13
still manages to gives us some of the wonder of one of mankind's
greatest achievements.  Howard and Hanks felt strongly about the story
they were telling and that passion is what saves APOLLO 13 from near
disaster.

Author
Choo Eng Aun
     APOLLO 13 is simply one of the most dramatic film this summer
(apart from swashbuckling BRAVEHEART). Director (and former actor) Ron
Howard (SPLASH, BACKDRAFT, FAR & AWAY), most noted for his dramatic
film making, displays again his brilliance in creating drama and
suspense in APOLLO 13. Being the second largest box office hit in the
US this summer (with more than US$150 million in the states alone),
this film is his most successful effort yet.
     Perhaps one of the most appealing feature of this film is the
pool of talented actors such as Tom Hanks (GUMP himself), Kevin Bacon
(FOOTLOOSE, TREMORS, A FEW GOOD MEN etc.), Gary Sinise (FORREST GUMP),
Bill Paxton (ALIENS, TRUE LIES, BOXING HELENA) and Ed Harris (THE
ABYSS, JUST CAUSE)..  all of whom gave good performances in their
respective roles.
     Apollo 13 was the second worst accident ever to occur in the
history of US spaceflight (the worst being the Challenger accident).
Jim Lovell (HANKS), the mission commander, together with his crew, Fred
Haise (PAXTON) and last minute replacement Tom Swigert (BACON) are put
to the ultimate test when part of their command module explodes on the
third day of the mission, more than three quarters way to the moon.
Suspense and drama ensue as the three men are left in space with their
spaceship out of control and the problem of surviving the journey
home ... if they ever reach it.
     Ed Harris and Gary Sinise who play, respectively, the man in
charge of the entire mission control and the astronaut who was supposed
to fly but was diagnosed with measles, both delve into their roles
superbly. Audiences are shown the chaotic and worrisome state of the
entire ground control crew, as they frantically attempt to come up with
ideas on how to save the astronauts from hurtling into space.  Also,
there are quite a number of real news footages which were broadcast
during the accident which took the entire US nation into 5 days of
drama in 1970.
     The special effects by Digital Domain are up to standard and the
music suits the suspense and drama very well, thanks to film-music
maestro James Horner.  Watch out for the launching sequence, it is
simply one of the most breathtaking scenes of the film. A bad point
though: APOLLO 13 features much technical jargon and many physics
concepts in its script.  Those who consider themselves `scientifically
illiterate' might have a slight problem understanding what caused this
and what caused that during the course of the show. This is however,
just a minor point, just forget all those technical bullshit and
immerse yourselves into the drama and suspense throughout the film. You
should enjoy it.

Author
Joan Ellis
     Things don't get much better than APOLLO 13.  In the sure hands of
director Ron Howard, several dozen actors hit pure notes in capturing
the essence of the American spirit without being sentimental, mawkish,
or melodramatic.  That's a triumph, considering what might have been
done with the subject of a military program in pursuit of public
relations.
     When John F. Kennedy assumed the burden of playing catch-up with
the Russians by announcing in 1960 that America would put a man on the
moon within a decade, NASA delivered with Neil Armstrong and his crew
in 1969.  By the following year, when Apollo 13 lifts off for follow-up
work on the moon, the feel of anticlimax envelops the mission.  In
crass dismissal of the effort, the networks refuse to cover it.  What
could match last year's feat?
     What more than matches it is a three-pronged probe into the
American psyche.  Jim Lovell (Tom Hanks), Fred Haise (Bill Paxton), and
Jack Swigert (Kevin Bacon) rocket into space on the ill-fated mission
that will suddenly rivet national attention when an oxygen tank
explodes and puts them in jeopardy.  They are trapped in a freezing
tank that is filling slowly with lethal carbon dioxide.
     On the ground, Mission Control struggles to save them. In superb
confirmation of American resourcefulness, Ken Mattingly (Gary Sinise)
and the ground team devise a way to put a square peg in a round hole
with canisters and duct tape that are already aboard the ship.  They
hand the crew a million-to-one solution. Even after Mattingly solves
the oxygen problem, the heat shield and parachutes loom as probable
catastrophes.
     All this unfolds in the early days of the celebrity culture, when
the media begins to hound the victims of catastrophe, sharks to blood,
the worse the better.  It also reveals the paradoxical American
reverence for a single life.  As much as Americans can kill each other
on the highways at the rate of 50,000 a year and shoot each other by
the hundreds in schools, when one life, or three in this case, jumps
into public jeopardy, the collective national psyche heaves up as
savior.
     And they did it by talking simply and directly. These astronauts
would surely have died if their fate had lain in the self-righteous,
self-absorbed verbosity of the 90s. If the images are of puffy space
suits and weightless games, the stuff of it is courage and
resourcefulness.
     The extraordinary rescue is delivered without a false note by
Kevin Bacon, Gary Sinise, Ed Harris, and a fine supporting cast.  Tom
Hanks simply has a direct line into the souls of the characters he
plays. Kathleen Quinlan conveys beautifully the twin mandates of a 60s
woman: support and perform.
     In these talented hands, this tale becomes a real white-knuckler
that manages also to capture the best of our national essence without
waving the flag.  It's moving, and it's good.


Author
Rory Ewins
     Every movie-goer knows that every now and then a particular actor
appears to be everywhere, dominating cinema screens for a year or two
and then passing out of the spotlight.  More interesting is when their
noteworthy roles do more than entertain, but capture something of the
mood of the times.  A few years ago the actor of the moment was Michael
Douglas, encapsulating a particular brand of middle-American male angst
in such films as FATAL ATTRACTION and FALLING DOWN.  More recently
we've seen Tom Hanks win Oscars for successive roles in PHILADELPHIA
and FORREST GUMP, two films intended as entertainment-as-statement, and
both very much films of their day.
     Well, lay your bets for next year's Oscars now, because Hanks's
ability to pick winners continues to hold true in APOLLO 13.  It may
seem odd to single out a seemingly straight-forward true-story
techno-thriller as indicative of the spirit of 1995, but bear with me:
APOLLO 13 is about a lot more than NASA circa 1970.
     It's a bit of a cheat to single out Hanks for attention: while he
gives a perfectly fine performance, this is very much an ensemble
piece, just as the whole American space programme has been.  NASA's
stars have been arbitrary ones--as recognised here in an early scene
when a fellow astronaut, talking to himself while watching a television
broadcast of Neil Armstrong walking on the moon, tries out a list of
great pioneers with Armstrong's name following that of Columbus: the
incongruity is clear.
     Director Ron Howard marshalls his team of actors and film-crew
perfectly.  The result is Howard's best film, a totally-convincing
depiction of America's big-budget spectacular of the late 1960s, the
Apollo programme.  While many film-makers have explored the other
big-budget spectacular of that age--the Vietnam War--few have fixed
their gaze upon the lunar missions, those grand, inspirational,
hubristic and faintly insane episodes which provided some of the
defining moments of the late twentieth century.
     The reason may be that in 1995 it seems odd to consider the moon
landings as definitive of our age.  It is something of a shock to watch
APOLLO 13 and realise that the shining white futuristic sets represent
a bygone age.  It's enough to prompt even the most hopeless optimist to
ask whether we have progressed or in fact gone backwards; only the
quaint monochrome computer readouts remind us that the whole enterprise
was underpinned by technology amazingly basic by todays standards.
     APOLLO 13 underscores the fragility of the whole exercise by
telling the story of the moon-shot which went wrong.  As the Challenger
disaster reminded a later generation, NASA has by no means been immune
to failure--even the Apollo 11 mission came perilously close to
crash-landing on the moon.  But Apollo 13 provides the story-tellers
with a successful failure and a happy-ending: after an on-board
explosion, Jim Lovell and his crew lost the moon but not their lives,
managing through a combination of sterling mission-control support and
their own skill and luck to return safely to Earth.
     For a story whose outcome is well-known, APOLLO 13 manages to
build to an incredible level of tension and apprehension, easily
matching the fictional flights of fancy which regularly reach our
cinema screens.  More than once while watching it, I wondered why I was
so enthralled.  It's a good, well-acted, well-made film, pushing all
the right buttons: nothing that we haven't come to expect (or at least
hope for) from big-budget American movies.  What was that extra
something which made it so gripping?
     APOLLO 13's extra something is, as I hinted at the outset, a story
which can be read as an allegory for our age.  The film is a tale of
near-catastrophic technological failure threatening life itself, and of
miraculous escape with one amp of power to spare.  It's not too much of
a stretch to regard that as a metaphor for the fears and hopes of
humanity in an age of ecological disaster.
     Just think about it.  The Saturn V rockets represented human
ingenuity at its technological, gas-guzzling, brute-force best.
Trusting their lives to that technology, the Apollo astronauts
represent us, as we roar into the future towards our goal.  Their goal,
of course, was the moon, but even that goal was symbolic of greater
things: human beings were taking the first steps towards the
colonisation of space (which is why, of course, these missions had to
be manned in order to underline their significance).  Nothing, it
seemed, could stop us; and so we seem to believe today, as we march on
blithely up the exponential curve of economic growth, discarding stage
after stage of our Saturn V rocket (i.e., our world's resources) in the
faith that we'll splash down safely at some point in the future.
     Today, however, even the most blinkered optimist has reason to
harbour subconscious doubts about the wisdom of our present path, and
APOLLO 13 writes those doubts large.  Something goes wrong.
Significantly, it's the oxygen supply--a metaphor for the Earth's
atmosphere--which has been sabotaged by human error.  The astronauts
are suddenly faced with a desperate race against time and diminishing
resources to get safely home.  The higher goal--the moon (or the
techno-nirvana goal of a world of 200-odd fully-developed
countries)--is abandoned, and the use of resources (the ship's power
supply) is shut down to a bare minimum, just as we fear we might have
to do back here on Earth in the late 1990s and beyond.  The results are
depressing: without power, the astronauts' world gets extremely cold,
and there's still no guarantee of a safe return in exchange.
     Read in this manner, the film is full of environmental messages
and metaphors.  It was the space missions, of course, which showed the
world the first pictures of the Earth as a beautiful blue globe hanging
in space, images repeated here as the astronauts wonder if they'll ever
get home.  In one poignant scene, a cassette-player hanging in
zero-gravity slowly runs down as its batteries die.  The carbon dioxide
levels in the ship's atmosphere increase to dangerous levels.  On
re-entering the Earth's atmosphere, the biggest fear is that the
heat-shields will fail and that life will become fatally hot for the
astronauts--global warming, anyone?
     I won't labour the point.  It's worth noting, however, that the
underlying message of APOLLO 13, given this environmental reading,
might be a dangerously optimistic one.  I don't mean because the film
shows that the know-how of the NASA staff at Houston safely pulls the
mission through: if we can't hope that human ingenuity will similarly
save us from disaster back here on earth, then we have no hope at all.
No, I mean that the final message of the Apollo 13 story is that there
is a definite time-limit to a crisis (in this case, a few days), and at
the end of it, if all goes miraculously well, you can sit back and
relax in safety and comfort--and even carry on as before.  And this,
surely, is what a lot of people hope will happen with the global
environment.  With a bit of temporary sacrifice, we'll fix everything
up, and then we can get back to business as usual--just like during
and after a war.
     Unfortunately, it doesn't necessarily work like that.  Dealing
with environmental problems will be the ongoing challenge facing us all
for centuries to come (if we should be so lucky to last that long), and
there's no safe splash-down at the end.  Life in the future might be a
lot more like huddling together in the cold lunar-module than emerging
into the brilliant sunshine with smiles on our faces.

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    A cinematic tour-de-force, +ACI-Apollo 13+ACI- was not only one of 
1996's best films, but Ron Howard's critical and commercial 
breakthrough, as he found himself with universal acclaim for this 
extraordinary adaptation of Jim Lovell's true account on what happened 
on this doomed space flight.  Breathtaking in nearly every aspect, 
Apollo 13 succeeded in creating suspense and drama from a 
story that was already well-known, with breathtaking shots of space 
through excellent special effects work. 
Jim Lovell (Hanks) is a veteran space commander who is being 
rewarded for all his efforts for the NASA space program by being given 
command of Apollo 13, the 2nd flight after Neil Armstrong's historic 
moon landing in 1969.  By then, public interest had gone down in the 
space program, and many viewed the space mission as routine, until an 
explosion in the command module left the crew, Jack Swigert (Bacon) and 
Fred Haise (Paxton), in the middle of space with extreme obstacles in 
their way.  Leading the efforts to bring the men back is Ken Mattingly 
(Sinise), who was the original pilot for the ship until he was scrubbed 
for medical reasons, and mission commander Gene Kranz (Harris).  Along 
the way, the crew encounters many problems that endanger their lives, 
and procedures never attempted before, as they try to defeat the odds, 
and make it home.
   Apollo 13 also tells the story of the people back home.  
While telling the story in the skies, the film manages to show the 
emotional turbulences that happen within the ship, and within the Lovell 
household.  Marilyn Lovell (Quinlan), Jim Lovell's wife, tries to keep 
her sanity while managing a household full of children, whose father is 
far from home, and in perilous danger.  The film also tells the story of 
the men in NASA, who are working frantically to solve the crew's 
problems, while managing with their own eccentricities. 
The casting for the film is pure genius.  Paxton and Bacon give 
emotional power to their roles few would have thought possible, and 
Sinise builds on his stunning performance in Forrest Gump to 
create an emotionally torn, yet tough Ken Mattingly, whose feelings of 
resentment and concern are brilliantly balanced to play an integral part 
in bringing the crew home.  The centerpiece of the cast is the finest 
actor in Hollywood, Tom Hanks.  Through his pains, suffering, toughness, 
determination, cool, calm, and steadiness, we the audience feel ease.  
It is comforting to know that Hanks is piloting this ship+ADs- he has a 
calm quality that drives the film's emotional heart.  This is Hanks' 
film, and he pilots it with cool precision, as he gives the audience 
what he masterfully delivers everytime: a quiet everyman who gets the 
job done.  He draws the sympathy of the masses, and then drives this 
film home in the clutch.
This movie is an unqualified success.  Everything about it is 
pitch-perfect, from the acting down to the extraordinary special 
effects.  The script blends real news-clips with dramatic footage, 
placing the viewer in the year 1970 with brilliant success, even using 
comedy, romance, and dramatic cliches to perfection.  The score, made by 
James Horner, is also brilliant, heightening the suspense and drama in 
critical situations, and highlighting the emotional trauma of all those 
involved in the mission.
The special effects are simply astonishing.  From the liftoff to 
touchdown, every effect, every space shot has the same realism as the 
newsclips blended seamlessly into the film.  James Cameron's Digital 
Domain outdid itself with this splendid recreation of space travel that 
is simply a marvel to look at.  The scenes in space are visually 
astounding, especially the lunar sunrise.  Every shot made me want to 
travel in space, and look at these magnificent views of the world.  This 
film wasn't made of this Earth, the effects are so real it had to have 
been shot in space.
Howard's direction is brilliant.  From the ingenious cinematography 
and effects, to the comic undertones of the script, to the quick cuts 
that energize the film's decisive moments, everything about this film 
works.  Howard balances the many settings, the many characters, the 
technical jargon, the realism, the news-clips, and the vivid special 
effects with ease.  The performances just are simply outstanding, with 
Hanks delivering another knock-out.  There is nothing to dislike, 
nothing to even consider a flaw.  This is one of the finest pictures of 
the decade, and is destined to be one of America's most treasured 
accounts of a historical time-period that was traumatic and 
inspirational at the same time.  Designed to be a classic, Apollo 
13 is one of the finest dramas of our age, and firmly supplants 
Howard and Hanks as leaders in their respective fields.  One only wishes 
summer movies are always this good.  This is one hell of a movie.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     According to a recent survey, most Americans old enough to
remember have forgotten about the ill-fated Apollo 13 mission to the
moon.  Let me confess from the beginning that I remembered only vaguely
that something happened.  Apollo 13 was the mission that hit disaster
in space.
     APOLLO 13 is director Ron Howard's tale of that jinxed journey.
Howard is an extremely talented director who specializes in comedies
such as PARENTHOOD and SPLASH and in realistic tales that are told
almost in real-time like THE PAPER and BACKDRAFT.  In APOLLO 13 he
attempts realism approaching documentary style.
     The movie is based on the book "Lost Moon" by Jim Lovell who led
the Apollo 13 mission.  In the movie he is played by the ever popular
and brilliant Tom Hanks.  The rest of the crew consists of Fred Haise
(Bill Paxton) and Jack Swigert (Kevin Bacon).  The key member of the
backup crew is Ken Mattingly (Gary Sinise).  The tale of the wives is a
secondary plot and focuses on Marilyn Lovell (Kathleen Quinlan).  The
crew at the NASA control center is lead by Gene Kranz (Ed Harris), but
is filled with a great second, third, and fourth string cast.  Every
actor was carefully chosen.  Nevertheless, the science and engineering
of what they did was the real star of the movie in my book.
     The story is set in 1970.  Apollo 13 was the second time human
beings attempted to walk on the moon so, of course, Americans were
bored stiff and did not care.  In today's vernacular, they had been
there and done that.  I refuse to relate any more since it is the story
itself that makes the movie.  The story is incredible.
     Other than the story and the perfect casting, the only other part
worth mentioning is the period makeup and costumes.  For someone who
was in grad school at Berkeley at the time, it was great fun seeing
again the heavy eye shadow, frosted lips, and strange hair styles on
the women and the too tight white shirts with ties, black horned rim
glasses, and big sideburns on the men.  You also see lots of dirty
smoking - think of it as a long antismoking ad given how vile they made
smoking look.
     Although I thoroughly enjoyed the movie, almost cried a couple of
times, and was fascinated by the innovative engineering solutions they
came up with, I found much wrong with the picture, and I expected to
like it more than I did.  First, I had a major problem with Ron
Howard's directing.  From start to finish the energy level in the
picture was way below an acceptable threshold.  Every action seemed
drawn out and too low key.
     The editing by Daniel P. Hanley and Michael J. Hill was another
area needing improvement.  It was exactly 45 minutes into the show
before anything of interest happened.  I know because I was watching my
watch wondering when the movie was going to get started.  Viewing this
first part was about as much fun as watching a Cricket match.  Nothing
happened, and it took forever.  The editor could have easily set up the
picture with 15 minutes tops.  Even after it started clicking, there
were many scenes where the astronauts would slowly push button lots of
buttons, and we were forced to slowly watch them.
     Finally, given the subject matter, one might expect some
incredible cinematography.  Cinematographer Dean Cundey's images were
okay, but nothing special.  The music by James Horner was totally
forgettable - another opportunity lost.
     APOLLO 13 runs 2:11 which is too long given the pacing.  It is
rated PG for some mild cussing and for frightening situations.  I think
it would be fine for any kid old enough to understand what is happening
which I thinks means 9 or older.  I recommend the show for its history,
science, and engineering and for the fascinating story, and I award it
***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Thomas Wheeler
     I've seen a good number of movies this summer--more than usual,
actually, and there's several more I'm looking forward to.  Thus far,
I've been to CASPER, BATMAN FOREVER, CRIMSON TIDE, DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE, POCAHONTAS, and am looking forward to attending JUDGE DREDD,
UNDER SIEGE 2, and MORTAL KOMBAT.
     As much as I've enjoyed each of these movies as they've come
along, none of them have compared for pure emotional intensity as
APOLLO 13.  I am not given to emotional reactions in movie theaters.
This one had me in tears several times.
     Even though we all knew the outcome, that the astronauts would get
home safely, the sheer drama of the film more than compensated for what
would usually be a terrible hindrance for a movie--knowing how it turns
out.
     Every aspect of this drama--the astronauts trying to survive, the
Mission Control people having to scrap everything they knew to find
ways to *keep* them alive and get them back, the families trying to
cope--and the disappointment in being *so close* to the moon--and not
making it, were brought full force to the screen.
     The cinematography was spectacular.  You weren't looking at
"special effects" here.  In fact, some of the filming actually took
place in zero-gravity! Ron Howard, Tom Hanks, and crew got permission
from NASA to use a training plane known as the "vomit comet", which
flies in ascending and descending parabolas to simulate zero-gravity.
     Words cannot easily describe the drama and intensity of this
movie.  Go see it.  You'll see what I mean.
     On a personal note, I was alive in 1970, when all this happened
for real (that this incredible adventure did actually take place truly
enhances the movie).  I was 10 at the time, but my father was in the
news business, so I heard a lot about it.  This movie took me back *and*
brought me up to date.
     The closing words of Tom Hanks/Jim Lovell in the film should be a
rallying cry. "Sometimes I still look up at the moon, and wonder when
we'll return." It can't be too soon.  Would I go? Knowing the dangers,
the risks, if given the opportunity, would this 35-year-old graphic
artist take a trip on a multi-story bullet to the moon? Just hand me an
astronaut suit and point me to the launch pad.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There were two important events in James Lovell's life in 1965.
He flew the Gemini 7 with Frank Borman, rendezvousing with Gemini 6.
That event got worldwide attention.  There was, however, a more
important event that even Lovell did not know about.  That was the year
that the design team on the Apollo program decided to increase the
voltage on the fuel cell oxygen tank heaters from 28 to 65 volts.  Only
a handful of people knew about that decision and James Lovell was not
one of them.  It was not a bad decision in itself, but it required
replacing the thermostatic switches in the tanks with ones that could
handle the extra load.  But that replacement was one detail that got
forgotten amongst the millions and millions of details necessary in
building a lunar rocket.  Under the right conditions the wiring could
run hot and the Teflon insulation fail, then the wiring could short,
the switches could fuse open, the oxygen could ignite, and the tank
could explode.  It was an unlikely chain of events, however, and it did
not happen to the first Apollo missions.  Five missions went into space
with what was essentially a bomb in their service module and each
returned safely.  Ron Howard brings to the screen the story of the
sixth Apollo mission into space, Apollo 13.
     When I go to see a historical film I like to get more than two
hours worth of entertainment.  I try to read all I can about the events
of the film and try to picture them myself.  I enjoy knowing that in
BRAVEHEART what they called the Battle of Stirling was really the
Battle of Stirling Bridge and Wallace won the battle because the
English army was half on each side of the bridge when he attacked.
Then if I write about the film I like to tell about what it got wrong.
However, I will not be pointing out much in the way of historical flaws
in APOLLO 13 because I have little to say.  In 1970 it was Swigert
saying "Houston, we had a problem," and I think in the film it was
Lovell saying it in the present tense.  Big deal.  At one point an
astronaut develops a fever.  It is a detail that could have been missed
in the accounts I read.  There may be two or three other minor
distortions.  Only GETTYSBURG has been as accurate an historical
dramatization in recent years.  Watching the film after reading
accounts of the flight I had fewer reactions of "Hey, they did that
wrong," and than of "Oh, that's what the book meant."  (The book,
incidentally, is A HISTORY OF MANNED SPACEFLIGHT by David Baker, a book
that is fairly detailed and authoritative.  NASA also has an account of
the mission on the World-Wide Web and which is included below.)  The
film does a remarkable job of making the technical concepts
comprehensible.  But where it comes to a choice between understandable
or accurate, the film chooses accuracy.  It was the right choice.  The
film takes the risk of not underestimating the intelligence of its
audience, and as of this writing seems to be playing to sell-out
crowds.  It may not have more thrills than a Sylvester Stallone film,
but they are authentic.
     The spirit of the film as well as the subject matter makes it a
logical successor to THE RIGHT STUFF.  The tone could well have been a
pessimistic account about the dangers of space exploration.  Instead,
Howard chooses to give us a much-needed reminder that the problems of
space are soluble, and they would continue to be so even under
incredibly short time constraints.  Like DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE,
this is a film about people solving problem quickly under extreme
pressure.  But the reason is not nearly so contrived and is far more
believable.  This is the story of the incredible no-excuses-no-failure
engineering feat of taking a wrecked spacecraft that had fifteen
minutes of life left in it and turning it into a lifeboat capable of
bringing three men 200,000 miles to a safe landing on Earth.
     The film begins with the Apollo 1 fire in 1967, a preparation for
a sub-theme of the fear with which the families of all the Apollo
astronauts live all the time but particularly during missions.  Jim
Lovell (Tom Hanks) tries to reassure his family, but still makes clear
to his wife (Kathleen Quinlan) that he is going to walk on the moon.
The film shows something of the training and the tricks of fate that
determine the crew who will go on the ill-fated voyage.  Much of this
part may be interpolated and the matter of guesswork.  But once the
flight begins--with what is probably the most breathtaking rocket
launch in any film fact or fiction--from there the NASA accounts of the
flight are pretty much the scenario of the film.
     Future films depicting the weightlessness of free-fall will have
APOLLO 13 as a standard to live up to.  There are no rotated camera
effects or floating objects on wires.  The weightless shots were filmed
in genuine weightlessness within the atmosphere.  The scenes were shot
in short segments aboard Air Force KC-135s flying parabolic courses to
create in actuality a zero-G set.  Some roles call for actors to make
special sacrifices, but having to actually act in freefall must have
been particularly difficult as well as unique.  It also must have made
it impossible to film any one long shot.
     Having to go through this particularly difficult form of acting is
Tom Hanks who is no doubt learned that a real lunar mission can have
more surprises than a box of chocolates.  His James Lovell, Jr., is
played with a sort of quiet professional dignity that is a first for
him.  Kevin Bacon plays the hot shot pilot John Swigert, Jr.  Playing
the third Junior of three on board, Fred Haise, Jr., is Bill Paxton.
None of these are particularly flashy roles.  After letting Tom Cruise
over-act just a little in FAR AND AWAY, Howard has much more subdued
performances in this film.  Kathleen Quinlan is losing some of the
fragility of her earlier roles, but what she still has is useful here.
And of course there is a role for Howard's favorite character actor,
his brother Clint, here playing a nerdy technician.  There is even a
semi-comic role for Ron Howard's mother as Lovell's slightly confused
mother.  Howard was reluctant to cast Ed Harris as nervous, go-getting
flight director Gene Krantz, since Harris is known best as John Glenn
in THE RIGHT STUFF.  However, the character is written thinly and the
audience needs the previous characterization to flesh out the
character.
     James Horner provides a score lending a quiet dignity to the
scientific pursuit supplemented by just a little too much rock music
that really does not do all that much to capture the feel of the
period.  More is done by the clothing and set design, especially the
occasional slide rule, which at least for a technical type (nerd) like
me did much more to create an early 1970s feel.  Also slightly overdone
was the emphasis on urine and vomit.  Special effects are first-rate
and flawless.
     This film is a paean to the power of perseverance to solve even
the most impossible problems.  This one is well worth braving the
crowds to see.  I give it a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     What follows is NASA's own account of the flight of Apollo 13.
Consider it one big spoiler:
Mission Objective:
   Apollo 13 was supposed to land in the Fra Mauro area.  An explosion on
   board forced Apollo 13 to circle the moon without landing.  The Fra Mauro
   site was reassigned to Apollo 14.
     At five and a half minutes after liftoff, Swigert, Haise, and
Lovell felt a little vibration.  Then the center engine of the S-II
stage shut down two minutes early.  This caused the remaining four
engines to burn 34 seconds longer than planned, and the S-IVB third
stage had to burn nine seconds longer to put Apollo 13 in orbit.
     Days before the mission, backup LM pilot Charlie Duke
inadvertently exposed the crew to German measles.  Command module
pilot, Ken Mattingly, turned out to have no immunity to measles and was
replaced by backup command module pilot Jack Swigert.
     Ground tests before launch, indicated the possibility of a poorly
insulated supercritical helium tank in the LM's descent stage so the
flight plan was modified to enter the LM three hours early in order to
obtain an onboard readout of helium tank pressure.
     The No. 2 oxygen tank, serial number 10024X-TA0009 had been
previously installed in the service module of Apollo 10, but was
removed for modification (and was damaged in the process of removal).
The tank was fixed, tested at the factory, installed in the Apollo 13
service module and tested again during the Countdown Demonstration Test
(CDT) at the Kennedy Space Center beginning March 16, 1970.  The tanks
normally are emptied to about half full, and No. 1 behaved all right.
But No. 2 dropped to only 92 percent of capacity.  Gaseous oxygen at 80
psi was applied through the vent line to expel the liquid oxygen, but
to no avail.  An interim discrepancy report was written, and on March
27, two weeks before launch, detanking operations were resumed.  No. 1
again emptied normally, but No. 2 did not.  After a conference with
contractor and NASA personnel, the test director decided to "boil off"
the remaining oxygen in No. 2 by using the electrical heater within the
tank.  The technique worked, but it took eight hours of 65-volt DC
power from the ground-support equipment to dissipate the oxygen.  Due
to an oversight in replacing an understated component during a design
modification, this turned out to severely damage the internal heating
elements of the tank.
     Third lunar landing attempt.  Mission was aborted after rupture of
service module oxygen tank.  Classed as "successful failure" because of
experience in rescuing crew.  Spent upper stage successfully impacted
on the Moon.
     The first two days the crew ran into a couple of minor surprises,
but generally Apollo 13 was looking like the smoothest flight of the
program.  At 46 hours 43 minutes Joe Kerwin, the CapCom on duty, said,
"The spacecraft is in real good shape as far as we are concerned.
We're bored to tears down here." It was the last time anyone would
mention boredom for a long time.
     At 55 hours 46 minutes, as the crew finished a 49-minute TV
broadcast showing how comfortably they lived and worked in
weightlessness, Lovell stated: "This is the crew of Apollo 13 wishing
everybody there a nice evening, and we're just about ready to close out
our inspection of Aquarius (the LM) and get back for a pleasant evening
in Odyssey (the CM).  Good night."
     Nine minutes later, Oxygen tank No. 2 blew up, causing No. 1 tank
also to fail.  The Apollo 13 command modules normal supply of
electricity, light, and water was lost, and they were about 200,000
miles from Earth.
     The message came in the form of a sharp bang and vibration.  Jack
Swigert saw a warning light that accompanied the bang, and said,
"Houston, we've had a problem here." Lovell came on and told the ground
that it was a main B bus undervolt.  The time was 2108 hours on April
13.
     Next, the warning lights indicated the loss of two of Apollo 13's
three fuel cells, which were the spacecrafts prime source of
electricity.  With warning lights blinking on, One Oxygen tank appeared
to be completely empty, and there were indications that the oxygen in
the second tank was rapidly being depleted.
     Thirteen minutes after the explosion, Lovell happened to look out
of the left-hand window, and saw the final evidence pointing toward
potential catastrophe. "We are venting something out into the- into
space," he reported to Houston.  Jack Lousma, the CapCom replied,
"Roger, we copy you venting." Lovell said, "It's a gas of some sort."
It was a gas- oxygen- escaping at a high rate from the second, and
last, oxygen tank.
     (by James A. Lovell, from Apollo Expeditions to the Moon, edited
by Edgar M. Cortright, NASA SP; 350, Washington, DC, 1975 )
     The first thing the crew did, even before discovering the oxygen
leak, was to try to close the hatch between the CM and the LM.  They
reacted spontaneously, like submarine crews, closing the hatches to
limit the amount of flooding.  First Jack and then Lovell tried to lock
the reluctant hatch, but the stubborn lid wouldn't stay shut'
Exasperated, and realizing that there wasn't a cabin leak, they
strapped the hatch to the CM couch.
     The pressure in the No. 1 oxygen tank continued to drift downward;
passing 300 psi, now heading toward 200 psi.  Months later, after the
accident investigation was complete, it was determined that, when No.2
tank blew up, it either ruptured a line on the No. 1 tank, or caused
one of the valves to leak.  When the pressure reached 200 psi, the crew
and ground controllers knew that they would lose all oxygen, which
meant that the last fuel cell would also die.
     At 1 hour and 29 seconds after the bang, Jack Lousma, then CapCom,
said after instructions from Flight Director Glynn Lunney: "It is
slowly going to zero, and we are starting to think about the LM
lifeboat." Swigert replied, "That's what we have been thinking about
too."
     Ground controllers in Houston faced a formidable task.  Completely
new procedures had to be written and tested in the simulator before
being passed up to the crew.  The navigation problem had to be solved;
essentially how, when, and in what attitude to burn the LM descent
engine to provide a quick return home.
     With only 15 minutes of power left in the CM, CapCom told the crew
to make their way into the LM.  Fred and Jim Lovell quickly floated
through the tunnel, leaving Jack to perform the last chores in the
Command Module.  The first concern was to determine if there were
enough consumables to get home? The LM was built for only a 45-hour
lifetime, and it needed to be stretch to 90.  Oxygen wasn't a problem.
The full LM descent tank alone would suffice, and in addition, there
were two ascent-engine oxygen tanks, and two backpacks whose oxygen
supply would never be used on the lunar surface.  Two emergency bottles
on top of those packs had six or seven pounds each in them. (At LM
jettison, just before reentry, 28.5 pounds of oxygen remained, more
than half of what was available after the explosion).
     Power was also a concern.  There were 2181 ampere hours in the LM
batteries, Ground controllers carefully worked out a procedure where
the CM batteries were charged with LM power.  All non-critical systems
were turned off and energy consumption was reduced to a fifth of normal
which resulted in having 20 percent of our LM electrical power left
when Aquarius was jettisoned.  There was one electrical close call
during the mission.  One of the CM batteries vented with such force
that it momentarily dropped off the line.  Had the battery failed,
there would be insufficient power to return the ship to Earth.
     Water was the main consumable concern.  It was estimated that the
crew would run out of water about five hours before Earth reentry,
which was calculated at around 151 hours.  However, data from Apollo 11
(which had not sent its LM ascent stage crashing into the Moon as in
subsequent missions) showed that its mechanisms could survive seven or
eight hours in space without water cooling.  The crew conserved water.
They cut down to six ounces each per day, a fifth of normal intake, and
used fruit juices; they ate hot dogs and other wet-pack foods when they
ate at all.  The crew became dehydrated throughout the flight and set a
record that stood up throughout Apollo: Lovell lost fourteen pounds,
and the crew lost a total of 31.5 pounds, nearly 50 percent more than
any other crew.  Those stringent measures resulted in our finishing
with 28.2 pounds of water, about 9 percent of the total.
     Removal of Carbon Dioxide was also a concern.  There were enough
lithium hydroxide canisters, which remove carbon dioxide from the
spacecraft, but the square canisters from the Command Module were not
compatible with the round openings in the Lunar Module environmental
system.  There were four cartridge from the LM, and four from the
backpacks, counting backups.  However, the LM was designed to support
two men for two days and was being asked to care for three men nearly
four days.  After a day and a half in the LM a warning light showed
that the carbon dioxide had built up to a dangerous level.  Mission
Control devised a way to attach the CM canisters to the LM system by
using plastic bags, cardboard, and tape- all materials carried on
board.
     One of the big questions was, "How to get back safely to Earth?"
The LM navigation system wasn't designed to help us in this situation.
Before the explosion, at 30 hours and 40 minutes, Apollo 13 had made
the normal midcourse correction, which would take it out of a free-
return-to-Earth trajectory and put it on a lunar landing course.  Now
the task was to get back on a free-return course.  The ground computed
a 35-second burn and fired it 5 hours after the explosion.  As they
approached the Moon, another burn was computed; this time a long 5-
minute burn to speed up the return home.  It took place 2 hours after
rounding the far side of the Moon,
     The Command Module navigational platform alignment was transferred
to the LM but verifying alignment was difficult.  Ordinarily the
alignment procedure uses an onboard sextant device, called the
Alignment Optical Telescope, to find a suitable navigation star.  Then
with the help of the onboard computer verify the guidance platform's
alignment.  However, due to the explosion, a swarm of debris from the
ruptured service module made it impossible to sight real stars.  An
alternate procedure was developed to use the sun as an alignment star.
Lovell rotated the spacecraft to the attitude Houston had requested and
when he looked through the AOT, the Sun was just where it was expected.
The alignment with the Sun proved to be less than a half a degree off.
The ground and crew then knew they could do the 5-minute P.C. + 2 burn
with assurance, and that would cut the total time of our voyage to
about 142 hours.  At 73:46 hours the air-to-ground transcript describes
the event:
     "I'm told the cheer of the year went up in Mission Control.
Flight Director Gerald Griffin, a man not easily shaken, recalls: "Some
years later I went back to the log and looked up that mission.  My
writing was almost illegible I was so damned nervous.  And I remember
the exhilaration running through me: My God, that's kinds the last
hurdle -- if we can do that, I know we can make it.  It was funny,
because only the people involved knew how important it was to have that
platform properly aligned." Yet Gerry Griffin barely mentioned the
alignment in his change-of- shift briefing -- "That check turned out
real well" is all he said an hour after his penmanship failed him
Neither did we, as crew members, refer to it as a crisis in our press
conference nor in later articles."
     James A. Lovell ( Apollo Expeditions to the Moon, edited by Edgar
M. Cortright, NASA SP; 350, Washington, DC, 1975 )
     The trip was marked by discomfort beyond the lack of food and
water.  Sleep was almost impossible because of the cold.  When the
electrical systems were turned off, the spacecraft lost and important
source of heat.  The temperature dropped to 38 F and condensation
formed on all the walls.
     A most remarkable achievement of Mission Control was quickly
developing procedures for powering up the CM after its long cold sleep.
They wrote the documents for this innovation in three days, instead of
the usual three months.  The Command Module was cold and clammy at the
start of power up.  The walls, ceiling, floor, wire harnesses, and
panels were all covered with droplets of water.  It was suspected
conditions were the same behind the panels.  The chances of short
circuits caused apprehension, but thanks to the safeguards built into
the command module after the disastrous Apollo-1 fire in January 1967,
no arcing took place.  The droplets furnished one sensation as we
decelerated in the atmosphere: it rained inside the CM.
     Four hours before landing, the crew shed the service module;
Mission Control had insisted on retaining it until then because
everyone feared what the cold of space might do to the unsheltered CM
heat shield.  Photos of the Service Module showed one whole panel
missing, and wreckage hanging out, it was a sorry mess as it drifted
away.  Three hours later the crew left the Lunar Module Aquarius and
then splashed down gently in the Pacific Ocean near Samoa,
     After an intensive investigation, the Apollo 13 Accident Review
Board identified the cause of the explosion.  In 1965 the CM had
undergone many improvements, which included raising the permissible
voltage to the heaters in the oxygen tanks from 28 to 65 volts DC.
Unfortunately, the thermostatic switches on these heaters weren't
modified to suit the change.  During one final test on the launch pad,
the heaters were on for a long period of time. "This subjected the
wiring in the vicinity of the heaters to very high temperatures (1000
F), which have been subsequently shown to severely degrade Teflon
insulation ... the thermostatic switches started to open while
powered by 65 volts DC and were probably welded shut." Furthermore,
other warning signs during testing went unheeded and the tank, damaged
from 8 hours overheating, was a potential bomb the next time it was
filled with oxygen.  That bomb exploded on April 13, 1970 -- 200,000
miles from Earth.

Author
Christopher Null
     I scarcely know where to start writing about APOLLO 13, the
long-awaited story of the catastrophic 13th mission of the Apollo space
program.  I went in expecting a whole lot from Howard and his
star-studded cast (Tom Hanks, Gary Sinise, Ed Harris, Kevin Bacon, and
Bill Paxton), and they delivered in full, the star being Hanks as
usual, who brings his usual strength and subtle forcefulness to the
role of Jim Lovell, the 4-time space shot veteran who never managed to
set foot on the moon.
     The story of APOLLO 13 is simple and well-known to many
Americans:  on April 11, 1970, at 13:13 military time, the
Apollo-Saturn 13 spacecraft was launched, carrying a crew of three men,
bound for America's third landing on the moon.  A third moon landing
was by then rather blase to the American public--so dull and common as
to not even warrant broadcast on television.  On the way to their
destination, however, on April 13, an oxygen tank exploded, making a
moon landing impossible and the return flight home one of the most
grueling experiences imaginable.
     The meat of APOLLO 13 concerns this return trip:  cutting off all
the systems to save power and almost freezing to death in an unheated
space module, struggling to improvise a carbon dioxide filter to keep
from asphyxiating, almost guessing at course corrections thanks to an
unusable computer, the newfound media interest that comes along with
any tragedy, and the pain that comes with come getting so close to
something you just can't have.
     Hanks is a latter-day master of expressing this emotion.  As they
fly by, unable to land, we see Hanks gaze longingly out over the lunar
surface he so desperately wants to walk upon.  The pain is clearly
visible:  so near yet so far.  The rest of the cast is also superbly
matched to their roles (with the notable exception of Kathleen Quinlan
as Lovell's wife, who sleepwalks through the film).  Harris is terrific
as seething flight director Gene Krantz, determined to keep the men
alive when everyone else has given up, and Paxton turns in a
surprisingly emotional role as Fred Haise, who becomes ill on the
mission but pulls through anyway.
     Overall, APOLLO 13 is one of the best films of the year, right
after SHALLOW GRAVE.  Howard's seamless use of special effects (none of
the film is stock footage) blends perfectly with the 1970 kitsch of
tie-dyes, metallic gold cars, and Dick Cavett.  What he finally
delivers is something he's been shooting for during his entire career
as a director:  a painstakingly detailed, in-depth look at the mission
and the people in it, never trivializing their struggle, while
generally avoiding sensationalism as well.  All the while, Howard
manages to entertain.
     APOLLO 13 gets my blanket recommendation.  You know, I was never
overly superstitious about the number 13 in the past.  If nothing else,
this movie has certainly changed that.

Author
Ed Powell
     The story of APOLLO 13 isn't fiction ... it is a dramatic
recreation of the actual situation that happened during the Apollo 13
mission to the moon.  During the flight to the moon, one of the oxygen
tanks on the command module exploded, causing massive system failures.
It was on luck and ingenuity alone that the crew of the Apollo 13
mission made it back to Earth alive.
     I cannot comment on the story and plot of this film.  It was so
incredible, that it could not have come from anywhere but real life.
The writing also falls under this description, except that there were
some moments that seemed a bit false ... a little artificial.  The film,
though, was filled with drama, emotion, and moments of comedy.  An
excellent script.
     There cannot be enough praise for the actors.  Although I
cannot really name names at the moment (my local paper doesn't have an
ad for the film in it), all were quite convincing in their roles.
     Design of the film was consistent with the time period, that
being the late 60s/early 70s.  A couple of items, however, seemed to be
a bit too modern for the time period.  The computer text on the screen
at Mission Control looked like they came off of an off-the-shelf IBM
PS/2, and a few of the controls on the space vehicles looked like they
came from the modern-day Space Shuttle.  Then again, I am not an expert
on space vehicles ... all of this could have been 100% accurate.
     There were quite a few visual effects in the film, all of which
looked very realistic.  Tom Hank's character's daydream of walking on
the moon looked as if they actually went to the moon and filmed the
scene.  All the zero-gee effects were realistic ... because they were
actually in zero gravity!  They filmed those scenes inside of the
training airplane lovingly known as the "Vomit Comet," where the plane
goes up to about 35,000 feet and then dives, giving up to 30 seconds of
near zero gravity conditions inside the plane.  Very well thought out,
very well executed.
     Ron Howard did a splendid job of directing this film.  My only
complaint is that there were just a few too many fancy camera moves
...  I felt at times I was going to be sick with all the tilts, pans,
and zooms the camera was doing.
     The music for the film was absolutely PERFECT!  From opening
credits to the end of the film, the music evoked the right emotions and
the right times.  Even I, ol' Joey "Stoneheart" Lemur, was brought to
tears at times (all quickly blinked back, of course.)
     This film contained strong language at times, and was quite
emotional.  You might want to think twice before bringing children
under thirteen to see this film.  Teens and older will thoroughly enjoy
this film, though.
     I cannot recommend this film enough.  This will probably win Best
Picture at this year's Oscars.  It is a stunning film, filled with
nail-biting tension and peppered with lighter moments.  Go.  See it.
You'll be glad you did!  :-)
Produced by Brian Grazer, directed by Ron Howard.
A Universal Pictures release.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Director Ron Howard makes nice, fuzzy movies like BACKDRAFT and
THE PAPER.  They're "human" films, with an emphasis on gung-ho over
grit.  Cast in point: the absorbing APOLLO 13, which recounts the
real-life problems of a 1970 moon shot that left three astronauts
(played by Tom Hanks, Kevin Bacon, and Bill Paxton) stranded in space.
Though a bit too much in places, the story of how NASA got its boys
back home is some of the best dram you'll likely see this year.
     The core story, with its fine acting and great special effects, is
the draw here.  The characters could be a bit more human, or, at the
very least, Paxton could've cried "we're all gonna die, man!"  (THE
RIGHT STUFF is still a better portrait of these pioneers.)  There is
one good in-joke: Roger Corman has a cameo as a congressman.  If the
three guys in the capsule don't have much in the way of personality,
said deficiency never gets in the way of the action.  The efforts of
the NASA guys on the ground (spearheaded by a cool Ed Harris) gives
fresh meaning to the idea of "old-fashioned American ingenuity."
     The rest of APOLLO 13 is all overdone, of course, with Kathleen
Quinlan (as Hanks' astronaut's wife) spending all of her time looking
distressed, while James Horner's string-section tries very hard to
overpower the DTS Digital sound effects.  Sigh.

Author
Melissa Martin
     There is a scene in the beginning of APOLLO 13 where the
astronauts of the disastrous Apollo 1 mission are boarding the ship.
During this short orientation sequence, I was awed, then gripped by
suspense, and then moved to tears by tragedy.  Not only does the whole
movie play like this, it also adds appropriate amounts of humor,
wisdom, and humanity.
     The script is amazingly written.  Facing the obvious difficulties
of writing an entire story around technical jargon, the writers did a
stunning job of making all the NASA lingo seem somehow completely
intelligible.  I was never lost for a second: indeed, as I walked out
of the theatre, I was using most of the space-speak that they used in
the film.  Also difficult to pull off is a story that deals with one
problem after another: in other movies with this type of anticlimatic
flow, the audience often becomes bored.  But this movie keeps you
riveted with one suspense-filled climax after another.  After every
problem has been faced and solved, there is a lot of remaining tension
that stops one from getting back into the flow of the movie.  However,
this was cleverly avoided by adding moments of whimsy, and some very
humorous scenes that relieve the tension, so that you can be on the
edge of your seat again when the next problem comes up.  This movie
can, at times, be extremely funny and delightful: this is well
countered by the true thriller nature.
     The story, guided by the tremendous directing talent of Ron
Howard, becomes a touching story of humanity alone against the two
greatest unknowns: death and the universe.  The movie, while being an
intelligent and well thought out thriller, also becomes a sentimental
film about the limits of human ability ... and the ultimate human
triumph.
     Not one actor in the superb cast gives a mediocre performance.
Tom Hanks is on the Oscar road again with his performance as Cmdr. Jim
Lovell.  This is Hanks at his versatile best.  Appropriately showing
his patented lovability (which is still endearing, unlike Meg Ryan's
narcissistic cuteness), Hanks also takes on a new role for him: the
dashing all-American hero.  Moments of passion are beautifully
complimented by a quiet, wordless, expressionless sorrow, and it is
easy to see the feelings that lie beneath the stony, professional-NASA
exterior.  Under Hanks' guidance, Lovell becomes a person with
astounding subtlety and range of emotions.
     Gary Sinise, (whom I didn't personally rave over in FORREST GUMP)
outdoes himself with a spellbinding performance as grounded astronaut
Ken Mattingly.  His emotions are so incredibly tangible that I was
moved to tears (extremely rare for me ... this is the second movie I've
*ever* teared up at) at one particularly touching scene of his.  During
much of the film, I felt horribly sorry for Mattingly.  However, this
is remedied by his later, amusing, smugness, and the fact that were he
not grounded, the astronauts never would have been able to return
home.
     Kevin Bacon gives a good, solid performance as the hotshot pilot
Jack Swigert.  I've never held Bacon in much regard, so this was an
extremely pleasant surprise.  Even his character, who appeared to be the
bitter, odd-man-out replacement pilot, was a likable character.
     Ed Harris is wonderfully determined as the cantankerous mission
controller, Gene Kranz.  Kathleen Quinlan is touchingly real as
Lovell's devoted but unsure wife, Marilyn, and all the supporting
actors in mission control were real and wonderful.
     The weakest performance, I felt, came from Bill Paxton as the
ailing Fred Haise.  While he was absolutely perfect as the joker during
the first part of the film, as Haise became ill, so did Paxton's
acting.  However, I suspect that this was because he really didn't have
much of a character to work with.  But he still gives an easily
above-average performance, and it in no way hurts the film.
     The visual effects are absolutely stunning.  During most of the
film, I had an extremely difficult time believing that the sweeping,
vertigo-inducing shots of the spacecraft were not real.  The scenes of
the earth and moon are so beautiful and sentimental to induce tears, or
at least an amazed sigh.
     One thing that is interesting to note is that even though
everybody *knows* that the astronauts survived, it in no way lessens
the suspense.  You're still perfectly gripped in fear.
     To sum it up, this is a brilliant, mature thriller (not like
no-brainers like CONGO) as well as a serene, sentimental film.  This is
a film for anyone--for anyone who has ever lost their moon.
     If it doesn't get Academy Award nominations for Best Picture, Best
Actor, Best Direction, Best Visual Effects, and at least one Best
Supporting Actor, it will confirm my belief that there is something
terribly wrong with the world.  This is easily the best film to be
released this year.

Author
Mike Gaines
     It's not a documentary; it's not a drama.  This is the docudrama
from Ron Howard who brought us BACKDRAFT, PARENTHOOD, and FAR AND
AWAY.  I think that this is one of the best movies to come out this
summer and I hope that people go see this instead of JUDGE DREDD.  What
makes this movie stand out above the others is that it's a wonderful
story, *and* it actually happened!  Part of the reason why movies have
been getting worse is that the stories have become so unbelievable that
they've become parodies of themselves.  This movie laughs *at* the
others.
     Not one person in this movie was miscast.  Tom Hanks will not win
an Oscar for his role this year; the movie was not built as an Oscar
vehicle.  Kevin Bacon, Bill Paxton, Ed Harris and Kathleen Quinlan
portray their characters beautifully and realistically.  Ron Howard
does turn up the emotion level a tinge high at the end, but besides
that he does a remarkable job of making the movie seem as much of a
documentary as he can.  The computer graphics and the zero-gravity
footage from the Vomit Comet are beautiful.
     There are some Hollywood-isms that I had a hard time swallowing.
First was when Jim Lovell's car wouldn't start; second was when the
overhead projector at Mission Control died for no apparent reason;
third was when Jim's wife lost her wedding ring in the shower.  All
these little scenes showing bits of bad luck to the characters in the
film didn't seem to move the story along.  The only problem is that you
can't tell if these things actually happened or if they were written
into the script just for the sake of showing the bad luck that was
happening to all the characters that week in April, 1970.  I'm almost
embarrassed to admit that I don't know myself after studying astronomy
for so long, but I don't know the details of this Apollo mission in
detail.

Author
Ben Hoffman
[Due to an upload problem, I didn't receive several of Ben Hoffman's
reviews until today, which is why some may seem a bit late.
-Moderator]
     This is the most enthralling film so far in 1995. with Tom Hanks
again giving an Oscar-nominating performance as one of three astronauts
trapped in space when one of the oxygen tanks blows up.
     The film is based on the true story of the almost fatal accident
in 1969 when the U.S. attempted to land the first humans on the moon
since Armstrong.  Much of the information in the film is revealed for
the first time as NASA does not always tell us everything.  Still more,
even the film does not reveal the whole story.
     Ken Mattingly (Gary Sinise) who was to have been one of the
astronauts has been exposed to measles and is scrubbed from the
mission.  Jim Lovell (Tom Hanks), (is the author together with
Jeffrey Kluger who wrote the book LOST MOON on which the book is based)
is the chief astronaut.  The two other astronauts were Fred Haise (Bill
Paxton) and Jack Swigert (Kevin Bacon.)    The Mission Control
commander is Gene Kranz (Ed Harris).
     Suddenly, from outer space, the ground crew hears "Houston we have
a problem."  That is the last thing the hundreds of scientists and
mathematicians at their computers want to hear. On board Apollo 13, an
explosion has occurred. There was the great dangers of running out of
oxygen, freezing to death if the power ran out and/or dying because of
the carbon dioxide each of the three was expelling.
     This film is a thriller in every sense of the word.  You will be
sitting on the edge of your seat as Mattingly, (who would have been on
board if he had not been dropped because of measles exposure) most
familiar with every part of Apollo 13, was called in to see what he
could do to keep the oxygen use to a minimum, to see if he could come
up with an idea to reduce the power usage.  It looked like history was
about to be made; three dead astronauts in space forever.
     What NASA did not tell the American civilians and anyone else
watching the Apollo 13, was that it was minutes away from disaster.
Even worse, as THE NATION magazine recently exposed, the Apollo 13 was
carrying a nuclear device with 8.3 pounds of plutonium.  This was to be
left on the moon for further experiments in the future.  Less than a
millionth of a gram could give a person cancer.  This was in the ship
as it tried to get back to Earth.  If the launching rocket had blown up
before Apollo 13 reached orbit, or if the spaceship crashed on landing
there could have been a nuclear holocaust.
     Keep that in mind when you watch the film and think of the
consequences ... and realize that we, the civilians, were never told
about how close our planet came to its end.  The plutonium in Apollo
13's capsule will be hotly radioactive for 2,000 years.  It fell into
the Pacific Ocean about 2000 miles from Sydney, Australia.  where it
will remain radioactive for 2,000 years. NASA implies that it is safe
but they forget that the ocean cannot absorb our garbage forever.
