Title
Review for Superman IV: The Quest for Peace (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jon Glazer
     I just got back from seeing the new SUPERMAN IV: THE QUEST FOR PEACE.
What a joke!  The theatre was anything but peaceful; everyone kept laughing at
the unreal circumstances Mr. "man" kept getting into and out of.
     As you'll notice in the opening credits (in the end ones too, if you're
not in too much of a hurry to get out before anyone recognizes you), Reeve
himself co-wrote this epic.  Well, it takes guts to write a terrible script and
then to act it out.  He even had the classic superhero speeches such as his
"the subway is still a safe place for people."
     The movie did, however, have the usual moments of good humor, much like the
other movies.  Clark reveals his true powers briefly and by accident at some
good points.  And his role reversal (trying to be both Superman and Kent) I
thought was pretty humorous too.
     There were even parts of the plot I could say were pleasingly surprising
such as Superman's turning old and the coincidental retrieval (and even
existence) of Krypton's last power--the power module of Kent's spaceship (sure
was lucky he got it when he did, eh?).
     In general, Chistopher Reeve, I believe, is bucking to get out of the
Superman business.  I do not think there will be much of an audience for
another one.  The movie was either very child-oriented or the producers have a
hard time seeing us viewers as anything more than children.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     I really shouldn't be surprised; in fact, I should have avoided this on
principle; but I really enjoyed SUPERMAN and thought SUPERMAN II was adequate,
and seeing Gene Hackman's name on the roster (and David and Leslie Newman's
names off it) gave me some hope that we might have something up to SUPERMAN II,
something corny but with enough grit to keep my attention.
     Instead, we have BATTLE OF THE FLYING WRESTLERS.  Others in
rec.arts.movies have listed the stupidities in this film; while I don't expect
Superman movies (in fact, I don't expect *any* movies) to be a lesson in
Natural Laws and How They Work, this film shrugs off absurdities like a rhino
with a valium habit.  And, as stated elsewhere, the special effects (which have
never been a strong point with these films) has sunk to bargain basement levels
--I'm suprised we didn't see any spaceships with sparklers attached to the
rear.
     Most disappointing, though, is that Supes is played as something of an
assh*le.  The only feature that has any appeal in this thing is Margot Kidder
as Lois Lane; many of her scenes with Clark have some real charm.  However,
Superman spends his time either trying to avoid her (especially the ridiculous
"how can Clark and Superman be in the same room at the same time?" scene,
which is so old and stale that it seems to crawl out onto the screen and die),
or he uses the "amnesia-kiss" displayed at the end of SUPERMAN II (boy, what
those yellow sun rays will do to a Kryptonian male...) to erase her memory
after each revelation that Clark is Superman.  This must leave Lois with an
unconsicous resembling a Unix(tm) core dump, and it makes you wonder what kind
of a relationship Ol' Supes feels he can have with a woman he's in love with.
     Really, not a shred of interest, even to comics completists.  Go see
ROBOCOP instead (it's worth the viewing, but it could have been just as good
(or better) with only half the violence.  Ick, melting people...).

Author
rosenzw@svax.cs.cornell.edu
     This has got to be the worst movie I've blown five bucks on in a very long
time.  Parts of it were, however, so bad that they were funny (Look, up in the
sky, it's a bird, it's a plane - it's a statue! ).
     By the way, after irrelevant scene 1, superman saving Soviet spacecraft,
when he hit the baseball in irrelevant scene 2, did anyone else think it was
going to hit the spacecraft (Look out Ivan - here we go again!).
     All in all, S-man had a lousy week (used up his dad's green thing,
violated the prime directive--non-interference--and had nothing to show for it).
But seriously, why was the subplot about the Daily Planet takeover in the movie
(to make it 2 hours long?)?  Why was Mariel Hemingway in the movie (to be a
damsel in distress for 18 seconds?)?  Chris Reeve did a really lousy job
writing this.  Why don't they get comic-book writers to write comic book
movies?  
