Title
Review for Wizard of Oz, The (1939)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Long Che Chan
A
How to begin a review of one of the most famous films of all time?  The
Wizard of Oz has become so beloved it is embraced by a legendary,
mythical aura that few films have (Casablanca and Gone With the Wind
have such an aura with the public; Citizen Kane has the same aura with
critics.)  Every one of its 101 minutes in duration has become
synonymous to great Hollywood.  Several scenes are unforgettable: the
famous scene in which Dorothy croons "Over the Rainbow" in a sepia-toned
Kansas; the moment when at last the film's fivesome (don't forget,
there's Toto too!) reach the Emerald City, one of the most famous
locations in the world of movies; and the sight of the almost villainous
Wizard and his facade hidden behind erupting flames.  Who will ever
forget the moment when Dorothy opens the door of her uprooted house,
exits, and steps into a world of color, over the rainbow?  Not only is
that scene celebrated, it's magical.  The Wizard of Oz is about the
journey of our beloved heroine, Dorothy Gale (Judy Garland), and her
dear friends as they follow the Yellow Brick Road in hopes of fulfilling
their dreams.
In The Wizard of Oz, a screen adaptation of the equally enthralling L.
Frank Baum book, The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, Dorothy represents our
weariness, our boredom with routines and life in general.  She dreams of
some glorious place away from her farm house with her Uncle Henry,
Auntie Em, and hired helpers Hunk (Ray Bolger), Zeke (Bert Lahr), and
Hickory (Jack Haley).  She is sick of the town hag Miss Gulch (Margaret
Hamilton), who tries to take her dog, Toto, away from her.  Everything
is dull and she longs for liveliness, as any young person would.
During the memorable cyclone sequence, Dorothy's Kansas is hit by a
twister and, stranded alone in her house, she is hit by a window and
falls into a deep sleep.  In her dream, she is in a place called Oz
where she has miraculously killed the Wicked Witch of the East, is loved
by thousands of munchkins, is sought after by the murdered witch's
sister of the West, and is given two ruby slippers by Glinda, the Good
Witch of the North (Billie Burke).  Despite her beautiful surroundings
(Oz is one of movie history's most fascinating, beautiful, and sacred
places), Dorothy longs for Kansas.  Glinda tells her that the only way
she can get back is to visit the mysterious Wizard of Oz.  She must
follow the Yellow Brick Road.
On her way to the Wizard's Emerald City, she meets three friends: the
Scarecrow who longs for a brain, the Tin Man who longs for a heart, and
the Cowardly Lion who longs for bravery.  Together, these three men,
Toto, and Dorothy make a great team and together they suffer obstacles
and the hateful intent of the Wicked Witch of the West, a frightening
woman with hideous seaweed-green skin and an unflattering black outfit.
When they get to Oz, our five friends realize that the Wizard is only a
"man behind a curtain," a strange Kansas-native who became lost in Oz
and was named its enigmatic ruler by the people.  He teaches the
Scarecrow, the Tin Man, and the Lion that the things they desire from
him have always been within them and are quiet qualities waiting to be
unleashed and realized.  The Scarecrow is intelligent, the Tin Man is
affectionate, and the Lion is courageous.  We, the audience, have
realized this all along but it enlightens us to see these characters',
our companions, dreams come true.  However, Dorothy's future remains
uncertain until Glinda arrives and informs her that home, too, is within
her.  Then, she taps her heels three times and chants "There's no place
like home"
The actors in the sepia-toned Kansas portion of The Wizard of Oz are
featured in the colored Oz section in more exciting, outrageous ways.
Ray Bolger, who plays Hunk in the Kansas part, is seen as the Scarecrow
in Oz.  Jack Haley plays Hickory and the sweet Tin Man.  Bert Lahr plays
Zeke in Kansas and then is transformed into the hilarious Cowardly Lion
in Oz.  Margaret Hamilton is the amazing villain of the movie and plays
the heartless Miss Gulch and the Wicked Witch of the West.  In Oz, the
characters are how Dorothy pictures her Kansas friends would be over the
rainbow.
Like many movie classics, The Wizard of Oz underwent its share of pain.
During the shooting of the film, many directors added their own touch of
brilliance: Richard Thorpe, George Cukor, King Vidor, and Victor
Fleming, the credited director of Oz who, that same year, became the
credited director of the many directors of Gone With the Wind.  There
was also trouble with the cast: first, Shirley Temple was coveted for
the role of Dorothy Gale and Gale Sondergaard was considered for the
role of Miss Gulch and the Wicked Witch, a character that was being
shaped into a glamorous villain due to the huge success of Snow White
and the Seven Dwarfs' Wicked Queen.  Perhaps the greatest calamities for
the actors were those of Margaret Hamilton and Buddy Ebsen.  The
near-fatal illness and replacement of Ebsen, who was the original Tin
Man, was spawned by the use of toxic metal make-up.  Hamilton's skin was
charred while doing the scene in which the Wicked Witch threatens
Dorothy and disappears in an explosion of fire and colored smoke.
Over the years, The Wizard of Oz has become the ultimate family film and
a favorite of the young at heart.  It is a movie of splendor and
grandness.  The newly-released DVD of the restored version of the film
is one of the best DVDs I've encountered yet.  Not only is The Wizard of
Oz restored to its original, colorful glory, but there are  hours upon
hours worth of features and goodies that are necessary for any Oz fan.
There are several theatrical trailers, behind-the-scenes snippets and
outtakes, publicity shots, a documentary hosted by Angela Lansbury, a
"jukebox" with nearly twenty tracks of The Wizard of Oz music
recordings, and several other treats.
The Wizard of Oz has become a classic not only because of the mythic
hardship the cast and crew faced during shooting, not only because of
Judy Garland's amazing delivery of each line and song, not only because
of Bert Lahr's priceless humor, Ray Bolger's gymnastics, or Jack Haley's
tenderness, but also because of the lessons it teaches while still being
enormously entertaining and enlightening.  The Wizard of Oz reminds us
that, though we may not live somewhere over the rainbow, there is, after
all, no place like home.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros. remake of MGM release
 Director:  Victor Fleming
 Writer:  Noel Langley, Florence Ryerson, Edgar Allan Woolf
 Cast: Judy Garland, Frank Morgan, Ray Bolger, Bert Lahr,
Jack Haley, Billie Burke, Margaret Hamilton, Charley
Grapewin, Munchkins, Toto
   I'd like five bucks for every time someone called out to me,
"Hey, Toto!" when I walk my cairn terrier around the
neighborhood.  "Is that really Toto?" adults would stop and
ask me, and I'd of course reply, "Sure it is; I've had him for
sixty-three years now."  As for the kids, well, surprisingly
enough some of them never saw "The Wizard of Oz" so the
best they can do is say, "Ma, Ma, look at the dog!"  Pretty
soon, though, thanks to a dramatic re-release of "The Wizard
of Oz," every kid for miles around will be joining the
grownups: "Ma, Ma, look, there's Toto!"
   Why do so many people know about this movie?   Sure,
it's one of the 100 greats, and in fact the American Film
Institute called it #6 in eminence.  But then, most Americans
probably haven't seen others on the list--anything by
Antonioni, Fellini, Buneul.  Roger Ebert has a theory, as he
says in his essay on "The Wizard of Oz"..."Elements
powerfully fill a void that exists inside
many children....home is everything, the center of the world.
But over the rainbow is the wide earth, fascinating and
terrifying.  There is a deep fundamental fear that events
might conspire to transport the child from the safety of home
and strand him far away in a strange land.  And what would
he hope to find there?  Why, new friends, to advise and
protect him."
   The Great American Movie Classic, one of those few
movies that come across as vividly the 15th time around as
the first, follows the odyssey of Dorothy Gale who at the age
of 16 is disappointed with her life on a remote Kansas farm
and with being ignored by her busy aunt and her workers. 
She dreams of flying over the rainbow to a magical fairyland,
some place preferable to life with hogs and seemingly
indifferent people.  When a tornado causes her to bump her
head and fall momentarily unconscious she, her little dog
Toto, and her entire house are presumably swept up and
taken to just such a fairyland, where she meets up with three
unforgettable characters who look surprisingly like the folks
back home.  Despite a series of breathtaking adventures with
them and with a wicked witch, a good one, a band of happy
munchkins, and a putative, god-like wizard who is other than
he seems, she realizes that it doesn't pay to wish for too
many things--because you just may get them.  Wanting
nothing more than to go home, she begins to appreciate her
aunt and her life in Kansas all the more, having taken an
incredible flight of fancy.
   What is more surprising than Dorothy's wind-swept tour is
the fact that this movie, which people see annually on TV,
has not been viewed for twenty-five years the way it should
be.   Not only do we now get to see the whole drama on the
wide screen: we see it with Warner Bros.' digitally restored
and remastered Dolby Ditial Stereo Sound.  The studio has
also spent nine months reconstructing the sepia opening and
cleaning and restoring damages and flickering with which the
1939 film masters suffered.  Originally released by MGM and
re-released by that studio in 1949 and 1955, "The Wizard of
Oz" got a TV broadcast in '56, so that youngsters of all ages
can appreciate the magnificent acting of the tragic figure of
Judy Garland in the role of Dorothy, who is supported ably by
comic figures Ray Bolger, Bert Lahr and Frank Morgan as her
three friends.  Not to be underestimated is the movie's cairn
terrier, Toto (playing himself), a mischievous pup who is
inseparable from her mistress and who is responsible in one
of the concluding scenes for removing the wool over
Dorothy's eyes, so to speak.
   What more can one say for a film that is virtually without
flaws?  If we must point out one blemish, it is in the scene in
which the exposed wizard gives the four travelers the movie's
meaning, a talky monologue particularly considering that the
kids in the movie audience will endure a drop-off in interest--
as indeed they did in a recent invitational screening.  All
things considered, parents who do not take their youngsters
to this seminal event in their rites of passage might have
abuse charges filed against them.  But then what adult could
fail to be enchanted by the remarkable, colorful,
heartwarming "Wizard of Oz"?

Author
Evelyn C. Leeper
     Most viewers see THE WIZARD OF OZ as merely a children's film, or as a
fantasy that entertains without edifying.  This is probably due to Baum's
(and Fleming's) subtlety, since in reality the film is an intense
philosophical statement.
     Consider for example Fleming's use of color.  Reality, to Fleming, is
drab and colorless; only the world of our dreams has life and color to it.
(i.e., the belief that the self is the only reality) in cinematic terms.
Dorothy is not so much using her dreams to allow herself to fit into reality
as she is discovering that reality exists only in her dreams.
     The characters that Dorothy meets in her dream (which is, in turn, her
reality) are symbolic characters, and her journey represents a rite of
passage to adulthood.  Her three companions, for example, represent the
three facets of her person: intellectual, emotional, and spiritual.
Throughout the film we see fertility symbols which represent her transition
from child to woman.  Although Baum's Dorothy was only six years old, it is
evident that Fleming's Dorothy is twelve or thirteen.  The ruby slippers
which are forced upon her are obviously a symbol of menstruation,
particularly since the slippers in Baum's book were silver.  And the menace
of the witch in the cyclone is emphasized by the use of the broom, an
obvious phallic symbol.  Dorothy has reached an age where womanhood and its
consequences are frightening, and her dreams reflect this.  Again and again,
we see symbols of her passage to womanhood:  the corn field, the apples
(representing the fruit of the harvest as well as the Biblical concept of
original sin).  In addition we see her confusion symbolized by the long
tunnel in the Wizard's palace which she travels UP in an obvious attempt to
return to the womb and escape her problems.
     As was stated before, her three companions represent the three aspects
of her person.  The Scarecrow is the embodiment of Dorothy's realization
that she must develop and use her intellectual abilities to a much greater
extent as an adult that she needed to as a child.  The Tin Man represents
Dorothy's emotional growth.  She eventually, through the character of the
Tin Man, comes to realize and accept her emotional side, even with the
dangers that such acceptance entails.  The Cowardly Lion is the
manifestation of Dorothy's spiritual growth (her belief in herself, if you
prefer).  Dorothy realizes that she must become more secure in herself if
she is to pass from childhood to adulthood.
     That Dorothy is undergoing a rite of passage is stressed in several
smaller ways.  The hourglass, for example, represents the inexorable passing
of time; Dorothy must leave her childhood behind whether she wants to or
not.  (Note also that when she tries to give up the ruby slippers, i.e.
womanhood, she is unable to, again pointing up the impossibility of
retreating to childhood again.) Also, though she wishes to remain in the
Emerald City (which like the rest of Munchkinland is populated by children),
she must leave its safety if she is ever to pass to adulthood.
     The famous "jitterbugging" scene, which was cut from the film prior to
release (presumably because it would have "dated" the film in a few years),
would have stressed this transition even more.  The Wicked Witch, before
sending her flying monkeys to kidnap Dorothy, says that she will send
something before them, "to take the fight out of [Dorothy]." The following
scene, which was cut, showed Dorothy and her companions being bitten by
"jitterbugs," whose poison caused them to dance until exhausted.  But the
jitterbug (as a dance) is very similar to many primitive dances which
represent the frenzy of the sexual act.  Hence here we have Dorothy
threatened by symbolic rape.  Given the moral climate of the time, it is not
surprising that the scene was cut.
     Dorothy's fourth companion in the film is Toto, her dog.  Since "toto"
is Latin for "all," we can interpret him as representing the totality of
Dorothy's personality, the union of the three aspects.  Using this
interpretation, we realize that Fleming has given us a dream within a dream,
further emphasizing the solipsism inherent in the film.  For, if we
interpret Dorothy's trip through Oz as a dream in which she (i.e., her
personality) is separated from her physical body, then Toto's escape from
the witch's castle represents the ultimate core of her self departing from
the imperfections of her personality's various aspects.  (The original
conflict, recall, was the attempted destruction of Dorothy's "all" or Toto.)
Just as beneath the physical layer there is a "spiritual" layer, so beneath
the "spiritual" layer there is yet a third, more essential, layer.  Only
when Dorothy is in harmony with the three aspects of her personality (i.e.,
when she is reunited with the Scarecrow, the Tin Man, and the Cowardly
Lion), can she attain her ultimate self (i.e., be joined again with Toto).
     So we see that far from a meaningless fantasy, THE WIZARD OF OZ is in
fact a deep philosophical statement which causes us to reflect on the
harmony or disharmony of the aspects of our own personalities.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     My son's school is putting on a production of THE WIZARD OF OZ -
he's a Munchkin whose one line is "It's a girl and she's asleep." - so
we rented the classic Judy Garland version from 1939.  Beautifully
directed by Victor Fleming, who won the award that year for best
director, but for GONE WITH THE WIND, THE WIZARD OF OZ is so
exquisitely constructed that it's hard to believe that it could have
been done any other way.  But there were scenes deleted, including a
jitterbug number, and others that were almost excised, including the
key "Over the Rainbow" number.
     The cast, which seems etched in stone now like a cinematic Mount
Rushmore, was not exactly what the studio wanted.  Buddy Ebsen was to
have been the Tin Woodman until the silver make-up made him sick.  And
W. C. Fields was the original choice for the Wizard, but he turned them
down.
     Opening to a bleak Kansas landscape, filmed in a nostalgic,
Sepiatone black-and-white, Dorothy wants to be anywhere but boring old
home.  After a long dream sequence that bursts forth in bright primary
colors and imaginative sets, the story ends in that same monotone
Kansas that it began but with Dorothy wanting never to leave home
again.  Just as the mythical sets for Oz are not meant to be real, so
the sets for the Kansas farm are so obviously done on a sound stage
that they too have a poetic realism that transcends the literal.  It is
the dream set in the Land of Oz that is the heart of the magical tale
that warms the hearts of young and old alike.
     Most "family" pictures aren't.  At best they are kids' movies that
keep the adults' attention with sufficient humor aimed at them.  THE
WIZARD OF OZ, on the other hand, truly mesmerizes all ages.
     With Judy Garland as Dorothy, Frank Morgan as the Wizard (as well
as many other roles), Ray Bolger as the Scarecrow, Bert Lahr as the
Cowardly Lion and Jack Haley as the Tin Woodman, the ensemble cast
never ceases to delight and amaze us.  Every scene brings some new joy
or gem of wisdom such as the "brainless" Tin Woodman's observation that
"some people without brains do an awful lot of talking."
     The sweet script by Noel Langley, Florence Ryerson and Edgar Allan
Woolf, based on the classic L.  Frank Baum novel, captivates us at
every turn.  "And she's not only merely dead, she's really most
sincerely dead." the coroner says of the Wicked Witch of the East, who
was killed by Dorothy's house.  The dialog that is spoken rather than
sung still has almost a musical cadence and is always just short of
poetry.
     The music is so infectiously happy that it is basically impossible
to keep your toes from tapping, your head from bobbing, and an
ear-to-ear grin from appearing on your face.
     The movie is perhaps best epitomized in Dorothy's dance as she
leaves the cute little Munchkins.  Singing "Off to see the Wizard," she
skips along with an infectious joy along the famous yellow brick road.
If we could enter the screen, every member of the audience would skip
right along behind her.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, gave the movie **** and said it was
wonderful. His favorite scene was the one with all the flying monkeys.
He said that "you can't grow too old for this movie."

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Wizard of Oz (1939, reissued 1998) 4 stars out of 4. Starring Judy
Garland, Ray Bolger, Jack Haley, Bert Lahr, Frank Morgan, Margaret Hamilton
and Billie Burke.
 A Kansas farmgirl, unhappy with her life, runs away from home, gets caught
in a storm and winds up in a strange land where she is helped by some
friendly, but vertically challenged people and harassed by an older woman
sorely lacking in social skills and suffering from a phobia about houses.
 The young girl embarks upon a quest to find her way home. Along the way
she is helped by three kindly strangers, a befuddled individual who
continually falls apart in a crisis; a stout, but cold gentleman who's a
bit rusty at heroics; and a mangy coward whose bark is worse than his bite.
 The quartet seek help from a powerful, but mysterious person who may be
able to solve all their problems.
 In the end, of course, the four, through many trials and tribulations,
learn themselves about their own true worth and that "there's no place like
home."
 What we're referring to, of course, is The Wizard of Oz. And unless you've
been locked in solitary confinment for the past 40-plus years or have been
living with some cult that shuns modern applicances, you know this story as
well as any fairy tale from the Brothers Grimm or Hans Christian Andersen.
 For the first time in almost 50 years, you can see one of the most beloved
movies of all time on the big screen, remastered and remixed - that means
the picture and sound have been improved.
 The question is, Why should I pay money at the theater to see a movie I
already have on video (or laserdisc)?
 The answer is simple: Nothing is as magical as a movie theater when the
lights dim and the opening credits fade in. Sure, you know the story, you
can sing along with the songs, you may even know every word of dialogue.
 But seeing Judy Garland at her young and innocent peak on the big screen
before she began that long slide that eventually landed her over the
rainbow for eternity is an experience not to be missed.
 On the big screen you will be able to really appreciate the sets and
costumes, and especially that wonderful moment when Dorothy steps from her
drab black-and-white world into the Technicolor splendor of the wonderful
land of Oz.
 Seeing The Wizard of Oz in a movie theater, the way God and Louis B. Mayer
intended you to see it, is like being at Cape Canaveral for a space shuttle
launch instead of watching it on television.
 It's an emotional, once-in-a-lifetime event that you will later regret you
missed.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's commentary on "THE WIZARD OF OZ" (Warner Bros.)
Starting today, the most beloved of all American musicals,
recently named the 6th Best Motion Picture of All Time by the American
Film Institute, is available on the big screen for the first time in
more than 25 years. Made in 1939, this delightful classic now has
state-of-the-art technical improvements, including a remastered
soundtrack and a digitally restored picture. Judy Garland stars as
Dorothy Gale, a Kansas farm-girl whom a tornado blows over the rainbow
to a magical land called Oz, where she and her dog Toto take a journey
down the Yellow Brick Road to find the fabled Wizard (Frank
Morgan). Along the way, they're joined by the Scarecrow (Ray Bolger),
the Tin Woodsman (Jack Haley) and the Cowardly Lion (Bert Lahr). But
did you know that Deanna Durbin or Shirley Temple were the studio's
original casting choices for Dorothy, that Buddy Ebsen played the Tin
Woodsman until the silver make-up made him ill, that W.C. Fields
refused the role of the Wizard, and that the song "Over the Rainbow"
was almost cut from the film? Not only did L. Frank Baum write a
charming fantasy but it's also an insightful philosophical commentary
on the fears, questions, and desires with which all children
grapple. Home is the center of every child's universe - but what if
that house was transported elsewhere?  What if one's drab, everyday
existence were suddenly, inexplicably changed to something dazzling
yet quite different? The three characters Dorothy meets on her rite of
passage represent the head, the heart, and the soul, as she grasps the
concept that things are not always what they seem. The issues raised
by "The Wizard of Oz" are dilemmas that intrigue and resonate with the
child in all of us - which is why this is the quintessential family
film. It's a MUST SEE this weekend.
