Title
Review for Elephant Walk (1954)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Elephant Walk" has been sneered at by critics
for 45 years now.  Yet it has aged well.  Elizabeth
Taylor is lovely in her endless collection of
revealing dresses, and the cinematography and
sets filmed on location in Ceylon (modern-day
Sri Lanka) are very good.
The criticism has been aimed instead at the silly
(but entertaining) finale involving rampaging
elephants and a burning mansion, and a soap opera-ish
love triangle with ivory-skinned Taylor at the center.
But this film has been viewed too cynically, perhaps
because its target audience is female.  Certainly
the script and story is a bit ridiculous, but
that is not necessarily a disadvantage.  "Elephant
Walk" is an unintentional comedy, and with this
view in mind the film becomes an excellent waste
of two hours.
The story begins with wealthy tea planter
John Wiley (Peter Finch) bringing his new bride
Ruth (Taylor) to his immense plantation and
estate in Ceylon.  At first Taylor is pleased
by the tropical beauty and her new-found luxury,
but there is trouble in paradise.
For some reason, Finch prefers the company of his
drunken, middle-aged friends, who turn his mansion
into their club.  Taylor is apparently the only
'white' woman in Ceylon, and in her annoyance
and boredom turns to angst-ridden overseer
Dana Andrews.  Besides the usual concerns over
guilt and morality, their would-be infidelity
is threatened by a drought and a cholera epidemic.
"Elephant Walk" was beset with production problems.
The roles played by Finch and Taylor were originally
intended for Laurence Olivier and his wife Vivien
Leigh.  Filming actually began with Leigh, but
the tropical climate and a nervous breakdown
interfered.  Taylor's luck was little better: a
freak accident involving a wind machine caused
her hospitalization with a steel splinter in
her eye.
"Elephant Walk" reminds me of "Rebecca", the
1940 Hitchcock epic.  A new bride out of place
at a mansion, run by a creepy servant who
dislikes her and who has a slavish devotion to
a long dead master.  Like in "Rebecca", the hated
mansion goes down in flames, with the now-attentive
husband promising her a new and better life
away from its remains.  This formula was far
better presented in "Rebecca", but it works here
as well.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
