Title
Review for Liebe ist k채lter als der Tod (1969)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
John Smyth
LOVE IS COLDER THAN DEATH (Liebe ist k채lter als der Tod) (1969)
Stockholm Film Review (http://www.reviewfilm.com)
In 1969, the Western world was in turmoil. The Vietnam war had
poisoned U.S. politics - events like the My Lai massacre, the
Tet offensive and the shootings at Kent State university fuelled
an already burgeoning counter-culture movement. In Europe,
students had taken to the streets in France (the so-called
chienlit), Germany was divided by the Iron Curtain and Warsaw
Pact tanks had savagely crushed the Prague Spring. The movie
world was feeling the whiff of revolution too. Bonny and Clyde
(1967) had already signalled that a change was coming.
In 1969, Dennis Hopper and Peter Fonda would make Easy Rider and
Sam Peckinpah would release The Wild Bunch. Directors like Francis
Ford Coppola, Martin Scorsese, William Friedkin, Peter Bogdanovich
and many others were on the verge of redefining American cinema.
Many of these new directors were inspired by the French New Wave,
the term describing the group of French directors who came to
prominence in the late Fifties and early Sixties. Directors such as
Francois Trauffaut, Jean-Luc Godard, Louis Malle, Claude Chabrol
and Erich Rohmer made movies which gave rise to the auteur theory;
the notion that the director was the most important influence on a
movie (as distinct from the producer, the actors or even the
writers). In Germany, a young film-maker was similarly inspired
by the New Wave directors. His name was Rainer Werner Fassbinder
and he announced himself to the world at the 1969 Berlin Film
festival with Liebe ist k채lter als der Tod. The movie got a very
lukewarm reception at the festival, though it didn't put Fassbinder
off movie-making.
Liebe ist k채lter als der Tod is dedicated to Rohmer and Chabrol,
and a minor (female) character in the film is called Erika Rohmer,
just in case we missed the introduction to the film. The film itself
is a very low-budget black and white production with atrocious sound
quality (not such a problem if you're reading the subtitles),
indifferent production values and several examples of very bad
acting indeed. The movie opens with a bunch of gangsters under
interrogation. Their inquisitors are not the police, but a crime
syndicate who want to recruit the unwilling gangsters into the
organisation, and intend to brutalise them until they acquiesce.
Two of the criminals strike up a friendship. Franz (Fassbinder) is
a pimp in Munich while Bruno (Ulli Lommel) is from a provincial town.
Franz is disdainful of the syndicate and tells Bruno to contact him
when they are released. Some days later, Bruno arrives at Franz'
address and meets his girlfriend, a prostitute called Johanna (Hanna
Schygulla). Franz is keeping a low profile because another pimp,
the Turk, is trying to kill him. At Bruno's urging, they devise a
plan to retaliate first (in a manner of speaking) by eliminating
the Turk. This plan leads to a much higher body count than expected,
and proves that Bruno is a ruthless killer. even though Franz is
impressed by his resolute manner, Johanna distrusts him deeply. She
fears him not just because he seems to have taken a proprietary
interest in her, but also his ambition could get both herself and
Franz killed. She becomes increasingly apprehensive when Bruno
decides to rob a bank with Franz.
Next paragraph (between the ****) contains spoiler information. Page down 
for the rest of the spoiler-free review.
Johanna's fears seem to be realised when Bruno, having killed one
of Johanna's clients, meets a man in a games arcade. They speak in
a coded manner, but it is obvious that they are both part of the
crime syndicate featured at the beginning of the movie. Bruno
instructs the other man to make sure that Johanna does not survive
the robbery attempt. At the beginning of the film, the syndicate
had threatened Franz by speculating about his girlfriend, but he
had not wavered. They had presumably decided that a more subtle
approach was necessary. Their presumption is that, once Johanna
is gone, Franz will join his new 'friend' in the syndicate.
However, Johanna has also planned ahead. When they arrive at the
bank, there are men loitering about outside. They are policemen,
who mortally wound Bruno in a shoot-out. Franz drags him into
the car, but Bruno is already dead. Franz is forced to dump his
body out of the car to halt the chasing police. Johanna admits
that she called the police, intending to prevent the robbery.
She has unwittingly saved her own life (and probably Franz' too)
but he calls her 'whore', believing her to have betrayed his
trusted friend. She was prepared to see her lover go to prison
than be killed in a robbery, but, at the end of the film, they
drive into an uncertain future, and Johanna's sacrifice goes
unrecognised.
Is this film any good ? Well, it certainly establishes some of
the themes that would occupy Fassbinder during his professional
life. There is a definite sense of style (though the fixed
camera position for almost every shot suggests a budget limitation
more than anything else). Hanna Schygulla is clearly star-material
she is positively brimming with confidence and charisma - she
would be Fassbinder's muse in many subsequent movies. Fassbinder
doesn't do so bad himself as Franz, but Ulli Lommel's performance
as Bruno is completely ludicrous - his inability to convey any emotion with 
conviction and his appearance (trilby, trenchcoat and sunglasses are 
straight out of the Forties) are more likely to induce sniggers. Fassbinder 
had a lot to learn about directing too - many of the scenes are far too 
amateurish, particularly the gangster scenes. The climactic scene at the 
bank is simply terrible. Some scenes provoke laughter - the appearance of a 
black American gangster's at the beginning of the film is both incongruous 
and unintentionally hilarious. A supposedly erotic scene between Bruno and a 
woman on a train is even worse. It's not surprising that the film got the 
cold shoulder in Berlin, particularly when compared to U.S. independent 
films.
As an introduction to Fassbinder's oeuvre, "Liebe ist..." is a good
example of the ideas that he would explore in later (and better made)
movies. His art-house techniques, melodramatic story and unconventional 
plots are all explored here, though the theme of betrayal and loyalty is 
perhaps more personal than some of his later, more thematic movies. 
Fassbinder's reach clearly exceeds his grasp here and the lack of money 
shines through - scenes where the film equipment accidentally appears in 
view , or the actors don't perform remain in the movie, suggesting that 
Fassbinder couldn't afford reshoots. His technique suffered from the budget 
restrictions too - he favours sparse dialogue and long pauses to punctuate 
the action, and the poor production values tend to be distracting to the 
audience. Still, he signalled his ambition, and would establish his 
reputation within a few years (and retains that reputation ever since).
Two of Fassbinder's contemporaries, Wolfgang Petersen and Roland
Emmerich earn their living in Hollywood these days. Petersen has
forsaken the gritty and gripping realism of Das Boot (1981) for more
mainstream fare such as Outbreak (1995) and In the Line of Fire (1993). 
Emmerich is Mr. Mainstream, who with Dean Devlin, has produced summer 
blockbusters such as Stargate (1994), Independence Day (1996) and the 
god-awful Godzilla (1998). It is doubtful that Fassbinder, had he not died 
of a drugs overdose in 1982) would have made the same transition. Though he 
turned to more accessible, English-language films towards the end of his 
life (he died at the age of 37), it is hard to envisage him devoting his 
talent to glossy superficial work - he was too much of an individualist for 
that.

