Title
Review for Mille et une recettes du cuisinier amoureux, Les (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Bradley Null
.     The title character of A Chef In Love is a Frenchman with equal
passions for his restaurant and his lover.  These dual passions create
an unusual love triangle which, like most of the film's political,
romantic, and historical issues, is never quite resolved.
     Like the contemporary The English Patient, A Chef In Love is
structured around countless flashbacks and takes pleasure in confusing
our sense of time and place.  It ultimately becomes apparent that these
flashbacks present a love story which takes place in pre-Soviet Georgia,
and our chef's female love interest is a member of that country's
aristocracy.  Both of the chef's passionate romances become troubled
when the Communist revolution threatens his prosperity, and he is forced
to choose loyalty to one of his loves.  This story is recounted in a
compilation of old letters and diary entries which have been delved up
by the woman's son and the chef's niece.
     Originally, the woman's son, Anton, is completely unaware of his
mother's past relationship and his parents's past identities.  However,
in an early flashback we see Anton's father chasing his mother with a
knife muttering the name of this chef.  This serves to quickly verify an
unresolved conflict that Anton becomes eager to uncover.  The flavor of
this subjective flashback, in which the fleeing mother suddenly becomes
a turkey and is slaughtered by her husband, establishes the confusion
and complexities packed within this film.  Throughout, we are taken by
surprise as the narrative jumps from past to present, uncovering new
evidence and then addressing the effect that the discovery of it has had
on Anton.
     This flashback structure also adds to the film's theme of
repetition and circularity.  For example, the camera commonly lingers
over the same entrees and artwork in both the past and the present,
creating a sense of timelessness for the film's subject.  The settings
and other decor in the film are also quite beautiful.  However,
throughout, the camera's persistently tight frame prevents us from
enjoying the grandness of these exotic locations and feasts.  This
denial of spectacle serves to focus attention more tightly on the
complex love triangle and the tension it causes, which is developed up
to the last frame of the film.
     Unfortunately, this preoccupation with the lovers forces most of
the others characters into flat and subservient roles.  For example,
Anton, although he discovers a whole new side of both his mother and
father, is denied the screen time to deal with these issues.  Likewise,
Anton's father is given just enough screen time for us to realize his
complexities, but not enough for us to understand them.  The most
egregious oversight however, is of Marcelle, the cook's niece, who is
not characterized at all, and ultimately serves to merely jump-start the
narrative by bringing these diary pieces to Anton.
     As a mature romance, A Chef In Love is the most compelling film to
come along in a long time (far superior to The English Patient). 
However, it is almost regrettable to witness so many interesting
characters and subplots being neglected for the sake of a single, albeit
interesting, story.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     50ish Frenchman Pascal Ichac (Pierre Richard) meets a beguiling
Georgian Princess named Cecilia Abachidze (Micheline Presle) in
director Nana Dzhordzadze's A CHEF IN LOVE, the Georgian nominee for
best foreign language film in last year Academy Awards.  With her
toothy smile and red curly hair, she looks more like a seductress from
a D. H. Lawrence novel than a princess.  With his salt 'n pepper hair
and beard and his bewitching smile, he charms her into staying with him
as his lover even though he is thirty years older.
     (Although I liked KOLYA, the Academy Award winner for best foreign
language film last year, my favorite of the nominees remains Berit
Nesheim's THE OTHER SIDE OF SUNDAY.  Sadly, it is the only one that
still does not have a U. S. distributor.  Is anyone listening out
there?)
     A CHEF IN LOVE opens in the present day in Paris where their grown
son Anton (Jean-Yves Gautier) has been given his father's memoirs.  The
story quickly skips to the 1920s to tell of Anton's parents' love
affair.  Although we come back periodically to see Anton reading his
father's papers, almost all of the action happens during a brief period
in the past.
     The word action is probably a misnomer since little "action"
transpires in A CHEF IN LOVE.  The script by Andre Graill and Irakli
Kvirikadze meanders from one small event to the other with no narrative
drive joining them, which is not necessarily bad.  With strong acting,
characters can imbue any scene with power and relevance.  The two
leads, Richard and Presle, in A CHEF IN LOVE, are quite good looking,
but their acting in this film is rarely compelling.
     Pascal is both an opera singer and a chef.  After falling in love
with his princess, he fulfills his dream of opening a restaurant, New
Eldorado, in the capital city of Tbilisi.  He runs it until the
revolutionary troops come.
     With a title of A CHEF IN LOVE, I expected many sumptuous scenes
of food with lots of close-ups, but the scenes rarely occur, and the
cinematography by Georgi Beridze is pleasing but nothing special.
     The movie becomes little more than a series of disconnected
incidents.  Typical is an early scene where the two lovers go to a
restaurant and become angry because they are served inferior food.
When they see rich people about to get some prime pork, they steal the
restaurant's only pig.  Another scene has Pascal throwing flour on
Cecilia in the kitchen.  She then runs out into another room looking
like a ghost.
     None of the film's episodes are involving, and the whole movie
left me feeling cold and detached.  A handsome film certainly, but I've
seen much prettier.  Even if I credit the film with more beauty than it
possesses, the movie is like a meringue -- briefly tasty, but with no
substance.
     A CHEF IN LOVE runs 1:35.  It is in French with some Georgian, and
both are subtitled in English.  The film is rated PG-13 for brief
nudity and a little profanity.  It would be fine for kids say 9 and up.
I am not able to recommend the film, but do give it ** for its nice
images.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
As with most foreign films that are sent here to the States, the story
is simple, the pace leisurely, no guns get fired, no one is killed yet
the film holds you in its grip.  Such a one is A CHEF IN LOVE, the
Republic of Georgia's film that was one of the 5 nominees chosen for
Academy Award consideration. Georgia was once a part of the USSR.
In keeping with several other foreign films, (Babette's Feast, Eat
Drink Man Woman,  to name but two), we are treated to a gorgeous spread
while the story of the Chef, Pascal Ichac (Pierre Richard, who first
became a big star with THE TALL BLOND MAN WITH ONE BLACK SHOE)
unfolds.
In 1995, Anton (Jean-Yves Gautier), while arranging for an art
exhibition fortuitously meets a photographer, Marcelle (Micheline
Presle.)    She has with her a manuscript, unpublished, written by her
uncle, Pascal,  which she would like Anton to read.  "Is the name
familiar?"  It tells of Pascal's last adventure in a wild, exciting
life when he returned to the Republic of Georgia.    What intrigues
Anton, is that his mother, Princess Cecilia Abachidze (Nino Kirtadze)
often spoke reverently of the dashing Pascal.   The Chef had written a
book, 1001 Recipes Of A Chef In Love which Anton now recalls his mother
felt was even more important than  the Bible.
Thus begins the story.  As Anton reads, we are treated to flashbacks to
the 1920s of what Anton finds on the manuscript's pages, much of it
about food but also about his having met a most beautiful woman,
Princess Cecilia, much younger than he, and how they  fell in love with
each other in a shared cabin on a train headed for Tbilisi.    Back and
forth in time the flashbacks tell us of the revolution, and how the two
lovers are affected while Anton begins to grasp the significance of
what he is reading and who his real father may be.
Pierre Richard's performance as the Chef is a delight.
In French, Georgian and Russian with English subtitles.
Ingeniously Directed by Nana Djordjadze

Author
Edwin Jahiel
A CHEF IN LOVE (LES MILLE ET UNE RECETTES D'UN CUISINIER AMOUREUX) ** 4/5
Directed by Nana Djordjadze.Written  by Irakli Kvirikadze, adapted by Andre
Grall.Photography, Guiorgui Beridze. Editing, Vessela Martschewski and
Guili Grigoriani.Production design, Vakhtang Rouroua andTeimour Chmaladze.
Music,Goran Bregovic.Produced by Marc Ruscart. Cast: Pierre Richard (Pascal
Ichac), Micheline Presle (Marcelle Ichac), Nino Kirtadze (Cecilia
Abachidze), Teimour Kahmhadze (Zigmund Gogoladze), Jean-Yves Gautier, Ramaz
Tchkhikvadze (Anton Gogoladze) A Sony Pictures Classics release. In
=46rench,Georgian, Russian, subtitled. 99 minutes.  PG-13.
A nominee for this year's Best Foreign Film Oscar, this Georgian film
(Georgia as in Caucasus, not Atlanta) is a co-production of many European
countries, notably France. Its French title means "The Thousand and One
Recipes of a Chef in Love."
It is natural for France to have played a major role in the making of
"Chef," since it  has been the major co-producing force for movies from the
former Soviet bloc. It is also the nation that, before and after the
dissolution of the USSR, best showcased Georgian cinema. My all-time
favorite festival, that of La Rochelle (France), some years ago devoted  a
huge portion of its program to Georgian films. These were accompanied by  a
large, lively and merry band of Georgian filmmakers who were not too
different from some of the characters in "Chef."
The Chef is Frenchman Pascal Ichac, played against type by the comic actor
(also writer, director and producer) Pierre Richard, familiar from his
roles in pictures such as "The Tall Blond Man With One Black Shoe,"" La
Chevre," and "Les Comperes." These are part of a large number of French
comedies that Hollywood has been remaking in the 1980s  and 1990s. In
general the adaptations are much inferior to the originals. The latest is
the  unsuccessful "Father's Day" (1997), from "Les Comperes"  of 1984.
Richard is almost unrecognizable in "Chef." Hirsute, and with his usual
naivet=E9 replaced by wordly sophistication, showing all of his 62 years, he
plays a jack-of-all-trades and master of many. He is a bon vivant,  has
been a rou=E9, a parasite, a gigolo, an opera singer  and, crucial to the
film, a gourmet and master cook whose legacy is a celebrated book of
recipes.
The movie is told in flashbacks of Ichac's adventures in Georgia during a
few years following the Great War. The ancient kingdom of Georgia was, as
per the Georgians, founded in antiquity by Jason and his Argonauts.
Eventually dominated by Turks and Persians, then annexed to the Russian
Empire in the 19th century,  after the Soviet Revolution Georgia emerged as
an independent state from 1918 to 1921.
En route to Tbilisi (a.k.a Tiflis), the capital, in a first-class train
compartment world-traveler Ichac meets  Princess Cecilia Abachidze,
appealingly played by Nino Kirtadze. (Georgian names end in  -dze, in  -ani
or in  -vili -- as in Dzhugashvili , later changed to Stalin,  or like
Kalikashvili). Both Cecilia and Pascal are sophisticates, free souls and
charmers. Pascal produces vintage wine out of his bags and a sumptuous,
unbelievable buffet out of nowhere. Who can remain unimpressed?
Pascal  could almost be the young lady's grandfather, but he is so lusty
and interesting that instant electricity is generated. The two become
lovers and go through colorful adventures.
Pascal's extraordinary palate and sense of smell allow him to concoct
culinary masterpieces. One day, at the Opera, his uncanny olfactory
abilities sniff out the gun-powder of a hidden bomb destined for Georgia's
President. He saves the man's life, the two become fast friends. Pascal is
allowed to open a restaurant in Tbilisi. Maniacally devoting his talents to
international and something like New Georgian cuisine to it, Pascal makes
of his "New Eldorado" a world Mecca for gourmets -- sometimes at the
expense of time spent with Cecilia.
Even so, he is very much in love with her, as well as with gastronomy and
life.
Asked by the President why a restaurant in Georgia and not in a Western
capital, Pascal simply states that he has fallen in love with the country.
Well he might. Georgia is a small country with an immense variety of
natural beauties. Its people are creative, artistic, have a lust for life,
drink, eat, sing, dance and do everything with energy. (Perhaps it is the
secret of their record longevity). They may also seem  slightly mad. All
this fits Pascal perfectly.
The short life of independent Georgia comes to an end when in 1921  the Red
Army and Bolshevik apparatchiks swoop down and take over.The Georgians of
today have always felt a totally separate identity from that of the Soviet
Empire. They declared their sovereignty in 1989 and independence on April
9, 1991. Georgian cinema, before and after the break, has been a major and
different entity within the Greater Russian system. In "Chef" the Bolshevik
invasion becomes another opportunity for criticizing Soviet culture.
The invaders are shown as uncouth military, opportunists, bullies,
barbarians or sexual deviants, although the caricatures do stop short of
cliches. The fate of  Cecilia, Pascal and Haute Cuisine becomes a tangle
that I will not reveal
The movie was directed by Nana Djordjaze, who looks  like her heroine
Cecilia. Ms.Djordjaze came to prominence in 1986 when her  "Robinsonada, Or
My English Grandfather" won the Camera d'Or (for best first feature) at the
Cannes Film Festival. Her husband, screenwriter-director  Irakli
Kvirikadze, did the script for "Chef." His films are excellent, especially
"The Swimmer" (1987)  Grand Prix At The San Remo Festival.
"Chef" has a lot of originality, creativity, local color, humor,
character-centered and historical details and first-rate production values.
It also has a number of structural problems, mainly, like the Revolution, a
lack of discipline.
The flashbacks from Paris-now to Georgia-then are a bit precious and lead
to a convenient  and rather ho-hum revelation. There is, however, the
exquisite bonus of Micheline Presle, the star of "Devil in the Flesh"
(1947). As Parisian Marcelle Ichac, the niece of Pascal, and   a
contemporary food photographer who cooks her own scrumptious culinary
layouts, at age 74 Miss Presle is an incredibly radiant, vigorous beauty.
Overall the film is loosely episodic and often lacks clear points of view.
There is a general vagueness as to its who-what-where-whens.  Until the
Reds invade, one is hardly conscious that a World War had occurred or that
a major revolution had taken place in Russia.
At the risk of nitpicking, I believe that many of the automobiles used by
the Red Army in 1921 are later models, even classic 1930s cars. On a basic
level is the fact that in a movie celebrating food, one does not get a true
sense of cuisine or follow the actual preparation of dishes. Pascal and his
staff are mostly shown bustling about and throwing things around.There are
no visual  kitchen glories as in "Babette's Feast," "Eat, Drink, Man,
Woman," or "Big Night."  We hear details of some of  Ichac's 1001 recipes,
but they are no substitute for sights that makes us salivate. The wider
frame of  love, life, politics,tragedies and the pursuit of happiness can
be counter-productive to the "eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we die"
thread.
All the same, in spite of faulty coherence and excessive to-and-fro-ing,
the basic frame of the picture is an original, often fascinating
experience. For gourmets of celluloid, i.e. connoisseurs, there is also a
series of in-jokes, of tongue-in-cheek, esoteric filmic and historical
references, as in the choice of names like Ichac, Lilli Lieftenstahl or
Madame Kollontay. This work may not make it into the Pantheon of food
movies but otherwise it is a very good addition to offbeat and to Georgian
cinema.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Pierre Richard, Nino Kirtadze, Timur Kamkhadze, Micheline Presle, 
      Jean-Yves Gautier
Director: Nana Dzhordzadze
Producer: Marc Ruscart 
Screenplay: Irakli Kvirikadze 
Cinematography: Georgi Beridze
Music: Goran Bregovic
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
In French and Russian with subtitles
     A CHEF IN LOVE, Georgia's entry into the 1997 Academy Awards 
sweepstakes, is a frustrating motion picture.  Frustrating, because this 
poorly-focused movie is guilty, first and foremost, of not taking 
advantage of its chief assets.  Films about food and culinary wizards 
are almost always evocative creations that tease the senses, even if 
they're imperfectly prepared.  A CHEF IN LOVE barely tickles the palate, 
and certainly won't drive scores of movie-goers in search of a quality 
meal the way BABETTE'S FEAST did.
     The film is structured in an irritatingly non-chronological 
fashion.  Instead of presenting the narrative in a straightforward 
manner, director Nana Dzhordzadze and screenwriter Irakli Kvirikadze 
have decided to skip around in time, flashing back and forward to events 
during the 1920s, while presenting the entire story from the perspective 
of a man reading the Chef's memoirs from 70 years in the future.  
Although this approach isn't as chaotic as it sounds, it dilutes 
character development and leaves us floundering in our attempts to get a 
solid grip on the emotional core of the romance that lies at A CHEF IN 
LOVE's center.  For films like PULP FICTION and BEFORE THE RAIN, the 
non-chronological structure was effective, because it amplified the 
plot.  In A CHEF IN LOVE, there doesn't appear to be a compelling reason 
for it, and the jumps and cuts serve primarily to distract us from the 
story Dzhordzadze is trying to tell.
     That tale is about an aging French chef, Pascal Ichac (Pierre 
Richard), who, shortly after the first World War, travels from his 
native country to the Caucasus mountains "in search of new tastes."  
While there, he meets and falls in love with the flame-haired, fiery 
Princess Cecilia Abachidze (Nino Kirtadze).  He will not marry her, 
however, claiming that he's too old.  The two spend time together, but 
their happiness is destined not to last.  Communist revolutionaries 
topple the government, and Pascal, a friend of the deposed President, is 
placed under house arrest.  Cecilia, despite her royal title, emerges 
virtually unscathed because one of the heroes of the revolution, Zigmund 
Gogladze (Timur Kamkhadze), wants her for his wife.  
     A CHEF IN LOVE purports to be about the enduring power of love 
(even a revolution and all sorts of nasty characters can't kill what 
Pascal and Cecilia share), but the film's exploration of the subject 
matter isn't compelling.  Although Dzhordzadze tries to trick us into 
believing that Pascal and Cecilia's romance is a great cinematic love 
affair, it comes across as incomplete and poorly-sketched.  A brief 
scene details their initial meeting, but, after that, every exchange 
between them happens long after a relationship is established.  A CHEF 
IN LOVE cheats us of the opportunity to fall in love with these 
characters as they fall in love with each other.  As a result, we're 
expected to accept them as passionate lovers simply because the 
screenplay tells us that they are.  That's a cheat, and it's one of the 
reasons why A CHEF IN LOVE falters.
     The modern-day scenes in A CHEF IN LOVE are pointless.  Jean-Yves 
Gautier plays Cecilia's middle-aged son, Anton, and Micheline Presle is 
Pascal's elderly niece, Marcelle.  Together, they page through the 
handwritten notes and diary entries of the late chef, attempting to make 
sense of his life.  One revelation late in the film seemingly justifies 
the presence of these characters, but it's not all that effective 
because we don't spend enough time with Anton and Marcelle to know them 
as more than plot devices.
     The lead actors, Pierre Richard and Nino Kirtadze, are wonderful, 
and it's thanks to their efforts that we develop a genuine liking and 
sympathy for Pascal and Cecilia.  Richard is especially noteworthy, 
giving a performance that is both bigger than and full of life.  His 
Pascal is the ultimate hedonist, who loves eating, drinking, making 
music, and making love.  Despite being more subdued, Kirtadze's 
portrayal is no less stirring.  Even as circumstances force Cecilia into 
Zigmund's arms, we sense that she will always love Pascal, and only 
Pascal, and that lends an element of effective tragedy to an otherwise-
erratic story.  Unfortunately, few of the supporting actors do much with 
their roles.  In particular, Timur Kamkhadze is disappointing because he 
is unable to develop Zigmund into more than an almost-cartoonish 
villain.
     A CHEF IN LOVE is being marketed as a worthy successor to the likes 
of BABETTE'S FEAST and BIG NIGHT.  However, it isn't in the same 
category as either, and not just because it doesn't truly tantalize our 
senses of taste and smell.  When it comes to plot and character, both of 
those films possessed a richness that A CHEF IN LOVE fails to attain.  
With its melodramatic flourishes and confused, anecdotal approach, this 
movie is frequently overdone or underdone, but rarely cooked to 
perfection.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
