Title
Review for Goonies, The (1985)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Joshua Tyler
The Goonies has convinced me that sterility might not be such a bad
thing.
The Goonies stars Sean Astin and Corey Feldman in their formative years,
as leaders of a ratty group of kids who live in the boondocks.  When
wealthy developers threaten to move in, they discover an old treasure
map, and set off in search of "the rich stuff" to save their admittedly
pathetic way of life.
The Goonies is more than just some goofy Fox Kids treasure hunt story. 
Over time, it has become a true cult classic, heralded by film geeks and
movie nerds the world over.  Yes, at its heart it is just a simple
kiddie tale, no different than the hundreds of other kiddie tales which
go straight to video every year.  But, The Goonies has a certain
scruffy, goofball roughness that makes it endearing and lovable,
allowing it a special place in the hearts of its followers that has
endured the test of time.
That's not to say that every viewer will quickly find himself caught up
in the film.  The Goonies suffers from an overabundance of shouting and
at times devolves into nothing more than a furball of grungy kids
running around screaming and talking over one another.  Indeed, at times
I was left wondering why director Richard Donner didn't hire a nanny or
a drill instructor to get the kids to shut up and talk in coherent
sentences.  But real kids are not quiet, and real kids do not deliver
Oscar-worthy lines with great drama and flair.  Real kids do run around
shouting and jumping and generally making a nuisance of themselves.  So,
perhaps in spite of the fact that the film frequently becomes extremely
annoying, the rampant kiddie-rampaging isn't so bad after all.
In the end, The Goonies is a flick to watch with your children.  Much
like this year's Spy Kids, this is a film that the whole family can
love.  Replete with lavish and quirky set design, goofily harmless
antics, and smart scoring, Donner manages to delight and surprise at
every turn in a coming of age tale the likes of which is rarely seen.
Grab the kids, order a pizza, and let The Goonies convince you that
perhaps your children really aren't so bad after all.
Director: Richard Donner
Producer: Harvey Bernhard, Richard Donner
Writer: Chris Columbus
Starring: Sean Astin, Josh Brolin, Jeff Cohen, Corey Feldman, Kerri
Green, Martha Plimpton, Jonathon Ke Quan, John Matuszak
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Chad Polenz
The Goonies
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1985, PG, 113 minutes [1 hour, 53 minutes]
[adventure/comedy]
starring: Sean Astin (Mikey), Josh Brolin (Brand), Jeff Cohen (Chunk), Corey
Feldman (Mouth), written by Steven Spielberg, Chris Columbus, produced by
Harvey Bernhard, Richard Donner, directed by Richard Donner.
Filmmakers know children have the wildest imaginations and the greatest
spirit of adventure, but few are able to make movies depicting that sense
accurately. So what makes "The Goonies" so good is the fact it epitomizes
that innocent feeling with a grand adventure all children fantasize about.
The film starts off in a lighthearted way as we see two brothers escape from
prison with help from their mother. They are the Fratelli's, a bickering,
bumbling family of criminals who are quite the caricatures, yet they keep
with the zany atmosphere. A funny, non-violent chase scene ensues and in the
process we are introduced to some of the supporting characters via cameos.
Anywhere else this might seem like too strong of an opening, but Donner's
pacing is breezy and fun.
Paldom and adventure always compliment each other, which is probably what
makes this film so enjoyable. The first act is a believable, funny portrait
of a group of pre-teenage boys known as The Goonies. First there's Mikey
(Astin), the leader who believes his father is going to save the neighborhood
from impending foreclosure (the reason for this is not clearly stated, and
although it is a flaw, it is not entirely relevant). We also meet Mouth
(Feldman), Data (Ke Hey Kuan), and Chunk (Cohen), whose nicknames reflect
something about them (Mouth is the wiseass, Data is the inventor, Chunk is
the fat kid). There's also Brand (Brolin), Mikey's older brother who's always
pushing him around. 
Right away we get a sense of reality and it's very funny as the boys are
always making fun of each other, telling each other to shut up, and using
curse words when adults aren't around. When they think they've found a map to
a pirate's treasure they jump on their bikes and head off to find it, even
though they know it could be dangerous.
Most of the film walks a fine line of plausibility, and it does a good job
in its manuevering. You don't find yourself wondering if the kids really
think they'll find the treasure, instead, you wonder if they'll actually get
to it. There are many obstacles in their way including the Fratelli's, booby
traps galore, and their struggle to work together. Sub-plots start to form
such as Chunk's "The boy who cried wolf" personality and his attempt to bond
with the Fratelli's deformed, almost mutant-like brother. 
There isn't much here in terms of story, it's basically a trek through miles
of tunnels and the encounters that ensue. The screenplay doesn't really
emphasize character development per se, but the characters don't seem
two-dimensional either. The movie aims to be an adventure and it does deliver
on that notion, even when the attempts at suspense and comedy go overboard. 
I'm not sure how I felt about the last act. Even though I was constantly
entertained, the entire final segment starts to push the envelope further
than necessary. The finale seems only slightly more grand than all the other
adventures, and the ending itself is just plain cheesy. 
It's difficult to tell if "The Goonies" is specifically aimed at "the kid in
you," or if it's just an offbeat adventure. Any way you look at it, it's
still innocent, funny, exciting, and original - you can't argue with that.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
e-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com or Polenz02@morrisville.edu
(C) 1997 Chad Polenz
