Title
Review for Desert Blue (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Samuel Goldwyn Films
 Director:  Morgan J. Freeman
 Writer:  Morgan J. Freeman
 Cast: Brendan Sexton III, Kate Hudson, Christina Ricci, John
Heard, Lucinda Jenney, Casey Affleck, Sara Gilbert, Isidra
Vega, Ethan Suplee, Michael Ironside, Aunjanue Ellis, Peter
Sarsgaard, Noah Taylor, Reese Witherspoon, Daniel von
Bargen
   Hardly anyone stops at the Bates Motel any more.  It's off
the main road and may get an occasional customer for its 12
cabins and 12 showers if a motorist gets caught in a blinding
storm.  Even if a couple of travelers did check in and a)
Norman was not particularly attracted to them, b) they didn't
bother to take a shower...what would they do with their time? 
Would they bother looking at the town, talking to the people,
seeing what small attraction existed therein?  Not at all likely.
   In "Desert Blue," by contrast, two people motoring across
the California desert do stop off, not because they're stuck in
a storm or are experiencing motor trouble.  They get out in
Baxter, California (population 89) because that's the driver's
destination.  His name is Lance (John Heard), he's a
professor of popular culture now writing a book about small
town Americana, and seeks out the hamlet to examine the
tallest ice cream cone in the country.  What's a story without
a conflict, though?  No problem.  His daughter Skye (Kate
Hudson), whom he has dragged along with him, does not
share her dad's feelings for civic areas smaller and less hip
than L.A. or San Francisco.  Skye is the star performer of a
cable TV show, well known in her urban circles but quite
without fame in a town lacking a single cable station.  "Desert
Blue" deals with the pleasures she beholds well beyond any
she could have imagined.  She connects with the teens who
make this their home and who, contrary to the popular
stereotypes, have no great desire to seek the alleged big
pleasures of a metropolitan expanse.
   Morgan J. Freeman, who wrote and directed this charming
tale, keeps the pace nice and leisurely, the better to have us
accept the conversion which the budding actress undergoes. 
Shades balanced precariously on the bridge of her nose and
cell phone in hand, she easily passes muster as the
prototype of young stardom while at the same time earning
the contempt of the local teens, who include Blue (Brendan
Sexton III), his best friend Cale (Ethan Suplee), Cale's girl
friend Haley (Isidra Vega) All Terrain Vehicle champion Pete
(Casey Affleck), and Pete's spunky girl friend Ely (Christina
Ricci).  When a truck carrying a secret ingredient for a cola
drink explodes, some of its contents spilling over its driver,
the incident is about to be written off as a simple vehicular
accident.  When the driver mysteriously dies, the town is
quarantined by the FBI, forcing the urbane Skye to mix with
the unworldly townies.  
   In the typical story, the locals would be fascinated by the
star in their presence.  In Mr. Freeman's hands, however,
conventional expectations are reversed as Skye learns that
each of the seemingly faceless young people has tale to
unfold, some aspirations to satisfy.  Sexton III, known to his
core audience of teens and twenty-somethings as a decent
kid surrounded by petty thieves in Freeman's "Hurricane
Streets" and as a puckish adolescent in Todd Solondz's
"Welcome to the Dollhouse," does a particularly fine job.  As
a mature 19-year-old who adores his recently departed father
he is trying to fulfill his dad's dreams of turning the desert
sand into an ocean park which would attract a large tourist
clientele.  That this small-town lad captures the affections of
a big-city TV star is made believable by Sexton, whose
gentle, natural ways and caring demeanor give the spoiled
and cynical Skye a new way of looking at life and a few days
of pure fun in a place she least expected to find any.  
   The audience for this film cannot help being pulled in by
the simple pleasures of the kids: fun fights between a team
throwing oranges at another group firing potatoes out of a
cannon; the disaffected Ely's getting her kicks from
dynamiting canoes--who ultimately does bring water to a
parched wasteland and whose idea of what to do if this were
her last day on earth is to blow herself up together with her
parents.  The romantic interludes enjoyed by the kids are
dittoed by Skye's father and Blue's mom, Caroline (Lucinda
Jenney) who enjoy lively discussions in Caroline's coffee
shop while FBI Agent Bellows (Michael Ironside) is getting
drunk while guarding the road to the quarantined town.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
Samuel Goldwyn Films
90 minutes
starring Brendan Sexton III, Kate Hudson, Christina Ricci, John Heard,
Lucinda Jenney, Casey Affleck, Sara Gilbert, Isidra Vega, Ethan
Suplee, Michael Ironside
written and directed by Morgan J. Freeman
I absolutely love small-town movies. Maybe it's something about the
scenery; maybe it's something about the hopelessness of the
characters; maybe it's because I live in a big city. Whatever it is,
I'm not really sure. But something has drawn me to love films such as
"SubUrbia", "Dancer, Texas Pop.  81" and now "Desert Blue".
"Desert Blue" is the new film from writer-director Morgan J. Freeman
(not to be confused with the actor), whose previous film was the messy
but convincing teenage crime drama "Hurricane Streets".  Freeman, who
was the assistant director on Todd Solondz's "Welcome To The
Dollhouse", doesn't make great films, but he knows enough about teens
to accurately portray their emotions.
"Desert Blue" is set in Baxter, CA; home of the world's largest ice
cream cone. Among the population of 80-something are 5 distinctive
teenagers. There is Cale (Ethan Suplee), who wants to be a sheriff,
Haley (Isidra Vega), who works in her father's market, Pete (Casey
Affleck), who races his A.T.V. all day, and Ely (Christina Ricci), who
is obsessed with blowing stuff up with her homemade bombs. The fifth
teenager is Blue (Brendan Sexton III), who works all day on a waterpark
that his late father tried to build.
Blue's father wanted Baxter to become a tourist attraction, so he
built the ice cream cone and he started on a waterpark called "Baxter
Beach". Since Baxter is located on an aqueduct, water should have been
easy to get. But just then, Empire Cola Company moved in, and their
factory had all the rights to the aqueduct. Blue's father then died in
his sleep when a fire burned down the town's motel.
Some time later, Skye (Kate Hudson), a TV star, passes through town
with her dad (John Heard) who is writing a book about small-town
americana and roadside attractions.  The predictably bitchy Skye is
begging her father to take her back to L.A., but just then, a truck
carrying secret ingredients for Empire Cola crashes on the side of the
road, releasing a toxic gas that may be poisonous. A quarantine is
issued, and Skye is forced to stay in town.
At first, Skye won't go anywhere near the group of teens, but when it
becomes apparent that there is nothing else to do, she begins to hang
out with them. Blue and Skye (mind the pun) especially start to hit it
off. Blue has never seen her TV show, but he is fascinated by her,
since she is from the real world. As it goes in the movies, Skye turns
out to have a heart of gold, and Blue finds himself in love with her.
An interesting aspect of "Desert Blue" is that the citizens don't feel
that they're missing much, but when they are quarantined, they realize
that they don't want to be trapped in town forever. A "Breakfast
Club"-like conversation occurs when the teens ask themselves what they
want to make of their lives.
The main conflict of the film is the kids trying to overthrow the
authority of FBI Agent Bellows, who is trying to keep them from
"infecting" anyone, since they may have come into contact with the
toxic formula.
Morgan J. Freeman has crafted a quirky, engaging and affecting
film. "Desert Blue" is rough around the edges, but Freeman knows how
to write and direct the fine cast of teens.  Brendan Sexton III, who
starred in "Hurricane Streets", has some nice chemistry with Kate
Hudson, Goldie Hawn's daughter who appeared in "200 Cigarettes"(with
Christina Ricci and Casey Affleck). Ricci's character is more of a
caricature, but she brings her wit and cynicism to the role.
"Desert Blue" is a quintessential small town film. It addresses the
issues of small town life, and it looks at a part of America that we
often never encounter. Freeman is a talent to keep an eye on.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 

