Title
Review for Fun (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Sam Leininger
Director: Rafal Zielinski
Cast: Alicia Witt, Renee Humphrey, William Moses, Leslie Hope
Written by James Bolsey from his play
Rating: No MPAA rating (violence, language)
Sundance Grand Jury awards to Alicia Witt and Renee Humphrey
No distributor as of Oct. 21, 1994
In a nutshell:
     FUN is a sometimes disturbing but excellent look at the effects of
physical and psychological violence.  On a scale of -4 to +4, I give it
a +3.8.
     Bonnie and Hilary are two teenage girls (played by Alicia Witt and
Renee Humphrey, respectively) who in one day meet, become best friends,
and kill an old lady.  We meet them in jail as they are interviewed by
the prison psychologist and a sleazy magazine reporter, revealing their
relationship and the events of the day.
     The duality of this picture on so many different levels makes the
film really come together as a whole.  Bonnie and Hilary have both
experienced abuse as younger girls, but both in a different way.
Bonnie has become a compulsive liar from a total lack of attention, and
Hilary was sexually abused by her father.  The two girls both have deep
problems from their past, which is what bonds them, but the two girls
are very different.  Hilary is able to express her feelings, and even
writes poetry, whereas Bonnie, who is *very* hyperactive, has buried
her problems so deep that the truth will probably never come out.
Alicia Witt and Renee Humphrey are absolutely fabulous, and have
characters that are very well constructed and deeper than most female
roles in film. The two main characters are just part of the dual nature
in this film.
     The prison interviews are shot in black and white in a very
documentary-type style.  Throughout the film, flashbacks in color take
us back to the day that Bonnie and Hilary had fun.  The two
"personalities" that the different styles take on create a whole image
that is greater than the sum of the parts. The color flashbacks are
more frantic, more excitable.  With the first flashback, we see the end
of the day -- Bonnie and Hilary are getting into bed to go to sleep,
and each flashback goes further and further back, creating great
anticipation for what you know is coming.  This style, and the talk of
Bonnie and Hilary, pull out lots of different emotions as you follow
them on their day.  At first, there is a certain excitement associated
with the murder, and when Bonnie and Hilary finally kill the lady, the
stark horror really hits home.  They stab her thirty-four times, and
show the death in real time.  This is a very graphic and powerful
scene, and is much more real than, say, the violence in "Pulp
Fiction."  This one act of violence is so raw and blunt, nothing needs
to be said.
     In a society and industry that feeds on the glorification of
violence, it is refreshing to see a film that uses violence to show the
value of life, or rather of wasted life -- Bonnie's and Hilary's as
well as the old lady's.  Bonnie and Hilary are as much victims as the
old lady is, and none of the three will be saved, but maybe if people
watch this film, they will think a little more about how precious life
is at any age.
     This film was made on the scraping up of money, and is very raw.
Zielinski explained that when he was making the film, he finished it
without outside investors, and added that "sometimes less is more."
There is no Dolby Surround Sound, the black and white footage was shot
on 16mm, and the film has a more personal feel; there is more of a
connection between the characters, the director, and the audience.
"Fun" makes the girls a part of you, and you don't easily forget them.
"Fun" is a film that sticks with you days after you see it.  You think
about it and remember it, which is good, very good.
     The sad thing about this film is that it isn't yet picked up by a
major distributor, and currently only showing at festivals.  I
recommend that anyone who has the chance to see this film, *do not*
pass it up.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Renee Humphrey, Alicia Witt, Leslie Hope, William R. Moses, 
      Ania Suli 
Director: Rafal Zielinski 
Producer: Rafal Zielinski 
Screenplay: James Bosley based on his play 
Cinematography: Jens Sturup 
Music: Marc Tschanz, the Armagedoon Dildos, and G. F. Handel 
No U.S. Distributor 
     It's said that the worst thing for a parent is to watch the burial 
of their child.  But what about watching the burial of someone murdered 
by their child?  In Rafal Zielinski's insightful and unsettling FUN, the 
premise is that two teenage girls meet, form an immediate friendship, 
and go in search of something "important" to share.  That "something" 
becomes the brutal and conscienceless slaughter of an elderly woman 
whose only crime was to trust them. 
     FUN is presented in two time lines:  the present, when Hillary 
(Renee Humphrey) and Bonnie (Alicia Witt) have been tried, convicted, 
and sentenced; and the past, when events before and after the murder are 
recounted in flashbacks.  Although the different time frames are 
interleaved, there's little opportunity for confusion.  The sequences in 
the correctional institute, which feature Hillary and Bonnie's 
interactions with a counselor (Leslie Hope) and a magazine reporter 
(William R. Moses), are in black-and-white, while the flashbacks are in 
color.  Not only do the different cinematographic styles separate time 
periods, they emphasize tone.  The "fun", reckless day of freedom is 
saturated by color; the aftermath is presented in bleak, monochromatic 
16 mm. 
     The meat of the story focuses on the psychology of the girls' 
actions.  Together, neither is likely to commit such a crime, but, as a 
pair, they become lethal.  There is no guilt or remorse.  The killing -- 
a bloody, sadistic crime -- is shrugged off as just another way to enjoy 
life.  It's the source of an adrenaline rush, a way to get high without 
drugs.  It forges the kind of permanent bond in a new friendship that no 
mundane act can accomplish.  And it's a way for the killers to prove to 
themselves that they exist outside the boundaries of normalcy. 
     Hillary and Bonnie's friendship is neither traditional nor healthy.  
>From the moment they meet, the pair experience a mutual, instant 
connection.  The gradual development crucial to most relationships is 
bypassed.  This is love at first sight, and it leads to one intense, 
passionate day of sharing everything -- life stories, secrets, and a 
murder.  There is no moderation, and the desperate neediness with which 
these two interact is disturbing.  Hillary and Bonnie are no longer 
individuals -- they have acquired a single, psychotic identity. 
     Character development in FUN is superior.  Not only does Zielinski 
delve into the personalities of his protagonists, but he gives us random 
pieces of information to flesh out the less important characters.  The 
counselor, for example, is not just a mouthpiece of judicial platitudes 
-- she's constantly fighting to overcome a misspent past.  And the 
journalist, despite the scavenger-like nature of his job, learns to care 
about the subjects of his latest article. 
     But, of course, everything comes back to Hillary and Bonnie, and 
the marvelous manner in which their characters are written and realized.  
These girls have deeply rooted problems.  As a child, Hillary was 
repeatedly sexually abused by her father, and it's indicative of her 
nature that she claims he didn't hurt her -- he just raped her.  Bonnie, 
with a wild, flamboyant personality that contrasts with her friend's 
introspective moodiness, is desperately in need of love, and will do or 
say anything to get it. 
     Obviously, there will be no Academy Awards for FUN; even if it had 
a U.S. distributor (which it doesn't), this isn't the sort of movie to 
attract the necessary publicity.  That said, however, Alicia Witt's 
remarkable performance is far better than that of most Oscar winners.  
Renee Humphrey is good in her own right, but she is constantly eclipsed 
by her co-star.  Only when the two girls are separated does the strength 
of Humphrey's performance come across. 
     Zielinski has a tremendous sense of mood and atmosphere, and he 
uses all the tools at his disposal to fashion the perfect tone.  His 
choice of music ranges from the heavy metal rock of a group called the 
Armagedoon Dildos to the classical strains of Handel's MESSIAH (this is 
probably the most unique usage ever of the choral "And He Shall 
Purify").  The camera work is impressive, and the choice of mixing color 
and black-and-white works to better effect here than in MRS. PARKER AND 
THE VICIOUS CIRCLE. 
     With themes and ideas in common with the likes of HEAVENLY 
CREATURES, HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER, NATURAL BORN KILLERS, and 
Kieslowski's A SHORT FILM ABOUT KILLING, FUN is an example of a motion 
picture willing to tackle more than one thought-provoking concept.  The 
intelligent, gripping result succeeds impressively, and presents a more 
complete and provocative portrait of relevant issues than any of those 
films.  Above all, however, FUN gives us a chance to peer into the 
psyches of two memorable characters.  The images we come away with will 
not soon be forgotten. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Christopher Null
     I find it amazing that *two* films about teenage girls slaughtering an
older woman would be released within a year of each other.  I find it even
more amazing that both turned out to be compelling, exceptional films.
     FUN, the more recent of the two films, is the story of two American
middle-class teens, one (Renee Humphrey's Hillary) is the victim of an
abusive father, the other (Alicia Witt's Bonnie) is an ultra-hyper
compulsive liar.  The two discover an instant bond and after one fun-filled
day of adventure, they decide to end the day's games with the brutal murder
of a local grandmother whose primary preoccupation is with BINGO.  For
"fun."
     HEAVENLY CREATURES, 1994's stunner (and Oscar nominee for Best Original
Screenplay), was a very similar tale of obsession among two friends which
ends in the murder of one of the girls' mother.  HEAVENLY CREATURES was a
true story made to seem almost unreal.  FUN is fiction, and it's almost too
believable.
     Half of the film was shot in mock-documentary fashion, on grainy, black
and white Super 16mm.  This half of the movie follows the girls after their
conviction for the murder.  The other half of the picture is in vivid color,
and traces the events of the fateful day.  The two halves are beautifully
intercut together with seamless editing by Monica Lightstone.
     Director Rafael Zelinsky does a remarkable job as well, balancing the
angelic looks of two girls, who only want to have fun, with the dark and
twisted desires that apparently lurk beneath their surfaces.  Credit has to
go to Witt and Humphrey as well (both won acting awards at Sundance), who
play their parts with sublime perfection.  Humphrey is a bit mature for her
15 year-old character, but Witt is an undeniable chameleon at taking on a
persona and making it her own.
     Although the film is a bit draggy during some of the prison scenes and
has a questionable performance by Leslie Hope as the girls' crusty
counselor, there's very little to complain about.  The power of FUN is in
watching these girls embrace their crime, even as they face an eternity in
prison in painful separation from each other.  They loved the murder; they
have no remorse.  It was "nuclear."  It was "fun."  The moral implications
weigh heavy on the viewer, and it stays with you for days afterward.
Ultimately, the film serves as a serious and disturbing reminder that "fun"
can be anything but.
-Christopher Null / null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Film Critic, Screenwriter, Novelist (Mailing list available)

Author
Shane Burridge
Few would have expected Rafal Zielinski, a director of simple teenage
sex comedies, to come up with this riveting study of two girls
detained in a juvenile correction facility.  Bonnie (Alicia Witt) and
Hillary (Renee Humphrey) meet on the side of the road one morning.  By
the day's end they have committed themselves to a lifelong friendship
sealed in a pact of blood.  William R. Moses and Leslie Hope play the
two adults trying to get to grips with the two girls and unearth the
full story behind their crime.  While both have common goals, their
motivations are different - Hope is a prim, businesslike prison
counselor determined to drive a wedge between the closed bond the
girls have formed; Moses is a magazine journalist who at first appears
out of his depth but gradually gains some insight into Hillary, the
more approachable of the duo.  His reasons for `getting the story'
have a resonance that is relevant to our experience of the film
itself: he feels it is Hillary's duty to explain every detail of her
senseless, violent crime so that she may share with his readers her
experience and help them understand what makes a young teenager go so
wildly off the rails.  Of course, we are undergoing an identically
vicarious situation by not only peering in on the interrogation of the
two girls but also reliving their crime through flashbacks.  Whether
or not, however, we gain a greater understanding of the girls is
murky.  Throughout, they insist on only one motivation for their acts:
fun.
I'm not sure why Zielinski chose to film the present-day sequences in
black and white and the flashbacks in color (other than to subvert the
convention of doing it the other way around) but they provide an
appropriate contrast of worlds - the word of adult reason, where there
is a clear definition of right and wrong/black and white; and the
girls' own world, an ephemeral, careless playground of `fun'.  As the
two teenagers, Witt and Humphrey are dazzling.  Witt is so natural
it's hard to believe her lines were scripted - what an ear for
dialogue writer James Bosley has!  Her delirious performance is what
you'll remember most from this film.  FUN is not for all tastes: these
girls are frank, vulgar, and frighteningly irresponsible - some
viewers may be disturbed that teenagers will identify with the
characters' high-octane teen angst and take their own best-friend
coteries to an illogical extreme.  This seems more specifically
pertinent when you remember that Bonnie and Hillary, who are greatly
influenced by movies and television themselves, appear uninterested in
forming any dissociation between their realities and fictions. 
Hillary frames her prison interviews the way they would exist in a
TV-movie; Bonnie, a habitual liar, persists in reciting a scenario in
which she is one of an army of invisible ninja.  The irony is that
this effect makes the movie appear even more real.  In fact, what's
most spooky about it is that its resemblance to based-on-fact
dramatizations is so strong there's virtually no distinction between
them.
