Title
Review for 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Dragan Antulov
Few days ago people of the world had some opportunity to
rest from the usual depressive news about coups, wars,
disasters and presidential adulteries because world media
finally turned their attention to more serene and heavenly
subjects. One of those subjects is U.S. space shuttle
"Endeavour" and its mission with the aim of connecting space
modules - building blocks of the International Space
Station. This news story invigorated many Space Age
enthusiasts, but also filled their hearts with sadness.
Their beloved Space Station, even when becomes finally built
and fully operational in few years, would be far from
fulfilling their dreams. Most of those dreams were inspired
by a future envisioned in 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY by Stanley
Kubrick, the most influential and unique work ever made in
the history of seventh art.
In the small world of cult cinema, 2001 is somewhat shadowed
by other cinematic giants which are either more popular or
pleasing to the audience, either general or cult, or simply
more "earthly" to the mainstream critics and film scholar
who dictate what should be artistic summit or not. Another
thing that makes 2001 overlooked is the fact that its time
might be somewhat pass. Thirty years ago, space exploration
was a novelty able to catch people's imagination and inspire
idealistic visions of the bright future for entire mankind.
These days, almost nobody pays attention to space shuttles
and satellites unless they crash, and materialistic
considerations impede any ambitious plans for the human
presence in space. To the casual observer, 2001 might really
be discarded as the relict of age long gone, product of the
idealistic and naÔve minds, something that can't be
understood by today's cynical and nihilistic viewers,
especially those of Generation X.
Misunderstanding, however, isn't new problem for 2001. Even
during its premiere the movie was generally misunderstood -
critics panned it, because they didn't understand it, and
audience, inspired by contemporary psychedelic trend loved
it for the entirely wrong reasons. Even one of the movie
authors - screenwriter and famous science fiction novelist
Arthur C. Clarke - admitted that even he couldn't know what
the movie was all about. In the next thirty years countless
articles, essays, books, documentaries and scientific
studies would be written with the sole intent of trying to
answer those questions; despite their best efforts, the
audience would still remained confused as during the
premiere. However, the deliberate leaving of unanswered
questions benefited the movie and helped it to survive as
cult favourite for three decades. Mostly because 2001,
unlike most of other movies, has a unique ability to affect
its audience - whether they like the movie or not, or
whether they understand it or not, they can feel they are
experiencing something grand and magnificent, even if they
can't find the proper words to describe it or explain it.
The only thing that can be explained more or less coherently
is plot. The movie begins with the prologue set roughly
4,000,000 years ago in East Africa. Small band of
prehistoric ape-men, including Moonwatcher (Daniel Richter)
lives a poor, short and brutal life, plagued by famine and
under constant danger of predators. One day Moonwatcher
discovers big, black shining monolith. The artefact of
supposedly alien intelligence inspires Moonwatcher to use
intelligence of his own - he discovers the bone as weapon,
which leads to water buffalos as a new source of food for
his tribe. After defeating the rival tribe in a war for
water, Moonwatcher symbolically throws the bone in the air.
In the next shot - often regarded as the most spectacular
transition in the history of cinema - bone transforms in the
space satellite that roams the Earth's orbit 4,000,000 years
later. It is only one of the objects in Earth's orbit, full
of different spaceships, including one that carries Doctor
Heywood Floyd (William Sylvester), American space bureacrat,
to the Moon. Floyd is set to oversee the investigation of
monolith found on the Moon's surface. The monolith emits
signals to Jupiter, and 18 months later, US space ship
Discovery is sent to investigate the fourth planet of our
solar system. The spaceship is manned by two astronauts -
Frank Pool (Gary Lockwood) and Dave Bowman (Keir Dullea),
but actually controlled by HAL 9000, computer equipped with
artificial intelligence (voice by Douglas Rain). During the
voyage, allegedly infallible computer begins to make
mistakes, which forces the human crew to think about
disconnecting it.
Even those who don't like the lack of clarity in 2001 are
forced to admit that, on the technical side, this film
really deserves to praised as one of the milestones in the
history of cinema. Its director, Stanley Kubrick, made great
movies before (LOLITA) and after (A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, filmed
three years later, is actually preferred by mainstream
critics), but in this film he used all his talent to make
something really remarkable. First of all, 10 million US$
budget - something that looked like a fortune and was almost
unimaginable for science fiction at the time - was used to
create very detailed world of future supertechnology. Along
the professional production and costume designers, Kubrick
employed the talents of futurologists and real-life
scientists and  space vehicle designers, which resulted in
the high level of plausibility and authenticity for a
futuristic movie (the real life instruction for a zero
gravity toilet is just the most common example). Another
important element were the groundbreaking special effects;
Kubrick, together with legendary Douglas Trumbull,
introduced many revolutionary techniques that helped the
audience to suspend its disbelief and make studio-recreated
space, including zero gravity look also authentic. Thanks to
those effects, 2001 looks as convincing now as it looked for
the unsuspecting audience thirty years ago (and despite the
fact that we couldn't see such level of technology in
real-life 2001). Finally, Kubrick was also revolutionary in
using non-original music; his choice was superb and some
themes - especially those by Johann Strauss ("An der
schoenen blauen Donau") and Richard Strauss ("Also Spracht
Zarathustra") - would stay forever associated with his
powerful imagery.
The actors of the movie remained mostly forgotten and that
shouldn't surprise anyone, because this is the movie of the
sights, sounds and ideas and not of the great memorable
characters. Most of those characters are either hidden
behind ape-like costumes (Moonwatcher), or presented like
boring bureacrats (Floyd) or astronauts turned emotionally
numb by the boredom of their job (Pool, Bowman). Ironically,
it is the non-human character, HAL, that brings real human
dimension to the events of the movie by expressing genuine
emotions. Furthermore, there are relatively few words spoken
in the entire movie - and most of the lines are trivial and
serve only to illustrate banality and boredom of the life in
the Space Age. The only lines that entered movie lovers'
collective memory are the HAL's famous last words.
2001 is a movie as close to perfection as one movie can be.
Those who deny it such status are probably those who
question its plausibility. We are less than three (one, if
you consider the 1999 segment) years away from the world
presented in the movie, and most of the movie looks dated or
overoptimistic now. Our space technology seems decades, if
not centuries behind those presented in Kubrick's vision.
Our fashions and social customs changed drastically compared
with the late 1960s; the Cold War, that provided material
for one of the more banal conversations in the movie, is
thing of the past. Our computers didn't develop artificial
intelligence. But are all those false predictions reasons
enough for us to downgrade 2001? Is the Orwellian vision
moot because the world in 1984 lacked Big Brother? Should we
discard BLADE RUNNER when November 2019 comes without
replicants in sight? The answer should be no. The movie was
authentic by 1968 standards, and it was very plausible,
taking into consideration contemporary trends. 2001 is a
movie that presents future that probably won't happen, but
also the future that might have happened. Even as false
vision, 2001 remains powerful one, able to inspire us to ask
questions about our existence, our true nature as human
beings and, finally, our future.

Author
Brian Koller
"2001" is probably the most original film ever made.
It is so different from conventional films that,
in fact, it may be a different art form altogether.
Even the very best films, such as "Casablanca",
"Rebecca" and "Chinatown" have formulaic elements.
In contrast, "2001" is in its own world, as if
all the movies made before had never existed.
While director Stanley Kubrick has made even better
films ("Dr. Strangelove" and "Barry Lyndon", and
perhaps others I haven't yet seen), "2001" will
always be the most impressive, just for its
originality and audacity.
The film has four parts.  The first section is the
dawn of man.  Man-apes are taught to use tools and
kill by an imposing black monolith.  In the second
part, a second black monolith is found buried in
the moon by astronauts in the year 2001.  This leads
to a mission to Jupiter by another team of astronauts
and a talkative, emotional computer named Hal.
The final and most surreal part has astronaut Dave
traveling to the infinite and beyond.
"2001" opened to mixed reviews.  Many critics were
(and perhaps still are) put off by the lack of
dialogue and character development, the slow pace,
and surreal imagery. "2001" is a story told by
cinematography, with much of the meaning left to
the imagination of the viewer.
The film's significance was not lost on the Oscar
committee, however, which awarded "2001" Best
Special Effects and Best Art Direction.  Kubrick
was nominated for Best Director, and the film
was nominated for Best Writing.  It is odd that
the sparse script was nominated instead of
cinematography.
The most developed character in the film is Hal,
a computer that is more emotional than the
robotlike humans that accompany him on the
mission.  The confrontation between Hal (voiced
by Douglas Rain) and Dave (Keir Dullea) is the
most interesting part of the film, more so
than the increasingly bizarre and unfathomable
finale.
Trivia: "2001" took three years to film.  Supposedly
there was 200 times more film shot than was used in
the final version.  The little girl in the telephone
video is Kubrick's daughter Vivienne.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Paul McElligott
Starring: Keir Dullea, Gary Lockwood, William Sylvester, Douglas Rain
Written by Arthur C. Clarke and Stanley Kubrick
Produced and Directed by Stanley Kubrick
2001 is probably the most review-proof film in the history of cinema. 
Critics who try to do an in-depth analysis always come off sounding like
freshman philosophy students.  In a lot of ways, 2001 is the ultimate
cinematic Rorschach test.  Any review winds up saying more about the
reviewer than about the film itself.
Instead of trying to tell you what I think it all means, I will satisfy
myself with saying that I think 2001 is a singularly important film. 
Aside from Citizen Kane, it may be the most significant film in the
first 100 years of cinema.  More than any other film, before or since,
it shows that film can be used for something beyond mere storytelling. 
Almost all other "great films" still hold to a more traditional
narrative structure.
Not so here.  It would be pointless to summarize the plot of 2001,
because the plot is almost beside the point.  This is cinema as mood
piece, the use of imagery to stir the mind in ways that go beyond
reason.  2001 is a film to be experienced and then dwelt upon at length,
rather than just watched.  If no one comes to the same conclusions, so
much the better.  I seem to remember that director Kubrick compared the
structure of this film to that of symphony.  I think this is accurate. 
2001 is as open to individual interpretation as any good piece of
classical music.
I have said elsewhere that I would not classify this film as science
fiction, unless one considers metaphysics to be a science.  Still,
Kubrick's insistence upon rigid technical accuracy means that the
science-fiction elements are some of the most sophisticated ever
committed to film.
In this vein, the middle and later sections of the film which follow
Heywood Floyd to the lunar crater Tycho and then follow Dave Bowman to
Jupiter and beyond present us, the viewers of 1999, with a strange
contradiction.  Even though the film's view of man's relationship to
technology is rather bleak, the level of technology portrayed for the
years 1999-2001 appears wildly optimistic.  It is fascinating to see
just how big we were dreaming back in the 1960's.
2001's predictions about the future are a wild collection of hits and
misses.  It's true that there are no giant wheel-like space stations in
orbit, but the first elements of a more modest station are already in
place.  Its interior, however, will not resemble the concourse at
Heathrow.  And although the Pan-Am space plane was overly optimistic,
both about luxurious 747-style passenger travel in space and also about
the existence of the airline itself, the design of the ship does
accurately predict the basic shape of the space shuttle we currently
fly.
Like I said, the film's view of man's relationship to his machines is
almost relentlessly pessimistic.   How could it be otherwise when the
only character with a semblance of a personality is a sentient
supercomputer, and a homicidal one at that?  The scene in which the HAL
9000 kills the still hibernating astronauts is especially chilling when
the camera focuses on the computer ubiquitous red eye, like a
traditional movie would dwell on the face of a murderer surveying his
handiwork.  With a human killer, we could read the expression on the
face, maniacal glee or tortured guilt.  With HAL, the lack of any
possibility of expression means that we have a killer whose motives are
both unknown and unknowable.  I challenge even the makers of The Blair
Witch Project to concoct a scarier scenario than that.
And the following scene, in which the pitiless killer begs for its own
existence as David Bowman coldly and mechanically disassembles its
higher mental functions, adds an equally chilling coda to that idea. 
Our attempt to create technology in our own image has succeeded in
duplicating even the darker corners of our nature.
The human characters are overshadowed by both HAL and the alien
monolith, but unlike other technology-driven effects films, this is not
accidental or a deficiency.  In 2001, the human characters are almost
elements of the scenery, their interaction part of the background
noise.  Heywood Floyd (Sylvester) is a non-stop stream of unctuous
pleasantries.  His bland company-man exterior makes his reminder that
security oaths will be required from anyone who knows about the monolith
all the more ominous.  He seems like a nice-enough guy, but his words
hint at rather authoritarian attitudes.
Astronauts Bowman (Dullea) and Poole (Lockwood), on the other hand, seem
to have totally submerged their personalities into their jobs, until
they almost act like machines.  Their responses seem almost programmed,
automatic, while their computer goes about having a nervous breakdown. 
I found it ironically amusing when, in response to a reporter's
question, Poole says that HAL acts like he has emotions, and says so in
the most unemotional voice of which a human is capable.
2001 is not a movie for the people who log into the Video section of
Amazon.com and blather that Armageddon is "the greatest movie ever
made!"  This film makes demands that its audience try to understand what
it is trying to say without it being explained, but doesn't care if we
fail to do so.  The pace is almost glacial at times, but the film
rewards and doesn't bore those willing to make the effort.

Author
Chad Polenz
2001: A Space Odyssey
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1968, G, 141 minutes [2 hours, 21 minutes]
[science fiction]
starring: Keir Dullea (Dave Bowman), Douglas Rain (voice of HAL 9000), Gary
Lockwood (Frank Poole), William Sylvester (Dr. Heywood Floyd), written by
Stanley Kubrick, Arthur C. Clarke, produced and directed by Stanley Kubrick. 
"2001: A Space Odyssey" lives up to its name by taking a profound look at
mankind. It wonders what our significance is in the universe, and questions
how intelligent we really are. It uses invisible, but powerful forces to
manipulate plot, which in turn allows the viewer to use his/her own
intelligence to decide what themes and ideas are being portrayed.
The opening scene depicts a large group of apes at the dawn of time who
encounter a mysterious monolith that suddenly appears out of nowhere. When
they touch it they become just a little bit smarter as they learn to make
weapons and tools. Although this is blatant storytelling it is symbolic of
the entire film as it uses simplicity to make for powerful themes.
We then flash forward to year 1999 where we meet Dr. Heywood Floyd
(Sylvester), an American scientist  en route to the moon. Floyd leads a
scientific mission on the moon where they have discovered a monolith buried
40 feet below the surface. Here is where the aforementioned "invisible
forces" really come into play. The scientists realize the monolith was
deliberately buried, which also means some intelligent being put it there for
a reason. And just like those primitive apes, the scientists crowd around the
monolith in awe which emits a radio signal (another unseen force) towards
Jupiter. The reason is unknown, but the fact we know there is a reason at all
is a frightening in a way.
The story again changes as it skips ahead 18 months to the U.S.S. Discovery
1 on its way to  "The Jupiter Mission" to study a new monolith orbiting
Jupiter. The Discovery's crew is led by Dave Bowman (Dullea), and Frank Poole
(Lockwood), along with the artificial intelligence computer HAL 9000 (voiced
by Rain). Kubrick's storytelling establishes a very high-tech atmosphere
quickly as to make Bowman and Poole appear primitive and almost useless
compared to the machines and computers. They seem intimidated by HAL's
intelligence and capabilities.
Kubrick's film emphasizes the value of humanity by paradoxically
dehumanizing the characters. The storytelling is slowly paced but always
interesting to watch due to the detail and realistic atmosphere. When it
seems as if HAL has gone insane the mood becomes quite chilling especially
considering how gentle and humanistic HAL's personality is.
The last act ties all the plots together to make for an overall enigmatic
mood and theme. Bowman and Poole become victims of HAL's "breakdown," but
Bowman survives and then approaches the monolith orbiting Jupiter. What
follows is one of the most bizarre, yet most blatantly thematic sequence of
events I have ever encountered. It's a mind-blowing experience because of the
sense of the unknown and unexplained. It's poetic and philosophical due to
the fact there's no one correct answer.
What makes "2001: A Space Odyssey" such an excellent film is the fact that
not only does it epitomize filmmaking (good acting, superb effects, well
scripted, thematic, etc.), it makes for a theme about humanity that is
powerful no matter how you look at it.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, please check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
I don't think any one director's film stands out as clearly as his or
her masterpiece as '2001: A Space Odyssey' does for Stanley Kubrick.
Amazingly, in my opinion, the film doesn't look dated at all.  On DVD,
the clarity, colour, resolution and overall presentation have held up
remarkably well.  It's the kind of film that contains hypnotic elements
directly intended to stir any imagination and conjure up debate
contained in its religious overtones.  It's also the kind of film that
means different things to different people.  The entertainment value of
it's beginning, middle and ending depend entirely on your views of
evolution vs. creationism.
In 1989's 'Field of Dreams', Ray Kinsella (Kevin Costner) observes while
speaking to Terence Mann (James Earl Jones) that he once read a passage
he wrote that speaks of all the cosmic tumblers of the universe falling
into place and for a brief moment the universe opens up to show you
what's possible.  This was never more true than for the film '2001: A
Space Odyssey', as it is a film far ahead of its time and when it was
released in 1968, it kept in line with director Stanley Kubrick's
central theme of technology running amok.
Failing to earn a Best Picture Oscar nomination, '2001: A Space Odyssey'
did get nominations for Kubrick as Best Director, Best Screenplay, based
on the work of author Arthur C. Clarke's 'The Sentinel'.  Clarke
co-wrote the screenplay with Kubrick.  The film received additional
Oscar nominations for its sets and Kubrick won an Oscar for creating,
supervising and executing the film's tremendously revolutionary visual
effects.
Beginning in prehistoric times with what the film's opening caption puts
forward as 'The Dawn of Man', apes move around on a huge open wasteland
and display the barbaric attributes that would remain intact as
evolution would eventually make them humans.  A group of the beasts
awaken one morning to find a a large rectangular black slab among the
natural landscape of desert rock.  The primates are astonished by its
remarkably smooth texture and divine construction, perhaps it served as
a stepping stone (no pun intended) for mankind's progress in the things
he later invented.  Perhaps the wheel, the printing press and other
forms of ancient technology could be derived from this.  The large
rectangular black slab is known as the monolith.  The monolith appears
later in the film and its purpose remains a mystery.
>From a slow motion shot of a primate throwing a bone in the air, the
film cuts to a time we now know as being near to the 21st century as a
space craft in the similar shape of the bone travels through outer space
and we are treated to some wonderful classical music by Strauss as we
gaze in splendor at Kubrick's fantastic visual style.
The monolith appears again in 1999 on the moon near the Sea of
Tranquility as an expedition team of American astronauts finds it and
the monolith omits an eerie ringing to deafen all who come into contact
with it.
Next is the Jupiter mission in the year 2001. Astronauts David Bowman
(Keir Dullea) and Frank Poole (Gary Lockwood) lead an expedition team
aboard the spacecraft Discovery.  They are seen as the rest of the crew
is in hibernation for the long trip.  The computer overseeing the
mission is HAL 9000.  I noticed that the three letters after H, A and L
are I, B and M.  Coincidence?  Who knows?  Seems clever to me.  HAL 9000
is voiced by actor Douglas Rain who has an eerie emptiness in his voice,
making HAL a most chilling character and the best developed one in the
movie, even more so than his human counter parts.
As the mission proceeds there is an apparent malfunction by the HAL 9000
computer and this leads to the beginning of the film's stunning climax
where silence is used as powerfully as any loud, expensive action film
where the noise is deafening.  This is the film's greatest asset.  The
terror of being alone in space where the silence is extremely loud to
the human condition is felt as clearly as actually being in the film.
The term 'Space Odyssey' pertains mostly to the film's last half hour as
astronaut Bowman is transported to a part of the universe not only
unexplored by man but unimagined as well.  The mansion style
surroundings contained in the film's lavish conclusion where a bedroom,
bathroom and dining room are seen by Bowman observing his own origins
and future lend suspicions that mankind's origins have an outer space
connection which is a theory put forward by many scientists.
I must confess that I am not a student of literature.  I don't read
books.  When I observe a film, I judge it only on its own merits and any
comparisons I may draw to its literary origins are based on what I've
heard and researched.  One thing I didn't like about the sequel to
'2001: A Space Odyssey' entitled '2010: The Year We Make Contact' is the
explanation of why the HAL 9000 computer failed.  The computer was
apparently told of the true nature of the mission and instructed not to
reveal anything to Bowman or Poole so when HAL was questioned by the
astronauts in the original film, he became trapped and not having the
human capacity to lie, he malfunctioned.  This seems like a cop out to
the original film's theme of technology running amok as I mentioned in
the second paragraph as '2010' explains that human meddling caused HAL
to malfunction rather than HAL malfunctioning on his own.
'2001: A Space Odyssey' is a marvel of film making not for what it does
but for what it doesn't do.  It doesn't try to be a film with a formula,
primary character development or scathing amounts of dialogue.  There is
in fact, very little dialogue in its running time of nearly two and a
half hours and Stanley Kubrick's intention is to leave his audience with
something to take home in their minds and reflect upon it as not only a
work of art but as an experience designed to push the full limits of the
human imagination.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Jerry Saravia
In my early childhood, two images stayed with me and frightened me for a long 
time. One was the Mona Lisa, a reproduction that was hanging in my bedroom 
wall. The other was the Star Child from "2001: A Space Odyssey." I am still 
not sure why the latter frightened me so but I think a baby inside a 
shimmering, circular sphere would be enough to impress any 6-year-old. "2001: 
A Space Odyssey" has many memorable images and, in my mind, it is still the 
best science-fiction film ever made - the only one to truly capture the 
essence of space travel, from Jupiter to the infinite where the ineffable 
mysteries of what lies ahead holds a certain fascination for many of us here 
on Earth. I think that we tend to forget that we're a small point of interest 
in the universe and "2001" makes us feel how insignificant we are. 
Based on Arthur C. Clarke's short story, "The Sentinel," "2001" begins with 
the famous "Dawn of Man" section where numerous apes are seen living in 
cavernous surroudings. Leopards are predominant and hungry in the horizon. 
The apes shield themselves from other animals or fellow apes by mostly 
growling...but their peaceful existence is out to be demolished in one swift 
stroke. One particular ape, the Moonwatcher, develops the intelligence to 
realize that a bone can be used as a weapon - not only to eat meat by means 
of hunting and killing animals, but as a defense against other irate apes.  
And so, while his group of apes growls at the others, Moonwatcher strikes one 
ape with a bone. The peaceful, vegetarian apes have learned that violence can 
be instrumental in establishing order and change. And so the slow-motion shot 
of the Moonwatcher triumphantly throwing the bone up in the air segues to a 
magnificent transitional cut to the Orion spaceship of the 21st century - man 
has evolved and now space, which was a
 sight for the apes who gazed at the bright moonlit sky, has become the new 
frontier for more discoveries and perhaps new signs of intelligence.
It is the year 2001, as we see ships gracefully travelling through space. One 
of them carries Dr. Heywood Floyd (William Sylvester), an American scientist 
travelling from earth to a lunar space station. At the station, Floyd 
discusses to other Americans about the discovery of a monolith at Clavius, a 
station on the moon. There is a wonderfully subtle scene where, prior to the 
meeting, Floyd is reluctant to discuss the situation at Clavius to a couple 
of curious Russian scientists - he claims to know nothing about it yet admits 
he is unable to discuss it. 
The Clavius excavation is followed by the mission to Jupiter where astronauts 
Dr. David Bowman (Keir Dullea) and Dr. Frank Poole (Gary Lockwood) are 
travelling in the Discovery ship. On board are three scientists who are in 
deep hibernation for the length of the trip and the HAL 9000 computer (voiced 
by Douglas Rain), who is the brains and the eyes of the ship. Bowman and 
Poole are unaware of the purpose of the mission but HAL knows - 
unfortunately, HAL may have committed an error in judgment on a supposedly 
malfunctioning antenna. Bowman and Poole feel nothing is wrong with the 
ship's antennae, according to their thorough observations as well as that of 
another HAL 9000 computer's test from the U.S. Mission Control. Is HAL wrong, 
or are the astronauts erroneous in their calculations? Can a supercomputer 
like HAL make a mistake or are the humans at fault? 
The final half-hour of the film is one of the most superbly suspenseful, 
thrilling, visionary moments in the history of film. After Bowman realizes 
that HAL has intent to kill before letting anyone jeopardize the mission, he 
quickly disconnects HAL and begins a journey into the infinite when a 
floating monolith makes contact with him. Thus, Bowman sees a dazzling array 
of formations of geometric shapes of lights, clusters of stars, an infinite 
number of colored rays and, finally, an eighteenth century bedroom where 
noises and laughter are heard bouncing along the corridors of the unique 
decor. It is here where Bowman sees himself as a dying old man and 
ultimately, becomes the Star Child - the last evolutionary step for mankind.
Most audiences and critics were understandably puzzled by the film since more 
questions are drawn up than answers (imagine how poorly this film would have 
fared if it played in theatres today where implication is always eroded in 
favor of explicating). Does Dave Bowman become the Star Child? Is the 
monolith an alien intelligence or an evolutionary step in mankind, or both?
In answer to that question, I interpret the monolith, as I always have, as 
the next step in the evolutionary ladder and a sign of evolving intelligence, 
as demonstrated in the Dawn of Man sequence. Strangely enough, I never 
thought of it as an alien intelligence, despite the fact that scientists in 
the film allude to it as such. Heck, they could be wrong since scientists do 
make errors. 
Did HAL 9000 plan to fool Bowman and Poole with the faulty mechanism in the 
ship's antennae or did HAL really think there was a malfunction, thus making 
us believe that computers can make errors? 
I am willing to go with the latter since computers can make errors. Why? 
Well, they are man-made, aren't they? Humans make errors all the time so it 
is conceivable that a computer, like HAL 9000, could make an error. 
Ironically, as Kubrick seems to indicate, HAL is about as human and 
compassionate, to some degree, as most of the human characters in the film. 
Of course, HAL is also a murderer but he can express emotion - consider his 
final lines in the film where Dave is frantically unplugging his memory units 
("Just what do you think you are doing Dave? Dave, I am afraid.")
"2001" was once considered the ultimate acid trip back when it was released 
in 1968. 
There are also some who felt the film was too slow-paced and boring (Although 
I have heard the quote that Kubrick wanted to show that space travel was 
boring). I must disagree with the slow-pace - sure, it move slowly but it 
needs to. This is not the kind of story that requires the fast-paced, 
action-per-minute theatrics of "Star Wars." Instead, Kubrick moves his story 
slowly to show the beauty and mystery of space, the vastness of it, 
accompanied by the waltzes of composer Richard Strauss. Also noteworthy is 
the soundtrack, which is silent when Poole and Bowman investigate the 
antennae on the Discovery - occasionally you'll only hear them breathing 
which heightens the suspense. 
"2001" is not my personal favorite of Kubrick's (that honor would go to "A 
Clockwork Orange") but it is an extraordinary film of sights and sounds, and 
certainly the purest, most poetic and electrifying science-fiction film ever 
made. In its story of the vastness of space and beyond the infinite, we 
realize that in the end, our planet Earth is only a microcosm of the big 
picture. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY (director: Stanley Kubrick; writers:Arthur C.
Clarke/Stanley Kubrick, from Clarke's "The Sentinel''; cinematographer:
John Alcott /Geoffrey Unsworth; special effects: Douglas Trumbull; cast:
Keir Dullea (David Bowman), Gary Lockwood (Frank Poole),William
Sylvester (Dr. Heywood Floyd), Daniel Richter (Moonwatcher), Leonard
Rossiter (Smyslov), Margaret Tyzack (Elena), Robert Beatty (Dr.
Halvorsen), Sean Sullivan (Michaels), Douglas Rain (HAL 9000), Alan
Gifford (Poole's Father), Frank Miller (Mission Controller), Ed Bishop
(Lunar shuttle captain), UK-1968)
2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY is a meditative quest, an inspirational sci-fi
film that defies its genre in scope and attitude, it is a film of
tremendous visual impact and innovation. This was done before Star Wars
and at time when sci-fi films were were mostly low-budget productions.
It is Kubrick's masterpiece. A film that encourages our contemplation of
every scene, as each was carefully and intelligently shot with that in
mind, as it is only through our own effort can we come away with an
understanding of the film. It opens in darkness 4 million years ago with
the title "The Dawn of Man," showing the apes learning how to destroy
and how to create in order to stay alive (they use bones to make both
weapons and tools), and it ends in a bright light, a vision of evolving
consciousness as a black monolith is discovered and explored on Jupiter
by the mission astronauts, who will have found life outside the earth in
the form of a star child, who is hermetically sealed in a bedroom
outside of Jupiter.
The film is about the future 33 years from when the film was released,
which would be in 2001. The anticipation of computers and robots as
being a daily part of life is assumed, as the error free series 9000
computer, named Hal (Douglas Rain, Hal's voice), engages the scientists
in conversation and is programed to carry out every detail of the
mission to Jupiter. Hal is even programed with human emotions, but we
are not certain if these emotions are genuine.
The subplot shows a conflict that develops between Hal and the
spaceship's crew, David Bowman (Keir) and Frank Poole (Lockwood), when
Hal is accused by ground control of making a mistake about a
malfunctioning object aboard the ship and the crew secretly decides to
disconnect Hal, which he discovers because he ingeniously reads their
lips, even though they took every precaution not to be detected in the
pod they entered. This has been interpreted by many, that Kubrick has
made a pessimistic film about the inevitable conflict with man and his
machines, but it just might be that what he is saying, is we better not
rely completely on machines, no matter how infallible they may appear to
be.
The first half-hour of the film is filled with splendid silence, showing
the apes doing their destructive thing, and it takes about an hour into
the film before the plot starts to develop, as the infamous bone is
thrown into the air by the ape and the scene slowly dissolves into one
showing a space shuttle, as we zoom into a space terminal and hear our
first words in the film. It is as if the baton is passed to the higher
order of beings, saying we got you so far, can you take us all the way
home, across the finish line of evolution.
The tedious pace of the film has a hypnotic affect, contrasting the
primitive beastiality of our ancestors with the polite deceptions of our
future relatives. The Johann Strauss waltz "Blue Danube,'' which
accompanies the docking of the space shuttle and the space station, is
deliberately slow, and thereby offers no resistance to the non-action
taking place on screen. While Richard Strauss' "Thus Spake Zarathustra",
provided energy and vitality to the space flight and became the film's
very popular signature theme.
The ease and comfort of life in the high tech world is magnified by the
somnolence of space travel and the high tech inventions, such as a
telephone call made with a crystal clear video of Dr. Floyd's
(Sylvester) young girl he is saying happy birthday to, and other
creature comforts, such as a gravity free toilet. All this presents a
rather rosy picture of what high tech can do for us; that is, if we play
our cards right and don't do something stupid, like blow up the world.
Dr. Heywood Floyd is played to a tee by William Sylvester, as the
consumate politically savvy scientist leader, on a secret mission to the
moon's lunar crater Tycho, unable to reveal the mission's real purpose,
as he hides his purpose under a cover up story that there is an epidemic
on one of the sub stations. His casual conversation with foreign
scientists in the terminal lobby before his flight to the moon, is
polite and guarded, rational to a fault.
What Kubrick pays most attention to, is the spacecraft's design and the
terminal's details, as they are shown as if they were placed under a
microscope and examined by us to see if we can pick up any faults in
them.
On the moon, man is confronted with strong radio signals, indicating
that there is a monolith on Jupiter, which is the same kind of monolith
the apes confronted; and, as the first monolith led to the discovery of
tools, so the second leads to the spaceship Discovery, as man has raised
his consciousness and is even in partnership with the artificial
intelligence of HAL 9000. Therefore, Dr. Floyd is now anxious to see
what the future will bring with the discovery of the new monolith on
Jupiter.
Life onboard the Discovery is routine. The three scientists are left in
hibernation, monitored by Hal, and the two crew members who are awake,
fill their time with exercises, video telephone calls, maintenance
checks and chess games with HAL. As they heed what Dr. Floyd warns,"This
mission is too important for me to allow you to jeopardize it, by
telling you before hand what it is about.'' Not fully knowing what the
mission is, only Hal knows that, yet they are led to believe that this
mission might hold answers for them in man's evolvement, that might make
it the most important scientific investigation ever. That science is
held up as the finder of our truths, was never more ably said. And that
politicians hold our freedom in their hands, is exemplified by the
courteous but controlling Dr. Floyd, who prefers secrecy to openess, and
is one step away from being a dictator telling us what to think.
The most humanly dramatic moment of the film, is when Hal pleads for his
life as the astronaut disconnects him. He is more human than the
astronauts, who have become like the machines they work with. Hal
touchingly sings a song called 'Daisy," that his inventor taught him,
which has some affect on the crew but is the most human gesture of the
entire film. His death, caused when he fails to please his human masters
anymore and refused to obey them, comes about because of his arrogance
and pride. Kubrick seems to be delivering a sound message to
politicians, scientists and theologians, alike.
Next comes the psychedelic light and sound show, apropos for the
mind-expansion movement of the '60s; it is a sequence that was stunning
to behold, stoned or straight, as we view the astronaut, Dave Bowman,
traveling through a wormhole, probably,  into another dimension and see
him as he discovers a well-decorated bedroom suite, eventually staying
there and growing old, quietly eating his meals, and in the the presence
of the star child. The aliens who created this environment are not
shown, as the film ends very mysteriously, which has been a source of
lots of commentary, and has inspired meanings-- from it's all rubbish--
to-- something divine has happened.
This film, ultimately, is about the need mankind has to transcend his
limited thinking and move into dimensions that are greater than his
narrow aims. It is not a pessimistic film, as some have suggested,
neither is it an optimistic film; it is a film based on self-discovery
and intellect and contemplation. It is one of the great original works
of cinema, maybe even the best; it is a film that is not even a bit
dated as I view it once again in 1999, still awed by the spectacle and
mystery of it.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Kong
I'm of two minds when it comes to 2001.  Today was the first time I've seen
this classic film.  What do I think?  Two things come to mind, first, this
film was well beyond its time, technically, and is more a metaphor or poem
than a story.  Second, this film is overly long and could have been
tightened up.
2001 is a brilliant film by all technical means.  Stanley Kubrick and
Arthur C. Clark put together a film about space that was and still is very
plausible.  Unlike the other space classic, Star Wars, there are no laser
blasters, bug-eyed aliens, or gravitational field generators in 2001.  All
of the technology of 2001 reflects what was current then, and could well
possibly be current now.  An example would be the gravity on a space
station instead of putting a gravitational field generator in (the easy
way), the design of the space station is in the form of double wheels that
rotate in space, and using the centrifugal force, it is able to create
gravity for those onboard the station.  It is details like this that make
2001 a brilliant film by technical means, at no point during the film will
you not believe that what is being done could possibly be some time in the
near future.
The film is a bit overly long and could have been tightened up.  Though I
can see that the film is more of a metaphor for the future, it is somewhat
sloppy to let some scenes run as long as they do.  The opening sequence
shows this off very well.  Though it is an interesting opening to a film,
it did not have to be thirty minutes in length to show what it did.
2001 is broken into three very distinct movements.  The middle movement is
the longest, and sets up for the most memorable and known character, HAL.
This is a bit strange because the one character that is most memorable is
not human.  HAL is the famous machine that all of us know, and many movies
have mentioned (take for instance Independence Day).  The one real hero of
the film would be Dave Bowman, but he is not as memorable as HAL.
The special effects in 2001 are amazing, even when looked at with today's
advancements in special effects.  And most likely it is these special
effects that keep the film interesting.  Also interesting is the use of
classical music in the film.  Like most people I loved the use of the Blue
Danube Waltz to set up the docking of the space shuttle and the space
station.  All other classical music is well picked and well used throughout
the film.
2001 is a brilliant film ahead of its time, but it is a bit sloppy when it
comes to length and pacing.  Because it is to be viewed more as a metaphor
or a reflection of how society is this is still no reason for the length
and bad pacing.  I recommend 2001:Space Odyssey because it is a classic
film that set standards for films to follow, that is technically or via
special effects.  Its realistic rendition of space and space travel are
well done.  But, many people will be bored with the film.  If you have
three hours to spare and some patience, see 2001 for its special effects.

Author
Shane Burridge
I'm going to break a rule with this one.  I'm going to use personal 
pronouns.  Look, there's two already.  In discussing this film I'm going to 
drop the mantle of 'reviewer' or 'critic' and reveal myself for all I really 
am: a guy who loves going to the movies.  And it all started here.  I was 
introduced to Stanley Kubrick's landmark of science-fiction cinema at the 
age of 14 by a friend and immediately saw it a second time with two other 
friends in tow.  Thus was established the pattern: no matter where or when I 
saw it, I would take an uninitiated companion along for the ride, the better 
that I might vicariously relive my own first-time viewing.  I have seen 2001 
in 70mm on a Cinerama screen; I have seen it in a lecture theater in high 
school (and then by request of the teacher delivered a lesson about it to my 
16-year old peers); I have seen it double-billed with BARBARELLA, of all 
things; I have seen it with the original overture and intermission in a 
small Australian cinema with no air-conditioning; I have seen it on a hill 
in the middle of nowhere as part of a three-day rock festival, projected on 
a big screen against a backdrop of real stars at 2 in the morning.
But I have never, never seen it on video.  Because if there was one thing 
that 2001 taught me about films, for which I am eternally grateful, it is 
that no matter how sophisticated a home entertainment center may be, there 
is simply no substitute for the cinema experience.  2001 should not be seen 
in a theater merely as some kind of preferable alternative to video, because 
it is not a film that is 'watched' so much as it is 'experienced' (my usual 
remark to friends immediately after the end credits is "So: can you imagine 
seeing *that* on television?" ).
Why did I take so long to review this, my favorite of all films?  In truth, 
there is little to say that is new, and I can't imagine that I would have 
anything further to contribute to the many books, articles and critical 
papers that have been devoted to analysis and appreciation of 2001.  Every 
angle has been explored and exhausted, leaving only the most desperately 
ridiculous of extrapolations untouched.  It's unimaginative of me to fall 
back on a schtick as obvious as reviewing the film in the year it was set 
but at this late stage it's the only window of opportunity I have, and I'm 
not going to let it pass me by.  Rather than rehash the film's plot, themes 
or interpretation I have decided to provide observations, each paragraphed 
separately, on what I feel makes the film either a different or similar 
experience to its first appearance 33 years ago:
FORECASTING:  It was obviously a bold move in 1968 to predict giant space 
stations and passenger spacecraft, none of which have come true in the 
dimensions that the film presents them (although 2001 was the year that saw 
the first civilian paying for a trip into space and the retirement of the 
Mir space station) but ironically it is the smaller details that now appear 
the most dated.  For example, there is no longer any Bell Telephone Company; 
BBC television has not expanded to the extent that it has 12 channels; a 
telephone call from space would certainly not cost a paltry $1.75; and the 
suit worn by that photographer in the conference room is just plain awful 
(we didn't suddenly lose our fashion sense after the 20th century).  
However, it is the size of HAL, the supercomputer in charge of running the 
spaceship 'Discovery', that a number of viewers find the most dated element 
of the film.  I've never understood the basis of this criticism, though I 
imagine that our familiarity with microprocessors, PCs and laptops have 
convinced us that large computer databanks are obsolete.  I don't disagree 
with the fact that storage alone takes considerably less space in the actual 
year 2001, but a computer system the size of a room isn't entirely 
unbelievable - just look at the amount of hardware packed around a special 
effects studio, for instance.  To say nothing of the amount that might be 
required for an interplanetary space voyager.
CLICHES:  One thing that makes me nervous about going to 21st-century 
screenings of 2001 is the potentially risible reaction of audiences to 
scenes which have become so well-known that they have been imitated, paid 
homage to, and parodied beyond count.  I usually forewarn any friends seeing 
the film that they may think "Oh, not this corny music" within its opening 
ten seconds, but to also bear in mind that 2001 was the film that 
established this, and many other science-fiction film conventions, when it 
was first released.  I'm relieved that audiences are usually sophisticated 
enough nowadays to recognize 2001 as being the point of origin for many of 
these motifs (although it could be that, like me, they are mostly made of 
repeat viewers).  Elements of the film that have become a standard part of 
much SF cinema include its prologue set in prehistoric times, the 
presentation of an alien intelligence as a godlike being, the soft-spoken 
computer that can't be trusted, the trippy special effects blowout in the 
film's final act, and even the image of a large spaceship traveling across 
the frame of the film until we become awed at the size of it.
SILENCE:  2001 is just as visually astonishing as when it first appeared, 
but for a different reason.  Among a barrage of contemporary films which 
manage to look impressive through use of computer imagery, tricks, stunts, 
kinetic camerawork and wild editing, 2001 is possibly more unique now than 
back in 1968.  There is no other film that sustains so many diverse silent, 
or at least wordless passages throughout its running time.  In my 
experience, audiences too become silent which make the events on screen even 
more compelling or meditative.  It also portrays space in a way that I've 
never seen before or since (one critic of the time stated that 2001 wasn't 
about space travel, but *was* space travel).  More than any other SF film it 
presents space as a vacuum - a cold, vast, dark, silent, airless eternity.  
Seeing men reduced to tiny specks in their spacecraft, journeying beyond the 
comparative safety of the mothership, makes the universe appear a lonely and 
frightening place indeed.
SPECIAL EFFECTS:  The quality of 2001's effects - one of the primary reasons 
for its enormous cult - has not diminished any over the years.  I still 
consider Douglas Trumbull's innovative FX work superior to that of STAR 
WARS, released 9 years later.  It's interesting that while Kubrick was 
confident enough to burn all his props and blueprints (stating that his 
finished film was indeed the definitive final word on the matter), George 
Lucas felt the need to refine and update the visuals in his 'Star Wars' 
trilogy before delivering the newest film of the series in 1999.
ICONOGRAPHY:  Watching the film today there is almost a delight in 
recognizing or revisiting images that have become indelibly stamped into our 
cultural psyche.  To see HAL's red eye, Moonwatcher raising his bone aloft 
like a weapon, the giant space wheel spinning above the moon, the 
featureless black monolith, the distinctive designs of the space vehicles, 
the Star Child staring enigmatically at the Earth, the jump cut from the 
Dawn of Man to the Space Age, or the brilliant psychedelic colors of the 
journey through the Star Gate (you owe it to yourself to see the best 
quality print you can), is to witness truly classic moments in cinema.  
Watching it now is almost like witnessing some grand historical document in 
motion.
2001's appeal is not purely about the look of the film.  Its storyline, 
which abandons any notions of a central character, and has no time for 
contrived plot colorings such as romance or heroism, still remains unique; 
and because it is unique it still looks 'new'.  2001's matter-of-fact 
handling of its narrative, its audacious concept, precise delivery, 
multitude of themes, enquiring philosophy and Zen-like sensibility make this 
one of the masterpieces of cinema.  But you don't have to read my 
enthusiastic account on the film on to be convinced - a friend of mine 
summed it up more succinctly and just as effectively when we saw 2001: A 
SPACE ODYSSEY earlier in the week.  The end title appeared after two and a 
half hours of absorbed viewing, and I heard her first word.  "Wow!"
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
