Title
Review for Backbeat (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Lon Ponschock
Directed by Iain Softley
Stars Sheryl Lee, Stephen Dorff, and Ian Hart as John Lennon
     See that?  'Never put the band credits on one of these things
before.  That's it's importance.
     BACKBEAT is about the early Beatles: the 1960 Beatles in Hamburg
on the Reeperbahn: the red light district.
     I never liked the Beatles ... at least the Ed Sullivan version of
them.  The music was over-played.  It was a media phenomenon.  It was
the 60's version of the bobby soxers screaming for Sinatra 20 years
before.  It was hype.  It's a bad memory for me, not a good one.
     BUT there are no Fab Four tunes in BACKBEAT, nothing to jerk your
chain about where you were in 1962 and what you'd be doing at Woodstock
a few years later.  No nostalgie du la boue or "reminiscence of the
mud."  What a relief.
     BACKBEAT put me in mind of THE COMMITMENTS and SWING KIDS.  This
Is The Grunge Beatles; something to put you in mind of a more
contemporary group. These days Nine Inch Nails or Nirvana would not
play strip clubs on the Reeperbahn to start a career though.  Perhaps
there is a lesson in that too.
     The music is Rhythm and Blues... and Lennon wearing his Buddy
Holly "super glasses."  All that.  All the lowlife and fights, fights
to be heard.  And we hear the Lennon wit, as he storms around like Sid
Vicious... Sid Vicious had no wit as I recall.  And the Cockney
accent.  I thought of Ken Loach's film RIFF RAFF during this too.  RIFF
RAFF: that film with the Cockney cast and English subtitles.  Ha!
     Before the new look of the Beatles there was the energy that rock
and roll and little blue pills could produce.  And those little Blue
Meanies produced a bunch of hard day's nights.  Before YELLOW SUBMARINE
and the Richard Lester films, there was Lennon, Stuart Sutcliffe, Paul
McCartney, George Harrison and Pete Best.  And there was Astrid.
     The story here as about Lennon, Sutcliffe and Astrid Kirchner, a
German photographer.  They want to play Lennon and Sutcliffe as
intimates.  To me it's insignificant that the legend might be
"contaminated" with a homosexual influence--insignificant that Lennon
and Sutcliffe had a relationship deeper than that which might be
tolerated by the screaming girls at The Cave in Liverpool or at Shea
Stadium in New York.
     This is Sutcliffe's story too.  Stuart Sutcliffe abandoned a
painting career to play with the band.  His career and reputation were
more firmly established than that of his rock and roll friends.
     We know that Sutcliffe was not a member of the Beatles when they
hit America and Shea Stadium,  so I don't think I'm giving anything
away when I relate the following scene and it's effect on me:
     We see Sutcliffe in the audience as the quartet version of the
Beatles is playing--in the audience with this longing look on his
face: the look I associate with an old cartoon which these days is
still probably broadcast at 5 am some- where.  It's a scene of a boy on
crutches who is left behind as the hole in the mountain where the land
of toys and candy is closing faster than he can keep up with.  I think
the cartoon was "The Pied Piper of Hamlin;"  one of those cartoons you
see at 5 am because of the partying from the night before: one of those
1940's cartoons drawn with a childlike and schizophrenic mania.  The
boy on crutches is left behind to tell the story of how the children
disappeared to the townsfolk of Hamlin.
     BACKBEAT is a good film all the way around.  Easily worth watching
a couple of times for the subtlety of language and the music itself.
It may be one of the best music biographies ever made.  This is rock
and roll.  And the film history of it is pretty scant or left wanting.
THE BUDDY HOLLY STORY should have been a lot better than it was ...
should have been a lot less saccharine.
     But here with the maturity of a European backdrop, the director
Iain Softley has given us the 1960 pre-Carnaby Street Brit homage to
the music which, like that of Buddy Holly, owes its soul to rhythm and
blues.  The Brit homage before the Brit invasion.

Author
Sue Roberts
Director: Ian Softly
Producers: Finola Dwyer and Stephen Wooley.
Starring Stephen Dorff, Ian Hart, Sheryl Lee, Gary Bakewell. 
     From the UK publicity of this film I anticipated it would be a
music documentary paying homage to early Beatlemania, however the
result was a far more interesting.  The writers (Softley, Ward and
Thomas) examine the embryonic band, and succeeded in showing the
breadth of their influences.  The Beatles ability to absorb not only
musical ideas, but those of painting, photography, Hamburg counter-
culture and Sixties socialism, allowed them to evolve a unique style.
     John (Ian Hart) is shown railing against the merely fashionable in
his search for the truly expressive and avant-garde.
     I was impressed with the performance (by Stephen Dorff) of Stu
Sutcliffe, the introvert, gifted beyond his years, with all the
confusion and angst of youth.  He achieved an intense and exhilarating
portrait of an artist at work.
     One of the things I most liked about this movie was the way it
indicated that, from the start, only John Lennon had a real sense of
destiny for the band.  A key theme of the story is the reaction of the
rest as they realise quite how this is likely to affect their future.
Their competitive desire for Astrid mirrors a similar desire for
quality in their work.
     Some of the characterisations are low key, but this serves to
reinforce the point that together, they were greater than the sum of
individual artists and musicians.
     Within minutes of commencing, this picture betrayed it's homage to
SCANDAL.  With wit and discretion it managed to achieved a UK-15
certificate.  For a teenage audience, an understanding of their
aspirations.  For the rest of us, a reminder of a time before
mortgages,  when we may not have had many of the answers, but at least
we were asking the questions!

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Stephen Dorff, Sheryl Lee, Ian Hart, Gary Bakewell, Chris O'Neill,
           Scot Williams, Kai Wiesinger, Jennifer Ehle  
Director:  Iain Softley 
Producers:  Finola Dwyer and Stephen Wooley 
Screenplay: Michael Thomas, Iain Softley, and Stephen Ward 
Music:  Don Was 
Released by Gramercy Pictures 
     Oliver Stone probably loves this film.  Not only is BACKBEAT a
story from "his" era, the early Sixties, but it bears more than a
passing resemblance to one of his own pictures, THE DOORS (although it
should be noted that BACKBEAT moves a lot faster).  If nothing else,
however, Stone usually gets his characters right, but the failure to
create a compelling protagonist is this movie's greatest flaw.
     Back before anyone had heard of the Beatles, they were a group of
five--John Lennon (Ian Hart), Paul McCartney (Gary Bakewell), George
Harrison (Chris ONeill), Pete Best (Scot Williams), and Stuart
Sutcliffe (Stephen Dorff)--playing clubs in Hamburg.  Lennon and
Sutcliffe were best friends, and every time McCartney tried to oust the
less-talented Sutcliffe from the band, Lennon threatened to leave as
well.  While in Hamburg, the group met Astrid Kirchherr (Sheryl Lee), a
photographer who became especially fond of Sutcliffe.  The love affair
that developed between these two threatened the stability of the band,
and led to one of the most difficult decisions that Sutcliffe ever had
to make.
     I would have enjoyed BACKBEAT more if I had begun to feel
something for any of the men or women populating this tale.  However,
since director Iain Softley seems more interested in establishing tone
and atmosphere than in creating vibrant personalities, he is unable to
harness the full power of his story.  In fact, the script itself is not
tightly-focused, although the lack of a strong lead character could in
part be responsible for this.
     On one hand, BACKBEAT wants to recount the story of how the
Beatles emerged from playing seedy German nightclubs to where they were
poised on the brink of stardom.  Equally, however, it attempts to
chronicle the development of the not-so-simple love affair between Stu
Sutcliffe and Astrid Kirchherr, and how that romance affected the last
years of Stuart's life.  While BACKBEAT does, to some extent, fulfill
both of these goals, it does neither to full advantage.  When the film
works, it's because the two purposes complement each other; when it
fails, it's because they are at odds.
     Mr. Softley uses an almost-documentary style of filmmaking,
complete with unusual camera angles and often-dark settings, to bring
home the immediacy of his motion picture.  This is successful more
often than not, but it could be argued that this method aids in further
distancing the characters from the audience.
     Music--rock 'n roll in particular--saturates BACKBEAT.  It has
the most thunderous soundtrack since that of THE COMMITMENTS and, if
marketed right, will sell tons of CDs and tapes.  Nevertheless, all the
visual and audio flare--and the tremendous energy that goes with
them--can't quite make up for those elements where the film is found
lacking.
     What makes it even more surprising that the characters have such
little magnetism is that, for the most part, the actors portraying them
do excellent jobs.  Other than having a somewhat variable accent,
Stephen Dorff is fine as Stu Sutcliffe and, excepting a single
over-the-top scene, TWIN PEAKS Sheryl Lee does a credible job playing
Astrid. Ian Hart gives an amazingly energetic and powerful rendering of
John Lennon.
     Movies like BACKBEAT are often the most difficult for me to
review.  I recognize the craft used in making the film, I admire the
intent, and I like the music.  The problem is, the characters don't
grab me, and the story meanders a little too much to limit the
importance of these minimalist personalities.  Many will doubtless feel
differently, especially those with a special interest in the early days
of the Fab Four.
     Regardless of how BACKBEAT is received, certain things about the
Beatles are immutable, including their history and their music.  It's
too bad this film didn't do as good a job capturing the other elements
surrounding the group as they did those two aspects.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Sheryl Lee, Stephen Dorff, Ian Hart, Gary Bakewell.
Screenplay:  Iain Softley, Stephen Ward & Michael Thomas.
Director:  Iain Softley.
     In the original edition of Trivial Pursuit, there is a question
which reads simply, "Who replaced Pete Best?"  From the phrasing of
that question, it would appear that at least one change from the
original lineup of The Beatles is assumed to be part of the popular
consciousness.  That probably is not the case for the true story behind
BACKBEAT, which dramatizes the pre-Fab days when they were in fact a
fivesome.  It is an intriguing and atmospheric study of a complicated
romantic triangle, but it lacks solid performances across the board to
back up Ian Hart's dynamic work as John Lennon.
     BACKBEAT opens in 1960, as Liverpool mates John Lennon (Hart) and
Stu Sutcliffe (Stephen Dorff) prepare to take their band The Beatles to
bigger and better things, which includes moving to Hamburg to take
advantage of the thriving club scene.  Stu is more interested in his
painting, but he joins John, Paul (Gary Bakewell), George (Chris
O'Neill) and Pete (Scot Williams) in Germany to follow up strippers in
darkened pubs.  There Stu meets Astrid Kirchherr (Sheryl Lee), a
bohemian photographer who introduces him to another side of Hamburg.
As they become closer, tensions rise within the band.  Paul questions
Stu's talent and dedication, and John seems jealous ... although of whom
is not entirely clear.
     Director and co-writer Iain Softley has a unique perspective from
which to tell the story of The Beatles' rise from ragged cover band to
international icons, so BACKBEAT never becomes simply an "early years"
bio-pic.  It does boast some clever music numbers which highlight the
band's frustration with their seedy environs, and an exciting sense of
place.  However, it's primarily the story of two friends divided by
their different passions, and the woman who brings those passions into
focus.  This theme is highlighted in one of the film's best sequences,
when Stu plays hooky from a recording session to spend the day with
Astrid, as Softley cross-cuts between the ever rowdier session and
Stu's idyllic encounter.  Both parties are exactly where they want to
be, and much of the conflict in BACKBEAT comes from John's frustration
that for Stu, The Beatles are not that place.
     Still, BACKBEAT could have been much, much stronger with some
better acting in two of the three lead performances.  It's certainly
not the fault of Ian Hart, who has cornered the market on playing a
homoeroticized Lennon after this film and 1991's THE HOURS AND TIMES.
He seethes as a young man filled with anger and confusion and
determination which can only find an acceptable outlet on stage.
Whereas in most films a line like, "We're going to be too big for our
own bloody good" would come off as silly historical revisionism, it
seems plausible coming from Hart's cynical visionary.  His brilliance
is emphasized, unfortunately, by the blandness of co-stars Stephen
Dorff and Sheryl Lee.  Dorff's Stu is always a bit too low-key, even
when he's doing his painting, so as a dramatic character he never
becomes all that interesting.  Lee is appropriately mysterious, but her
vampish persona goes overboard on occasion.  She doesn't inject enough
life into her performance to make it clear why everyone seems so
fascinated by her.  And sadly, Americans Dorff and Lee are both saddled
with uncomfortable accents.  BACKBEAT needs to feed off the conflict in
this central triangle, but there's not enough spark to their
interaction, and the film often plays like THE COMMITMENTS on
quaaludes.
     As long as the music is playing, BACKBEAT is quite good.  The rest
of The Beatles are played by great physical matches, particularly Gary
Bakewell as a dead ringer for the young Paul.  The songs are performed
by an all-star band (including REM's Mike Mills, Soul Asylum's David
Pirner and Nirvana's Dave Grohl) with an unrehearsed edge, and the
appeal of the energetic Beatles is obvious.  If only more of that
energy could have carried off stage.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In theory the new movie BACKBEAT is about the early days of the
Beatles in Hamburg and Liverpool before they became famous.  At least
this is the movie I went to see.  This movie would have been or at
least should have been fascinating.  I was a teenager in the 60s and
was a big fan of the Beatles's music when I was growing up.
     Forget theory.  The film known as BACKBEAT is actually about
Stuart Sutcliffe (Stephen Dorff) who dropped out of the group to paint
and about his girlfriend and photographer Astrid Kirchherr (Sheryl
Lee).
     A review of this botched attempt at telling the early life of the
Beatles is pretty easy.  If it was really this boring why make a movie,
and if it wasn't, why is this movie so?
     Now there are a few, and only a few good aspects of this film.
First and foremost, there are about a dozen music segments.  Ah, that
is the good news.  The bad news is that most of them seem to last all
of about thirty seconds so that the audience is not distracted from the
awful movie about Sutcliffe.  There is also Astrid's wonderful smile.
I am sure there must have been something else good about the film, but
I am unable to recall anything.  For the short music clips and for
Astrid's smile, I generously award the picture a single star.
     If anybody ever makes a good film about the early days of the
Beatles, I would love to see it.  My recommendation is to pass this one
by and look for one of the many Beatles documentaries if you want to
know more.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
