Title
Review for Made (2001)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Laura Clifford
Bobby (Jon Favreau, "Swingers") is an aspiring boxer who's intensely loyal
to his boyhood screwup buddy Ricky (Vince Vaughn, "Swingers"), his stripper
girlfriend Jess (Famke Janssen, "Rounders") and her young daughter Chloe
(Makenzie Vega, "The Family Man").  Bobby works as Jess's driver, but hates
having to watch her work.  When a guy gets too grabby at a private party,
Bobby boils over and a brawl ensues.  He's called in by Max (Peter Falk),
the local mob boss both he and Jess work for, and is given one last chance.
Against his better judgement (and a grudge for stolen carpet cleaning van),
Max allows Bobby to talk him into letting him partner with Ricky, but only
if he'll vouch for him, in writer/director Jon Favreau's "Made."
Favreau brings together elements of his "Swingers" success and a good dose
of the cast of "The Sopranos" for his feature directorial debut, "Made."
While the sharp dialogue that made his "Swingers" script such a success
can be found in Bobby and Ricky's banter, the writer/director's story stumbles
for lack of character background.
"Made" is" a comedic buddy road movie where two disparate green guys are
sent to the Big Apple as hired thugs to play in the big leagues of what
they believe to be a major drug drop.  While Bobby is level-headed and
responsible, Ricky is an impulsive, none too bright, self-serving blow
hard who can only be counted on to screw up any situation in as spectacular
a manner as possible.
The first recipient of their Mutt and Jeff routine is their flight attendant,
who finally puts Ricky in his place when he attempts to have her round up
women for their first class convenience.  Driver Jimmy (Vincent Pastore, 
Big Pussy in "The Sopranos") amazedly keeps darting his eyes in the rear
view as Ricky plays with opening and closing the barrier between limo driver 
and passengers.  Jimmy acts big with their bell boy (Sam Rockwell, "Box of
Moonlight"), flashing money for a room upgrade.  He begins squandering 
their per diem by ordering room service - from Bobby's room, of course.
They're brought to meet Max' client Ruiz (Sean 'Puffy' Combs), whom
Ricky immediately riles.  Given a second chance, Ruiz' right hand man
Horrace (Faizon Love, "The Replacements") tries to help the duo out, but
is horrified when Ricky uses the inside info he's given him on their
drop 'the Welshman' (David O'Hara, "Braveheart"), making fools of them
all.  Eventually, they do all make their way to the final meet in
Brooklyn with surprising results, only to be met with even more surprising
results on their return home to Jersey.
Favreau and Vaughn reprise their "Swingers" personas and their banter is
always entertaining.  However, Ricky's character is such a total jerk and
so completely unreliable that it's nonsensical that Bobby would ever
vouch for the guy.  Favreau the writer never provides anything that would
explain why Bobby would be so beholden to Ricky, an essential flaw of
his story, unless he means to portray Bobby as a complete patsy.  This
last supposition isn't implausible, given how Bobby's other relationships
are resolved and while the final scene provides a funny wrapup, the film
itself becomes instantly forgettable.
Favreau's blessed with a supporting cast who can't be faulted for his
story flaws.  Sean Combs is surprisingly natural as Ruiz, smooth and
intimidating, but not too intimidating.  Faizon Love is likeable as
Horrace and Pastore has reassuring presence as Jimmy.  Janssen is as
good as she can be with her underwritten character.  Makenzie Vega is a
child actress to watch.  Falk is stern and little else.  The film also
features Federico Castelluccio (Furio in "The Sopranos") as a bouncer
and Drea de Matteo (Adriana in "The Sopranos") as a party girl.  Jennifer
Esposito ("Summer of Sam") is the girl who changes her mind about Ricky.
Favreau employed no less a cinematographer than Christopher Doyle whose
stylish work in Wong Kar Wei's "In the Mood for Love" is replaced by meat
and potatoes treatment here.
Bobby and Ricky's squabbling routine is funny stuff.  Too bad Favreau's
"Made" never gives them a reason for being together.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
        After the success of 1996's _Swingers_, it would have been easy
for writer-star Jon Favreau to follow up the cult comedy fave with
another excursion in nouveau hipster catch phrases and swingin' big band
music.  But for _Made_, his directorial debut and long-awaited reunion
with co-star Vince Vaughn, Favreau has rather admirably taken a
different, unexpected route, and the ride is certainly a witty and
entertaining one.
        Knowing that _Made_ is completely unrelated to the Doug
Liman-directed _Swingers_ (that is, aside from sharing common talent) may
still not prepare fans of the previous film for this one's distinctly
darker flavor.  Favreau and Vaughn again play friends here, but the
relationship between struggling L.A. boxers/construction workers Bobby
and Ricky is far more volatile than that of _Swingers_' Mike and Trent,
as summed up by film's opening scene.  As the two face each other in a
bout, Vaughn's cocky Ricky openly mocks Favreau's no-nonsense Bobby,
setting himself up for a big pummelling.  The cycle constantly repeats
itself in a figurative sense after the pair are tapped by their
construction boss, small-time mobster Max (Peter Falk), to handle what
should be a quick and easy job in New York City.  Bobby wants nothing
more than to just do what he's told and collect the payment that could
provide a more stable life for him, his stripper girlfriend Jess (Famke
Janssen), and her daughter Chloe (Makenzie Vega, rid of the painful fake
lisp she sported in _The_Family_Man_).  Ricky, on the other hand, fancies
himself an instant organized crime big shot, leading him to do a number
of none-too-bright things that draw the ire of Big Apple big boss Ruiz
(Sean "Don't Call Me 'Puffy'" Combs, who fares better than expected in
his acting debut), his underling Horace (Faizon Love), and most of all
the increasingly impatient Bobby.
        Favreau doesn't give an artificial and inappropriate sunniness to
_Made_'s criminal milieu; this film even lacks a certain spring in its
step as far as pacing.  The slower, more rambling progression works well
in this context, though, for it adds to the dark undercurrent that runs
through the film.  While Ricky's antics are a primary source of light
amusement, the sense of foreboding lends an edge of danger to his
bumbling actions; there is always the real possibility that any one of
his wrong moves could be their final one.  The largely hand-held camera
work by cinematographer Christopher Doyle also adds to the gritty
atmosphere.
        Traces of grave seriousness turn up in _Made_ (particularly in
Bobby's side of the story), but there is no mistaking that Favreau has
cast a comic tale inside this dark world.  At the center of all of the
laughs is Ricky, whose delusions and general cluelessness make for
someone truly abrasive and annoying--which is exactly the often-hilarious
point, and Vaughn nails the role so perfectly that you may just want to
beat some sense into him, much like how Bobby tries to at various
junctures.  Favreau puts the pair in physical conflict once or twice too
many, but the banter that typically leads up to fighting, while not
_Swingers_ quotable, is spirited and sharp, as is the dialogue on the
whole.  False notes are rare among the entire cast, including those in
customary throwaway roles; even the likes of a briefly seen flight
attendant (Jennifer Bransford) and hotel bellboy (Sam Rockwell) exhibit
some level of colorful personality.
       Despite their clear cut differences in tone and style, comparisons
between _Swingers_ and _Made_ are inevitable, so to answer the burning
question: with its many memorable lines and scenes (the classic one with
the answering machine most quickly comes to mind) _Swingers_ is the
breezier, funnier, more enjoyable film.  But the reasons for my
_Swingers_ preference once again points up the fundamental differences
between the two.  _Swingers_ is more a movie of moments while _Made_ is
more about the larger picture--a picture that may not end up with the
fervent following of its flashier predecessor, but one that is definitely
worth a look.  (opens July 20 in New York and Los Angeles)
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Steve Rhodes
MADE, which would better be called ARGUE, reteams SWINGERS's Jon Favreau and
Vince Vaughn as Bobby and Ricky.  Although their mindless banter is cute at
first, listening to them becomes as tiresome as being stuck at a cocktail party
between battling spouses.  Favreau, who wrote the bright script for SWINGERS,
writes and directs the surprisingly mediocre MADE.  It's the type of film in
which positive comments on its short running length will generate a good portion
of the discussion afterwards.
Bobby is a boxer with a 5-5-1 record.  He and his live-in girlfriend, a lap
dancer named Jessica (Famke Janssen), and her young daughter, Chloe (Makenzie
Vega), are supported by a gangster named Max, played with every cliché possible
by Peter Falk.  
One day Max offers an unspecified, illegal job to Bobby and his obnoxious buddy
Ricky.  All they have to do is go from L.A. to New York and wait for their
beepers to buzz.  Oh yes, and they are not supposed to talk to anyone.  This is
something that Ricky, a constant screw-up and major motor mouth, is
constitutionally incapable of accomplishing.  From the moment that they sit down
in their first-class airline seats, Ricky starts pushing the limits as he almost
gets them kicked off by constantly using the stewardess call button before they
even leave the ground.  
Bobby and Ricky fight with words and fists over everything, with Ricky's
attempts at over tipping his way into a life of luxury being at the top of the
list.  The movie has little to do with the crime and everything to do with Bobby
and Ricky's disagreements.  Don't be surprised if you find yourself wishing that
someone would jump out from a side street and plug one or both of them.
One wishes that the actors would have fought more about the script before they
started the filming, as both of their foulmouthed characters show potential.  As
people kept walking out of our screening, it was easier to sympathize with their
plight than with the characters in the story.  The Bobby and Ricky routine would
make for a nice, short "Saturday Night Live" skit.  Anything more is overkill.
MADE runs 1:33.  It is rated R for pervasive language, some drug use and
sexuality and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the film **.  He thought that it was only "okay"
and complained that it didn't have much of plot.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, July 27, 2001.  In the
Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Bob Bloom
 MADE (2001) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Jon Favreau, Vince Vaughn, Sean Combs,
Peter Falk, Famke Janssen, Faizon Leve and Vincent Pastore. Written and directed
by Jon Favreau. Rated R. 94 minutes. 
 Made is a comedy-drama friendship movie cloaked in the garb of the mobster
genre. 
 Making his directorial debut, actor Jon Favreau brings along his Swingers
co-star, Vince Vaughn, for this tale of two mugs on a career trajectory to
nowheresville. 
 Favreau, who also wrote the script, is Bobby, Vaughn is Ricky. By day they are
construction workers. They also are wanna-be contenders, but neither has had
much success. Their last bout pitted them against each other and was a draw,
leaving Bobby's record at 5-5-1. 
 These two L.A. not-so-wise guys also work for Max (Peter Falk), a mid-level
mobster, who is patient and understanding with Bobby, but who hates Ricky's
guts. 
 Max has an easy job for Bobby; fly to New York and make a simple delivery to a
gangster named Ruiz (a smooth and silky Sean Combs). 
 Bobby, because of his lifelong friendship with Ricky, pleads with Max to give
his pal another chance and let him tag along to the Big Apple. 
 Against his better judgment, Max agrees. 
 Of course Ricky, a motormouth who inserts both feet everytime he speaks, nearly
screws up everything. 
 While Bobby tries to stay calm and professional, Ricky begins swaggering and
throwing money around as if he was John Gotti or Tony Soprano. 
 The constrast in styles and the chemistry between Favreau and Vaughn is what
makes Made so enjoyable to watch. 
 Favreau with his hound-dog face and slow-burn personality could be a modern-day
Oliver Hardy, only much wiser. 
 Vaughn is like someone vaccinated with a phonograph needle, he just keeps
yakking and yakking, unaware of the havoc he creates. 
 Yet despite Bobby's constant aggravation and agitation with his partner, a bond
of affection and loyalty binds them. 
 The contrast between the two friends is interesting to watch. Bobby is
button-downed, tightly-wound, always waiting for the next shoe -courtesy of
Ricky - to drop. 
 Ricky is mostly oblivious to the problems he creates and is genuinely surprised
when he comes under attack for his faux paus. 
 In New York, the two lackeys are like fish out of water, stumbling from one
situation to another, trying to keep alive. 
 Combs is elegant, cool and low-key menacing as the gangsta they are sent to
meet. 
 Falk is amusing in his small role, while Famke Janssen nearly breaks your heart
as Bobby's lowlife girlfriend. 
 More than anything, Made is a movie with heart. It is loud, obnoxious and very
talkative. But the cameraderie between Bobby and Ricky holds the key to its
interest. 
 Favreau does a commendable job in his directorial debut. He is a player to be
watched as he can only improve with experience. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Other reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom 

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
In this appealingly off-center black comedy Vince Vaughn plays something
very close to the perfect jerk.  The gap between who Ricky is and who he thinks
he is, between his self-confidence and his self-awareness, between his level of
intelligence and his level of hubris, is blinding.  And Vaughn handles the role
with the sure-footedness and bursts of improvisational inspiration of a Kobe
Bryant going coast-to-coast for a layup.  It's a gutsy, antagonizing performance
sewn with just enough seeds of endearment to keep it from ricocheting off the
screen.
Still, it wouldn't work without the low-key finesse of costar Jon Favreau
as Bobby, a down-to-earth plug who balances his buddy's spectacular asininity
with his own plodding good sense.  Favreau, who also wrote and directed Made, is
a sort of latter-day William Bendix (of the ‘50s sitcom Life of Reilly.)
Vaughn and Favreau made an impact five years ago in Swingers, which was
also written by Favreau.  Here he doesn't try to extend the same characters, but
they're clearly related.  Bobby and Ricky are a pair of losers who scrabble at
the fringes of society, finding different ways to fail at a number of low-end
pursuits.  They're boxers, laborers, petty criminals.  Neither of them are too
bright, but Bobby at least has a solid head on his solid shoulders.  He's in
love with Jess (Famke Janssen), a lap-dancer in the stable of a West Coast crime
boss named Max (Peter Falk).  He `drives' (bodyguards) her until his jealous,
protective heart gets him canned by Max for decking a customer who gets out of
line.  
Max likes Bobby.  When he has to fire him from one job, he offers him
another – a trip to New York to deliver a package.  Max doesn't like Ricky, who
has managed to lose a van from his carpet-cleaning business, but he agrees to
let Bobby take him along on the operation, which is first class all the way. 
Why a canny guy like Max would send two shmoes first class to New York and put
them up in a ritzy hotel and give them a chauffeured limo and a hefty per diem
in order to do a drop that could perfectly well be done by his efficient New
York people, headed by Ruiz (Sean Combs), is a question best not examined too
closely.  It's simply a vehicle, in the tradition of the classic comedy team
movies of Laurel and Hardy or Abbott and Costello, designed to get these
mismatched louts, this Yin and Yang of ineptitude, into a set of situations
where they can do their worst, and best.  
The cleverness of Made is certainly not in the plotting.  There's no `wow!'
twist, no layers and levels peeled away for a socko revelation.  This movie
works in its dialogue, and in the rapport of its characters.  Vaughn's
performance is dazzling, an edgy, obnoxious tour-de-force that makes you wince
while it makes you laugh.  Favreau, from his director's and writer's seat, is
content to cede the limelight to his buddy, and to let his own character provide
a cautious touchstone that gives the audience a place to park its sympathies. 
Combs lends a savvy New York cool, and stares incredulously as Ricky tries to
impress with his gangsta hipness; `Man, what is all this 21 Jump Street stuff?'
he asks.  Falk is wise and wizened, a made veteran who can shift from
compassionate to threatening on a dime.  The beautiful Famke Janssen doesn't get
much to do outside of her lap-dancing, but little Mackenzie Vega as her daughter
is adorable, and the rapport between her and Favreau provides one of the movie's
satisfying emotional chords.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   You wouldn't expect much symbolism in a comic romp once
again teaming "Swingers" thesps Jon Favreau with Vince
Vaughn, but in one scene a goldfish bowl turns over, the poor
fish tossing miserably on the floor.  This fish-out-of-water
theme comes up time and again as writer-producer-director-
actor Favreau plays the straight, serious Bobby to his pal's
fish-out-of-water, clueless Ricky (Vince Vaughn). Largely
unpredictable and decidedly uncommercial despite its easy-to-
take comic overtones, "Made" casts a dark shadow over the
two people whose friendship is not often a perfect blendship.
While Ricky is the fun member of the duo, his unsophisticated
antics lead both to face mighty serious trouble at the hands of
the mob.  "Made," then, gets both its laughs and its scares
from pitting two unlikely men together as best pals and
watching them play off their separate personalities against
each other and the people with whom they're dealing.
   If you enjoyed Favreau and Vaughn in Doug Liman's
"Swingers"--a look at L.A. single life from the point of view of
a man who has not gotten over his breakup with his girlfriend
for six months--you'll probably dig "Made."  While "Swingers"
took pot shots at life in L.A., "Made" aims its barbs at the mob
and, in fact, we can guess that writer Favreau is into
parodying both the serious guy and his frivolous partner.  
   Favreau wastes no time signaling us in the audience about
the basic difference in personality of Ricky and Bobby. 
Amateur boxers, they go at each other in the ring--Bobby
closely defending his body while seeking shots at his
opponent while Ricky deliberately opens himself up to
damage, taunting his competitor.  While working at their
daytime construction job, they are called in by mob boss Max
(Peter Falk) to do a job, a drop, which would require them to
go from L.A. to JFK: "Oh, we're going to New York"? queries
Ricky.  While Bobby takes the job because he needs the
money to get his girlfriend Jess (Famke Janssen) out of the
striptease business and get a better life for her six-year-old
daughter Chloe (Makenzie), Ricky seems to want nothing
more than to live it up in the Big Apple.  This gets Ricky and
Bob into heaps of trouble and brings on the ire of their
contact, Ruiz (Sean 'Puffy' Combs).
   Much of the witty dialogue comes across as improvised,
and successfully so, with Ricky repeatedly acting like the
"duh" guy, as when the mob's big customer in New York
(David O'Hara) says he's from Glasgow, Ricki wants to know
"Where's that?"  While the picture's spontaneous feel is
furthered by Christopher Doyle's hand-held camera, "Made"
has a sturdy narrative which moves forward at a deliberate
pace getting its chuckles from its situation gags (many taking
place in New York's Soho Grand Hotel in the city's most chic
area), and our delight at watching Favreau and Vaughn ham
it up in this clever and stylish buddy movie.
Rated R.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Bobby (Jon Favreau) is a small-time hood who wants to become a champion
boxer, but, with a 5-5-1 record, he is going nowhere fast. His girlfriend,
Jessica (Famke Janssen), is a lap dancer, a fact he has a hard time with,
especially when he escorts her to client bachelor parties. His boss, Max
(Peter Falk), likes Bobby and wants to help the troubled pug, so he sends
him across country to make an important drop. With his best friend, the
very problematic Ricky (Vince Vaughn), in tow, Bobby heads for big trouble
in the Big Apple in "Made."
"Made" tries to be a number of different things and, unfortunately, doesn't
do any of them well. Bobby wants to be a champ, seems dedicated, and gives
up. He wants to have a normal relationship with stripper girlfriend Jessica
(Famke Janssen), but that falls apart. He wants out from his mob
connections but continues to do Max's bidding out of loyalty. He knows his
best friend is an obnoxious, troublemaking bore, but persists in putting up
with every stupid thing Ricky does. There are also mob dealings, gangland
ambushes, an ambiguous shady deal, a Scotsman called "The Welshman" (David
O'Hare) and an unsung hero, limo-driver Jimmy (Vincent Pastore). There is
plenty going on, but none of it has focus.
There is an amusing chemistry between Favreau and Vaughn as best friend
characters, but, a few minutes into "Made" I'm asking myself "why in heaven
would Bobby ever put up with the obnoxious Ricky?" When Bobby gets his
friend a job as a driver for connected Max, Ricky sells the truck and
pockets the money. When they go on the "job" to New York City, Ricky does
everything he can to prove he is a jerk - over-bearing, he'll hit the
flight attendant call button with the most inane requests just because he
can, regardless of how annoying he is. When Max gives strict orders to stay
sober and keep a low profile, Ricky gets hammered and lets everyone know
he's there. And Bobby just puts up with it. The relationship never makes
sense and Favreau doesn't try to explain the why of it except to say that
they were boyhood friends. Vaughn's is a reprise of the same character he
played in "Swingers," but even more insufferable.
While the camera centers on the antics of Ricky and Bobby, there are a
couple of perfs worth mentioning. Sean "Puffy" Combs gives a good badass
tough guy persona to New York-based Ruiz, an "associate" of Max. It's
always a pleasure to watch Peter Falk even if his Max character only gets a
few minutes screen time. Friends of Favreau make up much of the cast with
cameos and small roles abounding with the director's buddies.
Favreau is trying for a gritty look and feel and uses hand-held cameras to
an annoying degree. Too many tangents hurts the flow of the film and Vince
Vaughn, while sickly funny, gets to be too much to take. "Made" doesn't
make it and I give it a C.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
Practically heckled out of the ring at their boxing match, best friends
Bobby and Ricky (Jon Favreau and Vince Vaughn) are hardly your titans of
the fights.  In fact, they aren't much in the way of titans of
anything.  They're almost losers.  Whenever Bobby gets ahead, Ricky's
antics pull him back down -- never on purpose, he just doesn't know how
to behave any better.
When Bobby gets kicked off his L.A. construction job, he pleads with
minor crime boss Max (Peter Falk) to give him something better to do
than smooth concrete and fistfight his buddies.  And so the hijinks
begin... as Bobby and Ricky head for New York in an unspecified role as
heavies for some deal of Max's.
A fiercely independent production courtesy of aspiring auteur Jon
Favreau, Made is a vague follow-up to Swingers, the acclaimed comedy
written and starring Favreau and fellow Made man Vaughn.  In fact, Made
reunites several Favreau friends, including his Love & Sex costar Famke
Janssen, as his stripper girlfriend.  Never mind the celeb status: It's
a miracle that Sean "Puffy" Combs got a role here, considering he didn't
know Favreau beforehand.
Out of the picture is director Doug Liman (who did Swingers and Go),
which is something of a loss.  Favreau is better in front of the lens
and behind a typewriter instead of wielding the camera.  He runs around
with a nauseating handheld half the time, framing shots badly and
jerking the rig about as he searches for the right shot.
Favreau's script, however, is predictably great, full of droll wit and
zingers that reduce costar Vaughn from the hip daddy-o in Swingers to a
mentally defective scalawag.  His brash character is loathsome, but Made
is completely Vaughn's movie.  Ricky is that obnoxious and unfortunate
friend you got stuck with growing up, the kind of guy who screwed up
everything... and somehow talked you into going along with it.  Whether
he's insisting they buy guns for their upcoming "drop" or repeatedly
ringing his flight attendant button (in a scene that recalls Favreau's
answering machine travails in Swingers), he simply gets on your every
nerve.  And it's unilaterally hysterical.
On the other hand, a misplaced supporting character can severely mess up
a movie, and Combs (here in his first real film role) is the poster
child for exactly that.  "Puffy" is not only a joke of an actor, he's a
joke -- period.  Casting him as some kind of New York drug kingpin is
ridiculous, and while his appearance here is obviously tongue-in-cheek,
it's still a nuisance to have to watch him "act."
Never mind that, though -- he only has 10 minutes of screen time. 
Anyone enamored with the unique and hip sensibility of Swingers will
find Made almost as much fun.  It's not a sequel, mind you, and it's
lacking the nuanced and compelling supporting characters that made
Swingers so memorable, but for grown-up comedy, you won't find better
this summer.
Director: Jon Favreau
Producer: Jon Favreau
Writer: Jon Favreau
Starring: Jon Favreau, Vince Vaughn, Sean Puffy Combs, Famke Janssen,
Peter Falk, Faizon Love, David O'Hara, Vincent Pastore, Makenzie Vega
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Two down-on-their-luck boxers get an opportunity to repay a debt to a gangster
by doing him a favor in New York City. As it turns out, one of them is a goof,
while the other likes to play things serious, and it isn't long before things go
awry and the boys run into even more trouble.
CRITIQUE:
Yikes...talk about a disappointment! This was actually one of the films that I
had been looking forward to the most all year, seeing as SWINGERS, the original
movie starring Jon Favreau and Vince Vaughn, is one of my favorite films of
all-time. So there I was, sitting in the theatre, seeing the two boys straddle
their way into another "hip" movie together, but wow...what a letdown. Very few
laughs, uninteresting and one-dimensional characters all around, a so-so story,
over-directing from Favreau, Puff Daddy "pretending" to be a big shot and one of
the worst endings that I've seen this year. If this flick didn't have Vince
Vaughn and his patented "Vaughnisms" going on, it would have been a total dud.
Thankfully, Vince is there and he is so "on" whenever his character talks or
walks onto the big screen (mind you, his character in SWINGERS was a better
rounded character, but that's another story altogether). They should have made
this whole movie about him, or at least have given the rest of the folks in the
picture something interesting to do or say. Favreau was "okay" as his friend,
but you just didn't care about the guy.
In fact, other than being a couple of knuckleheads who look good in suits, there
wasn't really much to either one of these two guys. A cheap "relationship" is
set up with Famke Janssen and her daughter (who is adorable, btw, but is tossed
into an emotional conclusion for what purpose again?!?), Puff Daddy and his
partner are as generic and lame as they come (was I supposed to fear P-Diddy's
character?), Peter Falk is good, but he's only in a couple of scenes, I
mean...what's this movie about? Well, it's about trying to score a few bucks off
the legend that is SWINGERS and I for one, certainly didn't mind revisiting
these guys in another movie, but hell boys, why not make a good movie the next
time around! This film had very little energy, featured rookie director Favreau
over-playing his directing card (dude, it's a comedy, no need to play the camera
so much), contained way too many montages (sign of a weak script) and basically
gave us only one reason to ever see it again: Vince Vaughn! I will stand up and
applaud this gentleman right now because his lines, his delivery and his
grandiose attitude in this movie were friggin' hilarious...he was soooo money!
(and I think he knew it, too!) It's just too bad that the rest of the movie
couldn't keep up with the man. The big downer at the end of the film didn't help
matters either. Skip this one altogether but watch it on video if you're a
SWINGERS fan, just to see what our ol' friend Trent is still up to...
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Go (9/10) - Out of Sight (8/10) - Swingers (10/10) - True Romance (10/10) - The
Way of the Gun (6/10)
