Title
Review for Ermo (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Seth Bookey
Hong Kong, 1994; Chinese with English subtitles
Ermo is the much younger wife of a former village "chief" who is trying,
in rural Chinese fashion, to keep up with the Joneses. The town is nestled
in the mountains and is accessible by a long winding mountain road. All
the houses are about ten feet apart from each other. Ermo, her husband and
son live in a comfortable house, but their neighbor--"Blindman"--is a
successful hauler and has a TV. The only TV in the village. Tiger, Ermo's
son, is constantly over there watching the tube
Ermo spends long days in physical labor, weaving baskets and making twisty
noodles. She then trudges into the closest larger town to sell her wares. 
She is determined and will not be bargained down her selling prices. She
endures the insults of Blindman's wife and eventually decides that she is
going to make enough money to buy the biggest TV in the county, one even
the county chief does not have. This leads her to eventually working in
the city as a noodle maker at a restaurant, and even living away from home
so she can make as much money as she can and not waste time commuting. She
even starts selling blood for money, at an alarming rate. Another evil
enters the picture as well: Blindman, who constantly complains of his
"fat, slack-assed wife" is paying Ermo a lot of mind, and making the
career suggestions that keep her from her home
Ermo is a tedious cross between Madame Bovary and Sunrise. It is hard to
know whether or not it is the cultural differences that make it a less
than compelling experience, or if it is in fact just slow moving and
unempathetic. The movie clearly moralizes that the best things in life are
free. That Ermo sinks to demeaning depths all for the sake of buying a
29-inch TV set really hits you over the head. 
China is undergoing a major cultural change as free-market influences
force rural dwellers into facing the 20th Century. Ermo's husband was once
the Communist chief of the village. He keeps reminding everyone that he is
no longer the chief when he is called by that nickname. It is clear that
having what you need and living communally has been replaced by the art of
the deal and having it all. If nothing else, Ermo provides a glimpse of
what sort of mindset and circumstances a tremendous percentage of the
global population possess.  If most Chinese villages are like the one in
Ermo, you can easily understand why the news of Tianenmen Square was
easily propagandized; what you cannot see or hear, you cannot think about. 
Ermo, like many women she probably represents, is naive and the best parts
of the movie are when she "visits" the TV she intends to buy, wondering if
the TV has forgotten Chinese when foreign language programs, and hoping it
does not "wear out" by the time she has saved up enough yuan to buy it. 
God only knows what she would do when she finds out about VCRs. 
Was it all worth it for Ermo? In many ways, the final moments of the film
answer that question very well. 
More reviews by Seth Bookey are available at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
Copyright (c); 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021 USA,
sethbook@panix.com. 

Author
Rich Siege
Keeping Up With the Joneses--Chinese Style.  
     ERMO is a cautionary tale of the pitfalls of the emerging
middle-class in modern Chinese society.  Ermo, the title character, is
a product of Chinese economic free-market reforms.  She's a
self-employed noodle maker who also makes produce baskets on the side
for extra income.  She supports her lazy husband  "Chief," a former
village official, and her son Tiger through long hours of hard work.
For her efforts, her family leads a modest but comfortable life.
     Ermo's problem is that her next door neighbors--"Blindman," his
wife and daughter--are doing even better.  Blindman bought a truck
which he uses as the basis of his successful hauling business.  They're
so successful, in fact, they own the neighborhood's only TV which makes
their home the favorite hangout of the local kids, including Tiger.
Ermo develops an intense jealousy of her neighbors; both for their TV
and for the resourceful, hardworking  "Blindman" who puts her own
layabout husband to shame.
     On a visit to a nearby city to sell her baskets, she sees
something in a department store that, for her, represents the answer to
her feelings of low self-esteem: a 29-inch color TV--bigger than the
richest family in the county could afford.  She determines that owning
this TV will restore her feeling of self-worth and improve her standing
in the community.  She decides to devote all her efforts to acquiring
this technological jewel despite the fact that she has little interest
in watching television herself.  In fact, she finds it quite
bewildering.  As she watches a store display of televisions she's
amazed at how the foreigners on the imported programs can all speak
Chinese.  She even becomes concerned, while watching a foreign language
program, that the TV has forgotten how to speak her native language.
     Despite this, however, the TV becomes Ermo's obsession.  She will
go to any length to acquire it.  She takes a restaurant job in the
city, where she lives, during the week, in squalid barracks.  She even
sells her own blood to the local blood bank for extra cash.  Every
night she lays her money out on her bed and counts and sorts her bills,
waiting for the day her new dream will be fulfilled.
     ERMO shows us the jealousies, petty bickerings, and romantic
intrigues common in middle-class life.  Although these situations are
dealt with in countless films, seeing them in the context of a rapidly
changing culture gives them new life.  Director Zihou Xiawen uses a
decidedly light touch to point out the darker side of capitalism.  Even
with its tragic elements, the film is good-humored and vibrant.
Despite their flaws, most of the characters have an underlying goodness
and honesty about them that makes it easy to sympathize with their
attempt to come to terms with a changing value system.
ERMO features Ailiya, Zhang Haiyan, Liu Peiqui and Ge Zhijun.
Screenplay by Xu Baoqi and  Lang Yun from a novella by Xu Baoqui
Produced by Ocean Film Co.
Distributed by Arrow Entertainment

Author
Pedro Sena
ERMO is one of those films that we just about expect to see in the western
countries. And, really, it may signal either a commentary on the outside
world, or it may display something about human nature and its fickle way and
style.
It is a story that can best be described as "keeping up with the Jones' and
doing it a step better".
Ermo, is a young married housewife that is a bit frustrated, because her
husband is disabled and she has to do the work. She spends much of her time
making noodles and taking them to town to sell them. In comes up a
neighbour, whose own wife he doesn't get along with. And he helps her go to
town to sell her stuff.
Ermo's child is constantly going to the neighbor's house to watch TV,
something that irks her to no end, and she resolves to get the biggest TV
that she can find. And instead of selling noodles, she ends up getting
another job and also giving away blood for various causes.
And although most things in this film happen accidentally, like the blood
giving, it is clear that Ermo is decided that she is going to go one up on
her neighbour. And she will do whatever it takes to get there.
And get there she does. And the whole town is now parked in her house
watching TV, and her disabled husband is no longer made fun of, except
lightly.  And the film ends in a note that is disconcerting to say the
least, although it may not mean anything. Ermo got it, but did not expect to
catch the "snow" on it in the middle of the night, when the stations are
signed  off.
It is a really well done, and written satire in many aspects, and it spares
no ideas when it decides to make fun of the people that are so dedicated to
the world of television. But above it all, the film, is really a knock on
the new life style, that is TV ridden, and not work oriented. Everything
seems to be planned that way. Work so hard to get to this point?  It becomes
a subtle statement about an empty society, and it is presumed that the  west
is looked at this way..... but the people are seeing this stuff in a totally
new light, and this time in color, although we were never shown the
neighbor's TV, which is obviously smaller.  To them, the outside is a  brand
new world.
While this is not a great film, with outstanding values in production like
Zhang Yimou, or Chen Kaige, it still is a sign that the vitality of the
Chinese film industry has been active, and not wasting its time. And it
should hit a much more lucrative larger market, as soon as China learns  to
work with the west a little better, through Hong Kong, if this is the
path that it takes.
Other than that, this is a nice film where the eccentric live, and the poor
come and watch. But it has some rather nice moments. And the dedication to
its goal, in Ermo's mind are worth the sight.
Very enjoyable film, although there really is nothing fancy, or artistic
about it... it just is.
3.5 GIBLOONS
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release Spring 1995 
Running Length: 1:33 
MPAA Classification: No Rating (Mature themes) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
     In the course of cinematic history, there have been many great 
quests:  searches for the Holy Grail, the Ark of the Covenant, the true 
nature of Humankind, the essence of God, and, during this film from 
Chinese director Zhou Xiaowen, a 29-inch television.  In ERMO, a 
somewhat better-constructed cousin to Zhang Yimou's THE STORY OF QUI JU, 
we follow the obsessive struggle of one woman (Alia) to earn the money 
to buy the biggest television in her village.  There's no sacrifice she 
won't make, an attitude that her aging, impotent husband (Ge Zhijun) is 
incapable of understanding.  In his view, money is for building houses, 
not buying gadgets. 
     If Ermo's marriage is bad, it's no worse than that of her next-door 
neighbor, Blindman (Liu Peiqi), whose overweight, shrill wife (Zhang 
Haiyan) is jealous of the thinner, prettier Ermo, who was able to bear 
her husband a son.  Blindman finds Ermo a job in a nearby city, where 
she can make more money than in their small village.  On the road, the 
two become lovers, but theirs isn't exactly one of the great screen 
romances.  Blindman talks about leaving his wife, but it's clear he's 
not serious, especially when he tells Ermo that she's a good person at 
heart, but he isn't. 
     The overall theme of ERMO echoes a simple truism:  it's often 
better wanting than having.  Ermo's entire life is focused on getting 
the television; what happens when she actually accumulates the money to 
buy it?  When her life has a goal, she is vibrant, energetic, and 
pugnacious.  Afterwards, how much of that will be replaced by apathy?  
Zhou is certainly criticizing materialism here, but only in the larger 
context of examining how we define meaning in our lives. 
     As was the case in QUI JU, we are presented with a vivid contrast 
between rural and urban China.  Ermo's backwater village is still living 
in the past; the city is, for the most part, modern.  However, where 
Zhang's film tended to meander, ERMO stays focused, and the interaction 
between Blindman and Ermo presents a sexual element absent from the 
earlier movie.   
     An expert at capturing subtle mannerisms, Alia possesses the same 
kind of screen presence exhibited by Gong Li.  Although there's nothing 
wrong with her delivery of dialogue, the actress' facial expressions are 
her greatest asset.  Ermo is not an exceptionally well-written 
character, but Alia does an excellent job of breathing life into her.   
     ERMO is certainly on less ambitious footing than the recent string 
of grand historical epics coming from China.  In many ways, this is 
refreshing, as the simpler story gives the viewer a different view of 
Chinese culture.  And, although the message of ERMO is presented 
seriously, Zhou isn't above having a little fun, and his lighter touch 
is one of the most refreshing elements of this enjoyable little drama. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
