Title
Review for Selena (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I was ready to learn a few things from writer/director Gregory Nava
(MY FAMILY [MI FAMILIA]) about Selena Quintanilla Perez, the superstar of
the Tejano music scene who was shot to death in 1995 at the age of 23.
Selena enjoyed a phenomenal popularity among Mexican-Americans, and seemed
poised to cross over to mainstream English-language success as well.  What
was the secret of Selena's stardom?  How did she make it to the top?
Well, after two hours and ten minutes of SELENA, I'm still not quite sure.
I know a few things about her family, a couple of things about her love
life...I even know that she loved pizza.  There are plenty of details
about Selena's life, but no _story_ of her life.  Without a compelling
narrative direction, SELENA becomes a polished and respectful feature film
version of an A&E "Biography."
     Jennifer Lopez plays the title role in SELENA, which opens in 1995 at
a record-setting Houston Astrodome concert, then flashes back 34 years in
her family's history.  We see her father Abraham first as a young man
trying to make it in a doo-wop vocal group, then twenty years later
(played by Edward James Olmos) as a middle class oil company employee with
wife Maricela (Constance Marie) aand three children.  When Abraham spots
musical talent in the 10-year-old Selena (Rebecca Lee Meza), he pushes all
the children into music, and forms an act with Selena singing out front.
The band begins to hit it big with the Spanish lyrics and cumbia rhythms
of Tejano music, launching Selena into regional recognition.  Abraham
dreams of even bigger things, however, and doesn't want anything to get in
the way, including Selena's romance with band guitarist Chris Perez (Jon
Seda).
     Nava tries to cover a lot of ground in SELENA, and one of the film's
primary flaws is that it seems more interested in relating events than in
giving those events any shape.  There are a dozen minor conflicts strewn
throughout SELENA, many of which could have been used to define what this
film is about.  Instead, Nava treats each one episodically, like a minor
hiccup in Selena's life which proves of little long-term consequence.
Maricela rails against Abraham's decision to quit his job and open a
restaurant, but then she goes silent for almost the entire rest of the
film; Abraham forbids Selena from seeing Chris, but all is forgiven once
they are married.  There are even confusing gaps in the story-telling (Who
were those guys who trashed Chris's hotel room, anyway?  And when did the
band get a recording contract?) which make SELENA feel even more
unfocused.
     SELENA generally feels most on-track when it captures her 
performances.  The concert footage is somewhat over-dramatized, but
Jennifer Lopez gives a charismatic performance as Selena, lip-synching to
the real Selena's recordings while smiling a thousand-watt smile and
radiating a genuine affection for her fans.  Nava tries to give her
calling more weight -- Selena says at one point that she feels "all the
hopes and dreams" of her fans -- but mostly she just seems to be a born
performer with an approachable personality.  Lopez has some very nice
moments, as does the generally reliable Olmos.  His intensity, and the
sense of responsibility he instills in Selena as a Mexican-American
celebrity, give SELENA its greatest sense of purpose.
     Even then, however, it still feels compromised by its unwillingness
to dig very deeply.  SELENA is a _very_ authorized biography, supervised
and executive produced by Abraham Quintanilla, which means that the only
villain in the piece is going to be Yolanda Saldivar (Lupe Ontiveros),
the Selena Fan Club president who shot Selena in an argument over
embezzlement from the club.  Abraham is given a tap on the wrist for his
stubbornness in opposing Selena's relationship with Chris, but otherwise
he comes out looking pretty good.  Nava doesn't challenge Abraham's
obsessive stage parenting as a substitute for his own failed music career,
nor does he wonder whether the children actually enjoyed their life on the
road.  More to the point of the film, Nava tells Selena's story as though
she should be a hero simply because she was a successful Chicana.  There
are worse reasons to lionize someone than for being a good role model, and
it is certainly a tragedy that a young woman died too soon, but the story
of Selena's life just doesn't make for a very compelling dramatic film.
SELENA didn't need to be filled with dirt; it just needed a reason for
being besides providing a pleasant but unremarkable memorial to a pleasant
but unremarkable singer.  The well-made and well-acted SELENA will almost
certainly satisfy Selena's fans.  Those of us who didn't understand why
she was so beloved may have to wait for the unauthorized biography.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The young Selena Quintanilla and her sister Suzette crawl on top
of the family's modest home.  Selena casts her eyes to the full moon
which engulfs the screen as Selena talks about her dreams.  Positioned
as a Mexican-American Horatio Alger story, the movie SELENA tells the
true story of a popular singer who was murdered in her mid-twenties.
     Although the film has a charismatic lead, Jennifer Lopez, in the
title role as the grownup Selena, the picture suffers from an overly
homogenized and sanitized approach.  Writer and director Gregory Nava
takes an all too reverential approach to the persona of Selena.  The
resulting film feels less like the story of a flesh-and-blood star,
than an idealized biography that a fan club might produce.  The film
has all of the high spirits and the depth of one of the old GIDGET
movies.
     All of this notwithstanding, I thoroughly enjoyed Lopez's
performance.  You may remember Lopez from her last role as the Cuban
nanny in BLOOD AND WINE.  In that movie, her part consisted of walking
around looking sexy.  In SELENA she owns the show with her
luminescence.
     The film starts in 1995 with Selena riding into the Astrodome on a
horse drawn carriage as her fans go wild.  As she sings, the camera
dwells on her fans as the spotlights pan through the audience.
Although there are numerous songs in the movie, Edward Lachman's glitzy
cinematography and Nancy Richardson's fast editing concentrate on flash
and dazzle.  Why Selena became such a Tejano music star, we never find
out.  Whether because the songs are filmed in such a distracting way or
because the ones they chose for the film are not Selena's best, the
film shows us a high energy entertainer whose singing can best be
described as, well, pleasant.
     The undercurrent of the movie has to do with the struggles of
being Mexican-American.  After the scene of the idolatrous fans in the
Astrodome, the movie flashes back to Corpus Christi, Texas in 1961
where Selena's father Abraham is part of a trio of Mexican-American
singers who are practicing "Blue Moon."  They discover the inherent
conundrum of being Mexican-Americans who sing Gringo music.  Both races
reject the group for racist reasons.
     The show makes another jump to Lake Jackson, Texas in 1981 where
Abraham (Edward James Olmos) lives with his wife Marcella (Constance
Marie) and their kids.  Abraham is the proverbial dreamer who is
counterbalanced by his ever logical wife.  He wants the moon, but she
worries about the mortgage.  Both characters stay in pure formula
territory.  With Dave Grusin's dreamy background music, the film comes
near to lapsing into a fairy tale.
     When Abraham realizes that young Selena (Rebecca Lee Meza) has a
remarkable voice, he makes her stop playing kid games in the backyard
and start practicing her singing.  He forces her siblings to be her
musical accompanists.  None of the kids are wild about the idea, but
Abraham is one of those old school fathers.  He commands; the kids
jump.  But, Olmos gives us a stage-father with a heart as well as a
dictator.
     The show skips again to El Paso, Texas in 1989 where Selena's
popularity now extends to small crowds at county fairs.  Her dad is
scandalized when Selena takes off her top and flaunts her body in a
Madonna-style bustier.  (Actually, Selena could have become rich
through diet books if the story is accurate.  Although her father and
sister are chubby, Selena brags that she lives exclusively on junk
food, especially pepperoni pizza, but her svelte figure is the sort
teenage girls dream about.)
     Her $600 per show makes for a meager existence for her family.
Abraham drives a bus, and Selena and the band live in it from gig to
gig.  Sometimes they stop to spend the night at fleabag motels with
signs proclaiming "Direct Dial Phones" as their chief amenity.
     One day, they sign a guitarist named Chris Perez (Jon Seda) from a
heavy metal band.  Although he looks like the character than may
provide some creative tension in the film, he turns out to be as sweet
as the rest of the family.  He does have one funny little habit.  He
wears a holster that is custom-made to hold a small bottle of hot
sauce.  When he takes Selena out for pizza, he draws and twirls the
bottle like a gun and shoots the sauce, thereby drowning his pizza in
it.
     With the exception of Tejano music fans, most of us probably first
heard about Selena when she was murdered, but the film treats the event
with all of the importance of an epilogue.  As the film is winding
down, she is suddenly killed, and the story ends shortly thereafter.
It is as if the movie does not want to destroy its nostalgic ambiance
with the brutality of real life.  Even the cinematographic techniques
change at the end with her murder being revealed in a brief and flashy
montage.
     Although the show has merit and Lopez delivers a remarkably
compelling and extremely likable performance, the picture suffers from
terminal blandness and leaves too many questions unanswered.  We learn
just enough about Selena to want to know more.
     SELENA runs much too long at 2:10.  It is rated PG for some mild
profanity and the off-screen murder.  The film would be fine for kids
of any age, but those under ten would probably be interested only if
they are Selena fans.  Lopez's delightful performance is enough for me
to be able to recommend the picture and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jennifer Lopez, Edward James Olmos, Jon Seda, Constance Marie, 
      Jacob Vargas, Jackie Guerra, Lupe Ontiveros, Becky Lee Meza
Director: Gregory Nava
Producers: Moctesuma Esparza, Robert Katz
Screenplay: Gregory Nava
Cinematography: Edward Lachman
Music: Dave Grusin
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Going into SELENA, I didn't know or care much about the life of the 
late Tex-Mex singer, whose death in 1995 came just as she was attempting 
to break into the mainstream American pop market.  As far as I was 
aware, Selena's tragic end was just another minor footnote in music 
history -- I hadn't heard of her before and I didn't expect to hear of 
her again.  Then along came this movie, and, sitting in a darkened 
theater, watching Selena's story unfold, my perceptions changed.  I not 
only cared, but understood a measure of the tragedy that had stricken 
her fans. 
     It would have been easy to trivialize Selena's story, turning it 
into a sudsy, made-for-TV type motion picture.  The details for 
something lurid and exploitative are there, but that was never an 
approach considered by writer/director Gregory Nava.  This is a simple 
story of hope and triumph, of one girl with the drive to succeed defying 
the odds and following her dream.  It's not an original tale -- movies 
like this abound -- but Nava's point-of-view is fresh.  
     In 1995's MY FAMILY, Nava explored the importance of blood ties 
within a Mexican American family.  Similar themes are woven into SELENA.  
This is a multigenerational story, exploring not only Selena's 
realization of her dreams, but the importance of her father's vision to 
all that she accomplished.  It was his belief in her that prodded her to 
follow her own path, and his support that convinced her that she could 
succeed in a field where every other Mexican American woman had failed.  
     Nava has brought back much of the cast of MY FAMILY to star in 
SELENA.  The two key on-screen contributors to this movie -- Jennifer 
Lopez as Selena and Edward James Olmos as her father, Abraham 
Quintanilla -- had roles in the previous feature.  Both are superb 
choices for their parts here.  Olmos breathes life and vitality into 
Abraham, a man who loves his daughter deeply, wants her to succeed, yet, 
by his own admission, doesn't know how to let go.  There's nothing 
cliched about the way Olmos approaches Abraham, who, in less expert 
hands, could have become a hackneyed type.
     Jennifer Lopez is radiant as the title character, conveying the 
boundless energy and enthusiasm that exemplified Selena, while 
effectively copying not only her look, but her mannerisms.  I wonder if 
Selena's family, upon watching this performance, felt an eerie sense of 
deja vu.  It's apparent from the clips of the real performer shown at 
the movie's conclusion that Lopez has done a masterful job of re-
creating a personality. 
     The supporting roles are no less capably filled.  Constance Marie 
plays Selena's mother, Marcela.  Jackie Guerra and Jacob Vargas are her 
sister, Suzette, and brother, Abie.  Jon Seda is Chris Perez, Selena's 
husband.  Lupe Ontiveros portrays Yolanda Saldivar, the president of 
Selena's fan club who eventually shot the singer to death.  Finally, 
making her screen debut is Becky Lee Meza as Selena at age nine.  While 
Meza's performance is a little rough around the edges, she shows the 
kind of spunk we expect from someone who would grow up to become such a 
charismatic figure.
     One of the most fascinating aspects of SELENA is how it deals with 
culture clashes.  At one point, Abraham points out to his daughter that 
for her to be accepted on both sides of the border, she must be "more 
Mexican than most Mexicans" and "more American than most Americans."  
She must speak English and Spanish flawlessly, and has to understand and 
identify with icons of both cultures.  This is a lesson that Selena 
takes to heart.  She is an American, but she is also a Mexican, and she 
learns to draw from both cultures to form her own style.  
     Nava's film flows beautifully, and the concert sequences 
effectively capture the electricity of such events.  SELENA achieves the 
perfect emotional pitch for the subject, and, though this is a 
celebration of life, youth, and family, our awareness of the inevitable 
end lends a sense of poignancy to the proceedings.  It's impossible to 
watch Selena's triumphant Astrodome concert without remembering that her 
life would be snuffed out less than a month later.
     Fame often follows tragedy, especially when the victim is cut down 
in the prime of life.  James Dean.  Buddy Holly.  Roberto Clemente.  
These are just a few names in a long, long list.  Now, Selena has joined 
that roster.  This movie will serve to further elevate her name and 
advance her legend.  Had she lived, she would have turned twenty-six 
this year, and people would have said that her whole life was in front 
of her.  But Yolanda Saldivar's gun wrote the final chapter to that book 
two years ago.  Now, there is a beginning, a middle, and, sadly, an end.  
And, as told by Gregory Nava, with an assist from the Quintanilla family 
(who were heavily involved in the production), SELENA is a shining 
story.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Walter Frith
Jennifer Lopez gives a star making performance in the biopic 'Selena'.  This
energizing look at the life of a blossoming music superstar whose life ended
in tragic fashion in 1995 at the hands of her fan club manager at a hotel in
Corpus Christi, Texas is an in-depth, creative and fascinating look at a life
based not only on talent and decication to one's craft but also to the bonds
of family life which is so splendidly played out by the entire cast.  
In 1987, 'La Bamba' starring Lou Diamond Phillips had a similar look as it
too was the story of a Mexican-American music legend whose life ended too
soon in a plane crash on February 3, 1959 that also took the lives of Buddy
Holly and The Big Bopper.  As well as documenting the final three years of
Valens' life, that film characterized the rivalry between Valens and his
older brother while 'Selena' chooses to focus on her family struggling and
working hard as children from the time Selena is nine until her death at age
twenty three.  
Led by the belief of their father (Edward James Olmos) that they can make it
big in show business, the family's other children aside from Selena learn to
play musical instruments and are by Selena's side as she climbs the ladder of
success.  Lopez looks astonishingly similar to the real life Selena and the
movie is an indication that her career can go far because of her dedication
to this role.
Director/writer Gregory Nava ('El Norte') brings a hard edged and straight
laced look to this film and makes Edward James Olmos as Selena's father the
pillar of strength as his towering performance as the family's bonding elder
is the best one in the film.
For movie lovers interested in knowing something about the life of this
talented superstar, 'Selena' takes the time to also be a sweet, tender and
caring film about family, success, disappointment and tragic circumstance
juggled for a perfect balance.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) After watching SELENA it's hard not to like the "Tejano"
singer.
I went to the movie knowing very little about Selena's music. I even
anticipated that I might not like it very well, because there are types
of Tex-Mex music that I can't stand (e.g., norteno music, the Mexican
version of polka). I was relieved that Selena didn't do polka, but I
still don't think I'd go buy her albums. Her music just doesn't appeal
to me.
Luckily, the movie doesn't require that you love -- or even like --
Selena's music. The movie focuses enough on the characters and the story
that even non-fans can enjoy it. I did.
Selena was a pop music singer. She rose to fame singing Tex-Mex songs in
Spanish and she was just making progress as a crossover singer --
crossing over to mainstream pop in English --  when she was gunned down
at age 23, ironically, by the president of her fan club.
SELENA tells the story both of Selena (Jennifer Lopez) and of her father
Abraham (Edward James Olmos). The movie opens with Selena's last big
concert in the Houston Astrodome. Her opening number is a medley
starting with "I Will Survive," a bit of heavy-handed irony that could
have been overplayed, but which ends up working rather well.
The movie then flashes back to her father's early stint in music, before
Selena was born. Abraham's doo-wop group is pretty good, but can't get a
gig anywhere because racist Anglos won't hire a group of Mexicans and
Mexicans don't want to listen to doo-wop.
The movie jumps forward several years, to when Selena is just 9. Abraham
discovers that music runs in the Quintanilla family like Mexican blood.
Little Selena proves to have the same love of, and more talent for,
music than he has. Her voice and interest in music inspire him to buy a
vanload of instruments for his whole family. After a rocky start, they
begin to sound pretty good together. They stick together through it all
and move on to the big time.
Though the subject herself isn't that interesting to me, I like the
story and the characters in SELENA.
SELENA is a rags-to-riches story, but it shuns the extremes common to
movies of this sort. Selena was not dirt-poor as a child. Her father was
difficult at times, but he was not portrayed as an inhuman monster. He
pushed the kids to practice, but he didn't crack the whip. He
disapproved of Selena's boyfriend, but he knew when he was overreacting
and was able to apologize. There were obstacles and conflicts, but none
of them were blown out of proportion.
Also, though Selena is murdered in the end, the movie manages to be a
triumphal story and not a tragedy. Her death is tragic, but the tone of
the movie is gracious and joyful, not bitter and sad. Come to think of
it, that's probably the better way to be remembered. It is more
generous, more healthful, to celebrate a person's life than to brood
over their death.
The characters in SELENA are well developed and likeable. Abraham, as I
mentioned, is not presented as an ogre. He is stern, but he loves his
kids as most fathers do, and his family always comes first.
Jon Seda plays Chris, Selena's boyfriend, guitarist, and husband with
quiet, shy, downcast eyes in spite of his heavy metal tendencies. When
the time comes for him to say "I love you," it's not just because the
script calls for it; it's because Chris and Selena have become best
friends.
Lopez shines as Selena who is always cheerful and seems to have a true
love for life. When a boy climbs on stage and starts dancing with her,
she stops the security guard from removing him. Soon she is dancing with
a stageful of smiling children. When she sticks up for Chris, it is not
an act of defiance to her father, it is truly defense of her best
friend.
The movie has its shortcomings. Nava and editor Nancy Richardson
introduced a motif of the moon that doesn't play well. A split-screen
effect is used occasionally that doesn't play well and is distracting.
Worst of all, the ending is some sort of jump to reality; real-life
mourners are intercut with footage of the real-life Selena. This
sequence brought to mind the coda of SCHINDLER'S LIST and the comparison
left a bad taste in my mouth.
Still, the movie is worth seeing, even if you don't like the music. It's
a shame that the movie came out only two years after Selena's death
because it seems like the movie is carefully targeted at just her fans
and mourners. I wonder if a greater distance might have made her story
more universal and given this fine movie a broader audience.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Lim Boon Wee
I have to confess that I know little about Selena when I watch the show,
and 2.5 hours later, I felt what thousands felt when she passed away in
1995, sadness and grief.
This movie was bypassed from the big screens here as the targetted 
audience might be small, but what a mistake it is. It is one of the most
moving show I have seen this year.
We are given a visual treat from the very beginning of the show, it would
be hard not to be shakened by the enormous reception Selena got from her
fans at the concert. You might be mistaken that she must be Madonna. A
song later, we are transported back to the time where her father was still
in his teens, trying to make it as a pop group, only to fail because of
language barrier.
A few decades on, he discovered that his daughter and his other 2 children
had the potential to fulfil his long time dream, to become famous ie. So,
his three children exchanged their stones and footballs for the mic, drum
sticks and the guitar. A typical journey for any pop star, it has to start
of from humble settings, get recognised and then move on to big things.
That is what we will get to see. What we are constantly reminded of is, it
is important to keep your dreams alive and see it happen.
Jennifer Lopez gave an outstanding performance as Selena, she does deserve
the Oscar nomination last year. She oozes the charm and energy that Selena
had. Edward James Olmos who plays her father, Abraham, also gave a strong
performance a concerned father and manager of his daughter. Sad to say,
Jon Seda's (Chris Perez) role as Selena's husband was not exploited, the
same can also be said for her brother and sister.
What probably spoiled the mood of the show is that you know what is you
know what is going to happen next. A colourful and happy journey for the
audience (and most importantly, for Selena herself) turned sour towards
the end, no thanks to her mistrust towards her employee.
One will feel what a waste of talent that was, she had the looks, she had
the voice and she had the fashion tastes, at the time where she was on the
verge of bigger times, she had to go. She was only 23.
Selena Quintanilla Perez (1971 - 1995)
MY HOME!           http://www.iscs.nus.sg/~limboonw
Man Utd        Page           http://www.iscs.nus.sg/~limboonw/mufc.html
UK Chart Page      http://www.iscs.nus.sg/~limboonw/Ukchart/
