Title
Review for Sol del membrillo, El (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     One is tempted during the opening of Dream of Light to proclaim it
one of the most fascinating documentaries ever made.  For 15 minutes,
there is nearly no dialogue, as Antonio López García, a renowned Spanish
painter, prepares a canvas for his next work: a painting of the sun as
it dances across the leaves and fruit of a quince tree.  The detail is
remarkable, and you sit up in your seat, waiting for things to really
get going.
     But about an hour into the painting (and six or so weeks in his
real life), you start to realize that the emperor may indeed be without
clothes.  García's painting indeed slowly comes to life, the key word
being slowly.  In fact, it's so slow it is literally mind numbing.  Yes,
you will fall asleep.  No, you won't miss anything.  And even after
that  hour, you've still got 88 minutes to go.  But then comes the
kicker: Imagine your surprise when García actually quits his painting
because Spain's bad weather makes the light all wrong and he can't
continue.
     No, really.  After 90 minutes, this documentary about a painting
becomes a documentary about the drawing García decides to make instead.
     Or is it even that?  Dream of Light is shot in a documentary style,
but it's clearly not a traditional documentary.  Why?  Because multiple
camera angles, seamless intercutting, and pro-grade production design
make it clear that multiple takes were involved, and that, in other
words, at least some of Dream of Light has been staged for the benefit
of the viewer.  How do I feel about this?  I'm not sure.  But maybe if
all this work had created a film worth sitting through I wouldn't be as
perturbed as I am about it.
     Whether it's a documentary or not, the sheer dumbness of the way
this movie was put together is alone enough to drag it down.  Director
Víctor Erice spends plenty of time with García at his work, showing us
the painstaking detail he takes in getting through a project, but he
also sidetracks the movie with a half-dozen side stories that are as
meaningless as they are dull.  I'd describe them... but I can't.  I
never did figure out the identities of all the bizarre people who wander
into García's backyard to watch him painting the quince tree.  Some are
family, and one appears to be a fellow painter, but most seem to be
handymen working on a construction job in his house.  And they add to
this story how?  Largely unreadable subtitles don't help things at all.
     Ultimately, like many films about art, Dream of Light is a pretty
movie that is pleasing on the eyes.  But like much of the art itself, it
also leaves a lot open for interpretation, and even more to the
imagination.  Too much for my taste.
Director: Víctor Erice
Producer: María Moreno
Writer: Víctor Erice, Antonio López García
Starring: Antonio López García, Marina Moreno, Enrique Gran, María
López, Carmen López, Elisa Ruiz, José Carretero, Amalia Aria, Lucio
Muńoz, Esperanza Parada, Julio López Hernández, Fan Xiao Ming, Yan Sheng
Dong, Janusz Pietrzkiak, Marek Domagala, Grzegorz Ponikmia
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
