Title
Review for Jeepers Creepers (2001)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Steve Rhodes
It's Only a Movie! by Richard Haberski Jr., Kentucky: University
Press of Kentucky. 2001. Review by Harvey Karten,
film_critic@compuserve.com
As a film critic for several online sites, I share with others of my
vocation a distress that while the public may be reading us, the
reviews themselves seem to be influencing only a few in their
choices of films.  I like to say defensively that it is not the critic's
function to operate as a Consumer Reports guide, to send people
to the theaters or to guide them into settling back into their
couches.  But the writing is on the wall; or, rather, the writing
should be there but it isn't: critics have lost much of the authority
they once had to influence the public.  In a short book filled with
lush prose, Richard J. Haberski Jr. strives to tell us why critical
authority has declined albeit less rapidly than the current
NASDAQ chart, topping his tome off with a mixed conclusion. 
On the one hand movies are such a joyful medium, the film world
may not really suffer for the breakdown in authority.  On the other
hand, "It is sad that today movie critics appear powerless ot help
us discover the art of moviegoing."
Tracing a brief film history encompassing the impact of select
organizations like the National Board of Review on the movie
choices available to us, Haberski's book is most enlightening and
relevant (at least to critics like me) when it referees debates
among several major writers such as Pauline Kael, Andrew
Sarris, Stanley Kauffmann and Dwight MacDonald--writers who
have had often divergent viewpoints on such issues as the
importance of the director, the gap between the younger and
older audience, the relative values of elitism and democracy, and
most of all the big question of whether movies should even be
considered an art that justifies critical analysis.  
Theory aside, the general public felt comfortable with the idea of
art until the dawn of the Pop era signalled by the ideas and
paintings of Andy Warhol.  The book reaches a high point in its
examination of the Big Debate between the Andrew ("auteur
theory) Sarris--who believes that the director is the all-important
creator of a film, and the late Pauline ("It's Only a Movie!")  Kael -
-who was known for toughness toward sugarcoated movies like
"The Sound of Music" and praised almost universally condemned
fare like "Bonnie and Clyde."  Despite her staunch advocacy of
strong films, Kael amassed a large readership with her disdain
for pretension and love for good films whether or not they had
"something to say."
"It's Only a Movie!" is a must-read for critics and would make a
sure-fire addition to the library of movie buffs everywhere.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "JEEPERS CREEPERS" (MGM/UA Entertainment)
  This nasty, little horror film begins as a bickering brother (Justin
Long) and sister (Gina Philips) are driving through the desolate countryside on
their way home from college and spy a man dropping wrapped-up bodies down a
drainage pipe. When Long decides to investigate, there's nothing but trouble.
"You know the part in scary movies where somebody does something really stupid
and everybody hates them for it? - Well, this is it!" Philips warns. What he
finds in the basement of an old, abandoned church  is a dying boy with a
horrifying, jagged-stitched incision from his neck to his navel, plus hundreds
of other mutilated bodies, stitched together on the walls and ceiling like a
disgusting tapestry. Long flees but now the monstrous, winged Creeper (Jonathan
Breck) is after both of them! Eileen Brennan appears briefly as the Cat Lady and
Patricia Belcher is Jezelle, a psychic who explains the evil creature's bizarre
feeding habits. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Jeepers Creepers" is a
fiendishly visceral 2 with an extraordinarily gruesome conclusion, giving new
meaning to the old song "Jeepers Creepers."
   And now - as Paul Harvey would say - for the rest of the story.
What's more scary than the cruelty of the satanic film itself is the fact that
writer/director Victor Salva is a convicted child molester who videotaped
himself having oral sex with a 12 year-old actor in California. Sentenced to
three years in prison, he served 15 months and completed parole in 1992. When
Salva made "Powder" (1995), the story of an albino boy with supernatural
abilities, Disney studio executives claimed that they did not know about his
prior conviction as a pedophile. And now, once again, in this MGM/UA film, that
fact is conspicuously absent from his press kit bio.

Author
Jerry Saravia
I might give more credit than deserved but I must declare that "Jeepers
Creepers" is, despite lapses in logic and plot holes big enough to drive a semi
through, alternately chilling and frightfully good entertainment. It is a hark
back to movies like "Fright Night" and "Return of the Living Dead" where good,
scary thrills and chills, not to mention characters we care about, were central
to our enjoyment. 
The film begins in an ominous tone recalling the open roadways out in the middle
of nowhere of "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre." We see two kids in the car, Trish
(Gina Philips) and her younger brother, Darryl (Justin Long), leaving for spring
break from college and headed home. There is the usual banter between siblings
about former boyfriends, dirty laundry, parents and urban legends. One
particular legend is about a prom couple that died out in the same road they are
driving on - they were found minus a head and a body. Suddenly, a roaring,
tootin truck that seems to have come out of hell chases them and nearly runs
them over. The truck disappears but later, Darryl spots a cloaked figure dumping
bodybags down a silo. The upshot is that the very same truck that almost killed
them is also there. Instead of continuing on their way home, Darryl decides to
go back to the church and find if anyone is alive in those bodybags. What
happens next is often terrifying, eerie and blackly comical - almost a
horror-comedy 
but not quite. 
"Jeepers Creepers" is sometimes uneven as it awkwardly balances itself between
humor and horror. The first half-hour, however, is great, terrifically chilling
fun since we are not sure where the movie is headed. When Darryl ends up in the
basement of the church, he finds bodies stitched together and decorating the
walls like the Sistine Chapel. We sense the killer is out there and that he
could be in the basement. The question is: what is this killer? In the credits,
he is known as the Creeper whose murderous strategy is taken from the lyrics of
the song "Jeepers Creepers." He is also able to drive a mean truck at fast
speeds and materialize from one place to another. 
Director Victor Salva ("Powder") does a splendid job of crafting what would
normally be a poor man's Clive Barker freakshow. Salva knows how to milk
suspense out of deserted roadways, dark basements, silhouetted scarecrows, black
crows, and so on. Most of the movie is saturated in atmospheric details, a nice
respite from slasher film cliches and postmodernist winking. There is a great
moment where the Creeper assumes a scarecrow position. I also like the constant
birdcalls from the crows, a reminder that death is nearby. 
Surprisingly, the acting by the two leads is astonishingly good. We are not
talking about prettified teens from the Freddie Prinze and Sarah Michelle Gellar
school. Gina Philips and Justin Long create credible teenagers facing an
unknowing, evil force. Their bickering, bantering moments are upstaged by
moments where they simply talk to each other, understanding and sizing each
other up. The film spends at least fifteen to twenty minutes establishing their
characters and that is a noble achievement in this day and age of soulless teen
characters who make self-reverential horror movie statements. 
"Jeepers Creepers" would have benefitted from tighter pacing towards its
conclusion, less of a Psychic Lady character who gives away too much
information, and less of the cops who try to kill the Creeper at the police
station. I would have loved to learn more about the bodies that decorate the
walls of the church and more of the Creeper's superhuman abilities. We are
unsure of what to make of this creature nor do we know its ultimate goal. But
that is part of the fun of "Jeepers Creepers" - its vagueness supplies the
chills, especially in the final, haunting shot. Watch out for those peepers!
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
There's a lot to admire about Jeepers Creepers.  It's a horror film, but
it's packed with neither the hottest modern rock tracks nor acting talent
from any show on the WB.  It doesn't start with a pre-opening-credits
killing to whet your sick whistle, and there aren't any sex scenes
interrupted by a knife-wielding psycho.  That's enough to break the
conventional horror mold right there, but Creepers is actually somewhat
frightening, as well.
Instead of raiding the WB's casting closet, Creepers' producers turned to
two other networks from which to pluck their plucky leads.  Ed's Justin Long
and Boston Public's Gina Philips play Darryl and Trish, a brother and sister
who have chosen to take the back roads on their way home from college.  The
ride is full of good-natured ribbing and a time-passing license plate game,
but things take a turn for the worse when a creepy-looking truck with an
even creepier-sounding horn appears behind them and tries to run them off
the road before disappearing over the horizon.
Of course, that's not the end of Darryl and Trish's trip to the dark side.
Further down the road, they find an abandoned farmhouse with the beat-up
truck parked next to it.  As they slow down, the siblings see a dark figure
removing what appears to be corpses from the back of the truck and dropping
them down a sewer pipe protruding from the ground.  Like every other horror
film moron, the two decide to check things out, making themselves targets of
a man in black (whom we'll call Creepers, just because he doesn't really
have a name).
Creepers' first half is very promising, but then writer/director/child
molester Victor Salva (Powder) starts in with the typical horror clichés.
I'm talking about stuff like having the car run out of gas or refusing to
start at an inopportune moment - not the other stuff that's been "borrowed"
from other films, like self-mockery of the genre (a la Scream), bad stuff
happening at a secluded farmhouse (a la The Texas Chainsaw Massacre) and
references to urban legends (a la, uh, Urban Legends).  Even the scenes
where Creepers tries to run Darryl and Trish off the road seems to be taken
right out of Duel, and the whole evil truck thing is done much better in the
upcoming Joy Ride.
One of the things that makes Joy Ride so enjoyable is the fact you never see
the bad guy.  Not here, though.  Creepers, who was frightening at the
beginning of the film, becomes pretty lame once you get a good look at him.
He's like the WWF version of evil.  Salva also inserts a completely
unnecessary psychic character (Patricia Belcher) into the action, just to
explain why Creepers is doing what he's doing, but it was a lot scarier when
we didn't know.
Still, Creepers is the most original mainstream American horror film I've
seen in a while.  It's better B-movie horror than John Carpenter has made in
a long time, with a darker baddie and leads that genuinely appear terrified.
Creepers is certainly entertaining enough, but in this sequel-crazy world,
I'm almost hoping nobody goes to see it, just so there won't be a lame
Jeepers Creepers 2 out next Halloween.
1:30 - R for terror violence/gore, language and brief nudity

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A brother and sister driving home through the countryside witness a man throwing
wrapped-up bodies down a chute. The two decide to go back and look into the
matter (don't ask!) and fall into a heap o' trouble. You bet!
CRITIQUE:
A definite step in the right direction in respect to the horror genre in films
today, but not without its own set of pitfalls. I really dug the first half of
this film. It was creepy, it was methodically paced yet filled with tension, it
reminded me of films like DUEL and THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE and it placed the
audience into realistic situations with some damn scary thoughts. Unfortunately,
the second half of the film fell into the same ol' contrivances that have
plagued horror films from the beginning. We get the leads running out of gas,
having trouble starting their car, cops not believing their story, folks
standing around watching scary stuff go down when they should be running and
basically a lot of goofy decision-making on the part of the protagonists. And to
top it all off, they actually thought that it might be a good idea to toss a
psychic into the second half...that's right, you heard me correctly, a psychic!
Ugh. I hate when screenwriters take the "easy way" out and slap an all-knowing
character into these films, a person who comes into the story to explain the
entire thing to the audience and give the leads advice on what to do next and
tell us what is happening (don't you think we're a little smarter than that?).
This film didn't need that type of character, as its premise alone was a very
credible and scary one.
I mean, here are a couple of good ol' American kids driving through the
heartland and witnessing a creepy-looking man shoving, what appears to be, dead
human bodies down a drainpipe. Scary shit, right? Well, this film does an
excellent job of building up all of that tension early on and keeping the "bad
guy" hidden for the first half of the movie. You wonder what is going on, you
root for the two kids because you appreciate what they might be going through.
Credit director Salva for creating that extra-special strain in the film with
some interesting directing choices and an excellent score for even more creeps.
It's too bad that the second half of the film just doesn't pan out as well as
you might hope. I tend to lose interest in lead characters whenever they start
doing stupidities in horror flicks, like standing around watching when they
should be turning around and running! But there were also a couple of small plot
holes that bothered me here as well, like why the "bad guy" felt the need to
play songs when whacking out his victims (or making correlations to them) or why
he had a namesake license plate? I mean...did I miss something here?
But overall, the film was definitely a nice change of pace from all of the teen
slasher garbage that we've been getting of late, and I certainly appreciated its
"old school" mentality (no MTV soundtrack in sight!). So I would still recommend
that you check this movie out, just to see what will hopefully be the
continuation of more creepy, tension-filled horror movies (SESSION 9, THE
OTHERS, GINGER SNAPS). Oh yeah, and the final shot of this film is one that I
will remember forever. Brrrrrrrr...thank you Salva, for not going "Hollywood" on
us in the very end.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Blair Witch Project (4/10) - The Fly (8/10) - Ginger Snaps (8/10) - I Know
What You Did Last Summer (7/10) - I Still Know What You Did Last Summer (4/10) -
Urban Legend (4/10) - Urban Legends (3/10) - Valentine (3/10)

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Jeepers Creepers (2001)
Gina Philips, Justin Long, Jonathan Breck, Patricia Belcher, Brandon
Smith, Eileen Brennan. Written and directed by Victor Salva. 87 minutes.
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Shifting modes abruptly near the halfway point, "Jeepers Creepers" is
really two movies. The first is a full-fledged creep-out, with a shadowy
killer and his would-be victims placed in disturbingly intimate
circumstances. The second is an old-fashioned monster movie, showcasing
a brazen creature willing to go anywhere, including a packed police
station, to satisfy its vile needs.
What connects the two is Darryl (Justin Long) and his sister Trish (Gina
Philips), a pair of likable college kids who are dumb. Very dumb.
Extraordinarily dumb. I-believe-Miss-Cleo-is-on-the-level dumb. George
W. dumb.
"Jeepers Creepers" opens on a sunny day, as Darryl and Trish tool down a
long, empty highway in the country on their way home to visit the folks.
Their squabbling is interrupted when a weathered pickup truck nearly
runs them off the road. Minutes later, while they are still catching
their breaths, they spot the truck parked by an old church. The driver,
anonymous in a wide hat and long coat, totes what appear to be two
bodies wrapped in bloody sheets across the ground and dumps then down a
drainage pipe. Then, with his face in shadow from the brim of his hat,
he stands straight and looks directly towards Darryl and Trish.
The terrified siblings tear down the road, only to see that wretched
truck in the rear view mirror moments later. Like a scene out of a
nightmare (or Steven Spielberg's "Duel"), the truck rams them repeatedly
and the two barely survive the assault. When the truck finally moves on
into the distance, the kids sit, gasping and shaking over their brush
with death. And then Darryl turns to his sister, looks her deep in the
eyes and say, "We've got to go back."
"We've got to go back," he says. Trish stares at him as if he'd
suggested they go swimming in the ocean wearing chum-scented sunblock.
"We've got to go back," he implores. "What if they're still alive? What
if it was you back there?" Trish, showing a welcome glimmer of survival
skills, suggests they call the police, but the batteries in their
cellphone are dead and "who knows how far we'll have to drive before we
find a pay phone."
At this point, I fought the urge to scream, "What about the farmhouses
you pass every 30 seconds? Unless you're driving through Amish country,
they probably have phones! What the fuck is wrong with you people?"
While my head throbs, Darryl and Trish drive back to the church. Darryl
leans in over the drainpipe, while Trish notes aloud that they are
following the classic pattern of idiot teenagers in slasher movies. Then
Darryl faintly hears a voice cry "Help!" and climbs into the pipe. What
a guy. If he had been in "Jaws" when the shark began swallowing Robert
Shaw, he probably would have dove in after him.
Now I realize that movies like this must place vulnerable people in
godawful dangerous circumstances, but would it kill the screenwriters to
at least make a passing attempt to paint the heroes as something more
than imbeciles? For example, how about this scenario: Darryl and Trish
spot the figure lowering the bodies into the drainpipe. He sees them and
heads for his truck. They attempt to speed away but they run out of gas
and their engine dies. Frantically, they pull the car off the road into
a field and hide behind the tall cornstalks. The pickup truck backs out,
fails to see them and goes racing down the highway. Knowing they have
but a few minutes, one of them looks around the church grounds for a
source of gas, while the other checks out the pipe for signs of life.
Sure, my proposal is overly reliant on luck and good timing, but
compared to what is presented onscreen, it is pure genius.
Regardless of the amber waves of stupidity, the first portion of
"Jeepers Creepers" is still scary as hell. TV veterans Long ("Ed") and
Philips ("Boston Public") are credible as brother and sister, and the
opening sequence lasts long enough to allow us to bond with the pair.
Writer-director Victor Salva ("Powder") effectively taps into our primal
fears about strange goings-on in rural areas, aided by Don FauntLeRoy's
skewed camerawork and Bennett Salvay's jarring score.
There is little I can reveal about the latter portion of the film
without spoiling things. Suffice to say that it becomes a much more
traditional monster movie, with a number of people trying to fend off a
bizarre creature (Jonathan Breck) that knows exactly what it wants and
isn't the least bit hesitant in getting those items. While a needless
scene with a whacked-out cat lady (Eileen Brennan) and the presence of a
character with too many answers (Patricia Belcher) muddle up the flow,
the story still delivers a sufficient number of cheap thrills, with a
wrap-up that is both silly and shocking. "Jeepers Creepers" may sputter
in the last reel, but it still delivers enough style and scares to
warrant a look by horror aficionados.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Jeepers Creepers is a functional, crafty, genuinely
scary little chiller that delivers exactly what it
promises and more. There's nothing extraordinary about
it - except, perhaps, the ending; more on that later -
but it's a masterpiece of utilitarian effectiveness.
My friends tell me that copious amounts of movies have
desensitized me to the thrills of a good horror flick;
it's saying something, then, that during Jeepers
Creepers I had to look at the people around me and
remind myself that it's only a movie.
Horror movie characters are almost invariably "hip"
now, flouting the clichés of the genre while at the
same time bowing to them. So I was pleasantly
surprised to see one that - with the exception of a
single, inconsequential line of dialogue - plays it
completely straight. It begins with Trish and Darry, a
brother and sister - the lack of a token "romance" is
also refreshing - driving on a deserted rural road.
Their bickering is interrupted when they are hassled
by an old farm truck that pulls up behind hen, bumps
them, swerves, honks, and finally runs their car off
the road and into a field. They dust themselves off,
recover, mutter something to the effect of "crazy
asshole" to themselves and continue on their way.
A few minutes later, they pass an abandoned church.
The menacing truck is parked nearby, and a
shady-looking man is throwing elongated objects
wrapped in red-stained sheets down a pipe. Rattled,
they pull over a couple of miles down the road. After
deliberation, they decide to go to the nearest police
station, alert the authorities and be on their way.
Well, that would have been the smart thing to do, at
least. But then we wouldn't have a movie, would we?
Actually, they decide to go back and investigate, with
the hopes of helping anyone who is still alive. And
though this action is undoubtedly stupid, Darry's
childlike curiosity is almost believable, like a
preteen's fascination with the hospital morgue or the
graveyard. What they find matches both of those
descriptions, and before long they are chased by that
same old farm truck, the driver's identity remaining a
secret until they get a mysterious phone call from a
psychic who tells them that once it has their scent,
it won't chase them to the end of the earth and back.
Though Jeepers Creepers does not occupy a respected
genre, it is charged, masterful filmmaking. It cuts
through the crap associated with teen horror films -
pop-culture-filled dialogue, corny in-jokes, love
triangles - and gives us what we want: white-knuckle
suspense, good jolts, serviceable acting and a villain
who is actually scary. Even the title, which seems at
first like the creation of a mildly retarded
publicist, has a logical and frightening relevance to
the plot.
Justin Long and Gina Phillips are competent in the
lead roles, which is all that the plot requires. We
sympathize: they're frightened and so are we. The
opening sequence, the only part of the film that can
be described as "low-key" also establishes their
characters as likeable, which is a plus because it
ensures that we won't be cheering for them to be
eaten.
Then there's the ending, which is as abrupt as it is
surprising. I'll say nothing more about it, except to
mention that though others in the theater were
shouting "That's it?!" I found it more satisfying than
any number of conventional dispatchings of the villain
that you always see in monster movies. I expected
another fade-in, and had to sit there and blink for a
while when the credits unexpectedly began to roll.
That sort of incredulous shock is what Jeepers
Creepers is all about. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Curb Entertainment/Amazon Film Productions
 Director:  Dana Lustig
 Writer:  Annette Goliti Gutierrez, Dana Lustig
 Cast: Selma Blair, Max Beesley, Brendan Fehr, Lochlyn Munro,
O'Neal Compton, D.W. Moffett
 Screened at: Loews Screening Rm., NYC 9/7/01
   Nobody ever says "all you need is love" in this movie--which
could probably fit neatly into some WOR-TV schedule on a
Wednesday at 5 p.m.--but the subtext is there.  "Kill Me Later" is
about a woman, Shawn (Selma Blair) who has had a
dysfunctional childhood (product of a divorced dad) and who
works in a bank--and is worked on in bed by her boss Matthew
(D.W. Moffett).  The trouble is that Matthew is not about to break
up his marriage to his pregnant wife, though Selma insists "I
never asked you to leave your wife."  Original this is not.  So
what's a poor girl to do when his silly boss chooses to remain
with his own family?  Suicide, of course.  After all, even a pretty
woman like Shawn can't bear to live without this jerk, and despite
her knockout of a figure and her tasteful, black, urban threads,
she sees no prospect of something better. The question remains:
how to do herself in?  Jump off a high building?  Leap from a
bridge?  
   Nah.  Some postmodern Prince Charming is always ready to
save such an unhappy individual, and what better choice for a
man than someone far more exciting than a bank manager...how
about a dashing bank robber who is sensitive to a female's
needs?
   The movie gets its title from Shawn's verbal contract with a
bank robber whose plans were about to be foiled by the police,
Charlie (Max Beesley).  "I'll help you escape," she offers when he
thinks he's merely taking her as an unwilling hostage, "If you will
kill me later.  The story is banal enough, with decent performers
like Selma Blair ("Cruel Intentions") and Max Beesley ("The Last
Minute") unable to do much with a script devoid of wit to say
nothing of credibility.  But director Dana Lustig makes matters
worse with some film-school, music-video jump cuts, excessive
use of a blue filter at one point during a car chase, and generic,
intrusive rock music.  As young cop-old cop, Lochlyn Munro and
O'Neal Compton are locked into the hackneyed roles of bright kid
with scientific theories of suicide vs. seen-it-all-what's-with-you-
and-your-notions cynic.
Rated R.  Running time: 89 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
After bloody clashes and independence won, Lumumba refused to pander to 
the Belgians, who continued a condescending and paternalistic relationship 
with the Congo.  Their officers, particularly General Janssens (Rudi Delhem) 
in the Force Publique, the Congo's Army, caused rebellions, undermining 
Lumumba, who was outraged at the rape and murder of Belgian nationals.  With 
unrest building, Moise Tshombe (Pascal Nzonzi) and the province of Katanga, 
which contained 70 percent of the country's resources, proclaimed secession.  
Lumumba replaced Janssens, making Mobutu a colonel, and went on a pacification
tour with Congolese President Joseph Kasa Vubu (Maka Kotto), but it was too 
late.  'When you want to drown a dog, you say it has rabies,' prophesies
Lumumba of his own fate.
Peck and Bonitzer do an exemplary job telling a complicated tale with a
myriad of players, although they frequently succumb to cliche, particularly
regarding Lumumba's private life.  Peck's script illuminates Bantu sayings 
like 'The hand that gives, rules' when Lumumba uses it with the American 
ambassador.  Peck's direction is less assured, with many scenes unfortunately 
playing like standard television fare.  He's served well, though, by his 
casting of Ebouaney in the title role.  Ebouaney is dynamic, radiating his 
character's fierce passion for his people and his country.  Lumumba's 
intelligence and ability to strategize, even as he's cornered by 
insurmountable odds, are given life by Ebouaney.  Peck's subject and lead 
actor elevate his film above its mediocre production.
"Lumumba" is a story that deserves to be told and Ebouaney's performance
makes the tragedy personally felt.
