Title
Review for Philadelphia (1993)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Although PHILADELPHIA could have been a better movie, more about
this latter, I really liked it, especially for Tom Hank's extremely
moving performance as someone dying of AIDS.  There are many parts of
the movie that I will remember for a long time, but most of all is the
courtroom scene where Tom Hanks testifies in his own behalf.  Hanks's
performance deserves an Oscar, but many other parts of that scene were
outstanding.  His makeup throughout the movie is chillingly realistic
especially how pale he looks at court.  I hate cute camera angles, but
the choice of having the camera tilted whenever it shows what Hanks is
seeing makes you feel sick too.  Overall, it really makes you think:
there but for the grace of God go I.
     There are two other excellent parts of the show.  The family,
especially his mother played by Joanne Woodward, is loving and stands
behind him without being judgmental and the characters in the family
are not overdrawn.  Another excellent scene is the costume ball.  You
can really see the love and the happiness even in times of trouble that
this group of gay friends have.  The script by Ron Nyswaner is
outstanding as is the directing by Jonathan Demme.  Demme is one of my
favorite directors.  His long repertoire of wonderful movies include:
SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, MARRIED TO THE MOB, SWIMMING TO CAMBODIA, and my
personal favorite SOMETHING WILD.  I recommend you rent them all many
times.
     The movie could and should have been even better.  The homophobia
was over done.  The scene in the drug store where someone tried to pick
up Denzel Washington starts off fine, but then goes overboard, ditto
for the bar scene, Washington's home scene, etc.  Also, Washington's
character was not well written.  He started off hating gay people and
by the middle and end of the movie, it was unclear what he thought.
     Some scenes were totally ridiculous.  Chief among these was the
scene where Hanks has to babble a long soliloquy signifying nothing
while listening to Opera music.  Finally, both lawyers at the trial
were too low key for such an important case, and Mary Steenbergen was
terribly miscast as she frequently is.  Her script was so bad on the
other hand, you kind of had to kind of feel sorry for her.  She has a
very limited range of acting abilities, but seems to be cast in widely
differing roles.
     PHILADELPHIA runs 2:05 and given all of the material it covers, I
don't think it could be made much shorter.  It is rated PG-13 for its
serious themes.  I highly recommend this show to everyone over 12 and
award it *** 1/2.  Now, go see the movie.  The good parts are
excellent, and the bad parts can be ignored.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring: Tom Hanks, Denzel Washington, Jason Robards, Mary
Steenburgen, Antonio Banderas.
Screenplay: Ron Nyswaner.
Director: Jonathan Demme.
     Maybe I've just been lucky, but after living in Northern
California for almost ten years I no longer think of "tolerance" as
merely a buzzword; it's part of the fabric of life.  Consequently, I
couldn't help but feel slightly patronized by the sense of outrage
which provides the backbone of Jonathan Demme's PHILADELPHIA.  The
message was important, but to me, it wasn't news.  When that message is
stripped away to permit examination of the filmmaking, I find as many
examples of what I consider bad decisions as I find good decisions, and
too many characters who come off as walking allegories.
     PHILADELPHIA is the story of Andrew Beckett (Tom Hanks), a
successful attorney in a large Philadelphia law firm.  He also happens
to be gay and HIV-positive, facts unknown to anyone in the law firm
when he is handed an extremely important case.  Soon, however, the
appearance of Karposi's sarcoma lesions on Andrew's face make it clear
that he has developed AIDS.  When crucial documents in the important
case appear to have been misplaced, Andrew is fired, ostensibly for
incompetence.  Andrew believes differently, and takes his case to Joe
Miller (Denzel Washington), an ambulance-chasing personal injury lawyer
with a profound streak of homophobia.  Joe decides to set aside his
personal feelings to represent Andrew and attempt to prove that he was
fired simply for being gay and a person with AIDS.
     PHILADELPHIA opens strongly with an effective montage of city
scenes, underscored by the wonderful new Bruce Springsteen song "The
Streets of Philadelphia."  We see Andrew as a typical workaholic
attorney, already living with HIV as part of his life.  It is to
screenwriter Ron Nyswaner's credit that it doesn't offer the stock
scene of a doctor delivering the somber news; HIV from the outset is
simply one element in Andrew's life, but not the defining element.  Joe
Miller is equally well-established, both at work and at home, as an
Everyman who recognizes somewhere the social similarities between being
a black man and being a person with AIDS.  PHILADELPHIA sets the stage
effectively, making the way this case will affect the two men the focal
point of the story.
     The problems begin once PHILADELPHIA hits the courtroom.  As a
courtroom drama, PHILADELPHIA is fairly pedestrian stuff, lacking real
dramatic punch and giving in to preachy speeches.  Demme makes the
extremely questionable decision of framing much of one lengthy trial
sequence from Andrew's perspective as he grows weaker.  There are
distracting camera angles and sound echoes which make it difficult to
concentrate on what anyone involved is actually saying.  Andrew's
condition became the total focus at a time when it simply wasn't
appropriate in the narrative.  Outside the courtroom things aren't much
better.  The relationship between Andrew and his partner Miguel
(Antonio Banderas) is practically an afterthought, and it struck me
that their one shared kiss is hidden from the camera by Hanks' head,
and that neither one ever says "I love you."  PHILADELPHIA's most
talked-about scene involves Andrew responding to an aria, a scene which
seems calculated to be one of those tour-de- force moments that wins
Oscars.  I found it way over the top.
     Hanks' performance has been touted as an Oscar front-runner, and
while he makes some bold choices, I don't feel it's the best work he's
done, or even the best work he's done this year.  With the exception of
the aforementioned aria scene, the character of Andrew stagnates, and
becomes more of a representative gay man with AIDS than a real person.
The same is true of Jason Robards as the senior partner in Andrew's
firm; he's too cut-and-dried, right down to citing the Bible on the
witness stand.  By far the best work, and the most dynamic character,
is Denzel Washington's Joe Miller.  Once again Washington fills the
screen with energy, and isn't afraid to show Miller's warts, making him
a very real typical American.
     As with THE WEDDING BANQUET, I went into PHILADELPHIA wanting to
like it and glad that it had been made.  But once again I felt the
message deserved a better messenger, one that treats homosexuality as
matter-of-factly as the recent TALES OF THE CITY miniseries on PBS.
PHILADELPHIA is a good idea, just not a particularly good film.

Author
Ralph Benner
     Imagine what Jonathan Demme's PHILADELPHIA would be like without
Denzel Washington as the homophobic lawyer. As it is, this first major
Hollywood movie about AIDS is play-it-safe, respectfully detached,
sometimes melodramatic and occasionally false. Without Denzel, it would
have been impossibly dreary, stacked, banal. It comes very close to being
these things anyway, but as the business card-pushing, TV pitching lawyer,
Denzel is the high octane fuel that keeps Demme's motor running. Once Tom
Hanks -- as the highly promising lawyer who is fired by his firm for
alleged incompetence but much more likely because he has AIDS -- asks
Denzel to take the case and refuses, we're in full view of Denzel's
bigotry against gays. There's nothing that he says about or how he
responds to homosexuals that provide comfort to anyone except uneducated
haters. In the movie's pivotal plot-turning sequence, at a public library
where Hanks is researching HIV-related discrimination, Denzel happens by
chance to also be there and he watches -- hiding behind his own pile of
material -- as Hanks, suffering from the outer manifestations of AIDS, is
being pressured by a librarian to move out of the general reading area and
into a smaller, more private spot. We can see both embarrassment and a
whole history's worth of discrimination in Denzel's face, which is puffed
out with an unchewed turnover of some kind. His reluctance to help Hanks
dissipates as he recognizes that there is, in spite of his bias against
gays, an analogy between what Hanks is experiencing and what his own race
has and still is going through. This kinship is never discussed, but we
can sense how troubling it is for Denzel to accept. As the case proceeds
through court, he says to Hanks that his anti-gay feelings are derived
from what most of us in the audience know are often exaggerated
stereotypes: that gays are people who wear their mothers' clothing; gays
are the kind of people who won't fight; are the kind who go after
children; are always wanting to get "in your pants." In what is the
picture's most moving sequence, Denzel watches a wasting away Hanks "live"
out a Maria Callas aria -- "La mama morta" from Giordano's "Andrea
Chenier" -- and sees that his fear of gays (and, of course, his FRAIDS) is
the result of deliberate ignorance. What is startling is that, once Denzel
realizes the extent to which Hanks -- and by extension so many other gays
--- have been hiding their sexual orientation as a means of preservation,
only to see their privacy being used against them, he charges into the
bigoted defendants with bold abandon, challenging them on their own
sexuality, hurling raw (even a few fresh) epithets. He zeroes in on what
isn't the actual legal but voyeuristic case: what Hanks, or any gay, does
in the bedroom. Denzel's lawyer starts at the beginning of PHILADELPHIA as
a shyster; by end, he becomes the Black Knight he never knew he was. Had a
younger Sidney Poitier performed the part, it would have been hokier than
it is and, much worse, condescending, gaggy. The kind of work Denzel
Washington does here, and has done in the first half of CRY FREEDOM, and
in GLORY and MALCOLM X surpasses anything done by Poitier and rivals
Morgan Freeman. And, I think, bests him: Freeman isn't loose enough in
front of the camera to work us up emotionally, and without that ability,
he's an expert at technique; his icy tightness keeps him from being the
inclusive movie actor Washington isn't afraid to be. 
     Movie politics being what they are dictated Tom Hanks would get
the best actor Oscar that Washington should have been nominated for. In
the William Hurt-KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN vein, Hanks gets accolades
because, as a straight, he plays a role so many others would run away
from. With the exception of the marvellous makeup effects, Hanks isn't
doing much as an actor that would distinguish him. His most taxing
moments, while in the courtroom, tend to tax us as well -- we're waiting
rather impatiently for him to get to his transitional point; his halts and
self-recognizing bits of physical agony are taking tolls on all of us
because he's getting to them inappropriately. This isn't meant to be as
cold-hearted as it sounds; Hanks simply isn't playing the strings of the
violin as means by which the character unfolds, but as a means to sustain
our sympathies. One could debate the timing of Hanks' deterioration: I
don't think it belongs in the courtroom, as it belabors with MADAME X
dramatics what is already a foregone conclusion. (The jury foreman
capsulizes the case perfectly.) The cushion of safety around Hanks isn't
reassuring, it's artifice -- paralleling Harold Brodkey's in The New
Yorker -- and gay groups protesting the movie for a variety of reasons are
right to point out that Hanks avoids his character's preference. There's a
clad-in-Navy suits dance, and a kiss of a yellowish hand, and clumsy
inferences of gay promiscuity, but it's as if the ghost of William
Friedkin's CRUISING and the religious fundamentalists were acting as newly
revised Hayes hounds. Hanks has two splendid, heartbreaking moments that
grab and shake us: his battle to control, outside Denzel's office, the
swelling of the pain of yet another rejection in his quest for justice,
and, at the conclusion of the aria by Callas, when the red on the screen
returns to normal light, he has the brief, tragic handsome maturity that
sometimes comes at certain stages of terminal illness. (Rock Hudson, Brad
Davis and Ray Sharkey also showed this.)  
     PHILADELPHIA, of course, isn't the first film about AIDS. There
was, initially, the cable production of the play AS IS, starring Robert
Carradine and Jonathan Hadary. Next came Aidan Quinn, Ben Gazzara and Gena
Rowlands in  the double-barrelled AN EARLY FROST. American soaps have
tackled it, too: "All My Children," "The Young and the Restless," "Days of
Our Lives," and though not directly about AIDS, "One Life to Live" dealt
with hatred of gays a season or two ago with writing worthy of but was
denied Humanitas recognition. Judith Light and Lucas Haas did THE RYAN
WHITE STORY. And there's LONGTIME CAMPION, and Julie Andrews and
Ann-Margret did a mothers' perspective on their sons' illness in a TV
special.. Then HBO brought us AND THE BAND PLAYED ON, the all-star version
of Randy Shilts's best seller about scapegoating that I've thus far
successfully managed to avoid. I did catch ROOMATES, which provided Randy
Quaid with a powerful, horribly scary moment of absolute fear (when
there's a knock at the door and he drops the towels). And I caught USA's A
MOTHER'S PRAYER with Linda Hamilton really pushing it. It's probably true
that Demme wouldn't have been able to make PHILADELPHIA as a mainstreamer
had he included scenes that showed homosexual coupling, yet isn't it
hypocritical of him to shy away from the very realities requesting our
tolerance after getting audiences to cheer on a cannibal? Leaving the
theatre, I heard a woman remark to another, "Lawyers  -- they're all scum,
aren't they?" That may be the more honest reaction to Demme's soft-headed
proselytizing. The script is chock full of holes, but the one question I'd
like answered is about the casting of Joanne Woodward's husband: Is he
meant to be a liberal Marlin Fitzwater? 

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  12/22/93 (NY, LA); 1/14/94 (elsewhere)
Running Length:  2:05
Rated:  PG-13 (Mature themes, language, brief nudity)
Starring:  Tom Hanks, Denzel Washington, Jason Robards, Mary Steenburgen,
           Antonio Banderas, Lisa Summerour, Joanne Woodward
Director:  Jonathan Demme
Producers:  Edward Saxon and Jonathan Demme
Screenplay:  Ron Nyswaner
Music:  Howard Shore
Released by TriStar Pictures
     Some will argue that a film, being essentially a means of
entertainment, can do little to change a national consciousness.
Others, citing the power of the medium, will claim that motion pictures
possess this rare and extraordinary ability.  These two opposing
viewpoints are about to be put to the test with two films that, while
different in so many ways, have a number of fundamental similarities.
The first is Steven Spielberg's SCHINDLER'S LIST.  The second is
Jonathan Demme's PHILADELPHIA.  For viewers of the latter movie, the
question is not whether they sympathize with Tom Hanks' AIDS-afflicted,
gay character, but whether that sympathy opens up a different
perspective on the victims of the disease in the real world.
     Andrew Beckett (Tom Hanks), a hotshot law graduate from Penn, has
a promising career ahead of him when he discovers that he has AIDS.
Choosing not to tell his mentor at the firm, Charles Wheeler (Jason
Robards) of either his disease or his sexual orientation, Andrew moves
forward with his case load as a senior associate, intending to fulfill
his duties for as long as his handicap permits.  But the partners learn
of his affliction, and while their dismissal is couched in terms of
incompetence, Andrew knows that his AIDS and homosexuality are the root
cause.  He takes his case to a number of lawyers, including ambulance-
chaser Joe Miller (Denzel Washington), none of whom is willing to
represent him--until Miller has a change of heart, recognizing a hint
of familiar discrimination in the way Andrew is being treated.
     The point has been made numerous times that this is the first "big
name, big budget" AIDS motion picture to come out of Hollywood, so I
won't belabor the point.  It's a good start, and some might argue "too
little, too late," but for there to be any hope of this industry having
an impact, more films of this caliber must be released.  PHILADELPHIA
is unlikely to succeed as a lone cry in the wilderness, however
impressive it may be.
     Tom Hanks gives what has rightly been called "the performance of
his career," lending humanity and vibrancy to the victim, and
portraying him in a manner that eschews maudlin, obvious tactics to
garner the audience's sympathy.  We feel for Andrew Beckett because he
seems to be a genuine human being, not because the script and
production have twisted circumstances to manipulate our emotions.
     With all of the plaudits garnered by Hanks, the work of Denzel
Washington, while less obvious, is as impressive.  Washington plays the
"everyman," the on-screen representation of those in the audience who
harbor homophobic tendencies.  He, like many viewers, is forced to
examine his bigotry, and reassess his feelings about the gay community,
as he comes to know them as people rather than symbols and
caricatures.  Its also ironic that most of PHILADELPHIA's humor comes
through Washington, the recognized dramatic actor (as he passes out
business cards), rather than through Hanks, known better for comic
roles.
     Curiously, Jason Robards has one of the worst-acted and the
best-acted scenes in the film.  Near the beginning, after being served
a summons demanding his appearance in court, his character rants that
Beckett is the criminal, having "brought AIDS into our offices." The
entire speech rings false, like something out of an anti-homosexual
pamphlet.  On the other hand, Robards redeems himself later in the film
when Beckett takes the witness stand--he speaks no words, but his
expression is descriptive enough.  Suddenly, winning or losing doesn't
seem as important.
     As far as the other supporting performers are concerned, Mary
Steenburgen is a relative non-entity as the prosecuting attorney,
Joanne Woodward is adequate as Beckett's supportive mother (it's nice
to finally see a family that stands behind someone with AIDS, as
opposed to the usual histrionics), and Antonio Banderas is marginal as
Miguel, Beckett's companion (there's never any chemistry between the
two supposed lovers).
     If there's a scene that will earn Tom Hanks the Academy Award,
it's where his character gives an impassioned translation of the aria
"La Momma Morta" while his lawyer looks on in stunned silence.  Here
Andrew expresses his acceptance of death even as he acknowledges his
continuing passion for life, and Miller feels fear as he recognizes
that his client no longer disgusts him.  This scene is PHILADELPHIA's
watershed.
     The sequences that work best are usually those that happen away
from the court:  Miller meeting a gay Penn student in a grocery store,
Miller at a bar watching himself on TV, Beckett refusing an AZT
treatment, and the aforementioned Maria Callas aria.  Unfortunately,
there are too few of these moments, with an inordinate amount of time
spent in front of the judge.  PHILADELPHIA doesn't work well as a
courtroom drama--some of the scenes are necessary to underline certain
points, but they go on too long.  More character development,
especially involving the complex relationship between Beckett and
Miller, would have elevated the picture's power.
     Symbolism is crucial to the story; the most obvious example is the
role of physical space between Beckett and Miller.  Before the AIDS
revelation, they are shoulder-to-shoulder, two lawyers on opposite
sides.  Then Beckett drops his bombshell, and Miller moves to the other
side of the room.  As the film progresses, they grow gradually closer,
sitting across a table at a library, then side-by-side in court.
Finally, past the moment of Miller's crisis of conscience, he drops all
barriers by lifting an oxygen mask to Andrew's face, momentarily
touching flesh to flesh.
     PHILADELPHIA was originally the movie's working name, but Demme
stated that once he saw the preliminary cut, he couldn't think of a
better final title.  The film actually has three stars--in addition to
Hanks and Washington, the city itself is shown in a favorable light.
The opening montage to the tune of Bruce Springsteen's "The Streets of
Philadelphia" is evocative.
     Even as it stands, with its faults, PHILADELPHIA is still a
remarkable expression of honesty and openness.  Miller's court
statements about this country's fear of homosexuals are frank and
to-the-point, and there are other observations with equal merit.  The
story is timely and powerful, and the performances of Hanks and
Washington assure that the characters will not immediately vanish into
obscurity.  And as long as people remember, there's a chance they can
change.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     PHILADELPHIA is Hollywood's first mainstream AIDS film and how
very mainstream it is.  There are few surprises or enlightenments in
this tasteful examination of the killer disease and its effect on both
the hetero- and homosexual population.
     Tom Hanks stars as Andrew Beckett, a favored young attorney at a
prestigious Philly law firm.  He's also gay and suffering from AIDS--
two facts that he has concealed from his employers.  After Beckett
begins displaying the first visible signs of the disease, he's fired.
His boss (Robards) says it's for incompetence, but Beckett believes
discrimination.
     The ailing attorney seeks counsel, gets several rejections, and,
finally, turns to Joe Miller (Washington)--a flashy, TV-advertising
lawyer who is quite vocal about his disapproval of the gay lifestyle.
Miller is willing to put aside his personal prejudices, however, and go
to court to fight for his dying client's wrongful termination...
     Though an exciting film by Jonathan Demme standards, PHILADELPHIA
is a bit of a bust as AIDS awareness.  Ron Nyswaner's story examines
homophobia from every angle, but offers far less insight into either
the disease or the lifestyle that contributes to it.  Given that the
title character is both gay and AIDS-afflicted, this discrepancy is
rather glaring.  And completely expected.
     PHILADELPHIA doesn't break too much ground.  The material is
treated in a standard, sterile fashion that could hardly threaten any
sensibilities.  Translated into plot specifics, this means virtually no
insight into Beckett's personal life and, essentially, no portrayal of
homosexual intimacy.
     Happily, in the hands of eclectic director Demme, even a
gloss-over doesn't appear glossy.  The director brings believability
and, even, fun to a solemn story.
     Demme is not a smooth filmmaker, by any counts, and PHILADELPHIA
is not a glamorous movie.  He populates Philly like he does all his
films--with characters that look and live like real people.  There no
mansions or storybook homes in Demme's universe.  Only authentic
characters.  And actors.
     Just as he strives to portray reality in all of its diversity,
Demme never lets his audience forget that they're watching a movie.  As
expected, the director peppers his product by rounding-up the usual
suspects.  The result is such seemingly non-sequitur casting as Charles
Napier as the trial judge and Roger Corman as a key witness.
     Move up to the majors and the top roles in PHILADELPHIA are played
equally well.
     Jason Robards is credible in a tough, but one-dimensional role as
Beckett's boss.  Mary Steenburgen shows up at the forty-minute mark
with a fine performance as a sharp defense attorney.  Washington, in
turn, shows off his OWN courtroom cool while making a nice
transformation from bigot to believer.
     (That is, with the exception of the film's Intentional Oscar
Moment--an ineffectual bit with Beckett driven to tears while
explaining the beauty of Maria Callas to his attorney.)
     Hanks also *looks* the part, courtesy of some very-real head-shaving
and intentional weight-loss.  His death-bed scenes are nothing short of
scary.
     One interesting/annoying aspect of PHILADELPHIA is the film's
omnipotent point-of-view.  Instead of a story told merely from both
Beckett's and Miller's viewpoint, Demme lets the audience eavesdrop on
EVERY character.  Does the narrative REALLY need the inclusion of such
things as the jury deliberations?
     To the credit of both Demme and writer Nyswaner, PHILADELPHIA
avoids most of the melodrama inherent in the subject matter.  Familiar
cliches, such as The Big Death Scene, have been graciously omitted.
Bottom: As the first mainstream AIDS film, PHILADELPHIA offers few
        surprises or enlightments into the killer disease.  Well
        acted, written, and directed, this tasteful film is more of
        an examination of homophobia than the disease that inspires
        it.

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are many movies that are remembered for the wrong
reasons, and PHILADELPHIA, 1993 courtroom drama directed by
Jonathan Demme, is one of them. Instead being remembered by
its own merit, it is only a footnote in a tale about moving
1994 Oscar acceptance speech by Tom Hanks - occasion that
inspired a movie by itself (IN & OUT by Frank Oz). And it is
really sad, since PHILADELPHIA happened to be the very first
big budget Hollywood movie dealing with the AIDS phenomenon.
It was also an opportunity for Demme to defend himself from
homophobia charges, inspired by the fact that some gay
groups didn't like the sexual orientation of the villain in
his Oscar-winning masterpiece SILENCE OF THE LAMBS.
This courtroom drama has a plot which is based on the real
life event (the fact which the filmmakers at first denied,
which, ironically, caused a lawsuit later on). Andrew
Beckett (played by Tom Hanks) is a young and brilliant
attorney who had just received a promotion in a prestigious
Philadelphia law firm, led by his bigoted mentor Charles
Wheeler (played by Jason Robards). In the same day, Beckett,
who was hiding his homosexuality from co-workers and
supervisors, finds out that he had contracted AIDS. Soon,
important legal brief vanishes from his possession and he is
fired from the law firm because of alleged incompetence.
Beckett knows that the real reason is homophobia, so he is
ready to start discrimination lawsuit. Unfortunately, few
lawyers are ready to take his case. The only exception is
Joe Miller (played by Denzel Washington), black ambulance
chaser who must overcome his own homophobic prejudices
before he begins long legal battle.
Made during the zenith of Political Correctness, in the
first year of Clinton presidency, PHILADELPHIA, like many
similar "socially conscious" movies, walks on the very fine
line between art and propaganda. The screenplay by Ron
Nyswaner almost pushes movie across that line, with
sometimes annoyingly clear contrast between Good Guys
(young, beautiful, talented and heroic gay character plus
his slowly evolving attorney) and Bad Guys (old, ugly and
bigoted establishment). The attempts to paint some shades of
gray (like the scene with the young black gay man and
Miller) look somewhat artificial and sometimes it provide
unnecessary plot holes. However, this movie is saved by
great directorial skill by Demme and great acting
performances. Demme, with his superb techniques, small
gestures and great use of close-ups allows us to see the
plot and characters through banal but all-revealing scenes,
like the accidental encounter between Beckett and Miller in
the library. The actors, on the other hand, are stealing the
show - Tom Hanks won his first "Oscar", and his portrayal of
AIDS-stricken man with the passion for life and justice is
touching and magnificent in the same time (although some
would see his opera singing scene as an emotional overkill).
Hanks should also be praised for the great physical effort,
because he went on a diet and lost 12 kilograms in order to
physically resemble terminally ill AIDS patient as much as
possible. His partner Denzel Washington is great too,
although his role didn't require such demanding physical
requirements. Instead, his character transformation from the
bigot into the compassionate human being is portrayed with
subtle but very effective actions (like, for example,
different levels of physical distance between Beckett and
Miller). Other actors are, on the other hand, underused -
Jason Robards' character is caricature, Mary Steenburgen as
his attorney is capable, and Antonio Banderas is totally
wasted as Beckett's lover.
Although Demme's good intentions and his talent should be
praised, they aren't enough to make PHILADELPHIA truly
exceptional piece of cinema. For the movie that was supposed
to be the groundbreaking Hollywood project about AIDS,
bigotry and alternative lifestyles, this film is too
mainstream and constrained by the content regulations - both
the old (which bar kissing between males in mainstream
films) and new (which prohibits portrayal of gay characters
as nothing less of saintly). Being exposed to the multitude
of independent, cable or even TV-movies that, one way or the
other, broke such rules, we must conclude that PHILADELPHIA
didn't pass the test of time, necessary to achieve the true
greatness. But, although overrated, PHILADELPHIA is still a
good film.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Andrew Beckett (played by Tom Hanks) is a successful lawyer for a
prestigious Philadelphia law firm.  He is clearly something of a hotshot
whom his firm has working for lucrative clients.  He also is gay and
discovers that he has AIDS.  When the first visible signs of his disease
appear he is fired over an alleged incident of incompetence.  He decides to
sue his former firm for wrongful dismissal.  The only lawyer he can get is a
flashy ambulance-chaser who is also an anti-gay bigot, Joe Miller, played by
Denzel Washington.  These two little-guys take on the big-guy law firm and
the result is the predictable courtroom battle which becomes a major media
event.  Beckett and Miller must slug it out with the legal giant in a
courtroom battle that Beckett may not live to see resolved.
     While the story is only too straightforward, the telling is not.  The
script by Ron Nyswaner has the feel of a stage play adapted to the screen
without sufficient consideration for the differences in the medium.  The
story will jump forward six weeks and then jump to a flashback to show
events that took place in that time.  At one point the evil law firm seems
to have dug up information that only Hanks and one of his lovers would have
known, but there is no explanation of how they know what they know.  Yet
with such a good case they make damaging admissions on the witness stand
without any thought of the reaction.
     There are major dramatic scenes that we would expect to see but which
are omitted.  We never see Beckett's immediate reaction to being told he has
AIDS, yet Demme takes screen time to give us an extended montage of street
scenes of Philadelphia and a helicopter ride around the rooftop statue of
William Penn.  Equally out of place is Hanks' extended and melodramatic
description of the beautiful aria "La Mamma Morta" from the third act of
Catalani's ANDREA CHENIER.  It is shot from odd angles at Hanks--Demme seems
to use a lot of strange camera angles in this film, bathed melodramatically
in red light from an unknown source.  Apparently Director Jonathan Demme
needed show Beckett was a man of deep passion while at the same time not
risking showing on the screen Beckett's passion for his lover Miguel, played
by Antonio Banderas.  In fact, there is virtually nothing in the film about
Beckett's private gay life, though we get to see a lot of his biological
family and the love and support he gets from his mother, played by Joanne
Woodward.
     Tom Hanks will probably be considered at Oscar time, though his
performance owes a good deal to his makeup artist.  Still his performance
was at least decent.  Neither Jason Robards, as the head of the law firm,
nor Denzel Washington seemed to be bringing much to their roles to
distinguish this performance from any of their others.  Joanne Woodward is
given about four scenes and may well be present only to lend her moral
support to the production.
     I suppose that Demme should be lauded for making a major Hollywood film
on the subject of AIDS, but PHILADELPHIA pales beside LONGTIME COMPANION and
this year's AND THE BAND PLAYED ON.  The best of intentions clearly went at
least somewhat awry.  My rating would be a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jon A. Webb
     Tom Hanks plays a lawyer who was fired by his legal firm for
having AIDS.  Denzel Washington is the ambulance-chasing lawyer who
prosecutes the law firm for doing this.  Mary Steenburgen defends the
firm.
     I liked this movie as a whole, but found some serious problems
with parts of it.   Tom Hanks acting, for example, is great.  I didn't
know he had the kind of intensity required to display such a range of
emotion so quietly.  He really carries this movie, and deserves the
accolades being heaped upon him for this role, independently of the
courage he showed in taking it.
     Jonathan Demme's direction is normally excellent, making it all
the more odd that he flubs some of the testimony so badly.  He is great
when he is directing Hanks--I remember especially the street scene
after Hanks's first meeting with Washington, and the soaring fantastic
opera scene.  Demme seems to have a gift for drawing out these kind of
individual performances (remember Byrne's dance at the beginning of
"Stop Making Sense"?) (By the way, the music in this film is excellent,
and really enhances the story line.)
     But in the courtroom, the direction, or possibly the editing, is
badly flubbed.  You don't have experienced lawyers, who are trying to
prove they are not bigots, just get up on the stand and start referring
to the Old Testament's views on homosexuality--at least, not without a
lot of goading.  The writing is weak here, too; it's as if the writer
wasn't interested in dramatizing what should be one of the two major
points of the film.
     There are a few other odd scenes as well.  Hanks's relationship
with his family is oddly uncomplicated.  It is as if Demme wasn't
intersted in these scenes, and wanted to get past them with as little
diversion from the main story line, but then, why put them in at all?
They aren't strictly necessary to the story line.
     Washington's homophobia is not convincing.  I'm fairly sure he
could have portrayed a convincing homophobe, after seeing his great
dramatic skill, so the problem must once again have been a lack of
clear direction.
     It is always nice to see Mary Steenburgen.  Here she seems
conflicted about her role, which is appropriate given the subject
matter.  I thought she was just about the best thing about the
courtroom scenes, after Hanks's brooding stillness.

Author
Greg Bole
     Wow, what an experience.  Tonight I got to see what I suppose
could be considered the world premiere of PHILADELPHIA, the new
courtroom drama about AIDS by Jonathan Demme.  The official premiere of
the film will be in a week or two (also in this city) but there was a
special free sneak-preview of the movie at the International House on
the campus of the University of Pennsylvania.  The place was *packed*,
people were sitting on the floor about four rows deep in front of the
first row of seats.  It was a thrill to watch the opening of the film,
which consists of shots of this city, and listen to the wild applause.
Plus of course everyone went nuts whenever Penn was mentioned (Tom
Hanks plays a gay lawyer who graduated from Penn's law school and is
dying of AIDS) and when shots near the campus were shown (there is a
very important scene supposedly in a law library that was filmed in
Furness, our library of Fine Arts ... I may have messed up the spelling,
I've never been in there, but it looked great).
     Okay, enough about that, let's get to the movie itself.  It was
very powerful.  It was the first movie that brought tears to my eyes in
a long time.  (I haven't seen THE JOY LUCK CLUB or SCHINDLER'S LIST yet
however) It really was a very fine film.  Most of it centered around
the actual trial (Tom Hanks' character hires Denzel Washington's to sue
his law firm firm when they fire him for having AIDS).  There are also
quite a few scenes documenting Hanks' experiences before and after his
being fired, and some excellent scenes showing more about Washington's
homophobic character.
     The movie isn't strictly about AIDS or about the fact the main
character is gay, but does focus on what these things mean to him and
his family, partner, and friends.  There are problems with the film; I
think Demme went a bit overboard here and there, one scene in
particular turned me off because of its heavy-handed approach, but over
all the movie was excellent.
     The performances were top-notch, Hanks was absolutely incredible
in the main role, Washington was excellent, but his character could
have used a bit more investigation.  Jason Robards did a fine job as
the head of the law firm who took Hanks in, then completely turned his
back on him.  I thought too many of the "negative" characters were
drawn a little strongly negative, but Demme certainly wanted to bring
out all the elements of society's feelings towards gays, especially
those who are HIV-infected.
     The movie really makes you think, and feel, and puts you into the
middle of what I feel is a very important topic.  I give it my full
recommendation.  (Also go to see some beautiful shots of my home city,
one I really feel will benefit from the exposure)  It really makes one
appreciate life and those you care about.  (A big hug to the one I
really care about.)  Go see it and enjoy.
