Title
Review for Spartacus (1960)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Dragan Antulov
1950s weren't the happiest of times for Hollywood talents
with leftist sentiments, since in the atmosphere of Cold War
hysteria many were considered to be Communists. Many of them
were blacklisted by studios and forced to take pseudonyms in
order to earn their living. It took great courage for
executive producer Kirk Douglas to defy the Blacklist and
hire a screenwriter from such blacklist. It took even more
courage to use his talent to make adaptation of the novel
written by radical leftist Howard Fast. And, to add insult
to injury for any hysteric anti-leftists in these times, the
subject of the film was life of a man who was considered one
of great Communist martyrs and role models. It all happened
in 1960 with SPARTACUS, the film that finally ended the era
of Hollywood black lists and thus became one of landmark
events in the history of American cinema. Unfortunately, its
historical importance barely corresponded with the quality,
and today it is often considered to be "the worst film ever
directed by Stanley Kubrick".
The novel, as well as the film, is based on the events that
took place in the first part of 1st Century B.C. Once
democratic Roman Empire became the wealthiest and most
powerful nation of the world, but with the wealth came
corruption and widespread use of slavery. One of such slaves
is Spartacus (played by Kirk Douglas), tough Thracian who
was sentenced to spend the rest of his life working in
Lybian mines, but even in such terrible conditions he didn't
cease to defy his captors. Slave trader Batiatus (played by
Peter Ustinov) thinks that such fighting spirit could be
used, so he buys Spartacus for his gladiator school in
Capua, Italy. Spartacus is there being subjected in intense
combat training and also develops feelings for slave girl
Varinia (played by Jean Simmons). One day the school is
visited by powerful Roman politician Marcus Licinius Crassus
(played by Laurence Olivier), and Batiatus, in order to
entertain two of his lady companions, organises four of his
best gladiator fighting to the death. In one of such fights
Spartacus is defeated but his opponent Drabba (played by
Woody Strode) decides to spare his life and instead
sacrifices his own in vain attempt to escape. Spartacus is
deeply moved by such event and when his beloved Varinia is
being sold away, his personal anger leads to spontaneous act
of rebellion that would be joined by all of the gladiators.
Soon gladiators overwhelm their guards and the news of their
revolt begins spreading like wildfire. Spartacus and his
rebels begin plundering rich slave-owners' estates and
thousands of escaped and liberated slaves join his band.
Spartacus would use his combat skills and experience, as
well as his charisma, to organise them into fighting force
able to handle any Roman army sent after them. Spartacus
begins his campaign towards port city of Brundisium, where
he would find to transport slaves outside of Italy into
freedom. In the meantime, slave revolt has some important
political consequences in Roman Senate. While Crassus wants
to use it as a pretext to impose his personal dictatorship,
his main rival, liberal senator Crassus (played by Charles
Laughton) wants to use the revolt as way to foil such plans
and save the Republic.
SPARTACUS had a lot of potential to be one of the greatest
films of its era, and the big box-office success and few
"Oscars" prove that. Unfortunately, it failed in being
anything more than historical spectacle because people
behind the project had rather different creative visions.
For screenwriter Dalton Trambo this historical story was an
excellent opportunity to comment on the social condition of
1950s America, not so subtly disguised in his vision of 1st
Century B.C. Roman Republic. Both countries were most
powerful in the world, but their old republican institutions
and democratic virtues had been corrupted by social
injustice and class exploitation, and in both cases
ambitious politicians were threatening to use society's
paranoia in order to install their own personal
dictatorship. It isn't very hard to imagine character of
Crassus being inspired by Senator Joe McCarthy.
Unfortunately, when Stanley Kubrick replaced director
Anthony Mann after his quarrel with Kirk Douglas, it turned
out that Kubrick's vision was quite different. Kubrick,
being perfectionist, checked the historical data about
Spartacus and concluded that Trambo, just like many PC
filmmakers of today, sacrificed historical accuracy for the
sake of delivering political message. For example, many
important details of Spartacus' campaign and his multiple
attempts to lead slaves out of Italy, as well as infighting
and desertions within his own ranks, remained outside the
script. Furthermore, Trambo's idea to make huge contrast
between rich, decadent and utterly depraved Romans on one
side, and their hard-working, clean-cut and noble slaves was
definitely not in line with Kubrick's own more pessimistic
and misanthropic view on human affairs. After unsuccessful
attempts to change the script, Kubrick lost interest in the
film and did his job as "hired gun".
This becomes evident when we compare first third of the
film, which was directed by Mann, with the segments later
directed by Kubrick. The segment directed by Mann is the
best in the film, because it deals almost exclusively with
Spartacus and the events that led to revolt. The audience is
being subjected to all harsh realities of the life of slaves
and gladiators, and action dominates the words. But as soon
as the plot is removed from the gladiator school and Kubrick
takes over, film loses momentum. Spartacus and his
gladiators are reduced to cardboard characters, and even
charisma of Kirk Douglas can't make him as sympathetic as in
the first segment of film. Hollywoodised romance between
Spartacus and Varinia also doesn't help, being injected in
the plot only to give some bright overtones to the dark, yet
corny finale. In this segment, bad guys in the form of
Romans are more interesting than the slave protagonists.
Charles Laughton is simply grand as shrewd, cynical,
hedonistic yet kind-hearted Roman Senator. In the case of
Crassus, screenwriters obviously didn't know how to
reconcile or explain the sharp contrast between Crassus'
insistence on old Roman values on one side, and his
depravity and ruthless dictatorial ambition on the other.
But Laurence Olivier still shows his great talent by making
this badly written character memorable. Finally, Peter
Ustinov justly deserved his "Oscar" for the role of Batiatus
- his character, despite being involved in one of the most
deplorable professions of slave trade, comes out as nice guy
at the end, not because of some sudden virtue, but because
of his humanity. Tony Curtis as slave Antoninus, singer of
songs we hear spoken as plain text, on the other hand,
played his role very badly, and his character would be
remembered simply as the dark object of Crassus' bisexual
desire.
Script and characterisation problems aside, SPARTACUS is
very attractive film because it doesn't lack spectacle. In
the latter part of film, Kubrick obviously tried to
compensate the lack of movie's quality with quantity - there
are plenty of mass scenes with many interesting details and
good use of colour photography by Russell Metty.
Unfortunately, the most spectacular scene - the final battle
between Spartacus and Roman legions under Crassus - is a
failure. We actually don't see why and how the slaves had
been beaten and Kubrick's effort to direct some 8,500
Spanish soldiers hired as extras weren't justified. After
the last climactic battle, we are presented with its tragic
aftermath, and subjected to many extra minutes of historical
inaccuracy and pointless melodrama. The music by Alex North
is also somewhat disappointing and explains why Kubrick in
his later films relied mostly on non-original soundtrack.
For some people three hours spent in front of SPARTACUS
might seem wasted, but despite being much overrated, this
historical epic can be quite entertaining. It is especially
interesting because of the insight given into one important
and splendid era of American motion picture industry, as
well into the early career of Stanley Kubrick.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Brian Koller
"Spartacus" is a historical drama that takes place
in Italy in the first century B.C.  Kirk Douglas
stars as the title character, an escaped slave who
leads an army of slaves against the Roman army.
The lengthy, expensive epic was directed by Stanley
Kubrick and adapted from the Howard Fast novel.
"Spartacus" is very loosely based on a true story.
Douglas is trained to be a gladiator by Marcellus
(Charles McGraw) at a facility owned by Batiatus
(Peter Ustinov), where Douglas falls for servant
Varinia (Jean Simmons).  In due time, Douglas leads
a revolt and takes the complex, then raids the
countryside building an army of slaves, among them
"singer of songs" Antoninus (Tony Curtis).
Back in Rome, the politicians and generals discuss
how to deal with Spartacus.  These include would-be
dictator Crassus (Laurence Olivier) and generous
schemer Gracchus (Charles Laughton).
"Spartacus" is a good movie.  The cinematography is
impressive, and the cast of extras rivals "The Ten
Commandments" for sheer size.  While far from Kubrick's
best work, the film is well directed.  Douglas,
Olivier, Laughton and Ustinov are entertaining
and well-cast.  When grimacing Douglas dunks McGraw's
head in a hot bowl of soup, you will be cheering for him.
But "Spartacus" is not as good as its reputation.
First of all, the action sometimes drags, especially
during the romantic scenes.  While the Romans are
given witty and sophisticated dialogue, the slaves
aren't as fortunate.  Stone-faced, sexually ambivalent
Curtis has to deliver lines like "It could be argued
so, master."  Douglas and Simmons actually have
the exchange:
Douglas: "Oh, Varinia, Don't make me weak".
Simmons: "You're strong enough to be weak."
(several melodramatic lines later)
Douglas: "Oh, Varinia, Varinia, Varinia."
The Romans are portrayed as either brutally
repressive or morally corrupt.  The slaves, in
contrast, are gentle and noble, with strong
family units.  The consistency of these opposing
depictions reduces the credibility of the film.
The plot also has some needless and unlikely plot
twists towards the end, involving Simmons and Douglas.
Douglas produced "Spartacus", replacing Anthony Mann
with Kubrick after they had an argument.  Douglas
and Kubrick had previously worked together on the
superior "Paths of Glory".  Kubrick disliked the
script but was stuck with it.  Much of the footage
never saw the theatre, and wasn't restored until 1991.
"Spartacus" won the Golden Globe award for Best
Picture.  Tellingly, the Academy didn't nominate
"Spartacus" for Best Picture, but it did award Oscars
for Cinematography (Russell Metty), Sets and Costumes,
and Best Supporting Actor (Ustinov).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Jerry Saravia
A 70mm Cinemascope spectacular directed by Mr. Stanley Kubrick, a format of 
film ratio in the same breadth since its inception in 1953's "The Robe," as 
well as many other epics. No, this is not "2001: A Space Odyssey." It is one 
of Kubrick's lesser works, at least in contrast with the films he created 
later on. "Spartacus" is the "Gladiator" of 1960 and far superior to its 
modern counterpart. It is often beautifully made, wonderfully scored, and 
exceptionally acted by most of the principal actors, but it is also a 
long-winded story with not enough pathos to warrant a more than three-hour 
length. 
Spartacus (played by the dignified Kirk Douglas) is a born slave selected to 
become a gladiator by the brutal yet cowardly Batiatus (Peter Ustinov, who 
won the Best Supporting Actor Oscar). Spartacus joins a gladiator school that 
has a tough regiment which includes running, jumping, dueling and avoiding a 
spinning ball with blunt projections (later used to similar effect in 
countless films including "First Knight"). These training gladiators are 
treated like prisoners of war - they are housed in dark, unpleasant dungeons 
where outside light hardly exists. Women are given to them to be pleased, but 
Spartacus proves to be impotent since love is something he is not experienced 
in - some of these scenes show the tender side of Kirk Douglas that has 
rarely been shown before or since. 
One day, the domineering, sardonic General Crassus (Laurence Olivier) visits 
the school along with some gleefully depraved friends to watch a real fight 
to the death. Batiatus is reluctant to stage such a fight but gives in 
anyway. Spartacus and an Ethiopian (played by the late Woody Strode) fight 
for the pleasure of the spectators, who interestingly seem to ignore the 
brutal fight until the moment of the kill. The Ethiopian chooses not to kill 
Spartacus while holding him down, and is thus killed by Crassus. 
Later, there is a revolt against the guards and an escape, though the slaves 
first stage similar fights to the death among the surviving guards. Spartacus 
is disgusted at such conduct in general, and persuades the slaves to fight 
the Romans in full glory, perhaps they could be called the "paths of glory." 
The rest of the film focuses on Spartacus' strategies to fight the Roman 
legions through most of Italy, while the Senate deals with the aspiring 
dictatorial machinations of Crassus in contrast with the older, wiser General 
Gracchus (Charles Laughton), who is wholly opposed to his sadistic, prideful 
antagonist. It is like a political campaign full of the usual backstabbers 
and irate politicians. 
The film's pleasures are listening to these Senate hearings, and the 
conversations between Crassus and Batiatus, and Batiatus and Gracchus - both 
Crassus and Gracchus are politicians with slightly different agendas on how 
to attack Spartacus' army. There is also some unusual insights on the private 
lives of Crassus and Gracchus, particularly for 1960. We learn that Crassus 
is bisexual and also pines for Spartacus' wife, Varinia (Jean Simmons). There 
is an originally censored scene, later restored, where Crassus shares a bath 
with a slave, Antoninus (Tony Curtis), who later joins Spartacus' army. The 
sly discussion is on oysters and snails, and Crassus admits he likes both 
oysters and snails (Olivier's lines were later post-dubbed by Anthony Hopkins 
for the 1990 restoration). In contrast, Gracchus is merely a womanizer and 
lives with several women who attend to his every whim.
If "Spartacus" suffers, it is from the developing relationship between 
Spartacus and Varinia, another former slave, which is often playful but 
mostly dated in its peculiar innocence. There must have been some strain on 
their marriage considering the chaos in and around Rome and her incoming 
pregnancy but because of the time in which this film was released, one must 
not fret over such details. 
Another flaw is how Spartacus is presented in the film. The adapted 
screenplay by the formerly blacklisted Dalton Trumbo focuses on the strength 
of Spartacus as a skilled fighter and his transition into an exceptional 
general with an acute sense of planning battle strategies. The first half of 
the film certainly shows that side of Spartacus, but as the film spans its 
196 minute running time, we find that less focus is placed on Spartacus and 
more on Varinia's eventual escape from the throes of Crassus, who wants to 
possess and own her. By the end of the film, Spartacus becomes a supporting 
player who is left crucified on a cross as are all his troop members. 
"Spartacus" is often breathtaking and alluring, and the battle scenes are 
well-directed and disorienting. This is a film that must be seen in a 
theatre, particularly to be astounded by the 70mm format that fills our own 
field of vision in ways most movies today do not. As compared to most of 
Kubrick's epics, however, which never seem dated and evolve with each passing 
generation, this one is just a pleasant time filler, an interlude for those 
interested in Kubrick's career. It is the one film where he had the least 
creative control over his vision, and it shows. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com 

Author
Duncan L. Cooper
An abridged version of the following research document appeared in the
Summer 1994 issue of Cineaste.  I welcome comments on the document and
on my proposal for an uncensored "Director's Cut" of SPARTACUS, at my
email address: activist@clark.net.  I would also be happy to
participate in a discussion on the USENET groups
rec.arts.movies.past-films and/or alt.movies.kubrick.
                                                         Duncan Cooper
     Follow-up research to my article "Who Killed SPARTACUS?"
(Cineaste, Summer 1991) has revealed evidence that Universal Studios
deliberately censored this film's explosive historical content in an
effort to keep it within the confines of the implicitly established mass
media limits of acceptable political discourse.  Despite the vigorous
objections of executive producer Kirk Douglas, director Stanley Kubrick
and screenwriter Dalton Trumbo, Universal's unwillingness to confront
prevailing political myths with historical reality resulted in the
elimination of approximately ten sequences which fostered the hope that
Spartacus' rebellion might actually have succeeded in destroying Rome.
These cuts included a six second battle sequence titled "Battle of
Luceria," a ten second map sequence titled "Battle Map-Metapontum," and
a lengthier battle sequence titled "Battle of Metapontum," all of which
depicted some of Spartacus' greatest military victories.  Four additional
sequences were also eliminated but later restored thanks to the
determined resistance of the filmmakers and the opposition of the
Catholic Church's Legion of Decency.
     Unlike the other conventional cuts imposed on the film by the
studio censors for sex, violence and nudity, these political excisions
were intended to reduce the film's main character to a primitive
spontaneous rebel who never really had a chance and to suppress
screenwriter Dalton Trumbo's vision of him as "a great military leader
who for four years running defeated the finest legions and the greatest
armies Rome could put in the field against him."  For Trumbo, this
relentless attack on what he termed the Large View of Spartacus, gave
evidence of 'an obsession with the Small View ... as to almost represent
a conspiracy, a vulgar conspiracy, to kill any distinction this film
might have had.' (1)  
     In his autobiography, Kirk Douglas described his conception of
the historical Spartacus based on his reading of the Howard Fast novel:
"Spartacus was a real man, but if you look him up in the history books
you will find only a short paragraph about him.  Rome was ashamed; this
man had almost destroyed them.  They wanted to bury him.  I was intrigued
with the story of Spartacus the slave, dreaming the death of slavery,
driving into the armor of Rome the wedge that would eventually destroy
her." (2)                             
     According to Douglas's biographer, Michael Munn, "the film was
first and foremost Kirk Douglas' vision" (3) and the film's star named
himself executive producer precisely "to insure that the picture would
be made his way."(4) Recent comments by Tony Curtis have confirmed that
Douglas was determined to give at least equal emphasis in the film to
the love story as to the slave uprising.  In fact disagreements over this
basic concept led to the dismissal of the film's first director Tony
Mann two weeks into production.  However, in a recent interview with
Douglas himself, the actor/auteur repeatedly stressed his own
determination to also portray on screen "the story of a slave whose
dream of freedom nearly overthrew the Roman Empire."(5)
     Special consultant on SPARTACUS Saul Bass has confirmed to this
author that during the whole time he worked on the project there was
never any doubt or wavering about this point in the minds of Douglas,
producer Eddie Lewis, screenwriter Dalton Trumbo or any of the other
members of the production company. (6)  As the shooting of the picture
came to a close all the key promotional materials produced for the film:
the thumbnail plot summaries, the comic book, the historical pamphlet,
the study guide, the souvenir book, the Soundtrack Album Program Notes,
the coming attractions trailers, the Bantam paperback edition of the
Fast novel ... all told the same story of a slave revolt against Rome
which won victory after victory and all but overthrew the Empire itself.
     The film's director Stanley Kubrick also subscribed to Douglas's
basic premise; but, in contrast to Dalton Trumbo (as well as Douglas
himself) he believed that historical realism demanded a more complex and
ironic slave story line.  To accomplish this Kubrick proposed some far
reaching plot changes while filming was in progress; but because of
Trumbo's opposition, these changes were only adopted after major
alterations.  Finally they were eliminated from the script altogether,
probably by the studio, leading Kubrick to virtually disavow the
picture.  In response to Michel Ciment's question as to whether there
was any relationship between his interpretation of antiquity in
SPARTACUS and his parody of the inauthentic Hollywood sword and scandal
epics of the 1950's in A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, Kubrick replied:
"None at all.  In SPARTACUS I tried with only limited success to make the
film as [historically] real as possible but I was up against a pretty
dumb script which was rarely faithful to what is known about Spartacus.
History tells us that he twice led his victorious slave army to the
northern borders of Italy, and could quite easily have gotten out of the
country.  But he didn't, and instead he led his army back to pillage
Roman cities.  What the reasons were for this might have been the most
interesting question the film might have pondered.  Did the intentions of
the rebellion change?  Did Spartacus lose control of his leaders who by
now may have been more interested in the spoils of war than in freedom? 
In the film, Spartacus was prevented from escape by the silly
contrivance of a pirate leader who reneged on a deal to take the slave
army away in his ships.  If I ever needed any convincing of the limits of
persuasion a director can have on a film where someone else is the
producer and he is merely the highest-paid member of the crew, then
SPARTACUS provided proof to last a lifetime." (7) 
     Kubrick may have wanted more realism but Douglas's concept still
had the makings of a tremendously exciting motion picture.  However,
Universal Studios head Edward Muhl had some very different ideas leading
to what Trumbo described as "a basic conflict of opinion about the
dimensions of Spartacus and his struggle, a conflict which has been in
evidence from the earliest beginnings of the project."  Originally Muhl
never really conceived of SPARTACUS as a "spectacle" or "blockbuster"
but rather as an intimate film costing between $3 and $4 million.  A
personal friend of Trumbo's and the man who officially broke the
Hollywood blacklist, Muhl too wanted to make an exciting, historically
accurate film.  He was particularly fascinated by the struggles between
the liberal and conservative Roman senatorial factions, transparent
analogues to contemporary American politics, which the writer had
injected into the script.  But, as he told this author: "Deep ideas are
nice to have in a picture.  But what counts is audience appeal."  In
response to the Douglas concept of SPARTACUS, he remarked:  "its
understandable that Kirk would want to build up his own part but that's
not what the picture was about," concluding: "We did what was possible
under the circumstances....  You know that phrase, 'the art of the
possible'." (8)  His attitude probably hardened when late in 1959
persistent rumors of new Hollywood hearings by the House Un-American
Activities Committee began to surface and when a full-scale right-wing
attack on the film began after it was revealed by Walter Winchell that
blacklisted writer Dalton Trumbo was the author of the screenplay.(9)
Thus, despite the fact that SPARTACUS was the first truly independent
production bankrolled by Universal, in the end Muhl's cautious approach
prevailed because he and the studio still held the trump card: the legal
right to make the final cut.  
     Of course, every big-budget film like SPARTACUS is a compromise
between the writer, director, producer and the studio which is providing
the financial backing.  However, in the case of SPARTACUS,  so bitter did
the conflict over the film's content become that Muhl only consented to
speak with this author on the condition that the painful clash of
personalities, now almost 35 years in the past, would not be discussed. 
According to Tony Curtis, "Universal was being so heavy handed about
everything including production values....  SPARTACUS cost $12 million and
was the most expensive picture Universal had ever made.  It ended up
grossing $14 or $15 million but they were scared shitless at the time."
(10)
     In his autobiography Kirk Douglas also complained about studio
interference in several pictures including SPARTACUS which his
production company, Bryna Films, produced with Universal's financial
backing and distribution.  He wrote: "THE LAST SUNSET is another example
of how a studio operates.  Universal insisted on controlling the
production." (11) In the case of SPARTACUS Douglas was particularly
frustrated with the elimination by studio censors of the famous Oysters
and Snails Scene between Tony Curtis and Laurence Oliver because of its
veiled homosexual references.
     However, according to Muhl, Universal watched the picture closely
"because it needed watching."  Universal appointed Marshall Green
assistant director to keep a close eye on Kubrick while Muhl's right
hand man, Mel Tucker, viewed all the dailies, worked closely with Eddie
Lewis, conferred frequently with Muhl himself, and accompanied Kubrick
to Spain, where many of the battle scenes were filmed, to keep the young
director within budget.
     The picture went through sweeping changes during the editing
process, particularly in the section between the beginning of the
slaves' trek across Italy and the end of their victorious march at the
seaport of Brindusium (see below).  According to supervising editor
Irving Lerner, the struggle over the final content of the film became so
intense that Universal executives, in an unprecedented move,
periodically came right into the editing room and ordered him to
reinstate or delete individual scenes, overriding Douglas' instructions.
As a result, a number of scenes, particularly those featuring Charles
Laughton, went in and out of the picture several times.  The process of
arriving at a final cut on which Lerner, Douglas, Kubrick and Muhl could
even temporarily agree dragged on for so long that Lerner was finally
forced to walk off the picture in order to begin directing his own film,
STUDS LONIGAN. (12) 
     The politically motivated cuts made during the editing obliterated
the film's intended inspirational message and seriously undermined its
claim to historical authenticity, both of which depended upon the
inclusion of at least a few battle sequences depicting some of
Spartacus' historic victories.  As SPARTACUS editor Robert Lawrence told
this author: "the idea [of shooting full blown additional battle scenes]
was discussed, but it was never actually done" because the money was not
forthcoming from Universal.  According to Lawrence, purportedly there
were fears that if the scenes of the early slave victories were too
good, they would detract from the impact of the final battle.  In fact,
following the conclusion of principle shooting, on August 4, 1959 an
agreement was reached between Bryna and Universal to film six days of
these slave victory scenes in Spain as part of a total of twelve days of
battle scenes at an estimated cost of half a million dollars.  However,
when Douglas came back with Trumbo's proposals for a large number of
additional scenes to be shot in Spain, the deal was re-negotiated.  The
new agreement of October 21, 1959 called for a total of twenty-two days
of shooting in Spain the following month at an estimated cost of nearly
a million dollars.  However, the number of days for battle scenes was cut
down to six, enough to accommodate the final battle but not the early
slave victories. 
     Instead, Douglas had to fall back on the idea of a "battle map"
described to Trumbo as a map "with some pictorial device superimposed
indicating the sequence of [a dozen important slave] victories ... during
the march from Luceria to Metapontum."(13)  However, the evidence
suggests that the studio initially rejected the Battle Map concept in
favor of a map without pictorial battles or superimposed descriptive
titles. (14)  According to SPARTACUS editor Bob Lawrence, "We had maps
with battles and maps without battles because some people wanted one
kind and some people wanted the other." Saul Bass was commissioned to
design this alternate map and produced several different versions, "very
elaborate at first, then later much simpler."  Bass was told that his map
was to be cut into segments to be used as inserts for a big montage
containing marching and dialogue but no battles.
      However, in December 1959 a significant amount of battle footage
did become available for additional battle scenes when the studio
rejected the first version of the final battle filmed in Spain as
"boring and conventional" and ordered a series of retakes featuring gory
shots of severed arms, legs and heads.(15)  As Bob Lawrence told this
author, "We had hundreds of feet of battle footage [for additional
battle scenes].  But some people wanted it in the picture and some people
didn't."  
     The following month a six second battle scene, the "Battle of
Luceria," depicting Spartacus' first great victory, was inserted into
the film following the first big slave march from Mt.  Vesuvius to
Luceria. (16)  At the same time, following the Revised Final Screenplay
the filmmakers apparently decided to go ahead with the Battle Map using
the rejected battle footage from Spain as well as titles naming the
sites of the great slave victories. (17)  To this end they inserted into
the picture a ten second sequence probably containing more Spanish
battle scenes, titled "Battle Map-Metapontum," following the second big
slave march from Luceria to Metapontum. (18)
     There is also some evidence suggesting that the filmmakers
subsequently assembled a much longer battle montage using the Spanish
outtakes which they intended to combine with Bass' map inserts.  In a
post-production scheduling memorandum dated February 12, 1960 to Ed
Muhl, Mel Tucker, Eddie Lewis and Bob Lawrence, Editorial Department
Chief Sid Lund requested that "In addition, the number, design and
timing of the map inserts for the battle sequences should be finalized
as soon as possible."  Lund was working on five other pictures at the
time and does not specifically remember this memorandum; but as he told
the author, if his memo made such a reference, "then the facts at the
time had to support it." Mel Tucker was more non-committal, asserting
that although he had never personally seen such a battle montage on
film, it was possible that the filmmakers did put one together but then
decided not to use it, before a screening for the studio could be held. 
     In fact, the evidence indicates that some time over the next two
months the filmmakers decided to drop the battle montage concept and the
Battle of Luceria in favor of inserting one major slave victory sequence
between the Battle-Map Metapontum and the triumphal March Into
Metapontum which followed.  This sequence, for which composer Alex North
wrote a pencil sketch score entitled "Battle of Metapontum," is cited in
the post-editing April 13, 1960 Revised Music Notes with the annotation
"NOT IN AS YET." (19) 
     Regrettably, by the end of April the Battle of Metapontum had also
been eliminated from the film.  However, National Screen Service did
complete work on a shorter six second version of the Battle Map
Metapontum for the filmmakers just in time for the June previews.  This
version included the Bass map together with a series of titles,
superimposed over scenes from the film, possibly those used in the 
deleted six second Battle of Luceria.  SPARTACUS production assistant
Stan Margulies, who oversaw the production of the battle map by National
Screen, cannot recall whether these scenes consisted of marching or
battle sequences.  However, as he told this author, his inclination is
that the titles represented the sites of Spartacus' important victories.
(20)
     Composer Alex North devoted the first six seconds of his piece
entitled "Metapontum Triumph" to the four crescendos which comprise the
music for the Battle Map and which can still be heard today as the
opening bars of the film's Overture. (21) However, after the previews
the film was handed over to Universal and "the Metapontum Map" was
eliminated as part of a whole series of 42 cuts and trims made by the
studio, according to Muhl, "for content, not for length."  With the
cutting of the Battle-Map Metapontum the entire triumphal March Into
Metapontum which followed was rendered practically meaningless and the
last vestige of truth about the real magnitude of Spartacus historic 
achievements was eliminated from this film.
     The studio cuts might have met with more determined resistance from
the filmmakers except for the fact that, with the exception of Kirk
Douglas, all of the other major players had departed for new projects
and were (probably) unaware of what was taking place.  Kubrick had
returned to England to begin work on LOLITA, Irving Lerner was off
directing STUDS LONIGAN, Bob Lawrence was in Spain making EL CID, and
Dalton Trumbo was busy working on his next project EXODUS.  Lawrence
sensed that the picture was long even for first run theatres and might
be cut by the studio.  However, when he returned he was horrified to
discover that, "All my notes, all the script notes: Gone.  Gone.  They
were thrown out.  All the trims, all the should-we-or shouldn't-we stuff,
all the 'Stanley says hold onto it but Kirk doesn't like it'.  All that
kind of stuff, beautifully labelled and ready: Gone."
     However, composer Alex North was still on the scene and protested
against the damage the cuts were doing to a number of his music cues.
When he learned that additional cuts were being made he was infuriated
and dictated the following scathing telephone message to Eddie Lewis:
"Since we spoke there have been additional cuts in Kitchen No.  One,
Forest Meeting and Luceria Camp [scenes].  This complete disregard and
disrespect for me and for my contribution by persons not qualified in
any artistic levels an insult to my abilities.  The illogical picayune
cuts force me to suggest you hire a butcher and remove my name from
screen credits.  With my background and reputation I do not intend to
participate in amateur night." (22)
     At the same time that almost all of Spartacus' historically
significant actions were eliminated from the film during the editing
successful attempts were made to eliminate almost all the amplifying
reactions to them as well.  These cuts not only reduced the film's
dramatic impact, in some cases they also seriously damaged its internal
logic, as the following examples amply demonstrate.
     - SPARTACUS BARGAINS WITH THE PIRATE TIGRANES FOLLOWING THE BATTLE
OF LUCERIA.  An added scene written by Trumbo as part of the retakes and
originally inserted following the first big slave march from Vesuvius to
Lucaria, it contained the following lines addressed to Spartacus:
     "Of course it pleases Roman vanity to think you're noble.  They
shrink from the idea that a slave can beat them.  Keep on winning and
they'll elevate you to the rank of a prince!  ...  The party of Gracchus
is in difficulty because the Senate can find no one to defeat you.
Therefore the party of Crassus delights in every victory you win....  But
you---you can't actually believe you're going to win?  With the endless
armies Rome can muster against you?  ...  Surely you understand you're
going to lose.  You have no chance.  The world is too small for you.  Every
power on earth will fight you.  Even the enemies of Rome will turn against
you if you show promise of success....  They'll butcher you to the last
man, women and child." (23)
A few days after this scene was shot it was shifted back in the film to
just prior to the slaves' first battle on Mt.Vesuvius and as a result
all the dialogue above was replaced with retakes or eliminated. (24)   
     - CAESER DISCUSSES THE BATTLE OF METAPONTUM.  The opening section of
the scene in the Roman baths, this sequence contained the following
dialogue referring to the Roman defeat at Metapontum:
Laelius: What news from Metapontum?
Symmachus: Heralds are crying the news now.  We lost nineteen thousand
           men including Commodius and all his officers!
Laelius: Nineteen Thousand!  ...  It takes us five years to train a legion.
         How can this Spartacus train an army in seven months? There's
         something wrong.  Something very wrong.
Eliminated from the film's first rough cut this sequence was restored as
a result of an eloquent plea by Trumbo in his Report on SPARTACUS.
Nearly cut again it survived to become the only specific reference to a
major slave victory still in the film today. (25) 
     - SPARTACUS SPEECH TO THE SLAVES BY THE SEA.  A cutting sheet dated
March 2, 1959 reads "dialogue out" in reference to Spartacus' lines:
     "We've  traveled a long ways together.  We fought many battles.  Won
great victories.  Now instead of returning to our homes across the sea,
we must fight again....  I'd rather be here, a free man among brothers,
facing a long march and hard fight, than to be the richest man in Rome.
Fat with food he didn't work for, and surrounded by slaves." (26)
The heart of Spartacus' speech to the slaves, these lines ultimately
remained in the film despite the initial cutting order.  But without the
battle scenes to which they refer most of their impact was lost.  
     -THE PANIC IN ROME.  A sequence depicting defeated legionaries
limping back into Rome while a terrified citizenry begins to flee the
city, these scenes were meant to convey the historical fact that
Spartacus' revolt reached such proportions that it precipitated a panic
which led to the installation of a dictatorship, signaling the beginning
of the end of Roman democracy.  As a result of Trumbo's Report on
SPARTACUS, this sequence was reinstated on the Present Edited Continuity
of Completed Picture as one of the Added Studio Scenes to be shot as
part of the retakes which were approved at the top level meeting of
October 10, 1959.  It showed up a month later on the Revised Music Notes
of November 2, 1959 marked "SCENE MISSING," but apparently it was never
shot. (27)
     - THE SENATE APPOINTS CRASSUS.  A scene intended to follow the PANIC
IN ROME sequence, it contained dialogue in which the Senate offers 
Crassus the command against the slaves and warns him that if he does not
accept, Rome will fall to Spartacus - a prospect to which Crassus reacts
with indifference.  Shot, according to Trumbo, as part of the retakes, it
was never used in the film. (28) 
     - THE BALCONY SCENE.  A scene which follows Crassus' assumption of
power in which Gracchus tells an increasingly outraged Caeser, "This
Spartacus has quite a talent when it comes to handling an army....  He's
developed such a bad habit of winning that Crassus may not be able to
cure him of it ...  If Spartacus wins I intend to ask the Senate to
emancipate his whole army."  Eliminated from the film's first rough cut
this scene was belatedly restored as a result of Trumbo's Report on
SPARTACUS and went in and out of the picture several times.  Its final
elimination by the studio after the Final Preview, destroyed the whole
motivation for Caeser's epochal defection from his mentor, Gracchus---
and republican democracy, to Crassus---and imperial dictatorship. (29) 
  -  THE ORIGINAL PROLOGUE.  Part of the first rough cut flashback
version of the film, this scene contained Crassus' long address to his
staff officers on the eve of the final battle including the lines: "Nine
Roman armies have been destroyed by Spartacus ... and our defeat will mean
the fall of Rome."  Cut along with the rest of Crassus' original speech
when the flashback was eliminated, these lines were still considered to
have enough audience appeal to be used as the opening scene of the
film's trailer. (30)
  -  SPARTACUS AND VARINIA'S LAST NIGHT TOGETHER.  A scene in which
Spartacus confesses his fear of impending defeat to Varinia:
The only specific statement in the film referring to Spartacus' series
of brilliant victories which the censors apparently never attempted to
cut, this scene represents the exception which proves the rule.  The
product of Trumbo's own growing uncertainty about the ultimate fate of
the revolution, this scene's overall hopeless tone meshed too nicely
with the studio's own hidden agenda to allow it to become a target for
elimination, despite its unwelcome historical candor.   
     - THE FINAL BATTLE.  A crucial reaction shot from this sequence
remains in the film, in which a visibly dazed and frightened Crassus
heaves a surreptitious sigh of relief at the appearance of his allies,
Pompey and Lucullus.(32)  However, in contradiction to the filmmakers'
express written intentions, the long and medium range rather than the
closeup take of this shot was used, obscuring Olivier's brilliant
performance during the picture's climactic moments and destroying the
basis for his character's words and actions during the remainder of the
film. (33) 
     - CRASSUS WALKS AMONG THE SLAVE DEAD.  This scene originally
contained Crassus' lines expressing his shock and disbelief at the sight
of the clearly evident love between the fallen slave men and women, a
love which has banished their fear of death, transforming them into a
force which he senses will ultimately prevail over the power of Rome.
The cutting of these lines without the author's knowledge during the
initial filming of this scene provoked some of the bitterest charges of
bad faith in Trumbo's entire Report on SPARTACUS.  But despite his
vehement protests, these lines were nevertheless excluded from the
subsequent retakes. (34) 
Despite these cuts a large number of scenes from the first half of the
film presaging great military success for the slave army did survive
through the Final Preview and beyond, including such scenes as
Spartacus' Speech to the Gladiators upon their return to the
gladiatorial school, Spartacus' Greeting To New Recruits on Mt.
Vesuvius, Spartacus Bargains With the Pirate Tigranes (Second Version),
Spartacus Confronts The Defeated Glabrus and Glabrus Reports Back to the
Senate (see my article, "SPARTACUS - A Second Look," Cineaste, Fall
1974).  Furthermore, a number of scenes from the second half of the film
which built upon or recapitulated the great slave victories also
survived, including such scenes as the slaves' Triumphal March into
Metapontum, Caeser Discusses Metapontum, Spartacus' Speech on the Beach
at Brindusium, Spartacus and Varinia's Last Night Together and the
Balcony Scene.  Together these scenes formed a veritable constellation
whose outline portrayed the figure of Spartacus, the rebel slave who
almost defeated Imperial Rome.
     However, the power source which illuminated this constellation was
the Battle-Map Metapontum which encapsulated in six seconds the action
to which the dialogue in these scenes referred.  Thus, once the studio
pulled the plug by cutting the Battle Map after the Final Preview, all
the lights in the constellation went out and the filmmakers' underlying
conception of the picture simply disappeared. 
     Not satisfied with the elimination or neutralization of nearly all
of the scenes which affirmed the idea of the Large Spartacus, the studio
appears to have forced radical changes in key dialogue as well in order
to make its message unmistakable.  Thus, during the last days of 1959, a
retake was done of the last scene between Spartacus and Antoninus in
which the key historical question posed by this film is addressed:
But in the retake Spartacus replies in the negative, providing an
explicit statement of the hopeless message which the film still delivers
today:
Antoninus: "Could we have won, Spartacus? Could we ever have won?"  
Spartacus: "No.(!) That was the wrong fight.  We were doomed from the
          beginning.  But it was a beautiful thing"  (36)
     As Robert Lawrence, told the author, "this scene was redone because
some people wanted the film to express this idea whereas other people
wanted to express the original idea." (emphasis added)
     Possibly as the result of audience reaction, the original version
of this scene was ultimately restored after the previews of June 1960.
(37)  But simultaneously a hastily revised version of the film's
voiceover prologue was introduced with a new downbeat conclusion:
"Here [in the Nubian gold mines] under whip and chain and sun
[Spartacus] lived out his youth and early manhood and dreamed the death
of human servitude.  The historians of ancient Rome have recorded the
death of his dream, and the utter destruction of his life and all his
hopes.  Yet his name still lives.  And the last vestiges of slavery
disappear before our eyes.  And the defeat of Spartacus has become the
victory of man "  (38)
Fortunately, this crushing repudiation of the filmmakers' entire
historical conception of SPARTACUS ultimately failed to find a permanent
place in the film; but only because, shortly before the Premiere,
objections from the Catholic Church's National Legion of Decency forced
the studio to restore the original version with a new upbeat opening
placing the story "in the last century before the birth of the new faith
called Christianity which was destined to overthrow the pagan tyranny of
Rome." (39)
      Conclusion: For An Uncensored "Director's Cut" of SPARTACUS
     In summary, de facto studio censorship reduced SPARTACUS from the
tragic, but ultimately uplifting, historical epic that Douglas, Kubrick,
Trumbo and even the Universal publicity department believed they were
making, to a sad reflection from which all traces of hope for progressive social change had been eliminated.  Even worse, all the deleted scenes from the picture which might have formed the basis for a full restoration were junked by Universal in 1975.  Thus, although Stanley Kubrick and the SPARTACUS restoration team wanted to restore the full 202 minute June 1960 Final Preview version of the film, the best they were able to do was a shortened 196 minute version of the 199 minute July 1960 studio censored cut which was shown to the press.
Kubrick now reportedly feels the film is "better than he thought it was."  However, the director has expressed no interest in going beyond the restoration to the reconstruction that is necessary to make a "director's cut" possible.  Only such a Kubrick-designed and approved director's cut can legitimately express the filmmakers' real intentions in making SPARTACUS. 
Such a director's cut of SPARTACUS would not be very difficult or expensive to produce, as the following sample outline of a reconstructed minimal "director's cut" indicates:
- The six second Battle-Map Metapontum depicting Spartacus' historic series of victories should be reshot and, together with North's accompanying music, overlaid onto some of the fighting scenes currently in the film.  The completed scene should be inserted prior to the triumphal March into Metapontum.  According to Saul Bass, this would cost no more than $100,000 or approximately ten percent of the total cost of the current restoration. 
- The Intermission could be moved back to follow the Metapontum Triumph to underscore Spartacus' initially victorious campaign.
- A battle montage using stills from the lost Spanish battle scenes, sound from the final battle, and the current intermission music, could be inserted, either as part of the intermission or just prior to the Battle Map Metapontum thus reinforcing the action implied by the Battle Map.
- Olivier's "nine Roman armies lines" which still appear on the film's trailer, could be reinserted into the Tent scene in place of Crassus' redundant lines: "Spartacus has every reason to believe that he has outdistanced the pursuing armies of Pompey and Lucullus." 
- Several successive closeup versions of Olivier's anxiety filled reaction shots during the final battle could be reinserted  
Were a "director's cut" to be produced along these or similar lines, then a far greater and more authentic version of this film may yet emerge into the light of day.
This essay is dedicated to the memory of Eric Orbom, 1960 Academy Award
Winner for Best Art Direction, who lost his life in the effort to make
the matte work in SPARTACUS state of the art.  The struggle continues.  
                             Notes
(1)  Dalton,Trumbo, "The Sequence on Vesuvius: Notes," pg.2; "Report on
     SPARTACUS," Section II, pp.46-47
(2)  Kirk Douglas, THE RAGMAN'S SON, pg.304
(3)  Michael Munn, Letter to the Author
(4)  Michael Munn, KIRK DOUGLAS, pg.78
(5)  Tony Curtis, Taped Radio Call-in Interview with the Author;
     Marshall Green (assistant director), Interview with David Chandler,
     March 25, 1960, pp.18-19; SPARTACUS, The Criterion Collection,
     (Laserdisc),Voiceover Commentary by Kirk Douglas, Analogue Track 2
(6)  Saul Bass: Interview with the author
Michel Ciment, KUBRICK, pg.151; See also Duncan Cooper, "Dalton
     Trumbo vs.  Stanley Kubrick: Their Debate Over Arther Koestler's
     THE GLADIATORS," in Cineaste, Summer 1991. 
(8)  Eddie Lewis, Interview with David Chandler, April 7, 1960,       
     pp.34-35; Edward Muhl: Interview with the author; Dalton Trumbo, 
     "The Sequence on Vesuvius: Notes," pg.2.
(9)  Dalton Trumbo, ADDITIONAL DIALOGUE, pp.493-4 (footnote), pp.534,536
(10) Tony Curtis, TONY CURTIS, THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY, pp. 180, 185
(11) Kirk Douglas, THE RAGMAN'S SON, pg.330
(12) Irving Lerner, Interview With David Chandler, June 29,1960, pp.3,17
(13) Dalton Trumbo, "SPARTACUS, Material To Be Shot in Spain," pg.31;
     Letter Jeffrey Asher to Eddie Lewis, January 25, 1960: Concerning
     SPARTACUS overhead charges by Universal on Spanish Shooting;
     Interview with Robert Lawrence.
(14) SPARTACUS: Present Edited Continuity of Completed Picture, October
     2, 1959; Seq.No.54; Appendix ST (Studio), ST-15; SPARTACUS: Revised
     Music Notes, November 5, 1959, pg.12, Reel XVI
(15) Outline for Battle Sequence, August 13, 1959; SPARTACUS, Present
     Edited Continuity of Completed Picture, October 2, 1959; Seq.  No.
     73; Appendix SP (Spain), SP-12; Continuity Breakdown, October 15,
     1959, Added Scenes-Spain, pp.51-55, Scenes 1-38; SPARTACUS, Music
     Notes, Revised II, January 21, 1960, by Stanley Kubrick, Reel XXII,
     Ft.No.000-441; SPARTACUS, Daily Production Report, November 25,
     1959, December 14, 1959; Letter From Fred Banker to Charles Block
     of Globe Photos on Bill Nunley SPARTACUS Layout, March 10, 1960: 
     Containing Promo-Profile of SPARTACUS propman-armorer Bill Nunley;
     "Proposed List of Gory Shots Tying to Battle Sequence As Outlined
     by S. Kubrick," January 4, 1960; Melville Tucker, Saul Bass, film
     editor Robert Lawrence: Interviews with the author
(16) SPARTACUS, Music Notes, Revised II, January 21, 1960, by Stanley
     Kubrick, Reel XVIII, Ft.No.000-009
(17) SPARTACUS: Revised Final Screenplay, January 16, 1959 with
     revisions through March 27, 1959, Scene 248E 
(18) SPARTACUS, Music Notes, Revised II, January 21, 1960, by Stanley
     Kubrick, Reel  XVIII, Ft.No.521-536. 
(19) SPARTACUS, Music Notes, April 13, 1960, Reels 16B, 17B; Interviews
     with Alex North collaborator Mark McGurty and orchestrators Henry
     Brandt and Sid Raiman   
(20) Letter from James Pollak, National Screen Service, to Stan
     Margulies, May 27, 1960
(21) Gordon Thiel, ALEX NORTH MANUSCRIPTS, UCLA   Music Library
     SPARTACUS, Orchestrated Score for "Metapontum Triumph"; SPARTACUS,
     The Criterion Collection, (Laserdisc), Overture   
(22) SPARTACUS, Music Notes, April 13, 1960, Reel 17B; Post-Final
     Preview Cutting Sheet, Item No.32; Combined Continuity on        
     SPARTACUS, June 20, 1960, Reel 9A, pg.3, no.19 (25 ft = 16 2/3   
     sec); Continuity and Dialogue on SPARTACUS,  July 26, 1960,
     Reel 8B,pg.3, no.20 (13 1/2 ft = 9 sec) (Cut = 11 1/2 ft = 7 2/3
     sec); Alex North, Typed Telephone Message to Eddie Lewis; Robert
     Lawrence, quoted in "The Fall and Rise of SPARTACUS," Film Comment,
`    March-April 1991.
(23) Dalton Trumbo, "Retakes; With Notes and Old Scenes For Comparison"
     October 1959; pp. 22, 24-27
(24) SPARTACUS, Daily Production Report, January 22,25,28,29, 1960;
     SPARTACUS, Music Notes, Revised II, January 21, 1960, by Stanley
     Kubrick, Reel XVIII, Ft.No.000; SPARTACUS: Present Edited
     Continuity of Completed Picture, October 2, 1959; Seq.No.53; Dalton
     Trumbo, "Report on SPARTACUS," Section II, pg.32
(25) Dalton Trumbo, "Report on SPARTACUS," Section II, pp.42-43;
     "Projection Room Notes-Running With Mr.Douglas," November 12, 1959,
     "Roman Bath Sequence"; Dialogue Continuity on SPARTACUS, April 18,
     1960, Reel 17, pg.3 
(26) SPARTACUS:Cutting Notes, March 2, 1960,"Speech on Beach," Reel 19;
     Dialogue Continuity on SPARTACUS, April 18, 1960, Reel 19, pp.1-2 
(27) SPARTACUS, 2nd Draft Screenplay, September 22, 1958, Scenes 256,
     259-260; Dalton Trumbo, "Report on SPARTACUS," Section II, pg.45;
     SPARTACUS: Revised Music Notes, November 5, 1959, pg.13, Reel XVII;
     SPARTACUS: Present Edited Continuity of Completed Picture, October
     2, 1959; Seq.No.66; Appendix ST (Studio), ST-19   
(28) Dalton Trumbo, ADDITIONAL DIALOGUE, pg.529; SPARTACUS; Photoplay
     Studies, Vol.25, No.4, August 1960; pg.18, still photo and caption
(29) SPARTACUS, Final Shooting Script, September 14, 1959, Sc.No. 284;
     Dalton Trumbo, "Report on SPARTACUS," Section II, pp.45; SPARTACUS:
     Present Edited Continuity of Completed Picture, October 2, 1959;
     Seq.No.67-68; Appendix ST (Studio), ST-15;SPARTACUS, Music Notes,
     Revised II, January 21, 1960, by Stanley Kubrick, Reel XX,
     Ft.No.237.11; Dialogue Continuity on SPARTACUS, April 18, 1960,
     Reel 19, pg.1; Dialogue Continuity on SPARTACUS (Incorporating
     Changes), June 3,1960, Reel 18B, pp.2-3; Combined Continuity on
     SPARTACUS, June 20, 1960, Reel 10A, pp.4-5; Continuity and Dialogue
     on SPARTACUS, July 26, 1960, Reel 10A, pg.4; Post-Final Preview  
     Cutting Sheet, Item No.31 
(30) SPARTACUS, Final Shooting Script, September 14, 1959, (actually a
     Cutters Continuity in the form of a script), Sc.8 
(31) SPARTACUS, Final Shooting Script, September 14, 1959, Sc.No. 273
(32) SPARTACUS, Unrestored Pan-and-Scan Video Tape Version,1985, Reel 2
(33) SPARTACUS, Daily Production Report, December 28, 1959; SPARTACUS,
     Additional Shots Beyond The Script Requirements, December 1959    
(34) SPARTACUS: Revised Final Screenplay, January 16, 1959 with
     revisions through June 1, 1959, Sc.321-323; Dalton Trumbo, "Report
     on SPARTACUS," Section II, pp.46-47
(35) Dalton Trumbo,"Retakes; With Notes and Old Scenes For Comparison,"
     October 1959, pp. 69-70
(36) Dialogue Continuity on SPARTACUS, April 18, 1960, Reel 26, pg.1;
     Combined Continuity on SPARTACUS, June 20, 1960, Reel 12B, pg.5
(37) Continuity and Dialogue on SPARTACUS, July 26, 1960, Reel 12B, pg.4
(38) Dialogue Continuity on SPARTACUS, April 18, 1960, Reel 2, pg.1;
     Combined Continuity on SPARTACUS, June 20, 1960, Reel 1B, pg.1;
     Continuity and Dialogue on SPARTACUS, July 26, 1960,Reel 1B,pp.1-2;
     SPARTACUS, Original Soundtrack Album, Decca Records, (and MCA
     Compact Disk), Program Notes 
(39) SPARTACUS, The Criterion Collection, (Laserdisc), Opening Prologue 
For further information, interested film historians, restorationists or
producers may contact the author at the following address:
or at his E-mail address: activist@clark.net 
[This article was announced as follows:
     The research article "SPARTACUS: Still Censored After All These
Years" has been placed on the rec.arts.movies.reviews newsgroup
archives.  The article documents how the filmmakers--Kirk Douglas,
Stanley Kubrick and Dalton Trumbo--were intent on making a film about
"a slave whose dream of freedom almost overthrew the Roman Empire," a
much greater and historically more authentic Spartacus than the one
which appears in the film we have today.  The article also details how
Universal Studios fought against this idea throughout the editing, how
the filmmakers nevertheless produced a final version of the film which
still projected their basic concept and which was shown at the final
previews, and how the studio then completely suppressed their vision
through a series of unilateral cuts made before the film was shown to
the press and public.  The author invites comments either to him
personally at his e-mail address: activist@clark.net, or in the
alt.movies.kubrick and rec.arts.movies.past-films USENET groups.]

Author
Chad Polenz
Spartacus
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1960 original version: not rated, 184 minutes [3 hours, 4  minutes]
1991 restored version: PG-13, 196 minutes [3 hours, 16 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Kirk Douglas (Spartacus), Laurence Olivier (Crassus), Charles
Laughton (Gracchus), Jean Simmons (Varinia), Tony Curtis (Antoninus), Peter
Ustinov (Batiatus), written by Dalton Trumbo, produced by Edward Lewis,
directed by Stanley Kubrick, based on the novel by Howard Fast.
        "Spartacus" embodies the spirit of the movies. It's an epic drama of noble
heroes and evil villains with glamorous costumes and lavish sets, all strung
together by outstanding acting. Not to mention the fact it was directed by
Stanley Kubrick, one of the greatest directors ever, who manages to convey an
important theme of humanism even through the film's commercialism.
        The story takes place in 200 B.C. Rome, an era where some of the most
important events in history took place. We meet a slave named Spartacus
(Douglas) who cannot endure his position and starts single-handedly fighting
the Romans until Batiatus (Ustinov), a recruiter of gladiators, discovers him
and sends him to a gladiator training center. 
        The first act revolves entirely around Spartacus' training. The initial
outlook is quite dark, both in design and in atmosphere. Douglas has few
lines during his training sequence, so it is Trumbo's screenplay and
Kubrick's direction that makes the film so interesting and moving.
        Many things happen to define the oppressive mood, such as the terrible
conditions the slaves are forced to live with while the Romans live like
kings. Spartacus meets Varinia (Simmons), a beautiful slave woman with whom
he is arranged, but cannot bring himself to treat her as the Romans treat
him. "I am not an animal!" he yells, to which she whispers, "Neither am I."
        Although little happens in terms of plot, a subtle romance develops between
Spartacus and Varinia. Meanwhile, the tension becomes so thick and tight it's
obvious something's got to give. When two couples of high authority visit the
camp and pay to see a battle to the death, Spartacus is chosen, and is about
to die when his opponent turns on the nobles instead. Spartacus then leads a
rebellion and all the slaves escape, and he is finally able to be with
Varinia.
        But this not a love story, it is one man's passion for freedom. The only
problem is the film's a bit too Hollywood for its own good. The actors put
their heart into their roles, but the scripting seems a little flashy, as if
these realistic characters were stuck in soap opera. The sets and the
costumes are beautiful, some of the most impressive I have ever seen, but at
times it seems a little too glamorous. Kubrick tries to counter this by
emphasizing the theme of freedom by detailing the contrasting attitudes of
Spartacus against that of the elite Roman officials.
        Laurence Olivier and Charles Laughton co-star as Crassus and Gracchus, two
senators who have a subtle rivalry going on. Olivier's character is a perfect
villain, he is hateable through his attitude alone. Gracchus is likable
through his kind acts but there seems to be even room for more character
development.         
        The film does not seem too concerned with telling a story so much as it is a
theme. Douglas and Simmons' characters do seem to be in love, but only in a
Hollywood manner. The battle of good (Spartacus' slave army) versus evil
(Crassus' arrogance and oppressiveness) does add a good deal of suspense and
adventure to the film, but not nearly enough. The ending is surprisingly
bleak, but gives a sense of poetic justice and the ultimate love through self
sacrifice.
        "Spartacus" has all the makings of a classic film, but seems to be a bit
bogged down by its own weight. As good as the film is, there's an even
better, more artistic and thematic film underneath it that constantly cries
out.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz 

Author
Frank Maloney
     SPARTACUS is Stanley Kubrick's classic epic about a slave rebellion
in republican Rome.  It was originally released in, I think, 1960, to
tepid reviews and packed houses.  Of the *major* Academy awards (best
picture, director, actor, actress) it was nominated only for best
picture; in all it won four Oscars, including Best Supporting Actor for
Peter Ustinov.  Despite its cold reception from the Academy, it was the
biggest money maker of its release year.
     On May 3 a restored SPARTACUS was released in several U.S. cities,
including Seattle.  I played hookey from work and Lyndol and I spent
three-and-a-half happy hours on a glorious spring day in the dark of one
of Seattle's largest houses watching a SPARTACUS that was even more
wonderful than it was when I saw it first-run at the age of 15 or 16.
I hope you get a chance to see this, the second greatest epic Hollywood
ever made (LAWRENCE OF ARABIA being the greatest by most, and my,
accounting).
     One of the reasons it is better this time around is it includes a
now-famous scene where Crassus (Lawrence Olivier) makes a pass at his
body-slave Antoninus (Tony Curtis).  The story is that Olivier insisted
that the scene be filmed even though Kubrick and the others knew that
the scene was unreleasable, so the soundtrack was never recorded.  For
the restoration, the scene was found in tact in the three-color
separations used to reconstruct the negative (the original negative
having long since been allowed to disintegrate); Curtis dubbed his
dialog by pitching his voice higher and Anthony Hopkins dubbed Olivier's
dialog seamlessly.  The scene is fascinating in its delicacy and
indirection, its talk of having appetites for oysters or snails or both,
as an historical footnote on the presentation of homosexuality in the
films.  More importantly, in terms of the overall film, it goes a long
ways toward filling out Curtis's character as well as his sudden
appearance among the volunteers joining Spartacus and the other escaped
gladiators on slopes of Mt.  Vesuvius; I never really understood
Antoninus before.
     Another reason why SPARTACUS is better the second time around is
that I am older and I understand the subtext now.  As a teenager, I
reacted merely to the spectacle.  As an old fart, I now react to the
theme of personal freedom that informs the entire movie.  The script was
written Dalton Trumbo, the great film writer who was blacklisted during
the Red Scare of the late Forties.  He had survived for years by selling
scripts through fronts and by using noms de plume; I understand he
actually was given a writing Oscar under an alias.  He could not enter
any studio in Hollywood.  Meetings had to be held in private homes.
Stanley Kubrick to his everlasting credit got tired of the hyprocrisy,
issued Trumbo a gatepass one day, and used Trumbo's real name on the
screen credits.  I tell you it gave me a catch in the throat to see the
credit, to see "Dalton Trumbo" proudly, defiantly displayed in those
huge 70-mm letters.  
     Just as the theme is human liberty, so the background of the film
itself recapitulates the theme.  Trumbo said he knew the studio
wouldn't go for the obvious stuff like the scene mentioned previously
and choked on the slight nudity and sex (Jean Simmons has two coy nude
scenes that were highly controversial in their day with the Legion of
Decency and other bluenoses), but he knew the studio execs weren't
astute enough to understand the really controversial aspect of the film,
its theme.  This theme is just as resonant today as it was then when
SPARTACUS marked the "official" end of the McCarthy Era.
     A third reason for liking SPARTACUS even more today is that no one
makes these wonderful sweeping 70-mm epics today.  Thirty years ago the
budget originally called for $12 million; you could not bring it in for
under $200 million today.  Hollywood made a terrible choice when it
turned its greedy back on 70-mm; the brilliant clarity of the medium
brings tears to the eyes of a movie lover, the tears of pain and regret.
     And these epic stars are no longer available either.  Look at the
cast: Kirk Douglas (Spartacus), Laurence Olivier (Crassus), Jean Simmons
(Varinnia), Charles Laughton (Gracchus), Peter Ustinov (Batiacus), John
Gavin (Julius Caesar), Tony Curtis (Antoninus), and literally a cast of
thousands.  Actors like Douglas and Olivier are more than equal to the
challenge of the epic medium.  Gavin was the weakest of the principals,
but gosh he was handsome--what happened to him, old farts want to know.
Jean Simmons was a marvel of strength and delicacy, a stronger version
of Audrey Hepburn, who didn't find real strength until she became
middle-aged.  But the absolute treats are Laughton and Ustinov, who have
two scenes together that ought to be required viewing for all interested
in acting for the screen.
     SPARTACUS was restored by the same team that restored LAWRENCE OF
ARABIA, the restoration that sparked the current wave of restored
classics.  
     This is more than recommended, this is required viewing.
And now a note from the Moderator:
"Breaking the Hollywood Blacklist: The darkest chapter of the American
entertainment industry was the years of the Hollywood blacklist.  People
accused of disloyalty to the government could not confront their
accusers, but would suddenly find that nobody would hire them.  Careers
were destroyed by innuendo.  One blacklisted writer was Dalton Trumbo.
Before the years of the blacklist he was a successful screenwriters, but
when his name appeared on the blacklist he could submit only very few
scripts and then only under a pseudonym.  Then in 1960 two major films
were released with screen credit given to Trumbo under his own name.  On
both films the directors and the lead actors risked being blacklisted
themselves by insisting to their studios that Trumbo's name appear in
the credits in type no smaller than their own.  When there was no fuss
from the public, it was generally acknowledged that the blacklist was
dead.  The films were EXODUS and SPARTACUS.  The directors were Otto
Preminger and Stanley Kubrick; the stars were Paul Newman and Kirk
Douglas."

Author
Wayne Citrin
     As most of you know by now, SPARTACUS is a three-and-a-half hour
restoration of a 1960 film directed by Stanley Kubrick.  It concerns one
Spartacus (Kirk Douglas), a gladiator-slave who leads a rebellion in the
ancient Rome of 72 BC.  There's romance (with Jean Simmons), and
friendship (with Tony "I also taught da classics to da children of my
mastuh" Curtis).  All this is played out against a backdrop of intrigue
between two powerful Romans, played by Laurence Olivier and Charles
Laughton.  Peter Ustinov, John Gavin, and Herbert Lom also play major
roles as powerful Romans.
     There are numerous problems with SPARTACUS, one of them moral, the
rest or them dramatic.  I'll get the moral one out of the way first.
Big Hollywood epics, it seems to me, are the Roman circuses of our time.
I felt very funny watching such an entertainment and, at the same time,
disapproving of those decadent Romans.  Perhaps the filmmakers actually
intended to put the viewer in such a dilemma.  Probably not.
     The dramatic flaws are more easily addressed.  There's nothing
really special about SPARTACUS.  As Stanley Kauffman put it in his New
Republic review, it's "Product."  This somehow isn't an accusation that
could be made about LAWRENCE OF ARABIA (the film with which this
restoration invites comparison).  The romance, the sentiments, and even
the grating background music, are all pure Hollywood, and the larger
scale doesn't seem to make things any better.  Even the big battle
scene, which could have benefited from the larger scale, is surprisingly
feeble.
     SPARTACUS has two giants in it: Olivier and Laughton.  But the
words that the script puts in their mouths are so small and trivial that
the actors shrink into insignificance.  Laughton fares slightly better,
due to his distinctive physiognomy, but Olivier is almost unrecognizable
(and the part could have been played by anyone).  Great actors really do
need to speak great words, especially great actors playing great Roman
patricians.
     In its defense, one can say that SPARTACUS moved quickly.  The
three and a half hours passed lightly, and I rarely felt that the action
dragged.  However, if Hollywood executives feel that the heritage of
Hollywood should be restored and brought to the attention of a new
generation of moviegoers, I wish they would spend the effort on
something not so overblown and yet banal as this film.
     What films would I rather see revived and restored?  Well, to test
an idea of mine, I went and rented a film last night.  It was also
directed by Stanley Kubrick.  It also stars Kirk Douglas.  It's about
half as long as SPARTACUS.  The film is called PATHS OF GLORY, and
watching it confirmed my feeling that it's the most perfect film ever
made.  At an hour and a half, it doesn't have a single unnecessary
scene, and it's full of perfect film moments.  Unfortunately, I know
many people who have never heard of the film.  MGM/UA would do the
public a great service by striking a new print and re-releasing it,
instead of forcing people to catch it on video or late-night TV.  One
PATHS OF GLORY would be worth three SPARTACUSes.
