Title
Review for Po Mo Knock Knock (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Turner
ShortStuffCentral.com presents a review by staff member Jon Turner.  For 
more reviews of Short films and Flash animation, check out 
www.shortstuffcentral.com, the Internet's home for Short Films.
Like so many great films, Po Mo Knock Knock is not what it appears on first 
viewing.  Ok, so it's no Fight Club, or even Sixth Sense for that matter, 
but for the message that it cleverly delivers in under three minutes, it's 
well worth your time to check out.  The entire black and white, experimental 
film consists of gloomy, artiste characters trying to communicate with each 
other through knock knock jokes.  It is a post-modern idea, if you will; 
hence the title, Po Mo Knock Knock.  The first time it plays through, the 
film appears dry, unintelligible, and random.  But once you catch on and 
become part of the inside joke, it proves to be a non-stop punch line.
Although, as a whole, it is definitely a comedy, the only actual joke in the 
film is one brief sight gag.  The Pollyanna comedy troupe wants you to 
experience it all as one long, surreal gag.  David Ball plays the character 
of Knock Knock, while his counterpart, played by the late Bill Stiles is 
called Who's There?  The men's struggle to communicate in a post-modern 
style parodies the general failure of such experimental films to convey 
their meanings.
The only problem with the film is that you just might not get it.  I 
certainly did not on my first viewing, but I found it quirky enough to want 
to delve further into the filmmaker's psyche.  With plenty of supplemental 
material on the DVD, I was able to do just that and came to really 
appreciate the intricacies of the extended joke.
Included with the film on this DVD compilation are four more tracks that 
illuminate the film's various meanings and serve up some great 
entertainment.  The Pollyanna troupe obviously has tremendous fun with their 
work as you can see in their 5 minute featurette, `Po Mo Love Doc,' during 
which they stay in character, and their `Matrix Special Edition' commentary 
track.  I find this bonus track to actually be funnier than the film itself. 
  The troupe completely ignores their film playing in the background as they 
elaborate on their fascination with the Wachowski's Matrix and tell 
hilarious stories about their obsession.  Also included is one more 
commentary track by director Greg Pak and another one with the whole troupe 
actually discussing their own film.
It may take you a few viewings to fully appreciate the work that went into 
Po Mo Knock Knock as well as the hilarity of the resulting film.  But at 
only 3 minutes running time, the joke never tires and the experience is well 
worth it.
Available on SHORT 10: CHAOS 
(http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00004Z4V8/shortstuff03)
