Title
Review for Girlfight (2000)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Bob Bloom
 GIRLFIGHT (2000) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Michelle Rodriguez,
Paul Calderon, Santiago Douglas,  Ray Santiago and Jaime Tirelli.
Written and directed by Karyn Kusama. Rated R
 Her name is Diana Guzman. She's a high-school senior with a chip on her
shoulder.
 Life has not been kind to Diana. Her mother is dead. She lives in the
projects of Brooklyn with her father and brother.
 Her father ignores her, lavishing money for boxing lessons on her
brother, Tiny, who would rather be an artist.
 But then, Diana decides that boxing is a way to express her anger, her
frustration, and she convinces Hector, Tiny's coach, to secretly train
her.
 This is the simple plot for "Girlfight," an impressive feature film
debut by writer-director Karyn Kusama as well as for its star, Michelle
Rodriguez.
 You may think, ah, a female "Rocky." But, sorry. "Girlfight" does not
offer the same uplifting kind of ending as Sylvester Stallone's classic,
even though it does end on a positive note.
 What "Girlfight" does, is trace the growth - spiritual and physical -
of Diana, as she learns to come to terms with herself and the world
around her.
 For Diana, boxing is a form of self-expression. It is her arena for
gathering her self-respect.
 Kusama's film is no feminist essay on the inequities of sports.
Girlfight is about people, not politics.
 As Diana, Rodriguez is lovely and volatile. She is not a classic
beauty. Hers is a tough, urban loveliness. Rodriguez, for a newcomer, is
able to mix smoldering danger with an appealing vulnerability.
 She boxes, not to make a statement, but simply because she likes it. To
her, it's a way to be noticed, which she isn't at home.
 The most powerful scene in the film comes when Diana confronts her
father, Sandro (Paul Calderon), who threatens to beat her. Unable to
hold back, Diana vents years of frustration on her unsuspecting parent
with near fatal results.
 "Girlfight" also is a love story, as Diana is attracted to Adrian
(Santiago Douglas), a fellow boxer. It is one of Kusama's in-jokes that
she names this character after Rocky's love interest.
 The bittersweet romance that grows between Diana and Adrian is
threatened by events in the gym and ring, but the two youths are able to
confront their differences.
 Like most first-time independent films, "Girlfight" has some rough
edges. It is a bit slow in a couple of spots. Yet Kusama's direction and
Rodriguez's charisma overcome any flaws.
 "Girlfight" is a tough, touching movie, introducing a filmmaker and
actress who should have an impact on the industry for years to come.
 Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@ journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
Reviews by Bloom can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Datatbase
at: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "GIRLFIGHT" (Screen Gems)
Curiously coinciding with the culmination of the summer Olympics, this is a
female twist on the perennially popular, "Rocky"-genre underdog tale. Written
and directed by Karyn Kusama, the coming-of-age story focuses on Diana Guzman
(Michelle Rodriguez), a sullen, tough, pugnacious, young Latina who is
determined to carve a different future for herself. But in Brooklyn's Red Hook
projects, there are not many choices. If she doesn't get pregnant, she's going
to wind up in a dead-end job. "Your mother was a receptionist in a very nice
office," her widower father (Paul Calderon) reminds her. So - without parental
consent - she sneaks into the ring and immediately views boxing as a viable
ticket out of poverty. The shabby gym becomes her sanctuary. She's encouraged by
her paternal coach (Jaime Tirelli) who recognizes her featherweight potential
and channels her rebellious rage into the discipline of the sport, despite the
inevitable ridicule and harassment. There's even a romantic twist provided by a
fellow boxer (Santiago Douglas) who competes with her in the ring. But the
climactic fight is too long and predictable. Plus, the script is burdened with
heavy-handed dramatic confrontations and awkward dialogue. Nevertheless, with
her mean left hook and a big mouth, Michelle Rodriguez - who's reminiscent of a
youthful Marlon Brando - exhibits all the unaffected feistiness necessary to
make her a winner. Indeed, this feminist fairy-tale was highly acclaimed at
Sundance, Cannes, Deauville and Toronto. And it's not surprising that the
brilliant independent film-maker John Sayles lent his expertise as executive
producer. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Girlfight" is a poignant,
satisfying 7 - if you like seeing a muscular girl pummeling and pounding her
opponents.

Author
Michael Dequina
        Karyn Kusama's _Girlfight_ quite literally hits theatres with the
formidable force of enthusiastic reviews and strong Sundance audience
buzz behind it.  But as is the case with a number of film festival
favorites, the film's impact in a traditional cineplex setting, while
potent, doesn't quite bowl one over.   However, one thing about the film
plays explosively in any viewing context--the blazing performance by
newcomer Michelle Rodriguez.
        _Girlfight_ would be unthinkable without Rodriguez as Diana Guzman, a
Brooklyn teen whose hot temper often gets her in trouble at school. 
Diana inadvertently finds an outlet for her aggression when running a
simple errand for her father (Paul Calderon) at the gym where her younger
brother (Ray Santiago) takes boxing lessons.  Seeing this as a way to
gain respect from others--but, most importantly, herself--Diana starts
taking lessons from her brother's coach Hector (Jaime Tirelli) without
her always-disapproving father's awareness.
        Kusama's story of empowerment and self-actualization follows a familiar
narrative trajectory.  Diana's new confidence gives her the courage to
confront long-simmering issues with her father.  Diana meets and falls
for talented fellow boxer Adrian (Santiago Douglas), which plants the
seeds for an easily foreseeable climax.
        The audience may know exactly where _Girlfight_ is going, yet the film
is still compelling, due in no small part to the grit Kusama brings to
the picture.  The  locations and the largely unfamiliar (only Calderon, a
bit player in _Pulp_Fiction_, is recognizable) faces add immeasurably to
the authenticity of the piece.  It also helps that the actors have the
chops to make the contrived convincing.
        Kusama's most impressive accomplishment is the character of Diana and
her believable transition from uncontrollable, disrespectful kid to
disciplined young woman.  Especially realistic is how fairly
unspectacular of a boxer she becomes, underscoring that it's not so much
the physical ability Diana gains but the mental adjustment.  A standard
Hollywood production would lose sight of that in favor of flash and
completely change her into an invincible superwoman; Kusama remembers
this is amateur boxing after all, and Diana becomes a capable, competent
fighter whose full potential has yet to be realized.
        The same can't exactly be said about the Rodriguez, who is simply
astounding in this, her professional acting debut.  Rodriguez doesn't
ever downplay Diana's harsher side, but her natural magnetism instantly
hooks the viewer, and as Diana subtly oftens and grows to care more about
herself, so does the audience about her.  It's an amazingly fluid,
complex performance, and if _Girlfight_ is just the beginning for
Rodriguez, there will be no stopping this luminous talent.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Steve Rhodes
One more fight at school and Diana, played with sullen intensity by 
newcomer Michelle Rodriguez, will be expelled.  Living in a Brooklyn 
ghetto and with a dead-end life, Diana decides to channel her energy 
into boxing at the gym like her brother (Ray Santiago).
Once she begins to fight, the angry and depressed Diana begins to find 
some relief from her surroundings.  Although the seedy gym, The Brooklyn 
Boys' Club, where she trains is even more rundown than the miniscule 
apartment she shares with her father (Paul Calderon) and brother, she 
gets the fulfillment from her sport that she has never gotten from 
school.  Rodriguez's impressive acting debut, however, is the only real 
reason to see GIRLFIGHT.
Although first-time writer and director Karyn Kusama spent 5 years 
preparing this project, the script is significantly underdeveloped and 
the director sets a lethargic pace.  Think of the film as ROCKY ON 
VALIUM.  There's lots of brooding teenage angst, but remarkably little 
ever happens.  Only in a dramatic confrontation scene with her father, 
in which she tells him, "Everything I know about losing I learned from 
you, Dad," does the movie have much emotional impact.
The picture follows a completely formulaic arc toward the big concluding 
match.  The gym features lots of clichéd signs ("Champions are made not 
born." "Winners never quit, and quitters never win."), even though the 
movie wants badly to be taken as something more than another Rocky 
Balboa story.  Nevertheless, the movie is one-idea story -- girl rather 
than boy as young boxer -- that never gets fleshed out beyond its 
concept.
Diana's boyfriend is a handsome fighter named Adrian (Santiago Douglas).  
Want to bet on whom she boxes in the concluding match?  Want to bet who 
is going to win?
The only surprise is how the final fight is edited.  After waiting for 
an entire movie for it come alive, the ending bout happens so fast that, 
if you blink a few times, you'll miss it.  I told actor Santiago 
Douglas, who was at our screening, that I did not like the way it was 
edited down to almost nothing.  He rolled his eyes and said only, "I 
agree. I agree."
GIRLFIGHT runs 1:50.  It is rated R for language and would be acceptable 
for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
     Enjoyed Stand and Deliver?  Well get ready to stand and deliver...
an uppercut to the jaw!  And are you prepared for a girl to come out
fighting and go toe to toe with a man?  Can this be?  Women's boxing? 
Let's get ready to rumble!
     Ahem.  Girlfight would have you believe the rather commonplace
sport of women's boxing was a freakish thing, barely known in the real
world.  Never mind that women occasionally fight on the undercard for
heavyweight title bouts.  And never mind that boxing mini-stars like Mia
St. John have graced the cover of Playboy.  No, female boxing can't be
real, despite three international federations devoted to the sport.
     But put all that aside for a moment.  What we're here for is what
all good boxing movies have to give: that Rocky feeling.  We want a
story about a hard-luck champ trying to pull himself (er, or herself) up
and out of the slums with nothing more than guts and spit.  Star
Michelle Rodriguez has plenty of both, imbuing her troubled Brooklyn
teen Diana with enough bullish spirit to dub her an instant, um,
Rockette.
     Sadly, the bulk of Girlfight is heavy on the girl, light on the
fight.  It takes 30-plus minutes before Diana ever laces up a pair of
gloves, not to mention the considerable wringing of hands over Diana's
poor school attitude, her relationship to her father (Paul Calderon),
and a strained yet totally expected romance with rising amateur boxer
Adrian (hmmmm...), played unevenly by Santiago Douglas.  Fortunately,
Rodriguez is such a scrappy charmer, she carries this picture entirely
on her muscled shoulders, and I'd be remiss not to say she deserves
early Oscar consideration.  Get her moving and she's a powerhouse, and
the film flows with her.
     The rest of the picture is not so fortunate.  While Diana's trainer
Hector (Jaime Tirelli) performs admirably in his trainer role as the
analogue of Rocky's Paulie, initially skeptical that a woman could fight
but eventually pushing her to heights, the remainder of the cast feels
plucked from, well, Brooklyn.  This lends the picture some needed street
cred (with Pulp Fiction bit player Calderon the only recognizable face
in the cast).  But it's way too much, as the overall production suffers
from an utter lack of competence in the editing department (no surprise:
Plummy Tucker, a self-indulgent John Sayles collaborator, is responsible
for the mess) and off-kilter photography that misses a lot more of the
action than it captures.
     However, easily the biggest problem with Girlfight is its length. 
At nearly two hours, the film is -- quite literally -- twice as long as
it should have been.  For comparison's sake, that's about four
full-length boxing matches.  Do the math.
     Fortunately, Theodore Shapiro's frantic piano score does a lot to
assuage the damage, livening up the atmosphere considerably despite the
pace.  The movie also manages to float (like a butterfly) around the
theme of boxing as the only way out of the hood for a lot of its
denizens, though it never quite drives home the desperation of its
characters, none of whom seem to have many genuine problems.
     Girlfight is not a bad time, to be sure, but I have to say I was
expecting something else.  Oh well.  It coulda been a contender.
Director: Karyn Kusama
Producer: Sarah Green, Martha Griffin, Maggie Renzi
Writer: Karyn Kusama
Starring: Michelle Rodriguez, Jaime Tirelli, Paul Calderon, Santiago
Douglas, Ray Santiago, Elisa Bocanegra, Shannon Walker Williams
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/girlfight/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Ross Anthony
A succinct title that well sums the story. Angry Diana is sick and tired of
her father being sick and tired of her less than girlie demeanor.
Stereotypical pops pokes, "It wouldn't kill you to wear a skirt once in a
while." Consistent in this tradition of macho, he dishes out the dough to
send Diana's nerdy brother to boxing lessons at the local gym.
Perhaps you can see this coming, but brother "Tiny" doesn't exactly take to
boxing while Diana begs for it. Tiny offers up his lesson money to Diana.
Happy about the exchange, but concerned, Diana asks, "What are you gonna
do?" Tiny responds, "I'm a geek, I'm sure I can find something constructive
to do." Add to this a bit of romance and you have the premise.
A few more developments enrich this toned-down lady "Rocky" tale. In tribute
(I suppose) a major player in the film is even named "Adrian" -- though this
time Adrian is a boy.
Diana takes to boxing with force, but not grace, paralleling her acting
early on. But just as she determinedly sharpens her athletic skills, her
acting prowess begins to dominate the ring. By the middle of the film she'll
have you in the palm of her glove. Worthy of special mention, Trainer Hector
(Jaime Tirelli), friend Elisa Bocanegra, and Adrian (Santiago Douglas) all
deliver powerful performances.
The film progresses with the same resolve as Diana though surging
prematurely, with two mini-climaxes replacing the end of film climax you
might expect. That "big fight" is a bit more confusing (emotionally) than
surging. Perhaps a bit more dialogue between the opponents prior to the
match, may have cleared up the matter, allowing audiences to cheer instead
of narrow their eyes.
Aside from the slightly wobbly conclusion, this is a smashing script with
powerfully crisp dialogue that strongly connects with the target. Confident
direction includes nice "first person" boxing sequences especially in a bout
with another female boxer; "Girlfight" is a strong contender of a film.
Girlfight. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring michelle Rodriguez, Jaime Tirelli, Paul Calderon Santiago Douglas,
Elisa Bocanegra.
Written and Directed by Karyn Kusama.
Produced by Sarah Green, Martha Griffin, Maggie Renzi at Screen
Gems/Independent Film Channel.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Homer Yen
"Girlfight" is a rough-edged fairy tale about Diana
Guzman (Michelle Rodriguez), a burdened 17-year girl
looking to rise above her low-rent status.  But things
do not bode well for our heroine.  She endures a
miserable home life, has little prospect of escaping
the Brooklyn housing project in which she lives, and
sees a murky future virtually bereft of any real
opportunity.
Diana is not a happy teenager, bubbling with anger and
attitude.  In school, for example, she seems to spend
most of her time in detention hall.  She has been in
numerous fights this semester and is on the verge of
being expelled.  Home life is no better.  Her father
seems impartial to her and unsupportive of her
activities.  He's a bullheaded man intent on imposing
an outdated set of rules on his children.  He forces
Diana's bookish brother to take boxing lessons when
his talents clearly lie elsewhere.  And to Diana, he
can only ask why she won't ever wear a skirt.
As chance would have it, she pays a visit to her
brother at the boxing gym where he trains and watches
some of the action.  Intrigued, she sees that boxing
may be just the right outlet for her anger and
athletic ability.   Thus, a gritty little drama starts
to take shape as she begins to train.   Working as
hard as any Olympian, Diana learns the basic
techniques in a surprisingly short amount of time. 
Over a period of a few months, she increases her
strength, learns a variety of combination moves, and
begins to spar with the other guys in the gym (there
are no other female boxers there).  Her skill is
gaining her a measure of acceptance, while her
physical regimen gives her an important personal
boost.
During her time in the gym, she meets up with Adrian
(Santiago Douglas).  He's a promising featherweight
training for the pros.  She likes him and he's also
interested in Diana but has trouble with commitment. 
When the two eventually spar, he just sort of dances
around, not really sure what to do.  No doubt, his
indecision in the ring parallels his indecision in his
heart.  Diana, however, is not afraid to be
forthright.  "I love you," she confesses to him and
then connects with a vicious left cross.  With each
punch thrown and each bout fought, Diana grows, both
as a boxer and as a woman.
This hard-to-find film (currently playing in 28
theatres nationwide and only at the Mazza Gallerie in
DC) is satisfying fare with gritty performances and an
efficient plot line.  In fact, this film received high
recognition at last winter's Sundance Film Festival,
splitting the top dramatic prize and winning the
best-directing award.  Its struggling class milieu is
reminiscent of film's like "Flashdance" and "Saturday
Night Fever," which is a style seldom seen in today's
Hollywood productions.  In fact, there is a noticeably
unglamorous and homegrown feel to this film that lends
to its charm.    Brooklyn accents are heavy, the
picture is grainy, the sound is tinny (when the letter
's' is used, the hissing sound is inescapable), and
you can always hear the neighborhood's ambient sounds
of horns, barking dogs, car alarms and sirens.  It
also does well at conveying the intensity of the
fights, using quick edits and a flurry of staccato
notes.  This method is simple, yet effective.  And so
is the movie.  "Girlfight" keeps its balance,
maintains its intensity, and comes out ahead in the
end.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The Sundance Film Festival is known for the showcasing of smaller,
independent, character-driven films. Earlier this year, two movies shared
the top honor at the festival: YOU CAN COUNT ON ME and GIRLFIGHT. And while
I liked the former film much better than this one, I can say that both films
certainly do exemplify the qualifications needed to succeed at that
festival. They are both small, they are both quite independent (obviously
so) and they are both very character driven, something rarely found in the
blockbusters coming out of the Woods of Holly nowadays. Don't expect
wham-bam, and you should be okay.
PLOT:
An aggressive young girl without much hope in her future enrolls herself
into a local boxing club without her father's knowledge. She steals some
money from him to take the courses and improves her techniques as time goes
by. Eventually, she meets a young boy interested in the sport and in her,
and gets the opportunity to participate in some amateur fights versus boys.
CRITIQUE:
An okay film weighed down in cliches but more than made up for by its very
real characters and the charismatic performance turned in by its star,
Michelle Rodriguez. In fact, it was Rodriguez's early scenes that drew me
into this film right away and kept me going for quite some time.
Unfortunately, the film itself eventually dragged a little for me, with a
longer than needed runtime and an emotional entanglement which wasn't as
interesting to me as the "fight" being put forth by the lead character. And
despite its independent and grungy look, which actually made the film more
believable and appealing, I was distracted by several over-directed scenes,
in which there seemed to be too much emphasis placed on the camera and its
telling of the story. What's the old saying? "If you notice the directing,
than the director is not doing a good job?" Well, in this case, the film,
and the directing for that matter, certainly weren't bad, but the film as a
whole just didn't pull me into its mission as I hoped it would early on. The
characters were all very real, as were the situations and people surrounding
them, and the whole premise of a girl going through the training and
striving towards that unreachable goal was cool, but not as intense as I
expected.
I guess my biggest problem with the film would have to be its lack of
tightness. If the film would have been snipped a little here and there,
tucked and mucked, I think it would have made more of an impact. As it
stands, the film certainly does have its qualities, with the top of that
list belonging to the powerful performance set forth by Michelle Rodriguez,
whose gaze alone scared the crap out of me. You go, girl! Hopefully,
somebody somewhere will give her an award for an exemplary performance and
undeniable screen presence. The rest of the cast was also good, especially
Jaime Tirelli as the trainer, believable throughout, and Paul Calderon as
the washed-up dad, whose interesting dynamic with his daughter didn't really
conclude with the end of the picture. In fact, if you don't like
"open-ended" finishes, you might want to pass on this one.
The film does not have a clean-cut ending, but under the circumstances, I
personally didn't mind. All in all, the film should definitely appeal to the
equal opportunist in all of us, and I for one can certainly do with more
movies with females in the lead, especially after this sad sack of a movie
year! There is also a lot of ROCKY appeal to this film, the down-and-out
loser going for the gold with everyone against her but the audience. So if
you're feeling down on yourself, not recognizing any optimism in your own
future...see this film and maybe Diana's strong will to succeed will rub off
on you! Either way, you will definitely see a film filled with real
characters living real life situations NOT topped off by rose petals :)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
And if you're wondering what the star of this film, Michelle Rodriguez has
done before this film, well...nothing! She apparently answered an open call
for the lead role and was about the 300th girl to test for the part. It was
her first speaking role in a movie and she had never boxed before this film
either. But she does have two other projects coming out next year
respectively entitled REDLINE starring Vin Diesel and 3 A.M. starring Pam
Grier and Danny Glover.
Besides tying for the top honors at this year's Sundance Film Festival,
GIRLFIGHT also won top prize at France's Deauville Film Festival, which
highlights American independent films.
Writer-director John Sayles executive produced this film and also shows up
in a small cameo as Diana's science teacher.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   About ten years ago a friend told me that he had started
seeing a cognitive psychotherapist about his problem with
anxiety.  Since psychologists are not allowed to prescribe
drugs, I figured he must be taking the talking cure.  To my
amazement and certainly to his, the doc advised him to join
Gleason's gym near the Brooklyn Bridge in our home
borough.  I couldn't believe my ears.  Is this what cognitive
therapy was all about?  Maybe this was the way patients
were supposed to have their heads shrunk?  Have their
grandiosity beaten down to size?  Get their aggressions out? 
I wish he didn't switch doctors because I'd love to have given
an ear to the way things turned out at Gleason's, but
fortunately I experienced the next best thing by seeing the
movie "Girlfight."  "Girlfight" also takes place in Brooklyn,
though not in one of the lovelier parts of that great borough. 
Writer-director Karyn Kusama has the camera trained on the
Red Hook neighborhood that juts out a bit on the map, an
area considered tough perhaps because it's the locale of
several city projects and used to be the scene of Saturday
night violence.  "Girlfight" is about an 18-year-old woman
who, like my anxiety-ridden friend, has problems, though she-
-unlike my pal--is indeed able to work them out in the boxing
ring!  How is this possible?  Not because she had her
aggressions knocked out of her. Quite the contrary.  And not
because she was cut down to size by skilled opponents. 
Rather, she "found" herself. Boxing was her thing, her true
identity.  Every high-school guidance counselor believes that
if the kids in their schools could all find the thing they love to
do, what they were really good at, they would be upstanding,
happy citizens.  There's quite a bit of truth to this, as the
movie skillfully--make that beautifully--illustrates.
   "Girlfight" spotlights the wonderfully talented Michelle
Rodriguez in her debut role in a film that won Ms. Kusama
the Best Director's award at the Sundance Film Festival this
year and garnered the Grand Jury Prize for the movie itself. 
The picture takes us into the mind of a troubled and
troublesome adolescent, Diana, whose mother's suicide eight
years previous did not help much and whose father, Sandro
(Paul Calderon), seems decent enough and yet lacking in
common sense.  When Diana gets into trouble by picking a
school fight for the third time in her senior year, she is
warned that the next time, expulsion will be the name of the
game.  (Contrary to what the principal says, though,
expulsion is not an option in New York until a kid is 21 years
of age.)  One day she watches her brother Tiny (Ray
Santiago) getting punched on in the neighborhood boxing ring
and she retaliates by giving the perp a punch in the nose. 
>From that moment, amateur boxing becomes her new love. 
She trains vigorously with the Panamanian-American on duty,
Hector (Jaime Tirelli), and learns that with the exercise of
discipline and the outpouring of enough sweat, you have at
least a fighting chance of success--even if your opponents in
the ring are almost all young men.
   Kusama does an exquisite job of bringing out the best in
her young performer.  At the very beginning of the movie she
knocks off the best shot of the picture, a long close-up gaze
at the face of the distressed Diana whose sullen look could
stop a clock.  Throughout the movie, Kusama keeps the
soundtrack gloriously limited.  When the background music
does come in, boy is it dramatic!  Spanish guitar combining
with Latin rhythms and a flamenco beat gives way to a
contained score alternating a mood of romance with that of
dissonance.   Kusama captures the feel of the community:
the men playing cards for moderate stakes, a motley
assortment of hangers on and trainers in the gym from the
trainers to the promoters to the commissioner to the referees.
Posters abound such as "It's not the size of the dog in the
fight--it's the amount of fight in the dog."  In one humorous
scene a referees introduces a major amateur bout with his
embarrassing rendition of the National Anthem.  
   Jaime Tirelli and Michelle Rodriguez make a terrific and
thoroughly believable team as the dedicated instructor and
committed learner while Santiago Douglas turns in a
respectable role as Diana's romantic interest--a young man
whom she ultimately must fight in the ring.  The film is adept
at fashioning contrasts, the most surprising being that in the
same Latino family Diana is the macho character while her
brother Tiny is more feminine, hoping to go to college to learn
to be an artist.  What is especially heartwarming (not to take
away from the laugh-out-loud pictures like "American Pie" and
"Road Trip" and "Loser") is that "Girlfight" tells us what
teenage angst is really like and does so in a thoroughly
entertaining manner.
Not Rated.  Running time: 110 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Diana's (Michelle Rodriguez) getting into trouble at her Brooklyn High School 
over her pugilistic tendencies while her single dad Sandro (Paul Calderon, 
"Out of Sight") is pushing weekly boxing lessons on her artistically inclined
younger brother Tiny (Ray Santiago).  When Sandro won't give her an allowance,
Diana secretly takes matters into her own hands and convinces Tiny's trainer 
Hector (Jaime Tirelli, "City of Hope") that she can come up with his $10 per 
lesson fee in this year's Sundance Grand Jury and Director winner, "Girlfight."
"Girlfight" cops a tough feminine 'tude from the get go when star Rodriguez,
leaning on a locker, glares up at us from beneath her eyelashes, recalling
Malcom McDowell's punk in "A Clockwork Orange."  Soon Diana's beating on
a pretty classmate who's dared to steal the less attractive
Marisol's (Elisa Bocanegra) boyfriend and insult her in the process.  She
picks up Tiny at the Brooklyn Athletic Club and hauls off and belts Ray,
a boxer and classmate ('I couldn't resist,' she says).  When Diana goes home, 
she glowers as she performs the womanly duties of serving dinner and cleaning 
up, listens to a TV news report of a woman whose boyfriend set her on fire, 
and watches a neighborhood woman struggle with her small children on the 
street below.
Diana's not all about feminist brooding sullenness, however, as can be seen 
when she begins formal boxing training and the top amateur featherweight, 
Adrian (Santiago Douglas) catches her eye.  She listens to Hector, but watches
Adrian flirt with his oh-so-feminine girlfriend.  Soon they're thrown into
each other's company after an amateur bout, sharing dinner at a diner (she
orders a rare cheeseburger with extra bacon, he has a salad with a cup of
soup) and a ride home.  Adrian's intrigued by this woman he can talk to, and,
after squiring his trophy girl to an event Diana also attends, is forced
to realize Diana's the one for him.  Then the real confrontation presents
itself - Hector is entering his prize boxer, Diana, in the finals for the
amateur featherweight championship - against Adrian.
Writer/Director Karyn Kusama (one time John Sayles' assistant, supported here
by his long time producers Sarah Green and Maggie Renzie) has fashioned a
film whose main character is so immediately in your face you reject letting
her in.  Gradually, however, Kusama's screenplay and newcomer Rodriguez' 
performance win you over before you realize it because they're just so real.
Diana, we learn, has a reason to be angry and has very wisely channelled
it into something productive.  She's also not all fight, caring for Tiny
and Marisol, while trying to establish trust with Adrian.  She's believable
physically, training and sparring in the gym.  She subtly projects emotions
as well, such as when, discovering a home totally unlike her own, her eyes 
dart around, taking in all the family pictures.  She can be plain (particularly 
with an eye blackened!) or show smoldering sexiness.
Support is equally strong and well cast, particularly Santiago Douglas'
Adrian who undergoes an anti-macho catharsis because of knowing Diana and
Jaime Tirelli's good-hearted Hector, a small time trainer whose mind is opened 
when he finds talent in an unexpected package.
The screenplay never lets its characters take routine paths and builds
with a graceful arc.  The climatic scene is preceeded by a beautiful
silhouette shot of Hector asking Diana 'Do you know him inside?  Do you 
know yourself inside?'  The denouement is beautifully realized in front of
the dingy window in the broom closet that's been deeded to Diana for a locker
in the all-male domain.
Kusama's direction is sure and strong.  Along with her cinematographer
Patrick Cady and production designer Stephen Beatrice, a real sense of 
place is created.  Whether on the streets, in homes, at school or the gym, 
we know we're in a real, urban neighborhood.  Fight scenes are immediate, 
with some punches coming right at the camera lens.  
The unique score by Theodore Shapiro is heavily percussive, often sounding like 
castanets backing a metronome.  Sound by Mary Ellen Porto is sharp, punctuated 
with thematic bells and buzzers from school halls to ringside.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
James Brundage
You can take the girl out of the fight, but can you take the fight out of
the girl?  Well, as all of those overcoming-the-odds,
beating-the-hell-out-of-the-adversary movies of recent and past would have
us believe, no.  Instead, you can channel it, make it into a focused rage
that is capable of winning matches and perhaps even capturing a viewer's
interest for a few hours.
While Girlfight may result in a general sense of control and the winning of
a few matches on the behalf of this female boxer Diana (Michelle Rodregiuz),
it does not capture our interest.  In fact, this two-hour movie feels like a
three hour movie, has almost no character development to boot, and has all
of the clichéd cinematography and director that makes me wonder if these
cinematic craftsmen learned their trade off of a crackerjack box.
In the beginning of Girlfight, Diana goes into duke-out mode after a girl
sleeps with a guy that a friend of hers wants.  This apparently has been her
fourth fight of the semester, and the principle wants her act cleaned up or,
of course, it's expulsion.
Before I go on with my singular-minded tirade of why one should avoid
Girlfight at all costs, let me ask an open-ended question: how many times
have we seen this before?  Really.  Isn't this the formula for a
boxing/overcoming troubles movie: person A is really angry, gets threatened,
gets ship shape, and we all live happily ever after?
This formula is basically the path that Girlfight follows to the most
clichéd ending ever: slow motion hugging with a freeze frame and a
high-grain shot.  Gimme a break or break someone's neck, please.  How this
film got the Grand Jury at Sundance is beyond me.
Girlfight does have its nice points, however.  There is a fascinating
relationship between Diana and her father (Paul Cauldron) and Rodregiuz does
a wonderful job of expressing the trials and triumphs female boxing.  Yet
this relationship could stand a lot more development instead of the schlock
treatment it gets (only one scene actually affects you).
To it's credit, Girlfight goes the Raging Bull method in boxing matches,
have each fight be a quieter, well-photographed routine instead of having
each punch by a slap across the face by Thor's hammer.
But all of this doesn't get over the fact that Girlfight really never goes
anywhere.  When the parental conflict is resolved, the little steam that
Girlfight was running on runs dry, and you still end up being subjected to
two boring boxing matches and a helluva lot of psuedodrama before this dog
of a film finishes.  And, when the two hours are over, the only thing you'll
get out of watching Girlfight is a headache and an enjoyable period of
mutual complaints with your friends, and unless that's your idea of a
pleasant evening, neither is Girlfight.
Director: Karyn Kusama
Producer: Sarah Green, Martha Griffin, Maggie Renzi
Writer: Karyn Kusama
Starring: Michelle Rodriguez, Jaime Tirelli, Paul Calderon, Santiago
Douglas, Ray Santiago, Elisa Bocanegra, Shannon Walker Williams
Short Stuff short film review:
http://www.othercinema.com/~jbrundage/
