Title
Review for Committed (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Miramax Films
 Director: Lisa Krueger
 Writer:  Lisa Krueger
 Cast: Heather Graham, Casey Affleck, Luke Wilson, Goran
Visnjic, Patricia Velazquez, Alfonso Arau, Mark Ruffalo, Kim
Dickens, Clea DuVall, Jon Stewart, Art Alexakis
   Before divorce became so easy to obtain in most states,
Americans who needed to split faster than they could do so
by the Reno route could go to Mexico.  The typical path took
the unhappy marrieds first to El Paso, Texas, where they
spent the night at a hotel (the women often propositioned by
the bellmen), while they crossed a bridge into Ciudad Juarez
in the morning to meet their lawyers and spend a few minutes
in court.  Nowadays, of course, legal splits are so effortless
that some young people enter marriage never expecting a
true commitment since, after all, are anyone's parents still
together?  You could not be blamed for wondering when the
ritual will change, with reverends intoning, "...until divorce do
you part."
   Writer-director Lisa Krueger takes a contrarian view of
marriage vows with "Committed," breaking with the traditional
notion of El Paso as the conventional location of the
penultimate day of a marriage.  Krueger's 1996 debut with
"Manny and Lo" was about a pair of orphaned sisters who
take to the road in an old station wagon and sleep in model
homes, a fresh and warm comedy. Krueger is still as
sympathetic and understanding of her characters, but there is
little freshness in this small, sluggish tale.  A date movie
targeted to twenty-somethings who are contemplating
matrimony, "Committed" serves principally as a showcase for
the talent of Heather Graham, who, after her larger-than-life
role in "Austin Powers II" may have looked for a chance to
strut her stuff in a more modest story.  =
   "Committed," which would fit better on a small screen,
perhaps on a cable network, focuses on Graham in virtually
every scene as the young bride, Joline, who is compulsive
enough to believe in her vow to "love, honor and protect" her
man.  So addicted is she to fidelity--or more accurately to being a
woman of her word--that when her flustered and foggy-
minded photographer husband Carl (Luke Wilson) bolts to the
Texas sticks after 587 days of marriage, she is determined to
locate him, to observe his actions, to protect him from harm,
and to bring him back to his senses. Equipped with just a
trace of a sorcerer's enchantment, she simply tosses his
picture on a map of the U.S. and, bingo, there he is in El
Paso, hiding out in a shack just short of the Mexican border. =
Having "jumped off a cliff," as Joline puts her experience, she
is introduced to adventures that are not promised in even the
most hyped-up travel agency brochures.  Despite her
vows she comes close to pursuing an affair with the charismatic
Neil (Goran Visnjic), who makes pinatas for sale in
neighborhood trade fairs.  She also befriends Carmen (Patricia
Velazquez), a Mexican with a love for anything American.
   We surely need regular doses of correctives for blockbuster
films like "Armageddon," but "Committed" is so soporific that
even the hardiest of Sundance fans might scream for another
showing of "Rules of Engagement" or "U-571."  Casey Affleck
as Joline's phlegmatic brother--a young man who unlike his
sister seems to have no boundaries or desires to commit to
anyone or anything--is meant to be an appealing, laid-back
personality, but comes across instead as a guy who at best
some 23-year-old women might want to mother.  In a
moderately engaging cameo, Alfonso Arau--who directed
"Like Water for Chocolate" and "A Walk in the Clouds"--
performs in the role of a snake-handler with magic powers. =
But if you're going to throw in some magic realism as Arau
did in "Chocolate," you'd best take your cameras to a town
like Sedona, AZ.  Still, not even that burg's red rocks could
bring enchantment to this absolutely ordinary piece.
Rated R.  Running time: 98 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Michael Dequina
"Committed" is what Joline (Heather Graham) is to her deadbeat husband
Carl (Luke Wilson) through thick and thin, for better or for worse. 
Audiences, however, are likely not to feel the same devotion to Lisa
Krueger's stridently offbeat comedy of the same name.
Because of Graham, viewers are likely to at least develop a commitment
to seeing this film through to the end.  An innately likable actress, she
carries the screen with ease in this, her first lead role.  But as the
film progresses, that likability relates less and less to the character
she plays.  Joline's dogged determination to make her marriage work first
comes off as admirable, even as she makes her long road journey from New
York to El Paso, Texas to locate Carl, who runs off without warning after
597 seemingly happy days of wedlock.
Once she's there, Joline shadows Carl not unlike a stalker, keeping
watch over him without making her presence known.  She does, however,
connect with some of the locals, namely Neil (Goran Visnjic), Carl's next
door neighbor, who has designs on Joline; Carmen (Patricia Velasquez),
Carl's new girlfriend--that is, until she meets and befriends Joline; and
Carmen's grandfather (Alfonso Arau), who shares his gift of the mystical
with Joline.
Most of _Committed_'s attempts at humor come from these supporting
characters, namely their quirks.  Neil is an artist who makes pińatas. 
Carmen is a waitress who regularly sneaks a taste of the drinks and
dishes she serves.  Joline's brother Jay (Casey Affleck) is as
commitment-shy as she is committed.  Each one of these characters can be
described as off-center, but little eccentricities can only go so far in
holding an audience's attention--and even less in making them laugh.
And, ultimately, it's up to the peripheral characters and their foibles
to do that job because the lead character becomes such a drag to hang
around with.  Of course, Carl discovers Joline, and after that point her
efforts to hold onto him seem less believable and reasonable.  While one
never comes to the point of hating her, one does stop liking her and
starts to pity her, for she is clearly out of her mind.  This shift is
somewhat expected--after all, rarely do films bearing a double-edged name
not end up relating to both meanings--but that doesn't make the turn
easier to swallow or the film more enjoyable to sit through.
I understand the point Krueger was trying to make--namely, the question
of when devotion becomes obsession, and knowing when to let go.  But in
_Committed_, she has somehow made this potentially provocative subject
boring.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: talk... talk... more talk...
It isn't a good thing to be watching the big screen thinking, "My God
Heather Graham is skinny..." because it means that the story that is
trying to grab your attention and suck you into it's world, isn't doing
its job.
Graham holds the spotlight for almost every second of Committed, as
Joline, a club manager who is embarking on her lifelong commitment to
love of her life Carl (Luke Wilson). Carl is a newspaper photographer
who years for the excitement of shooting breaking news stories, but who
is always assigned to take pictures of food. 597 days later, Joline is
planning a surprise birthday party for her hubby, four months too soon,
because he seems to be in a fog. It's more than a fog. Carl walks out
and disappears out West somewhere, sending only a catus picture postcard
as news that he is still thinking of Jo.
To Jo, whose word is her bond, "for better or for worse, 'til death do
us part" means exactly that. Doing a careful budget, and renting a car,
she sets out to find her stray, using a smudged postmark as a guide and
clipping coupons all along the way. The journey leads to Texas, near the
Mexican border at El Paso. Miles of empty ranchland stretch in front of
you and a rickety fence marks the border. If ever there was a visual
representation of "getting lost in the wilderness," this is it. There
she not only finds Carl, she meets and befriends his new girlfriend
Carmen (Patricia Velazquez) and her wise-man grandfather (Alfonso Arau)
who senses in her an untapped power . . .
Actually, anyone with a modicum of intelligence knew from the very first
shot of the movie that Joline was very in tune with witchery. Though
that "w" word is never mentioned, we found ourselves thinking "is she a
good witch or a bad witch?" as the flick played out. Turns out it's a
bit of both and it's a bit of the story like all the other bits of the
story that is underdeveloped and underwritten. What could be comic, as
Joline surveils her hubby's house with brother Jay (Casey Affleck) and
Carmen in the cars behind her, also watching, isn't.
Casey is such an underachiever that, as a counterpoint to his gangbuster
sister, he isn't. Rounding off the cast of half formed characters is
Neil (Goran Visnjic) who lives in the house next door to Carl and gets
turned on by the thought of seducing a married woman. He's out of luck,
as Jo is committed to Carl, as her ongoing voice over informs you.
You're actually hearing the daily journal she's writing about her
commitment to her husband, as well as other observations on daily life,
relationships and commitment. It all reminds us of long ago, heavy duty
college conversations about the same subjects, over well stoked bongs.
Oh, yes it does (not that we have any info about writer/director Lisa
Krueger's modus operandi). Aimed at a GenX audience, Committed would be
perfect for that audience except that it is slow and way too analytical,
in the way that Thai stick induced philosophy is . . . except for the
lack of a good rush.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Committed, he would have paid...
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Robert Strohmeyer
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/09b1c50eb22e1645882568d10007a213?OpenDocument
I walked into the screening of Committed with low expectations, having
acquired some taste for Heather Graham though her appearances in
Drugstore Cowboy, Swingers, Boogie Nights, and, perhaps most notably,
Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me, but bearing little hope for a
good story. After all, even Miramax's promotional synopses gave this
picture about an over-zealous love junkie a lackluster pitch. The lesson
here: Sometimes bad salesmen pitch good widgets.
As Forrest Gump might put it, Heather Graham is as Heather Graham does.
In this flick, she does pretty good. Backed by the furrowed brow malaise
of Luke Wilson (Home Fries, Dog Park and one of the best episodes of The
X Files) and the way-cooler-than-his-brother Casey Affleck (200
Cigarettes), Graham's wide-eyed charm is disarming and convincing.
You'll also find some great supporting performances from Patricia
Velasquez (The Mummy-Don't worry; she's much wittier here.) and Alfonso
Arau (Like Water for Chocolate, A Walk in the Clouds and-my favorite-El
Guapo from The Three Amigos). The premise of the story is lame at best,
but the combination of on-screen talent and resourceful writing and
directing manage to pull off a better-than-mediocre movie. Committed is
a perfect date movie, and I suspect it'll also be a winner among women
whose men are too dumb to stay put.
Graham plays Joline, a newlywed who is, as the title points out,
committed to her marriage beyond all reason. She's not just into
marriage, but honesty in general, and the film's first postulate is that
that makes her unique. Whether you buy this or not is irrelevant because
once her husband (Carl, played by Wilson) walks out the door, she's off
like a flash (after a brief cameo from Everclear lead singer Art
Alexakis) to Texas, led by a random smattering of homegrown witchcraft.
Lending some credence to the validity of her practices, she does happen
upon Carl near the Mexican border, leading to some of the most
heartwarmingly cheesy I-know-you-need-your-freedom-but-I'm-here-for-you
dialog ever written for the screen.
Writer/Director Lisa Krueger has pulled off a charming, funny script and
brought it to film against all odds. This is a film that shouldn't be
good, but somehow is, and I advise all you young lovers out there to
grab yourselves some tickets and see it.
For those of you looking for comedic weirdness Graham showed in Austin
Powers, look elsewhere. And forget about the sex; it's only hinted at
here.
Director: Lisa Krueger
Producer: Dean Silvers, Marlen Hecht
Writer: Lisa Krueger
Starring: Heather Graham, Casey Affleck, Luke Wilson, Goran Visnjic,
Patricia Velasquez, Alfonso Arau
http://www.megachannels.com/watch.asp
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Heather Graham is a lovely woman. Now that we have dispensed with the
obvious, can we ponder for a moment the mystery of why she continues to
pull down roles in films with edge and attitude, since she appears to have
little of either? TWO GIRLS AND A GUY, BOOGIE NIGHTS, BOWFINGER -- in each
she was competent, but primarily served the function of being a lovely
woman. And in AUSTIN POWERS: THE SPY WHO SHAGGED ME, even competence
eluded her. I can only guess that Graham gives killer auditions. On
screen, she melts into the art direction whenever she's not serving the
function of  well, you get the picture.
     Lisa Krueger's COMMITTED is a goofy, quirky sort-of romantic comedy
that offers some pleasant character-based amusement. The fact that it's
not more is only partly Graham's fault. She plays Joline, a New York
nightclub booking agent who has decided that her word will always be her
bond in life. That goes double for her marriage to Carl (Luke Wilson),
which she values above everything else (to the point that she has had a
wedding band tattooed to her finger). She is understandably distraught,
therefore, when Carl decides he needs some space, and flees for parts
unknown. But Joline takes nothing so seriously as "till death do you
part," and so sets out on a road trip to find Carl. Eventually she tracks
him down in El Paso, where he may not be terribly pleased about being
tracked down.
     For a little while, I thought Krueger was on her way to making
COMMITTED a sly commentary on children of divorce coping with their own
commitment issues. We learn that Joline's own parents split, perhaps
inspiring Joline to the equivalent of a child of an alcoholic's
proselytizing teetotaling (as it may have inspired her brother Jay, played
by Casey Affleck, to a somewhat creepy attachment to Joline). Krueger may
even have intended the film as a commentary on the way society looks at
people with passionate commitments. There's something intriguing about the
way it is assumed someone who will fight to the end for a marriage must be
a bit nuts, just as it is assumed fervent believers in anything must be a
bit nuts.
     Actually, COMMITTED only teases with subtext, since it's not much of
a commentary on anything. That doesn't mean it's not entertaining in a
sporadic, out-of-left-field sort of way. Whenever COMMITTED seems to have
been lurching along far too long in search of a good scene, it finds one
that delivers unexpected laughs (Patricia Velasquez as an utterly
indifferent restaurant waitress; Alfonso Arau in a too-rare screen
appearance as a kindly Mexican medicine man). It even delivers unexpected
romantic heat on occasion, in moments between Graham and Goran Visnjic as
Carl's El Paso neighbor Neil. Neil's full-aura massage of Joline is one of
the sexiest screen scenes ever in which no one lays a body part on anyone
else.
     I wish it all felt like it added up to more, but there's a huge hole
at the center of COMMITTED. To be fair, Graham does some nice things with
the ever-earnest Joline that prevent her from turning into a joke. 
Unfortunately, she appears to spend all her acting energy on the work of
yanking Joline from the jaws of caricature. COMMITTED is one of those
films in which the things going on around the main character end up far
more interesting than anything happening to the main character herself. 
Perhaps that's the way Krueger wrote it, retreating to the same
isn't-this-all-terribly-indie mannerisms that shackled Krueger's previous
effort MANNY & LO. Or perhaps everything around Joline just seems more
interesting because Graham doesn't have the presence to command the
narrative's focus. I kept wanting to see more edge in Joline's connubial
stalking, and realizing there was no way I'd ever get it. In a
sporadically funny film, Heather Graham tries to turn from lovely woman
into a leading lady, only to fade into the art direction once again.
