Title
Review for Three Seasons (1999)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
"Three Seasons" is being billed as the most acclaimed film in the
history of the Sundance Film Festival, having won three top awards,
including the prestigious Grand Jury Prize. Writer/director Tony Bui
and his film deserve all the praise that they have gotten for making
this breathtaking, heartbreaking drama.
The film is about dreamers; people with hopes and
aspirations. However, in war-torn Vietnam, the dreamers are
constrained by their poverty-stricken fate. "Three Seasons"
intertwines the stories of a cyclo driver, a prostitute, an American
G.I., a young woman, and a little boy. At first glance, the bunch
would seem to have nothing in common, but "Three Seasons" takes the
time to prove that they all are lost souls.
"Three Seasons'" cast is composed almost entirely of Vietnamese
newcomers, but Harvey Keitel (also one of the film's producers) shines
in a small role as a former American G.I. searching for his long-lost
daughter. The role is a small one, but Keitel's presence and warmth
add an extra layer of heartfelt emotion to an already complex,
multilayered production.
Among the Vietnamese cast, Don Duong radiates as a cyclo driver named
Hai who falls in love with a prostitute, and desires her love in
return. It is such a sweet, quiet performance, but it is one that,
like the rest of the film, is subtly heartbreaking.
Every character in "Three Seasons" has a desire; a hope. Whether it be
love, stability, or family that the character needs, writer/director
Tony Bui makes us feel just the right amount of compassion for each
one. In a way, "Three Seasons" leaves the viewer feeling somewhat
depressed. Each character will indeed fulfill their dream, but not
necessarily in the way in which one would expect.
The thing, however, that makes "Three Seasons" so groundbreaking,
apart from the fact that it's the first American film filmed entirely
in Vietnam, is that the Vietnamese, who, in modern American cinema
have been portrayed as the enemy we know nothing about (in so many
Vietnam War movies), finally get their own movie; a movie that proves
that even they have some heart and soul.
Tony Bui has handcrafted a flawless masterpiece; a gem that deserves
much more than its 3 Sundance Film Festival awards. "Three Seasons" is
a quiet film that will reward multiple viewers with its symbolism and
subtlety, and it will provide an emotional, but unsentimental
experience.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST


Author
Louis Proyect
"Three Seasons," a bittersweet film set in contemporary Saigon,
crosscuts between three pairs of people struggling for love and
fulfillment in a world entirely hostile to those goals. The Saigon of
"Three Seasons" is a money jungle where people eke out livings against
a backdrop of garish new hotels. That Vietnam was once the hope for
progressive people around the world, as well as its own people, gives
the film added poignancy and a sense of lost possibilities.
The film opens with Kien An (Nguyen Ngoc Hiep) being admitted to a
suburban walled compound where she will work picking white lotuses to
sell on the streets of Saigon. This young woman joins her co-workers
in the daily harvest on a small pond that is faced by a large
foreboding house occupied by the Teacher Dao (Tran Manh Cuong), who
has not been seen in public for many years. Someone tells her that it
is his ghost who lives there. Their work is of a primeval nature,
perhaps unchanged for a thousand years or more. They row across the
pond in tiny rowboats, pick the beautiful white flowers, while singing
work songs. One day, to the resentment of the more senior
lotus-pickers, Kien An adds new verses which have more depth and
subtlety than the simple verses usually sung.
Teacher Dao hears her new verses and bids his servant bring the young
woman to see him. She discovers that the man, of an indeterminate age,
is confined to a wheelchair. He is in the advanced stages of leprosy
and his fingers have been eaten away by the disease. He tells her that
she will be his fingers and begins to compose new poems that she
spends each day transcribing. Their partnership gives meaning to their
lives. What can not change is her daily chores on the pond and on the
streets of Saigon. This simple laborer's life is being wasted, as her
master's is wasting away due to disease.
The next pair includes James Hager (Harvey Keitel), a Vietnam veteran
who sits outside his hotel each day staring into the windows of the
"Apocalypse Now" disco, where he believes he will find the daughter he
left behind in the war. That is where he met her mother, who has
recently died. One night he runs into a street kid Woody (Nguen Huu
Duoc), who survives by selling trinkets out of a folding case. As
Hager spills out his story to the young boy over a beer in the disco
late one night, the lights go out suddenly. When they come on again,
the case is missing. For Woody, this is as much of a blow as the loss
of the bicycle in the neo-realist classic "Bicycle Thief," which was
also set in a grim postwar urban setting. Woody assumes that Hager has
stolen the case and spends his days wandering around the city
searching for the American and his case. Meanwhile, Hager continues
his search for his daughter.
The casting of Keitel is no accident. He lent his considerable clout
in the industry as Executive Producer in order to make the film
happen. The only thing he got in exchange was the privilege to act in
one of his most powerful roles to date. Keitel has long been
associated with independent films like "Three Seasons" and deserves
enormous credit for making this latest one happen. Nguen Huu Duoc,
like the young star of "Central Station," was also a non-professional
who the director discovered on the streets of the city doing exactly
what he does in the film: selling trinkets. Both films are about the
desperate situation of children and it is a sign of the integrity of
the films' creators that they made this casting decision.
The final pair, who really define the dramatic and emotional core of
the film, are Hai (Don Duong), a pedicab driver and Lan (Zoë Bui), the
woman he falls in love with--a prostitute. When he first meets her,
she is running from a bar after having an altercation with a client.
Lan offers to drive her home and falls in love with her instantly.
>From that moment on, he follows her everywhere, just to be near her
and to be able to drive her home. While she at first appreciates his
solicitousness, after a while she becomes annoyed. What does he want
from her? She is so used to having men treat her like a piece of meat
that she can not relate to someone who loves her for herself. She
tries to wise him up. She points at one of the new hotels and lectures
him. You see that place? The people who stay there look nothing like
us. They have money and we have none. Someday when I have money I will
join them and leave all this behind.
Hai does not know how to respond to her. There really is no answer,
because the new Vietnam is based on money and nothing else. The only
hope is to find a job with a multinational corporation or sell your
flesh. Lan is the realist. This does not prevent Hai from continuing
to pursue her. When he finally wins $200 in a pedicab race, he uses
$50 to buy Lan's services. When they go up to a hotel room, he only
asks her to remove her makeup, change into a nightgown that he's
bought her, and go to sleep. When she awakes, she discovers that he
has gone without touching her.
Perhaps the only person capable of making such a film is Tony Bui, the
writer and director who fled the country with his family in 1970 when
he was two years old. He visited Vietnam in 1994 and developed what he
described as a passion for the country. He explains that, "A driving
force for me was to make a film in Vietnamese with Vietnamese actors
and to tell a modern story. Growing up I only saw the Vietnamese in
war films, as faceless people running through the jungles with guns.
That's not what I saw when I went there. I wanted to bring out their
humanity in a way that hasn't been shown, the universality of the
human spirit."
"Three Seasons" is scheduled for theatrical release later this year.
Do not miss it. It is a beautiful and moving work of art.
(For Marxist discussion: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html)

Author
Murali Krishnan
(Dialog in Vietnamese, English subtitles)
The climate of Vietnam passes through three seasons, and just as the
seasons endlessly disappear and return, so to the human spirit cycles
through periods of loss and redemption. This sentimental film follows
the parallel stories of several characters in Vietnam and details the
similar journeys of the different people.
The narrative is comprised of several distinct, and occasionally
intersecting stories. The first consists of a young woman who joins
the employ of a scholarly leper who raises and sells lotus flowers.
Another follows a former American Marine (Harvey Keitel) who has
returned to search for a daughter he abandoned years ago. Another
follows a young urchin who ekes a living by peddling trinkets. Another
presents a cyclo (cycle rickshaw driver) who yearns for a young woman
apparently unavailable to him.
The common element to the stories is that they all embody loss and
rejection. The Marine and the urchin depict people coping with loss,
and the flower seller and the cyclo embody the power of redemption.
The narrative deftly cycles between the subplots, and tempers the
drama of each with the context switches. The characters are well
drawn. It is obvious that they all have a past, but exactly what it is
is implied, and left as an exercise for the viewer. This is the
antithesis of formulaic filmmaking, where the story overexposes its
character to make up for a lack of depth.
When presenting a story with such weighty themes, a weak film will get
bogged down by melodrama. Filmmaker Tony Bui avoids this trap by not
overstating the emotions that are presented. The actions and events
are neither extreme nor manipulative. The film successfully uses
subtlety and symbolism to craft a moving story.
The film is both well written and well acted. Its only real flaw is
that at times it relies on stereotypical characters, and one cliche
relationship. However, it generally avoids convenient resolutions, and
thus remains an enjoyable film.
Recommended. This is a slow, sentimental film that is captivating. The
beautiful cinematography captures the oppressive heat, the drenching
rain, and natural beauty of Vietnam. Its symbolic stories also reflect
the power of the human soul, and its ability to persevere. Although it
has shortcomings, it is a moving and pleasant film.

Author
Pedro Sena
(Seen at the 22nd Portland International Film Festival, in Portland, Oregon)
 Some films have glitz. Some have actors. And we rarely tire of seeing these
things. And then there are some films that just "are" and are not trying to
be anything symbolic or meaningful, except to "exist". This is one of those
films.
 THREE SEASONS has a series of threads, or stories, that do resolve
themselves rather well. However, if this film is a sign, this is about the
way that Vietnam has grown since the end of the war, and how it has become a
more modern country, while also showing us what it has not left behind. I am
not convinced that the film is really trying to bring across anything of a
statement, since the film maker is obviously well defined in terms of what
his vision is, and these kinds of films, one goes to see for its vision, not
its gut wrenching story. This is here also, but in many ways, it is a sort
of poetic justice, that the Vietnamese culture may be starting to create for
itself.
 Of the four stories, one can hardly separate what this is leading to. They
do cross each other's paths here and there in rather subtle ways, but never
to interfere with each other's path. So one could easily define this as a
"day in the life", and a photographic style that is so caring and
understanding that it helps us really fall for the beauty of the film. It
has heart and then some. One could hardly expect any more from a film.
 One story centers around a young girl who has joined a group of women to
pick up lotus flowers and then go sell them in the streets. Unlike the older
women, she decides to sing a different song one day, and she attracts the
religious leader, who is very ill and has stayed away from the public for
some time. Even though there is no hint of it, I suppose that we could think
of him as a war casualty. The young man has lost his fingers and can not
write poetry which he used to in his younger days. His face, and no doubt
his body, are terribly disfigured. And the young girl is allowed to visit
him. She has a liking for poetry and words and takes on the job of writing
down the stuff that he recites. As he dies in the end, she takes it upon
himself to put into action one of his visions, or dreams. A really beautiful
little story that gives us at least one thing that we take for granted in
life, that we rarely work with. Make a poem out of life, and live it
through. The second story is the one that seems slightly out of place, but
must have been added to the whole, and it does not take anything away from
the film. An American comes back to Vietnam to see if he can meet up with
the woman he had lived with (or married - not clear), and had fathered a
child. His campaign is hitting dead ends until the day before he is to leave
when he meets a young girl that looks like is the one he is looking for.
Apparently it is, and he ends up in a restaurant talking to her. He had sat
in front of the restaurant the whole time in the film,  probably as some
sort of memory that this was not a restaurant way back then, and was the
location that got him what he has come to realize was a gift. The third
involves a small child who walks the streets selling small items for his
boss. One day he meets the American and his box of goodies is stolen. He
gets punished by his master, and continues his journey looking for the box.
Eventually he finds it, and along side comes another young girl, who will be
his companion. This is the story that hits us the strongest, and in of
itself may be the one that has the largest point to make about anything.
 And the fourth story is the one that we can not get away from. A young
prostitute is making a living and has high hopes and dreams that one day she
will not have to walk the streets again. A cyclo driver decides to help her
as much as he can and drive her whenever she needs. But her dates do not
seem to be picking her up, as much as they dump her. Her hopes are dashed
and this is something that she does not wish to face. The cyclo driver gets
a chance to make some money and fortune is on his side. He buys her for the
night, and gives her a dress, that is rather old fashioned compared to the
clothes that she wears. And instead of him wanting to make love to her, he
wants to watch her sleep. He leaves her breakfast in the morning.
Unfortunately, he has made displayed the very thing she has hoped for, but
can not get from the men she picks up, and this brings out a crisis for her.
In the end, it appears that she has given in to this man, who genuinely
cares for her, above all else, something that she has not been able to
appreciate yet.
 Of all the films in the 22nd Portland International Film Festival I have
seen, this one stands out as the premiere one. It's one of those films that
is difficult to let go and not appreciate. The direction all through out is
so clean and well done, using different styles for each story, to create a
wonderful tapestry that is rare in many films. This is a film that is not
trying to impose anything on our minds, not trying to say anything, and yet,
the one thing it teaches us is that poetic justice does exist, and perhaps
this is the one thing that Vietnam has grown to become that we have not yet
seen, or learned about.
 With some magnificent music along the way, this is a truly stupendous film
that deserves a wider audience, were Vietnam not a sore point for too many
Americans. Here is a country that has grown out of the war, and is making
something of itself, if the film has its only point that it is making.
 Outstanding acting, and work through out, it is without a doubt one of the
nicest films this reviewer has seen in a long time.  Few films feel this
good, and show you the "good" come out ahead. If anything, this is as
positive and hopeful as anyone can look at anything, be it a country, or the
very people that make up that country. And it takes a very special film
maker to do something like this, one that has the courage to dare see the
good side of things, and find the good people.
5 of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena, Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1999. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     THREE SEASONS is an odd melding of Asian film styling with the
story telling of Robert Altman.  Like Altman's SHORT CUTS the film
involves multiple (in this case four) short stories, each developing in
parallel and in close geographical proximity but otherwise mostly
unrelated.  Four plot lines are set in Ho Chi Minh City and begin and
end about the same time.  In one story a cyclo-driver becomes obsessed
with a beautiful prostitute and decides to do whatever it takes to win
her.  (A cyclo is a bicycle modified with a wide passenger seat in
front to be used like a taxi.  One sees them frequently in Southeast
Asia.)  In another plotline a woman comes to the city for a job picking
flowers in a lotus pond and selling them in the city.  She becomes
involved with the recluse who owns the lotus pond.  The third story
involves a street boy who makes his living selling small items like
cigarette lighters from a box.  When his box is stolen he must get it
back again or go hungry.  The fourth plotline involves an American
Vietnam veteran who returns to Ho Chi Minh City driven by conscience to
find his daughter whose mother he abandoned during the war.
     It is very difficult to tell stories of any real plot complexity
in a film that is going to tell four stories in as little as 110
minutes.  If one adds to it that the pacing of this or many Asian
films.  Each of the four stories could probably be told in three or
four sentences.  What is important is not the plot but the texture of
the telling and the feeling for what has become of Saigon after it
became Ho Chi Minh City.  We see a daily life that in some ways is not
that different from what we have in the United States.  The story of
the cyclo-driver and that of the street boy could take place in just
about any big city with few modifications.  The man looking for his
daughter, the least developed of the four stories, might also, but
would be much more likely to occur in Vietnam, with its particular
problem of abandoned mothers.  The story of the lotus pond probably
would not work any place but Asia.
     THREE SEASONS was written and directed by Tony Bui, based on his
own stories. Bui was born in Vietnam, but raised in the US and this
constitutes a return to his parents' land.  It is the first American
independent film shot in Vietnam since the war.  The film stays away
from politics, however, no doubt in part because it had to be passed by
Communist censors and had to play in the United States.  Curiously they
do not seem to object to the film calling the city Saigon rather than
its more politically correct name in Vietnam.  The film plays double
duty as a fiction film and as a documentary look at what Bui saw when
he returned to his country.  Bui has the eye of an artist with much of
the Asian sense of color.  We see this in the cyclo-race that is the
centerpiece of one of the stories and in the sensuous pleasure the
camera takes in the bright red blossoms of a country scene.
     THREE SEASONS--where the title comes from us unclear since it
seemed to me to take place over a much shorter period of time--is what
used to be called a feast for the eyes but remains a simple quiet
little film and not one that says very much.  I rate it a 6 on the 0 to
10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Perspective is a curious matter.  Take the question of the Vietnam
War, for example.  The conventional wisdom runs that the United States
lost the conflict when troops were withdrawn before the fall of Saigon.
For those of you laboring under the misapprehension that that was the end
of the story, Tony Bui's THREE SEASONS shows us a modern-day Saigon in the
full bloom of capitalism; in the ideological long run, you might say the
war was won after all.  Sometimes, a thing is entirely how you look at it
rather than the thing itself.  Even in the mind, style can triumph over
substance.
     There is an abundance of style on display in THREE SEASONS, enough to
cloak its lapses in substance.  The narrative consists of four largely
independent stories of life in modern Saigon.  In one, a young woman named
Kien An (Nguyen Ngoc Hiep) goes to work at a lotus farm, and becomes
intrigued with the reasons behind the reclusiveness of her employer (Tran
Manh Cuong).  Another finds cyclo-cab driver Hai (Don Duong) becoming
infatuated with local prostitute Lan (Zoe Bui), and intent on serving as
her knight in shining armor.  The third involves a street urchin and
trinket seller named Woody (Nguyen Huu Duoc) on a quest for the suitcase
full of goods he lost in a bar.  Meanwhile, American Vietnam War veteran
James Hager (Harvey Keitel) searches for the daughter he left behind.
     Visually, THREE SEASONS is a remarkably assured piece of film-making,
using the contrasts of ancient, war-time and modern Vietnam to perfection.
In the picturesque countryside, delicate wooden bridges share the
landscape with neon advertising signs; in the city, the war's terrible
legacy has been turned into an opportunity for a theme bar (characters in
the film frequent the "Apocalypse Now Cafe").  Cinematographer Lisa
Rinzler captures flower-showered streets and lotus gardens with a warm
glow, helping make THREE SEASONS an often enchanting tone poem on the
conflicts inherent in introducing the contemporary into the conventional.
     As a narrative, it's considerably more inconsistent, as one might
expect from the multiple independent story-lines.  By far the most
effective is the tale of cyclo driver Hai, given the strongest emotional
and thematic pull by Don Duong's exceptional performance.  At its core his
is a tried-and-true hooker with a heart of gold story, yet something in
Duong's manner makes the cliche more resonant, his attempts to "save" Lan
more ennobling than predictable.  Each of the other tales has its moments,
but they come more sporadically.  Keitel's American perspective feels
particularly intrusive, almost like a sop to American audiences; what's
more, it adds a title-confounding fourth story to the three seasons.
Though THREE SEASONS rarely inspires seat-shifting, it's never as engaging
as it is when the focus is on Hai.
     Still, the stories do ultimately come together as tales of healing,
of reconciling Vietnam's troubled past with its challenging present and
future.  As the first American production shot in Vietnam since the war,
it's also an often-compelling cultural document.  There's little doubt
that THREE SEASONS feels somehow more "significant" because it is so
gracefully and beautifully composed, but that's hardly a cause for
consternation.  If it pushes plenty of the right aesthetic buttons, that
only proves that glamour can change one's perspective, as it clearly has
in a post-war Saigon where Coke adds life.

Author
Greg King
This sublime and beautiful looking low budget feature is the
first American film to be shot in Vietnam since the end of the war.
In his assured first feature, director Tony Bui pays homage to his
native country, shaped by massive destruction and upheaval.  Even two
decades later, the country is still undergoing an enormous period of
cultural, social and political change, and trying to come to terms
with its legacy.
Born in Vietnam but raised in America, Bui's dual background
gives him a rare insight into this sense of uncertainty, of being
caught between two cultures.  He directs with a sense of compassion
and insight, and puts a human face on this tortured country.  The
movie is filled with a sense of despair and loss, but it also
resonates with a spirit of optimism and a very real humanity.
Three Seasons actually consists of three or four tales, all
loosely woven together by the subtext of a nation's search for its own
identity.  The central characters of these stories come to
symbolically represent Vietnam's past, present and future.
Kien An (Ngoc Hiep) works on a farm, where she picks lotuses
which she sells on the streets of Saigon.  She also captures the
attention of Dao (Manh Cuong), a reclusive poet who suffers from
disfiguring leprosy and has lost his inspiration to write.  She soon
becomes his muse, and inspires him to write again.  Hai (Don Duong)
drives his cyclo through Saigon, and falls in love with Lan (Zoe Bui),
a prostitute who plies her trade at some of the city's most luxurious
hotels.  Woody (Nguyen Huu Doc) is a young boy who braves even the
foulest weather to sell trinkets to tourists at hotels.  When his bag
goes missing, he suspects an American (Harvey Keitel) of stealing it.
Keitel, who is also credited as one of the executive
producers, delivers a more restrained performance than usual as an
American who has returned to Saigon to find the daughter he fathered
during the war.  Apart from Keitel, the cast comprises solely of
Vietnamese actors who do not speak English, while the crew is made up
of a combination of American and Vietnamese technicians.  Lisa
Rinzler's gorgeous cinematography creates some exquisite visuals and
lyrical images, and deservedly won a prize at this year's Sundance
Film Festival.  Richard Horowitz's music beautifully complements the
evocative visuals, adding to the film's haunting quality.
But, while Three Seasons is visually quite rich, the movie is,
at times, a little dull and slow paced, and may not appeal to all
tastes.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

THREE SEASONS (director: Tony Bui; cast: Don Duong (Hai), Nguyen Ngoc
Hiep (Kien An), Tran Manh Cuong (Teacher Dao), Harvey Keitel (James
Hager), Zoe Bui (Lan), Nguyen Huu Duoc (Woody), 1999)
Saigon is a different place from the days of  the Vietnam war, when we
defended the corrupt government of the South against the attacking
communist forces from the North, and lost that unpopular war-- a war
that heatedly divided our country, as well. To go back and see what that
city is like now, should be interesting, especially since there is very
little media coverage of Saigon that reaches main street America. The
26-year-old director, whose family escaped Vietnam when he was a two
year old to live in California, has gone back to find his roots and
observe his people and see how they live today.
This rather sentimental elegy to his country, plays much like a
travelogue, bent on painting a pretty picture of the country despite the
sad tale it tells of four diverse, gentle souls, whose symbolic
fictionalized venture will prove to be very touching, as we follow them
around Saigon and observe them as their lives sometimes interact with
each other.
What the film lacks is a real poet's cutting edge and tension, and what
is also astonishingly absent, is a view of the political situation. But
what is even more astonishing, is the complete lack of anger from those
who are poor, whose lives are so polarized from the very rich.
There is little risk taken here by the director, who has shot a
purposefully fictionalized account of Vietnam, showing only that it is
being swallowed up by capitalism and its own passivity. But he is not
blaming anyone for what happened. Forgiveness, he implies, is the basis
of Vietnam's onward existence. The Coca-Cola signs and the luxurious
hotels serve only as reminders that this country is being overtaken by
commercialism and greed, nevertheless the director seems content to film
his picturesque view of the city, as is, of these materialistic
intrusions appearing without any kind of analysis as to why. The pastel
colors of the film and the brightness of the city, allow even the
squalid slum section of town to appear to be picture perfect.
All four of the main characters the story follows, are victims of the
country's past war, who are now trying to cope with their situation by
understanding what it is that they are now feeling that weighs heavily
in their heart.
The film opens on the site of an opulently lush lake with Kien An
(Nguyen Ngoc Hiep), who is part of an all-female work force hired to
pick white lotus blossoms on the temple estate of an embittered recluse.
He is passing himself off as a poet and some kind of wise man, who can
feel the beauty of nature in his soul. This first story relates to the
beauty found in the spring weather as observed for the harvesting of the
lotus.
After gathering their crop, where the women sing traditional songs, they
go to Saigon and sell their flowers on the streets. Competition arises
for Kien An, as vendors of plastic scented imitations do a better
business than she does.
When she sings a different song from the other women's, the boss
recognizes it as a song from his happy youth, when he was so filled with
enthusiasm for life, until he developed leprosy
and lost all his fingers, and retreated from life by hiding in the
shadows, embarrassed that children made fun of him when they saw him.
Kien An writes down the poems he dictates to her, that are filled with
so much pain and beauty. The heavy-handed symbolism in her story relates
to how this country can't face its true self anymore, blaming itself for
the disease it caught.
The next story is even cornier, as the romantic Hai (Don Duong), a cyclo
driver, falls in love with Lan (Zoe Bui), a $50 a trick prostitute. Hai
courts the snobbish whore in his cyclo, giving her rides from the luxury
hotels in which she does her business back to her slum area apartment.
When Hai wins $200 in a cyclo race, he then pays for her services, and
the haughty Lan turns out to be a frightened girl, who is confused and
unsure of herself. Another symbolic message, this time relating to their
country and how it must learn to love itself without being gobbled up by
foreigners. The season is summer and it is extremely hot.
Next we have a street urchin peddler of trinkets, Woody (Nguyen Huu
Duoc), a boy of eight or nine, who tries to sell a lighter to James
Hager (Harvey Keitel) in the Apocalypse Now Bar. He is an ex-marine
looking for the grown daughter he fathered, but has never seen, while
stationed in Saigon during the war.
The kid's suitcase is stolen, and he spends the remainder of the film
searching in the rain for the thief stealing everything he possesses
that is of value, who he thinks is Harvey. Again, these characters are
symbolic-- Harvey, for our country to put a closure on the past; and for
the kid, to get in off of the monsoon rain and become strong in spirit,
because he is the future of the country.
Everything gets tidied up in nice little packages by the film's end and
every one walks away enchanted, and this very picturesque take on
Saigon, that seems to be a love affair the director is having with his
ancestral country, turns out to be an irksome charmer to behold. It
lacks what it thinks it has: poetic vision. There is not much substance
in its lyrics, and its beauty can only be taken as skin deep. When we
think about what this film was saying, there is not much there that is
perceptive enough to add something worthwhile to its lugubrious tale.
The plain truth is, that there was just nothing striking said during
this well-crafted film to hold our attention. It was mostly an arty kind
of mush, fed to a Western audience that is dying to see something nice
about Vietnam, even if that something can't get past being sentimental
jive. The clichéd story had too many coincidences and improbabilities in
it, and an incomplete picture of how this city now functions, for its
story to be considered as being relevant to the topic it covered, except
by those who are pleased and willing to see something about Vietnam that
lets them forget about the war and the terrible conflicts it brought to
both countries.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
Somewhere along the way in THREE SEASONS, writer and director Tony Bui's
cinematic poem, viewers finally realize that the movie isn't about
anything per se.  Without the heavy pretensions and somnolent length of
this year's Oscar nominee THE THIN RED LINE, it shares its lyric beauty
and its gorgeous cinematography.  THE THIN RED LINE is ostensibly about
war, although the flora and fauna seem to get the most screen time, but
THREE SEASONS has much simpler ambitions.  It wants to embrace the
audience with a motion picture tone poem about current day Vietnam.
Watching it is like lying on a white sand beach as gentle waves lap at
your side.
Bui, who lives in Sunnyvale, California and left Vietnam at the age of
2, understands how to craft memorable images of the country he has
visited many times.  His first film, THREE SEASONS, which was an
astonishing triple award winner (Grand Jury, Audience and
Cinematography) at this year's Sundance film festival, is more a movie
for the heart than the mind.  Full of breathtaking imagery and melodious
folk tunes, it casts a magical spell on its audience through the simple
milieu of the people's daily routines.
In the midst of the lush visuals, three small stories grace the screen.
One concerns the relationship between a relatively expensive prostitute
(Zoe Bui) and a driver of a cyclo (a bicycle with a seat), played by Don
Duong in the film's most memorable performance.  Another is about a
flower picker and seller (Ngoc Hiep Nguyen) and her fascination with a
sick, fingerless poet (Manh Cuong Tran).  The third concerns a
mysterious ex-GI (Harvey Keitel), who is there on a visit, and a young
street vendor (Huu Duoc Nguyen), who is selling an old cigarette
lighter.  Although each story is told with great delicacy and finesse.
In the best of the three, there is a particularly sweet scene in which a
group of waiting cyclo drivers reflects on their modest income.  One of
them remarks that they do not earn enough money in a month to pay for
even the cheapest room at the hotel outside of which they wait for their
passengers.  Another one, with a contented smile, says that he wouldn't
want to stay at a 4 or even a 5 star hotel, since he sleeps in a 1,000
star place every night -- without a roof, he has the glorious, starry
sky above to lull him to sleep.
Lisa Rinzler's radiant cinematography and the beautiful sets are likely
to provide viewers' most vivid memories of THREE SEASONS.  The film
opens strikingly with dark, thin boats cutting through waters filled
with lily pads and lotus blossoms.  The women who sing melodious folk
songs ("Can anyone tell how many stalks are in a rice field?  How many
bends are in a river?  How many layers in a cloud?") are there to pick
the flowers that they will sell on the city streets.  Another remarkable
image occurs later as one of these boats cuts through the dark fog with
only a small lamp to guide it.  The light casts a golden glow on the
placid waters, creating a scene that Monet would have loved to capture
on canvas.
The director, who is a master at staging, pays careful attention to the
small details.  Listen and watch the old electric fan as it slices
through the heavy moist air of one of Vietnam's stifling heat waves.
And listen to the soothing rain falling during the torrential downpours.
THREE SEASONS floats like a lotus blossom on still waters and is an
exquisite treat for those willing to venture just a little outside of
the traditional motion picture format.
THREE SEASONS runs 1:53.  The film's sparse dialog is in Vietnamese with
English subtitles.  It is rated PG-13 for brief sexuality and mature
themes and would be fine for kids around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When I taught high-school history we had to follow the
syllabus exactly.  One lesson dealing with the close of World
War II had the title, "Japan's Loss is a Blessing in Disguise
for the Japanese People." Pretty presumptuous of New York
State to make that judgment, isn't it?  The department of
education is virtually saying, "Who won the war anyway?" and
when you look at the Japan of 1990 and compare it to the
feudal country that existed until the mid-19th century and
liken the currently prosperous state with the immediate post-
war economy of shoddy goods and cheap labor, you might
even agree.
  Could we say the same thing when we look at the Vietnam
of the past decade?  Though the United States dropped more
firepower on that little nation than it did in all the conventional
bombings of World War 2, you wonder why.  The U.S. would
have won the war without ever dropping by.  Looking at
Saigon--which was seized by the North and renamed Ho Chi
Minh City (though nobody calls it that)--it appears so
capitalistic that you'd think the U.S. prevailed and made the
place in its own image.  Some of the early images that strike
the viewer of Tony Bui's meditative, profoundly lyrical "Three
Seasons"--the neon street advertisements for Maxwell tapes
and products, for Ricoh cameras; the glitzy hotels patronized
by rich Vietnamese, Europeans and Americans--we can but
come away with the impression that the Communist leaders
of Vietnam avoided the mistakes made by Fidel Castro in
Cuba.  Of course Saigon was not a Communist-run city until
after the war.  But rather than proletarianize the infrastructure
by converting hotels into deteriorating housing for visiting
dignitaries and cracking down on prostitution, the honchos of
the now-united Vietnam look the other way at street hustling.
They may see the profession perhaps as a way to attract
dollars, and condone geisha-style girls in the plush lodgings
to lure the greenbacks to the Indochinese state.  How does
this film allow us to make these assumptions?  The
production notes state that the censors followed the
filmmakers around and scrutinized every foot of celluloid,
refusing to allow a discarded meat bun to pass muster while
feeling perfectly at ease with the peregrinations of a smart-
looking, well-dressed hooker.
   If "Three Seasons" were simply a testament to the power
of capitalism to hold sway where violence failed, it would hold
only minor interest with any but a specialized audience. 
Agitprop is hardly the stuff of entertainment.  At its core the
picture deals poetically with troubled people, individuals
seeking some sort of closure in their lives, some resolution to
their difficulties.  As James Hager, a GI who had fought the
Viet Cong some thirty years earlier and is now back in Saigon
on a different mission, Harvey Keitel is not the most
compelling character.  But he is the one most likely to
engage a western public.  Hager has been spending time in
Saigon eager to meet the daughter he left behind after his
brief affair with a Vietnamese woman.  He spends his days
lounging outside the hotel, his nights drunk in a bar known as
"Apocalypse Now."  Though he appears to the cyclo drivers
who observe him day after day to be a kind of zombie, he
emerges as a compassionate man eager to resolve what he
calls his problem with Vietnam.  Kien An (Nguyen Ngoc
Hiep), yet another person seeking some form of completion,
is a young woman who has taken the job of picking lotus
flowers as women had done for generations, selling them in
the city.  A poet at heart, she meets the reclusive supervisor
of the lotus pond, Teacher Dao (Tran Manh Cuong), who was
once handsome but is now being consumed by leprosy. 
When Dao--who invites young Kien to his darkened room in a
temple--informs her that he used to write poetry but then lost
his fingers to the dread disease, she offers her own fingers
and becomes entranced with the Teacher's recitations of
verse.  The most riveting relationship, however, is between
Lan (Zoe Bui), a prostitute who works the plush hotels like
the Majestic, and her admirer, Hai (Don Duong), who hangs
about her hotels like a puppy to offer her rides.  Hai's
ambition is to earn the $50 that Lan requires of men who
want to spend the night with her.  Because of his love for the
woman, however, he has no intention of exploiting her and
will prove instrumental in resolving Lan's own incompleteness
as well as his own.
   The acting of the ensemble is first-rate throughout, not
unexpected considering that Don Duong is Vietnam's best-
known actor and that 108 kids auditioned for the part of yet
another principal, Woody (Nguyen Huu Duoc), a street urchin
who sells trinkets to tourists and winds up involved in quite
an adventure himself.  Ironically, the film proves more critical
of capitalism than you might expect the Communist
government to be.  In a rare meditative mood, Lan tells her
admiring cyclo driver of the rich folks she observes, "We live
in their shadows every time they build a new hotel...they're
not like us...I'll do anything, even marry one, to live as they
do."
   Director Tony Bui, a 26-year-old Vietnamese American who
fell in love with the Far Eastern country he had not seen until
he was 19 years of age, scatters his film with metaphors. 
They do not get in the way, however, but add immeasurably
to the film's deliberate charm.  Kien An complains that people
are buying more plastic flowers than her natural lotuses:
"convenience is everything for them...the flowers will not wilt
or die."  Even those who do not care for the slow pace of the
story or the absence of American-style melodrama will 
appreciate cinematographer Lisa Rinzler's photography. 
Rinzler contrasts the dilapidated side streets with the bright
lights of the Saigon's "Ginza"; the rustic simplicity of the lotus
pond with the drunken entertainment of the tourists and
wealthier citizens.  Working with a crew that included both
Vietnamese and Americans, director Tony Bui has turned out
a spiritual meditation on a peaceful people whose nationalist
spirit successfully repelled Chinese, French and American
invaders but has become itself overrun with the fast pace and
modern spirit of capitalism.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Three_Seasons_ (PG-13) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
For the most part, Tony Bui's gorgeous Sundance favorite is a fascinating
look at life in modern-day Vietnam, seen through the eyes of a number of
characters leading different lives in and around Ho Chi Minh City: a young
woman (Nguyen Ngoc Hiep) who strikes up an unlikely friendship with the
old, ailing owner (Tran Manh Cuong) of the lotus farm at which she works; a
cyclo driver (Don Duong) who falls for a prostitute (Zoe Bui); and a very
young street vendor (Nguyen Huu Duoc) whose case of merchandise is stolen.  
If only Bui and co-writer Timothy Linh Bui had left it at that: three
storylines to match the three seasons of the title.  But in a blatant
concession to the film's Western production roots, also added to the mix is
an unnecessary storyline about a GI (Harvey Keitel) who is searching for
the daughter he left behind.  Although this thread briefly intersects with
the others (as they all do), it could not be more far removed in terms of
style, mood, and execution; while the other stories feel true to life, this
one feels like manufactured melodrama, and it is rather stiffly acted by
Keitel (with the exception of one emotional wordless scene).  Thankfully,
though, his storyline is given the least amount of screen time, never
becoming so obtrusive as to dilute the simple power of the other plots or
the uniting poetry of Lisa Rinzler's breathtaking cinematography.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

