Title
Review for Siegfried & Roy: The Magic Box (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
One time I loudly mentioned to someone that I'd see any film, no matter
how stupid, as long as it was in 3-D (this was before Battlefield Earth
was released).  Well, somebody must have heard me and then gone out and
made Siegfried & Roy: The Magic Box, the latest film made for IMAX in
their wonderful 3-D format.  All jokes about their sexual preferences
aside (as S & R say, `In magic, anything is possible'), I've always been
more that a little bit uncomfortable with two German guys that insist on
surrounding themselves with the whitest animals on the face of the
planet.
So I checked my preconceived notions at the door and prepared to be
dazzled by an onslaught of incredible images from the bonus film
dimension.  And IMAX doesn't disappoint here; Box is a lot of fun to
watch, as long as you don't pay much attention to the actual content of
the film, which tells the life story of S & R.
Siegfried Fischbacher grew up in Rosenheim, Germany, and became obsessed
with magic at an early age.  After dazzling his father with a trick,
Siegfried rode his bike to a Munich magic shop, where he apparently
learned the tools of his trade.  Roy Uwe Ludwig Horn hails from
Nordenham, Germany, and was as crazy about animals as Siegfried was
about magic.  He had a half-wolf/half-dog that saved his life, and
eventually befriended a Bremen Zoo cheetah named Chico.
Much is made of S & R's difficulties growing up in war-torn Germany, but
I couldn't help but think that they were better off there than in Poland
or Austria during World War II.  The paths of the two future Vegas
performers finally crossed aboard a luxury liner, where Siegfried
performed his magic and Roy was a waiter.
The two eventually took their show on the road, receiving little pay and
less glory.  They even had to eat burnt potatoes because Chico's lean,
raw meat diet was siphoning all of their cash.  It's hard to feel sorry
for them when they wear ridiculous outfits, live in fabulously gaudy
homes and seem more concerned with their tans and their hair than they
do anything else.  Hey, they can buy you and sell you a million times
over – don't feel sorry for them.  Besides, why did they have to eat
burnt potatoes?  That just means one of them was a really bad cook.
On the plus side, director Brett Leonard (IMAX's T-Rex: Back to the
Cretaceous) does a great job connecting scenes together with incredible
3-D images, a lot of which reminded me of the Dutch film Character for
some reason.  He doesn't have much to work with in terms of a story, but
Leonard adds enough of his own touch to keep the film interesting.  Sir
Anthony Hopkins (Mission: Impossible 2) provides decent narration, as
well.
0:50 – Not Rated, and should contain nothing offensive or frightening
for kids
