Title
Review for All the Vermeers in New York (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
George V. Reilly
     ALL THE VERMEERS IN NEW YORK is a film written, directed, edited,
and photographed by Jon Jost.  It stars Stephen Lack and Emmanuelle
Chaulet.
     I hated VERMEERS.  I found it to be self-indulgent, vacuous,
irritating, boring, and pretentious.  About a quarter of the audience
disliked it enough to walk out before the end.
     The plot, if the mishmash of disjointed scenes can be thus
dignified, concerns a Wall Street stockbroker, Mark (played by Lack),
who is smitten by a young French actress, Anna (played by Chaulet), whom
he encounters at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.  She is staring
intently at some paintings by Vermeer, and he is taken by her likeness
to one of the portraits.
     The film is full of pointless scenes.  A long scene at the
beginning of the film takes place in a gallery: an artist is arguing
with the owner, desperately, angrily trying to get her to advance him a
loan, while elsewhere in the gallery, a woman is looking intently at the
large canvasses on display.  None of the characters ever appear again in
the film, save the receptionist who only has a minor part in the scene,
nor do the events there have any bearing on what happens subsequently.
Then there's the whirlwind tour of the columns and the opera singer
roommate whose only role on the couple of occasions that she appears is
to irritate her other roommates (and the audience) by practicing her
voice exercises.
     I disliked the photography: the subjects were often out of focus;
Jost likes tight, tight closeups of his subjects' heads; he pans across
various scenes in a jittery, almost stroboscopic fashion; and in one
irrelevant scene in a hallway full of tall columns, he moves the camera
through the columns in a random fashion, stopping here, panning there,
turning suddenly to the left or the right, so that by the end of the
scene I felt slightly motion-sick.
     The characters are remote and unappealing.  Anna is distant and
aloof; the closest she comes to showing some warmth or interest in the
other characters is her occasional quirky smile.  Mark snaps his way
through work, snarling down the phone, hectoring his colleagues.
Outside of work, he becomes somewhat more likable, if hardly appealing.
     This film won the L. A. Film Critics Award for Best Independent
Film.  I hate to think what the competition must have been like.

