Title
Review for Month by the Lake, A (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Christopher Null
     Take a base of ENCHANTED APRIL, a little of THE POSTMAN, maybe
some MEDITERRANEO, throw them together, and what do you get?  A mess,
to be sure, and I'm guessing it the result is something like A MONTH BY
THE LAKE, John Irvin's new film about two star-crossed lovers who find
romance in their "golden years."
     Vanessa Redgrave and Edward Fox play the leads of Miss Beaumont
and Major Paulo, aging British singles who vacation at a lake in 1937
Italy, just before World War II.  The pair soon discover each other:
She is a headstrong photographer.  He is a crusty businessman who
dabbles in sleight-of-hand.  Clearly, they are meant for each other,
and a love/hate relationship develops on the spot.  As the romance
progresses, the two abuse and play off each other's insecurities so
well, you'd think they really were a couple.  When youngsters Miss
Bentley (Uma Thurman) and Vittorio enter the picture and complicate
matters, the film becomes a game of sly cat and mouse, where you never
know who is chasing after whom.
     The fundamental problem is that A MONTH BY THE LAKE is supposed to
be a romance, but the emotions of love are dreadfully lacking from all
the players, probably because Trevor Bentham's spare script doesn't
provide any room for these feelings.  As far as I could tell, the
supreme act that pushes Miss Beaumont head over heels for the Major is
the fact that he sends her flowers as a peace offering over one of
their spats.  It just isn't that easy.  Most of the time, the two seem
to hate each other, and in all honesty, the Major is a big jerk.  When
Miss Beaumont falls for him, it's really kind of depressing.
     That aside, the film is well-made and has some funny moments,
particularly when the principals are acting spiteful.  Also, the
picture's true worth comes out in its theme of the impending war and in
making us feel that this idyllic lakeside village is doomed when the
inevitable bombing begins.  I don't know if that was the message they
were shooting for when making a romance, but that's what they got, and
ultimately, this unexpected power is what makes the film worthwhile.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Miss Bentley (played by Vanessa Redgrave) has been coming to Lake
Como for vacation since she was a little girl.  When she was young,
many English vacationed in Lake Como, but of late there are few other
English vacationing here.  This year she is the only person from home
until a new mystery man arrives.  Major Paul Winslow (Edward Fox) is
more boy than man, but Miss Bentley is interested in the dashing-
looking Englishman.  But then so is Miss Beaumont (Uma Thurman), the
newly arrived American nanny for an Italian family.  The two compete
for Winslow's attentions, Beaumont with her youth and a seemingly
effortless flirtation, Bentley with what might almost be called a
campaign.  Against the background of the pleasant Italian scenery the
two play out their game.
     This all sounds like it could be done very broadly and could be
quite funny.  Or it could just bask in the sunshine and lovely natural
setting and somehow end up being magical like ENCHANTED APRIL was.
Neither is really the case.  Trevor Bentham`s screenplay, based on the
novelette by H. E. Bates leans more toward understatement.  Winslow is
such a silly man that one wonders why the women are trying so hard.
Beaumont is young and attractive, but empty and shallow.  The only
strong emotion in the film is Bentley's desperation for the man who may
be her last chance ever to marry.  Perhaps buried in this film is an
allegory about the effortless brashness of America and a more serious
and more conflict-bound Europe, but if so, there is not much to the
metaphor.  More likely this is just an effort to tell a leisurely story
in a leisurely setting.  If the latter it true, it is a little too much
leisure, and the viewer starts looking for the political conflict that
must be present in 1937 Italy.  In fact, for 1937 Italy, the Lake Como
area must be among the least interesting places to be in the country.
When Bentley sees a Fascist parade and nearly gets into serious trouble
for photographing it, the film seems to perk up a bit in the hope that
something of some import will happen.  But the moment is quickly
fleeting and the story returns from a battle of ideas to a battle of
flirtations.  It is not surprising that more is not made of the pre-war
politics since the original Bates story was set around 1960, or so I
have been told.
     Director John Irvin is best know recently for his WIDOWS' PEAK, a
film that I found even more predictable than A MONTH BY THE LAKE, but
at least it had a story to predict.  Vanessa Redgrave does what she can
with the silly woman she plays, but it cannot have been one of her
favorite roles.  I know there are people in the world someplace who
think that Uma Thurman is talented and very attractive just like I know
there are people who think liver and onions is delicious.  It is hard
for me to be keen on either.  Going back to A ROOM WITH A VIEW, we have
seen quite a few prestige British period pieces playing the art house
circuit.  H. E. Bates is unfortunately no E. M. Forster and A MONTH BY
THE LAKE is no ROOM WITH A VIEW.  Rate it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
     After playing a dying woman in both HOWARDS END and LITTLE ODESSA, 
Vanessa Redgrave has focused her skills on something a little lighter.  
A MONTH BY THE LAKE, the frivolous-yet-sluggish romantic comedy from 
director John Irvin (WIDOWS' PEAK), gives her an opportunity, no matter 
how ephemeral, to lay aside her serious reputation and become immersed 
in a story whose only real issue is whether two late-middle-aged Brits 
of vastly different temperaments can fall in love.
     The entire film takes place at a vacation resort on the shores of 
Italy's Lake Como during the late Spring of 1937.  Away from this 
breezy, idyllic paradise, rumors of war are growing, but they rarely 
intrude on the vacation of Miss Bentley (Redgrave), who is a regular 
visitor to the lake.  This is a time of peace before an unspeakable 
tragedy--a period when everyone knew what was coming and did their 
best to seize a few months of happiness before the world was plunged 
into darkness.  Yet it isn't the growth of fascism that makes this year 
different for Miss Bentley--her father has only recently died and she 
has just ended a 14-year affair with a married man.  The only other 
English citizen at the hotel is Major Wilshaw (Edward Fox), an upright, 
uptight ex-British officer on his first visit to Como.  He and Miss 
Bentley strike up a friendship but, while she is interested in 
tentatively pursuing something deeper, he holds back, his eye having 
been caught by a young, flirty American nanny (Uma Thurman) who enjoys 
leading him on just to see how big a fool she can make of him.
     The first half of this film drags.  The coy sparring between Miss 
Bentley and the major can't sustain the viewer's interest by itself, and 
there's little else going on.  Trevor Bentham's script is smart, dry, 
and, too often, stagnant.  Aside from a few droll comic interludes 
(including a very funny tennis match), it takes a long time for A MONTH 
BY THE LAKE to get moving.  When it does, it's enjoyable in the way that 
most intelligent romantic comedies are enjoyable, but there is an 
obvious start-up penalty.
     As is often the case, no matter what kind of role she plays, 
Redgrave steals the show.  Buoyant and cheerful, Miss Bentley is an 
instantly likable character--far from the sort of stodgy fifty-
something Englishwoman abroad one might expect.  While it took an 
ENCHANTED APRIL to unwind characters played by Joan Plowright and 
Miranda Richardson, Miss Bentley is carefree before she ever arrives at 
Lake Como.  
     Edward Fox plays Major Wilshaw as a somewhat laughable, pompous 
bore.  Yet, even though the character often comes across as fatuous, Fox 
knows when to reign in the comic element.  There is a touching moment 
late in the film when Wilshaw shows that, as thick as his emotional 
armor is, the proper thrust can still penetrate it.  This scene, which 
takes place during a magic show, is A MONTH BY THE LAKE's most serious, 
as well as one of its finest.
     Uma Thurman, fresh from the glitz of PULP FICTION, intentionally 
overplays her role as an American hussy.  Taking a cue from the WIDOWS' 
PEAK performance of Natasha Richardson (Redgrave's daughter), Thurman 
turns her Miss Beaumont into the perfect caricature--someone whose 
only two purposes are to add comic flair and romantic complications to a 
relatively static plot.  Without Miss Beaumont, nothing would have 
happened between Miss Bentley and Major Wilshaw, and without Thurman, 
nothing would have happened in this movie.
     Romance for the over-fifty crowd is a rare commodity in motion 
pictures.  Judging by the average Hollywood take on the matter, one 
might easily assume that it's rare for someone with gray hair to fall in 
love.  A MONTH BY THE LAKE has a different view of the world, and one of 
the chief pleasures of this film is watching two aging, uncertain 
characters bumble their way into a relationship.  It's unfortunate that 
it takes so long to set up the situation, as the most lasting effect of 
this slow start is to dampen the eventual payoff.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Here is another film that should be nominated for an Oscar ... in
just about every category.   If you loved ENCHANTED APRIL, you cannot
afford to miss A MONTH BY THE LAKE.
     The stories of the two films are entirely different but the mood,
the scenery, the acting have the same wonderful flavor that was found
in ENCHANTED APRIL.  Vanessa Redgrave (as Miss Bentley) has never been
better.  I sat transfixed as I watched this great actress do her
stuff.
     Miss Bentley has been coming with her father to a resort near
Italy's famed Lake Como since she was a child.  Now a middle-aged but
beautiful and lively spinster, this is the first time she is there
alone, her father having died that year.  "Unmarried" would be a more
accurate choice than "spinster."
     Major Wilshaw, a wealthy and fascinating man ((Edward Fox)
unexpectedly catches her eye.  This is his first visit to the resort
and she arranges to show him around.  Despite some happenings that
might have broken the light relationship they had, they somehow
continue to see a lot of each other until the young and beautiful Miss
Beaumont (Uma Thurman), a nanny to two children, makes a play for the
wealthy Major.  That is when things begin to happen;  you will not want
to miss a moment.
