Title
Review for Last Lives (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1996. Director - Worth Keeter, Screenplay - Dan Duling, Producer - 
Steve Beswick, Photography - Kent Wakeford, Music - Greg Edmonson, 
Visual Effects Supervisor - Jaison Stritch, Special Effects Supervisor - 
Greg Hull, Production Design - C. Daniel Hall & David Rawlins. 
Production Company - Promark Entertainment Group/Videal Gmbh/C.E.G. 
Productions.
C. Thomas Howell (Aaron), Jennifer Rubin (Adrienne), Billy Wirth 
(Malakai), Judge Reinhold (Merkhan), David Lenthall (Benza), Robert 
Pente (Khafar), J.C. Quinn (Lieutenant Denny Parks), Richard Fullerton 
(Roma)
Plot: The scientist Merkhan perfects a device which can allow travel 
between parallel worlds and chooses as his test subject the convicted 
murderer Malakai because of Malakai's singular fixation with finding his 
dead wife. Malakai successfully crosses over and momentarily visits the 
bedroom of Adrienne, this world's counterpart of his wife. But shortly 
before his scheduled execution Malakai escapes, crosses over and abducts 
Adrienne from the midst of her wedding ceremony to Aaron. Merkhan 
follows but is fatally wounded in a shootout. Before he dies he gives 
Aaron several armbands that can revive the wearer from the dead that 
allow Aaron to defy death in his pursuit of the ruthless Malakai.
This sf-action hybrid is a fairly silly effort. Its plot setup is a 
blatant steal from `Twelve Monkeys' which was released only the year 
before this was made - in both films a criminal is chosen as a pioneer 
in a temporal experiment because of their fixation on a particular woman 
who they in due course end up abducting. Needless to say `Last Lives' 
does it with considerably less imagination than the excellent `Twelve 
Monkeys' did. As an action film it is competent enough with some 
reasonably exciting car chase sequences. However as a science-fiction 
film it is really quite silly. It is hamstrung by the daft gimmick of 
having the hero armed with a collection of bracelets that can revive him 
from the dead and as a result is filled with a series of quite 
contrivedly absurd sequences which have hero Howell being shot in the 
head, thrown from balconies, crisped in car crashes, and at the climax 
dealing with the villain's goons variously by grabbing electric fences 
as they catch him and blowing himself and they up in a shed filled with 
explosives. As the scientist Judge Reinhold seems awkward and 
embarrassed. Jennifer Rubin, in an badly unbecoming haircut, looks drab 
and neurotic, delivering a performance that  would appear to be under 
the influence of major tranquillisers. The incredibly handsome Billy 
Wirth cuts what at first seems an interestingly romantic villain, 
although this is unfulfilled, and he spends the rest of the time mooning 
over Rubin in a series of telepathic romantic longeurs that do seem to 
go on forever.

