Title
Review for Far Off Place, A (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Reese Witherspoon, Ethan Randall, Jack Thompson, 
           Sarel Bok, Maximilian Schell
Director:  Mikael Salomon
Producers:  Eva Monley and Elaine Sperber
Screenplay:  Robert Caswell, Jonathan Hensleigh, and Sally Robinson
Music:  James Horner
Released by Walt Disney Pictures in association with Amblin 
                Entertainment
     Nonnie Parker (Reese Witherspoon) is a 14-year-old girl living on
a farm in Africa.  Harry Winslow (Ethan Randall) is a 16-year-old boy
visiting with his father from America.  The two get thrown together
when elephant-tusk poachers murder Nonnie's parents and Harry's father
in an attempt to cover their tracks.  With the help of a teenage bush
man named Xhabbo (Sarel Bok), Nonnie and Harry attempt a crossing of
the Kalahari desert to escape the poachers.
     A FAR OFF PLACE is undoubtedly designed as a "family film" (hence
the PG rating), but parents should be warned.  Some of the scenes of
animal death may be quite disturbing to younger children.  Despite
Disney's disclaimer that no animals were injured during the filming of
the picture (the dead elephants are actually meticulously-constructed
life-size replicas), this is unlikely to make more of a difference to
the little ones in the audience than the knowledge that Bambi's mother
was only a cartoon deer.
     The basic plot is relatively simple, although there are moments
when certain elements of it becomes needlessly (albeit briefly)
convoluted.  The best part of A FAR OFF PLACE is, predictably, its
centerpiece--the trek across the Kalahari.  On this journey, the
three principle characters learn a lot about life and each other.  The
revelations border on trite, but they're at least presented in an
enjoyable fashion.
     Reese Witherspoon (last seen as the charming younger sister in THE
MAN IN THE MOON) shows a lot of ability and presence in her role as
Nonnie.  Her character is not especially well-written, but she gets a
lot out of it.  Sarel Bok is equally good.  Unfortunately, the same
cannot be said of Ethan Randall.  Randall's Harry is an often-obnoxious
whiner, and the actor seems to have trouble finding much that is noble
in Harry's character.  Randall is outclassed by Witherspoon and Bok in
almost every scene.  They are pleasures to watch; he is not.
     As a family feature, A FAR OFF PLACE does a pretty good job.  It
puts together all the right formulas in a frequently-engaging fashion.
The villains are predictably evil and the heroes unabashedly good, but
the main struggle is less of a morality play than man against nature.
The cinematography (by Juan Ruiz-Anchia) is impressive, especially
coupled with James Horner's fine score.  A FAR OFF PLACE, while clearly
not a milestone of film, is a predictable-but-satisfying movie
adventure.
     Double-billed with A FAR OFF PLACE is the newest Roger Rabbit
cartoon, "Trail Mix-Up."  The nine-minute short is rather average
cartoon fare until the clever ending.  I found it neither exceptionally
funny nor dull.  Children will love it; adults, if not as fond of it as
their offspring, should at least be able to tolerate it.  "Trail
Mix-Up" has the subtlety--and plot--of a Roadrunner and Wiley Coyote
cartoon, although it certainly isn't as clever as the latter.  While
not worth a trip to the theater on its own merits, "Trail Mix-Up" is a
painless diversion, and an okay appetizer for the much longer A FAR OFF
PLACE.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
Despite the fact that Disney films usually only goes for the greedy kill
when it comes to the making of films, at least here is one film that is
rather nice, preachy in some ways, but still very dedicated to a worthwhile
cause.....that bucks the general trend.
A Far Off Place is about a young man that gets caught up in the middle of a
war on the ivory in Africa.  While being out in the country with the new
friend he has just made, both their families get exterminated by a band of
thieves, so it seems, when in all actuality they were erased by a mob that
is defiant about its stand on the illegal trade of the massive elephant's
ivory.
In the process, the two get taken up by an aborigine, African variety --
what are they doing here anyway...??? -- that pretty much leads them to
freedom and the eventual downfall of the ivory baron and his control of the
whole area.
And while the film starts with the type of relationship that two teenagers
are believed to have, none to speak of, but now they are forced to stick
together to survive and get to their destination, the film moves along with
the strength of the aborigine, that stands out as the wonderful actor and
person he is.  Though bit by a sand scorpion, he manages to deliver his
friends to safety and ensure that the wild is preserved for his own people
and the animals who also take a liking to him.  In the process he shows us
that the elephants are also intelligent people and that they understand when
one talks to them..... a herd helps the children escape by erasing all their
tracks.
This film really is more about the feudal lord systems that run much of
Africa than anything else, and the white man has become the greedy devil
which we hope is finally ending, although the underground war against the
poachers is still gigantic.... this type of film should help one become
aware of it.
Excellent film, and enjoyable at every moment with very good acting and a
tremendous story.  Brutal as only the jungle can be in places, although it
is the survival that matters in this case.

Author
David Pimmel
Starring Reese Witherspoon, Ethan Randall, Salek Bok, Jack Thompson
Directed by Mikael Salomon
Written by Robert Caswell, Johnathan Hensleigh, and Sally Robinson
Based on Laurens Van der Post's books
Rated PG for language, mild violence
     Two teens and a bushman guide are forced to cross the Kalihari
Desert in order to escape from the ivory poachers who killed their
parents.  Along the way they discovery themselves.
     Okay I'll admit that this film is riddled with formula.  And I'll
admit several key aspects are highly predictable.  However, this is my
favorite 1993 film to date.  Granted, we aren't very far into the year,
and I've only seen a half dozen or so '93 films, but this is at the top
of the list.  Herein I would like to outline several of the key reasons
I liked the film.  This will be hard to do with out giving something
away, but as I said the film is somewhat predictable.
     First, the story is interesting.  The struggle of the two teens
and the bushman against the Kalihari gets right at the core man's
existence.  For all their nastiness, the evil men never come close to
being as menacing and dangerous as the disinterested nature.  The real
antagonist in this film is Mother Nature, not the poachers.  Of course
the poachers are some of the most despicable people I've heard about.
The opening sequence to the film, where a band of poachers attacks a
herd of elephants with submachine guns  and then takes power saws to
their tusk is one of the most horrifying images I've seen on film
because it is so very real.  Also the story is paced very well.  The
kids spend a long time in the desert, but we never get tired of desert
scenes.  Each is fresh and reveals new information about the characters
and the environment they are moving through.
     The second reason I like the film was because of the solid
performances by the three leads.  The first of three we meet is Nana.
Reese Witherspoon is outstanding in this role of the free spirited,
determined young girl.  Ethan Randall's character Harry  is the next we
see.  At first his character is stiff and uninteresting, however, over
the course of the movie, as the character changes, the actor brings
more and more life into him.  The final major character is Habo (sp?),
played by Salek Bok, the bushman who leads them into the desert.  His
character is probably the primary reason I liked the film.  Many will
find the bushman voodoo magic to be a poor plot device, but having
studied the bushman some, I find it fascinating.  The bushman as a
people are so in tune with nature and the world around them that they
see and feel things we can't.  I really believe that.  Their dependence
on nature is complete, and they must be completely in touch with it in
order to survive.
     A third strong characteristic of this film is the cinematography.
I'm not going to get into an in-depth analysis of camera angles and
such.  What matters is that the filmmaker does an excellent job of
catching a very striking landscape.  While this doesn't paint a
portrait of the Kalihari as a vacation spot, it shows one of the last
remaining areas of the world that man hasn't destroyed.  Of course
Mother Nature hasn't made it real hospitable for man to go to either.
     The one major flaw with the film is the highly predictable
poacher/bad guy story that spurs the much more interesting desert
journey.  In fact wrapping that story up nearly ruins the end of the
film.  But I guess the end was necessary for narrative closure.
     In summary, I would strongly recommend this film to anyone.  Small
children might lose interest, but older kids should like it.  Most of
the kids around me seemed to be enjoying it for the most part.  The
poacher story line is fairly predictable, but the desert journey was
simply fascinating, particularly if you are interested in non-Western
cultures and ideologies.
     The new Roger Rabbit cartoon, "Trail Mixup," before the film was a
little disappointing.  The animation was excellent, particularly during
the wild flying about scenes, but it just wasn't that funny.  Maybe I
would have enjoyed it more, if I hadn't been expecting so much.
