Title
Review for Marie Baie des Anges (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

MARIE BAIE DES ANGES (ANGEL SHARKS)(director/writer: Manuel Pradal;
cinematographer: Christophe Pollock; cast:Vahina Giocante (Marie),
Frederic Malgras (Orso), Jamie Harris (Jimmy, Sailor), Nicolas Welbers
(Goran), Swan Carpio (Jurec), Andrew Clover (Sailor), 1997)
Two things could be said for sure about this movie, which uses mostly
nonprofessional actors, that it is disturbingly romantic and it is
troublingly inconclusive. It tells a nonlinear, fantasy story, and it
does so by stunning visualizations that capture the importunate
moodiness about a boy and a girl, both of whom are outcasts, living in
the beautiful French Riviera region of Côte d'Azur. It stylishly picks
up the angst of the two passive teens, loners, who are prone to
violence, boredom, sex, alienation, theft, and mental unbalance. There
is no telling narrative to sink one's teeth into the story, but the
visceral images and the emptiness of the youth's quest are fully
explored in an original way, by the first-time director, Manuel Pradal.
Metaphors abound in this film, so much so that one could overdose on all
the heavily intended poetical images and still not find much to sate
one's hunger for what this film is ultimately about, which becomes the
film's major fault. It starts off by making the beautiful landscape
(ocean vistas and richly adorned hills) a metaphor and contrasting that
with the ugly souls of all the young people in the film. The landmark
rising out of the water from two million years ago in the Baie des Anges
becomes the main metaphor for the film, as the bay near Nice has two
spurs of jutting rocks called angel wings that are shaped like shark
fins-- which have deterred invaders from coming ashore throughout the
centuries, as their ships get shipwrecked when navigating on these
waters. Also, once a year, the custom used to be that a child had to be
sacrificed to appease the Gods. If you want something that is
predictable about this unpredictable film, you have it here, you can bet
your popcorn money that before the film is over some innocent kid will
get it.
If you want to read some politics into this film, you might say that the
director was using  the local American navy base as a metaphor, showing
the mixed-reaction it gets from the locals, as he tried to get at what
the local reactions to the base are by showing that there is an
undercurrent of disrespect and lack of trust for each other. The French
locals are viewed as being thieves, dirty juvenile delinquent-types, and
stupid by the Americans, while the locals view the sailors as violent,
filthy rich, disrespectful of their girls, and unable to speak French
fluently.
Marie (Vahina Giocante, who is a professional ballet dancer-in the Opera
de Marseilles), is the troubled 15-year-old girl who is fascinated with
picking up American sailors at the local navy base, despite some of the
apprehensions she has about their sexual aggressiveness.  Orso (Frederic
Malgras) is a nonprofessional actor, who plays the troubled 17-year-old,
the one seeking a gun, cast as a marginalized local. He falls for Marie
and goes on a strange and empty romantic idyll with her.
The pair seem suitable for each other, as their desperate lives keep
intersecting, and the two misfits continually pull each other out of
predicaments. Nothing is told about their family history and where they
come from. They have no conversations. It is as if they came out of
nowhere and are only figments of our imagination. The mystery about
them, gives them a Camus-like sense of existentialism, it is as if the
more modern the story tries to be, the more it can be seen rooted in an
old philosophy, a philosophy of fatalism.
The beauty in the film is from the never stopping camerawork, picking up
one beautiful scene after another, though what connection this all has
to do with the movie is anyone's guess. As I thought this film was about
loners versus the group psychology prevailing, whereas the loners can't
function with any kind of social measure because their troubling souls
can find no place in modern French society to fit in. The trouble with
that pat explanation of the film, is that the film doesn't help itself
any by overloading the imagery, so that if one wanted to, there could by
many other explanations for what the film was about. After a certain
point, that becomes an annoying feature of the film, as the two teens
lose their humanity and seem to be only symbols for what the director
was trying to say. This is possible because of there persistent silence
and lack of character development.
Marie is seen erotically dancing in front of the sailors and then again
in front of a boat owner and his son, where she distracts them so that
Orso could steal their boat and the two of them use the boat to go on an
exotic picnic together. Orso lives by robbing houses and is a peripheral
hanger-on with the locals. She has been rejected by the locals for
choosing to go after the sailors, who lure her with their money and
forbidden sex, taking her to nightclubs, but the sailors reject her
after having sex with her, and brutally throw her away from them when
they had what they wanted from her, calling her a whore.
The point of the story is, that these two losers have found each other
and want to share their disturbed lives together without judgment and
modification. Aside from being a stunning film to watch, I could see no
beauty in its dark character portrayal of the lovers and the film's
overall pessimistic attitudes toward youth. The film had too many
missing ingredients in it for it to be impactful; I could hardly
remember the main characters just a week later after seeing the film,
only remembering how alluring Vahina Giocante was and how beautiful the
South of France looks.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Vahina Giocante is France's answer to Viagra.  If you see
her on the screen but don't go home with her, you will suffer
side effects, but they're temporary."  "So," said a friend, "Go
see 'Mary Bear'" (as he pronounces the title).  "It will get your
juices flowing."  This guy, who probably owns a respectable
supply of testosterone, understands two things: 1) the power
of movies to "get your juices flowing" and 2) the fact that
Vahina Giocante is the only reason to see this French
muddle.  You see, Manuel Pradal, who introduces this new
femme fatale to the cinema-loving world, probably thinks she's
the next Brigitte Bardot.  But while this fourteen-year-old who
shows little personality has substantial good looks, there's
nothing there that you won't find in any high school from the
island of Jersey to the streets of Jersey City.  If you will
indulge another comparison, Mr. Pradal is no Harmony
("Kids") Korine, whose eponymous tykes fill their merry-go-
roundelays with considerable humor in an equally plotless
picture.
   Marie (Vahina Giocante), who is nicknamed "Baie des
Anges" (the bay of angels) because she hangs around a body
of water in Nice which was once the home of a shark called
("anges de mer"), seems to have no home, or at least no
curfew.  She intends to make the most of this asset by
throwing herself hedonistically into a gang of American sailors
at a base where the Yanks appear alternately to be
rehearsing for "South Pacific" and for "On the Town," with one
naval hero doing a comic Gene Kelly shtick and others
crowding around the jail-bait in a choreographed, lusty
songfest.  When one of the young French wanderers gets
stabbed by a Yank whom he has just robbed and others in
the youth gang call for "war" against the U.S. base, Marie
doesn't give a fig.  She's having fun with people who talk
quite a bit less than Eric Rohmer's characters, her own
countrymen.
   But just as the Americans tire of her, she runs into a kid
fresh out of reform school, a good-looking, feral, devil-may-
care Orso (Frederic Milagras), who sneaks into swank homes
on the Riviera to take the jewels but is not against picking the
pockets of Americans who are swimming and are careless
enough to leave their francs, their watches and their clothes in
the nearby bushes.  Instantly attracted, she follows this petty
hoodlum around like a cocker pup whose owner is dangling a
sausage.  They drink, tussle, and make merry as only teens
know how to do, but this being a French movie that needs to
make like Truffaut, it has an ending which is not in the typical
Hollywood tradition.
   The Montpelier-born director, Manuel Pradal, intends this
first feature to be a fairy tale combining the natural beauty of
the Riviera with the sordid delinquencies of roving bands of
recent immigrants from Yugoslavia and Albania.  To ornament
the hoped-for fabulous aspect, he haphazardly throws in
scenes from a Grand Prix, from Carnaval and from other
Mediterranean elements.  He allegedly spent a year hunting
for young non-professionals, met 15,00 kids, and looked for
performers who could best express their resentment at being
outsiders. Though he deserves credit for casting young
people right out of juvenile prisons in France and Italy, the
title "Marie Baie des Anges" sounds better than the film looks. 
The picture jumps around too rapidly as if directed by a
channel surfer impatient for a machine-gun series of
gratifications, and its characters are too little developed to
garner our sympathy. Rated R.  Running time: 90 minutes. 
(C) Harvey Karten 1998
