Title
Review for Tales from the Darkside: The Movie (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
The Phantom
     The Phantom has always been an avid admirer of Steven King and George
Romero, so when CREEPSHOW was released in 1982, the Phantom was first in line
to see it.  Although it does not rank as one of the best (or even one of the
better) horror films of all time, it did have a certain unique style and charm,
and it combined just the right amounts of humor, camp, gross-outs and scares to
keep its audience entertained throughout its five short "tales of terror."
     CREEPSHOW was also the first horror film in a long while to present short
"ghost stories" rather than one full-length tale.  Since then, however, there
have been several films that have attempted CREEPSHOW's unique style; some,
like TWILIGHT ZONE -- THE MOVIE and CREEPSHOW 2, succeeded in part; others,
like NIGHTMARES and CAT'S EYE, failed utterly and have since been relegated to
positions of honor (right behind the Big Gulp displays) in 7-11s across the
country.
     The Phantom has also been an on again, off again admirer of the television
show "Tales From the Darkside" (the shows never seemed consistently good enough
to watch on a regular basis, and the enlightened station managers of the
shadowy independent television stations on which "Tales" is broadcast tend to
hide the show on sunny weekend afternoons and late on weekday nights between
thirty-minute hair replacement system commercials and six-hour-long "No Money
Down" scams), so it was with high hopes that the Phantom went to see TALES FROM
THE DARKSIDE: THE MOVIE.  (The Phantom apologizes profusely for that last
sentence, and invites his phans to take a moment to catch their breath before
going on to the next.)  After all, the best episodes on "Tales" are quite good
-- at least as good as any of the classic Twilight Zone episodes -- and the
majority are frequently innovative and clever.
     Besides, the Phantom is also a sucker for anything Romero does, and has
been ever since NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD.  Since he and King did such a good
job with CREEPSHOW, it stands to reason that TALES would be a worthy sequel.
     But alas, the ads for TALES tell tales themselves.  The film is promoted
as being "from" Romero and King, but in fact only one of the three tales is
"from" them.  And that one tale ("Cat From Hell") isn't even directed by
Romero; instead he and King co-wrote it.  (The Phantom is not, of course,
disappointed that King didn't direct any or all of the film; ever since MAXIMUM
OVERDRIVE the Phantom has been awakening with cold sweats over the prospect
that King might once again be allowed to step behind a camera and inflict
another of his cinematic visions upon his adoring and naive public.)
     The tip-off should have been the credit given to Sir Arthur Conan Doyle,
who even when alive had little experience writing or directing horror films.
Now that Sir Arthur is no longer with us, his being listed as one of the
"from"s should have sounded warning bells of fraudulent advertising at least,
and tedious and predictable horror "tales" at worst.
     But tedious and predictable do not do TALES justice.  This is a horror
film for people who do not like surprises, or perhaps people who are always 20
minutes behind Angela Lansbury each Sunday evening.  As the film plodded from
one "chilling" tale to the next, the Phantom found himself wondering whether it
were still possible to make a horror film that was neither ridiculous (like our
friends THE FIRST POWER and THE GUARDIAN) nor tedious.  And he nearly fainted
dead away in disbelief when the first tale turned out to be about a mummy that
-- no, the Phantom won't give away the chilling surprise.  Oh, all right, the
mummy ACTUALLY COMES TO LIFE AND KILLS PEOPLE!  EEEK!  The Phantom was so
scared he nearly dropped his popcorn.  Scarier still is the thought that even
Sir Arthur (who unfortunately is given "Inspired by a story by" credit) is not
as old as this threadbare tale.  If only Bud and Lou were still alive....
     One would think that the director, John Harrison (who directed the entire
film), would have learned from the horrifyingly bad "Cigar Store Indian" tale
in CREEPSHOW 2; dead things and/or inanimate objects coming to life went out
with Karloff and Lugosi, and in fact it's been nearly 60 years since someone
made a good horror film that featured a mummy.  Hammer Films knew how to do it
then, but alas, neither Sir Arthur nor John Harrison seem to know how to do it
now.  Sir Arthur, at least, has the excuse of being otherwise occupied
decomposing at the moment, so we can forgive him; but Michael McDowell (who
also worked on BEETLEJUICE) is still among the living and can therefore still
be held responsible for his script.
     Of the two tales that follow, only "Cat From Hell" is interesting, and
then only because of Buster Poindexter's outrageous performance as a feline hit
man.  The final tale, "Lover's Vow," features some very nice creature effects
(done by FX wizard Dick Smith), but as its plot line is more transparent than
the film stock on which it develops, the Phantom will refrain from summarizing
it here for fear that it might bubble and blacken under the bright light of
criticism.
     The film would be a near-total letdown if it were not for the "wrapper"
segments that feature a perfectly cast and perfectly unflappable Deborah Harry
as a slightly deranged housewife planning a dinner party.  Her performance in
TALES is nearly as entertaining as were the comic book segues in CREEPSHOW, and
she gives us all something to stick around for as each tale slowly drowns under
the weight of an impossible load of exposition.
     That exposition is the central problem with TALES FROM THE DARKSIDE (well,
that and the fact that "darkside" has been confounding the Phantom's spell
checker all evening); if ghost stories told around a campfire were told like
this, all the campers would be fast asleep before the teller could even get to
the first cliche.  (By the way, for those phans who may avoid this film even
after it supplants the other 24-hour favorites behind the Big Gulp display, the
Phantom wishes to point out that yes, the mummy tale does indeed contain the
celebrated "closeup of mummy's hand as it emerges from coffin" scene.  Happy
60th birthday, Mr.  Scene!  How we've enjoyed you through the years!)  
     In fact, the Phantom now understands at least one reason why CREEPSHOW was
so much fun: each of its tales was short, sweet, and to the point.  Romero has
always understood that horror films are different from other kinds of films in
that they exist solely to scare their audiences, not to engross them with
complex character relationships and witty repartee (not that TALES could be
said to boast either of these).
     So perhaps Romero could have saved TALES, but perhaps not.  There seems to
have been so little effort put into this film that its title could be more
appropriately TALES FROM THE DIM SIDE; the film, which like the television show
on which it is loosely based, is a Laurel production -- so Romero must have had
more to do with it than he's letting on -- but sadly, TALES FROM THE DARKSIDE
is a film that will garner no one's laurels.
     Fortunately, there is an alternative for those phans who decide not to
subject themselves to the small-screen entertainment of TALES FROM THE DARK
SIDE: a small, odd, but very effective horror film now in limited release
called BRAIN DEAD.  The Phantom saw BRAIN DEAD on a "Times Square double-bill"
with TALES (that is, he saw TALES first then ran across Broadway in a desperate
search for something that even remotely resembled a horror film), and he was
very glad he did.  He will have a full review of it next week (along with a
review of Mark Lester's CLASS OF 1999), but for those phans who have an
opportunity to see it, the Phantom heartly recommends BRAIN DEAD.
Coincidentally, BRAIN DEAD was written by Charles Beaumont, one of the original
writers for "The Twilight Zone," and it heartened the Phantom to see a horror
film that was well-written, intelligent, and contained no mummies.  

Author
Randy Parker
        Taken on its own merits, TALES FROM THE DARK SIDE: THE MOVIE is not
a masterpiece, but it is a decent collection of horror stories, a la
CREEPSHOW and CAT'S EYE.
        TALES FROM THE DARK SIDE: THE MOVIE takes its name from George
Romero's low-budget TV series.  The film version features three ghoulish
tales plus a wrap-around story which connects everything together.  Three
of the four stories are worth checking out, including the wrap-around which
stars Deborah Harry as a housewife preparing for a dinner party.  For the
main course, Harry plans to bake a ten-year-old boy, whom she has locked up
in her kitchen dungeon.  As she preheats the oven and chops up the
vegetables, the boy tries to distract her by reading horrifying stories
from a book called "Tales From the Dark Side."
        The first tale, "Lot 249" (*1/2), is based on a story by Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle, and it's easily the weakest in the movie.  Screenwriter
Michael McDowell has prepared a woefully bland revenge thriller featuring a
rotting mummy, who murders his victims by mummifying them.  "Lot 249" is
essentially a third rate FRIDAY THE 13TH-style slasher movie.
        The second tale, "Cat From Hell" (***)--written by George Romero
and based on a story by Stephen King--is the most stylish and rousing.
William Hickey plays a grouchy old millionaire who pays mafia hit man David
Johansen $100,000 to ice an evil black cat.  Johansen is wonderfully greasy
as the overconfident thug who soon discovers he's no match for THIS cat.
        The third tale, "Lover's Vow" (**1/2) is notable mostly for its
dazzling special effects.  Written by McDowell, "Lover's Vow" stars James
Remar and Rae Dawn Chong in a gruesome and gory love story involving a
monstrous gargoyle.  The transformation scene seems kind of passe coming on
the heels of last decade's werewolf and fly movies, but fortunately, the
spectacular effects compensate for the lack of originality.
        Taken as a whole, TALES FROM THE DARK SIDE is fun but frivolous;
like the television series, it goes in one ear and out the other.
