Title
Review for Tremors (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
     Remember that game you played as a kid, when you tried to walk
across, or around a room without touching the floor; or made it a
mission to get from one place to another without stepping on any part
of a "forbidden" zone?  That primal consciousness is, I believe, what
makes this film so instantly appealing to its fans.
     Kevin Bacon and Fred Ward are two jacks of all trades who own a
pickup truck and little else, drifting from one job to another in the
small desert town of Perfection.  Meanwhile, a visiting seismologist is
investigating mysterious disturbances in the ground.  As it transpires,
these are not caused by earthquakes but earthworms, and big ones at
that.  Worse, these worms are predators, which detect their prey by the
vibrations of their footsteps.  It doesn't take long before Bacon,
Ward, and co. figure out what is going on, from which point the story
becomes the struggle for survival that we've seen in countless monster
movies before--with one major twist.  Most movies of this type (THE
THING, THE BIRDS, NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, et al) invariably hole up
the protagonists in a restricted location, which they defend against
the attacking hordes.  TREMORS turns this on its head: the characters
are not confined by the walls of some makeshift sanctuary, but by the
vast Nevada desert landscape itself, which they can't even set foot
on.  In fact, any contact with the ground is a bad move, so they end up
ON the buildings, not in them.  Most of the second half of the film
involves this assorted handful of characters arguing about their
predicament and hopscotching from one 'safe' zone to the next.
     There is no explanation for the creatures (their origins are
discussed arbitrarily in one brief dialogue exchange) and they seem
smaller-scale country cousins to the sandworms in DUNE (which are also
attracted by vibrations), but the film-makers never make their
creations laughable, or thankfully, their characters
disposable--there's no stock 'bad guy' amongst them for the
scriptwriters to sacrifice to the monsters; and it's fun watching the
can-do approach they take to their bizarre situation.  Film's highlight
for the gun crowd will be the scene in which two survivalist fanatics
unload nearly their entire arsenal into one of the attacking
creatures.  The desert setting, drowsy and stultifying on the surface,
is used to good effect, and Bacon and Ward give effortless performances
that match this to "Perfection."  Snappy pacing and canny writing make
this more than just a B picture.  Film's major problem was trying to
sell the idea of giant earthworms as effective movie monsters. Also
with: Michael Gross (from TV's FAMILY TIES), and Ariana Richards as a
pogo-stick hopping tyke, who'd later graduate from being terrorized by
giant worms to giant dinosaurs in JURASSIC PARK.  Some kids have all
the luck.

Author
Greg Goebel
     To some people, the term "B-movie" translates as: low quality
film-making.  If "quality" translates as high budgets, big-name actors, and
grand themes, then that equation would seem to be true; but as any progressive
quality-assurance person will tell you, that's a somewhat arbitrary definition
of "quality."  A more useful definition is: "Conformance to specifications."
Or, more simply:  "Does it accomplish what it is trying to do?"
     Using such a definition, it would seem likely that there are more
"high-quality" B-movies than A-movies, since B-movies rarely (and almost never
successfully) have any higher ambition than to entertain -- which should be a
relatively simple goal.
     TREMORS begins in the back-of-beyond in Nevada -- a gritty little
country-store town with the name of "Perfection" -- with two handymen, Earl and
Val, who do the dirty and dusty work for the region's few inhabitants.  They're
a couple of tough fellas, but they've had enough; they pack up their belongings
in their beat-up 4x4 and are heading out of town when STRANGE AND DEADLY
OCCURRENCES block their way and lead them and the inhabitants of Perfection in
a struggle for survival against ...  THINGS ...  
     I don't really need to say any more about the story than that; you
undoubtedly get the general idea.  Which leads to the next question:  Well, is
this movie any good?  The answer to this question relates directly to the
discussion of "quality" above.
     I cannot describe TREMORS in terms of any superlatives -- there is nothing
original about this film, there is nothing in it that stands out as
exceptional, and there is nothing particularly memorable about it.  But I don't
dare say anything unkind about it either, for if one accepts the premise that
this is a B-movie and isn't intended to do anything but give the viewer a good
ride for an hour-and-a-half, it absolutely succeeds on those terms.  In fact,
it is so competent and deft that it could be used as a textbook case of "HOW TO
MAKE A GOOD B-MOVIE."  (One wonders if the credit "CAROL ANNE HURD -- EXECUTIVE
PRODUCER" has something to do with it.)
     We have a plot that clicks along nicely with few false moves; the story is
developed intelligently and resolved equally intelligently.  The dialogue makes
few false steps and the acting is competent throughout.
     The characters drive the film; TREMORS avoids the twin traps of either
making them comic-book heroes or condescending to them as rustic clods; they're
ordinary people who are reacting sensibly to a survival situation.  Val and
Earl may be uneducated and unwashed shit-kickers, but they're decent people and
not stupid or cowardly; and even the local survivalist couple, while the butt
of a few jabs, are doing the right things when the situation gets rough.
     And TREMOR's biggest asset is that it hits EXACTLY the right tone:  It
takes itself JUST SERIOUSLY ENOUGH to keep the viewer going, without collapsing
into outright comedy.
     Okay, this isn't a great film, and I know those who want something a
little more innovative and artistic will probably hate it.  But those who are
less particular will find their time and money well spent, and may even want to
give a little restrained applause while they sit there with a smile on their
faces in appreciation of this good-natured horror flic.
     Oh, yes, the caveats: moderate foul language -- a little gore; whether
gratuitous or not is arguable.
