Title
Review for Aguirre, der Zorn Gottes (1972)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chris Loar
Written and Directed by Werner Herzog
Starring Klaus Kinski (Don Lope de Aguirre), Del Negro (Brother Gaspar de   
Carvajal), Ruy Guerra (Don Pedro de Ursua), Peter Berling (Don Fernando   
de Guzman), Cecilia Rivera (Flores), Helena Rojo (Inez), Edward Roland   
(Okello)
There is some evidence to support the theory that Werner Herzog was   
completely out of his mind.  We're talking here about a fellow who once   
ate his own shoe, sole and all, on a bet; who reportedly used a loaded   
pistol to keep eccentric actor Klaus Kinkski from deserting a production;   
and who has been accused of enslaving indigenous populations to assist   
with his location shots.  If a tendency towards instability and excess is   
one hallmark of genius, Herzog certainly qualifies.
Ironically, instability and excess are the very traits Herzog seems to be   
criticizing in his first major feature, _Aguirre:  The Wrath of God_.   
 The title character in this film is driven by obsession -- especially by   
self-obsession.  It would be easy to argue that Herzog's production of   
this film demonstrates the same characteristics; he dragged his cast and   
crew off into the Andean highlands for weeks of filming, reportedly   
spouting rather self-importantly about his art for the duration of the   
shoot.  But while Aguirre's traits lead him to disaster, Herzog's pay off   
for him in spades, because _Aguirre_, though deeply flawed, is also a   
truly great film.
The film is based on an incident that occurred in the Andean highlands in   
the late sixteenth century.  The party of Gonzalo Pizarro, seeking the   
fabled city of El Dorado, sends out a small scouting party, headed by the   
ostensibly valiant Don Pedro de Ursua (a very pretty Ruy Guerra).   
 Disastrously, however, Ursua's deputy is the leering Don Lope de Aguirre   
(a credibly crazed Klaus Kinski).  The rest of the party is assembled in   
classic epic fashion: we have the noble priest, Brother Gaspar de   
Carvajal; the token black man, Okello; the ostensibly noble but   
completely ineffectual nobleman, Don Fernando de Guzman; and a couple of   
damsels in distress, Ursua's wife Flores and Aguirre's daughter Inez.  So   
far, we have what looks like a perfect opening for a rather stirring epic   
adventure, a la _The Seven Samurai_.
But almost immediately, things begin to go wrong -- both with the   
expedition itself and with our expectations that this will prove to be an   
ordinary epic adventure.   Following a deadly attack by local villagers,   
Aguirre takes advantage the confusion and distress to stage a mutiny.  He   
believes that the party can find El Dorado on their own, and set up a   
vast empire, not answerable to Spain.  Abandoning all ties to Spain and   
Pizarro, Aguirre leads his party farther down the river through greater   
and greater hardships, all the while seeking the elusive El Dorado.  I   
don't think I'm giving away too much to say that things end very badly   
for all concerned.
The centerpiece of the story is the figure of Aguirre, played with crazed   
demonism by Klaus Kinski.  He's terrifying in the part -- his lips   
contort underneath cold blue eyes that convey a ruthlessness that slips,   
not so slowly, into insanity.  By placing him and his arrogant delusions   
about himself and the environment he finds himself in, Herzog seems to be   
criticizing the entirety of Western culture, from imperialism to Nazism   
to the American occupation of Vietnam.  Aguirre and those who follow him   
are ultimately destroyed by their own delusions of grandeur; in the end,   
the world they're confronting is simply too large and complex to be   
encompassed by their petty plans and ambitions.  Herzog makes this point   
effectively; unfortunately, to drive home this allegory, he makes a   
number of concessions, particularly in drawing his characters.  The parts   
somewhat underwritten, and Herzog's use of the camera doesn't help -- he   
uses plenty of sweeping shots of the river and wilderness, at the expense   
of close-ups and sustained shots of individual actors.   This is, to some   
extent, and intended effect; it drives home the idea that Aguirre and his   
crew are rendered almost irrelevant by their environment.  But it also   
gives the film a rather cold, cerebral feel that might frustrate some   
viewers.
But despite these sacrifices, the film still makes for compelling   
viewing.  It's filmed with a delirious energy, all sweeping pans and   
unsteady footing, emphasizing the hallucinogenic quality of the   
expedition and Aguirre's slide into madness.  The colors are striking,   
sometimes lurid, and the scenery is just exquisite.  And the structure of   
the tale itself, with its allusions to the very heroic epics which it is   
in fact critiquing, makes the film more than watchable.  We can't   
identify with the characters, but we recognize the story well enough to   
be carried along until it's too late for us to back out.  We're tricked   
into following a story that promises to be glibly satisfying, and by the   
time we realize what we're in for, it's already too late.

Author
Pedro Sena
This is one of the earlier Werner Herzog films, and it put both himself, and
Klaus Kinski, in the knowing, that they were around to stay.
Klaus Kinski had done many B rated films through out Europe, and had never
been able to acquire the respect he might have liked to have for a half way
decent actor ( even if his life is not ) and the quality of work he could
do, when given the chance.  Werner Herzog was a perfect vehicle, because it
allowed Klaus to experiment and Werner to just shoot many rushes, when the
actors don't know it.  For this reason, many of Werner Herzog films, have
characters which are well developed, but also show an inclination to do one
or two things that don't seem to fit, but they work.  Such is the price for
improvisation on an expensive medium.  Add libbing is often a better answer
than a temperamental writer, or worse yet, a temperamental actor, which
Klaus is, if the special (shown occasionally on PBS) on Fitzcarraldo is any
indication.  However, the continuity of the character is better, thus
showing a side of the actor, which is not always found in the pre meditated
and over studied acting styles.
Aguirre, the Wrath of God  is a good film, if you happen to like to see an
endless jungle, full of green-ery, mystery, and secret noises, and spaces.
Accompanying this visual film is the music of the German group POPOL VUH,
whose music is moody, very well defined, and well applied.  The music for
this film was around, before the film was made, which suggests that the
director took the feel of the music and built a scene around it.  The
perfect example is the opening of the film, when the music has a sad
somberness to it, which is filled with an incredibly beautiful long shot of
the Amazon jungle from a distance, with its fog moving in slow portions
across a very large valley.  Underneath, is the river, and Aguirre on his
raft, running into the side of the river in the fog.  The mystery, may be
infused with blindness after all.
Aguirre is the story of the Spanish explorer who went up the Amazon river to
find Eldorado.  He never reached that far, and disappeared totally, nothing
of his voyage, raft, or belongings was ever found.  The myths and legends
say that the Indians killed him, which the film plays to the hilt.  By the
time Aguirre arrived in the deep Amazon, many of the tribes had already been
alerted to the evils of the 'white man in a hard robe' as the Guayacu
Indians described the old Spaniards in their armors.  However, there is also
a story that he did arrive at the higher plateaus of Peru and decided to
stay there forever,  for he found the area beautiful beyond belief, which
the film also plays on.
In between this slow moving, but beautifully shot film, Aguirre tries to
withstand the common ailments which befell those who tried to navigate an
incredibly difficult river to maneuver, due to its size, and chaotic waters.
He manages to survive until the end, when the arrows of the Indians finally
have done in all the menders of the raft.  The film ends with the raft
moving downriver, bumping into a few rocks, turning, and moving down another
slow stream, until it fades out of existence.  The camera pans upwards to
the sky and the film ends.
It isn't a great film, by any means, but it establishes what Werner Herzog
will perfect in the later film NOSFERATU , which is a cohesion of music and
visual style.  Aguirre, though a curious film, is not an enjoyable film,
though we may learn a line or two of history while watching it.
Only for film addicts, and art film students.
Still, it is a good film.  Has little dialogue, except for Aguirre's
meanderings and fantasies.  It is the study of one man's obsession.
