Title
Review for For All Mankind (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Craig Good
     FOR ALL MANKIND is the kind of disc that makes you glad you own a
laserdisc player.  It is currently available only on disc.  The director, Al
Reinert, hopes this leverages into a theatrical release which would be followed
by a release on VHS.  It is the story of the decade-long Apollo program, told
in the words of the astronauts themselves and with the movies they shot in
space.  It captures and recreates the excitement I felt back when it was
happening.
     Using interviews taped starting in 1976, Reinert lets these "original
extra-terrestrial humans" narrate a composite mission made up of footage from
all the Apollo flights.  He spent years in NASA's vaults gleaning some of the
best of their copious 16mm footage.  These shots, some of which have never been
seen outside of NASA, were carefully enlarged to 35mm.  The whole thing is
backed up by a wonderful Brian Eno score.
     The awesome launch of a Saturn V, the beautiful violence of stage
separation, and the views of the Earth from the Moon which changed forever our
perception of our world are here in all their glory.  The superhuman astronauts
listen to Country Western and Frank Sinatra, make home movies and play with
their food while traveling farther than any before them.  This is an intimate,
first-hand account of one of man's greatest technological feats.
     The CAV version of the disc includes a generous "still gallery" at the end
of each side which includes each mission logo, and a photograph of each crew.
The entire fourth side is supplemental material covering each mission, where
each astronaut is today, the beautiful paintings of Al Bean, and selections
from pioneering fiction films about travel to the moon.  The analog audio track
includes a commentary by Reinert on the making of the film.
     If you have a player, this is one worth owning.  If you don't yet own a
player, perhaps this will convince you to buy one.  If you see this title in
the theatre some day be sure to see it.  FOR ALL MANKIND is an energizing and
uplifting labor of love.  I'm glad Al Reinert made it.
