Title
Review for Music of the Heart (1999)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Athan Bezaitis
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/afcf141b8b5cec37882568110020fd27?OpenDocument
The creator of A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET and SCREAM is toying with our
conscience again, only this time his weaponry isn't Freddy's claws or a
murderous prank caller.  Director Wes Craven's latest endeavor, MUSIC OF
THE HEART, switches gears to more virtuous human emotions in order to
tell us the story of one woman's triumph and the revival of a
downtrodden urban community.  Oddly enough, this film is just as
powerful as any of Craven's horror films and can evoke strong emotion
and sentiment, if you let it.
MUSIC OF THE HEART begins like any of the other `triumphant teacher'
dramas we've all seen.  STAND AND DELIVER and DANGEROUS MINDS both
crossed my mind as I sat through the first hour of Roberta Guaspari's
(Meryl Streep) struggle to teach a handful of young urban kids how to
play the violin.  This part of the story is hackneyed and clichéd, and
you've seen it before--if not in a previous movie than in some boring
after-school special.  But where other `triumphant teacher' dramas fail
because they concentrate too much on the saintliness of the teacher,
this movie succeeds in its captivation of Roberta Guaspari's character
flaws, and her struggle as a single mother attempting to raise her two
children in East Harlem.  When the film expands beyond the existence of
just `Roberta the teacher' and into the rest of her life, the film
becomes genuinely enjoyable.
About an hour and a half into MUSIC OF THE HEART, it zaps you ten years
into the future.  All of a sudden, you're in the nineties.  Roberta's
kids are older and more mature and although she's still single, she is
now an accomplished teacher.  However, her fate is not yet sealed as she
faces a career-threatening crisis that jeopardizes all she has worked
for.
This is where the film really takes off and the strong supporting cast
kicks in.  School principal Janet Williams (Angela Bassett-- HOW STELLA
GOT HER GROOVE BACK) and Jane Leeves ( `Frasier') both are superb in
support of Streep, who puts on yet another credible chameleon act.  Her
teenage children, Nick (Charlie Hofheimer) and Lexi (Kieran Culkin) are
both uplifting and extremely affable as they help their mother cope.
Even Gloria Estefan, in her acting debut, rounds out an excellent
supporting cast.  With all its cylinders clicking, the film takes a kind
of MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS path toward a conclusion filled with grandeur.
I don't consider myself overly emotional, but this movie is really
touching:  I haven't felt tears swelling up like that since CURLY SUE
with James Belushi.  I don't know if it was just my mood or the violin
music coupled with some powerful surges of sentimentality.  Decide for
yourself, and let me know.
Cast: Meryl Streep, Angela Bassett, Aidan Quinn, Cloris Leachman, Jane
Leeves, Michael Angarano, Charlie Hofheimer, Henry Dinhoffer Kieran
Culkin, Jay O. Sanders, Cole Hawkins, Gloria Estefan
Director: Wes Craven
Producer: Walter Scheuer
Editor:  Patrick Lussier
MPAA rating:  PG
Year of Release: 1999
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Joy Wyse
The fact that this movie is rated PG will probably work against it.  Too
many people will think that it would be drab and boring.  It's not. 
Actually, there is violence (a killing), racial bigotry, and sex among
other things.  There isn't anyone who won't identify with someone in this
film.  If you've ever struggled with practice to learn to play any
instrument, or if you've had to listen to someone else practice, you will
sympathize with that actor.
Basically, this is true story of a woman, Roberta Guaspari (Streep) who
teaches violin in a Harlem school.  Sure, you know where the storyline is
going.  If she didn't succeed, they wouldn't have made the film, now would
they?  But this is the story of the road she takes to achieve her goal. 
She teaches her pupils, their parents, and the staff much more than how to
play the violin.   She also helps her two sons overcome the problems that
accompany her divorce from their father.  They manage to grow into
upstanding young men despite the living conditions that are thrust upon
them.
I wish that movies such as this were compulsory for children to see.  We
re all aware of the multiple problems facing today's youth.  Some of it
is addressed here, such as the racial tension that exists between Ramon, a
Hispanic boy and his classmate, an African-American.  Their classroom
argument ends with Ramon telling the other boy to drop dead.  That
evening, when the boy is killed by a drive-by shooting, Ramon feels
responsible for his death.  Roberta reassures Ramon that if he had such
powers, he would be the world's greatest violinist!  More important, if we
are not exposed to good, classical music when we are young; we miss out on
one of the most pleasurable things in life.  No, liking the classics does
not make you a nerd.it makes you a more well rounded person.  This is
truly a `feel-good' movie.  Give yourself a treat and see it.  It's an A,
all the way.  I could see it over and over again.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Music of the Heart (1999) Meryl Streep, Aidan Quinn, Gloria Estefan,
Angela Bassett, Jane Leeves, Cloris Leachman, Kieran Culkin, Charlie
Hofheimer, Jay O. Sanders, Josh Pais, Olga Merediz, Michael Angarano,
Jade Yorker, Eva Loomis, Justin Spaulding, Dominic Walters, Jean Luke
Figueroa, with appearances from Isaac Stern, Itzhak Perlman, Arnold
Steinhardt, Mark O'Connor, Michael Tree, Diane Monroe, Karen Briggs,
Charles Veal, Jr. and Joshua Bell. Screenplay by Pamela Gray, inspired
by the documentary "Small Wonders," based on the life story of Roberta
Guaspari. Directed by Wes Craven. 124 minutes.
Rated PG, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests
to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net
Congratulations on the new film, Wes. After a long career as a horror
director, I can certainly understand why you wanted to break into the
mainstream. With "Music of the Heart," you've certainly done so. In
fact, this inspirational story, starring Meryl Streep as a
middle-class woman who brings the joy of music to inner-city kids, is
about as mainstream as you can get. I do have a few questions about
the production, though, and hope you'll bear with me.
I realize how frustrating it was to be locked into the horror
genre. You were never given the respect you deserve, despite being one
of the greats. You wrote and directed the original "A Nightmare on Elm
Street," only to see the studio take your creation and crank out a
series of increasingly shoddy sequels. You did a hell of a job
directing "The Serpent and the Rainbow" (that scene with the wicked
government man approaching a strapped-down Bill Pullman with a hammer
and a long nail Yikes!), but the film didn't appear to open any
new doors for you. Even with the incredible success of the "Scream"
franchise, you were still perceived by some as just another guy who
makes scary movies. The money and respectability of mainstream films
must have been incredibly tempting, but I wonder what drew you to this
particular project.
I know that you were moved by the true-life saga of Roberta Guaspari,
a mother of two from New York's suburbs who started teaching violin to
kids in Harlem after her husband left her. Her story is moving and
dramatic, especially when, after a decade of service, funding cuts
threaten to end her music program, but
Wes, what I'm getting at is this. Why make a big, glossy Hollywood
movie of this story? The 1996 documentary, "Small Wonders," already
captured the magic of Roberta and her devoted students. The violin
playing was wonderful and the Carnegie Hall concert footage
stunning. With an Academy Award nominated feature already available to
the public, why recreate it with actors? I realize that many people
would rather have a root canal than watch a documentary, but did you
really think a fictionalized account would pack as much punch as the
real thing?
Frankly, if your intent was to share insights about Roberta Guaspari,
it didn't work very well. Yes, we understand how shaken she was when
her husband ditched her; that was obvious. Roberta comes off
determined and obsessive, but what really makes her tick? Her young
sons seem fiercely devoted to mom, but when the film abruptly jumps
ahead ten years, her oldest boy is surly and resentful, complaining
about virtually every aspect of her parenting skills. Then, almost as
suddenly, he does a complete behavioral turnaround and is all smiles
again. What was up with that?
And why the formulaic story treatment? Come on, man, a lot of this
movie plays like something from the Lifetime Channel. You incorporate
virtually every cliché in the book, including a reaction shot from
a dog, for God's sake! Many characters seem to exist solely as props
for Roberta, like the Afro-Centric mother whose fiery rhetoric is
snuffed out by one Arthur Ashe reference from Roberta. Too easy,
Wes. And was it really necessary to throw in that nasty music
department character? Not only was the actor over the top, but his
presence seemed totally unnecessary.
Now, I know Madonna was originally cast in the role of Roberta, but
left because of "creative differences." Exactly what were those
creative differences? Did you finally see her in "Shanghai Surprise?"
Speaking of casting, why hire Gloria Estefan and the wonderful Angela
Bassett and then barely use them? Such a waste of talent.
Of course, some of the casting worked out well. Meryl Steep turns in a
fine performance, although her mannerisms are awfully reminiscent of
her character in "The Bridges of Madison County." As Roberta's
potential love interest, Aidan Quinn is more lifelike than usual. I
loved seeing Cloris Leachman back on the screen, even though her
character is another cliché, and young Michael Angarano is terrific
playing Nick as a boy.
Forgive me if it seems like I'm damning the movie with faint praise,
but I expected more sparks and less convention from a man as talented
as you. There were exhilarating moments, like the shots of various
children learning self-esteem from the discipline of playing the
violin, and the concert sequence is electric, even though it also
seemed a little too slick. More interaction between the violin masters
and the students might have helped. Incidentally, was one of the
characters sporting Freddy Krueger's hat? If so, nice touch!
Hopefully, on your next mainstream film, you'll feel comfortable
enough to take more chances. In the meantime, I'll rent "Small
Wonders" and watch the real thing instead of this movie-of-the-week
version. One final request, Wes. Would you track down the Miramax
executive who changed the title of the film from "Fifty Violins" to
the sappy "Music of the Heart" and kick his ass for me? Thanks, buddy.

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
DIRECTED BY:      Wes Craven
STARRING:         Meryl Streep, Aidan Quinn, Angela Bassett, Cloris
Leachman, Gloria Estefan
WRITTEN BY:       Pamela Gray
RATED:            PG for brief mild language and sensuality.
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:       Proverbs 6:23, Colossians 3:23, 2 Corinthians 8:11
A study was done some time ago which measured the overall impact that
structured musical programs have on grade school children.  The results
overwhelmingly indicated that those students who studied and played a
musical instrument also performed better academically.  This finding is
not at odds with the true life story depicted in MUSIC OF THE HEART.
Meryl Streep (ONE TRUE THING) plays Roberta Guaspari, a woman whose
husband has just left her for another woman.  Taking her two young sons
and retreating to her home town and the familiar comfort of her mother
(Cloris Leachman, NEVER TOO LATE), she is at a loss as to know what she
should do next.  An old friend (Aidan Quinn, PRACTICAL MAGIC), knowing of
her skill as a violinist, points her in the direction of a teaching
position in an East Harlem alternative school.
Though she has limited work experience and virtually no professional
teaching experience, the principal (Angela Bassett, HOW STELLA GOT HER
GROOVE BACK) decides to hire her on a trial basis as a substitute teacher.
The first half of the movie has Roberta struggling through the
transitional period of coping with a very difficult time in her life...
both personally and professionally.
Ten years later, her "substitute" status remains unchanged but her violin
program has grown to encompass the students of three different inner-city
schools.  In fact, it has become so popular that the students must enter a
lottery to see who will be allowed to take her class.
The second half of this movie (which is infinitely superior to the first)
deals with Roberta's fight to save the program from succumbing to imposed
budgetary cuts.  This fight culminates with a fundraising concert named
"Fiddlefest" which was performed in 1993 on the stage at Carnegie Hall
with guest violinists Isaac Stern, Itzhak Perlman, Mark O'Connor, Arnold
Steinhardt, and others (all playing themselves).
Ms. Streep adds yet another stellar performance to an already impressive
resume.  She plays a woman supremely confident in her ability as a
musician, yet because of her failed relationships, not as confident about
herself as a woman.  We never once doubt her abilities or insecurities
even though we know both are pretended.
MUSIC OF THE HEART is directed by horror film maven Wes Craven (SCREAM),
in his first departure from the genre which brought him fame.  Mr. Craven
is not as successful in presenting the nuances of Roberta's personal life
such as the raising of her sons or her relationships with men.  But the
film soars whenever the focus returns to the music and the students who
must play it.
Over half of the students in the film were selected from Ms. Guaspari's
actual classes.  The precision, dedication, commitment and discipline
these students had to develop in order to learn this difficult instrument
will certainly be transferable to any endeavor they choose to attempt in
the future.
Ms. Guaspari's teaching secret was her innate awareness that children
desire discipline in their lives.  She elected to teach them to "stand
strong."  Not just physically, using the proper musician's stance, but
internally.  Instead of coddling them or providing them with compassionate
but unwarranted compliments, she rode them incessantly to do better.  She
inspired them to reach for greater heights.  And they loved her for it.
"For the commandment is a lamp; and the law is light; and reproofs of
instruction are the way of life:"  Proverbs 6:23 [KJV]
Without reproof to teach us when we are doing something incorrectly, we
will never learn, grow, or improve.  Ms. Guaspari's lessons had an impact
which reached beyond the simple playing of notes on a stringed instrument.
Discipline is a learned quality one may draw upon for a lifetime.  The
students learn that to play from the heart, one must first master the
fundamentals.  The only way to do that is the punch line to an appropriate
old cabdriver joke:
Question:  How do you get to Carnegie Hall?
Answer:  Practice, practice, practice.
This same answer can be applied to achieve proficiency in any field,
including the spiritual ones.

Author
Jon Popick
Take your pick:  Music of the Heart is either the touching portrayal of
a real-life teacher and her uphill battle to teach urban children to
play the violin; or it's Mrs. Holland's Opus, a weepy, by-the-numbers
chick-flick that pushes all the right buttons.  I think it's somewhere
in between, but the wonderful performance by Meryl Streep is enough to
sway me a bit more toward the former.
Music's opening credits display photographs from the seemingly perfect
life of Roberta Guaspari (Meryl Streep, Dancing at Lughnasa).  We learn
that she is happily married to a naval officer and has two marvelous
sons.  When the credits end and the picture starts, Roberta is teary,
frazzled mess because her husband just left her.  She and her children,
Nick (Michael Angarano) and Lexi (Henry Dinhofer), are forced to move
from their suburban home.
Since she doesn't really have much professional experience other than
playing the violin, Roberta has a tough time finding a job until she
meets an old high school classmate named Brian Sinclair (Aidan Quinn, In
Dreams). Brian is amazed that Roberta isn't a concert violinist (her
college professor told her that she started playing too late) and refers
her to Janet Williams, an East Harlem school principal (Angela Bassett,
How Stella Got Her Groove Back) in need of a music teacher.
At first, Janet has no interest in hiring Roberta on account of her lack
of teaching experience, but changes her mind the next day when Roberta
wheels in her two fiddling kids to demonstrate the discipline that she
has taught them.  When Janet balks at the idea of the school being able
to afford violins for students, Roberta proudly chirps that she
purchased fifty to start a private program years ago.  Roberta is hired
on a temporary basis.
Once her classes start, Roberta finds herself in a younger version of
Sister Act  a class full of disorderly little kids that sword fight
with their bows and use the violin cases to simulate machine guns.
Other teachers are skeptical, resentful and distant, and she even finds
resistance in the parents of her students.  One angrily states that her
kid doesn't need to learn the music of `dead white men,' while another
calls the principal when Roberta's attempts at teaching discipline are
mistaken for downright cruelty.
Roberta and her students are able to pull off the big
make-it-or-break-it recital, earning the respect of parents and teachers
alike.  Flash to ten years later, where Roberta's program now
encompasses three area elementary schools and students must win a
lottery to enroll in her classes.  But ten days before their big annual
concert, she learns that the funding for her program will be slashed
from the next budget.
Music is a big career step for horrormeister Wes Craven (Scream), who
directs Pamela Gray's (A Walk on the Moon) script of the true story that
was originally the basis of a documentary.  I half expected to see
Freddie Krueger jump out from behind a desk at the school.  The film
also has horrible continuity, with cupboards open in one shot and
magically closed in the next, and the presence of 3D Doritos in a film
that is supposed to be set in the 1980s.  Who do they think they're
kidding?
While Music is considerably slowed down by both Roberta's romantic life
and her home remodeling, and the film's need to portray the peril of
inner-city life, Streep and the depth of her character shine like a
brightly polished fiddle.  As Roberta, she gets to constantly hammer
home the importance of practicing while warning her students that
they're `going to make your parents sick if you play like that.'  I
smell another Oscar nomination.
2:04  PG for some mild adult situations and the talk of violinsI mean
violence

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When David Lynch made a movie this year starring a
lawnmower, we felt sure that this was not just an instrument
to make suburban grasslands look like golf courses but an
out-and-out serial killer.  What a surprise that the machine
was simply a convenient--if unstable--transport system for an
half-blind octogenarian visiting his ailing brother in a
neighboring Midwestern state.  Wes Craven has now joined
the bandwagon of newly chaste and virtuous filmmakers. 
The horrormeister who has already turned out
such dramas of fear and loathing as critic Jon Bauer's
favorite "Last House on the Left," "A Nightmare on Elm
Street," "Vampire in Brooklyn" and "Scream" now turns to a
sweet, inspiring, true story with a documentary look about a
woman who faced the horror of stubborn parents and
tenacious administrators before butchering the bogeymen of
bureaucratic bullheadedness.  
   "Music of the Heart" is sentimental like "The Straight Story"
but unlike Lynch's conflict-free tale, this one is loaded with
contention.  The trouble with "Music" is not its occasional
stickiness but its predictability.  We follow the usual
trajectory: the principal character is in heaps of trouble during
the initial phase but by the conclusion every last knot is
neatly tied.  The marital difficulty, the dissension of school
authorities and some parents, the difficulties in getting grade-
school kids from the ghetto disciplined and involved with the
violin lessons--not a single dilemma remains at the
conclusion of the two hours and then some.  In this case,
however, the argument can be made that the facts of the
story are true: that "Music of the Heart" is simply a
dramatized version of the wonderful documentary "Small
Wonders" that you can easily obtain today on video which
details the miraculous teaching done by Roberta Guaspari
over a ten-year period despite the difficulties she faced at
home as a single mother of two boys, devastated that her
Navy husband had deserted the family that so loyally followed
him from base to base.  
   Despite the flaws of predictability and occasional
mawkishness, Craven's story tugs at the heartstrings just as
the fifty lads in each of Guaspari's classes tug at their violin
strings.  Craven opens the tale as Guaspari (Meryl Streep),
having been dumped by her husband, takes a humiliating job
gift-wrapping presents at a department store on the advise of
her interfering but well-meaning mother, Assunta (Cloris
Leachman).  When a former friend she had known from high
school, Brian Sinclair (Aidan Quinn), runs into her, some
chemistry develops, but while Guaspari is looking for a stable
man to take the place of her ex, Brian is not interested in
commitment.  
   Moving to East Harlem with her boys, Guaspari overcomes
the resistance of the principal of an elementary school, Janet
Williams (Angela Bassett), and of a constipated music
teacher and is hired as a substitute.  In one bizarre
altercation, she is confronted by a parent who refuses to
allow her son to continue in her class because Guaspari is
teaching the works of "dead white composers" and because
she has come to Harlem presumably "to save poor black kids
who never asked to be saved."  When this parent asks the
teacher to name a single black composer and gets no
answer, she seems to have lost her own argument.  If indeed
there are no major African-American composers, wouldn't the
violin class be a step toward bridging that gap?
   Almost miraculously restoring order in a classroom of
young, energetic but unfocused kids, she gains their affection
by proving to them that they could improve their playing
weekly through practice and dedication, even holding a
successful concert in the auditorium before previously
incredulous parents.  When after ten years' time the
shortsighted local Board of Education and District
Superintendent cut the funds out of the music and art
programs, Guaspari is to be out of a job by the end of the
term.  But she survives by holding a concert of her charges
together a few ringers like Isaac Stern and Itzhak Perlman in
Carnegie Hall, no less, raising enough money to continue the
wonderful program.  Guaspari continues to this very day
teaching in East Harlem and, in fact, during the closing
credits the audience is given a phone number to call if they
wish to pledge money to the program.
   As satisfying to the soul as the movie is, perhaps it would
not have succeeded so well in evoking the affection of an
audience had someone of lesser talent than Meryl Streep
been cast as Ms. Guaspari--though I wish that scripter
Pamela Gray did not give her so many annoying "you-know"'s
to say.  At no time does she look like an actress rather than
a grade-school teacher.  A bit on the frizzy side and as
vulnerable in her personal life as she is a strong presence in
the classroom, Ms. Streep turns in her usual radiant and
expressive performance of the sort we've come to expect
after watching her in films like "Kramer vs. Kramer," "The
Deer Hunter," and "The Bridges of Madison County."  One
wonders why her character in this film, however, remains a
substitute teacher having never taken the necessary tests for
a regular license.  (Being a substitute, she can be dismissed
at the whim of the principal and her salary can never rise
above about 2/3 of what she might earn with the same work
as a regular.)
   The film moved me particularly because I've taught in
inner-city schools for quite a number of years and have
always tried to introduce programs to enrich the regular
classroom curriculum.  I've taken kids to Broadway and off-
Broadway theater weekly, to field trips outside the country
(Montreal), and to sites around New York City as diverse as 
concert halls and veterinary offices.  During that time I was
continually badgered by administrators to fill out the field-trip
forms correctly, by parents who worried that their kids would
be missing regular instruction, and by teachers who resented
my taking the youngsters out of their classes occasionally for
purposes that they considered only marginally educational. 
I'd not be so arrogant to say that in my years as an educator
I'd achieved anything like what Ms. Guaspari had, but I hope
that the public does not come away from this film believing
that she is one in a million.  There are 70,000 teachers out
there running against almost insurmountable odds in trying to
do their jobs with mostly poor kids in New York City.  Many of
them are heroes in my book though there is not nearly
enough time or public interest to allow them to display their
wares on the silver screen.  Consider Ms. Guaspari not
unique but an example of the daily miracles that quite a few
career teachers have been capable of effecting.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MUSIC OF THE HEART (1999) ***1/2. Directed by Wes Craven. Written by 
Pamela Gray, based on the life story of Roberta Guaspari and inspired 
by the documentary "Small Wonders." Photography, Peter Deming. 
Editing, Patrick Lussier. Production design, Bruce Miller. Music, 
Mason Daring. Produced by Marianne Maddalena,Walter Scheuer, Allan 
Miller and Susan Kaplan. Cast: Meryl Streep (Roberta Guaspari), Aidan 
Quinn (Brian Sinclair), Gloria Estefan (Isabel Vasquez), Angela 
Bassett (Janet Williams), Jane Leeves (Dorothea von Haeften), Cloris 
Leachman (Assunta Guaspari), Kieran Culkin (Teen-age Lexi), Charlie 
Hofheimer (Teen-age Nick), Josh Pais(Dennis Rausch) et al. A Miramax 
release 110 minutes. PG
Wonders will never cease, said Sophocles.(Not the ancient Greek but a 
friend who speaks in cliches). Wes Craven, a shockmeister( plus 
schlockmeister for some), the creator of Freddy Krueger (Nightmare on 
Elm Street), is synonymous with horror flicks such as Scream, The 
People Under the Stairs, Shocker, The Swamp Thing, The Hills Have 
Eyes, Vampire in Brooklyn, etc.
The 77-minute documentary Small Wonders, released in 1996, made by 
Allen and Lana Miller, and Oscar-nominated, dealt with East Harlem 
violin teacher Roberta Guaspari-Tzavaras, whose sheer dedication, 
persistence and missionary-like zeal succeeded in educating hundreds 
of kids in the face of lack of funds and equipment, elimination of 
music and arts programs in the city's budget, and personal 
difficulties.
Craven, a professorial-looking, classical music lover, now 
middle-aged,  saw the documentary, was enthusiastic about making a 
theatrical feature of it, pursued his project with fervor. Overcoming 
raised eyebrows and  several stumbling blocks, (Madonna was to be his 
star), he was at long last able to enlist Meryl Streep who had never 
seen any of his films, to come up with a first-rate writer, other 
good performers, an amazing array of children, and finally a movie 
that looks, sounds and plays beautifully.
The film caught me by surprise. Its previews don't do it justice. The 
title is sentimental, old-fashioned. (It was originally 50 Violins, 
which suggested a musical film, hence a probable loss of public). 
Every sign pointed to a feelgood, inspirational picture, of which too 
many are schlock without shock. But watching the finished product I 
realized that I, too, had fallen into the trap of preconceptions and 
generalizations about films with dedicated teachers. I had forgotten 
Mr.Holland's Opus; or the marvelous ancestor of them all, Goodbye Mr. 
Chips (1939); or the sweet-and-sour gem The Blackboard Jungle (1955), 
the British To Sir, with Love (1967), the less-known The Corn is 
Green (with Bette Davis, 1945) and others.
I suspect that my suspiciousness came from too many films made for 
teen tastes in the last two decades. They were school comedies 
--often funny for adults too --in which students did everything but 
study and their teachers were gamekeepers or ridiculous figures or 
ineffectual wall paper.
In any case, Music of the Heart is a first-class movie. I have not 
seen Small Wonders, so I cannot tell how faithfully MOTH develops it 
-- but I have the feeling that scriptwriter Pamela Gray and the 
director have stuck close to the documentary, with a few changes. 
(From a tiny picture I located the real Roberta is definitely a 
brunette). The feature is convincing throughout, with warmth and 
sentiment not exploited to the hilt.
In my audience no one wept audibly, but eighty-one percent of the 
viewers had moist eyes. (The margin of error is 3 %). My only 
criticism is that there is just a tiny bit of background given for 
Roberta. Her presence is alive and lively; her past is nebulous..
Roberta Guaspari, a mother of two boys, is ditched by her husband for 
one of the couple's close female friends. Roberta takes on a dumb 
store job, meets old school chum Brian who sends her to his friend 
Janet, a school principal. I'll omit general developments as well as 
details so as not to undo the pleasures of discovery --except that 
the movie wraps up with a large group of Roberta's kids playing in 
Carnegie Hall along with such fiddle greats as Itzhak Perlman, Isaac 
Stern, Arnold Steinhardt and several others.
All the actors are exceptionally good. Angela Bassett, who shared top 
billing with Eddie Murphy is Wes Craven's Vampire in Brooklyn is, 
additionally, gorgeous at 41. Gloria Estefan whom I knew only as a 
singer, has a perfectly performed supporting role.
On the screen, Aidan Quinn has always had a most likable persona. He 
can also be differentiated from others, an exception today when too 
many faces are interchangeable and semi-anonymous. It was a good move 
not to make too big a deal of his relationship with Roberta, and to 
have Quinn vanish for a couple of big stretches. The same 
non-hammering of several supporting characters is also a clever 
decision. It allows concentration on Roberta, her pupils and her 
struggles -- time well spent and never dull.
And Merryl Streep? Now 50 yet entirely credible as a woman in her 
late 30s, she is a marvel.  Let me mention an apocryphal story. In 
the 19th century, a famous Polish actress came to Paris. She was 
received like a queen. Appearing on the Opera's stage, she declaimed 
some things in Polish. The Who's Who audience did not know this 
language, but the lady was so great that she had them all moved to 
tears and applauding wildly. Later it was disclosed that the actress 
had recited the Polish alphabet, and La Marseillaise, the French 
National anthem. Streep could do the same.
For this movie she also learned to play the violin, from scratch (an 
apt expression in this case). Add this to her past feats, and you get 
not merely the Woman with a Thousand Faces, and Accents, but of a 
thousand capabilities too.
MOTH, on top of its other plusses, quietly yet firmly stands as a 
social triumph for race relations. The children, young and older, 
their parents, the overall milieu in Black and Hispanic Harlem, and 
so on, come in all sizes, flavors and ethnic backgrounds. Yet there 
are no sides formed, no racial conflicts, no mentions of prejudice. 
Striking a realistic note is the mother of black child who first 
rebels at the incursion of a Whitey teacher who does irrelevant white 
music. But Roberta wins her over.
The commonplace element of drugs and violence is played way down too. 
There is no X-rated language. Not that the film has been bowdlerized. 
Roberta has ex-cons working on the dilapidated house she bought, but 
furious at their methods, incapacity, and drinking, she fires them 
all. A student simply tells of her dad hitting her mother. Otherwise, 
there are no goody-goody passages in this early contender for the 
next set of Oscars.
This is indeed a feelgood movie, but with natural, realistic 
feelgoodness. We can use this in these rather cynical movie-days.

Author
Jamey Hughton
I remember making a pact, right after `Patch Adams', to not be easily be
suckered by movies dripping with sentimentality. But darn it, `Music of
the Heart' is just layered with feel-good material and bright
characterizations. It's hard to dislike a movie that uses such skill
with it's manipulation. In addition, it's also a terrific family film.
This is the true story of violin teacher Roberta Guaspari, who fought
the school board to keep the musical program active in a handful of
inner city Harlem schools. It could also be described as `Mrs. Streep's
Opus'.
Yes, Meryl Streep brings her dramatic clout to the demanding role of
Guaspari, and that brings both good news and bad. Out of the gate,
possibly because of her distracting star power and the rushed writing,
it is relatively difficult to identify with Roberta's character and
grasp her academic point-of-view. She is very strict with her students,
but what insight does that create into the story? Slowly but surely, we
begin to recognize the intentions of the character, and show admiration
for the thoughtfulness and human feeling that Streep has once again
applied.
One thoroughly interesting fact about `Music of the Heart' lies with the
unlikely presence in the director's chair: horror veteran Wes Craven.
After leaving an impression with the `Scream' films and the original
`Nightmare on Elm Street', Craven has attempted a precarious cross-over
to drama. At first, his inexperience with the genre is fairly obvious,
but as the film progresses Craven finds a surprisingly comfortable niche
with directing this material. It doesn't carry the heart-warming courage
of `Mr. Holland's Opus', but `Music of the Heart' is casually assured
and filled with little morsels of dramatic truth. The tag team of Streep
and Craven works better than you would anticipate.
Yes, Oscar could come calling once again for Meryl Streep, but it's the
solid ensemble cast that makes `Music of the Heart' work. Angela Bassett
displays her usual forceful stamina as Janet Williams, the principal at
an inner city school who initially doesn't hire Roberta because of her
lack of experience. Blue-eyed Adian Quinn is endearing, as always,
playing a new love interest. Gloria Estefan also delivers in the tiny
role of a supportive second-grade teacher, and the three lead actresses
together produce a flaming fireball of estrogenic force. It's like a
schoolteacher's version of `Thelma and Louise', in a restrained but
effective manner.
The movie tackles more issues than just Guaspari's teaching of violin.
There's some powerful moments between Roberta and her two sons, who must
cope when their father leaves them for another woman. In it's dramatic
build-up, the movie manages to produce some authentic moments of feeling
and warmth. It's a good movie for anyone to see, although missing out on
the experience would not be a life-altering decision.
It's commendable of Wes Craven to be attempting such a difficult
cross-over, and also for achieving his intricate goal. Watching this
heartfelt chick flick about morals and musical instruments, who may ask
yourself: This is the guy who directed `Scream'? Of course, when the
third installment of that series comes around in February 2000 (with
Craven directing), you may find yourself wondering: This is the guy who
directed `Music of the Heart'? Mission accomplished, Wes.
Thankfully, there is no layer of artificial sentiment covering the film.
In it's entirety, it's a wholesome and agreeable movie for the whole
family, despite the periodic flaws that surface every once in awhile.
The child actors are cute and perform up to par, even if some of their
problems are clichéd and predictable in the extreme. The mother who
doesn't want her son to be learning `white man's music', the unexpected
casuality... basically everything is there.
It doesn't strike the perfect chord, but `Music of the Heart' is highly
convincing. The uplifting true story of Roberta Guaspari could have been
told better, but `Music of the Heart' is still edifying enough to
properly divulge her morals.
Your Comments Appreciated:  ">HREF="mailto:movieviews@hotmail.com">

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MUSIC OF THE HEART" (Miramax Films)
Can Wes Craven, creator of slasher/horror movies from Nightmare
on Elm Street to Scream, score in another genre? Yes! Working with an
intelligent screenplay by Pamela Gray (A Walk on the Moon), Craven
goes for a different kind of gut emotion in this timely, true story
violin instructor Roberta Guaspari, the mother of two young boys, who
was abandoned when her Naval officer husband ran off with another
woman. Forced into asserting her independence to survive, she cleverly
badgers an East Harlem principal into hiring her as a substitute music
teacher, despite the protests of the tenured faculty and the wariness
of the inner-city parents. Fervently believing in discipline, dignity,
and commitment, Roberta Guaspari struggles to teach classical violin
to disorderly, often resistant students, building self-esteem and
changing their lives in remarkable ways. And her crusade leads all the
way to Carnegie Hall, where violinists Isaac Stern, Itzhak Perlman,
Arnold Steinhardt and Mark O'Connor join in Fiddlefest, along with the
children of Guaspari's actual East Harlem violin program. If the story
sounds familiar, it was the basis of a 1995 Oscar-nominated
documentary, Small Wonders. Meryl Streep delivers a polished, virtuoso
performance that could earn her another well-deserved Oscar
nomination, while Angela Bassett, Gloria Estefan, and Aidan Quinn
deliver strong support. Estefan performs the title song with teen
sensation 'N Sync, and the sound track talent includes Jennifer Lopez,
C Note, Macy Gray, and Julio Iglesias Jr..  On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, Music of the Heart is an exhilarating, uplifting 8. Like
Mr. Holland's Opus, it's sentimental and emotionally manipulative but
there's an audience for this kind of heart-warming film that everyone
in the family can enjoy.

Author
Steve Rhodes
When a director like Wes Craven, who has built his career on horror
flicks, wants to find something different for a change of pace, what
does he pick? How about a script from Pamela Gray about teaching violin
to Harlem students -- a story "inspired" by a documentary, as the
credits claim?
You might expect an edgy movie, full of surprises. If you do, you'd be
wrong. MUSIC OF THE HEART is MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS dumbed down and clichéd
up. Even if the subject it chronicles is worthy, the film about it is so
hopelessly saccharine that watching it may induce sugar overload.
The film stars Meryl Streep as divorced, single mother of two, Roberta
Guaspari, a long time substitute teacher who establishes what becomes a
wildly successful violin program for inner city kids. The schmaltzy
script that Streep has to work from is beneath her, but, like the
trooper she is, she gives it her all.
The well disciplined children have such nice manners that you'll find it
hard to believe that they live in a ghetto. Roberta is a miracle worker.
One minute her students are screeching away on their violins, and the
next they're making melodious music at a concert.
The scenes are set up for maximum emotional effect. Roberta teaches her
kids, for example, that standing tall and firm is part of the musical
training regiment. She pushes one girl over only to realize that she
wears leg braces. In another incident she reproves a girl for being late
to class. When Roberta probes for the reason, she finds that the girl's
grandmother has been mugged. When Roberta inquires whether her
grandmother is okay now, the girl explains that she is dead. Raise the
melancholy background music up high and cut. Impact made.
Surprisingly, half of the movie concerns not the music program but
Roberta's family and social life. Her two boys put an ad in the
personals to find her a date. They even bet on whether her first date
will kiss her or not.
The film's saving grace is a rousing, star-studded ending that is the
musical equivalent of the big game. It is completely satisfying even if
the level of the kids' playing isn't quite believable. The satisfying
conclusion does not, however, make up for the all the time waiting for
it.
MUSIC OF THE HEART runs too long at 2:04. It is rated PG for language
and would be fine for kids of any age, but those younger than teenagers
are likely to be bored.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
"How do you get to Carnegie Hall? Practice, practice, practice."
Starring Meryl Streep, Aidan Quinn, Angela Bassett, Gloria Estefan.
Rated PG.
There are two parts to Music of the Heart. One is a charming, well-
developed, engrossing human story. The other is a derivative, formulaic
piece of pseudo-inspirational melodrama. Priority is given to the
latter. Meryl Streep does her best with it, but fails to lift it above
mediocrity; the general storyline is too tired and too overdone to work
with any actor or actress. This is a good effort from genre-hopping
director Wes Craven, but it never does come around.
They say it's a true story: struggling musician Roberta Gaspari comes
to East Harlem with her two kids to teach. Though she is met with
fierce opposition, she manages to start a violin class in a local
elementary school. She is treated with skepticism by the principal
(Angela Bassett) and with utter contempt by the head of the music
department. Determined as anything, she persists and succeeds in
establishing an enormously successful program that is eventually taken
beyond the elementary school and into the high school.
Meanwhile her husband and father of her two boys has left her for a
former friend and she starts up a relationship with the charming Brian
(Aidan Quinn), whom the boys take to well. Unfortunately it falls apart
when Brian tells Roberta that he does not believe in the institution of
marriage and if Roberta didn't meet all of his need he would, in
theory, seek to have his needs met elsewhere. After that fling comes to
a screeching halt, Roberta spends years as a single mother, until her
fed up sons, now all grown up, place a personal ad in the newspaper on
her behalf (but without her permission).
Her life is torn apart when, predictably, the school board cuts the
budget and the violin program is cut. Her position is put in jeopardy.
She decides to give the system a fight for their money. With the help
of her friend, Roberta plans a benefit concert at a local theater,
starring her most advanced violinists as well as a couple world-famous
violin stars. Hell, she even brings back 3 of her first students, now
dashing young ladies and gentlemen who still happen to remember how to
impeccably play a difficult instrument.
Music of the Heart manages to go through every solitary convention
usually associated with these kinds of films. There's the idealistic
teacher whom nobody believes in but who triumphs at the end; the evil
schoolboard that conveniently slashes the budget; the mother of a
student who confronts the teacher, telling her that what she is
teaching is worthless ("white man's music," in this case); and of
course the big standing ovation at the end. It is a retread of a whole
bunch of movies: Dangerous Minds, Mr. Holland's Opus, Lean on Me, even
Sister Act. It's even less compelling.
I did like the personal story, which is far too shortened and concise.
The result of the personal ad was wrapped up so abruptly it seemed like
a script screw-up; I wanted to see more. Roberta Gaspari is a rich,
interesting character stuck in a horrid plot punctuated by occasional
heartfelt moments. The film's focus is on the wrong part of the plot;
the human story would have served as a far better vehicle for thespian
extraordinaire Streep.
The film was directed, oddly enough, by none other than Wes Craven, the
horror-meister who brought us A Nightmare on Elm Street and Scream. I
suppose he molds to the genre well, with only the slightest hints of
his horror movie roots (such as a scene where Streep, upon finding out
some bad news, walks menacingly down a hallway, her head low, her hair
flowing, with intense music blaring on the soundtrack) left over. I
appreciate the effort to break out of his niche genre, but this was the
wrong project to do so; his Scream movies were much less ordinary and
formulaic.
The film insists on telling us that it's a true story, almost as a
justification for its trite plot. When I pan a film that was "based on
a true story" on the grounds of an inadequate plot, people always tell
me "That really happened: the filmmakers didn't make it up!" Well I
don't care. Not every true story has to be made into a movie. This
particular story has been filmed too many times, both fictitiously and
allegedly based on facts. Enough already.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Music of the Heart (1999) 
Rated PG; running time 124 minutes
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Title?0166943 
Official site: http://www.musicoftheheart.com/  
Written by: Pamela Gray
Directed by: Wes Craven
Starring: Meryl Streep, Aidan Quinn, Angela Bassett, Cloris Leachman, 
Gloria Estefan, Charlie Hofheimer, Kieran Culkin, Michael Angarano, 
Henry Dinhofer, Jane Leeves; as themselves: Karen Briggs, Jonathan 
Feldman, Jean-Luke Figueroa, Ramon Diane Monroe, Mark O'Connor, 
Sandra Park, Itzhak Perlman, Arnold Steinhardt, Isaac Stern, 
Michael Tree, Charles Veal Jr. 
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 1999
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsmusicof.html
I loved "The Red Violin" so much, I was sure that another flick that was
more specifically about violins, would be good; especially with two of my
favorite actresses--Meryl Streep and Angela Bassett--in it.  Was I right,
or, in the vein of "Dangerous Minds", et al, would this be Yet Another
flick where the White Savior Rescues The Poor Ghetto Chulllldrin?
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below):
"Music Of The Heart" is the true story of Roberta Guaspari (Streep), a
violinist and former Navy Wife freshly divorced from her philandering
ex-husband (his choice), who is pressed to find a job.  Having moved
around in the Navy so much, she doesn't have a lot of prospects in her
suburban environment, where she lives with her mother (Leachman) and sons
Nick (Angarano at 7-years-old; Hofheimer at 17-years-old) and Lexi
(Dinhofer at 5-years-old; Culkin at 15-years-old), until Brian Sinclair
(Quinn), tells her about a teaching job that may be available--in East
Harlem.  Principal Janet Williams (Bassett) is skeptical at first, but
soon she is convinced to let her work as an elementary school substitute
music teacher in her school, where Roberta meets Isabel Vasquez (Estefan),
an assorted batch of students, and later, Dorothea Van Hauften (Leeves),
who may be able to open doors for Roberta and her violin students as time
goes on.
The Upshot:
Remember the old Mickey Rooney movies where, when the gang needs to raise
funds for a project, they just "put on a show!"?  1990's, meet the 40s.
I'll be frank: most of the backstory of this movie was kinda dull; I can't
say that I cared much about Roberta's story as it pertained to her
husband, or her kids, or her mother, or even the strange relationship with
Brian (and boy, did Quinn look weird; haven't seen him in a lonnnng
time).  Even the normally-strong Streep, nor the equally powerful Bassett,
couldn't quite pull the first half of this movie out of the doldrums; and
though Estefan was refreshingly natural in her big screen non-music debut,
she wasn't really all that integral to this flick, and didn't really make
a dent in the snooze factor of the first half.  The young actors (whose
names I didn't catch, so I won't bungle them here) made it worth watching,
but it was a task otherwise.
But skip down to the end of this review, and you'll note I gave it the
greenlight.  Why's that?  Three reasons: the story picked up the pace in
the second half (and the final scenes, which I'm desperately trying not to
give away--but it ain't Rocket Science, folks--were worth the wait.); Wes
Craven, predominately known for his "Freddie Kruger" slasher flicks,
played a soft hand here, only giving in to his horror-flick trickery once
(hard to describe, but there's a scene in the school where there's
movement in the background behind Roberta, and the camera zooms in on her,
that made me wonder if some demented demon in gory makeup would come up
from behind her); and most importantly, the kids were allowed to be
genuine elementary-age kids, not ruffneck hooligans from da hood, read'ta
buss' up a be'ouch, nor insufferably cute Projects projects, waiting for
Missy Roberta to deliver them up from out of bondage.
[WARNING: SPOILER AHEAD] And I have to give this away, sorry: there was a
beautiful moment where Roberta and the students play a song that, as I
mentioned in my "Crazy In Alabama" review, I have come to despise for the
trivial way it's treated: "We Shall Overcome".  But this treatment
honestly left me in tears, due to its sincere beauty.  Only children, I
believe, could've pulled that off; I applaud them heartily for it. [END
SPOILER]
Aside from Wes Craven's soft side, as well as the low-cutesiness quotient
of the students as well as Roberta's kids, there were no real surprises in
this one; the usual tour-de-force that is Meryl Streep, was more subdued
(though I loved the way she handled the kids, with a strong hand), and
Angela Bassett seemed almost an afterthought.  But not every movie needs
to be The! Next! Big! Thing!, after all; "Music Of The Heart" ends as a
Feel Good movie that left me feeling good--and that's just what the doctor
ordered.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]
    As a Black woman, I see the "Black Factor"--things that affect me as a 
    "consumer of color"--in many aspects of life; movies included. Whether 
    from the standpoint of noting Black (and other "minority") cast and crew
    members (if any), to the (lack of) focus toward "people of color" (dag, I
    hate that term), to the out-and-out antagonistic attitude toward Us 
    (Jar-Jar, anyone?), the "Black Factor" (BF) is something that plays as 
    much a role in my film enjoyment as any other aspect of the movie itself.
"Black people don't play the violin."
If you've ever said, or thought, something like that, try to imagine what
it's like hearing it directed at you, violin-in-hand.  And imagine it
coming from a Black person.  Stupid, right?  And unfortunately, all too
common (substitute "skydive" or "go hanggliding"--or any number of
pleasures of which I partake--for "play the violin", and you Feel me).  We
are, far too often, Our own worst enemies when it comes to having access
to non-traditional, non-monolithic, events and life-choices; We
(rightfully) fight tooth and nail for the ability to gain access to
"common areas", then We deride others of Us who go through doors that
aren't usually painted Black.  So you probably won't be surprised to know
that I took great pleasure in seeing so many Black, and Latino, faces in
Roberta's classes (and there are some additional treats to be had in the
final scenes, but I won't give them away).  Almost made me want to take up
the fiddle.
On that ubiquitous Other Hand...one of the scenes that the TV networks
have been showing in the ObStreep interviews, resonated with me, as it
addresses the very point I made in the beginning of this review: Naim's
mother, a Black woman, pulls him out of Roberta's class, saying that she
would not let her son be treated as an object that needed to be "rescued"
by Roberta.  I was glad that it worked out for all parties concerned in
the end (since this is based on a true story, my assumption is that this
is how the situation really happened--though I just read that the folks at
the school upon this is based, have taken offense at how the school is
portrayed.  But that's another story for another time), but the
character's concern is one that's shared by this reviewer, when it comes
to movies such as this; the assumption is that the parents can't, or
won't, make any effort to try to make a better life for their children,
and therefore need the paternalistic rescue attempts of people who
otherwise have no stake in the neighborhood.  The vibe in this movie is
that the teacher just wanted to open up a window that none of the kids had
opened to them before; the extent to which this has been achieved, should
be able to be seen via the real-life students.  Next time I'm in Nuevo
York, I plan on checking that out first-hand. 
Bammer's Bottom Line 
Wes Craven proves he's good for more than just hack-n-slash; though it
won't burn up any ballots come Oscar time, you could do a lot worse with
your box office bucks [can you say, "Bringing Out The Dead"?]  And there
was even a Public Service Announcement giving the phone number to make
donations for Roberta's group, "Opus 118": 212-831-4455.  Do it...for the
Chulllldrin!
"Music Of The Heart":  (rating: greenlight) 
[Bams succumbs to the pressure]: How do you get to Carnegie Hall?  
Can't hurt if you Know Somebody...

Author
Bill Chambers
MUSIC OF THE HEART ** (out of four) 
-a review by Bill Chambers (bill@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Meryl Streep, Angela Bassett, Aidan Quinn, Jane Leeves
screenplay by Pamela Gray
directed by Wes Craven
I must preface this review by admitting how much I despise the title
Music of the Heart-NASA's Think Tank couldn't come up with something
more generic. Wes Craven's new pic was more provocatively (and
appropriately) called 50 Violins in development, and the switch only
proves how far distributor Miramax has strayed from its edgy roots.
Almost as infuriating is the positioning of an 'N Sync/Gloria Estafan
duet as Music of the Heart's theme song-this unlistenable ballad opens
and closes a film about music appreciation. 
Faithfully based on the Oscar-nominated documentary Small Wonders,
Music of the Heart stars Streep as Roberta Guaspari, a divorced mother
of two sons who develops, at the urging of Brian, a man she met in
high school (Quinn), a music program for Harlem gradeschoolers. The
reception from staff, students, and parents of students is cool at
first (racial issues, for the most part), but Roberta's dedication
eventually wins over all three parties. 
The story shares not only its basic outline with Mr. Holland's Opus
but also an extremely frustrating "# Years Later" title card that
weakly compacts Roberta's experiences as an educator. (Are both movies
telling us that the life of a teacher is so repetitive that the
intervening years between getting hired and retiring are a write-off?)
I preferred what Craven had going in its first half: the moralizing
was kept to a minimum, the narrative took unexpected turns (who could
anticipate the outcome of Roberta's romance with Brian?), and
Roberta's militaristic conduct in the classroom provided a refreshing
take on the To Sir, With Love standard-no affable Mr. Holland is she. 
Unintentional humour, soapboxing, and slack direction mar Music of the
Heart's second half. When a few of Roberta's graduates return to strut
their stuff for the new batch of students, they are conveniently the
children we met earlier all grown up. When the horror of urban life in
the nineties hits Roberta, the sequence plays like one from a moldy
"ABC Afterschool Special". More gravely, this plot point and many
others are not satisfactorily paid off. Take, for example, the story
thread regarding Roberta's oldest son, Nick (played Michael Angarano
at 7 and Charlie Hofheimer at 17), who is almost expelled for a spate
of wild behaviour (emphasized in cheesy, choppy slow motion). One
heart-to-heart with Roberta later and he's a cherubic goodie-goodie
again. The primary grades are tough on a kid, especially in inner
cities-how were his problems resolved outside the home? (Young Nick
did, after all, almost murder another little boy.) 
Craven's biggest blunder is to build audience anticipation for a
rendez-vous between real-life master violinist Isaac Stern and the
small wonders. Roberta's funding is cut, so she opts to organize
(after she, Principal Williams (Bassett), a journalist (Leeves), and
what seems like everybody else in town have sat around in Roberta's
enormous living room the same way the Muppets do tossing out
harebrained ideas) a benefit concert, the venue for which hinges on
Stern's input. His name is also mentioned in virtually every scene
leading up to the climax, yet his cameo amounts to one shot. Blink and
you'll miss him. I wanted a moment in which the physically disabled
Isaac introduces himself to the girl who also can't stand up when she
plays her instrument, even if it didn't actually happen-Gray's
screenplay is, oddly, not formulaic enough.
You'll notice that up to this point I have neglected to discuss Wes "A
Nightmare on Elm Street" Craven's filmmaking background. I didn't feel
it necessary until moments ago I had an epiphany: timing is everything
in horror movies and comedies-there's little in Music of the Heart, a
light drama, that exercises Craven's well-honed editing skills, save
for a few genuinely amusing takes from Josh Pais as Roberta's teaching
rival, Dennis. That said, Craven just turned sixty, and I fully
sympathize with his desire to leave fright flicks. After two excellent
Scream pictures and a handful of other creepy classics, he's eligible
for retirement from the genre, but he does seem a little lost without
a reason to scare us.

Author
Bob Bloom

 Music of the Heart (1999) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Meryl Streep,
Angela Bassett, Aidan Quinn and Gloria Estefan. Directed by Wes Craven
 A woman is deserted by her husband, left with two small boys to raise.
She has to find a job. Her only vocation is playing the violin. She has
taught some students, but has never held a full-time job.
 The woman, through a friend, learns of an inner-city, alternative school
and talks the principal into giving her a job.
 Over the years, the program grows until it is threatened by budget cuts.
The teacher, the principal, parents and various friends unite with the
students to put on a concert to save the music program.
 This sounds like a Lifetime made-for-TV movie. Or worse, one of those
do-gooder films, such as "Dangerous Minds," in which a white educator
ventures into the inner city to help better the lives of minority students.
 Well, as the adage goes, life imitates art. But with "Music of the Heart,"
we have art imitating life.
 The movie is based on the true story of Roberta Guaspari, who did initiate
a violin program in East Harlem. Guaspari, a Navy wife, was deserted by her
husband and left to raise two boys.
 After 10 years, budget cuts eliminated her program and the community did
rally to save it. A concert was staged at Carnegie Hall featuring many of
Guaspari's students as well as such violin greats as Isaac Stern and Itzhak
Perlman.
 "Music of the Heart" is a life-affirming, feel-good movie.
 It also is a paean to music - and its ability to serve as a catalyst to
build character, self-esteem and self-confidence.
 What sets "Music of the Heart" apart from other such films is Meryl
Streep's performance. At first, her Roberta is a shattered, scared woman
who only feels sorry for herself and her situation.
 But as she settles into her new position, her confidence and her
self-worth increase at the same time she instills these emotions into her
students.
 Admittedly, the movie is a bit cliched. Yet, life can be cliched. People
such as Roberta Guaspari who through sheer determination raise themselves
up do exist. We read about them everyday.
 Streep's eyes light up when she is teaching her students. She is a
taskmaster who bullies, cajoles and threatens her students, always pushing
them to do better, to raise their standards and continue testing themselves.
 "Music of the Heart" falters in its portrayal of Roberta's private life.
Her failed relationship with an old high school classmate, Brian (Aidan
Quinn), seems forced.
 Otherwise, the movie contains few missteps.
 Angela Bassett is fiery and strong as the school principal who fights for
Roberta's program. Also featured are Cloris Leachman as Roberta's mother,
Gloria Estefan as a fellow teacher who befriends Roberta and Jane Leeves as
a friend who helps organize Roberta's concert.
 The foundation of the film is Streep's interaction with the various
children who play her students. They sulk, complain, connive and only
grudgingly tolerate Roberta, until they begin to realize the gift she is
driving into them.
 The most incredible aspect of "Music of the Heart" is that it is directed
by Wes Craven. Yes, that Wes Craven, the horrormeister who has given us
"Nightmare on Elm Street," "Last House on the Left," "Scream" and "Scream
2."
 Craven demonstrates that he is not limited to horror films. His direction
is sure, his camera work straight-on. He lets his characters tell the
story, no fancy tricks.
 Even at a bit over two hours, "Music of the Heart" holds you. It is a
movie you will stand up and cheer, a film that offers a positive message
that may also inspire as well as entertain.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Mac VerStandig
NOTE: Ordinarily, Moviereviews.org will not give away any critical plot 
points of a film that could be interpreted as "spoilers." However, being 
that Music of the Heart is based on a true story and that 
Moviereviews.org feels the film can not be properly credited without 
such revelations, plot giveaways will appear in the following review. If 
this bothers you, please note the 3 star rating of the film and stop 
reading now.
"What does it take to play Carnegie Hall? Practice."
It takes two hours for Music of the Heart to "play Carnegie Hall," both 
figuratively and literally. Like the children it portrays, the movie 
starts from the dark realms of awful cinema and works its way up to a 
show-stopping performance at the legendary concert hall.
Roberta Guaspari (Academy Award winner Meryl Streep) has two kids, a 
husband who left her and 50 violins she bought from a small shop in the 
Mediterranean. Her life desperately needs a jump start and gets one when 
she meets a man who introduces her to a job as a music teacher at an 
East Harlem elementary school. She soon finds her job is on the rocks as 
the men in her life continue to rotate through revolving doors. That is 
the pattern-like plot of this production. Ultimately, the film chooses a 
zero-sum answer to these problems and finds her music career at an 
all-time high when the men in her life finally vanish.
The first hour of Music of the Heart is rather painful. Roberta's 
character lacks development and consequently seems to be flat. Also 
lacking depth is the film's "bad guy," a narrow-minded music teacher 
(Josh Pais) who rejects Roberta out of principle (the movie never 
explains exactly which principle that is) and conveniently comes and 
goes from the plot according to when it might be dramatic to have a 
villain around.
The next 15 minutes of the film are mediocre. They are highlighted by 
one child's return to Roberta's class (coming after the great old 
Hollywood scene where he explains be can't be around anymore because 
"My mom said...") and a glowing concert. Not knowing the running time, 
you may expect the credits to role at this point. But they don't. 
Instead the film uses the next 45 minutes to finish its journey from bad 
to mediocre to excellent.
Director Wes Craven, known for his works of horror, uses some old 
sentimental tricks to get the audience tearing. One romantic break up 
scene is highlighted by the classic "But... last night..." and 
Roberta's two children also have textbook conflicts with their single 
mother regarding their father's absence.
The city of Harlem plays a strong role in the movie. Roberta's mother 
is initially reluctant to see her daughter move to that part of town and 
the film does nothing to combat that stereotype. The noise tracks for 
these scenes are dominated by sirens; predictably one of Roberta's 
students is gunned down and killed off screen.
One thing the film does lack is subtlety. The fact that a little boy was 
playing "We Shall Overcome" on his violin after the aforementioned 
shooting was a cute and discreet reference. The fact that the entire 
orchestra begins to play it over and over soon after is an overdone 
reference that shows how little credit he gives the audience. (Of 
course, in horror films the foreshadowing and between-the-line moments 
are meant to be overdone, so perhaps he too is just learning to play the 
game.)
Even with all its flaws, Music of the Heart is a beautiful film. That is 
not an excuse for the movie's poor beginning. But as I watched the 
scenes in Carnegie Hall, I thought of some of the great acts that have 
taken that stage. In December of 1979 a comedian named Andy Kaufman put 
on a show that will forever be remembered as one of the most original in 
theatre history. The performance included a dead-on Elvis impression, 
Robin Williams in disguise and a moment at the end when Kaufman 
announced he would take the whole audience out for milk and cookies. So, 
how did this comic genius choose to open the show of his life? He had a 
character named Tony Clifton take the stage for the sole purpose of 
irritating and angering the audience. Perhaps it is okay for Music of 
the Heart to start off rusty because just as Kaufman had Santa's 
favorite food, this movie has an amazing finale.

Author
Ross Anthony
Based on the real life of Music teacher Roberta Guaspari and, surprisingly,
directed by horror notable Wes Craven, "Music of the Heart" is an
inspirational story that finds its harmonies not without their share of
dissonant notes.
Her husband out of the picture, house-mom Roberta moves to the inner city to
teach violin at the local elementary school. Burdened at first by the
troubles plaguing inner city kids and then later by budget cuts, Roberta
struggles to keep her violin class and family (two young boys) in tune.
Streep's portrayal of Guaspari is loving, yet refreshingly harsh, "That was
terrible! You're going to make your parents vomit if you don't practice."
The movie has just enough sappy moments already, an angelic teacher would
have made its own audience vomit. Though I like Angela Basset, her
performance as the beautiful hard-nailed principal is (as Guaspari would
say) terrible. As it turns out, her screen time is minimal. While Quinn is
wonderful as the love interest, this film is clearly all about Streep as
Roberta with the kids and the violins. Of course, Streep is supreme. Also,
Cloris Leachman (as her nagging mother) deserves praise. Delivering rather
plainly a total of no more than ten lines, Gloria Estefan's presence (the
supportive colleague) is not much more than a cameo. Both pairs of actors
playing Roberta's two sons (the film jumps to a "ten years later" second
half) do a fine job and are extremely well cast.
Contrived moments seemingly meant to add drama to the picture actually
subtract. For instance, Streep, originally declined a position by Bassett,
returns to the principal's office to show off how well she's taught violin
to her two sons. This is on the sticky edge of excessive sap; but not yet
over it. What should have been a rich scene is lessened by the fact that the
current burnt-out music teacher just happens to be in the office. The violin
playing is followed immediately by the near cliché, "Can't expect too much
from these kids" debate.
On the other hand, half of the 150 violin students appearing in the film are
or were actual students of the real life Guaspari. And seven of the
non-violin-playing child actors took lessons from her in preparation for
their roles.
In the end, living up to it's name, the picture has a lot of heart. If you
could score an excellent film like "Stand and Deliver" for violin blending
in the dissonant overtones of a less-than-excellent one like "Gloria," the
resulting performance would be "Music of the Heart."
Music of the Heart. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG.
Starring Meryl Streep, Aidan Quinn, Gloria Estefan and Angela Bassett.
Directed by Wes Craven.
Screenplay by Pamela Gray.
Produced by Marianne Maddalena at Craven/Maddalena/Miramax.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Bob Bloom

 Music of the Heart (1999) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Meryl Streep,
Angela Bassett, Aidan Quinn and Gloria Estefan. Directed by Wes Craven
 A woman is deserted by her husband, left with two small boys to raise.
She has to find a job. Her only vocation is playing the violin. She has
taught some students, but has never held a full-time job.
 The woman, through a friend, learns of an inner-city, alternative school
and talks the principal into giving her a job.
 Over the years, the program grows until it is threatened by budget cuts.
The teacher, the principal, parents and various friends unite with the
students to put on a concert to save the music program.
 This sounds like a Lifetime made-for-TV movie. Or worse, one of those
do-gooder films, such as "Dangerous Minds," in which a white educator
ventures into the inner city to help better the lives of minority students.
 Well, as the adage goes, life imitates art. But with "Music of the Heart,"
we have art imitating life.
 The movie is based on the true story of Roberta Guaspari, who did initiate
a violin program in East Harlem. Guaspari, a Navy wife, was deserted by her
husband and left to raise two boys.
 After 10 years, budget cuts eliminated her program and the community did
rally to save it. A concert was staged at Carnegie Hall featuring many of
Guaspari's students as well as such violin greats as Isaac Stern and Itzhak
Perlman.
 "Music of the Heart" is a life-affirming, feel-good movie.
 It also is a paean to music - and its ability to serve as a catalyst to
build character, self-esteem and self-confidence.
 What sets "Music of the Heart" apart from other such films is Meryl
Streep's performance. At first, her Roberta is a shattered, scared woman
who only feels sorry for herself and her situation.
 But as she settles into her new position, her confidence and her
self-worth increase at the same time she instills these emotions into her
students.
 Admittedly, the movie is a bit cliched. Yet, life can be cliched. People
such as Roberta Guaspari who through sheer determination raise themselves
up do exist. We read about them everyday.
 Streep's eyes light up when she is teaching her students. She is a
taskmaster who bullies, cajoles and threatens her students, always pushing
them to do better, to raise their standards and continue testing themselves.
 "Music of the Heart" falters in its portrayal of Roberta's private life.
Her failed relationship with an old high school classmate, Brian (Aidan
Quinn), seems forced.
 Otherwise, the movie contains few missteps.
 Angela Bassett is fiery and strong as the school principal who fights for
Roberta's program. Also featured are Cloris Leachman as Roberta's mother,
Gloria Estefan as a fellow teacher who befriends Roberta and Jane Leeves as
a friend who helps organize Roberta's concert.
 The foundation of the film is Streep's interaction with the various
children who play her students. They sulk, complain, connive and only
grudgingly tolerate Roberta, until they begin to realize the gift she is
driving into them.
 The most incredible aspect of "Music of the Heart" is that it is directed
by Wes Craven. Yes, that Wes Craven, the horrormeister who has given us
"Nightmare on Elm Street," "Last House on the Left," "Scream" and "Scream
2."
 Craven demonstrates that he is not limited to horror films. His direction
is sure, his camera work straight-on. He lets his characters tell the
story, no fancy tricks.
 Even at a bit over two hours, "Music of the Heart" holds you. It is a
movie you will stand up and cheer, a film that offers a positive message
that may also inspire as well as entertain.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
David N. Butterworth
        First let me dispense the answers to those burning questions which
have been dogging you for weeks now.
        Yes, "Music of the Heart" is directed by Wes Craven, the veteran
shockmeister responsible for over 20 horror films including such
blockbusters as the "Nightmare on Elm Street" and "Scream" series ("Scream
3," incidentally, is due out February 4th).  "Music of the Heart," although
(unintentionally) scary at times, is his first radical departure from the
genre.
        Yes, Meryl Streep wasn't the original choice to play Roberta
Guaspari, the substitute teacher who revitalized an East Harlem public
school and many of its students with her successful violin program (when no
one wanted one) and the subject of Craven's new film.  Madonna was the
director's first pick, but she bailed out early citing "creative
differences."
        And yes, singer Gloria Estefan makes her acting debut in the film
but blink and you'll miss her.  Ms. Estefan spends more time nibbling on a
carrot than she does acting, and her name up there alongside Streep's,
Aidan Quinn's, and Angela Bassett's is like saying Kevin Costner starred in
"The Big Chill."
        If the storyline sounds at all familiar to you (and you'd be in the
minority if it does), then that's because Roberta's success story was
profiled in an OscarŽ-nominated documentary from 1996 entitled "Small
Wonders."  I suspect few people saw that film, but someone clearly felt
that this story was interesting enough to turn it into a large-scale
Hollywood product with brand-name stars and a new song by Gloria to send
the Miami Sound Machine groupies skipping off to Tower Records after the
show.
        "Let's dramatize it" someone must have said after seeing "Small
Wonders."  Unfortunately they did everything but.
        The main problem with "Music of the Heart" is that it's devoid of
drama, making it an extremely difficult film to pigeonhole.  Nothing much
really happens, no one tries to prevent it from happening, and when it does
happen it's not very interesting anyway.
        Streep, as you'd expect, is pretty good in the role, here passing
on her usual accent-of-the-week.  Streep's messy perm and bloodshot eyes
aren't exactly flattering to Ms. Guaspari, but I suspect they're closer to
the real Roberta than anything Madonna might have thrown her way.  Quinn,
on the other hand, seems strangely out of whack (he provides Roberta with
the obligatory love interest, is sent packing halfway through the film, and
then, surprise surprise, reappears for the big Carnegie Hall finale).  And
it's a pity to see the skilled Angela Bassett ("How Stella Got Her Groove
Back," "Waiting to Exhale") stuck in a stock high school principal role.
        That big Carnegie Hall fiddlefest, by the way, is shot with an
incredible lack of flair by someone clearly more comfortable orchestrating
decapitations and disembowelments.  Even the presence of violin greats
Isaac Stern and Itzhak Perlman can't pep it up any.
        On the plus side, the kids who learn about the finer points of a
violin bow have real charisma and with a little more drama than "Sorry, I
forgot my violin today Miss Guaspari," "Music of the Heart" might have
scored some much-needed points.  Instead, it's a poor choice for Craven, an
odd choice for Estefan, and a particularly good choice for Madonna.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MUSIC OF THE HEART (1999) ***1/2. Directed by Wes Craven. Written by 
Pamela Gray, based on the life story of Roberta Guaspari and 
inspired by the documentary "Small Wonders." Photography, Peter 
Deming. Editing, Patrick Lussier. Production design, Bruce Miller. 
Music, Mason Daring. Produced by Marianne Maddalena,Walter Scheuer, 
Allan Miller and Susan Kaplan. Cast: Meryl Streep (Roberta 
Guaspari), Aidan Quinn (Brian Sinclair), Gloria Estefan (Isabel 
Vasquez), Angela Bassett (Janet Williams), Jane Leeves (Dorothea von 
Haeften), Cloris Leachman (Assunta Guaspari), Kieran Culkin 
(Teen-age Lexi), Charlie Hofheimer (Teen-age Nick), Josh Pais(Dennis 
Rausch) et al. A Miramax  release 110 minutes. PG
Wonders will never cease, said Sophocles.(Not the ancient Greek but 
a friend who speaks in cliches). Wes Craven, a shockmeister( plus 
schlockmeister for some), the creator of Freddy Krueger (Nightmare 
on Elm Street), is synonymous with horror flicks such as Scream, The 
People Under the Stairs, Shocker, The Swamp Thing, The Hills Have 
Eyes, Vampire in Brooklyn, etc.
The 77-minute documentary Small Wonders, released in 1996, made by 
Allen and Lana Miller, and Oscar-nominated, dealt with East Harlem 
violin teacher Roberta Guaspari-Tzavaras, whose sheer dedication, 
persistence and missionary-like zeal succeeded in educating hundreds 
of kids in the face of lack of funds and equipment, elimination of 
music and arts programs in the city's budget, and personal 
difficulties.
Craven, a professorial-looking, classical music lover, now 
middle-aged,  saw the documentary, was enthusiastic about making a 
theatrical feature of it, pursued his project with fervor. 
Overcoming raised eyebrows and  several stumbling blocks, (Madonna 
was to be his star), he was at long last able to enlist Meryl Streep 
who had never seen any of his films, to come up with a first-rate 
writer, other good performers, an amazing array of children, and 
finally a movie that looks, sounds and plays beautifully.
The film caught me by surprise. Its previews don't do it justice. 
The title is sentimental, old-fashioned. (It was originally 50 
Violins, which suggested a musical film, hence a probable loss of 
public). Every sign pointed to a feelgood, inspirational picture, of 
which too many are schlock without shock. But watching the finished 
product I realized that I, too, had fallen into the trap of 
preconceptions and generalizations about films with dedicated 
teachers. I had forgotten Mr.Holland's Opus; or the marvelous 
ancestor of them all, Goodbye Mr. Chips (1939); or the 
sweet-and-sour gem The Blackboard Jungle (1955), the British To Sir, 
with Love (1967), the less-known The Corn is Green (with Bette 
Davis, 1945) and others.
I suspect that my suspiciousness came from too many films made for 
teen tastes in the last two decades. They were school comedies 
--often funny for adults too --in which students did everything but 
study and their teachers were gamekeepers or ridiculous figures or 
ineffectual wall paper.
In any case, Music of the Heart is a first-class movie. I have not 
seen Small Wonders, so I cannot tell how faithfully MOTH develops it 
-- but I have the feeling that scriptwriter Pamela Gray and the 
director have stuck close to the documentary, with a few changes. 
(From a tiny picture I located the real Roberta is definitely a 
brunette). The feature is convincing throughout, with warmth and 
sentiment not exploited to the hilt.
In my audience no one wept audibly, but eighty-one percent of the 
viewers had moist eyes. (The margin of error is 3 %). My only 
criticism is that there is just a tiny bit of background given for 
Roberta. Her presence is alive and lively; her past is nebulous..
Roberta Guaspari, a mother of two boys, is ditched by her husband 
for one of the couple's close female friends. Roberta takes on a 
dumb store job, meets old school chum Brian who sends her to his 
friend Janet, a school principal. I'll omit general developments as 
well as details so as not to undo the pleasures of discovery 
--except that the movie wraps up with a large group of Roberta's 
kids playing in Carnegie Hall along with such fiddle greats as 
Itzhak Perlman, Isaac Stern, Arnold Steinhardt and several others.
All the actors are exceptionally good. Angela Bassett, who shared 
top billing with Eddie Murphy is Wes Craven's Vampire in Brooklyn 
is, additionally, gorgeous at 41. Gloria Estefan whom I knew only as 
a singer, has a perfectly performed supporting role.
On the screen, Aidan Quinn has always had a most likable persona. He 
can also be differentiated from others, an exception today when too 
many faces are interchangeable and semi-anonymous. It was a good 
move not to make too big a deal of his relationship with Roberta, 
and to have Quinn vanish for a couple of big stretches. The same 
non-hammering of several supporting characters is also a clever 
decision. It allows concentration on Roberta, her pupils and her 
struggles -- time well spent and never dull.
And Merryl Streep? Now 50 yet entirely credible as a woman in her 
late 30s, she is a marvel.  Let me mention an apocryphal story. In 
the 19th century, a famous Polish actress came to Paris. She was 
received like a queen. Appearing on the Opera's stage, she declaimed 
some things in Polish. The Who's Who audience did not know this 
language, but the lady was so great that she had them all moved to 
tears and applauding wildly. Later it was disclosed that the actress 
had recited the Polish alphabet, and La Marseillaise, the French 
National anthem. Streep could do the same.
For this movie she also learned to play the violin, from scratch (an 
apt expression in this case). Add this to her past feats, and you 
get not merely the Woman with a Thousand Faces, and Accents, but of 
a thousand capabilities too.
MOTH, on top of its other plusses, quietly yet firmly stands as a 
social triumph for race relations. The children, young and older, 
their parents, the overall milieu in Black and Hispanic Harlem, and 
so on, come in all sizes, flavors and ethnic backgrounds. Yet there 
are no sides formed, no racial conflicts, no mentions of prejudice. 
Striking a realistic note is the mother of black child who first 
rebels at the incursion of a Whitey teacher who does irrelevant 
white music. But Roberta wins her over.
The commonplace element of drugs and violence is played way down 
too. There is no X-rated language. Not that the film has been 
bowdlerized. Roberta has ex-cons working on the dilapidated house 
she bought, but furious at their methods, incapacity, and drinking, 
she fires them all. A student simply tells of her dad hitting her 
mother. Otherwise, there are no goody-goody passages in this early 
contender for the next set of Oscars.
This is indeed a feelgood movie, but with natural, realistic 
feelgoodness. We can use this in these rather cynical movie-days.

Author
Michael Dequina
After making her name in fluff (for better or worse) for years,
Elisabeth Shue broke through with the "career-changing revelation" (as
_Vogue_ put it) of her Oscar-nominated performance in 1995's
_Leaving_Las_Vegas_.  While her career might have changed for the better,
Shue's performances changed for the worse, embarrassing herself in the
likes of _The_Saint_ and _Palmetto_.  John Duigan's _Molly_, with the
Oscar-baiting arc of its title character, is obviously designed to show
off more of Shue's acting chops.  Instead, it just shows that
_Leaving_Las_Vegas_ may have been a fluke.
As Molly McKay, Shue is called on to cover a wide acting spectrum.  For
half of the film, Shue has to act as if she had the mind of a child, for
Molly is mentally challenged; for the other, after Molly receives miracle
surgical treatment that awakens her mental capacities, Shue has to be an
innocent yet observant and energetic naif.  She fails miserably on both
counts.  She yelps, grunts, mumbles, jumps, screeches, and mugs to no end
as Molly#1; as Molly#2, she's just as jumpy but with eyes perpetually
wide and a chirpy, singsong voice.  Neither portrayal resembles any
actual, non-acted human behavior, whether the person is mentally
challenged or not.
Shue's performance is just one of this unconvincing, uninvolving film. 
Dick Christie's script is a hodgepodge of elements from _Awakenings_ and
_Rain_Man_, an analogy that actually makes the film seem better than it
is.  If you've seen either of those films, you will know every turn of
the plot, right down to the ending, well before they come.  But aside
from not coming up with anything slightly original in the main story,
Christie doesn't come up with a single satisfactory subplot.  A romance
between Molly's well-meaning but selfish brother Buck (Aaron Eckhart,
doing a nice job--the only person who does so--in a change of pace,
non-sleazy role) and Molly's doctor (Jill Hennessy) is spoken of but
never shown.  Come to think of it, that's the only attempt at a subplot
Christie and Duigan make.
In their defense, though, _Molly_ has been trimmed down to a remarkably
slim 89 minutes from the 100something-minute run time of its original
cut, which played on airlines this summer before its fall theatrical
release.  Even so, the fact that there are only 89 of them doesn't make
any of those minutes any less tedious, and 89 minutes of Shue's strained
Acting display is 89 more than anyone should ever have to endure.
By contrast, _Music_of_the_Heart_ marks the annual Oscar nod bid for the
oft-nominated Meryl Streep, and once again it looks like she'll make it
into the Academy's top five.  In this fact-based drama directed by, of
all people, horror king Wes Craven, Streep delivers another strong
performance as Roberta Guaspari, who, after a messy divorce, finds new
meaning in life by teaching the violin to elementary school kids in the
inner city neighborhood in East Harlem.  Ten years later, having inspired
many creative young minds and won the respect of ther peers in the
intervening decade, Roberta's program is threatened by cuts in education
funding.
I would not call Streep's work here her best in recent years; it doesn't
nearly hold a candle to her elegantly wrenching turn in 1995's
_The_Bridges_of_Madison_County_.  But _Music_of_the_Heart_ is unthinkable
without her (imagine what a howler the film would have been if original
star Madonna had not backed out); it's her passionate performance that
carries the audience through the rough patches in Pamela Gray's script. 
For example, scenes involving Roberta's attempt at a new romantic life
don't pay off in the end, and some dialogue reeks of a writer's hand;
when Roberta breaks up with her boyfriend (Aidan Quinn) at the same time
she fires her home construction crew, she says to each individual crew
member, "You're fired," then turns to Quinn and says, "You're fired,
too."
And then there are the maudlin fixtures of films such as these: the
bright student whose mother decides to pull him out of the class; the son
who feels neglected by all the attention Roberta lavishes upon his
students.  Yet the film works; there's no denying the uplift of
Guaspari's remarkable true story, and even though he doesn't completely
avoid the trap of sugary sappiness, Craven sends the audience out feeling
happy and inspired--which is the very reason why one would buy a ticket
into _Music_of_the_Heart_.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Scott Renshaw
MUSIC OF THE HEART
(Miramax)
Starring:  Meryl Streep, Aidan Quinn, Angela Bassett, Jane Leeves, Gloria
Estefan, Jay O. Sanders.
Screenplay:  Pamela Gray, inspired by the documentary SMALL WONDERS.
Producers:  Walter Scheuer, Allan Miller, Susan Kaplan, Marianne
Maddalena.
Director:  Wes Craven.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  118 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Before the screening of MUSIC OF THE HEART I attended, there was a
short clip in which Mery Streep and Gloria Estefan appealed to viewers to
support arts and music education. It was a heartfelt appeal, and I was
surprised to find the film evoking a heartfelt response. I was touched by
the perseverance of Roberta Guaspari (Streep), the real-life East Harlem
music instructor on whose life the film was based. I responded
passionately to the narrow-minded administrative mandates that, in times
of budgetary constraint, describe the arts and music in public schools as
"extra," or not part of a "core curriculum." And my heart was lightened at
the sights and sounds of children making beautiful music. I'll willingly
make the following admission, Gentle Readers: I found myself getting
misty-eyed during MUSIC OF THE HEART. 
     I follow this admission with one of a different sort, the sort that
makes viewers everywhere want to throttle critics within an inch of their
thumb-turning, star-distributing lives: MUSIC OF THE HEART, moving though
it may be, just isn't a particularly good film. It begins with former Navy
wife and mother of two Guaspari coping -- badly -- with her husband
leaving her, trying to figure out what will come next in her life. In need
of work and a sense of purpose, the one-time musician and occasional
teacher proposes to East Harlem elementary school principal Janet Williams
(Angela Bassett) a violin program for students. Though the program
initially faces major obstacles from parents and other teachers, it
eventually becomes a phenomenal success, providing discipline and a sense
of accomplishment for kids unfamiliar with those concepts. Then those
nasty budget cuts begin rearing their ugly head, forcing Roberta to find
creative funding solutions.
     There's no denying the fundamental emotional appeal of a story like
this one. Hollywood has always loved "inspirational teacher" films, and 
there have been plenty of them: THE MIRACLE WORKER; TO SIR, WITH LOVE;
CONRACK; DEAD POETS SOCIETY; STAND AND DELIVER; LEAN ON ME; MR. HOLLAND'S
OPUS; DANGEROUS MINDS; etc. In recent years they have become even more
prevalent -- perhaps indicative of how much more complicated teaching has
become -- as well as more rigidly formulaic. The unconventional teacher
meets with resistance from students; some intransigent teachers (here the
amusingly monotonal Josh Pais) view the newcomer as a threat to their
slothful cynicism; eventually there is proof that the teacher has made a
difference. 
     The ultimate disappointment of MUSIC OF THE HEART has little to do
with its predictability; on the contrary, like many films of its kind it
hits its emotional high notes even though you know exactly where they're
going to come. No, the disappointment in MUSIC OF THE HEART comes from a
strangely fragmented narrative that never quite commits to a central
story. The film occasionally explores the juxtaposition of Guaspari's
background and that of her students, but the intrusions of social problems
in the kids' lives are lurching and token pieces of "reality" -- a child
of separated parents here, a victim of a drive-by shooting there, an
instance of domestic abuse thrown in for good measure. Pamela Gray's
script also toys with Guaspari's own search for confidence as she instills
it in her students, but that story is resolved long before the final
fade-out, leaving a blurry character for Streep to develop. When the story
starts winding its way into Guaspari's experiment with blind dating, you
have to wonder if director Wes Craven has any sense for its focus.
     The real kicker comes during the final 45 minutes, when the story
suddenly leaps forward 10 years to the violin program's financial
crisis. There's no question it was a pivotal moment in the history of
Guaspari's program, nor is there any question the Carnegie Hall benefit 
concert -- featuring big name performers like Isaac Stern, Itzhak Perlman
and Arnold Steinhardt -- makes for a rousing finish. It just doesn't feel
like part of the same film. STAND AND DELIVER reached its natural 
conclusion with the first successful AP exam; MUSIC OF THE HEART tags on a
45-minute coda after Guaspari's first successful concert. Of course there
are several touching moments in that final 45 minutes, and throughout the
film. Unfortunately, however, it's the ideas alone that are touching, not
the way the film presents them. It's easy to be moved by the sentiments 
expressed in Streep and Estefan's introductory clip.  It's harder to be
moved by a story that lets the mere concept of an "inspirational teacher"
film do all the work.

Author
Jonathan F Richards
     To repeat that Meryl Streep is the most gifted movie actress of her
generation is to be the bearer of no startling news.  One of Streep's most
remarkable qualities as an actress is that she finds her personality and
mannerisms in her characters, whereas most actors, even very good ones,
bring their own personae to the character.  In "Music of the Heart", a
movie based on a true story previously told in the documentary "Small
Wonders", she plays Roberta Guaspari, a determined woman who teaches violin
to kids at an East Harlem elementary school.  Streep spent two months
intensively learning the instrument, and she hardens her jaw and thickens
her speech into the patterns of a small-town girl and Navy wife whose
horizons are defined by her marriage and her music.  
When the marriage falls apart, she's helplessly adrift until a chance
meeting with an old friend (Aidan Quinn) leads to her traveling to New York
to land a job.  Streep's face as she rides a taxi through Harlem, clutching
her pocket book to her breast, tells you everything you need to know about
this woman.
Sadly, there is more to the movie than Streep's acting.  There is also
a screenplay, stitched together by Pamela Gray like a quilt of the most
familiar material she can find.  Gray has gathered her patches from every
movie ever made about teachers in inner city schools, without ever
stumbling across any with dramatic value.  The result is a series of
monotonous, colorless, repetitive and boring scenes about a life that would
not appear to be worth the telling if it were not for a lively and stirring
grand finale at the movie's end.  When Guaspari's school program is
threatened with a budget redline, she pulls together a benefit "Fiddlefest"
that winds up in Carnegie Hall with guest artists like Itzhak Perlman and
Isaac Stern sharing the stage with Roberta and her students.  Only at this
late point does the Kleenex come out, and the two hour ordeal rises at last
to a satisfying conclusion.  The presence of these virtuosi and the
legendary venue brings some magic, but it is magic that is borrowed, not
earned.  
The role of Roberta Guaspari was originally Madonna's, but she took a
powder a couple of weeks before shooting started.  Too bad.  Madonna's
acting talent would have been less at odds with the level of the material. 
The shocker is that this drab and uneventful exercise is directed by that
master slasher, Wes Craven ("Nightmare on Elm Street", "Scream").   In his
effort to mend his ways, Craven has crawled into the soft shell of the
reformed drinker who used to be life of the party, but now bores everyone
to tears.  

Author
James Sanford
         If you didn't know going in that "Music of the Heart" is based
on a true story, you might easily mistake it for Hollywood hokum. Simply
put, many of the events in the life of violinist/educator Roberta
Guaspari seem too good to be true.
 After being left high and dry with two young sons by her naval
officer husband, Guaspari took a friend's advice and seized the
opportunity to work as a substitute music teacher at an alternative
elementary school in East Harlem. Despite skepticism from her fellow
faculty members -- "their attention span doesn't go beyond 'do re mi',"
cracks one veteran of the students -- Guaspari went forward with her
plans to use the 50 violins she'd purchased during a stay in Greece as
tools to start a violin class. Soon, she had to hold a lottery to limit
her class sizes.
 Acclaim and support also poured in from the brightest lights in
the classical music world, and when Guaspari's program was threatened
because of budget cuts, such stars as Itzhak Perlman, Joshua Bell and
Isaac Stern offered their support to save it.
 It all sounds enormously uplifting and hugely contrived.
Sometimes "Music" plays that way, too, especially in the early
stretches, which include a fairly tepid romance between Guaspari and a
crusading journalist (Adian Quinn) and some early brushes with a
no-nonsense principal (Angela Bassett) that seem a bit too calculated.
Director Wes Craven, taking a break from the horror films he's best
known for (the original "Nightmare on Elm Street" and the first "Scream"
are two of his crowning achievements), initially has a tough time
getting the rhythms of his scenes down and several of them run on too
long or end abruptly.
 But "Music" does finally overcome its haphazard first reels,
due in large part to a typically vibrant performance by Meryl Streep as
Guaspari. It's no secret the movie was originally intended as a vehicle
for Madonna -- in fact, the real-life Guaspari looks more like Madonna
than Streep.
 Without denigrating Madonna's abilities, it's difficult to believe she
would have improved on Streep's work here. Streep makes Guaspari's
metamorphosis from self-pitying victim to impassioned activist seem
effortless and, while a pro might spot flaws in her musicianship, her
playing certainly looks and sounds genuine.
 On top of that, most of Streep's scenes are played opposite
children, something any actor will tell you is a challenge at the best
of times. Not only does she refuse to condescend to these little
co-stars, she dares them to rise to her level, and many of them do just
that. This is not a movie that pauses to dwell on the dimpled cheeks of
a little cutie; the kids in this cast actually have to work, probably in
much the same way Guaspari's students did.
 Though it doesn't always manage to make Guaspari's trials
credible, the script does make some valid points about how people can
impose limitations on themselves and their children. Confronting a
self-righteous African-American mom who wants to pull her son out of the
violin class because she can't see any point in him learning "dead white
men's music," Roberta asks pointedly, "What if Arthur Ashe's mother had
told him he couldn't play tennis because it was a white man's game?".
 The film actually improves on Guaspari's autobiography of the
same title by making at least some effort to individualize some of her
pupils; the book tends to address them as statistics. But ultimately
both the book and the movie have the same message, that sometimes what
we think is our biggest disaster can actually be the springboard for our
greatest triumph. It's an age-old sentiment, but Guaspari and Streep
sell it with plenty of conviction. James Sanford
