Title
Review for Big Carnival, The (1951)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Also known as "The Big Carnival", "Ace in the Hole"
was a major commercial failure  for director/producer/
co-screenwriter Billy Wilder.  The theme was too harshly
critical and misanthropic for audiences who were seeking
entertainment.  However, the film is highly regarded today
in this more cynical age.  If anything, the story has become
more appropriate over the years, as the separation
between news and entertainment has blurred.
Kirk Douglas was ideally cast as cynical, talented
journalist Chuck Tatum.  Fired from several high-paying
jobs due to his reckless behavior, he takes a job
at a small New Mexico paper and waits for his chance
to reclaim the big-time.  His big break occurs when
miner Leo Minosa (Richard Benedict) is trapped in
an Indian cliff dwelling.  Tatum successfully manipulates
the story into a media circus, in the process striking
bargains with Tatum's selfish, loveless wife Lorraine
(Jan Sterling) and a crooked sheriff (Ray Teal).
Lorraine must pretend she is grief-stricken, while
Teal receives favorable publicity in return for giving
Tatum exclusive access to Leo.  Meanwhile, poor Leo is
left to die, as the rescue operation is deliberately
slowed in order to stretch out the story.
Midway through the film, Tatum has a character
transformation due to his guilt over Leo's plight.
This is the major weakness of the film: had
the venal Tatum survived and emerged triumphant,
the film would have retained greater shock value
and would have made its point more clearly.  But
it is understandable why Douglas' character was
changed; the film was too forceful for contemporary
audiences even as released.
Lorraine and the sheriff, however, remain completely
unsympathetic throughout.  Their characters' favorable
outcomes, contrasted with Tatum's self-destruction,
also makes a point.  If you have been a heel all of
your life, no one will buy it when you become a
do-gooder.  The character of cub photographer
Herbie (Robert Arthur) is also interesting: his
trusting, ethical character is quickly corrupted
by Tatum's unscrupulous, sensational brand of
journalism.
The script has some great lines.  My favorite is
Tatum's boast "Now that they've pitched me a big
fat one, I'm gonna smack it right out of the
ballpark."
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
