Title
Review for Sap saam taai bo (1973)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
J. Crawford
     Revenge, burnings, traditional dance numbers, drinking
(drunkenness), lechery, attempted rape, plotting, more revenge,
... dynastic intrigue, pageantry, all the elements of a classic Shaw
Brothers production (filmed in Shawscope!) are included in THE HEROIC
ONES.  This gem of the classic age of kung fu movies is directed by the
great Chang Cheh who clearly is the forerunner of modern day filmmakers
like Tsui Hark and his contemporaries.  If you've seen any of Hark's
films (SWORDSMAN; WONG FEI HONG 1, 2, 3; ZU, WARRIORS OF MAGIC
MOUNTAIN; etc.), you should check out Cheh's HEROIC ONES.
     This epic features David Chiang in the role of the 13th prince,
a powerful young fighter, one of thirteen brothers who all seem to be
skilled martial artists.  Chiang, at the time, was a rising young star
at the Shaw Brothers studio, Western audiences saw him paired with the
late great Peter Cushing a few years later in the Hammer/Shaw Brothers
co-production THE LEGEND OF THE 7 GOLDEN VAMPIRES (a.k.a. 7 BROTHERS
AGAINST DRACULA).
     The 13th prince is the favored son of the king with 13 sons. he
appears to be the youngest, brashest, strongest, and most charming of
the 13 brothers.  His lofty status with the king causes jealousy among a
couple of his brothers which leads to a very gruesome family feud.
throughout this adventure there are a number of excellent fighting
scenes.  The last third of the film is full of great sword-fighting and
super kung fu.
     Director Chang Cheh has made over a hundred films in his long
and illustrious career.  His work for the Shaw Brothers studio represents
the best films produced during the 1960s and early 1970s at that most
renowned motion picture factory. His use of lighting and costumes to
establish character is outstanding here.  His camera seems to be always
moving into the action and the editing draws the viewer in to the story
at hand.
     All the performers do well in their roles.  Ti Lung performs well
as the 11th prince as does Chin Han in his role as the eldest son.  Han
turns in a surprisingly poignant performance. there are many good
scenes in THE HEROIC ONES but one of the very best is an extended scene
in which Ti Lung must rescue his father from an assassination attempt
and together they must fight their way out of the enemy's city.
     This is apparently a complete version of the film and it contains
one of the bloodiest, most visceral murders that I can recall seeing in
any Shaw Brothers film of that era.  It took this viewer completely by
surprise and I loved it.  The screenplay, up to that point, gives no
indication of this scene happening and when it does, it blows you
away.  There are some universal ideas and concepts included in THE
HEROIC ONES that are clearly expressed in this wonderful film without
spoken words.  Clearly, Chang Cheh should have a place of honor in the
history of global cinema.
