Title
Review for Outbreak (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     OUTBREAK is a detective story and a thriller about a germ.  It was
produced and directed by Wolfgang Petersen of DAS BOOT and IN THE LINE
OF FIRE fame.  This is a director who knows how to create great tension
that really grabs the audience's attention and holds it through out the
entire movie.  He is also a master at action sequences and the military
helicopter scenes in this flick were evidence of his abilities as well
as that of the cinematographer.
     OUTBREAK starts in a remote village in Zaire.  From the very
beginning of the show we know that there is a virus of cataclysmic
proportions.  It works so fast that if you are not dead in twenty-four
hours after being exposed, you are safe.  This germ detective story is
excellent and the pacing is good so that your eyes stay glued to the
screen.  Go to the bathroom before entering, you don't want to miss any
of the details.  It is complex and yet quite easy to follow.
     The germ detective work had much the flavor of the movie AND THE
BAND PLAYED ON about the hunt for the source of the AIDS illness.
OUTBREAK at its best was almost as good.  Petersen is a master
director.
     After seeing this movie, I should warn you that you may never want
to fly in airplanes again.  You certainly will find yourself leaving
any theater where someone coughs.
     Sad to say, we also learn from the beginning that there is a
subplot in the show that is going to have us believe that our military
has some covert operations of massively evil proportions going on.
Without this ridiculous and unnecessary sojourn into again lambasting
our own generals, the movie had a perfectly plausible ring to it.
     The acting was uneven.  Dustin Hoffman, whom I have not seen in
many movies recently, stars as the military chief of biological
research.  His research was on finding the causes of and curing viral
infections--not on developing killer germs.  Hoffman delivers star
quality work.  He is totally believable and never goes overboard with
his acing which he has been known to do in other films.
     Also excellent in the show was Hoffman's sidekick played by Cuba
Gooding Jr.  He played the aggressive green recruit character in fresh
and interesting ways.  He enliven every scene he was in.
     Rene Russo who was so excellent in Petersen's last show, IN THE
LINE OF FIRE, was given a poorly written part as Hoffman's domestic
counterpart--the head of germ research at the CDC.  She was also his
ex-wife.  (Believably, having an ex-wife as beautiful as Russo, Hoffman
spent most of the movie trying to get her back.) Russo's acting was not
credible and moreover, I would just as soon have seen her whole part
eliminated.  The germ research had the energy to stand on its own and
did not need a romantic second subplot to add excitement to the movie.
     Another tragedy of the film was the wasting of Morgan Freeman as
Hoffman's commanding general.  This was the weakest character Freeman
has ever been asked to play--very one dimensional.  This brilliant
actor (GLORY, DRIVING MISS DAISY, THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, etc.) did
not seem to care about the show and gave a pedestrian performance.
Finally, the less said about Donald Sutherland's part as the Major
General who was Freeman's boss, the better.  Both characters were
cliches that should not have been in a movie of this caliber.
     OUTBREAK runs an exciting 2:00.  It is rated R for bleeding
eyeballs and other makeup effects that you see on Halloween masks.
There was a 10 year old behind me that loved the movie.  I recommend
this tension filled detective story to everyone above the age of about
9, and I award it ***.  Absent the unnecessary diabolical military
subplot, I would have been able to give the movie another half star.
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The film starts with a quote saying that viruses pose the greatest
threat to human existence on this planet.  That is probably fairly
accurate.
     Hey, want to see something really scary?  I am not talking scary
because things jump out at you or actors wear plastic masks.  I am
talking scary because it is only too possible.  It probably has already
come near to happening in recent years.  Most of OUTBREAK is a very
credible extrapolation of what might well happen if a seriously
dangerous virus got loose in this country.  If Zaire Ebola had gotten
loose close to home the events shown in OUTBREAK are really quite
possible.  In fact it is difficult to read the non-fiction books THE
COMING PLAGUE by Laurie Garrett or THE HOT ZONE by Richard Preston
without envisioning scenarios not unlike the one in this film.
     As the film opens with an outbreak of a viral disease in Zaire in
1967, the U.S. Army's response to eliminate the disease is quick but
effective.  Twenty-eight years later an Army team from Fort Dietrich
led by Dr. Sam Daniels (Dustin Hoffman) finds a new viral disease has
broken out in the Motaba River Valley and dubs the disease Motaba.
Even Daniels, who is used to working with the likes of Ebola, Lassa,
and Hanta, is frightened by the virulence of Motaba.  And even as he is
returning home to report the terrible new disease, Motaba virus is
traveling to the U.S. by its own route.  And a disease with the
virulence to infect 260,000,000 people in 48 hours and to kill them in
not much more is loosed.
     Daniels wants to pursue the new disease but is ordered off.
Ironically, his ex-wife, Dr. Roberta Keough (Rene Russo), who works for
the Centers for Disease Control, has an opportunity to investigate the
same disease Sam has told her about.  Daniels finds his strings being
pulled by his superior officer, played by Morgan Freman, and a higher-
up general, played by Donald Sutherland, neither of whom want him
working on the new virus.  Sutherland is quick to call in drastic
action to quarantined areas.  "Be compassionate," he tells a
Presidential commission on the crisis, "but be compassionate globally."
What he sees as compassion on the global level is something very
different on the local level.  The film clearly doesn't agree with this
policy, but under the circumstances he may be talking sense.
     One problem with the script by Laurence Dworet and Robert Roy Pool
is that it is all too obviously trying both to be realistic and at the
same time to be an action film.  The two just don't go that well
together.  OUTBREAK wastes time on developing the rocky relationship
between the two divorced doctors.  Then it wastes the last third of the
film on an unlikely and gratuitous action story built around a
surprisingly tired and over-used premise.  It makes a human the villain
as if the story did not have enough viral villains.  And the human
villain's motive is a strikingly overused cliche.  More disappointing,
the race to understand and control the new virus is diverted into a
standard action-film chase.  This takes time and emphasis away from
more interesting questions such as how is it possible to maintain a
strict quarantine on a town of 2600 people?  When the chases are over
it is all the harder to remember what set this story apart from so many
similar action films.
     It is a shock to see Dustin Hoffman in a science fiction film and
one in which he plays an action hero, albeit a reluctant one.  Donald
Sutherland plays much the same character he played in PUPPET MASTERS,
though he plays the character as seen from a different viewpoint.  Rene
Russo is competent and likable in her role, and it is nice to have a
woman over thirty-five in a starring role, but she does not imbue her
character with any real power.  Curiously, for a German, director
Wolfgang Petersen seems to have a need to put action in a story that
might work better as a more cerebral piece.  That is a fault here even
as it was with his ENEMY MINE.
     This is a film I can well recommend for its first two-thirds and
if you have come that far, at least you will not be bored when the film
turns from extrapolation to action.  But the final forty minutes or so
has some serious sacrifices of logic for commerciality.  Somebody
apparently decided that the more interesting and more credible story
would not sell.  I was at times thinking this would be a strong +3, but
it lost a point in the final reel.  It remains a high +2 on the -4 to
+4 scale.
     The following are comments I made about OUTBREAK before seeing the
film:
     "Let me put it this way.  In its present form the Satan Bug is an
extremely refined powder.  I take a saltspoon of this powder, go
outside into the grounds of Mordon and turn the saltspoon upside down.
What happens?  Every person in Mordon would be dead within the hour,
the whole of Wiltshire would be an open tomb by dawn.  In a week, ten
days, all life would have ceased to exist in Britain.  I mean all life.
The Plague, the Black Death--as nothing compared with this.  Long
before the last man died in agony, ships or planes or birds or just the
waters of the North Sea would have carried the Satan Bug to Europe.  We
can conceive of no obstacle that can stop its eventual world-wide
spread.  Two months, I would say two months at the very most....  The
Lapp in the far north of Sweden.  The Chinese peasant tilling his rice
fields in the Yangtze valley.  The cattle rancher on his station in the
Australian outback, the shopper on Fifth Avenue, the primitive in
Tierra del Fuego.  All dead.  Because I turned a saltspoon upside
down....  Who would be the last to go?  I cannot say.  Perhaps the
great albatross forever winging its way round the bottom of the world.
Perhaps a handful of Eskimos deep in the Arctic basin.  But the seas
travel the world over, and so also do the winds; one day, one day soon,
they too would die."
     That was from the novel THE SATAN BUG by Ian Stuart (a pen name
for Alastair MacLean).  Almost the identical quote was used in the film
version.  And it hooked me into a different type of science fiction I
had not known about before, epidemiological science fiction which looks
at what would happen if some really virulent and contagious disease got
loose on modern society.
     I like to consider science fiction a field where people are
thinking out some of the most serious issues that could be shaping our
future.  It is the ideal place to work out some of the more frightening
epidemic scenarios, much as it was for working out scenarios of nuclear
war.  But on the whole science fiction writers have avoided talking
about disease or have limited themselves to separating themselves from
the real action by examining isolated groups of scientists as in
ANDROMEDA STRAIN or the aftermath as in EARTH ABIDES or the British
television series SURVIVORS.  Even THE STAND concentrated only on
people who were to survive.  The time is right for science fiction to
consider the most serious societal aspects of epidemics, but I do not
know if OUTBREAK is the right film.
     Consider some of the issues that particularly dangerous viruses
raise.  Suppose some new virus that came along was something so bad
that the rights of the afflicted were overwhelmed by the danger they
pose to those not yet afflicted.  That is pretty much what happened
with diseases in the Middle Ages, and all our medical research has done
has been to raise the threshold a little to make it harder for a
disease to reach that level.  Science fiction writers, be they in
literature or film, have never seemed as excited by that concept as
they might be.  The attitude of writers has seemed to be, "After all,
we have licked polio and smallpox and it is just a matter of time for
the rest of the diseases."  Well, now people are starting to realize
that we are not as secure as we thought.  Malaria and tuberculosis are
on the rebound; AIDS is not readily amenable to treatment.  And we
think of AIDS as being a horrible disease, but we still have the luxury
(and, yes, the responsibility) to consider the rights of the victim.
If AIDS was as contagious as Zaire Ebola the politics of dealing with
it would have to be very different.  (Incidentally, a very sobering
thought: the best evidence is that Sudan Ebola did not have a common
origin with Zaire Ebola.  That means that in the course of a few short
months nature had invented the Ebola virus twice.)  How would we handle
a disease for which care-giving was tantamount to suicide?  What if the
mere proximity of victims constituted a genuine threat?  Many of the
most bigoted myths and exaggerations about AIDS are theoretically
possible in some disease.  In fact, even AIDS is probably worse in some
regards than the disease in OUTBREAK.  It has a much longer interval of
contagion before showing symptoms.  Combine that with high
susceptibility and you have a monster a few microns long that is a lot
scarier than anything most writers have considered so far.  Hopefully,
recent books on the subject of newly emerging diseases may get people
thinking about these issues even if science fiction writers continue to
shy away from the subject.

Author
Steve Kong
Humans might be on top of the food chain, but Outbreak shows just how weak
we are up here. The scary thing is that realistically we won't be wiped out
by something bigger and larger, but by something so small that we need a
microscope to see it. Outbreak brings up the scary, but frighteningly
realistic, premise that a virus, not unlike the Ebola Zaire virus, could
wipe us out with in days.
Outbreak starts about thirty years ago in Africa, where an Ebola-like virus
Motaba has almost wiped out an entire village. The doctors and survivors
are told that they will be getting medical supplies soon and they cheer as
a plane flies overhead and drops a package. They find out all too late that
the package contains not medical supplies but something to wipe out the
Motaba virus.
The U.S. Government believes that the virus has been wiped out until in
present day it shows up again. An illegally shipped monkey infects one guy
and director Wolfgang (Air Force One) Peterson uses an unusually
entertaining (though very frightening) way of showing how the virus is
passed along. Outbreak follows Col. Daniels (Dustin Hoffman) who is a
specialist with viruses. He's just getting over a divorce with Robby (Renee
Russo), whom he used to work together with, but she is now going off to
Atlanta to work with the Center of Disease Control.
Daniels is sent to Africa to check out the outbreak and it looks pretty
serious. But, his officials, General McClintock (Donald Sutherland) and
General Ford (Morgan Freeman), doubt that the outbreak can reach America.
That is until a whole town is infected and dying. Daniels along with his
team of specialists, his ex-wife, and a whole lot of Army grunts quarantine
off the town and try to find out how to cure all these people.
While Daniels is trying to find the cure, McClintock devises a way to try
to firebomb the town to get rid of the virus.
Director Wolfgang Peterson has a good eye with the camera. He has many long
continuous shots that are quite interesting to watch. One of these
interesting shots follows the path of a flying virus, which is absolutely
amazing and frightening, when you see it. Peterson knows his timing also;
he keeps the film moving along at a good pack, never really stopping to
take a breath. And as far as action goes, he knows how to do that also.
Outbreak seems to have two distinct parts to it. The first part is a
chilling techno-thriller. This first hour is very interesting and
informative showing how the virus can be passed on, how the virus ravages
the human body, and how it eventually kills a human. The second hour is
more of an action film. This hour includes a thrilling helicopter chase, a
race against the clock to find "the host", and playing chicken with a C-130.
Though I thoroughly enjoyed both parts of the film, I would have like to
have seen the film follow through intelligently with the first half of the
film without having to go to the race against the clock formula.
Worth mentioning, next to the two leads, Dustin Hoffman and Renee Russo, is
Cuba Gooding Jr. Though he has a stock character, as Major Salt, he does
all he can with it, and is one of the most memorable characters in the film.
There are some minor annoyances with Outbreak. One would be the thin
subplot about Hoffman's Col. Daniels and Russo's Robby. Though it's an OK
subplot to have in there, it wasn't quite necessary. The action ending, as
mentioned before, feels somewhat tacked on. It is exciting though, but
there could have been a more intelligent way to end the film.
Outbreak is a thrilling film that for the first hour uses its intellect to
thrill you, then in the second hour it uses its adrenaline rush action to
thrill you. Outbreak is an overall fun film to see, so don't miss this movie. 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     If we learned anything during those lazy Saturday afternoon sci-fi
film festivals of our youth, it's that there's nothing more fun than
watching the end of the world.  WAR OF THE WORLDS ... INVASION OF THE
BODY SNATCHERS ... THE DAY THE EARTH CAUGHT FIRE ... great disaster flicks
from an era when our fears were fueled by the space race and the arms
race.  Decades later, those fears are still there. Only now we've
traded our space suits for bio suits.
     In the super-creepy OUTBREAK--which has nothing to do with the
Richard Preston bestseller CRISIS IN THE HOT ZONE--the threat is the
deadly Motaba virus, which has spread from the African jungle to the
sleepy California community Cedar Creek.  The disease is 100%
contagious and 100% fatal.  The victims bleed from the inside out.
     Only one scientist (Dustin Hoffman) knows how bad the situation
really is, and, of course, he's the lone voice of logic against every
possible cliche, from the ex-wife colleague (Rene Russo) to the
skeptical military commander (Morgan Freeman).  He even has a
wet-behind-the-ears sidekick!
     Director Wolfgang Petersen turns the screws very effectly, even if
he paces the film like a sequel to SPEED.  The are very few pauses in
the first ninety minutes, so some scenes seem rushed.  No problem,
There's still *plenty* of paranoia to go around.  The sight of soliders
barricading a quarantined town is something to see.  As is a
single-take tour of the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute for
Infectious Diseases.  The best, by far, is a sequence showing airborne
microbes spewing from a coughing patron in a movie theater!
     The whole thing works very well until the final reel, at which
point the film falls apart.  Credit a pair of tacked-on helicopter
chases and a completely unnecessary confrontation between Morgan
Freeman and Donald Sutherland (as a goofy general).  The added action
is pretty stupid, and it almost causes an important plot point to get
glossed over.  But who am I to argue with audience testers?
BOTTOM LINE:  Contagious fun with a lousy ending.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: general release 3/10/95
Running Length: 2:08
MPAA Classification: R (Graphic disease, language)
Starring: Dustin Hoffman, Renee Russo, Morgan Freeman, Donald Sutherland,
          Cuba Gooding Jr., Patrick Dempsey, Kevin Spacey
Director: Wolfgang Petersen
Producers: Arnold Koppelson, Wolfgang Petersen, and Gail Katz
Screenplay: Laurence Dworet and Robert Roy Pool
Cinematography: Michael Ballhaus
Music: James Newton Howard
Released by Warner Brothers
     Apparently, it isn't enough for a plague to be the villain.  A
microscopic entity, "one billionth [human] size" with the potential of
wiping out the population of the United States in 48 hours, doesn't
represent a sufficient threat.  Therefore, OUTBREAK has decided to give
us a nasty, power-mad U.S. army general who is more concerned with
pursuing his own agenda than saving a couple thousand citizens in the
small California community of Cedar Creek.
     The problem with OUTBREAK is that extraneous plot elements like
Donald Sutherland's general, a couple of aerial chases, and an
unbelievably contrived search for a monkey, keep getting in the way of a
chilling horror story.  What would happen if a contagious, lethal virus
with no known antidote, got out of control?  How would the citizens,
doctors, patients, and government deal with the situation?  In this film,
we're given tantalizing glimpses of that scenario, but the need to
interject action and adventure for a momentary thrill robs OUTBREAK of
dramatic power.
     Yes, this movie is an entertaining and sometimes wildly-exhilarating
ride.  The helicopter chase sequence is thrilling--only it doesn't seem
to belong here.  And, when the movie is over, any more-than-cursory
consideration of the plot reveals gaps that even sizable doses of
coincidence and contrivance can't completely fill.  OUTBREAK is not one
of those pictures that improves in retrospect.
     The story opens with a fast-paced, dazzling display of firepower as
an entire village is annihilated in Zaire's Motaba River Valley.  Ordered
by two army types (Donald Sutherland and Morgan Freeman), this is deemed
the only viable "cure" for a rampant plague.  Many--both the sick and
the healthy--die, but the virus is kept from spreading, at least for
the better part of three decades.  But in 1995, it shows up again, only
this time it's not restricted to Africa.  Brought across the Atlantic by
an infected monkey, the Motaba infection mutates into a more deadly
strain, and begins to attack the American public.
     A small group of dedicated professionals are the first--and
perhaps only--line of defense against the virus.  These include Col.
Sam Daniels (Dustin Hoffman); his ex-wife, Robby (Renee Russo); his best
friend, Casey (Kevin Spacey); and the newcomer to the team, Maj. Salt
(Cuba Gooding Jr.).  Defying direct orders from Freeman's General Ford to
stop the investigation, Sam uses all the resources at his disposal to win
the battle against his microscopic foe before one of his loved ones is
stricken.
     As directed by accomplished film maker Wolfgang Petersen (IN THE
LINE OF FIRE, DAS BOOT), OUTBREAK is a beautifully photographed,
competently-acted piece.  Dustin Hoffman is carefully contained as
Daniels, never straying over the top.  Cuba Gooding Jr. gives a stable,
if sometimes cliched performance, as the "sidekick."  Freeman and Russo
are solid in supporting roles.  Only Sutherland, sporting an American
accent, can't avoid chewing on the scenery.  His portrayal, like his
character, would be more at home in DR. STRANGELOVE than here, and it's a
sore spot that the movie never quite recovers from.
     Most viewers are likely to enjoy OUTBREAK, especially coming as it
does in the midst of a veritable wasteland of general release
pictures.  It's an escapist thriller with good guys to root for and bad
guys to hiss at.  Yet the source of lamentation is not what's on
screen, but what could have been there.  No one likes to be teased, but
that's exactly what this movie does to us, with predictably frustrating
results.  Fluff--especially the variety with a lot of flashes and
bangs--often makes for perfect light entertainment, except when, as in
the case of OUTBREAK, it starts out with the promise of so much
more ... a promise that is never fulfilled on a higher-than-superficial
level.
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Dustin Hoffman, Rene Russo, Morgan Freeman, Cuba Gooding Jr.,
           Kevin Spacey, Donald Sutherland.
Screenplay:  Laurence Dworet and Robert Roy Pool.
Director:  Wolfgang Petersen.
     You've got to love it when Hollywood producers find themselves
scrambling to be the first out of the blocks with an idea.  As has
already occurred in recent years with Robin Hood and Wyatt Earp
projects, there was a race last year between two studios to get
killer virus films into production.  A project based on the current
best seller THE HOT ZONE was originally set with Robert Redford
and Jodie Foster starring, but script troubles caused the deal to
fall apart.  That left OUTBREAK alone to cash in on the virus fever
generated by THE HOT ZONE, and it's likely to be a big hit.
Though its conventional action climax doesn't fulfill the promise of
a gripping first hour, it's still a satisfying popcorn thriller.
     Dustin Hoffman stars as Sam Daniels, an Army scientist
specializing in epidemeology.  When he is sent to investigate a
plague in Zaire, he discovers a highly communicable virus with a
100% mortality rate.  His attempts to warn his boss General Billy
Ford (Morgan Freeman) go mostly unheeded, until a monkey carrying
the virus is smuggled out of Africa and finds ints way into a small
Northern California town.  As the disease spreads rapidly through
the population and the town is quarantined, Daniels goes to work
with his team of experts:  ex-wife Robby Keough (Rene Russo);
veteran bug-hunter Casey (Kevin Spacey); and the cocky but untested
Salt (Cuba Gooding Jr.).  Unfortunately, the military has its own
interests to protect, and that means that one way or another, no one
is getting out of town alive.
     The first half of OUTBREAK, which actually deals with the
spread of the disease, is as tense an hour as I have spent at the
movies in a long time.  Director Wolfgang Petersen makes some great
decisions filming scenes like a tour through the Army's medical
facility, which moves ominously from labs studying relatively
benign viruses to those studying the bad boys.  There is also a
wickedly funny moment when an infected man sneezes in a movie
theater, and we watch particles flying through the air into other
people's mouths.  As long as the focus is on the progress of the
epidemic, and on the attempts by Hoffman's team to trace the path of
the infection, OUTBREAK is a taut and often nerve-wracking
experience.
     What eventually becomes clear is that Petersen's direction is
orders of magnitude better than the script from which he is working.
The battle-of-wills, love-hate relationship between Hoffman and
Russo is forced and unnecessary, as well as ripped off from THE
ABYSS.  The attempts at humor are frequently limp, the performances
(except those by Space and Gooding) perfunctory and the characters
of the standard, one-dimensional action film variety.  And those
aren't the only elements that warrant comparison to standard action
films, as the conclusion becomes not a down-to-the-wire hunt for a
cure in the lab, but a down-to-the-wire helicopter chase, or rather
several down-to-the-wire helicopter chases.  The sequences are
exciting and well-filmed, but they don't belong in this movie any
more than a U-boat battle would have belonged in SCHINDLER'S LIST.
     I have a personal beef with OUTBREAK as well, namely that it
relies so much on government conspiracy theories.  The prospect of a
deadly disease wreaking havoc is powerful enough without resorting
to paranoia-mongering, and I have yet to see much evidence that any
really big secret can be kept in the talk show age, let alone for
thirty years as is the case in OUTBREAK.  Frankly, it's sloppy
plotting, and indicative of OUTBREAK's roots as part of a race to be
first rather than best.  For one hour, OUTBREAK keeps the tension
high, but Petersen could have done much more with a script just a
re-write or two more polished.

Author
Dragan Antulov
When people think about the eradication of human race, they
usually envision nuclear holocaust, sudden change of
climate, asteroids falling from the sky or similar
spectacular events. But history teaches us that the equally
deadly potential lies in tiny microscopic organisms -
viruses and bacteria able to practically wipe out entire
nations. Invention of antibiotics and progress of medical
science in the last century or so created illusion that the
infectious diseases are the thing of the past. That illusion
was shattered with the epidemic of AIDS in 1980s, and people
are now more willing to pay attention when media starts
reporting about various exotic ailments that happen to be
contagious, deadly and untreatable. Few of those ailments
are as scary as various forms of haemorrhagic fever -
extremely contagious viral infection that causes one of the
most unpleasant deaths imaginable. Probably the most
notorious among them is Ebola, disease which killed hundreds
of people in central regions of Africa five years ago. By
the unusual yet chilling coincidence, these events happened
roughly in the same time as the premiere of OUTBREAK, major
Hollywood feature film that dealt the effects of Ebola-like
outbreak on modern society.
The "protagonist" of this film is Motaba virus, strain from
Central Africa which is able to kill infected human in less
than 48 hours upon contagion. Despite not being airborne and
thus having limited contagion potentials, the strain is so
deadly that the two US Army experts in late 1960s would
rather firebomb the infected camp in Central African jungle
than allow infection to spread further. Some thirty years
later, Motaba again strikes Central Africa, but, as usual in
such circumstances, isolated villagers are dead before they
can spread the infection further. Unfortunately, monkeys can
carry the virus and one of them is caught and smuggled into
USA. Soon, the population of Cedar Creek, small town in
California, starts getting sick and dying like flies.
Colonel Sam Daniels (played by Dustin Hoffman), U.S. Army
top expert for infectious diseases disobeys the orders of
his superiors - General Billy Ford (played by Morgan
Freeman) and General Donald McClintock (played by Donald
Sutherland) - and flies to now quarantined Cedar Creek in
order to investigate the origin of mysterious plague. There
he meets his estranged wife Robby Keough (played by Rene
Russo) who investigates disease as the head of CDC team.
They start working together while the crisis escalates,
because the strain mutated into airborne form. While Daniels
and Keough struggle to find possible cure and thus stop the
epidemic from spreading to the rest of the nation,
McClintock offers simple but grim alternative - firebombing
the town and incinerating the virus together with all the
inhabitants.
OUTBREAK was directed by Wolfgang Petersen, German filmmaker
who enjoys reputation of one of the best craftsmen in modern
Hollywood. His talent is at display in this film, especially
in the way he paces film and turns screenplay by Laurence
Dworet and Robert Roy Pool into thought-provoking yet
exciting story. The same feeling of doom and helplessness
that marked DAS BOOT, Petersen's best known film, could be
sensed here too, but Petersen creates it through entirely
different methods. Events in the film happen at the rapid
pace, and the viewer could empathise with the protagonists
who see world literally falling apart before their eyes, in
the same way microscopic bug destroys the bodies of their
victims. Petersen is uncompromising in the portrayal of the
destructive effects of haemorrhagic fever - nobody is immune
from its devastating effect, people get infected and die
regardless of their race, religion, gender, age or whether
they are nice people or not (all illustrated with almost
comedic but chilling shots of virus travelling from one
unsuspecting host to another). What is even more chilling in
this film is the way epidemic destroys society indirectly -
human relations, even most basic must be severed, kindness
and compassion equals suicide, people must leave their loved
ones in order to survive and the only way to stop the
apocalypse is to use even less considerations and more
genocidal potential than the illness itself. Because of the
chillingly realistic and believable depiction of the
apocalypse that might wait around the corner turned OUTBREAK
was supposed to be one of the best disaster films ever made
in Hollywood.
Unfortunately, that didn't happen. Although Petersen managed
to overcome some unnecessary plot distractions in the
screenplay (marital problems of the protagonists), he
couldn't overcome certain realities of 1990s Hollywood. And
one of such realities is the unwritten rule that any film
with a budget over 50 million US$ must have obligatory happy
ending in order to satisfy the audience. So, in the last
third, film suddenly changes genre and general mood - what
was supposed to be dark, disturbing drama about conflict
between Humanity and Nature is suddenly turning into
light-hearted actionfest that feature conflict between Good
Guy (Dustin Hoffman not very comfortable and even less
believable as action hero) and Bad Guy (in the form of
Donald Sutherland who repeats his evil bureaucrat/officer
routine for the umpteenth time). Naturally, all notions of
credibility go down the toilet and the viewers' intelligence
is repeatedly insulted with the series of implausibilities -
while average R&D in real life pharmaceutical industry takes
years to create drugs, our hero manages to extract the
medicine in the matter of minutes, just to save his wife in
time; bomber crews, which are trained to exterminate
millions of innocent civillians without any remorse, are
simply talked into disobeying the direct order). That last
segment of OUTBREAK - flooded with cliches and cheap
sentimentality - is probably the one of the most
disappointing pieces of celluloid ever made in 1990s
Hollywood and it could serve as the perfect illustration of
the sad state of American film industry.
To be fair, even in this segment, Petersen handles the
action very well, and OUTBREAK in general looks like a
well-acted and well-crafted film. But, among the many missed
opportunities of 1990s Hollywood, this one is probably the
most bitter.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
