Title
Review for Toys (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
David Vessell
Ahort!  My first non-music review.  Be patient with me.
     Visuals can fool a person into liking a mediocre movie.  Hell, I
fell hook, line, and sinker for THE LAWNMOWER MAN despite Brosnan and
Fahey's embarrassingly bad acting.  Long, long ago, I fell for TRON,
which is practically devoid of plot.  Visuals cannot rescue a movie with
neither acting nor a plot.  Makes sense, I think.
     TOYS does not lack for acting, and the plot is no more groundless
than your typical Tim Burton movie.  But for some reason, I walked out
of the theatre after seeing TOYS feeling less than satisfied.
     The general plot goes something like this:  Robin Williams is
Leslie Zevo, the gently eccentric son of the gently eccentric owner of
Zevo Toys who  kicks off and leaves the business to his brother, a
career military man played by Michael Gambon.  Gambon is as eccentric as
his deceased brother, but in a much less gentle way, and proceeds to
transform the previously light-hearted toy factory into a
security-paranoid breeding ground for war toys, real and imagined.  The
movie eventually leads to a confrontation between Williams and Gambon
and...well, go spend your five if you really need to know what goes from
here.
     Joan Cusack plays Leslie's outer-orbit sister Alsatia, Robin Wright
plays a worker who Leslie falls for (and vice versa), and LL Cool J
plays Gambon's son, Leslie's cousin.  The race thing is never addressed,
which is probably just as well, as it leaves an amusing mystery amongst
an already heavy suspension of reality.
     Individual kudos go to Joan Cusack and LL Cool J.  Cusack sparkles
as the gentle little-girl space cadet.  It would have been all too easy
to play Alsatia as a typical slapstick ditz, but instead her
characterization suggests a sharp, insightful eccentric.  LL Cool J,
obviously not an actor by trade, turns in a respectable if amateur
performance as the too-serious paramilitary nut who finds it necessary
to camouflage himself as a pile of couch cushions when visiting family.
Of course, J is a captive of the script and doesn't add all that much to
the character, but his deadpan delivery is charming.
     It's not that Robin Williams did a bad job, just that he didn't do
a spectacular job.  After seeing him in GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM and
ALADDIN, one expects energy and sheer crazed but tightly controlled
chaos.  Williams's performance here features small, confined burst of
that same mania but Levinson doesn't quite give him enough slack to
really sparkle.  Williams is also undermined by the script, which starts
out strong but crumbles right in the middle of the movie's climax.
     Michael Gambon turns in a good role as the evil military man who
takes his toys a few steps too far.  Though his character grows more and
more ridiculous as the movie wears on, Gambon holds you and you accept
it.  Though his funny moments in the movie are few and far between, he
makes the most of them, particularly the scene where he approaches his
invalid, mush-mouthed father for advice on whether or not to take over
the company.
     Robin Wright is fun to look at, and she does a competent job of
playing Williams's love interest, but that's about it.
     Did I mention visuals?  The toys, the mammoth factory sets, the
incredible shrinking room where Williams consults with his R&D team on
fake vomit, the computer animation.  Though the movie is not the special
effect tour de force that THE LAWNMOWER MAN was, it doesn't need to be.
But the visuals and cinematography make you feel wide open and
claustrophobic at all the right times.
     One aspect of the movie that most people are bound to miss is the
excellent soundtrack.  Hans Zimmer and Trevor Horn provide most of the
incidental music and write a good portion of the songs used.  Wendy and
Lisa provide "The Closing of the Year," which starts as a gentle
Christmas song and jumps into grand orchestral children's choir funk
stomp mode soon after.  Pat Metheny lends his guitar to another gentle
instrumental (the title of which I can't for the life of me recall),
which metamorphoses into a hauntingly weird operatic number once Grace
Jones's vocals join it later.  But the soundtrack is made by two
absolutely excellent tracks, "Happy Workers" by Tori Amos (yes, Tori
completists have another album to buy) and "The Mirror Song" by Thomas
Dolby.  The former accompanies the first panoramic factory scene, the
latter used in a mock music video staged by Leslie and Alsatia and is
probably the best song Dolby has done in years.
     Well, wrap it all up together and what do you get?  Eh.  The movie
starts out great, then stalls, then gains momentum as the confrontation
between Williams and Gambon begins, then crashes horribly on the ending.
The ending is what ruins the movie.  Too bad, because otherwise TOYS
would be a movie talked about for years to come.  Without the ending,
TOYS would have rated a +3 on the davE scale.  Instead....
-- 
*davE*   Making the world safe for intelligent dance music.  dave@bradley.edu.
########## David L. Vessell -- Bradley University Computing Services #########

Author
Malcolm Austin
     I liked this movie a lot more than other people seem to have.
Partially, I think, this is because of one of my own quirks of judging a
movie.  I will often greatly enjoy a movie that achieves a distinctive
mood or feel through music, set design, camerawork, or other incidental
components, even if the plot and/or central characters of the movie are
weak.  This is why I enjoy some "bad" movies such as DUNE, STREETS OF
FIRE, or THE 5,000 FINGERS OF DR. T.
     TOYS certainly achieves such a unique feel.  If this film does not
win an Oscar for set design, the Academy will have forfeited all
respectability as judges of artistic merit (like they haven't
already ...).  The movie is simply wonderful to watch from beginning to
end.  The only movie I can think of to compare it to is WILLY WONKA AND
THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY, but this film is far more sophisticated,
visually, than that.  (Even if it doesn't have the Oompa-Loompas.)  One
thing that surprised me was how good the soundtrack was.  It uses
several of my favorite contemporary musicians, such as Enya, Thomas
Dolby, and the new and obscure (or so I thought) Tori Amos.  Not since
NORTHERN EXPOSURE have I seen such a variety of music used well to
create mood.
     Let's quickly go over the bad points.  The plot is predictable, but
that's not really the problem.  It starts with a lot of promise for an
obvious formula, but quickly becomes very dumb, culminating in a final
scene reminiscent of the classic SANTA CLAUS CONQUERS THE MARTIANS.
(This is not a complement, believe me.)  Most of the casting is actually
quite fine, with the notable exception of Robin Wright, who wanders in
and out of the movie sporting a really strange Southern accent, and
seeming to imitate Darryl Hannah all through the movie.  Robin Williams
is a perfect choice for the character of Leslie Zevo, and not just as a
zany comedian, but his talent gets squandered so badly that his only
good moments are the scenes where he is, in fact, a zany comedian.
(Contrast this to DEAD POET'S SOCIETY, in which his *worst* moments are
when he is a zany comedian.)  He does have one hilarious scene towards
the end as he delivers a Pattonesque speech to a bunch of wind-up toys
in his inimitable style.
     Joan Cusack, on the other hand, delivers a wonderful performance as
Leslie's sister Alsatia.  I think her work was good enough to merit a
Best Supporting Actress nomination, although I doubt she'll get one.
     There are so many unique scenes in this movie that I think it is
well worth seeing, despite its obvious flaws.  I'll definitely be
watching this film again.
-- 
=Malcolm Austin==w:(212)703-6134==h:(914)633-3966==maus@fid.morgan.com=====

Author
Shane Burridge
I doubt many people were prepared for this whimsical project from
Barry Levinson, especially considering the solid base of reality that
his previous works had been grounded in.  Apart from occasionally
flirting with the fantastic (allegory in THE NATURAL, hallucinations
in YOUNG SHERLOCK HOLMES) Levinson had not been pegged as a fantasy
director by the Hollywood establishment, so it's interesting to
discover that TOYS was intended as his directorial debut (he made
DINER instead).  It's just as well he postponed it for ten years -
given its ambitious nature and lavish production I don't see how he
could have made it back then.
Film is set in a toy factory (which looks like a kind of kiddie
METROPOLIS) inherited by a cashiered General (Michael Gambon) who is
less than happy about losing his career in the army for a future in a
toyshop, especially one run by his frivolous nephew (Robin Williams,
in another of his kid-who-never-grew-up roles).  The world of TOYS is
too innocent by half, which is why it comes as no surprise to us when
the General decides to exploit the factory's production concepts for
his own ends.  Story is inventive and otherwordly, but even after ten
years of thought it doesn't appear that Levinson has gotten it quite
right - I think the ending, while logical in light of where the film
is heading, is unsatisfying, for one thing.  But as TOYS is set in a
world where nothing is what it appears, any intangibility on
Levinson's part can only seem fitting.  It's as if he remembered a
dream and tried to visualize it for others to see.  I also like the
tone that he maintains throughout much of its length - it would have
been too obvious to go the way of black comedy.  TOYS definitely isn't
dark: its bright primary colors are mixed with pastels; everything we
see is supergeometric, shiny, and spotless.  Even the newly-enthused
General gets into his role as factory owner by switching the design of
his camouflage outfit over to cheerful colors.
The main reason to see TOYS is its look.  Its crystal-clear
photography and innovative sets deserve to be seen in a cinema -that
much was apparent to me when viewing it a second time on television
and seeing how lacking in atmosphere the opening sequence looked in
comparison.  Surreal visual sense (inspired by Magritte), magical
setting (the only scenes outdoors take place in a ubiquitous green
field), and naive, offbeat plot make for a perfect bedtime story. 
Simple message - 'War is bad' - will not be lost on children.  That we
think the meetings of the toy executives trivial and absurd is ironic
considering we think nothing of the more familiar (but equally absurd)
domain of the strategic military conferences in the film.  Williams
combines both levels of play (toys and soldiers) in his climatic
address to the factory toys, throwing in every jingoistic cliche in
the books, combining Gandhi, Kennedy, Martin Luther King, Henry V,
Lord Kitchener.  Rapper LL Cool J acquits himself well as the
General's son.  Joan Cusak gives a standout performance as Williams'
quirky sister, who sums up attitude of film in her line "the best part
is no-one got hurt".
TOYS is like a big toy itself, a grab-bag of novelties and visual gags
- there's a great bit where the General, under X-ray surveillance, is
spouting about war as if he is Death personified.  Sci-fi fans will
pick up the line poached from THE DAY THE EARTH STOOD STILL as the
last war toy fires its final shot (I don't know how many people share
this view, but contrary to film's message, I find the military toys
more interesting than the boring clockwork toys that seem to be the
factory's main product line).  Film's memorable trailer featured
Williams improvising in an open field, setting audiences up for an
out-and-out comedy that they didn't get.  This goes some way to
explaining its lukewarm reaction at the box office.

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     This is one of the most frustrating movies of recent times.  For
the third time, Robin Williams has made an overblown movie of style over
substance (the other two being POPEYE (which I liked) and HOOK (which I
really didn't)).  Williams played the quietly manic son of a
recently-dead toy manufacturer whose inheritance is passed on to his
uncle.  Joan Cusack played his sister and Robin Wright played the woman
he gets interested in.  I don't remember the name of the actors who
played the uncle or Cousin Patrick.  I think the actor who played
Patrick was acting in his first movie, and he played his role so
straight that he provided a perfect foil for Williams and Cusack.
     The first hour of this movie is full of delight and fun surprises.
The writing is a tad weak, but the acting was pretty good considering.
In a movie like this, the acting usually dies before the writing does,
but that didn't happen here.  The art direction and camera angles were
inventive.  The movie starts to fall apart in the middle and dies during
the last half (though the last ten minutes or so return to being
quirky).
     Barry Levinson and the writer (or did Levinson write this one too?)
should be taken out and "re-educated".
     I saw this movie in a cinema with eight theaters.  When people saw
the long faces walk out of this movie at the end, about a third of the
people waiting went to see FOREVER YOUNG instead (the line for A FEW
GOOD MEN being too long).  This movie is being marketed as a comedy, but
for nearly twenty excruciating minutes, there's absolutely nothing funny
about it.

Author
Frank Maloney
     TOYS is a film directed by Barry Levinson, written by Valerie
Curtin and Barry Levinson.  It stars Robin Williams, Michael Gambon,
Robin Wright, Joan Cusak, LL Cool J, with Donald O'Connor.  It is rated
PG-13, for mild profanity and mature humor.
     TOYS was a disappointment.  I had hoped for something a lot more
energetic, if nothing else.  There is no plot, merely a skeleton on
which to hang a dazzling visual experience.  Michael Gambon and Robin
Williams were both too restrained, too whimsical.  They were both
outshone by Joan Cusak, the only member of the cast who really got the
idea of what they should have been doing.  In fact, the rapper LL Cool J
put in a more interesting performance, even given his inexperience as an
actor.
     Barry Levinson is to blame, of that there can be no doubt.  It was
his idea nearly 15 years ago.  He and his former writing partner Valerie
Curtin wrote the script then; their collaborations include BEST FRIENDS
and JUSTICE FOR ALL, both inferior to his solo writing work (DINER, TIN
MEN) or to the films he only directed (RAIN MAN, BUGSY).  Perhaps, he
should have asked Terry Gilliam to be his script doctor; it definitely
lacks (and needs) that kind of dark imagination.  Levinson is more
interested in making a couple of rather obvious points than in telling a
story.  For example, he rathers earnestly pursues the idea that weapons
are toys for the bloody-minded, that we can choose whether we want our
toys to be life-affirming or lethal.  He gives us some wonderful visual
effects, including a very pointed and chilling scene of generals qua
skeletons.  But, are we to suppose that Barry Levinson thinks that this
is some special vision, some unique insight, vouchsafed only to him that
he can squander so much talent to so little purpose?
     If you want to immerse yourself in Robin Williams' genius for
improvisation, go back to ALADDIN or rent Levinson's GOOD MORNING,
VIETNAM.  You get only a few really memorable Williamsesque moments in
TOYS and long stretches where he has all too little to do.  Williams
gives his all to promoting the film for Levinson and indeed the trailer,
shot in a Spokane wheat field, is vastly better than the movie it
advertises.
     Of the other performers, Joan Cusak is the most memorable in the
role of Williams' sister.  She is otherwordly, fragile, the last word in
gentle space cadets; when her big denouement arrives, we actually can
believe it as earned and established both by the script and by her
performance.  It is one of the few bright spots in the film.  Michael
Gambon, who was so loathsome in THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER
LOVER, is mostly addled here.  His evilness become really clear only too
late in the film, a villain who consults his invalid father and calls
him Daddy; it does not suffice.  Robin Wright as the love interest is
supposed to be a female version of Williams, but she fails to convince.
LL Cool J is blunt and slightly amateurish, but earnest and direct in
the way of gifted amateurs.  He plays Gambon's son and the facts of skin
color and lineage are entertainingly ignored.  Finally, Donald O'Connor
puts in a charming cameo as the dying owner of the Zevo toy company.
     But the real and only star of TOYS is the visual effects, the sets,
the production design, the computer animation, and the wonderful,
wonderful toys.  Everything that TOYS lacks in the way of story it
possesses in abundance in visuals.  It is this aspect of the film, a la
Tim Burton, that gives it any chance at all of surviving as something
like the masterpiece that Levinson clearly had in mind for himself.  And
there is something about TOYS that lingers in the mind.  I woke up this
morning thinking about it, having dreamed about it during the night.
     However, I really cannot recommend TOYS to most of you.  If you
have a strong taste for Robin Williams, if you must see every movie that
Barry Levinson makes, if your primary interest is in the visual effects,
then you will go to TOYS.  A lot of non-specialists, however, will stay
away, unless they find themselves with no other movie and the
possibility of a discount ticket.
