Title
Review for Network (1976)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Uggh, tabloid t.v.  Catering to the lowest common denominator.  That's
nothing new.  Before the trashy antics of these sleaze profiteers there
were other, more innocuous attempts to get people hooked on boob tube
entertainment of a low class nature.  'The Gong Show' perhaps?  The
'Unknown Comic', 'Gene, Gene, the dancing machine' and that curly haired
host were all bad enough but 20 years ago who would have thought that
during a television talk show, fights would break out.  Now it seems
that during fights on these shows, audiences keep waiting for a talk
show to break out.  When Geraldo had his nose broken some years ago,
many thought that sort of thing was the exception rather than the rule
and while few people get injured on these shows, at least what the
audience sees first hand, I truly believe that these scenarios are
REAL!  Perhaps not all the time, but surely the famous incident
involving the murder of a young man by another man as an alleged result
of appearing on one of these shows, makes you wonder how much is staged
and how much is indeed real.  In case you don't know what I'm talking
about, there was an incident a couple of years ago where a certain trash
talk show had people on stage waiting to meet their secret admirers.
Each person greeted a member of the opposite sex except one, a man, who
had another man admit he had a crush on him, causing him great
embarrassment.  You can guess the rest.
In 1976, when the film 'Network' came out, it was about a fourth place
network, UBS, and ABC, NBC, and CBS all finishing ahead of it in the
ratings each week.  Desperate to get ratings and offset huge annual
financial losses, they luck into something.  A washed up television
anchor man named Howard Beale (Peter Finch, in his Oscar winning role as
Best Actor), has his employment terminated because of low ratings and
announces during a live broadcast that he will commit suicide on live
television in the near future before he leaves for good.  Causing panic
among the executives watching, they remove him by force and after some
thought, Beale convinces another executive and his best friend, Max
Schumacher (William Holden), to put him back on to rectify the
embarrassing statement.  Given this opportunity, he causes more
embarrassment for the network by using the word "bull****" and the
ratings jump 5 points during that broadcast.  Taking advantage of this
situation, a ruthless female executive named Diana Christensen (Faye
Dunaway in her Oscar winning role as Best Actress), convinces her boss
in charge of programming, Frank Hackett (Robert Duvall) to put Howard
Beale back on the air and keep him on despite the irresponsible nature
of his content and the shocking nature of his messages.  He agrees and
thus 'The Howard Beale Show' is born.  He is described and an 'angry
prophet, denouncing the hypocrisies of our time'.  His show influences
the network to include other tabloid segments and this shocking new
brand of television causes a fury among angry broadcast regulators and
government officials who want the show stopped.
Screenwriter Paddy Chayefsky, who won his third Oscar for the scathing
script of 'Network' was a true genius way ahead of his time.  He
predicted back then that television standards would get lower and lower
and they most definitely have.  In addition to tabloid talk shows,
people have to contend with sitcoms that all look the same, recycled
from ideas of the past without a clue in proper execution or hint of
original thought.  '3rd Rock from the Sun'/'Mork and Mindy',
'Frasier'/'Cheers'.  Even highly charged dramas such as 'ER' and 'NYPD
Blue' bring up memories of 'St. Elsewhere' and 'Hill Street Blues'.
Chayefsky's observations of television programming are not cynical, just
the thoughts of a realist.  For all of you doubting Thomas' out there,
ask yourself why many shows debut in the fall while only two or three
survive after the first year.
Misery loves company and the high ratings enjoyed by tabloid trash
television shows are in large part, a  reflection of people with similar
lives.
Nominated for 10 Oscars in 1976, including Best Picture and Best
Director (Sidney Lumet), 'Network', as I mentioned, won Best Actor and
Actress Oscars for Peter Finch and Faye Dunaway.  Finch died before the
awards were given out and received his award posthumously.  In addition
to the acting awards won by Finch and Dunaway, Beatrice Straight won the
Best Supporting Actress Oscar as Max Schumacher's tortured wife living
with the reality that her husband is in love with and is having an
affair with another woman.  Straight's performance is an example of why
the Supporting acting categories were created.  She only appears in a
couple of scenes but they are brimming with talent and a convincing
portrayal of her character.  The most unique performance in 'Network'
comes from Ned Beatty who plays the top executive in the television
company who delivers his philosophy of the corporate world like a
television evangelist.  He received a Best Supporting Actor nomination
and finally, William Holden was nominated along side Finch for Best
Actor.  Not many films get the distinction of having five cast members
nominated for Oscars, and as of 1997, 'Network' and 1951's 'A Streetcar
Named Desire' remain the only two films to receive three Academy Awards
for acting.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Ralph Benner
        Nothing written by Pauline Kael during her reign as America's
bitch supreme is more embarrassingly lacking of her usual perception and
foresight than her review of 1976's NETWORK entitled "Hot Air," which can
be found in her collections "When the Lights Go Down" and "For Keeps." The
expected salient observations are made: that the movie has a crummy,
hurried-up look, that the late Paddy Chayefsky's prophetic screenplay is
scatterbrained, and that William Holden's a marvellous camera subject once
he decided that he didn't need movie goddess tricks to cover up his age.
(Panicky Warren Beatty should follow suit.) You can't fault personal taste
either: if a movie doesn't appeal to her, it just doesn't appeal. However,
as readers of her criticism are well aware, Kael never let simplicity get
in the way of her "crow bar" examinations. "Hot Air" is an excoriation of
Chayefsky's supposed case of the N.Y. hates, with the boob tube used as
his central metaphor. As you read the first paragraph of this lengthie,
your radar is swirling: My God, how can she miss what's so obvious? She
discerns the author's rant on television, then blows it by using his
hatred-warning against him. Crashing blindly into her own rhetoric, she
berates, "Television, he says, is turning us into morons and humanoids."
Not buying what has come to fruition, she asks, thousands of words later,
what is inherently answered in her question: when Howard Beale tells
viewers to scream, "I'm mad as hell and I'm not going to take this any
longer," she reduns: "Is the viewers' obedience proof of their sheeplike
response to TV or is it evidence that the Prophet has struck a nerve -
that the public is as fed up as he is?" Kael somehow missed that it's
both. She commits her own coup de grace when foaming about this:
"Chayefsky, it seems, can be indignant about people becoming humanoids,
and then turn a somersault and say it's inevitable and only a fool
wouldn't recognize that. And he's wrong on both counts. There are a lot of
changes in the society that can be laid at television's door, but
soullessness isn't one of them. TV may have altered family life and social
intercourse; it may have turned children at school into entertainment
seekers. But it hasn't taken our souls, any more than movies did, or the
theatre and novels before them." Attacking Chayefsky for exactly what
television has done -- for being the very instrument that has robbed us of
our collective soul. Movies, theatre and books rarely alter a nation's
psyche because they require discrimination of purchase and effort in
assimilating. If not the omnipresent box, what then could have mugged us?
Corrupt politics? Pervasive amorality and violence? The contemptible
phoniness and hate of God squads? Not without the power of television.
Years ago, in "Movies on Television," the second article she penned for
The New Yorker before becoming one of its critics, Kael enunciated the
stunningly false principle that all we get from the box is television. The
piece a failure for the same reason "Hot Air" is -- her love of movies
(and books, jazz, classical music and theatre in descending order) had,
for too long, prevented her from acknowledging what so many recognized
even before NETWORK: that television is IT. You can't reject or fight TV's
promiscuous invasiveness by denying its power, which is in devouring all.
It's the black hole of Earth -- nothing escapes. The sad fact is, we've
all become little Dianas. Only our hots aren't generated by ratings, like
Diana's, but by trash, scandal and hate. Psycho Dan Rather wrote years ago
that "the camera never lies." In spite of wanting to believe the truism as
safeguard against ever lowering thresholds of standards, today we ask:
does the camera ever tell the truth?

Author
Brian Koller
"Network" is an excellent black comedy that attacks
the television industry, its lust for ratings, and its
willingness to sacrifice any standards necessary to
achieve ratings.  While some of the many speeches by
the actors have more passion than spontaneity, they
are well written, and the various plot lines fit together
like a glove.
William Holden plays a world-weary news executive at
money-losing television network UBS.  Peter Finch
is the long-time UBS news commentator.  He is to be
yanked from the air for low ratings, but in one
of his last broadcasts threatens to commit suicide
on the air.  Audience reaction is sensational, and
thanks to prodding from programmer Faye Dunaway,
Finch keeps his job.  The UBS evening news becomes
an entertainment show, complete with psychics, gossips,
and wild rantings from Finch, who closes each broadcast
by fainting onstage.
Holden tries to fight the transformation of the
news show, and is fired by UBS boss Robert Duvall.
Duvall is even more ambitious and cynical than
Dunaway, and it is one of his most energetic
performances.
"Network" is unusual in that the two male leads are
men in late middle age.  Both Finch and Holden were
nominated for Best Actor.  Holden gives the better
performance, and has a magnificent gravelly voice.
However, Finch had died before the awards ceremony,
and his award for Best Actor may have been for
sentimental reasons.
Despite having a very small role, Beatrice Straight
won Best Supporting Actress.  She plays Holden's
wife, who has been abandoned by Holden for Dunaway.
Straight and Holden have an argument that is
very well written and acted.
Dunaway also won an Oscar for Best Actress.  "Network"
deserved won Best Writing, and was nominated for
Best Cinematography, Film Editing, Director (Sidney
Lumet) and Best Picture.  While "Rocky" won that year,
"Network" was the real star of the 1977 Academy Awards.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: William Holden, Faye Dunaway, Peter Finch, Robert Duvall, 
      William Prince, Arthur Burghardt, Beatrice Straight, Ned Beatty
Director: Sidney Lumet
Producer: Howard Gottfried
Screenplay: Paddy Chayefsky
Cinematography: Owen Roizman
Music: Elliot Lawrence
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     In motion pictures, there are essentially three types of satire:  a 
fatuous, silly kind that emphasizes jokes to the exclusion of all else; 
a lightly comic approach that gently pokes fun at issues while 
developing a plot and characters; and a vicious, unrelenting attack that 
uses gallows humor to obtain laughs.  The television news industry has 
been well represented on screen in each of the latter two categories.  
BROADCAST NEWS, starring William Hurt, Holly Hunter, and Albert Brooks, 
and directed by James L. Brooks, takes an affectionate-but-pointed look 
at what goes on behind-the-scenes.  NETWORK, director Sidney Lumet's 
contribution, goes much farther.  It's a dark, dark comedy that 
ruthlessly skewers the news industry on a stake, then roasts it alive.  
     NETWORK is brilliant, but it's not very funny in the conventional 
sense.  Those looking for a bellyful of laughs would do better renting 
something else.  This movie has its share of amusing moments, but the 
comedy is so bleak that it's best appreciated on the intellectual level.  
I can envision a viewer chuckling grimly and nodding his or her head at 
some of NETWORK's nastiest barbs; I can't see this movie causing anyone 
to collapse in a paroxysm of laughter the way THIS IS SPINAL TAP does.  
NETWORK is best enjoyed for what it is -- a blistering social commentary 
that uses exaggeration to make its point.  Terms that should not be used 
to describe it:  "light," "breezy," "inconsequential," "amiable," 
"pleasant," and "hilarious."  
     The story takes place in the news room of UBS-TV, a fictional, 
last-place network.  The UBS Evening News, anchored by veteran Howard 
Beale (Peter Finch) is struggling, coming in way behind ABC, NBC, and 
CBS.  In an attempt to reverse its fortunes, UBS decides to can Beale 
and bring in someone new.  The night after Beale is told of his firing, 
he announces on-air that not only has his contract been terminated, but 
that he will kill himself during his final broadcast in one week.  "I'm 
going to blow my brains out right here on this program," he states.  The  
network is flooded with calls of shrieking protest.  UBS' ratings go up.
     After a discussion with UBS' news director, Max Schumacher (William 
Holden), Beale agrees to rectify the situation.  So, that night, the 
anchor states that he has decided not to go ahead with the suicide, then 
proceeds to deliver a blistering attack on life in America, calling it 
"bullsh*t" and using several words that usually don't get past the 
people in Standards & Practices.  Schumacher is fired for allowing the 
broadcast to go out, but, when the overnight ratings indicate that 
Beale's tirade was a huge hit, he discovers that he still has a job.  
Meanwhile, a programming executive at the network, Diana Christensen 
(Faye Dunaway), pleads with the new head of UBS, Frank Hackett (Robert 
Duvall), for control of the news division.  She claims she can make UBS 
News the most watched newscast in the country.  When she's given the 
opportunity, she revamps the broadcast, turning it into a cross between 
a variety show and an evangelical program (which, in many ways, is a 
forerunner of today's tabloid gossip half-hours), with Howard Beale, the 
"Mad Prophet of the Airwaves" as the centerpiece.  
     While Beale is all-too-happy to be a part of Christensen's vision, 
Schumacher, a proponent of the "hard news" approach, is less thrilled.  
To pacify him, Christensen begins an affair with him -- one that causes 
Max to leave his wife.  Meanwhile, on the air, things are good, with 
Beale turning into a national phenomenon.  Then, inevitably, ratings 
begin to drop.  Beale's message becomes too depressing for the public.  
Drastic measures are called for.
     The final scene of NETWORK is intended to be frankly shocking.  
And, when the movie was released in 1976, it was.  Since then, however, 
television in general, and the news in particular, has become so openly 
grotesque and sensationalistic that NETWORK's finale seems more credible 
than appalling.  If you doubt this, consider the case of Pennsylvania 
state treasurer R. Budd Dwyer.  On January 22, 1987, he called a news 
conference to discuss his recent conviction for embezzlement.  After 
reading a short, prepared statement, he produced a gun, placed it in his 
mouth, and killed himself.  At least one local TV station broadcast the 
entire event, and the audio of the suicide could be heard on every radio 
news update in the area.  
     NETWORK's point is, of course, that ratings drive everything.  
Everyone in the broadcast industry recognizes this, and so does most of 
the public, so it's not exactly a revolutionary concept.  What's unique 
is the film's outrageous approach to the subject.  And NETWORK doesn't 
just stop with the numbers -- it delves into the reasons why certain 
programs do better than others and what the viewing public really wants 
(which is often very different from what they say they want).  With an 
unblinking frankness that is sometimes uncomfortable, NETWORK examines 
three undeniable characteristics of TV viewers:  a love of scandal, a 
taste for anything lurid or shocking, and a short attention span.  More 
than 20 years ago, director Sidney Lumet and writer Paddy Chayefsky 
possessed a prophetic vision -- it's almost as if they saw Jerry 
Springer and Jenny Jones coming.  
     NETWORK is not a perfect film.  There are times when the pacing is 
uneven (I have always been curious about what was cut from the final 
version).  A little too much time is occupied by a subplot involving the 
development of an hour long entertainment show based on the exploits of 
a group of terrorists (complete with a not-so-subtle Patty Hearst 
lampoon).  On balance, those are small complaints, and they do little to 
mar NETWORK's brilliant shine.
     NETWORK was brought to the screen by a film maker with a tremendous 
track record, and this was undoubtedly one of his greatest success 
stories.  It earned Sidney Lumet, the director of 12 ANGRY MEN, SERPICO, 
MURDER ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS, DOG DAY AFTERNOON, and THE VERDICT, one of 
his four Best Director Oscar nominations (he hasn't won any).  While I 
won't go so far as to claim that NETWORK is Lumet's best effort, it 
ranks alongside DOG DAY AFTERNOON (also about the corruption of the 
media) as one of his most acid and pointed social commentaries.  
     The cast, which earned five acting nominations (and won three), is 
stellar.  The best-known member of the ensemble group is probably 
William Holden.  An Oscar-winner for STALAG 17, Holden went on to star 
in such memorable films as SUNSET BOULEVARD, BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI, 
and THE WILD BUNCH.  Here, as the morally-burdened Max Schumacher, 
Holden brings depth and feeling to a crucial role, adroitly treading the 
line separating the starry-eyed idealist from the uncaring pragmatist.  
Schumacher is the character in NETWORK that the audience most identifies 
with, and Holden's near-perfect performance is one reason why.
     As Diana Christensen, Faye Dunaway won an Oscar for her work here.  
Her character is smart, manipulative, cold, and oh-so-sexy.  Schumacher 
offers this pointed description of his lover:  "I'm not sure she's 
capable of any real feelings.  She's television generation.  She learned 
life from Bugs Bunny."  Alongside roles in BONNIE & CLYDE and CHINATOWN, 
Dunaway's performance in NETWORK remains among her most accomplished.  
It's easy to see what Schumacher saw in Christensen, even though he knew 
who and what she was -- she's as easy to love as she is to hate.
     The third member of the main trio is Peter Finch, who was given a 
posthumous Oscar for the part of Howard Beale.  Finch died of a heart 
attack some two months before the Awards ceremony.  It was his second 
nomination (the other being for SUNDAY BLOODY SUNDAY) and only victory.  
The actor's performance is masterful, as he essays a man on the cusp of 
desperation and madness.  Finch gives Beale his power and charisma, 
making it possible to understand how a nationwide audience could be 
captivated by this latter-day evangelist.
     The supporting cast is no less impressive.  Robert Duvall plays the 
calculating head of UBS -- a man determined to lift the struggling 
network from the mire it has slipped into.  Ned Beatty received an Oscar 
nomination for his performance as a businessman who warns Beale about 
whom he can and can't insult during his "sermons."  And Beatrice 
Straight won a Supporting Actress statuette for portraying Schumacher's 
long-suffering wife, Louise, who is deeply hurt by her husband's 
rejection of their 25 year marriage in favor of an affair with 
Christensen.  One passionate monologue in the second half of the film 
gained her the award.
     In total, NETWORK garnered 10 Oscar nominations; it walked away 
with four wins (Actor -- Finch, Actress -- Dunaway, Supporting Actress -
- Straight, and Screenplay).  Yet the awards are nothing more than a 
testimony to NETWORK's strength as both a film and a satire about the 
realities of television and the relationship between news and 
entertainment.  As Beale says in his most inspired speech:  "Television 
is not the truth Television is a circus, a carnival, a traveling troupe 
of acrobats, storytellers, dancers, singers, jugglers, sideshow freaks, 
lion tamers, and football players.  We're in the boredom-killing 
business."  This is Lumet's message to the audience, and it, like 
NETWORK, is just as pertinent today as it was in 1976.  In fact, a case 
could be made that the movie works better when viewed in the '90s, 
because things that seemed far-fetched 20 years ago aren't nearly as 
unbelievable today.  One wonders if, in another few decades, a future 
generation will look at this film and guess whether it was "based on a 
true story."  
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Mike Brown
Faye Dunaway............Diana Christenson
William Holden..........Max Schumacher
Peter Finch..................Howard Beale
Robert Duvall..............Frank Hackett
Wesley Addy...............Nelson Chaney
Ned Beatty...................Arthur Jensen
"TV is showbiz" says Diana Christenson, a self-absorbed network
executive, played by Faye Dunaway, this is the underlying message seen
throughout "Network" one of the most intelligent satires I have ever
seen.  The story focuses on a news anchor man named Howard Beale
(Peter Finch) who we learn that for the past several years life has
not been going very well for him as his news program declines in
ratings for the fourth consecutive year, he is a struggling alcoholic
and that his wife has just left him.  These factors all add up to his
dismissal from UBC, the number four network behind NBC, CBS and ABC.
Losing all faith in life, Howard decides to announce to the world that
he is going to blow his brains out on his live telecast on his last
day.  This immediately causes and uproar from the public who are
offended yet at the same time interested as seen through the high
ratings which the show achieves after his announcement.  As a result,
Howard Beale gets a brand new television show named after him where he
gets to speak his mind on any topic he chooses.  This is where
"Network" really gets clever with its witty and intelligent script,
its energetic acting and hard-nosed directing all combining together
to set it in the same league as Dr.  Strangelove and Wag the Dog.
However, most of the credit should go to the script which was written
by Paddy Chayefsky who actually worked for a large network before
turning to screen writing.  He has captured the behaviour of the
network executives perfectly.  He knows that ratings are everything to
networks and if they don 't have them then they'll do anything to get
them even if it means exploiting a human being.  Throughout the course
of the film, I found myself was always interested in what Howard Beale
was about to say next because the dialogue was so fresh and inventive.
Chayefsky writes the dialogue in a way, that to a point, actually
becomes scary that people actually think and talk like this.  In fact,
if there was only one weakness in the entire movie it would be that in
some scenes the dialogue is so unbelievably cruel that we can't
believe that people actually talk like this.
Another strong point in "Network" would have to be the incredible
acting which can only be described in one word, perfect.  Each
performance, no matter how minor, is excellent with particular
standouts being Peter Finch and Faye Dunaway.  You can tell that the
actors really got involved in their characters to the point where
Peter Finch is no longer himself but actually Howard Beale and the
same goes with Faye Dunaway.  An excellent script is always an actor's
best friend and it really shows here.
If we can learn one thing from "Network" it is that television is
extremely powerful and is capable of shaping people's opinions and
views.  Howard Beale knew this and in his own words he was "Mad as
hell and wasn't going to take it anymore."  As a result, the power of
television destroyed him as a human being.  At the same time he was
propheting his ideas and opinions to the public he was using the very
tool he was against, television.  Whether or not he was crazy or
actually spiritual, Howard Beale did in his own words become a
"humanoid" because after years as a news anchor reporting about the
death and destruction we see every day in the world he was finally fed
up with it all and stopped caring.  I came away from "Network" with
the sense that if you have an opinion you should say it, if you don't
like something you should say so, don't let life go by without being
involved in the things that you care about.  Care is the key word I
came away with from this movie, Howard Beale stopped caring about
people and about himself and he became unhappy and deeply depressed as
a result of it.  You could say that this movie is depressing and
cynical in a sense that some people actually view the world as the one
portrayed in this movie where money is everything.  Whether you accept
this view or not, I'm sure most people will agree that is an important
film that has something to say about the world and where it is
heading.

Author
Long Che Chan
A-
The television industry is a vicious world of circling sharks, a world
of death, violence, sex, manipulation, cynicism, and spite.  Paddy
Chayefsky's dark exposé of this industry, Network, is savage, hilarious,
and strangely powerful.  From it has come the famous cry, "I'm mad as
hell and I'm not going to take this anymore," screamed live on air by
Peter Finch's final character, the depressed and degraded
ex-anchor-gone-mad Howard Beale.  Chayefsky and one of the great
American directors, Sidney Lumet, show us a plethora of venomous and
interesting characters in a film that dares to explore not only the
corruption of electronic journalism, TV execs, and machinery, but also
the corruption of a generation polluted by the god-like, morbid minds on
screen.
Howard Beale (Finch) has just been fired from his anchoring job on the
struggling network UBS.  On the air, he refuses to go out without a
bang.  He announces he will commit suicide on television, for all to
see, and jokes about how this outburst will surely buoy the current, low
ratings of the news show.  Of course, the public and press react.
Everyone is either outraged or enlightened.  This may have been the
first time an anchor has shown his true, humanistic colors on the tube.
The public is interested.
On the next night, executives agree to keep Howard Beale on the show for
one day.  They expect him to apologize for his emotional eruption.  He
doesn't, though.  On UBS news that night, Beale decides to segue into a
tell-all, pessimistic tale of corruption and hypocrisy in our society.
He also uses the "Bs" word.  UBS News has sky-rocketed up the Nielsen
Ratings and, though it is clear to his friends (William Holden) that he
has lost his mind, the station keeps him as an anchor to better their
ratings.  The audience seems to be responding to Beale's seemingly
biblical proclamations because they seem so true.  Everyone has become
tired of happiness and people are willing to listen to the empowering
mockery of American culture Howard Beale and UBS News are providing.
One night, Beale, wet from the outside rain and in his raincoat and
pajamas, begins ranting his apocalyptic and trademark angst shout on TV,
"I'm mad as hell and I'm not going to take this anymore!"  He urges his
viewers to get up from their chairs and go to the window.  He tells them
it is no use to change things when you're not as "mad as hell."  "You
have to get really angry first," he advises.  That night, the whole
nation screamed from their windows the furious cry of Howard Beale.
Faye Dunaway is Diana Christensen, the sexy and driven programmer of the
new Howard Beale show, a wrath-ridden, daily showcase of Beale's
newfound philosophies.  Max Schumacher (Holden), the original news
programmer, is fired because of his concern for his insane friend.
Diana and Frank Hackett (Robert Duvall), the power-hungry executive,
milk Beale of all he can offer and use him like a dog.  Beale has
commanded an entire culture to tune in every night and watch him
screaming about "truthful" issues.  He has reached the heights of an
American guru or idol.  He may even have replaced the role of God in
America.  He speaks of the illusion of power and the illusion of
television.  He is a good man who has exploded; he is sick and tired of
blood-thirsty hounds.
There is a very moving subplot in Network, one of infidelity that
involves Max, the middle-aged, helpless producer, and Diana, the
ruthless young programmer, in an affair.  We also see Beatrice Straight
in a very brief but brilliant performance as Max's wife.  We learn that,
beneath Diana's assured exterior, she is completely empty of human
emotion and is numbed to reality.  Max, who is going through a mid-life
crisis, gives a moving speech on his fear of death and how he used Diana
to rid this fear and, in turn, was used by her.  As a college student,
Diana had a great crush on Max when he gave a lecture at her university,
but now that her past infatuation has become a delusive relationship, we
realize that her exposure to the television culture has steered her life
in a superficial direction.  However, as Lumet pointed out in his great
book Making Movies, it is not the TV, a mere machine, that has corrupted
an entire generation and will corrupt many generations to come, but the
horrible minds on the screen that conquered the goodness of the people.
Diana is a woman who was raised on these corrupted minds and Max,
realizing this, flees the affair.
Network, with the guidance of Lumet and cinematographer Owen Roizman,
plunges us into an artificial world in which everything is based on the
dollar bill and the manipulation of a confused mass audience.  Not only
are the executives, programmers, and presidents of these stations at
fault for contaminating our souls, but we are as much at fault too, if
only because we have allowed ourselves to be persuaded by money-making
ideas that may seem novel at the time but, as Beale would say, are what
we could have find within ourselves.  No, Network is not a film of
immense, sappy coating.  It is brutally funny and relentlessly moving.
It gets its point across very well through its pungent darkness and
Chayefsky's amazing script.
The cast is heaven-sent.  Faye Dunaway is calculative and scheming and
she gives one of her best performances ever as Diana.  William Holden is
extremely impressive and affective as Max, giving probably the most
moving performance in the film.  Peter Finch won the Best Actor Oscar
posthumously for playing Howard Beale with the passion and anguish that
he did.  Beatrice Straight and Ned Beatty stand out in very small roles
with superbly written monologues.
Network, directed by the great man who brought us such masterpieces as
12 Angry Men and Dog Day Afternoon, is outrageous and campy.  The issues
of television corruption may be exaggerated (or may not be) but they are
not difficult to believe.  (*Spoiler*) When Howard Beale is killed at
the end for his show having network-threatening ratings, it is not
beyond belief.  A world of extortion and villainy is always capable of
stooping that low.  What Network may eventually make clear is that
people are able to go to such horrific, violent extremes for the simple
reason of money, but only when they have been hardened and made plastic
by the sinister coercion of illusions.

Author
Jason Overbeck
Network was a fantasy when it arrived in the theatres in 1976, now it
plays well as a satire of where news is headed (soon).  It is angry,
funny, smart and one of the very best films of the seventies.  This film
satires news, programming and pretty much every other hot topic of the
seventies.  Yet the themes Network satires seem universal, some of the
problems of the seventies have taken shape in our modern time.  Some
complained that it tries to cover too much, and is over-ambitious.  This
is very true, yet I do not subtract from a film greatness for being
overly ambitious.
Network has Howard Beale (Peter Finch in posthumous Best Actor winning
role) as a anchor for the fourth rated television network, he gets fired
because he is a drinker, his wife has died, he is over the hill, and
(most important) his ratings have slipped.  He announces over the air
that broadcasting is his life and he plans to blow out his brains on the
air.   He is given another chance where he states that; "Yesterday I
announced on this program that I was going to commit public suicide.
Admittedly an act of madness. Well, I'll tell you what happened: I just
ran out of bullshit."  His ratings go through the roof.
He is invited back to keep hosting, and shouting obscenities, and so it
goes.  There is great protest be Howard's best friend and producer Max
Schumacher (William Holden).  For Howard's return is Diana Christensen
(Faye Dunaway Best Actress winner), an aggressive programmer who wants
more junk and higher ratings.
Max and Diana also start an odd affair.  She is unable to love because
she sees sensitivity as weakness, and Max is married and has a
grandchild on the way.  The affair while well written and conceived is
another example of screenwriter Paddy Chayefsky.  The romance would work
well as its own movie melodrama, another account of how strong and great
this film really is.
The acting rocks in this film.  Three actors won acting Oscars and two
others were nominated.  The direction is also very taunt and well
handled by Sidney Lumet, the great director who has never won a Best
Director Oscar.  
If for no other reason, see Network because it will always be an answer
to a movie quote trivia question.  This is the film that contains the
infamous line, "I'M AS MAD AS HELL AND I'M NOT GONNA TAKE IT ANYMORE!"

Author
Brandon Stahl
 As I watched Network, Sidney Lumet and Paddy Chayefsky's stunning
satire of news journalism, I drew parallels to the beginnings of my
career; I'm currently trying to work my way into journalism and news
reporting, trying to live out my dream of being a reporter or an
editor.  I've written what seems like thousands of cover letters to
anyone with a publication, begging editors to take a chance on me. I
write these letters as though I were on my hands and knees; because
sometimes it's just that hard to break into the field.  You'd try
anything, even begging.  Network starts out with idealistic people
like me in mind, but then let's us know that there is absolutely no
room for realism where money and ratings are involved and leaves us
behind in the first fifteen minutes.  After all, most, if not all,
news outlets are run by corporations who are bound to fulfill life's
beautiful chain: you have to make people watch or read your product,
advertisers will pay money to reach those people, and money is
God. This isn't a new concept, of course, but it's delivery in Network
is so cynical and angry that it seems new and leaves you with a sense
of doom.
 "I'm mad as hell and I'm not gong to take it anymore!" I've been
saying that line for years, but until I first watched Network, I
didn't realize it's significance.  I had no idea what "it" was. The
story is about, more or less, Howard Beale (played by Peter Finch),
who had been the nightly newscaster for the fictional UBS news for the
past eleven years, until he was fired for low ratings. He had nothing
else except his news job; no kids, no wife, so his whole life revolves
around being a journalist. You can imagine what this must do to a
person.  When Beale is told that he has been fired, he goes on air to
announce his suicide. He's calmed down and given one more chance, but
this time he goes on air to say that life "is bullshit, always has
been bullshit, always will be bullshit." That doesn't get him fired:
the network realizes that his on air tirades are ratings gold, and it
gets him his job back. Beale is later "taken over" by the truth, and
his show isn't about news, but becomes his own pulpit to tell a studio
audience and anyone else who will tune in what's wrong with our world
(and the answer was almost always the network he worked for.) The show
is a number in the ratings.
 Network's critique of news ends about halfway through the film and
moves on to television and people who grew up knowing nothing else
besides the glowing box (people like me). Faye Dunaway, who is perfect
in this movie, plays the vice president in charge of programming.
When she realizes that Beale is a ratings bonanza, she demands to be
put in charge of the news.  What does she know of journalism? Nothing,
but she knows everything about getting people to tune in; so she
creates and supports Beale's news circus.  Her character is a
television; it is superficial and cannot feel emotion. In a way she is
nothing more than a machine from a show like Lost in Space.
 William Holden plays one of the only characters sane characters in
the story.  He had been in charge of the news department, but watched
as Dunaway turn into a circus. Still, he leaves and betrays his wife
to start an affair with Dunaway, because he's attached to the
television too.  "I can't get you out of my mind." Holden realizes
that she's nothing more than a television, but still tells her, "All I
want is you for you to love me."
 "I'm mad as hell and I'm not gonna take it anymore" has been accepted
as one of most favored maxims. All of us, at several times during our
lives, are mad as hell, and many of us shout those exact same
words. We scream that we won't take it anymore, but really, what do we
do about it? Network is the kind of movie that critiques what is
wrong, but then asks us what we're going to do about it, knowing full
well that the only answer is nothing. We just take pleasure in
shouting from the windows that we're mad as hell.  It's the release
that we enjoy. Network is the blackest type of satire; like
Dr. Strangelove, it creates a reality that is extremely plausible and
convinces us that it could happen, but at the same time tries to
maintain a level morbid insanity and humor. The events in Network
could happen (and some would argue that Fox Television has already
created that reality) but we laugh it off because we know there's
nothing we're going to do about it.
