Title
Review for Time After Time (1979)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Chris Casino
Writer/Director: Nicolas Meyer, Cast: Malcolm McDowell (H.G. Wells), David
Warner (John Leslie Stevenson), Mary Steenburgen (Amy Robbins).
The movie deals with H.G. Wells, a newspaper columnist in Victorian
England, who sees the future as a utopia, where science has solved
all our problems, inventing a time machine that his friend John
Leslie Stevenson (who is later revealed as the mysterious man who's
been killing all these prostitutes, Jack the Ripper) has stolen and
used to travel to 1979. Being that Wells doesn't want Stevenson
wreaking havoc on 'utopia', he uses the time machine to follow him,
and discovers that 1979 is anything but the utopia he envisioned before.
But he does find out that women have become more liberated, which is
something else he'd always hoped for, and he discovers this in Amy
Robbins from 1979 San Francisco (an irritating Mary Steenburgen).
With a plot like that, anybody'd really expect it to be excellent,
and if it isn't, there's something wrong with Nicolas Meyer.
Thankfully, there's nothing wrong with Nicolas Meyer. It's very well
done, McDowell is great as Wells, the film moves along as you'd
expect it, and all in all, it's an excellent film.
Wells is also very well portrayed in the film, too. H.G. Wells was a man who
didn't believe in religion, believed in women's lib, and believed that
science would take care of us. Besides that, he had a very cynical attitude
towards a lot of things, and Nicolas Meyer has written all of this into his
character. He obviously studied Wells, which is very wise, I think.
The only problem is Mary Steenburgen as Amy Robbins. It's partially her
irritating performance, but it's mostly do to her poor character design.
She's supposed to be so liberated, but she never knows what to do once
she's finally convinced that Wells is telling her the truth.
If you can look past that, try the movie out. It's very entertaining,
so I tell you, grab a bucket of popcorn, a glass of soda, and enjoy
H.G. Wells' amusing attempts to catch Jack the Ripper and save utopia.
If you're looking for a good time travel film, you couldn't do much better.
I'd advise would-be filmmakers,"Take a lesson from this flick, folks. This 
is how you make a sci-fi movie."

Author
James Berardinelli
     Nicholas Meyer, a talented writer/director who likes developing
interesting characters and situations out of genre types (THE SEVEN PER
CENT SOLUTION, STAR TREK IV: THE VOYAGE HOME), made his directorial
debut with 1979's TIME AFTER TIME.  Unfortunately, while this science
fiction/thriller has a premise with tremendous promise, the execution is
hampered by obvious plot holes, inconsistent characters, and uneven
acting.  Despite all its flaws, however, TIME AFTER TIME still remains
an entertaining--and occasionally fascinating--two hours, as well as
a favorite among Meyer fans.
     The plot postulates that H.G. Wells (Malcolm McDowell) not only
wrote about a time machine, but actually created a working model.  One
night, a guest at a dinner party slips downstairs to put it to the test.
This man turns out to be Jack the Ripper (David Warner), looking for an
escape from the police, and now Wells must pursue him eighty years
forward in time, to 1979 San Francisco.  There, the writer/inventor
falls in love with a young woman, Amy Robbins (Mary Steenburgen), whom
he must protect from becoming one of the serial killer's twentieth-
century victims.
     The best aspect of TIME AFTER TIME is the "fish out of water"
element.  Later films, such as "CROCODILE" DUNDEE and STAR TREK IV
(which, not coincidentally, Meyer co-wrote), have had great success with
this sort of story--a naive outsider who is thrust into the confusion
of a modern-day city--but TIME AFTER TIME did it a few years earlier.
It's amusing to see Wells cope with modern-day traffic patterns,
television, and fast food restaurants.  In fact, his pursuit of the
Ripper is often far less engaging than watching him struggle to
understand the complexities of life in the late '70s.
     While McDowell is fine as Wells, David Warner plays the Ripper as a
run-of-the-mill psychopath--not at all the sort of fascinating,
diabolical villain necessary to keep this film moving.  All things
considered, Jack is more likely to provoke a yawn than a surge of
terror.  Meyer's script distances him from us so that we never feel
anything particularly strong for or against him.
     Despite a certain charm and appeal, Mary Steenburgen, in one of her
early roles, is awkward as Amy.  This character is supposed to be a
smart, assertive, liberated woman, yet the story continually places her
in contrived and vulnerable positions.  At times, her actions are more
like those of a typical female victim in a slasher movie than a heroine
worthy of H.G. Wells' attention.
     There are a lot of nice touches in TIME AFTER TIME, but the overall
plot is too obviously scripted.  When a certain element in the time
machine's construction is carefully pointed out twice, we know it's
going to become important.  This sort of thing happens repreatedly in
TIME AFTER TIME--unsubtle hints at what's coming next.  Fortunately,
in future features, Meyer's direction would lose much of that heavy-
handedness.
     For those who expect a tightly-written mixture of the detective and
science fiction genres, TIME AFTER TIME is bound to be a disappointment.
It's more of a lighthearted fantasy/romance with a few thriller elements
thrown in.  Indeed, the movie might have worked better had Jack the
Ripper not been around at all.  Alas, he is the engine that keeps the
plot moving, and there are times when his very presence weighs down this
movie like a proverbial albatross.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
For many scientific purists, concept of time travel is so
preposterous that they tend to bar time travel films and
novels from science fiction domain. According to them, time
travel books, comics and films should be branded fantasy
instead. That position might find its arguments in the way
that Hollywood usually treated time travel. Most of the
time, that concept was nothing more than a convenient excuse
for exotic, but standard adventures and films without any
ambitions of seriousness. But, every once in a while, there
comes a time travel film with brains. George Pal's classic
adaptation of equally classic H.G. Wells' novel THE TIME
MACHINE is one of them. TIME AFTER TIME, 1979 film and
directorial debut by Nicholas Meyer, is perfect companion
piece to it.
In George Pal's film, by naming the hero - Victorian time
traveller - "George", the authors hinted that the real hero
of the novel might be H.G. Wells himself. Meyer, who had
already played with mixing fiction with real historical
personalities in his novel SEVEN PERCENT SOLUTION, goes even
further - the time traveller in his film is really H.G.
Wells (played with Malcolm McDowell). Same as his "George"
incarnation, he invites his friends in London 1893 to
present them his new innovation - the time machine. The
presentation is, however, interrupted when Scotland Yard
arrives. It turns out that one of the guests, Doctor John
Leslie Stevenson (played by David Warner) happens to be Jack
the Ripper. While Wells and his friends struggle with
shocking revelation, Stevenson uses the confusion and, out
of desperation, decides to test this new machine. Examining
Stevenson's mysterious disappearance, Wells concludes that
the killer managed to travel to year 1979. Feeling
responsible for allowing bloodthirsty maniac to roam in
future Utopia, Wells goes to future too in order to bring
him to justice. His travel brings him to San Francisco 1979,
strange new megalopolis that at first sight looks like an
utopian society. But, soon he discovers that the Utopia has
its bad side, and, most of all, his quest for Stevenson is
failing. Things change when he meets Amy Robbins (Mary
Steenburgen), bank teller and liberated woman, who decides
to help him in his quest, mostly because she fancies bizarre
but charming Englishman.
Although it is actually not based on H.G. Wells' novel, this
film is closer to its spirit than 1960 version. When he
wrote the novel, Wells was less interested in pure
scientific speculations; instead, he saw science fiction as
a way to talk about burning social issues of his time, as
well as to offer some solutions. This film presents us Wells
as a man before his time, socialist reformer who fought for
free love, feminism, racial equality, people's rights, and
many other things we now take for granted. Meyer uses time
travel to confront Wells' ideals with reality - when he
arrives in San Francisco during the zenith of ultra-liberal,
hedonistic era of sexual revolution and counter-culture, he
discovers that many of his ideals are reality. But, on the
other hand, human nature hadn't improved and, all those
ideals are paired with world wars, nuclear weapons,
pollution, terrorism and other horrors Wells couldn't have
imagined. While poor idealistic reformer has trouble fitting
into this fascinating, but in the same time frightening
world. On the other hand, bloodthirsty yet cynical and
practical Stevenson makes 1979 his home without any
difficulty.
Clever commentary is the reason enough to fend off all the
critics of this film, who had considered TIME AFTER TIME to
be nothing more than light- hearted fantasy. Their argument,
of course, is valid only the movie is entertaining indeed -
conflict between Victorian gentleman and the modern
environment provided excellent opportunity for many subtle
yet effective jokes. The humour in this film is really
charming, and it is helped by Malcolm McDowell who uses this
film as rare opportunity not just to play a good guy for a
change, but also to express his comedic talents. His partner
Mary Steenburgen shows her comedic talent too, and also the
great skill that helps her in the transformation between
strong modern liberated woman and classic damsel in
distress. The romantic chemistry between the two is great,
and it shouldn't surprise anyone that they transcended their
partnership into real life.
Unfortunately, David Warner didn't feel particularly
inspired in the role of Jack the Ripper. He lacks the
charisma of pure evil that is necessary ingredient for any
effective villain that this film required. Flaw in the
characterisation is just one of the many of this film -
cheesy and totally unconvincing special effects, scientific
plot holes and implausibilities, some rather uninspired
lines - that culminate in rather disappointing and ultra-
conventional finale. The musical score of Hollywood veteran
Miklos Rozsa, on the other hand, might have looked
anachronistic in any other film of the period, but it was
right on the target in this story. But, all in all, TIME
AFTER TIME is more than good piece of science fiction
cinema, that could outrank not only some of the time travel
atrocities of its own time (FINAL COUNTDOWN comes to mind),
but also some of the future films with much more fame
(TERMINATOR, BACK TO THE FUTURE).
(Special note to x-philes: Charles Cioffi, who played
skeptical FBI official in the pilot episode of the X-FILES
appears in this film with similar role of skeptical San
Francisco police inspector.)

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TIME AFTER TIME (director/writer: Nicholas Meyer; screenwriters: Karl
Alexander/ Steven Hayes/from a Nicholas Meyer story; cinematographer:
Paul Lohmann ; editor: Donn Cambern; cast:  Malcolm McDowell (H.G.
Wells), David Warner (Jack the Ripper), Charles Cioffi (Lt. Mitchell),
Mary Steenburgen (Amy Robbins), Kent Williams (Assistant), Geraldine
Baron (Carol), Patti D'Arbanville (Shirley); Runtime: 120; Warner/Orion;
1979)
This lighthearted fantasy asks, what if the idealist H.G. Wells didn't
just write about the Time Machine but lived it! It's mainly an
emotionally flat, one running joke type of lightweight literary film
that is done in by a very dull middle section and too much unnecessary
gore. The film has some interesting items about it, including the
onscreen romance between the two stars meeting for the first time on the
set, Malcolm McDowell as H.G. Wells and Mary Steenburgen as Amy Robbins,
whose romance continued in real life, resulting in their marriage (and
later on their divorce). The director-writer Nicholas Meyer (Star Trek
11) -- he also wrote the witty novel "Seven Percent Solution" -- worked
the screenplay from his own novel, showing some clever touches here and
there, but not enough to hold my interest for the duration of the film.
The theme grew tiresome and David Warner as Jack the Ripper never
developed as a particularly interesting villain. There was nothing
gained by seeing him hold a scalpel to a woman's throat and then slit
it.
The film opens in the Victorian London of the late 19th century. Dr.
John Leslie Stevenson, a friend in Wells' inner circle and a noted
surgeon, gets exposed as Jack the Ripper, after he just slices up a
prostitute and the police trail him to Wells' house. He escapes arrest
by fleeing in Wells's Time Machine he was demonstrating to friends in
his cellar. He raised the money to build the machine by his writings in
the newspapers on free love and on utopian socialism, believing that the
future would be a place of no hatreds and no wars.
Wells determines that Jack the Ripper escaped into the 20th century,
ending up in the San Francisco of 1979. He decides to follow him, as the
machine returns after Jack arrives at his destination. The Time Machine
works by the cosmic rays of the sun and by possessing the master
ignition key, it enables the passenger to return with the machine to his
original place of departure. If you don't have the key, you can't
return. With the key still in his possession, Wells goes in pursuit of
Jack the Ripper, figuring it is his responsibility to stop him from
killing others.
In San Francisco, there are some amusing moments as the naive Wells has
to adjust to the modern complexities of the world and its hustle and
bustle. He is perplexed to see airplanes, hail a cab, ride in a car,
speak on the phone, but one thing is evident, he has not arrived at
Utopia: hearing about wars, death camps, terrorist actions, and all the
daily crimes just sickens him, as he can't wait to return to Victorian
London.
In his pursuit of Jack, he meets a kooky bank officer and the two become
an odd romantic couple. He seems adorably old-fashioned and gentlemanly,
with a very stand-offish British wit, while she's an aggressive woman's
libber, a modern California-type of lady, and an admirer of British
eccentrics who are straight.
Three women are slain in the style of Jack the Ripper, which clinches it
for Wells, that he hasn't changed. Jack easily fits in with the modern
times, while Wells is disillusioned, realizing that he was wrong about
the world changing for the better. It just advanced in technology but
regressed into a more violent state than ever before.
The police think he is a lunatic and don't take him seriously when he
tells them about Jack the Ripper. Amy only believes him when he takes
her for a spin in the machine. They travel a few days ahead into the
future, where a newspaper headlines Amy as the serial killer's 5th
victim. They quickly go back to regular time to prevent her murder but
can't stop murder number 4, even though they know where it is taking
place. The film has many plot holes and flaws, one of them is: that it
is not possible to go back in time and change history, all one can
change is something that is only a duplicate, even if you think you are
changing something, you are only deceived by appearances. Albert
Einstein mentioned that about time travel and that's good enough for me.
Jack wants the key Wells has to the machine and threatens to kill Amy if
he doesn't get it, as the two battle each other. The film concludes as
Jack and Wells tussle over Amy, and through some clever turns Wells is
able to outwit his former friend and chess opponent, who always used to
beat Wells.
The Jack the Ripper part of the story never really worked as a thriller,
it all seemed too heavy and misplaced, I am certain the film could have
been salvaged if it kept with the fantasy/romance story between Amy and
Wells. That part of the film was amusing and gave way to some
interesting insights about the modern world. The film suffered from
being too poorly presented, as it always appeared less than exciting,
nevertheless it was occasionally diverting, and some cult sci-fi fans
might like it more than the general public should.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
