Title
Review for Love Affair (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Warren Beatty, Annette Bening, Garry Shandling, Katharine
Hepburn, Pierce Brosnan, Kate Capshaw.
Screenplay:  Warren Beatty and Robert Towne.
Director:  Glenn Gordon Caron.
     Making an old-fashioned romance isn't as easy as it might look.
While films from this year like IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU and ONLY YOU
attempted to re-create the magic of bygone love stories, they succeeded
primarily in creating cloying pseudo-parodies of what those classic
stories were all about:  that perfect someone appearing at the most
improbable--and inconvenient--time.  LOVE AFFAIR does it right.
Warren Beatty and Annette Bening have taken this third telling of a
tear-jerking classic and made it a warm, sentimental and beautifully
filmed experience, limited in its effectiveness only by Beatty's
somewhat wooden lead performance.
     Beatty stars as Mike Gambril, a former NFL quarterback and
inveterate womanizer who is engaged to a popular talk show host (Kate
Capshaw) as more of a business deal than a love match.  On a flight to
Australia, Mike meets Terry McKay (Bening), a struggling would-be
singer herself engaged to a wealthy businessman (Pierce Brosnan).  When
their plane is forced to make an emergency landing, Mike and Terry end
up together for three days on a ship bound for Tahiti and the flight
which will take them home.  In those three days they fall in love, and
vow to meet again in three months if their lives are free of their
previous entanglements.  However, fate intervenes on the appointed day,
and the course of true love does not run smooth.
     If there is one unquestionable triumph to LOVE AFFAIR, it is the
atmosphere.  Director Glenn Gordon Caron (creator of TV's
"Moonlighting") sets up the kind of shots one might expect from a film
fifty years older:  Bening descending a staircase into frame; Beatty
appearing entirely in shadow during their airport fairwell; a slow,
patient scene late in the film in Bening's apartment.  There is a
lyricism to his direction, without the force qualities of other recent
romances.  Cinematographer Conrad L. Hall shoots in deep oranges and
with lots of filters, and photographs Bening in the loving style which
used to be reserved for Grace Kelly or Ingrid Bergman.  Ennio
Morricone's sweet, simple score also contributes to a mood which
inspires you to hold your date's hand a bit more tightly.
     This is not to say that LOVE AFFAIR gets by on style points
alone.  Beatty has rounded up a truckload of talent to bring the script
(co-written by Beatty and Robert Towne) to life.  At the top of the
list is Bening, Beatty's real life better half, who shines as Terry.
Few actresses in film can manage the kind of mature, intelligent appeal
she brings to her roles, which makes it a shame that her appearances
have been so infrequent of late.  Here she is both savvy and
vulnerable, more than a match for Beatty's aging playboy but still
harboring basic insecurities.  It's not a flashy role--LOVE AFFAIR is
not a flashy movie--but it's a fine performance.  Garry Shandling is
a delight as Kip, Mike Gambril's agent, toning down his usual neurotic
persona and giving a witty reading, and Harold Ramis has a funny cameo
as an acerbic accountant.  But the film is stolen by Katharine Hepburn,
making her first big screen appearance in 13 years as Mike's Aunt
Ginny.  Her scene with Bening, in which she lays the groundwork for
Mike and Terry's relationship, is wonderful, and proves that Hepburn
can still act the heck out of a part (as well as that she is familiar
with a certain four-letter word).
     It's one of LOVE AFFAIR's most significant failings that that same
scene does more to explain Beatty's character than Beatty himself
manages to do.  He sort of wanders through this part at times, never
letting us know what Terry sees in him beyond his come-ons.  This could
have proved to be a fatal flaw, but there is just enough inherent
romance in the situation that their pairing doesn't seem completely
implausible.  LOVE AFFAIR also lags significantly once the two lovers
are separated, with nearly non-existent roles by Capshaw, Brosnan and
Chloe Webb attempting to bridge the gap.  But the cathartic final scene
is effective enough to make up for the melancholy tone of the final
half hour.
     Sentimentality is frequently a tough sell.  LOVE AFFAIR may be
schmaltz, but it is artfully executed and well-acted schmaltz.  And it
renews my faith that somewhere, someone knows how to make a real love
story.

Author
Ralph Benner
     Onliners may recall that a few years ago when Warren Beatty and
Annette Bening were hawking their bomb LOVE AFFAIR, they appeared on
Oprah, who was wetting her panties with false enthusiasm. When she wasn't
soliciting her in-studio audience for undeserving favorable reaction to
the movie, she was kissing the stars' asses. Actually, their stoney asses,
because Beatty and Bening were so guarded about themselves, so tight and
controlled and cool, that they almost came off as snobs. And just this
kind of aloof self-protectiveness about themselves is what they bring to
their movie. Beatty and Bening brought this type of dung to BUGSY and won
over some noodle-brained east coast critics, but to bring it to a four
hankie tribute to AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER is suicide. What makes it all the
more offensive is that no one had the guts to tell Mr. Hollywood and his
Ice Princess to shove their acts where the moon don't shine. 
     Followers of Beatty know he's usually a smart producer, but
somewhere along the line, in wanting to make his own version of the Cary
Grant-Deborah Kerr comedic weeper, he lost brain cells: he didn't ask the
most obvious of all questions: is a remake necessary? Whatever your
feelings about the Leo McCarey sudzer (which he also made earlier as LOVE
AFFAIR with Dunne and Boyer), it's just about impossible to see how it
needed an updating; this is the one of those movies that are best
described as "guilty pleasures," for you know you're being had but what
the hell? When you have two beautiful stars like Grant and Kerr, you go
along for the cruise. And you can't help yourself: even when you fighting
off the heart-clogging schmaltz, you're preparing for the water works when
Grant opens Kerr's bedroom door. All that matters is that they belong
together. But what is one to make of Annette Bening as the 90s Terry
McKay? Who'd want her except a masochist? 
     As LOVE AFFAIR begins, and it's in trouble right from the start,
what with that cloying Uncle Tom Bobby Short singing "Changes," Beatty's a
retired quarterback about to be married to a television personality (Kate
Capshaw) who got him a sports anchor position he isn't qualified for; like
Grant, he's a gigolo. Bening's a sometimes singer who tricks as a
decorator for her betrothed -- wheeler-dealer Pierce Brosnan; in other
words, like Kerr, she's a gigolette. Beatty and Bening end up together in
the first class section of plan headed for Sydney, but engine trouble
forces the 747 down on a tiny atoll! (Don't even consider asking about the
likelihood of survival.) They're rescued by a Russian cruise ship and
while on it, they fall in love. One wonders what they find attractive
about each other: in de-aging lighting effects, Beatty looks and acts and
talks like he's suffering from the very earliest symptoms of Alzheimer's
-- though sometimes he appears to be bumming from Steven Weber's Brian on
"Wings" -- and Bening, with a runway model's thinness and haughty sarcasm,
is this or any season's polar vortex; she'd have no trouble immobilizing
Mr. Freeze. Lovable? She's not even tolerable. As the ship docks in
civilization -- Tahiti! -- it just so happens that Beatty's aunt doesn't
live far away and he asks Bening if she'd like to go along while he visits
her. She's dubious of an auntie, but hey, she's got time to kill while in
paradise. Old auntie is Katharine Hepburn of the Tremors, who promptly
upgrades Cathleen Nesbitt with one line: "f..k like a duck." 
     Though based on the Leo-McCarey-Delmer Daves screenplays from the
two previous versions, writers Beatty and Robert Towne slice away (or
later edited away?) the relationships Mr. & Mrs. Supposedly Beautiful have
with their intended. Beatty has only a few scenes with Capshaw, who's
never allowed to be anything but a distance presence. (At least with Neva
Patterson in AFFAIR TO REMEMBER, we had the chance to watch her die of
public embarrassment over Grant's future in gooey artistic expression.)
And Capshaw has been horribly attired and photographed: in a flat shag
reminiscent of Fonda's in KLUTE, and wearing a god-awful beaded beret,
she's more prostie than celeb. (TV newsers are whores, but not Kate.)
Bening has only a bit more time with Brosnan, who doesn't steal the movie
-- because he's not given the chance -- but he's the only one with any
blood circulating. Unintended in its real meaning, he's given the only
true line of dialogue to utter: to Bening, he says, "Boy, you're a tough
nut to crack." The writers retain McCarey's worst part: the kids' stuff,
including Bening "farmer in the dell"ing. It slumps further into
abjectness when the kids turn Lennon and McCartney's "I Will" into
REMEMBER's nauseous "Tomorrow Land" and "He Knows You Inside." All this
"family value" warmth can't thaw Bening out of her chilled encasement.
     Rumor has it that director Glenn Gordon Caron wasn't really in
charge, and I think it's entirely possible to see that he wasn't as soon
as the movie opens. This is another of Beatty's vanity productions, and
his age insecurity is all over the place; while Caron acted as traffic
manager, Beatty applied the soft focus to Conrad L. Hall's camera lens.
Frankly, the movie doesn't feel directed; it feels staged for still motion
-- every bit, every jerk, every blink and sip and kiss and everything else
seems stilted. And because Beatty makes us exceedingly aware of his fears
of aging, as he in did in DICK TRACY and BUGSY, he has made himself the
target for the charge that he's too old -- 56 -- to play this part. Grant
was too: 53 when he made REMEMBER. But Grant had intrinsic class, which he
used as a cover; Beatty's too suspicious to discover if he's got any. The
sharpie Beatty usually is as movie maker has dulled: he's opted for drabby
glamour and the sobby cutes to get by, when, if he really believed in this
project, he'd have put Brosnan in as star and put him opposite the kind of
personality who could enliven the garbage, give it the spark and wit it
needs for the 90s -- someone like Carrie Fisher. Hepburn's tremors most
likely became Beatty's when he saw what he ended up with: an expensively
stupid movie that has zilch reason to be.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Warren Beatty, Annette Bening, Gary Shandling, Pierce Brosnan,
           Kate Capshaw, Chloe Webb, Katherine Hepburn 
Director: Glenn Gordon Caron 
Producer:  Warren Beatty 
Screenplay:  Robert Towne & Warren Beatty based on the 1939 motion 
             picture LOVE AFFAIR, screenplay by Delmer Daves and 
             Donald Ogden Stewart, story by Mildred Cram and Leo McCarey 
Cinematography:  Conrad L. Hall 
Music: Ennio Morricone 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     Warren Beatty's LOVE AFFAIR is the third incarnation of the tear-
jerker that SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE named as the prototypical "woman's
movie."  Originated in 1939 under the direction of Leo McCarey, LOVE
AFFAIR starred Charles Boyer and Irene Dunne as the playboy and
playgirl couple who meet and fall in love on a transatlantic voyage.
Eighteen years later, McCarey lengthened his script, added considerable
humor, and brought to the screen AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER, with Cary Grant
and Deborah Kerr.  Now, Beatty has taken this story and adapted it for
today's audience.
     Actually, the only switch from the Fifties to the Nineties is a
rather unconvincing plot contrivance to get Mike Gambril (Beatty) and
Terry McKay (Annette Bening) off the Los Angeles-to-Sydney flight on
which they meet and onto a boat.  The plane experiences engine trouble
and has to make a forced landing on a small Pacific island.  Since no
other aircraft can land on the small runway, the passengers are
transported away by ship.  While sailing to Tahiti, Mike and Terry fall
in love.  Some days later, once they reach New York, they agree to wait
three months (to relieve themselves of unwanted fiancees and get their
lives in order), then meet atop the Empire State Building.  What
happens is a matter of record, especially for those who have seen
SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE, but I won't spoil it here.
     One curiosity is that in all three versions of this story, the man
has had a different name.  For whatever reason, his opposite has
remained Terry McKay (although, admittedly, it would be hard to imagine
Warren Beatty going by the name of Cary Grant's Nickie Ferrante).  Her
name, however, is not the only thing to stay the same.
     While the first half of LOVE AFFAIR remains true in spirit and
general storyline to AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER, the second half (beginning
with the Empire State Building sequence) is almost identical, with much
of the same dialogue being used.  The setting may be modern, but the
style and feel are lifted right out of the romances of the fifties.
     Leo McCarey has said that one of his reasons for casting Grant and
Kerr for AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER is that he wanted to heighten the
comedy.  In the new version, Beatty and Bening bring a certain
playfulness to their roles, but the humor has been toned down.  This
has the unfortunate effect of turning LOVE AFFAIR into an
occasionally-overwrought melodrama.  It's not as manipulative as it
could be, but teary eyes in the audience shouldn't surprise anyone.
     Beatty, despite an undeniable screen presence, is rather flat in
the role of the aging ex-quarterback.  Compared to Grant, he exudes
little charisma.  Beatty's co-star and wife, Annette Bening, on the
other hand, shines, constantly eclipsing her spouse.  Not only does she
have the vivaciousness and sparkle of Kerr, but an almost-eerie
similarity in appearance.
     I'm not sure that women will universally like this film better
than men, but romantics will certainly appreciate it more than cynics.
It is an unabashed love story, filled more with romance than sex, and
concerned with character interaction over plot.  My main complaint with
the film is that it's not sufficiently different from its predecessor
to warrant the remake.  AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER may be thirty-seven years
old, but it still stands up well.  With so few changes, this makes
1994's LOVE AFFAIR redundant.  Charming, but redundant.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Jon A. Webb
     LOVE AFFAIR is an example of a film actually improved by its
marketing.  The film is a remake of the classic tear-jerker AN AFFAIR
TO REMEMBER, which played so prominent a role in SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE
(which was, in a way, another remake.)  The plot has not aged well;
the roles of women and men (not to mention the position of the
differently-abled) have changed enough in forty years so that the pride
that drives the final scene doesn't make much sense anymore.
     So the film is badly flawed, but by playing up the movie's
relation to their real-life love affair and marriage Warren Beatty and
Annette Bening have improved it quite a bit. One is supposed to
understand from this film the deep affection Beatty felt for Bening,
which led him to finally settle down with her.  Beatty's acting range
is so limited that I did not think this came across, but the mere
casting of Bening in this role, when she is somewhat past her prime
(appropriately, given the context, but strikingly against tradition for
Hollywood) makes one understand his feelings for her much more than his
unchanging expression ever could.
     There are really only three or four significant characters n the
film:  Beatty, Bening, Katherine Hepburn, and Gary Shandling, who plays
Beatty's character's agent, in the exact style of his character from
the Larry Saunders show.
     I found Hepburn's performance quite striking, easily the best in
the film.  I do not think I have ever seen an old person played as
simply and directly as here. It is quite daring to do this, because
everyone will assume that she is simply playing herself. Perhaps she
is, but we must also remember that she is a fine and experienced
actress.
     There are some nice travel shots.  Tahiti is beautiful.  I would
say that taking a Russian cruise ship on a tour of the South Pacific
looks like a nice way to spend a vacation.
     In summary, the film is pretty badly flawed, and not worth the
build-up it was given by its marketing, but it is far better than many
critics (who must be comparing it with AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER) have been
saying.  It's entertaining, it has a nice solid romantic feeling and a
singular performance by Katherine Hepburn.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     LOVE AFFAIR is at least the third remake of the original 1939 LOVE
AFFAIR.  Unlike SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE which was loosely based on the
original, this one shares most of the key story elements.  SLEEPLESS IN
SEATTLE was technically based on AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER (1957) which was
in turn based on LOVE AFFAIR (1939).
     This LOVE AFFAIR is about a famous football player turned
announcer (Warren Beatty) and a waitress turned interior decorator,
singer and child care worker (Annette Bening).  It features an
important cameo by Katherine Hepburn as the football announcer's aunt.
It has other smaller cameos as well such as Ray Charles singing a
classic Christmas song of his.
     The best way to describe this movie, also written by Beatty, is
that it is first and foremost, a mood piece.  The photography of Tahiti
interlaces the whole show as does the dominatingly loud music of the
30s.  It leaves you with a sort of Bali High ambiance and the feeling
of having drunk a soothing cup of warm tea on a foggy evening.
     The camerawork is spectacular.  Watch Beatty and Bening walk
through the lush green fields of Tahiti with the fog encased mountains
as their backdrop.  Watch the shadows on their faces on the front porch
in Tahiti.  The whole show has the warm glow of a Renoir.  As a
travelogue, as a tour de force in camerawork, and as a mood creator, it
is excellent.
     Where the movie falls down is the story and the characters.
Beatty has a monotonic delivery style which makes it hard to believes
he really cares about anything.  Bening is SO lovely to look at (OK,
OK, Beatty is not too bad looking either), but the lines she gives were
not convincing enough for me.  Yes, in real life they are a devoted
couple, but the romance they displayed in this movie was not believable
or interesting.  They did have a few memorable lines, but on the whole
it just did not click.
     I am not a fan of cameo rules by actors approaching senility.  Too
often the audience just ends up feeling sorry for the actors.
Hepburn's performance was an exception to this rule.  Her part was
important, and she was good in it.
     LOVE AFFAIR runs 1:45.  It is incorrectly rated PG-13.  This is a
PG show.  There is no nudity or violence; there are 3 very mild cuss
words that are whispered.  Any kid old enough to be interested in
romance can see this show.  On the other hand, I give it just ** and do
not recommend it to anyone as it just did not work for me.  If you go,
you may fall asleep some as I did, but you will never be offended.  You
will forget it all soon after you see it with the exception of the
visuals of Tahiti.  Wait and rent it.  Watch it some night when you are
having trouble falling asleep.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: October 24, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Pedro Sena
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.
One always wonder why these stories exist. It seems such a hopeless thing, a
romantic ideal that is often doomed to crash. But, in between,  is often the
story of a person, or two, that really tears our hearts apart, makes us cry,
laugh, pay attention, and then some.  But nice music all the  way through
helps us cope through a rather difficult situation.
This story of a double identity, is a magnificently original story, that
might be only unsatisfying in the end, but then, this is forgivable, since
the role is played by the same woman. The film fits, either way it decides
to end, although I have to admit that I have become spoiled by the Hollywood
stories... I wanted the two to meet, I really did.
The story centers around a girl whose fiancée just dies. She never really
met his friends, and all of a sudden, is meeting a few of them. By chance,
she comes across the guy's class yearbook, and she decides that she wants to
write a letter to her ill fated fiancée. One gets the idea that she does not
wish to let go of this one, and this is, of course, often dangerous.
But the film has an ironic twist right from the start. The girl sends off  a
letter, and it gets returned. And a correspondence starts.
And one comes to find out that this person, with the same name, is a woman,
instead of her ex-fiancée. And, on top of it, this woman has been linked to
him from the first day of school. And we learn of the whole story  through
these letters.
And the film keeps getting better and better, until it comes to an end. The
two women did not meet, but at least the hopeful woman has regained a
measure of caring and understanding for the fiancée she never had the chance
to  meet. Amidst these suggestions, is that both people with the same name,
actually liked each other, but could not do much about it, as the other
classmates were always teasing them, and playing tricks on them, which made
any connection almost impossible. And on top of it, people were always
making fun of them by putting them together, and teachers mixed them up all
the time.
There are a few things that stand out in this film, the major one being
Miho Nakayama, in the double role, which is excellent, and really well
designed and thought out. One does not really realize that it is the  same
woman that we are watching for a long time.
If there are a couple of things that are also interesting here, but at times
a bit odd, and more spontaneous than otherwise, is that the camera has the
habit of moving around a lot, and by virtue of its movements, it allows the
actors to really get into it without stoppages, which is the nicest thing
in the acting in this film. But there are times, when the camera is a bit
off key, for example in a setting when the young man friend of Hiroko, who
is trying really hard to pursue her. The camera is restless during that
moment, which is ok for him, but not for her. She is totally still the whole
time. But it creates a nice analogy for the film character and its doings.
She is a bit stuck in her thinking, and will not let this go. And everything
around her is moving along, even if it is not exactly what she was hoping
for.
The film ends on what could be considered a less than positive note, but I
think that we can tell that the young Hiroko is coming to grips with what
she has faced, and will come out of it.
Along the way, the film keeps adding moments of psychic suggestions and
connection, like when Itsuki is in the hospital in the end, and she can hear
Hiroko's words. These touches suggest that there is a much larger connection
between these two other than the young man, but the film never  takes to it,
and builds on it.... it could become a whole other film.
And like Kieslowski's film THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE, in this film the
inner characters never really make the total connection with their
doubles... but the possibility is now there, and right in front of the
character's face... and this is where the film ends.
Really nice film, with some great touches all the way through. It has some
lagging moments, but these come around as well. There are things that
happen that do not seem to make sense, but come clear a bit later.
