Title
Review for Bless the Child (2000)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Laura Clifford
The Bethlehem star shines bright one Christmas and a child is born beneath it
on December 16.  Nurse Maggie O'Connor (Kim Basinger) arrives home a week
later to find her drug addicted sister Jenna (Angela Bettis, "Girl,
Interrupted") huddled in her doorway clutching a newborn which she abandons
with Maggie.  Six years later, during a string of child murders, she returns 
as the wife of Erik Stark, (Rufus Sewall, "Dark City") founder of The New Dawn, 
a Scientology-like organization for young drug addicts.  But Maggie discovers 
The New Dawn is really a front for Satanists looking for a special child in
"Bless the Child."
"Bless the Child" is the anti-"Omen."  It also borrows copiously from other
Satanic horror flicks such as "The Prophecy" and "The Exorcist." 
The horror genre is a tough one to succeed in as can be seen by the enormous
amount of dreck one must sift through in order to find the gems.  With that
in mind, "Bless the Child" isn't all that bad, mostly due to it's unusual
emphasis on the good part of the 'good vs. evil' plot and some imaginative
special effects.  It's also derivative to the max, perfunctorily acted
(except for Sewell's over-the-top perf) and features some outright howlers
(of laughter, that is).
Cody (Holliston Coleman) is quiet to the point of being diagnosed as autistic
so attends a special (conveniently Catholic) school where she resuscitates
dead birds and makes votive candles burst into flame.  Her nightmares are
telepathetically shared with Aunt Maggie, who races to Cody's bedroom to
find the child held hostage by red-eyed rats while being leered at by the
gargoyle outside her window.  Cody's head banging incidents scare away
Maggie's dates.
Once Cody's snatched by Stark, Maggie crosses paths with FBI Agent John Travis
(Jimmy Smits), a former seminarian who's on the case of the murdered children
(all, like Cody, born on December 16).  He believes Stark's involved but needs
to prove it.  Maggie gets tips, follows them on her own and gets into 
enormous jams that Travis can then save her from.  Meanwhile Stark's trying
to 'turn' Cody to use her special powers for the dark side.  He tries to
convince her by lighting bums on fire and sweet talking her into jumping off
their building's roof, but she's not buying it.  The whole things ends on
Easter Eve in a gothic mansion where Cody must accept Satan or die.
Kim Bassinger frets a lot and Jimmy Smits looks earnest.  Sewell gets mileage
out of the freekiness of his lazy eye.  Holliston Coleman is quite believable
as the troubled Cody.  Lumi Cavazos ("Like Water for Chocolate") is luminous
as a nun.  Christina Ricci is wasted (both literally and figuratively) as
a former New Dawn goth chick.  Angela Bettis nicely traverses the road from 
strung out to brainwashed.  Ian Holm's nothing more than a classy credit, 
appearing in one unnecessary scene.  It's truly fun to see Dimitra Arlys again, 
(so good as the diner waitress who tries to kill Robert Redford in "The Sting") 
here playing the demonic nanny right out of "The Omen."
The screenplay adaptation (Tom Rickman, Clifford and Ellen Green) of Cathy
Cash Spellman's book contains a few nice touches.  Travis prays for help
and a janitor offers some encouraging words - when he leaves the dead lillies
on Travis' window sill are abloom again.  A pretty woman uses her umbrella
to open subway doors Maggie and Cody are running for, then is nowhere to
be seen when Maggie turns to offer thanks.  It also offers such idiocy as
a rescue attempt at a dentist's office and blatant ripoffs such as having
Maggie's housekeeper leave her rosary under Cody's pillow (straight out of
"The Exorcist").
The best thing about "Bless the Child" are the special effects by Glenn
Neufeld ("Terminator II") and Joel Hynek ("What Dreams May Come").  They
create demonic creatures which Maggie begins to see when evil is afoot.
Their hovering and skittering are truly creepy, some resembling the flying
monkeys of "The Wizard of Oz."
"Bless the Child" is mostly derivative junk, but its few novel touches 
are worth noting.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
You know that a movie has issues when most everyone in the audience comes
out laughing...and it's not a comedy! And what a strange career path for
director Chuck Russell. He starts his career off with a decent take on the
"Nightmare on Elm Street" series with his debut as director on installment
number three. He follows that up with THE BLOB the very next year, but waits
another six years to do his next piece, a little film called THE MASK
starring Jim Carrey, and then one more star vehicle in ERASER two years
after that. So then he thought, "Let me wait another five years, get a weak
script jammed with cliches and hope that Jimmy Smits and Kim Basinger could
pull it out of its ashes"?!? Strange dude and one crappy flick.
PLOT:
A six-year old girl is believed to be some kind of mysterious prophet sent
down from God. A Satanic cult wants the girl to switch over to their side,
while the girl's aunt wants to...well, save her from those damn devil
worshippers! Enter one occult expert agent, plenty of bobo cops and lots of
nuns praying, and you've just about got the gist of things here.
CRITIQUE:
With plot holes the size of my ass, this movie barely squeezes any sense out
of its cliché-ridden plot, with wasted talent, cheezy effects, bad dialogue
and unintentional laughs to boot. What's good about this movie? Well, Rufus
Sewell is pretty fun to watch as the head of a creepy runaway children's
shelter/Satanist supreme, with seriously wicked eyes and just enough ham in
his performance to go with all of the cheese lying around. The little girl
is also pretty good but unfortunately her character doesn't really do all
that much. And believe it or not, I was actually enjoying some of the film's
first half hour, which starts off with some promise, but not before bonehead
moves after bonehead moves from our protagonist, Basinger, just drown the
film's entire basis of believability. For some reason, it takes her more
time than anyone to figure out that her niece is gifted, and even longer to
figure out that every move that she makes...is a dumb one! Add that to the
entire police force of incompetents, save for Jimmy Smits (whose talent
agent advised him that playing the exact same cop character from NYPD BLUE
would be a good career move? At least change the clothes, Jimmy!), zero
scares, zero thrills and even less actual drama, and you've got yourself a
pretty bad movie. And why would respected actors like Christina Ricci and
Ian Holm take bit parts in this movie? Did they owe the director a favor or
something? Together, they barely have five minutes of screen time, but I
suppose that Ricci's hospital room scene might be worth a look for some of
you horn-dogs.
The worst part about this movie is its hilariously unbelievable ending,
which features police officers coming up with the brilliant idea of
"sneaking up" on a man's house, who they know to be guilty of a crime!
Uuuhmm...how's about knocking on the door and arresting his sorry ass,
officers?! Anyway, I don't usually inscribe spoilers in my reviews but the
stupidity of some of these characters is just too difficult to describe
without validating it with solid idiotic proof (and there was plenty to go
around). And did Basinger lose some of her acting "talent" during her hiatus
from the profession after her 1997 Oscar win? Difficult to say if it was her
lines that were really bad, or if she just delivered them poorly. Either
way, little originality, very obvious computer effects, little thrills,
little drama and very little entertainment value, certainly bestow the honor
of one of the worst movies of the summer upon this film. But if you really
don't mind a rehashed gobbledygook of various Satanic and "kid"-based
thrillers, and enjoy watching films that don't bring anything new to the
table...well, drink some beers, smoke some beans and rent this video,
because it may just be one of the funnier thrillers of the year.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Chuck Russell.
Cast: Kim Basinger, Jimmy Smits, Holliston Coleman, Rufus Sewell, Angela 
Bettis, Christina Ricci, Ian Holm.
2000 - 105 minutes
Rated R (for violence, gore, profanity, and drug use).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, August 12, 2000.
There's no easier way to say it than "Bless the Child" is a very bad movie. 
The film, directed by Chuck Russell (1987's "A Nightmare on Elm Street 3: 
Dream Warriors"), joins an increasing number of recent religious-themed 
horror pictures that include 1999's "Stigmata" and "End of Day," and while 
neither of those were cause for any sort of praise, at least they knew what 
genre they were in and how to keep the pacing actually moving. No such luck 
with "Bless the Child," which gets off to a shaky start with a heartrendingly 
earnest scene between two sisters (one of which is a drug addict), and then 
goes downhill from there as the proceedings become buried deeper and deeper 
in inane and preposterous plotting.
Maggie O'Connor (Kim Basinger) is a lonely, divorced nurse living alone in a 
New York apartment building when, a few days before Christmas, finds her 
younger sister Jenna (Angela Bettis), whom she hasn't seen in a long time, at 
her doorstep with a newborn baby. Strung out on drugs, Jenna runs away before 
Maggie can try to get her help, and is left to raise the child as a surrogate 
mother and an aunt. 
Switching forward in time, six-year-old Cody (Holliston Coleman) has been 
diagnosed with Borderline Autism, but Maggie is beginning to suspect she may 
not have that at all, but some genuinely unique gift. In the school yard one 
day, Cody seemingly mends a seriously hurt bird, which eventually flies away 
from her hands. And she always seems to be talking to unseen entities, a 'la 
"The Sixth Sense." 
Enter Eric Stark (Rufus Sewell), head of the New Dawn Foundation, a recovered 
drug abuser who has put all of his excess strength into helping others who 
have lost their way in life. Despite being a well-publicized figure, FBI 
agent John Travis (Jimmy Smits) has not yet been able to piece together the 
complex puzzle that links Eric directly with a series of gruesome child 
murders that have been committed recently in the city. And as Black Easter 
(Easter Eve), which is the day Satan is to be reawakened, slowly rolls 
around, it is up to Eric, who has now hooked up with Jenna, to find Cody and 
brainwash her into believing in the forces of evil. 
Why, might you ask, do they really need Cody? Hell if I know. It's fairly 
safe to say that screenwriters Thomas Richman, Clifford Green, and Ellen 
Green are the only ones who could ever possibly make sense of this silly 
hogwash. "Bless the Child" is an admittedly difficult film to summarize 
because it is so marred in ludicrousness and overplotting that, to attempt 
making any sort of explanation just leads to more diw-witted twists that need 
to be clarified. 
Academy Award winner Kim Basinger (1997's "L.A. Confidential") is an actress 
who has been widely criticized in the past for her questionable talents, but 
even before her Oscar win in 1998, I have always liked her. Basinger brings a 
genuine honesty to her film roles that not many actors can fully attest to, 
and can do comedy just as well as drama. Basinger must have known the trouble 
she had gotten herself into with this picture, then, since she is too often 
overly sincere in her line readings, or looks to have just awoken from a deep 
slumber. Either way, Basinger has turned in one of her most mediocre 
performances to date, in, undoubtedly, one of her weakest films.
Almost everyone plays second fiddle to Basinger's Maggie, and not many 
supporting players manage to stand out from the crowd. Young Holliston 
Coleman, however, is a real find, and dodges all dangers of becoming an 
unctuous child actor. Rufus Sewell (1998's "Dark City") is appropriately 
threatening and makes for a nasty villain, but he is too promising of an 
actor to be wasting his time wading through such inconsequential material. 
The same goes for Angela Bettis (1999's "Girl, Interrupted"), as Jenna, and 
Christina Ricci (1999's "Sleepy Hollow"), who does a professional job with 
her five minutes of screen time, and then gets out while the going is still 
good. Ricci is a fine actress, one of the more promising of her generation, 
so why she chose to appear as a drug addict whose only purpose is to explain 
the plot to us through frivolous dialogue remains a mystery--unless her 
no-doubt meaty paycheck played a role in getting her cast. Meanwhile, Jimmy 
Smits is a crushing bore without anything of interest to do or say.
"Bless the Child" is an amazing feat for a big-budget Hollywood 
horror-thriller. The movie is overblown and highly unsatisfying, completely 
dull and visually dreary throughout, without any provocative characters, plot 
developments, or visual effects (which, by the way, look cheesy), and only 
one suspenseful sequence (set atop a bridge). Director Chuck Russell may have 
done occasionally respectable work in the past, but his luck has finally run 
out here. Russell proves to have no sense of how to film a scene and make it 
work, and drags everything out to the point of genuine nausea. 
Rule #1 in the annals of Horror Movie Filmmaking 101 is, "Don't make a boring 
horror movie." Rule #2 is, "Don't make an unscary horror movie." Rule #3 is, 
"The storyline must be brought to life in a way that will make the viewer 
believe in what is occurring." Rule #4 is, "Some visual filmmaking flair must 
be present." And Rule #5 is, "If you realize you've failed on Rules #1-4, for 
the love of God, do not unleash the now-so-called 'horror' movie upon the 
unsuspecting public!" "Bless the Child" falls into the trap of Rules #1-4, 
but as proven by the release of the film, as well as this review, director 
Russell didn't have the good sense to pay attention to the most vital rule of 
all. I think we all know which one that is.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani

Bless the Child     *1/2
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Buena Vista International on January 5, 2001; 
certificate 18; 107 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:120
Directed by Chuck Russell; produced by Mace Neufeld.
Written by Clifford Green, Ellen Green, Tom Rickman; based on the novel 
by Cathy Cash Spellman.
Photographed by Peter Menzies Jr; edited by Alan Heim.
After winning an Oscar for "L.A. Confidential", Kim Basinger had a baby 
and took a rest from movies for three years. This is not a great way to 
return. "Bless the Child" is yet another shoddy and uninteresting movie 
about dark forces -- throw it onto the pile with "Stigmata" and "Book of 
Shadows: Blair Witch 2".
Basinger stars as Maggie O'Connor, a psychiatric nurse left to raise her 
young niece Cody (Holliston Coleman) when her heroin-addicted sister 
Jenna (Angela Bettis) skips town. The child is quiet and withdrawn -- 
autistic, everyone assumes, until she's kidnapped by a gang of 
Satan-worshipping child killers who have discovered she's the Second 
Coming, and want to use her power for evil.
The first half of the movie involves Basinger's raising of the child; 
it's dumb in its hammy dialogue and cliched, obvious scenes of creepy
noises coming from nowhere clear, but so familiar it's somewhat 
involving, and contains the potential to turn into good pulp fiction. 
Structural elements are stolen from "The Exorcist", and hey, if you're 
gonna steal, steal from the best.
Ah, but it turns to vinegar. It's annoying stupid, not fun stupid. There 
are a parade of vulgar scenes depicting the kid's greatness, showing her 
bring birds back to life and light candles through telekinesis, during 
which I thought, shouldn't the child of God be a wise and kind-hearted 
revolutionary, rather than a smug little kid pulling Houdini tricks? 
Several moments defy common sense, such as one in which a cult defector 
sits in a cafe giving Basinger information, and in run a bunch of 
Satanists who give the defector chase and don't think to touch Basinger 
at all. The movie wants us to take it seriously, and yet there are 
sneering villains, guns waved around, and cars dangling off bridges.
It's funny at times -- how could it not be when one of the baddies is a 
ludicrously stone-faced Mrs. Danvers clone, the climax takes place in a 
cobweb-filled haunted house, and at one point knitting needles are used 
as murder weapons? At other times it's just sick -- you can't laugh too 
hard when you're watching Devil-worshippers burning homeless people to 
death and committing ritual infanticide.
One other thing -- the special effects are terrible. They look like 
pieces of cartoon superimposed over live action. Five years ago movie 
visuals were so perfect that mentioning them in reviews seemed 
redundant. Nowadays they almost always suck. A sign, perhaps, that the 
digital revolution ain't all it's cracked up to be?
COPYRIGHT 2001 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
The UK Critic is located at www.ukcritic.com

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Chuck Russell
Written by: Cathy Cash Spellman (novel), Thomas Rickman
Maggie O'Connor (Kim Basinger) is a child psychologist whose sister, Jenna 
(Angela Bettis), just dropped by after a several year hiatus. Jenna is a 
drug addict and dumps her baby girl, Cole (later played by Holliston 
Coleman), in Maggie's lap and then takes off. Maggie raises the child as her 
own, but Cole is different than most children. Cole has strange gifts like 
being able to move objects and bring the dead back to life, but Maggie 
doesn't seem to think anything of it. After six years of raising Cole, Jenna 
shows up again, still drugged up, but now married to a wealthy self-help 
guru named Eric Stark (Rufus Sewell). Eric and Jenna want Cole back, and 
when Maggie refuses they take her anyway. Maggie goes to the authorities and 
speaks to FBI agent John Travis (Jimmy Smits), who becomes convinced that 
Stark is behind a series of child murders that have been taking place in the 
city. As it turns out, Stark is the head of a Satanic cult and believes that 
Cole is the world's savior, who he must convert to his evil ways. Maggie and 
John have only one week to track Stark down and reclaim Cole before Stark 
either kills her or converts her, whichever proves easier.
I don't know about you, but I'm getting a little tired of these weird, 
quasi-religious movies Hollywood has been throwing at us lately ("Stigmata", 
"End of Days", even "Dogma"). These films are usually thrillers, and somehow 
involve a conflict with the church and the end of the world, and some 
hapless fool thrown in the middle of it all. That about sums up Chuck 
Russell's ("Eraser") "Bless the Child". The only difference is, Russell's 
film is deeply religious and pro-church, while most of these films are 
generally anti-religion. Does that make it less irritating? Not by a long 
shot. I can't honestly say there is one specific thing that's wrong with 
"Bless the Child", it's more that there's nothing really good about it. This 
is the kind of movie you'll sit through, not really caring what's going on, 
just waiting for it to end. The kind of movie where you'll be thinking about 
things like doing laundry when you get home, or how much fixing your car is 
going to cost instead of paying attention to what's happening on screen. 
It's not all Russell's fault, no one could have done much with this 
frightfully dull script, but a lot of the blame can rest firmly on his 
shoulders; mainly for the languid pacing and dreary cinematography.
"Bless the Child" does go out of its way to prove one thing: Kim Basinger's 
Oscar for "LA Confidential" was a fluke. I've never thought of Basinger as a 
great actress (quite the opposite actually), and while I thought she gave a 
very nice performance in "LA Confidential", I didn't think it was Oscar 
worthy (though every one of her co-stars gave a performance worthy of an 
award). In "Bless the Child" she doesn't seem quite sure how to act. Half 
the time she's timid and unsure of herself, then she'll suddenly switch to 
fighting people and screaming. Rufus Sewell, who gave great performances in 
both "Dark City" and "Dangerous Beauty", delivers a mediocre one here. He 
simply seemed incapable of acting turly evil, which is (I think) how this 
character was supposed to be. Jimmy Smits is, well, Jimmy Smitts; likeable 
enough, but little more to him. Holliston Coleman isn't required to act 
much. All she's really asked to do is refer to herself in the third person, 
hug people, and smash her head against walls (don't ask me about that one, 
it never gets explained). Despite what both the previews and the opening 
credits would have you believe, Christina Ricci ("Sleepy Hollow") and Ian 
Holm ("The Fifth Element") show up in what amount to little more than 
cameos.
"Bless the Child" is a movie filled with lots of little details that simply 
don't work. Right from the start, when Maggie and Jenna meet up I knew I was 
in for a bumpy ride. The two have an argument which somehow manages to 
dredge up every traditional reason why movie sisters fight. Why do I say 
movie sisters rather than just sisters? Because movie sisters fight about 
things like drug use, miscarriages, ex-husbands, and anything else remotely 
melodramatic the writers can think of. The dialogue is fairly hammy and 
cheesy (I actually started thinking of a ham and cheese sandwich my mind was 
wandering so much), and once again writers stole that classic line from "The 
Usual Suspects" - "The greatest trick the devil ever pulled was convincing 
the world he didn't exist." If that line gets stolen for use in one more 
cheesy movie I'm going to, well, complain some more I suppose. The fact that 
Chuck Russell doesn't direct too often becomes painfully obvious about 
fifteen minutes into the film, when he makes every mistake in the book. 
Russell's biggest mistake is throwing strange images at you, the picture 
fades to the next scene, and what happened in the last scene is never 
explained.
How many loose ends do you usually like your movies to have? None? Well then 
I'd recommend staying away for that reason alone because guess what, nothing 
gets explained. We never learn just who Cody is supposed to be (Savior 
reborn? An angel come to earth?), and we never learn what Eric Stark is 
hoping to accomplish by turning her to his side. His way of converting her 
doesn't make a whole lot of sense anyway. There's a brief hint of the last 
temptation of Christ in there, but Eric's idea of temptation seems to be "do 
this or I'll kill you". You're no doubt wondering about the special effects, 
because any good religious thriller (assuming one exists other than "The 
Exorcist") is bound to have them, right? Well, the special effects in "Bless 
the Child" probably would have been fairly creepy were it not for the fact 
that they appear to have been produced on a home computer. The score, by 
Christopher Young ("The Hurricane"), isn't exactly bad, it's just not used 
enough to make much of an impression. Russell throws the score in during the 
really dramatic moments, but other than that we don't hear it too often. 
It's obviously loud and dramatic during the film's finale, but the problem 
is that the finale is anything but dramatic. It's so anti-climactic I just 
about dozed off during it. "Bless the Child" runs a painful 110 minutes, but 
you'll have to decide if you want to pay eight dollars for a two hour nap. 
I'd recommend the film to fans of "Stigmata" (assuming they exist) and give 
it two and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Susan Granger
  There's a problem casting Kim Basinger. Since winning an
Oscar for "L.A. Confidential," she's attempted two protagonist roles -
"I Dreamed of Africa" and this - and neither has worked. Kim's pretty
but emotionally passive. Which just isn't appropriate for this
supernatural thriller in which a psychiatric nurse, a lapsed Catholic,
discovers that her strung-out junkie sister's child, Cody (Holliston
Coleman), whom she's cared for since birth, is "special". Not only can
the six year-old cause objects to spin and the snow inside a
paperweight form a cyclone, she revives a 'dead' bird in the school
yard. And that's just the beginning of the girl's spiritual power, at
least according to runaway informant Christina Ricci and censured
Jesuit Ian Holm, who reveal that Cody's birth coincided with the
reappearance of the Star of Bethlehem after two millennia - and the
devil is after her soul. His missionary is creepy looking Rufus
Sewell, whose unfocused eyes are as disconcerting as a leering
gargoyle. Predictably, Cody is abducted by his black-clad Satanists
and threatened continuously to renounce God for the forces of darkness
before Black Easter. "She will be ours!" vows Sewell. Only Jimmy
Smits, as a former seminarian-turned-FBI agent specializing in the
occult, is willing to help Basinger. (For this, Smits quit "NYPD
Blue"?) Reminiscent of "Stigmata," "The Exorcist," "The Omen" and "The
Sixth Sense," the stilted screenplay, credited to three writers,
strips novelist Cathy Cash Spellman's plot down to its sinister
mystery-child essentials. Chuck Russell's direction is lackluster and
the special-effects are limited to computer-generated rats and
demons. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bless the Child" is an
ominous, apocalyptic 4.  Good vs. Evil? You guess who wins.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Chuck Russell's BLESS THE CHILD, it's God's angels vs. the Devil's 
team, and it's looking good for the forces of evil.  But don't count out 
the Lord's side until the last inning.
Starring Kim Basinger, recently seen unimpressively in the equally awful 
I DREAMED OF AFRICA, BLESS THE CHILD is a canonical B-movie, 
supernatural thriller.  In the old days, it could have played as part of 
a Saturday double feature, along with a serial, a newsreel and a couple 
of cartoons.  Part of a genre that includes such trashy movies as 
STIGMATA, BLESS THE CHILD is one of the better of such bad movies.  If 
that sounds like a left-handed compliment, it is.  Perhaps the most 
devastating comment on the film is that it isn't scary.  Unintentionally 
funny, certainly, but rarely frightening.
A typical example of the unintentional humor occurs on a country road 
with fog as thick as the proverbial pea soup.  "Where's our backup?" 
asks FBI Agent John Travis (Jimmy Smits).  "They were right behind us," 
replies the perplexed state trooper accompanying him.  The fog is good 
at making people disappear in such films, but, of course, the lack of 
any backup is no deterrent in a story in which stupid actions are par 
for the course.  
In another scene, Maggie O'Connor (Basinger) goes alone into a bad area 
of town to personally confront the Devil's agent, Eric Stark (Rufus 
Sewell).  Eric is a cross between a Tony Robbins-style motivational 
speaker and a David Koresh cult leader.  He leads a permanently peppy 
group known as the New Dawn Foundation.
The story opens with Maggie's strung-out sister, Jenna (Angela Bettis), 
dumping her 6-day-old baby, Cody, with Maggie and then disappearing for 
6 years.  When Jenna returns, she's just as wasted on heroin as ever, 
but now she is Eric's new bride and there to collect Cody (Holliston 
Coleman) in order to do the Devil's work.  But Cody is a child who has 
been blessed by God with certain gifts and doesn't convert to the dark 
side easily.
The best part of the movie is that Coleman and most of the adult actors, 
save Sewell, give quite respectable performances, much better in fact 
that a film of this caliber deserves.  The result is a silly movie 
that's more watchable than you would expect, even when great actors like 
Ian Holm have to deliver such gems as, "Today, the concept of evil is 
politically incorrect."
This much can be said for BLESS THE CHILD -- at least it gives God a 
fighting chance.  Usually church officials shown in such supernatural 
balderdash appear just as loathsome as the Devil himself, leaving us 
with no side for which to root.  This time, God isn't such a bad guy, 
and his side just might win in the end.  But I don't want to give 
anything away to those of you incapable of guessing obvious conclusions.
BLESS THE CHILD runs 1:50.  It is rated R for violence, drug content and 
brief language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com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------=_NextPart_000_001A_01C001E2.1E05B0E0--

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Chuck Russell. Screenplay by Tom Rickman, Clifford Green and
Ellen Green, based on the novel by Cathy Cash Spellman. Starring Kim
Basinger, Jimmy Smits, Rufus Sewell. Running time: 108 minutes. Rated AA
for controversial subject matter and violent scenes by the MFCB. Reviewed
on August 16th, 2000.
One of 1999's biggest hits -- and biggest surprises -- was "The Sixth
Sense", a thriller about a young boy with supernatural abilities. It was
only a matter of time before the formula was copied and thinly-veiled
knock-offs began hitting theatres. Almost exactly a year later, the first
of these has arrived in the form of "Bless The Child", a thriller about...
wait for it... a young girl with supernatural abilities.
But to pick at how "Bless The Child" is derivative of "The Sixth Sense"
would be too easy, even unfair. Surprisingly, "Bless The Child" is not a
bad film in its own right. Certainly, it is no classic -- it is too 
unambitious for that, stringing together timeworn plot pieces and boasting
acting and direction that are, in general, workmanlike at best. But it
does not embarrass itself, and is enjoyable in the kind of  
turn-your-brain-off way that often characterises summer movies.
New York City, Christmas 1993: Child psychologist Maggie O'Connor (Kim
Basinger) is met at her apartment by her estranged sister Jenna (Angela
Bettis from "Girl, Interrupted"), a drug addict who has been missing for
two years. Jenna has brought with her another surprise: a daughter, Cody,
just nine days old. Jenna alludes to Cody being a strange baby, but avers
that she was not born hooked on narcotics. (That the identity of Cody's
father is a mystery should come as a surprise to no one.) Minutes later,
Jenna runs off again, abandoning Cody with Maggie. Maggie decides to raise
the little girl on her own.
Six years later, New York City is being terrorised by a series of
ritualistic child murders. An FBI agent specialising in occult crimes,
John Travis (Jimmy Smits), is brought in to assist in the investigation.
Meanwhile, Cody (Holliston Coleman) has begun to manifest strange
abilities -- she can make objects spin, and brings a dead bird back to
life. It turns out that the murders are being committed by the New Dawn, a
cult run by Eric Stark (Rufus Sewell) who are looking for a special child
born on December 16th, 1993. This, of course, is Cody and soon Stark
shows up on Maggie's doorstep with the long-lost Jenna as his new bride.
When Maggie refuses to let Stark and Jenna take Cody, Stark has her
kidnapped. With the help of a renegade New Dawn member (Christina Ricci),
Maggie discovers that Stark and his cult are really Satan-worshippers,
who plan to turn Cody and her powers to their own dark cause.
Anyone who has seen even a fraction of Hollywood's thriller output is
likely to find much of "Bless The Child" rather familiar. Many aspects are
recycled from better works -- not just "The Sixth Sense", but also
"Rosemary's Baby" and others. The screenplay, by Tom Rickman, Clifford
Green and Ellen Green, based on the novel by Cathy Cash Spellman, is a
routine affair which unfolds predictably, with few surprises. The
characters are poorly balanced. Smits is kept in the background for the
first three-quarters of the running time, and enjoys no character
development whatsoever. Ricci, meanwhile, is present in only two scenes
and is a transparent plot device. Similarly, a religious group opposed to
the New Dawn is abruptly introduced late in the film, and just as abruptly
dismissed. Their sole purpose seems to be to explain some of "Bless The
Child"'s mythology.
And there are some rather murky plot details as well. For example, if
Stark has gone out and found Jenna, surely he's known for some time that
Cody is the child he's after. Why, then, do his followers hunt down other
children until just shortly before Cody's abduction? Also, the New Dawn
killed the youngsters after they failed some sort of test; why do we never
see Cody undergo this rite?
Despite these flaws, I still found myself enjoying "Bless The Child". 
Director Chuck Russell is no M Night Shyamalan -- he demonstrates few
distinctive directorial stylings here -- but his pacing is good, and he
seems to understand that less is more. For instance, when Maggie
experiences brief moments where she can see demons encircling the New Dawn
headquarters, these are held long enough to be effective but are gone
before we can start picking holes in the (well done but still very
obvious) computer animation. This principal is particularly well-employed
at the climax of a chase across a subway platform, the movie's most
visually striking scene. Indeed, the design work throughout "Bless The
Child" is above average -- keep an eye out for the atmospheric graveyard
exterior in the final act, for example.
Also very good are some of the supporting performances. Sewell is 
terrific, creepy without going over the top into sheer black-hearted
lunacy. Newcomer Coleman also does a fine job. The youngster is charming
without being overly coy, and she interacts well with the adults. Less
impressive are the two leads. Basinger is sleepwalking through "Bless The
Child", demonstrating a  limited emotional range; she clearly isn't trying
very hard. Smits just seems bored with his role, which gives him little to
do and seems to rely largely on his "NYPD Blue" TV character to 
substantiate itself in the minds of the audience. Ricci is sadly wasted in
her very brief role, although she tackles what little material she is
given with gusto.
As a sequel-in-spirit to "The Sixth Sense", "Bless The Child" is a pale
imitation, lacking the invention and surprises of that film's script, the
atmosphere and artistry of its direction, and the quality and conviction
of its performances. Judged on its own merits, though, "Bless The Child"
is reasonable popcorn fare, fun to watch and lacking any truly 
cringeworthy elements. Summer 2000 has been full of movies which don't
quite live up to our expectations, which settle for being passable when
they could have been more. Here, then, we may well have the poster "Child"
for the season.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/BlessTheChild.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Christopher Null
     Yes, August is upon us and with it comes the second appearance of
the twice-yearly dumping ground for Hollywood.  Like the February
doldrums, August brings us films filled with fading stars and awful
storylines that weren't deemed good enough to break even after a big
summer marketing campaign, nor will they be able to go toe to toe with
meatier fare during Oscar season.
     And to open August, enter Bless the Child, possibly the worst movie
I've seen this year.  Well, after Mission to Mars.
     Swallow hard before reading this ridiculous plot synopsis, which I
can already tell is going to be painful to type.  In a nutshell, Jesus
has returned to earth in the form of a little girl (Holliston Coleman),
who is abandoned by her druggie mother (Angela Bettis) as an infant, to
be raised by Aunt Maggie (Kim Basinger).  Six years later, Satan's
minions are out to kill the girl, of course.  And this year, Satan's
head minion is a New Agey creep named Eric Stark (Rufus Sewell),
determined to convert the Jesus girl to The Dark Side before Easter...
or else she must die!  (I guess they picked Easter because, you know,
they missed the whole millennial paranoia genre window by about a
year.)  Enter an occult-expert FBI agent (Jimmy Smits) and you've got a
kind of cop-thriller-paranormal Sixth Sense wannabe that makes
apocalyptic pap like End of Days look like The Seventh Seal.
     While young Coleman is a gifted actress, the movie has her doing
little more than beating her head against the wall, hugging people, or
spinning stuff with her magical powers (backed up by lousy digital
effects).  Basinger proves that, yes, L.A. Confidential was a total
fluke and that she can't act after all.  And Sewell appears to be
channeling Dr. Evil for his goofy bad guy role.  While Christina Ricci
is being used to sell this film to the unsuspecting masses, her part is
barely a cameo comprising three minutes of screen time.
     But bad acting doesn't kill Bless the Child, it's the bad plot that
aborts this production.  Driven by randomness, coincidence, and just
plain stupidity on the part of the characters, the movie wanders from
scene to scene with little more purpose than filling 100 minutes before
we get to the inevitable showdown at the end.  This has been a
successful M.O. for action films for a century -- but few have had the
gall to try to work in a God vs. Devil plot.
     The film is so over the top that Maggie's car, when falling off a
bridge, can't just splash into the water -- it has to explode into
flames on the way down.  The film is so derivative it actually steals
lines from other movies (notably a slight variation on "The greatest
trick the devil pulled was convincing the world he didn't exist" from
The Usual Suspects).  And the film is so amazingly obvious that you
expect Stark's limo to have "666" on the license plates.
     Altogether, Bless the Child is almost bad enough to become a cult
classic.
Director: Chuck Russell
Producer: Mace Neufeld
Writer: Thomas Rickman, Clifford Green, Ellen Green
Starring: Kim Basinger, Jimmy Smits, Rufus Sewell, Ian Holm, Angela
Bettis, Christina Ricci, Yan Birch, Lumi Cavazos, Holliston Coleman
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Chad Polenz
Oh boy, when is Hollywood going to grow up and stop making these supernatural 
thrillers about Satan trying to take over the world using methods that can be 
stopped simply by bullets? 
Here's the lowdown: this is another quasi-horror/quasi-action flick about 
seemingly innocent people who find out they may be, as the tagline reads; 
"mankind's last hope." This time it's Kim Basinger as Maggie O'Connor - a 
nurse living in New York City whose drug-addicted sister leaves her with her 
baby. Basinger raises the child as her own, a girl named Cody who is a bit 
different than other children. We even get such trite lines like "It's like 
she's listening to something we can't see." Oooh. There's a subplot going on 
about a series of child murders which are somehow related to New Age guru 
Eric Stark (Rufus Sewell) who is being hunted by FBI agent John Travis (Jimmy 
Smits) who happens to be a former seminary student and specializes in occult 
crimes. 
It's really easy to see what is going on here and where the story will go. 
Will Maggie - a normal, average every-day woman be able to defeat a rich cult 
leader whose boss happens to be the devil? Will Travis finally be able to get 
enough dirt on Stark to make a conviction stick? Will Cody learn how to use 
her powers to spin plates and light candles by telekinsies to save the world? 
The film isn't so much about the answer to that as it is the process. It 
attempts to play it safe by concentrating more on Maggie then bombarding us 
with a lot of cliche occult tomfoolery. Yeah, those symbols everyone has 
tattooed on their arms are pretty scary and yeah all that Catholic mysticism 
is fascinating because of all those stained-glass windows and Renaissance 
paintings and the dusty old books in the exiled Jesuit priest's sanctuary. 
And yeah the showdown at the end really had me believing Satan himself was 
going to win this time (the big cheese even makes a CGI cameo). 
What it all comes down to is that there's not an original idea to the film. 
The screenplay is as trite and predictable and full of cliches as any horror 
flick released in 20 years. The special effects seem very half-assed and 
aren't all that impressive (dark grey is not a scary color). The villains 
have no motivation other than the fact that they're villains and therefore 
they are bad. 
Just another movie released on an otherwise dead weekend and will be 
forgotten about in a few weeks. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-1B02-25D1C49-39CCF478-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.
