Title
Review for Duel (1971/I) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mike Merrin
During these times when Spielberg has appointed himself official
guardian of Holocaust survivors, and has forgotten how to make small
scale films, it is salutary to remember that he was once one of the
best directors in what some of us think was the "Golden Age" of
American film-making.
"Duel" is the first in a series of films made by Spielberg which
really showcase his talents. He is not a great dramatic director - his
serious films are preachy, self-conscious and grossly overscaled. But,
god, the man is a great entertainer when he tries to be. "Sugarland
Express" is a witty, subtle road movie that has a stunningly powerful
conclusion. "Jaws" is the best blockbuster Summer movie ever
made. "CE3K" is a dose of pure joy, summed up by the look of elation
on Truffaut's face at the end. "1941" is overlong and patchy, but
contains some of the most incredible set-pieces I've ever seen in a
film, and is much more interesting as a film than "The Blues
Brothers", which is similarly overstuffed (and which, by the way,
makes the worst use of Aretha Franklin that I can imagine - why the
hell do they take Matt Murphy when they could have left him and taken
the Goddess ?)
"Duel" was his first big success - not his first professional film, as
some sources claim. His feature length "Columbo" episode was made in
1971. "Duel" was his first film as solo director to appear in cinemas
in Europe, and was certainly the film that got him marked as a
director to watch.  Watching it again, two things stand out. Firstly,
the sheer talent which is evident in every single frame. Secondly, the
absence of later Spielberg traits, those which drag down his films in
the eighties and nineties.
The story of "Duel" is classically simple. A man, called Dave Mann, is
driving to a meeting through the Californian desert - the film was
shot on a fifteen mile stretch of Highway 14. He encounters a huge
truck, which he overtakes. He then allows the truck to pass him and is
unnerved by the sheer bulk of the machine. All seems normal, except
that the truck won't speed on ahead of him and remains close, choking
him with fumes. Then the truck prevents him from overtaking, until an
arm waves him past - into the path of an oncoming car.
A primal story of man versus machine ? Well perhaps, except Spielberg
complicates things by introducing one of his favourite early themes -
the perceived inadequacy of the modern male. Mann is listening to a
radio phone-in, where a man is complaining that he has to stay at home
and keep house. He later has a phone conversation with his wife, who
complains that he is not agressive enough and that he let her be
"virtually raped" by one of his friends at a dinner party, without
intervening and knocking the man for six. Dave Mann is beset not only
by the truck, but also by his notions of what he should be, but
isn't. A later confrontation with a truck driver, when Mann gets
decked, proves the point to him - he just isn't macho enough. Except
... well, except that such things don't seem to matter. What could any
man do when faced with this fume-spouting monolith ?  Spielberg - no
macho man himself - gives the answer when Mann finds he can only
defeat the truck by beating it in a battle of wits.
The truck is one of the great monsters of horror cinema. Seemingly
banal in its ordinary appearance, it grows more sinister the more that
Spielberg's camera observes it. Indeed, it's very _lack_ of anything
unusual becomes suspicious. By the end, the front of the truck has
apparently grown character and looks malicious and greedy. The
headlights become eyes, constantly watching, waiting for Mann to make
a single mistake. The truck is one of the great examples in cinema of
a motiveless malignancy. It doesn't seem to want anything except to
destroy it's chosen victim - where it comes from, why it is doing
this; neither question is addressed by Spielberg, who wisely realises
that the less we know, the more intrigued we are.
The truck driver is never wholly seen, but his presence is established
through small details - the waving hand, the cowboy boots. He could be
anyone, a fact that Spielberg plays upon in a triumphant suspense
scene in a truck stop, when Dave Mann starts to believe that he has
found his tormentor. We are so skilfully sucked into the nightmare,
that we share his paranoia. The scene concludes in a punch-up, and
then a funny-unnerving coda.
If there is a weakness in this film, it is Dennis Weaver. He's an
efficient actor, but rather uninspired - he plays this role exactly
the way he played every other role. He's professional, but he doesn't
have the comic spark of lunatic terror that, for example, John Lithgow
brought to "Twilight Zone". There's a lovely scene towards the end
when Dave Mann is roped into assisting a school bus, while the truck
mockingly observes his discomfort. But Weaver doesn't seem to get the
joke, and his reaction to the mocking children at the back of the bus
is simply embarrassment.
The ending, however, is marvellous. Having arrived at the edge of a
mountain, Dave Mann adopts a matador pose, jumping off the car just in
time for the truck to smash into it, and then career down the
ravine. As the truck drops, we hear a wonderful groaning sound, that
might possiibly be the truck screaming its last. Then, in what might
be termed the twist, there seems to be no sign of the driver's mangled
body. But we saw the driver ... didn't we ? The final image of Weaver,
sitting, nowhere to go after his final victory, is potent and
memorable.
Spielberg's early triumph in this film is still one of his most
memorable achievements. That's not to belittle Richard Matheson's
spare, ironic screenplay, but this is a director's film. Every shot is
calculated to add to the final effect, and even the padding out,
needed for the theatrical release, is engaging and characterful. The
traits which are notably absent here are overlength and
sentimentality. There is a cruel streak of comedy running through
"Duel" which might have improved several of Spielberg's later
films. There is not a single moment of false sweetness in this film -
something which invaded Spielberg's technique in "ET" and which has
never been overcome since. Think of that awful ending to "Amistad" or
the glutionous saccharine sentiment that is all-pervading in "Hook"
and "The Color Purple".
Could Spielberg make a film as clean and tight as "Duel" again ?
Probably not, but he's not alone in . Martin Scorsese will never make
another film as fresh as "Mean Streets" - and it would, perhaps, be
unfair to expect him to. I just wish to Spielberg would stop being
Saint Steven and go back to being the witty practical joker who made
wonderful films about killer trucks, Great White Sharks and Generals
who cry over Dumbo. That Spielberg, the one who is long gone, is
summed up in the beautiful scene in "CE3K", when Roberts Blossom
stands up in the briefing room, and testifies to having seen Bigfoot -
and, dammit, we believe him. The new Spielberg may have God on his
side, but he was much more fun when he had a bit of the Devil in him.
"Tchaikovsky - was he the tortured soul who poured out
 his immortal longings into dignified passages of stately 
 music, or was he just an old pouf who wrote tunes ?"

Author
Shane Burridge
Not technically Steven Spielberg's film debut, as it began life as a
TV-Movie, but it was expanded for theatrical release outside the US
after Universal saw its box-office potential.  Man-vs-truck story
brings together powerhouse talents of young director Spielberg and
fantasy writer Richard Matheson (they'd reunite for the TWILIGHT ZONE
movie and AMAZING STORIES series).  When David Mann (Dennis Weaver)
passes a truck on a desert road the truck driver retaliates by passing
him in turn.  From there begins a murderous fight for ownership of the
road.  Weaver becomes an unwilling David to the truck's Goliath.  Most
fascinating element of this film is that we don't really question the
unseen truck driver's motivation.  This is because Matheson's sharp but
simple story works almost entirely on a primal level: territorial
dominance and the battle for survival.  Despite millennia of evolution
the human brain still retains the instinct of the hunt.  Mann is quite
obviously Man, and his blood-red car is as nondescript and generic a
vehicle as you would find.  The truck, on the other hand, is an amalgam
of different archetypal beasts - it is a smoke-belching dragon (which
appears to be waiting in its cave at one point when it turns its
headlights on), a lumbering mammoth (witness its animal bellow at the
film's conclusion), and, it has been suggested, a precursor to the
shark in JAWS (we see menacing POV shots as it glides towards its
prey).
This is the production that really got studio heads taking notice of
Spielberg, and it's fun watching him at work.  As every frame was
storyboarded it makes an ideal piece  for perusal by film students. 
Extra footage for the cinema version includes scenes with a bus and a
railway crossing (although in retrospect I find these don't work as
well as the more basic cat-and-mouse bullying on the open road). 
Weaver, best known for his cowboy detective McCloud, is an unusual but
effective choice for the role of the bewildered, victimized motorist. 
Story is not too far removed from a Western anyway - there is a desert
setting, a bar fight, a cowboy-booted villain (the only glimpse we
really get of him), a collection of licence plates on the truck's
grille (in the manner of notches on a gun holster), a basic
good-vs-evil challenge to the death.  Instead of guns, the
protagonists use the next most significant instrument of murder in
civilized culture - their vehicles.  It may get you thinking about the
highways the way JAWS got you thinking about the beach.  Even though
it was intended for television, film's pacing and tension is hurt by
ad breaks.  Rent it or tape it.
