Title
Review for All About Eve (1950)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"All About Eve" is a black comedy that cynically skewers
the theater, with an outstanding and wicked script.
It was nominated for an amazing fourteen Oscars,
winning six including Best Picture, Best Director
and Best Screenplay.  Joseph L. Mankiewicz both
directed and adapted the screenplay from Mary Orr's
"The Wisdom of Eve".
Bette Davis stars as aging actress Margo Channing,
whose long-successful Broadway career is based upon
plays written by Lloyd Richards (Hugh Marlowe) and
directed by Bill Sampson (Gary Merrill).  Bill is also
her lover, although their relationship is stormy due to
temperamental Davis' insecurity about their age
difference (Bill is eight years younger).  (Davis
and Merrill wed in real life, later in 1950).  Margo's
best friend is Lloyd's wife Karen (Celeste Holm).
Karen takes pity on a starstruck young woman who keeps
hanging around the theater, hoping to get a glipse of
Margo.  This lovely, ingratiating young woman is Eve
(Anne Baxter) who, upon being introduced to Margo, soon
becomes her servant and secretary.  Gradually it becomes
apparent that Eve wishes to become the next Margo Channing,
as she tries to take Margo's place in Lloyd's upcoming
play, and even tries to steal both Lloyd and Bill.
Eve's rise is partly choreographed by sarcastic,
cold-hearted theater critic Addison De Witt (George Sanders).
Marilyn Monroe, already stereotyped, has a small supporting
role as a dim-witted would-be actress.
The script is about as good as it gets.  Margo's line
"Fasten your seat belts, it's going to be a bumpy night"
is the most famous, but in their context many others are
just as good.  My favorite is Margo's withering comment
"All playrights should be dead for 300 years!"
Underpinning the script and story is Margo's fear of
losing both Bill and her career to the younger, more
attractive Eve, while not realizing that even her spoiled
diva personality is superior to Eve's fraudulent humility
and cunning manipulations.  The awards ceremony shown
at film's beginning and end epitomizes Eve's (and the
theater's?) phoniness, with Eve in her acceptance speech
thanking Margo, Lloyd, Bill, and Karen while they
in turn watch her with ironical contempt.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Heather Picker
     Written and Directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz. Starring Bette Davis and
Anne Baxter, with George Sanders, Celeste Holm, and Gary Merrill. 1950, 138
min., Not Rated.
     In 1950, two movies about show business and the lives of aging stars were
released: Billy Wilder's "Sunset Boulevard" and Joseph L. Mankiewicz's "All
About Eve." Both were big successes, the latter being nominated for a record
fourteen Academy Awards (the record has been tied but never surpassed), and
winning six, including Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Writing. Widely
considered to be the film best capturing the world of theatre, it is thoroughly
entertaining, and is one of the best written, directed, and acted of all
American movies.
     The movie begins with a prestigious stage-acting award being presented to
young Eve Harrington (Anne Baxter). As an elderly man makes a speech prior to
handing her the award, we hear the commentary of theater critic Addison DeWitt
(George Sanders). He introduces us to the world he observes, and we are taken
back a few months in time, to before Eve was a star. Karen Richards (Celeste
Holm), wife of famous playwright Lloyd Richards (Hugh Marlowe), is making her
way to the theater one night as she begins thinking of the young woman she sees
waiting near the door every night.
     She is introduced to the woman, Eve Harrington, and learns that Eve has
watched every single performance of her husband's current success, the play
"Aged in Wood," because she is a great fan of it's star, Margo Channing (Bette
Davis). Karen decides to introduce Eve to Margo, who initially objects to
meeting the girl. Once Eve begins talking with Margo, Margo's suspicious
assistant, Birdie (Thelma Ritter), Lloyd and Karen, they become captivated with
her. She tells them of how she went to work at a beer company to help her poor
parents, and how depressing her existence was until she met a man named Eddie.
They married, and he went to fight in the war, and when he was killed she was
devastated. Seeing Margo perform the play in San Francisco lifted her spirits.
Since then, she has been a devoted supporter, and credits Margo and the magic
of the theater for giving her something to live for.
     Birdie quips, "What a story. Everything but the bloodhounds snapping at
her rear end." Margo admonishes her and the friends are humbled at the eager
kindness and sad past of Eve. Margo's boyfriend, theater director Bill Sampson
(Gary Merrill), arrives to take Margo to the airport with him, as he must board
a plane for Hollywood, where he is going to direct his first motion picture;
and Margo asks Eve to accompany them. Shortly thereafter, Eve becomes a fixture
in the lives of Margo, Birdie, Bill, and the Richards'. Birdie, who cleans up
after Margo, never seems to warm up to Eve, who begins assuming the
responsibilities of helping with Margo's career and relationship with Bill.
     Margo grows tired of Eve's attentiveness, and asks Birdie why she seems to
distrust Eve. Birdie explains that Eve seems to be studying Margo, as if she
were a blueprint. Margo notices the same thing, and, when Bill comes back and a
party is thrown at Margo's house in honor of his return and of his birthday,
she cannot stand it anymore. Before he comes up to say hello to her, he greets
and talks with Eve for twenty minutes. Margo, none too pleased, announces, in
one of the film's most famous quotes, "Fasten your seatbelts, it's going to be
a bumpy night."
     This is when the famous plot of "All About Eve" is realized. As the night
wears on, and much attention is paid to Eve, Margo gets drunk and acts rude.
Marilyn Monroe has a small part as Miss Claudia Caswell, the wannabe actress
that DeWitt brings as his date (with the ulterior motive of her getting to know
stage producer Max, played by Gregory Ratoff, as DeWitt finds out more about
Eve), and has several funny lines. When Margo gets Max alone, they begin
talking about a play he needs to cast, and she says that she will audition for
him if he can give Eve a job, as she no longer wants her around.
     As usual, Margo is late for the audition, and arrives to find DeWitt (with
Miss Caswell, who was there for the audition, also), who tells her that it is
over. Eve gave a terrific audition, and Lloyd, who had written the role
specifically with Margo in mind, thinks that Eve is perfect for the part. Margo
barges into the theater and confronts Lloyd, Max, and Bill. Eve disappears as
Margo begins shouting, and Lloyd and Max both eventually leave. Bill stays, and
Margo confesses that she is afraid of losing him, citing their age difference
(she is eight years older), and the ever-growing presence of Eve in their
lives, as her reasons. In a heated scene skillfully guided by Merrill and
Davis, Bill tells her that if that is how she feels, it is over, and leaves.
     Karen, who, at Eve's hesitant request, pulled some strings to get her a
position as Margo's understudy in Aged in Wood, decides to give Margo a dose of
her own medicine, and hatches a plan. Lloyd, Karen, and Margo go away for the
weekend, and they run out of gas on the way back. Margo misses the performance,
and Eve has the chance to flex her acting muscles. Of course, this was all
arranged so that critics would know to see that night's performance, and she
receives some nice press. Sort of.
     Before the next morning's papers go to press, Addison is lurking outside
of Eve's dressing room and hears her make a pass at Bill, who flatly turns her
down. Addison engages Eve in conversation, and the next afternoon, they run
into Karen, and tell her that Eve is about to meet with movie scouts. Addison
hands Karen the newspaper, and tells her to read his column. In it, Eve sounds
off, making references that she is better suited for the part than Margo, who
is too old to be playing a twenty-something.
     Karen goes to see Margo, who is furious and upset. Bill rushes in to
comfort Margo. Later, a reunited and engaged Bill and Margo go to dinner with
Karen and Lloyd, and Eve asks to see Karen in the ladies room. She tells her
that Addison DeWitt twisted her words, and acts very upset. As Karen's sympathy
for her grows, Eve asks for the role of Cora, which is supposed to belong to
Margo, in Lloyd's new play. Karen says no, and Eve blackmails her, telling her
that if she does not get the role, DeWitt will print a story revealing why
Margo missed the performance that gave Eve her chance at stardom.
     Luckily, Margo tells a nervous Karen, when she returns to the table, that
now that she is going to be a married woman she can't accept the role of Cora.
Eve is cast, and Bill is convinced to direct the play, although he does not
want to work with Eve. He and Lloyd fight a lot during rehearsals, and it is
clear that the production is taking its toll on everyone.
     Eve talks with DeWitt a few hours before opening night, and tells him that
Lloyd is leaving Karen for her. DeWitt is disgusted by her lie, and tells her
that even if something was going on between her and Lloyd, nothing could ever
come of it because she belongs to him. Naturally, he has dirt on her, and when
she is faced with his knowledge of her deceit (i.e., the false stories she told
everyone to gain their sympathy), she agrees to his terms. Finally, the movie
picks up where it began, with Eve accepting an award for her performance in the
play. After the ceremony, she goes back to her hotel room to find a young fan
inside, eager to meet her.
     The screenplay for "All About Eve," written by the film's director, Joseph
L. Mankiewicz (adapted from the Mary Orr play, "The Wisdom of Eve") is filled
with sparkling, snappy dialogue and the characters are richly developed.
Clocking in at about two hours and eighteen minutes, the film, surprisingly,
never seems to drag, moving from one situation to the next. The sophisticated
screenplay is vividly brought to life by one of the best ensemble casts ever
assembled.
     Bette Davis is in top form as Margo, an insecure star very aware of the
fact that her famous persona doesn't guarantee anything, and who sees her
popularity and career fading. Anne Baxter shines as Eve, Celeste Holm and Hugh
Marlowe are great as Karen and Lloyd, and Thelma Ritter is amusing as Birdie.
Gary Merrill and Davis (who were married that year) are excellent together, and
George Sanders gives a brilliant turn as the diabolical, omniscient DeWitt (for
which he won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor).
     An interesting thing about this movie is that, though it is about the
theater, it mostly occurs off-stage. The story, about the conniving protégé,
has been imitated numerous times, but none have come close to capturing the
atmosphere of this script. Mankiewicz, besides penning an immortal screenplay
filled with many clever, sharp-witted lines (Margo tells Lloyd, "All
playwrights should be dead for three-hundred years"), has crafted a timeless
story and classic movie.
      The Verdict: "All About Eve" has all of the elements of a classic film in
spades. Terrific acting, direction, and a knowledgeable and fascinating script
add up to a movie experience that all film buffs should have.
mailto: Ahber16@aol.com
Review courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com
