Title
Review for Crow: City of Angels, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Christopher E. Meadows
My score: 2/10 (* out of a possible *****)
    If you loved Highlander and groaned at Highlander II and III...if
you loved Alien and Aliens but Alien^3 made you want to beat your head
repeatedly against the wall...if you enjoyed The Crow, then use the
money you would have spent on City of Angels to rent the original and
watch it again.  City of Angels is a waste of money and a waste of
time.
    Why did the original Crow work so well, and the sequel fall so
flat?  Let's compare the two movies, look at what The Crow had that
COA (or, perhaps more appropriately, _DOA_) did not.
    Leaving aside the issue of morbid curiosity and publicity (which
shouldn't have anything to do with how good the movie actually is in
the first place), firstly, The Crow had Brandon Lee.  His poise, his
screen presence, his sardonic humor...the more I watch The Crow, the
more I mourn his premature passing.  City of Angels had Vincent Perez,
who just went around killing people.
    When it comes right down to it, one of The Crow's greatest assets
were its characters.  Brandon Lee's Eric D'Raven, Ernie Hudson's
sympathetic beat-cop Albrecht, Michael Wincott's fiendishly
charismatic Top Dollar, the thugs, Sarah, Sarah's mother, the whiny
pawnshop owner...whether you loved them or hated them, they were all
memorable, they said memorable things ("At least he didn't do that
'walking against the wind' shit.  Man, I hate that...") and it made a
difference to you whether they lived or died.  
    City of Angels gives us cardboard cutouts who wander the movie's
dark backdrop and occasionally get killed and/or mutilated, many of
whom are direct clones of characters or aspects of characters from the
first movie.  Whereas in The Crow, I watched Eric Draven hunt down and
kill his murderers and relished every moment, in CoA I just wished he
would get _on_ with it.  We just don't _care_ about these people,
which means what happens to them has very little impact upon the
viewers.
    And then there's the story of the film itself.  It may not be _War
and Peace_, but there _was_ a story to The Crow that was, if I might
be so bold, uplifting.  It wasn't just a "guy comes back from the dead
for revenge" movie; in a very real sense it was a story about seeing
the desolation and depravity of your surroundings and rising _above_
them--as the song went, "it can't rain all the time."  Some people are
capable of this redemption on their own (like Sarah); others (like her
mother) need a little help, and there are still people out there
trying, even if they doubt they'll ever make a bit of difference
(Albrecht).  City of Angels, on the other hand, just gives us a dead
guy running around killing people.
    City of Angels, while it rips off the basic plot of The Crow and
even clones a scene or two, so utterly and completely misses the point
that it's just not worth sitting through.  More attention is paid to
the atmosphere than to the story, and with the rock soundtrack and the
avante-garde cinematography, it sometimes feels more like you're
watching a 90-minute music video on MTV.  Viewers are treated to an
hour and a half of depravity and violence, with none of the humor, the
emotion, the redemption of the original movie.  Not only is it
pointless, it commits the cardinal sin of being _boring_, and it
cheapens the first film.
    Leave this one for the same teen Goth crowd that keeps White Wolf
Games in business...I imagine _they'll_ eat it up.
--
(This review is copyright 1995 by Christopher E. Meadows. Distribution
is okay as long as it's not for profit and this notice remains intact.
Permission granted for all rec.arts.movies.reviews and Internet Movie
Database archival, including CD-ROM.  Distribution on any other CD-ROM
is verboten without Chris's permission, however.)
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Author
Bryant Frazer
"There will be another," the ads for this sequel proclaimed, and why 
not?
True, Brandon Lee is dead, but there would be no reason for him to 
appear in a followup to 1994's The Crow, anyway. The idea of spinning 
artist James O'Barr's original comic book series into a sequel franchise 
revolves around the notion that a different startled soul would come 
back from the dead in each movie, taking its own righteous vengeance 
against the world. Given that basic framework, the story could move in 
any number of directions.
Of course, it doesn't. Stubbornly, The Crow: City of Angels backtracks 
to the beginning of the previous film, when Lee's Eric Draven found 
himself drawn back out of his grave to do a Charles Bronson on the thugs 
who tortured him and his girlfriend to death. I remember the first film 
primarily as a harrowing exercise in brutality. In flashback, we see the 
most excruciating crimes exacted on Eric and his lover, and then we 
watch in real-time as Eric pays each perpetrator back in kind. It's loud 
and repetitive, true, a sadist's delight -- but it's also horrifying and 
fascinating.
City of Angels gives us more of the same, but less skillfully. There's 
an audience guaranteed for a film like this, although bad reviews and 
poor word-of-mouth will likely ensure that it won't be much of a 
success. In fact, Miramax subsidiary Dimension Films was so fearful of 
the critical reaction to this picture that reviewers were shut out of 
advance screenings. (I've never understood the reasoning behind this 
tactic, since good notices have never been key to the success of movies 
like The Crow.) So much for any confidence in the worthiness of their 
followup.
This time, Ashe (French-accented actor Vincent Perez) is retrieved from 
his watery death (he and his young son were shackled together, shot, and 
then thrown off a pier) by the crow who serves as his link between the 
worlds of the living and the dead. Perez might have some screen presence 
if he's given something to do with himself, but here he's simply thrown 
in front of the camera as a pretty face. At first, he's shivery and 
frightened, but he quickly recovers from the shock of his own death and 
becomes a badass biker from beyond the grave. He's befriended by Sarah 
(Mia Kirshner), presumably an older version of the child who narrated 
the first film. Kirshner, so beguiling in Exotica, is here an 
exquisitely photographed blank. Tattooed with angels' wings, Sarah is 
just about as lovely as women come, but she serves no purpose, not even 
as seductress.
The gang of punks who killed Ashe are ostensibly commanded by Judah 
(Richard Brooks), but a far more interesting choice as leader would have 
been Iggy Pop, who plays a gaunt fellow named Curve. Iggy, all bones, 
veins, and drawl, is the only one who seems to have shared in the 
aesthetic of ruin that defines this film. Like all good things here, 
he's dispatched too soon and without much imagination. In the meantime, 
we're subjected to tedious glimpses of Judah's compound, where bondage 
is the order of the day and hot wax is poured over naked bodies in S&M 
fantasies that would seem shy of the cutting edge even if they weren't 
distinctly secondhand. Even the soundtrack is tired. More than anything 
I've seen from Hollywood lately, City of Angels smacks baldly of product 
-- it's a movie with a lousy script but a great look.
Critics have been quick to fault the direction of MTV veteran Tim Pope, 
but his work isn't that bad per se. He's got a good eye, and some 
intriguing visual ideas -- if anything, this movie has a few too many 
scenes of ridiculously striking imagery. His major stylistic failing is 
that he can't seem to direct an action scene, and the quick, nonsensical 
cutting that ensues is reminiscent of a low budget kung fu movie. But as 
director, he must also shoulder the blame for the little screenplay that 
wasn't, the performers who couldn't, and an apparent lack of ideas on 
the parts of everyone involved. Who bought David S. Goyer's anemic 
script, anyway? The producers of this Crow were either too dim to 
realize their story was doomed to be a hollow rehash, or too cynical to 
figure their audience would know the difference.

Author
Chad Polenz
1996, R, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
Starring: Vincent Perez (Ashe - The Crow), Mia Kirshner (Sarah), Richard
Brooks (Judah), Iggy Pop (Curve), produced by Edward R. Pressman, Jeff Most,
written by David S. Goyer, directed by Tim Pope.
The legend of the Crow states when someone dies a crow takes their spirit to
the realm of the dead, but if something went wrong in the land of the living,
a person can come back to set the wrong things right. That's a fantastic
concept, but "The Crow: City Of Angels" proves it's an idea that can only be
used once.
Vincent Perez stars as Ashe, a man who lives in an a futuristic version of
the Gothic city of the original film, only this setting is much more surreal
than Gothic. He and his son were killed when they witnessed a vile gang
killing, and much like the original, we are constantly shown flashbacks of
their execution. The problem is, as innocent as Ashe and his son may have
been, we don't learn anything about their characters. There's too much
implication of the good versus evil forces at work, and not enough detail and
depth to move us in any way.
A now adult Sarah (Kirshner) meets Ashe and explains he is an invincible
ghost who must get revenge. Perez makes for a convincing common man, but his
transformation into a vengeful, almost superhero-like man is not transitioned
well at all. He seems like Jean Claude Van Damme trying to imitate Brandon
Lee.
Richard Brooks co-stars as Ashe's arch nemesis Judah, who is some kind of
Sadomasochist drug dealer, who, much like Top Dollar, has a supernatural
presence to him. But Brooks is unconvincing, he is too cliche for his own
good, and the story isn't original or detailed enough to make us hate him.
Iggy Pop also co-stars as Curve, a typical villain who is more talk than
anything else.
Although the first film did not have a straightforward style to it, this one
is just poorly assembled to begin with. There are long durations between
scenes with important characters, endless supposedly evil rhetoric, overly
violent fight scenes that are not exciting, and a complete lack of plot. Ashe
is not as cunning as Eric Draven was, he seems to just stumble upon his
enemies.
The ending is so insanely strange (and just plain cheesy), there is no way
the sense of justice the film wants you to feel could possibly be felt. It's
hard to sympathize with characters who are just going through the motions.
"The Crow: City Of Angels" had a lot going for it. Its production design was
a bit too surreal, but certainly interesting to look at. The elements of
character, mood, and theme made the original excellent, this one simply apes
the mood and makes up the rest. 


Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Vincent Perez, Mia Kirshner, Richard Brooks, Iggy Pop, 
      Vincent Castellanos, Ian Dury, Tracey Ellis, Thomas Jane, 
      Thuy Trang 
Director: Tim Pope
Producers: Jeff Most, Edward R. Pressman
Screenplay: David S. Goyer based on the comic book created by 
      James O'Barr
Cinematography: Jean-Yves Escoffier
Music: Graeme Revell
U.S. Distributor: Dimension/Miramax Films
     One has to wonder why the film makers bothered to make a sequel to 
1994's THE CROW.  Although it made money, that movie, which brought the 
world of James O'Barr's comic book to life, was not a huge box office 
success, and a fair number of its viewers were probably  lured into 
theaters by macabre curiosity.  It is, after all, the film Brandon Lee 
had been working on at the time of his tragic death.  As a result, the 
release of THE CROW was swathed in the kind of lurid sensationalism that 
inevitably fattens up a gross.  There is no such behind-the-scenes story 
to increase audiences for the second installment, and the result is 
likely to be a short theatrical life.
     Actually, THE CROW: CITY OF ANGELS is little more than a subpar 
remake of the first outing, with a less-charismatic actor in the lead 
role (European hunk Vincent Perez takes over for Lee).  The story goes 
something like this:  an evil drug lord (Richard Brooks) orders Ashe 
Corven (Perez) and his young son killed after they are discovered  in 
the wrong place at the wrong time.  Aided by an animatronic crow, Ashe 
comes back to life to gain his revenge on his killers.  His path crosses 
that of Sarah (Mia Kirshner), a refugee from the first film, and she 
becomes a pawn in the drug lord's schemes to destroy Ashe, whose only 
source of vulnerability is the black bird that flies above him and 
provides his powers.  
     Everyone in the cast, from Perez down, plays their role as if they 
are stoned.  Despite looking like an outcast from the band KISS, Perez 
never musters much energy.  Mia Kirshner, last seen stripping in 
EXOTICA, gives a flat, uninteresting performance, and Richard Brooks' 
sadistic Judah is more likely to inspire apathy than hatred.  Villains 
need to be charismatic; Brooks is just plain dull.  Iggy Pop, who goes 
over-the-top as Judah's sidekick, is much more entertaining.
     The start-to-finish violence and throbbing rock soundtrack are 
evidence that the film makers recognized the story's inadequacies and 
attempted to compensate on a purely visceral level.  Like the first 
CROW, this is a new wave DEATH WISH, but that film at least had the 
distinction of being original in approach, if not content.  This one is 
a rehash, and director Tim Pope doesn't display nearly the same skill 
that Alex Proyas brought to the earlier feature.  
     THE CROW takes place in Detroit; CITY OF ANGELS transpires in a 
stylized, gothic Los Angeles that looks almost identical to the one John 
Carpenter recently captured in ESCAPE FROM L.A.  This is a nightmarish 
view of the city's future -- a cheerless place more fit for inhabitation 
by the dead than the living.  Speaking about L.A., Sarah says, "They 
call this the City of Angels, but all I see are victims."  Really, 
though, when it comes to THE CROW 2, the victims aren't the poor souls 
suffering on-screen -- they're the men and women who paid money to gain 
admittance to the theater.  THE CROW, unlike the main character, should 
have stayed dead and buried after its first go-'round.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
evelyn_kingston@bc.sympatico.ca (The Kingstons)
This attempt reserect the story of a crow helping the dead to right the
wrong failed to make it out of the coffin. Vincent Perez (Ashe) was a
good choice to succeed the late Brandon Lee but unfotionatly the
material was not of the same calibre.
On it's own merrits this film is passible, barely though. When compared
with the first film, City of angels lack the emotion, action and grit.
The first is more of a love story in which Lee (Draven) is brought back
do to the death of his one true love. Lee must seek out the gang of
thugs that took the life of his love. The second film deals with love
but the love of a father & son. Although tragic this does not carry the
same emotional feeling of the screen. The prevece nature of this film
makes of crave for a shower after leaving the theater.
Story wise was this films weakest point. The focal point of the story,
the climax, was the worst of this movie. When the crow is being killed
Ashe is wounded it the same manner. Not so in the first film. When the
crow is shot Draven simply looses his powers.  After Ashe leaves Curve
(Iggy Pop) floating if the water people on the river bank toss "flower
for the dead" in, which just happen to form a crow around Curve. Not
likely!  This film lacked the action scenes of Lee which made this
movie a bit-of-action thriller. What little action there was, was fist
rate.
The imagery was well done on most of the film execpt for a few shots of
Ashe on a motorcycle which make one wonder, had they ever heard of a
steadycam?
Having the all new soundtract was good but Graeme Revell (composer)
only seemed use the same pieces from the first. A good score but this
was one area from the first film where it would have been nice to have
a change.
This movie was somewhat enjoyalbe but made me want to get home and
watch the first film all the more. Maybe if James O'Barr (the writer of
the comic) had more to do with this movie it could have been better. My
suggestion, wait for video, or if you can't, go to the mat.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Vincent Perez, Mia Kirshner, Richard Brooks, Iggy Pop.
Screenplay:  David S. Goyer.
Director:  Tim Pope.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The advertising campaign for THE CROW: CITY OF ANGELS invites us to
"Believe in the power of another," but it sounds more like a plea for
sympathy.  After all, what are you supposed to do when you want to make a
sequel but the star of the first film is no longer with us?  Well, I
suppose the obvious answer -- swallow your checkbook and allow THE CROW to
rest in peace -- was unacceptable, but this is one sequel which seemed
utterly doomed from the first minute.  1994's THE CROW was a film with a
striking look, but it owed virtually every ounce of emotional resonance it
had to the tragic death of star Brandon Lee while filming the scene in
which his character is killed.  CITY OF ANGELS has no such back story to
prop up its re-tread of the first film, and seems determined to substitute
excess for emotion in what has to rank as one of the year's most grueling
cinematic ordeals.
     The setting is the near future in the City of Angels, where a drug
lord named Judah Earl (Richard Brooks) controls all.  It is the misfortune
of a mechanic named Ash (Vincent Perez) and his young son to witness a
gang of Judah's thugs murdering someone, and they in turn are murdered as
well.  But a little thing like death can't keep Ash down, not when he
becomes one with the vengeance-minded spirit of The Crow.  He befriends a
tattoo artist named Sarah (Mia Kirshner), but he has little time to spend
on relationships.  His mission is to find the people responsible for his
son's death -- including Judah himself -- and destroy them so that his
soul might find peace.
     If there is anyone you should really feel sorry for in this mess, it
is Vincent Perez, because I don't think he ever had a chance.  This isn't
like Val Kilmer stepping into Batman's boots, or Pierce Brosnan taking
over as 007; it's more like someone trying to replace Patrick Stewart as
Captain Picard.  THE CROW's fans are passionate about the film, and in
particular about the man they see as headed towards stardom before he was
cut down in his prime.  Perez has the right look for the part -- he looks
serviceably eerie in The Crow's face paint and leather duster -- but he's
not Brandon Lee.  That's not even a criticism, because I'm not convinced
Lee was anything that special.  The point is that those who come to this
film because they loved THE CROW are going to have a real problem with
this guy with a French accent taking over for their hero.
     Then again, I suppose Perez always could have said no, especially
once he got a look at a script which has him making his entrance emerging
from a fountain of water in tattered clothes looking like Esther Williams
on the way to a rave.  There is plenty of silliness like that in CITY OF
ANGELS (it tries to stake a claim to mytho-poetic status by including a
Tiresias-like blind seer), but mostly it is an empty recycling of THE
CROW.  The radical switch involves having the dead man avenging a son
rather than a lover, but otherwise it simply finds a different
leather-clad fellow killing his own killers one by one, and oh, the time
and energy exerted on finding creative methods of inflicting pain.  The
bill of fare in CITY OF ANGELS includes a hypodermic needle jammed up a
nose, a tattoo needle applied to the eyeball, eyes gouged out, and even a
tortured crow (don't worry, no animals were harmed in the making of this
film).  It's a resolutely ugly film director Tim Pope has put together,
heavy on gratuitous S&M but light on any semblance of a point.  Sarah (we
assume this is the skate-punk from the first film all grown up) serves
only to give us the lovely Mia Kirshner to look at, and Pope appears far
more concerned with serving up candle-wax-on-the-nipples than creating
characters.
     There are plenty of individual reasons to avoid CITY OF ANGELS
(though Iggy Pop makes an ideal villain for The Crow since he looks like a
corpse himself), but it's much simpler to explain why each category of
potential viewer should stay away.  If you did not see the first film, you
probably have no interest in a dark story of vengeance with plenty of
unpleasantness. If you saw the first film and did not like it, expect more
of the same in CITY OF ANGELS, only less compelling, less artistic and
more obsessed with music video theatrics.  And if you saw the first film
and _did_ like it, do the memory of Brandon Lee a great honor and do not
let his death provide a producer with an excuse to build a franchise this
awful on his grave.
