Title
Review for Everyone Says I Love You (1996)
Number of Reviews
22

Author
Adam Joyce
The return of the musical is upon us. It began with "Evita", and now Woody
Allen has brought the musical-comedy back to life with "Everyone Says I
Love You". It is the story of a very well off family living in New York,
and takes the audience on a journey through their daily lives, highlighting
both the high and lows. 
The basic family set-up involves the two parents, Bob (Alan Alda) and
Steffi (Goldie Hawn), four daughters, a son, a grandfather, and Joe (Woody
Allen), Steffi's ex-husband. Joe is still very much a part of the family
and regularly visits from his home in Paris. Joe seems to have had an
endless array of failed relationships, and continuously pines for his
ex-lovers. Meanwhile, the eldest daughter, Skylar (Drew Barrymore) is
deeply in love with Holden (Edward Norton). In one of the many comical
scenes, Holden has the engagement ring placed on a dessert dish which is
served to Skylar. Unfortunately Skylar eats the dessert immediately,
swallowing the ring. What follows is a highly amusing scene in which the
couple visit the hospital and look at an x-ray of the ring. The hospital
staff congratulate the couple, marvelling at the ring on the x-ray. From
here they break into one of the many song and dances, involving all manner
of patients and staff. 
At first it is somewhat bizarre to see the cast break into a song, but
gradually one becomes accustomed to it. Beyond merely being accustomed to
the singing, one actually begins to enjoy these scenes immensely. All the
singing scenes have been superbly choreographed. This choreography has been
combined with the cinematography to provide the audience with very smooth,
clever, entertaining sequences. They are definitely one of the film's
highlights. By the end of the film, it's hard not to sing along with the
actors. 
Woody Allen's success with this film comes as a result of how he has dealt
with it. He has very much followed the traditional musical-comedy style.
Everything is 'picture perfect'. It's like looking at a postcard: it's
always so much better than the real thing. This is true of the scenes in
"Everyone Says I Love You". There are the scenes in Venice, with the fresh,
smooth, clean water flowing through the channels. New York is covered in a
layer of crisp, white snow, and is unbelievably beautiful. Paris,
particularly in the final scene is beyond perfection. It involves a scene
in which Joe and Steffi dance beside the River Seine on Christmas Eve. The
light reflects off the dark water as the pair dance, and Steffi begins to
fly. This probably sounds ridiculous, but the flying (gliding more suitably
describes it) adds to the perfection of the scene. This is all a key part
of the musical, which in this case could be re-labelled as fantasy. The
script is witty and clever, the acting near faultless. Follow the family
dilemmas of this upper class (near perfect) family, and enjoy the ride! 
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/review.htm

Author
Nick Durutta
Say what you will about Woody Allen's movies these days--and I would be 
the first to admit that they don't compare to his 1970s heyday--he still 
has the capacity for invention and surprise.
His latest, "Everyone Says I Love You," is a perfect case in point, 
resurrecting a nearly-defunct form of cinema--the musical--and giving it 
a fresh, invigorating spin.  Most recent attempts at movie musicals have 
failed dismally, mostly because modern audiences are not willing to 
suspend disbelief long enough to accept characters bursting into 
spontaneous song.  "Everyone" addresses that by staging its musical 
numbers with a self-conscious wink at the audience, as if to say, "Yes, 
this is corny and kinda dumb, but we KNOW it's corny and kinda dumb, so 
play along!"
It's also fortunate that Allen does not try to inject original songs 
into the story, but relies on semi-standards from the 30s and 40s.  The 
only judgment call that occasionally misfires is having actors not known 
for their singing abilities use their own voices (including Allen 
himself).  Hearing Julia Roberts and Drew Barrymore warble is 
particularly painful; but others in the cast--Goldie Hawn, Edward Norton 
and Alan Alda--are surprisingly good. 
Apart from the music, "Everyone" is standard Woody Allen.  It concerns a 
group of upper-class New Yorkers wrestling with relationships and 
assorted neuroses.  Woody is an expatriate writer living in Paris and 
keeping up a strangely close relationship with his ex-wife (Hawn) and 
her current husband(Alda).  While on a vacation in Venice with his 
daughter, Allen meets Roberts and pursues a romance with her.
Meanwhile, back in New York, Alda and Hawn's daughter Barrymore is about 
to marry a junior lawyer (Norton) only to get her affections diverted by 
a just-released convicted murderer (Tim Roth).  Although you get a 
good helping on Allen one-liners, that's pretty much what there is in 
the way of plot, which would be rather pale minus the musical numbers.
But the musical interludes are handled wonderfully.  A song-and-dance 
number in Harry Winston's Fifth Avenue jewelry emporium is almost 
overpowering in its exuberance.  And a finale scene of Allen and Hawn 
dancing on a deserted moonlit quay in Paris is almost transcendent -- 
literally (Hawn does some very unusual spins and leaps).
When all is said and done, it's as light as a parfait.  There's 
relatively little of Allen's moralizing and whining.  But that's 
certainly okay.  The musical genre works just as well today as it did in 
the Golden Age of 50 years ago -- particularly when it's done so 
knowingly right.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Woody Allen
Starring: Woody Allen, Natasha Lyonne, Goldie Hawn, Julia Roberts, Alan 
Alda, Drew Barrymore, Edward Norton, Tim Roth, Natalie Portman, Gaby 
Hoffman, Lukas Haas, Billy Crudup, David Ogden Stiers
The old musicals of the 30s and 40s showed a bunch of people 
surrealistically dancing and singing about being in and out of love 
instead of just following the usual route and telling the audience.  
Well, Woody Allen has taken this approach and taken some big twists on 
it.  For one, the characters are way more neurotic than the previous 
ones.  And the people in it, well, some of them really can't sing.  
However, this film is one of the most fun, entertaining films Woody has 
made in a while.
The story kind of takes a removed "Hannah and Her Sisters" approach to 
the characters, who are not only diverse but numerous.  The film is 
narrated by DJ (Natasha Lyonne), who is a collegiate chick in a huge 
family.  Her mother (Goldie Hawn) divorced her father (Woody Allen) 
years ago and remarried another guy (Alan Alda), but they're still all 
friends.  With Alda, Hawn had several kids, including two feuding 
daughters (Natalie Portman and Gaby Hoffman), a somewhat naive daughter 
(Drew Barrymore), and a son who turned out to disappoint his liberal 
parents by becoming totally right-wing conservative (Lukas Haas), who 
has big political fights with his father all the time.
Now, Drew is engaged to Holden (Edward Norton, in his third cool flick 
of '96), who is great and all but is about as naive as she is.  Then she 
meets an ex-con (Tim Roth) who her mom helped get out of prison who kind 
of piques her interest in that criminal way.  And also, Allen, who is 
very neurotic (as usual) and is a writer living in Paris, falls in love 
(or lust) at first sight with a Manhattener (Julia Roberts), who is one 
of the people who his daughters listen to through a hole in their 
mother's therapy room.  So DJ ends up teaching Allen how to get to her, 
using all her loves and causing her to fall deeply in love with what she 
thinks is Allen.
Now, the storyline is rather basic, I mean for a Woody Allen flick.  
It's not bad, but it's nothing totally special either (although the 
Roth/Drew thing is pretty original for Woody, I suppose), but what makes 
this film great is the musical parts.  He modernizes all the tunes, not 
by actually changing them or anything, but by staging dances in the most 
original places possible.  He does a musical sequence in a ward in a 
hospital, featuring straight-jacketed mental patients, pregnant women, 
and people casted head-to-toe dancing and singing "Makin' Whoopee."  He 
stages a montage of characters singing that great Marilyn Monroe tune 
"I'm Through with Love," doing it in the most clever ways, including 
having a rapper rap the tune, but with changed lyrics featuring a single 
word that causes this to be rated R.  And the finale features Woody and 
Goldie dancing on the shores of Paris, complete with flying.
The musical sequences are clever and charming in themselves, but the 
thing that may be a problem to some people is the choice of singers.  
Woody chose the actors for their acting capabilities and then later told 
them they were going to have to sing.  So we get to hear such 
non-singing people as Woody Allen and Julia Roberts croon, while we get 
to hear the surprisingly good Ed Norton, Tim Roth, and Alan Alda, as 
well as the women we all knew could sing, Goldie Hawn.  Drew is the only 
one who's dubbed, since she probably petitioned for it.  Oh well, I 
don't feel a loss (just kidding, Drew).
And the acting's great, as it always is in a Woody Allen film.  Standing 
out are Woody (as usual), who makes great faces as he lies through his 
dentures about liking the same things as Julia, and Julia, as she always 
does, rocks.  Also standing out are Ed Norton, who talks in a kind of 
neurotic way, as he seems to feel the need to replace Woody when he 
finally retires from acting; and Lukas Haas is hysterical as the 
tres-conservative son.  And Alda and Hawn are great as the always are.  
Natasha Lyonne is great as the very indicisive and narrating daughter.  
I have no clue who she is, but she rocks.
If there are any problems, it's that some of the subplots don't end as 
well as they could.  Some actually feel rushed.  The one dealing with 
Portman and Hoffman actually feels edited, but this one never really 
took any kind of form anyway.  But I have to give it to Allen for 
finding the funniest ending to one of them in recent memory with regard 
to the Lukas Haas one.
The thing that's great about this film is the way it presents itself - 
as a 30s or 40s musical for the cynical 90s.  The characters in this 
film seem to be trying to escape from reality through their songs and 
dances, so they can forget their problems for a couple minutes.  And 
they're truly fun.  I usually cringe at musical sequences in 90s movies, 
but this seems to be a rare exception.  This is Woody's best film since 
"Husbands and Wives" and one of the most entertaining films of '96.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Wendy E. Betts
Parodies of Busby Berkely's famous geometric musical numbers have
become so common in film that some people may think of them as
defining the classic musical number, but in "Everyone Says I Love
You," Woody Allen reminds us of how much more there was to the movie
musical.  Lovingly making use of virtually every standard except the
overhead shot of geometric patterns, Allen has created a movie that
isn't just a parody of, or even tribute to, the classic movie musical;
it's a genuine rediscovery of the form.  Watching it, I finally
realized what, for me, is the test of a real musical:  it made me wish
I could be in the movie.
The somewhat rambling story concerns the romantic vicissitudes of a
wealthy, liberal New York family, as enthusiastically and confidingly
narrated by one of the daughters.  I don't feel like dwelling on the
plot, which has its ups and downs:  some of the scenes are charming,
some very funny, and some--particularly during Allen's chemistry-free
romance with Julia Roberts--are tiresome, but not too painfully so.
But the plot--as so often in musicals--is really secondary to the
musical numbers.
>From the very beginning of the film, in which a lovestruck young man
sings to his girlfriend and people on the street join in, I knew I was
going to like this movie.  I can pinpoint the exact time I was sure:
when a long-haired panhandler, holding out a cup for change, starting
to sing along; it was perfect, not just because it was funny, but because
it was so exactly what Busby Berkely himself would have done, if he
were alive today.  Such touches are evident throughout the film, not
as cheap parody but as bridges to an earlier mode of film-making.
But if this film merely replicated modes of the past, it would just have
had me longing to see the originals, just as the film "Brain Donors"
only made me wish I was watching the real Marx Brothers.  There is much
more to it than that.  The songs, almost all sung by the actors
themselves, have a shy, unsophisticated quality that doesn't exactly
emulate most old musicals (although who _really_ thought Ruby Keeler
could sing or dance?) but which captures some of the same _feeling_ as
those films in which nobody was afraid to burst into song or dance at
the drop of a hat.  And the dancing--oh the dancing!  I don't think
I've ever consciously realized before how wonderful it feels to see
people dance, how exciting and alive and freeing it is.  Especially
when they just seems to be dancing from sheer joy.
I think the strongest barrier to the making of musicals today is
_embarrassment_.  A lot of what went on in the genre seems silly by
current standards, only fit as a subject for parody.  "Everyone Says I
Love You" works because it's not afraid to look silly.  Some of the
actors were obviously shy about singing, and mostly it works:  I
haven't liked Allen as much in years as I liked him timidly singing
"I'm Through With Love."  Dancing, on the other hand, really needs to
be done with gusto and bravura and here it is; it's mostly ensemble work by
professional, although one character gamely, if clumsily, joins in and
succeeds through sheer chutzpah.  The only dance that didn't really
work for me--although my husband adored it--is an attempt at a
half-Kelly, half-Astaire romantic number between Allen and Goldie
Hawn; Allen was obviously too timid to pull it off well, and (perhaps in
compensation) has Hawn magically floating and flying around like Peter
Pan.  It's both silly and rather beautiful, but I would have preferred
seeing Allen just really throw himself into the dance, without relying
on gimmicks.
"Everyone Says I Love You" has some flaws, especially in the
non-musical parts--but then, that's almost a standard of the genre in
itself.  For the most part, it was a genuinely magical experience and
I, for one, would be thrilled to see others join in the attempt to
revive the movie musical--as long as they do it with as much love and
understanding of the form as this film shows.
-- 
Wendy E. Betts, Editor, "Notes from the Windowsill."

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Miramax)
Starring:  Woody Allen, Julia Roberts, Goldie Hawn, Alan Alda, Edward
Norton, Drew Barrymore, Natasha Lyonne, Tim Roth, Natalie Portman.
Screenplay:  Woody Allen.
Producer:  Robert Greenhut.
Director:  Woody Allen.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Woody Allen is one of the unlikeliest film-makers I can think of to
try to revive the movie musical.  It is true that Allen has made nostalgia
something of his personal fiefdom, and that he clearly loves the old
standards, but that doesn't necessarily make him the best man for the job.
To oversimplify the matter somewhat, the near-total disappearance of the
musical as a cinematic genre has been the product of a less innocent era;
for a musical to work its magic on you, you had to surrender to its
often-absurd optimism, something increasingly difficult to do in a cynical
time.  Woody Allen may not necessarily be a cynic, but he has become
somewhat synonymous with sophistication.  EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is an
entertaining trifle which never truly transports you because Allen is too
often outside the genre.  This may be the first meta-musical.
     EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU deals with the complicated romantic
entanglements of an upscale extended family.  Teenager DJ (Natasha Lyonne)
narrates the interwoven stories, beginning with her sister Skylar's (Drew
Barrymore) engagement to upstanding young Holden (Edward Norton).  Skylar
and DJ's unlucky-in-love father Joe (Woody Allen) is an author living in
Paris, currently trying to woo a young art historian named Von (Julia
Roberts); Meanwhile, Joe's dyed-in-the-wool liberal ex-wife Steffi (Goldie
Hawn) is remarried to like-minded Bob (Alan Alda), though Bob's son Scott
(Lukas Haas) has become a conservative Republican.  Naturally, all the
relationships have their problems.  Skylar is attracted to a rough ex-con
(Tim Roth), Von is still married (if unhappily) and there may still be a
bit of a spark between Joe and Steffi.
     With so many film-makers content to make the same film over and over,
you have to respect Allen for experimenting constantly with techniques
(the hand-held camera work of HUSBANDS AND WIVES and MANHATTAN MURDER
MYSTERY), narrative devices (the Greek chorus of MIGHTY APHRODITE) and
genres.  EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is an experiment, to be sure, with most
of the actors singing their own parts and production numbers popping up in
the oddest places.  A couple of the numbers work superbly, notably a
ghostly dance to "Enjoy Yourself (It's Later Than You Think)" which is
reminiscent of Disneyland's Haunted Mansion, but watching this film makes
you realize how long it may have been since you've seen characters break
into song on screen; even though you know it is a musical, it is a bit
startling every time a song begins.  Still, no one embarrasses him or
herself (though Julia Roberts comes close), and the familiar songs are
given unique spins out of their plot-appropriate appearances.
     The problem with EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU isn't the songs, it is
Allen's approach to them.  His audience is notoriously upscale, and he
makes his films decidedly with that audience in mind; how better to 
explain the knowing laughter which accompanies a cameo appearance by
Itzhak Perlman playing violin at a party?  In fact, knowing laughter plays
a significant role in EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU.  Allen appears to be
banking not on the songs and dances themselves being entertaining, but on
their silly incongruity being entertaining.  One moment, a light-hearted
duet between Goldie Hawn and Woody Allen on the banks of the Seine,
strikes a perfect low-key tone, but it is a rare exception.  Allen has
made a comedy in which the object of much of the humor is the fact that
people are singing and dancing; he is getting us to laugh _at_ the musical
genre, not with it.
     One of the ironies of that effect is that Allen may also have given a
winking acknowledgment to critics of his romanticized view of New York.
An early sequence finds a panhandler breaking into song, and Allen's
tendency to focus on upper crust Manhattanites is given a nudge as he sets
a scene Le Cirque and a production number at exclusive jeweler Harry
Winston's.  There is plenty to laugh at in EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU, from
Skylar's propensity for swallowing engagement rings to one hilarious swipe
at Italians from a Teutonic housekeeper, as well as inspired performances
by Edward Norton (effortlessly charming in his two musical numbers) and
Tim Roth (hilarious as a suspicious criminal thrust into high society).
Curiously, those two performances also emphasize why EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE
YOU isn't better.  They offer a couple of rare moments of unrestrained
glee in a story which feels constrained by its characters' social
positions, even though Allen is all too conscious of the world in which he
has set his story.  It is noteworthy that the Marx Brothers play a
significant role in the film's climax (as well as the title, a tune
prominently featured in HORSE FEATHERS), because EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU
is a musical in the sense that the Marx Brothers' early films were
musicals, where songs serving romantic sub-plots only got in the way of
the real funny material.  It is also set in the posh world the Marxes used
to tear to shreds, only the classy folks are the heroes this time.  Once
upon a time Woody Allen seemed comfortable with Marx-ist ideology, but
perhaps he has mellowed with age.  EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU sings, but it 
might have soared if the guiding sensibility had been Groucho instead of
Margaret Dumont.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        With his twenty-ninth film, Woody Allen proves again that he 
can be successful in nearly any genre he tries. EVERYONE SAYS I 
LOVE YOU is Woody's first musical, a magical and romantic movie 
that manages to be bitingly funny and warm-hearted at the same time. 
Allen, who is 60 years old, is still just as entertaining now as he was 
at any point in his career, maybe more so because the movies he 
makes no longer focus on him but make him one player in a large 
ensemble cast.
        The plot centers around one large, well-to-do family. Alan 
Alda plays Goldie Hawn's second husband, with Natalie Portman as 
their teenage daughter and Lukas Haas the conservative son in an 
otherwise liberal family. Woody is Hawn's first husband, their 
daughters Natasha Lyonne and Drew Barrymore serving as 
reminders of the love they once had.
        Edward Norton plays Barrymore's boyfriend, who sings "Just 
You Just Me" to her in the film's opening scene, and later plants an 
engagement ring in her dessert as a romantic surprise. He gets a 
surprise of his own as she unknowingly eats the ring, which leads to 
a long song-and-dance scene in a hospital in which even a man in a 
full-body cast breaks into song. This scene is indicative of the film's 
delightful balance between parody and tribute to the elaborate, long-
gone musicals of the past.
        Allen plays an author who lives in Paris and has had little 
luck with love, until he sees Julia Roberts walk by. This turns out to 
be an amazing coincidence, because Lyonne has listened in on many 
of Roberts' therapy sessions and knows every little detail about her. 
Armed with this knowledge, Woody personifies her desires and 
fantasies and has no choice but to fall in love with him. And because 
he wrote the script.
        Meanwhile, bleeding heart liberal Hawn has crusaded for the 
release of convict Tim Roth, who comes over for dinner and manages 
to steal Barrymore's heart with his uncouth ways, while Portman and 
her best friend Gaby Hoffman both fall in love with the same boy. All 
these characters have their romantic difficulties, and they all get to 
sing "I'm Through With Love" at one time or another.
        Every character in EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU, at one time 
or another, bursts into song. The most intriguing thing about this is 
that Allen had all the actors except Barrymore do their own singing. 
Hawn and Norton turn out to be surprisingly good, while the rest 
are at least adequate. None of them sound especially professional, 
but dubbing everyone with professional vocals would have rung 
false and destroyed the film's sense of ambition that makes you feel 
like, when strong emotions hit, anyone will sing in public.
        There are a lot of very funny lines and situations in 
EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU, as in any good Woody Allen film, 
but this one manages to be a lot more optimistic and touching than 
most of his movies. The scene in which Allen dances with Hawn on 
the banks of the Seine exudes more romantic warmth and poignancy 
than any other moment in any one of his movies. Maybe he's finally 
found happiness with his adopted daughter.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!

Author
Ivana Redwine
Starring: Woody Allen, Natasha Lyonne, Julia Roberts, Goldie Hawn, 
Alan Alda, Edward Norton, Drew Barrymore, Tim Roth, Lukas Haas, 
Natalie Portman, Gabby Hoffman 
Written and directed by Woody Allen 
Cinematography: Carlo Di Palma 
Music: Dick Hyman 
MPAA Rating: R (for one use of strong language) 
Running Time: 101 Minutes
Imagine the enchantment of the MGM musicals of the 1930s and 1940s 
filtered through the mind of Woody Allen and what you have is EVERYONE 
SAYS I LOVE YOU. Although the musical numbers are old standards, the 
story is set in the 1990s; yet the vintage music does not seem 
incongruous with the contemporary setting. In a strange alchemy, Allen 
combines his own personal brand of angst and intellectualism with the 
lighter-than-air quality of the old musicals, and the result is a 
wonderfully romantic movie that is one of his funniest ever. 
People tend to either love or hate Woody Allen movies, and the 
reaction to EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is likely to be similar. I'm a 
Woody Allen fan, so it's not surprising that I loved this film and was 
swept away by its charm. It's not a perfect film, but more important 
than perfection is the feeling that stayed with me for days after 
seeing it--an almost weightless feeling of the beauty of love and the 
shortness of life. 
All the principal actors are given at least one song, and except for 
Drew Barrymore, they do their own singing rather than have the voice 
of a professional singer dubbed in. Some of the actors, notably Goldie 
Hawn and Edward Norton, are very good singers indeed. On the other 
hand, some, particularly Woody Allen and Julia Roberts, are barely 
adequate as singers, but their songs work anyway--the movie is not 
about getting every note just right, it's about the giddy joy of 
falling in love and the bittersweet heartbreak of falling out of it. 
Music and an ensemble performance drive the intertwined love stories, 
which revolve around the members of an extended blended family. The 
story structure is almost a dance of life that continuously circles 
around in a cycle of love found, lost, and then found again. The 
disparate story elements are unified by the use of the narrator DJ 
(newcomer Natasha Lyonne), who is the college-age daughter of Steffi 
(Goldie Hawn) by a previous marriage to Joe (Woody Allen). Like almost 
everyone else in the film, DJ is a romantic at heart who seems to be 
always falling in and out of love. In addition to narrating, she acts 
as cupid in helping Joe meet Von (Julia Roberts), a woman he has 
fallen in love with at first sight. 
Woody Allen's Joe is not unlike characters Allen has played in the 
past, an ordinary-looking man who is angst-ridden, neurotic, and 
intellectual. When Joe breaks up with his girlfriend, he takes a trip 
to Venice with his daughter DJ to try to escape his heartache. In a 
beautiful and wistful scene, Allen half sings, half speaks "I'm 
Through With Love" while he forlornly looks out at the Grand Canal. Of 
course, he isn't through with love for long. He soon sees Von and is 
instantly smitten.
As luck would have it, DJ knows all about Von because DJ and her 
mischievous friends have eavesdropped on Von's therapy sessions. (The 
idea of kids eavesdropping on therapy sessions is as horrific as it is 
funny, but this is the edgy kind of humor that Allen pulls off 
beautifully.) DJ feeds her inside information to her father, and for a 
while Joe is able to transform himself into the man of Von's dreams. 
Then, in an ironic and almost karmic twist, Joe is dumped by Von. 
After having been with him, she feels that she has fulfilled her 
romantic fantasy and wants to return to her old life.
Another major thread in the film is the relationship between DJ's 
sister Skylar (Drew Barrymore) and her fiance Holden (Edward Norton). 
Holden seems to be just perfect for Skylar, although things don't 
always go smoothly. For example, in an attempt to be romantic when he 
proposes to her, Holden hides the engagement ring in a dessert 
parfait, only to have Skylar swallow it. Later in the film, Skylar's 
mom, who is active in supporting liberal causes, throws a party 
celebrating the release from prison of Charles Ferry (Tim Roth). 
Skylar is so attracted to Charles that she breaks her plans for the 
marriage to Holden. But don't worry, Holden won't be through with love 
for long. When Charles returns to his old criminal ways, Holden and 
Skylar reconcile.
Another important thread in the movie concerns the remaining 
tenderness and attraction between Joe and his ex-wife Steffi. I really 
liked this thread's bittersweet quality and gentleness. Allen and Hawn 
have a great chemistry together, especially as they dance and sing 
while taking a late night stroll in Paris along the Seine. This scene 
simply took my breath away. Wildly romantic, it is the one scene in 
the film that is most reminiscent of the grace and screen magic of the 
old musicals. The effervescence of its music and Steffi's 
gravity-defying dance make it rank with some of the best scenes of 
this genre; I'd recommend seeing this film, even if it is just to see 
this one scene alone. 
EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU explores love as it affects the heart through 
a wide variety of ages, including even a kid's first crush. There is 
an amusing minor thread about two girls, Lane (Gaby Hoffman) and 
Laura (Natalie Portman), who both have a crush on the same boy. 
Eventually they do get to know him after following him around for 
awhile; yet, heartbreak lurks on the horizon. He asks only one of them 
out.
Even though EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is funny and romantic, it is not 
all fluff. The film is at its most powerful when it acts as an almost 
cinematic equivalent of a vanitas painting, juxtaposing the beauty of 
love with the idea of mortality and the frailty of the flesh. For 
example, there is an effervescently joyous song and dance number set 
in a hospital, but the number contains harsh undercurrents. In the 
scene, doctors, nurses, patients--some of whom are bandaged or in 
wheelchairs--dance and cavort while singing "Makin' Whoopee." Another 
outstanding scene in the same vein is almost a "danse macabre" set in 
a funeral parlor where ghosts rise out of their coffins, singing and 
dancing to the tune "Enjoy Yourself (It's Later Than You Think)." 
Allen has created some quirky and delightful characters. In addition, 
he has cast them well, which is important because the success of an 
ensemble performance depends largely on the strength of its actors. 
Part of what works in this film is that there are couples of a variety 
of ages, and for the most part these couples have the kind of 
chemistry that gives screen romance its luminescence.
Julia Roberts is convincing as the art historian Von, a beautiful and 
intelligent woman who becomes the focus of Joe's infatuation. She is 
perfectly cast as the kind of irresistible Goddess-like creature that 
could possibly make an ordinary guy like Joe do something as crazy and 
desperate as to try to transform himself into someone he is not. The 
relationship between Von and Joe is basically an extended one-liner, 
and Roberts has the kind of physical attractiveness and intelligence 
that makes the joke work. 
Woody Allen as Joe is good, although this is the kind of role that he 
has done so many times that it has become almost an alter-ego for him. 
Where Allen really shines is in the scenes he shares with Goldie Hawn. 
Steffi is a wonderful, funny, and subtly dizzy character. In addition, 
Goldie Hawn is probably the best singer and dancer of the ensemble.
Alan Alda plays Steffi's current husband Bob, who is a slightly 
steadier and less neurotic man than ex-husband Joe. Casting is key 
here since Alda seems not to act so much as to play out facets of his 
charismatic and very funny self, and he turns out to be a rather good 
singer as well. 
Edward Norton is wonderful as Skylar's betrothed. He obviously has 
great versatility as an actor; this is a much different role from the 
icily manipulative murder suspect that he played recently in PRIMAL 
FEAR. He truly steals the show when he sings "Just You, Just Me" to 
Skylar as they walk around New York's upper East Side during the 
film's opening sequence.
Tim Roth is Charles Ferry, the prisoner whose cause is championed by 
Steffi. When he comes to dinner there are some hilarious moments, 
thanks to Roth's comic gifts.
Natasha Lyonne sparkles both as the narrator and as Joe's biological 
daughter. She is perfectly believable in a role which in the hands of 
a lesser actress could have easily turned into little more than a 
device to unify the story. But Lyonne handles it beautifully, 
breathing life and credibility into a fanciful part.
Although it features flat-out gorgeous location shooting in such 
glamorous, yet real, places as New York, Paris, and Venice, this film 
and its characters belong wholly to the world of make-believe. This is 
a world where you are best friends with your ex-spouse, where the kids 
never seem to suffer any ill effects from the divorce, and where money 
is never a problem. Even the singing panhandler in the first sequence 
shot on the streets of New York is strangely non-threatening and 
better groomed than any panhandler I've seen lately. But let's face 
it, escape is the reason that many people, including me, sometimes go 
to the movies. However, Allen's trademark edginess and anxious 
intellectualism give the escapism of this film a much different flavor 
from that of the musicals produced during the Great Depression and 
World War II.
Although EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is not one of Allen's deepest films, 
it is one of his most entertaining. It is a light film whose surface 
sweetness is tempered by echoes of love's potential for heartbreak and 
the impermanence of life. It is a film for Woody Allen fans and anyone 
who likes to laugh, who has been in love, or who has had a day when 
they couldn't get an old song out of their head.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Woody Allen, Natasha Lyonne, Julia Roberts, Goldie Hawn, Alan Alda,
Edward Norton, Drew Barrymore, Tim Roth, Lukas Haas, Natalie Portman, Gabby
Hoffman Director: Woody Allen Screenplay: Woody Allen
Everybody gets to sing, everyone gets to dance, and of course everybody
gets to say 'I love you' in this 'Woody Allen' musical. This movie feels
like a spring day on the 4th of July; bursting into song in the toilet,
shower or petrol station; with feelings of uninhibited spontaneity breaking
the chains of shy reservation and self consciousness; allowing that
something special from the inside to re-sparkle the glib world; or more
simply put, it's like that incredible 'glow' of being pregnant before the
morning sickness sets in.
Things of notes - Drew Barrymore's breasts. She doesn't like wearing bras,
and Woody Allen has smartly worked this asset into one of the movies
strengths. The effects of moonlight shining through that blue saffron
evening gown, are like dark cherries on two Christmas Puddings. Yum! The
Woody-Goldie/dance-fly sequence is a prime example of magical, onscreen
tenderness shown between two mature, divorced adults - touching and amusing
at the same time. However, I really wanted to see Woody swing Goldie so
hard that she would fly into the French Riviera. Now that would have been a
memorable scene.
As a very choosy Woody Allen fan, who carries an incredible 'hate/love'
relationship with his work - I would say that I like this movie because it
is witty, original and uplifting. 'Musicals' have unfortunately become a
rare, and dying breed of cinematic motion, and I admire Allen's courageous
attempt to revive the art with such droll satire. Dislikes - too much
partner swapping, too many people talking at the same time; both of which
are unfortunate Woody Allen trademarks.
Since everyone feels warm and fuzzy; and everybody loves everybody else
let's smile, group hug, camera and FLASH!

Author
Thomas Skogestad
I have seen several (but not that many) Woody Allen movies. I didn't
particulary like Radio Days, The Purple Rose of Cairo, Play it Again,
Sam.
I quite enjoyed Manhatten Murder Mystery and Everything ... Sex, and I
loved Might Aphrodite. However I found Bullets Over Broadway to be a
snoozing bore. And Bullets got some very raving reviews, but I didn't
think I'd like. But I finally saw it (double feature with Ready to
Wear I think) and hated it. Since ... I Love You also seems to be
getting raving reviews I wasn't sure if I'd want to see...
People burst into singing and dancing, something I hardly ever
like. But this movie is so infectious. And funny! And entertaining!
(And unlike Evita, they only sing when they need to.) Sure some of the
actors may not be great singers, but they seems to be having a great
time, and so does the audience.
That's all I have to say. Really, if you think that is going to be a
dull movie, you're probably dead. And dead people should not be forced
into movie theatres. Is Mark Leeper dead? He said that "This is an
almost ghastly misfire". 
The movie is rated R, for *one* use of the word motherf*****.
Rating: *** 1/2 out of ****

Author
Berge Garabedian
Woody Allen's first foray into the cinematic world of musicals, once
again boasts a cast full of brand names from Hollywood, and Woody's
ever-present comedic genius.
PLOT:
Musical that presents us with the ups and downs of a rich family from
New York. They travel to Paris and Venice, and introduce us to their
love lives through the international language of gab and music. 
CRITIQUE:
Upbeat musical that works on some entertainment-value levels, but fails
to delve into anything of great motivation for the audience to fully
enjoy. This film is your basic Allen comedy (Standardized with the
continually funny one-liners..."I should go to Paris and jump off of
the Eiffel Tower. If I took the Concorde, I could be dead three hours
earlier."), but with much less character development, and much more
songs sung by the cast. I personally am not a fan of musicals, so I
must admit that I was somewhat surprised that I semi-enjoyed this
movie. I mean, it wasn't like EVITA, where the actors sung their lines
throughout the entire movie. These songs were nice and lively, and
introduced only when needed (Although I must admit that I could've done
without the Woodster's awful crooning, and Julia Roberts' brave attempt
at carrying a tune.)
Overall, the actors were very good, like every other Allen movie, with
Alda, Hawn and Tim Roth sticking out in my mind as the standouts (Mind
you, as per usual, I didn't care for the Barrymore performance.) The
scenery shots were beautiful, especially the fall and winter snapshots
of New York, and the Venician and Parisian vignettes. The ending was a
bit weak, but then again, the entire story line wasn't really much to
get excited about. Just a bunch of little adventures laced through some
nice music and gorgeous scenery. 
Definitely far from my Allen favourites like ANNIE HALL (8.5/10),
BANANAS (8/10) and CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS (8/10), but a continuing
sign of a genius whose only barometer of success lies deep within his
own consciousness and spirit. Keep it up, Woody!! You're the man.
Little Known Facts: 
Goldie Hawn's real name is Goldie Studlendgehawn.
Tracey Ullman filmed several scenes for this film, but all were cut by
Woody to reduce the film's running time.
Woody Allen's real name is Allan Stewart Konigsberg. Word on the street
is that the man speaks fluent French, and that he refuses that watch
any of his own movies once they've been released. One of his funniest
one-liners was ""I'm not afraid of dying...I just don't want to be
there when it happens." He apparently plays a mean clarinet with his
band, every Monday night in a local jazz café in New York City. 
Drew Barrymore made her screen debut as William Hurt's daughter in the
Ken Russell film ALTERED STATES (6.5/10) in 1980. At the age of 7, she
starred in a little movie by Steven Spielberg (her godfather) called
E.T. (8/10), and then spent the next few years going through drug-abuse
and alcoholism. She is half Hungarian from her mother's side, Ildiko
Jade.
Despite his reputation as an actor being firmly established, Tim Roth
still likes to tend bar from time to time. He stands 5"7.
Edward Norton has a degree from Yale in history.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Woody Allen's musical EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is a delightful and
infectiously happy movie.  As a film critic, I can rarely afford myself
the luxury of taking the time to see a movie twice, but I made an
exception for EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU.  Why confine the pleasure to a
single setting?
     Allen attracts talent to his projects, but this show has even more
than normal.  Alan Alda plays liberal Democrat Bob and Goldie Hawn
plays his guilty liberal Democrat wife Steffi.  Their daughter DJ
(Natasha Lyonne), who is the narrator, explains that the difference is
that her mom's parents were rich whereas Bob's were not, hence her
mom's guilt.  Almost everyone in the picture, as in most of Allen's
films, are quite well off.  Bob and Steffi have an expensive and
extensive place in Manhattan, complete with a maid.
     There is a black sheep in the family.  Their son Scott (Lukas
Haas) has become a conservative Republican.  "How did I end up with a
kid on the other end of the political spectrum?"  laments Bob.  "How
did I fail?"  Woody loves poking fun at everyone.  The way Scott's
conservative values are "resolved" in the film will undoubtedly
infuriate some, but I thought it was hilarious.
     Steffi's best scene shows her addressing a group of prison guards
and presenting her solution to prison unrest.  She tells the stunned
guards her idea for the prisoners, "I say give them an opportunity to
decorate their own cells with their personal interior decorator."
Nothing comes of this visit other than that she makes good friends with
soon to be released prisoner Charles Ferry (Tim Roth).  This friendship
will test her resolve as a do-gooder.  Yes, you feel sorry for a
vicious criminal, but would you want daughter to marry one?
     Drew Barrymore is picture perfect as their innocent daughter
Skylar.  She is engaged to boyishly handsome Edward Norton as Holden.
They have many delightful scenes together including the one where she
accidentally swallows the ring he gives her.
     Woody is the star of the picture as Steffi's ex-husband Joe.  As
usual, Woody plays the part of someone who has trouble with
relationships.  As Joe puts it, "In a relationship, it is better to be
the leaver than the leavee."  His last relationship has gone sour and
he has been left.  "I should go to Paris and jump off of the Eiffel
Tower," he tells Steffi and Bob.  "If I took the Concorde, I could be
dead three hours earlier."  Woody plays his usual character obsessed
with death -- Mahler, but funnier.
     Eventually Woody will go to Venice and meet a married woman named
Von, played by the ever gorgeous Julia Roberts.  They will have an
affair that will be the centerpiece of the story.  My favorite line of
his comes after she compliments him on his love making abilities.
Being overly debonair, he confesses, "There was a moment there when I
stroked when I should have hickeyed."
     All of the above is great comedy, but it is the musical part that
makes the film stand out.  The film is like a traditional musical and
unlike EVITA in that the musical numbers are frequent, but most of the
lines are spoken, not sung.
     The musical numbers come from great old songs and are sung by the
cast.  Some of them have weak voices, with Woody's being the smallest,
but all of them manage to provide happiness and mirth.
     It is hard to choose which of the musical numbers I liked best.
Many of them rely on choruses.  When they are looking at the X-ray for
the lost ring, for example, the doctor breaks into song as do the
nurses and the patients.
     Easily the most imaginative musical number happens in the funeral
parlor.  The dead relative gets out of his casket looking exactly like
one of the ghosts from Disneyland's Haunted Mansion.  He gathers other
ghosts to sing, "Enjoy yourself, enjoy yourself, it's later than you
think."  Soon Bob and Steffi and all the kids are singing and dancing
with them.
     The film is exceedingly beautiful, certainly the most attractive
movie Allen has ever made.  His usual cinematographer, Carlo Di Palma,
can be credited.  Talking the colors from a Central Park in fall that
has never looked lovelier, he uses that color palette for all of the
photography.  Unlike typical Allen films we also get location shots in
such picturesque locales as Paris and Venice.
     EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is a joy to behold.  You leave the
theater with a song in your heart and wanting to repeat the experience
again.
     EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU runs 1:41.  It is rated R for a single
bad word from a rap song.  Other than that, the film is pure PG.  As
soon the rap guy appears, cover your kids ears for a few seconds and
the singer and his one profanity will be history.  With that precaution
you can take kids of any age to see the film although those under nine
will probably not be interested.  I strongly recommend the picture to
you and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU(1996) *** 1/2 Written and directed by Woody Allen.
Photography, Carlo DiPalma. Editing, Susan E. Morse. Music arranged and
conducted by Dick Hyman. Music performed by Dick Hyman and the New York
Studio Players. Chorus, The Helen Miles Singers. Choreography, Graciela
Daniele. Production design, Santo Loquasto. Costumes, Jeffrey
Kurland.Produced by Robert Greenhut. Cast: Edward Norton (Holden), Goldie
Hawn (Steffi), Woody Allen (Joe), Alan Alda (Bob), Gaby Hoffmann (Lane),
Natalie Portman (Laura), Drew Barrymore (Skylar), Natasha Lyonne (DJ),
Lukas Haas (Scott), Julia Roberts (Von) and Tim Roth (Charles Ferry), David
Ogden Stiers (Holden's father) et al. A Miramax release. 97 minutes. Rated
R (Prudishly, illogically)
Q. I know that this a Woody Allen musical, his first. Isn't this unusual?
A. Unusual in that movie musicals have almost disappeared, but not
surprising since the film comes from Woody.
A. Allen ( born in 1935)  is  a first-rate jazz clarinetist with a passion
for popular music, especially that of his youth, which includes film music
and the music in films. Remember that in the many years before the advent
of rock, pop songs of stage and screen came fast and furious and stayed
around for a long, long time. People of Woody's generation, plus the next
one, often remembered and sang an enormous repertory that went back many
years, well before the aficionados' birth. For a connoisseur like Woody,
the backlog is immense.
Q. Are you saying that Woody used this kind of music in his films?
A. And how! The "old" music added immeasurably to his movies, whether as a
key element, nostalgia or commentary. He even had recourse to "old-style"
new songs sometimes. For example, in his early film "Bananas," he used a
splendid Marvin Hamlisch song, sung in Spanish and "genuinely" Latin
American. Other movies used old tunes. At the 1979 Cannes Festival, the
closing, out-of-competition film was "Manhattan." It opened with
sensational, romantic views of New York City, to the music of Gershwin's
"Rhapsody in Blue." On a huge screen and with state-of-the art sound this
was so beautiful that the audience of professionals broke into applause.
Q. I see ... and I remember now how well he used pop music in "Broadway
Danny Rose," as impresario Rose tries to promote a has-been singer. Also
the old tunes in "Hannah and Her Sisters" ....
A. ...and all of "Radio Days" including the sweet-singing Diane Keaton;
and, and...  ending with the funny-phony chorus in "Mighty Aphrodite."
A. In a way, a non-plot movie. It is about a big family of wealthy
(presumably WASP) Manhattanites, the kind that give little soirees where
Itzhak and Navah Perlman play (wait 'til you hear what they are playing!).
Steffi (Goldie Hawn, very charming) had long ago divorced writer Joe
(Allen), married Bob (the ever pleasant Alan Alda). This produced parents,
step-parents and miscellaneous categories of siblings.
Bob and Steffi are liberal Democrats. Steffi is into causes, such as the
one that takes her --chauffeur driven-- to prisons where she suggests that
the inmates be given a chance to participate in the redecoration of their
cells. Bob is being driven crazy because his young son Scott is on an
arch-conservative political kick. (There's a funny solution to this). The
family includes a dotty grandpa, almost out of the old Dad in TV's "Keeping
Up Appearances." There's also an authoritarian German cook.
Steffi's and Joe's daughter, DJ, in her late teens, narrates the movie. Her
sister Skylar (a name out of Sonny and Cher?), played by Drew Barrymore, is
engaged to Holden, played by Edward Norton, currently famous for "Primal
Fear" and "The People vs.Larry Flynt."  The couple open the film as they
sing the title oldie in Central Park and in the streets -- the main
excursion of the film into the working classes. Holden ( a reference to
Caulfield?) is the scion of wealthy David Ogden Stiers (born in Peoria,
none too recognizable, but then where there's an Alda there's a Stiers).
Q. Is this an all-singing movie like "The Umbrellas of Cherbourg"?
A. No. It 's cross between the late Dennis Potter's BBC series "The Singing
Detective" and "Pennies from Heaven " (plus the "Pennies" film with Steve
Martin) and the 1930s flicks that used any excuse to break into song and
dance. There are differences though. The old songs in the Potter series
used dubbed original recordings and commented on many topics.  The 1930s
movies used professional singers. Here the tunes are mostly about love and
sung by the actual cast of non-singers. Allen had everyone warble in
his/her real voice (except for Drew B. who can't sing at all).
Q. Doesn't this produce horrible sounds?
A. You'd be surprised how well just about everyone comes through, perhaps
not with flying colors but  pleasantly. However, contrary to what you may
have heard, there are also professionals who sing and dance in imaginative,
funny, hilarious, most skillful sequences. Like the personnel at Harry
Winston's jewelry store; like assorted hospital patients to the tune of
"Making Whoopee" ; like ghosts in a funeral home. For Halloween we get
tricked and treated to a great, juvenile version of "Chiquita Banana."
There's a killer sequence in Paris, a Groucho Ball where all the men and
women are made up as Grouchos (Woody is perfect) and where a large group
does a number, "Hooray for Captain Spaulding" from a  Marx Brothers film.
The performers sing it in French. It's a howl.
A. My guess is that Woody is pay homage to the millions of French
cinephiles and Groucho-ites. In France, during the several student unrests
of the past, many wall graffiti stated: "I am a Marxist, of the Groucho
persuasion."
 Q. How does Joe-Woody come into the story?
A. Early on, he visits the splendid apartment of his best friends (Hawn and
Alda).He now lives in Paris, where his latest amour has dumped him. He is
the same old Woody, yearning for romantic love with younger women, full of
tales of woe and  his usual  neuroses. But instead of feeling all this as
"deja vu," I found it comforting, the way I used to do for the Monty Python
people, not in spite, but because of the basic sameness of program after
program. I don't mention this haphazardly, since Woody and the Pythons
were, for me, the main comic geniuses of the post-war period.
A. He now wants to return to Paris and kill himself there. He even thinks
of taking the Concorde to get there earlier and do it. Instead he ends up
by the romantic canals of Venice with daughter DJ who has engineered in
most complex and funny ways  (these include a peephole in a New York wall,
near-fatal jogging, posing as a Tintorettto scholar) for Joe to meet and
seduce fellow neurotic  Julia Roberts, a married art historian. More
follows, with the finale, back in Paris finding Joe and Steffi dancing by
the Seine -- an enchantingly lyrical sequence where amazing special effects
make Steffi glide on land and rise in the air.
Q. Are there good gags and good one-liners?
A. All you ever wanted but were afraid you wouldn't get. Woody may still
play his dysfunctional persona, but as a film maker he is totally
functional, hits on all cylinders, crafts beautifully his amusing details.
Like the experienced gag-writer he used to be, he misses nothing, has full
control over gags, topping them and topping the topper.
A. In showbiz parlance, the  building up gags on top of previous ones.
Like a two- or three-stage rocket.  For instance, Holden plans to surprise
Skylar with a ring placed inside a dessert. She swallows it. They rush to a
doctor who, pointing to the ring in the X-rays, asks Holden how much it
cost. "Eight thousand dollars."  "You could have gotten it for six thousand
from my brother-in-law."  Or take a Sikh cabby who joins the singing ... in
his own language. Or Tim Roth, as creepy an ex-con as any, who is paroled
thanks to Steffi and repays her by taking-- temporarily-- Skylar away from
her fiance Holden. And more...
A. Clear how? What do you mean exactly?
Q. I have in mind all those movies that increasingly play guessing games
with the public, often confuse it, make us spend too much time figuring out
who's who, what's what and all that -- not to mention impossibilities.
Among thrillers, for instance, you never find that "clear and clean"
development that Alfred Hitchcock did so well.
A. I understand. Yes, on the face of it, once you figured out which child
is from which marriage, there are no outlandish question marks. If later
you think back, you might become aware that there's some sketchiness in
certain characters, but no more than in a "Broadway Melody" movie. It
doesn't hurt, but somewhere I read that a great deal more footage had been
shot, with more characters that were cut out of the final version. Even so,
what comes through with utter clarity is Allen's trademark, sentimental
adoration of New York, his selective view of the good that precludes the
bad and the ugly. This time, Woody expands his urbanolatry with additional
valentines to Paris and Venice.
Q. You rate this film three-and-a-half stars, high praise. Do you think the
public and the critics will agree?
A. Devotees of  Woody and of vintage music, yes. This is one of those rare
fun-fun-fun, pack up your troubles in the old kit bag and smile, smile,
smile movies that I'd like to see again, and soon. Allen has chosen his
songs very cleverly among good ones by first-rate tunesmiths-- but then he
selected mostly items that are less familiar than the golden chestnuts. If
you know them, there's the pleasant shock of recognition. If you don't,
there's the pleasure of discovery. But for people who, for reasons of
culture or age are indifferent to such super-oldies, it could be a
different story.
Q. How do you think the film will be received abroad?
A. I really can't guess. In Europe Woody Allen is an icon, a film deity.
I'm glad he is yet I have always been puzzled, since he uses the American
vernacular in ways not always translatable. Not to mention his New York
brand of Jewish humor and other ethnic humors -- of which, by the way,
there's little in "Everyone..." Now when all is said and done, it's the
movie's music that is its backbone -- and while there are many connoisseurs
of jazz abroad, I can't tell how many Tin Pan Alley or Broadway specialists
exist there.
Q. So the film might not get fully appreciated?
A. Again, I can't tell. But look at what happened a few years ago at Cannes
to the wonderful Terence Davies picture  "The Long Day Closes," about the
gray life of postwar British working classes whose escapism was in  (mostly
American) movies and popular songs. Many Europeans just didn't get it. The
songs meant nothing to them.
Still, even those viewers of "Everyone" who are outside this nostalgia loop
ought to appreciate the superior production values (sets, photography,
orchestrations, etc.) to which Woody's usual, superb collaborators have
imparted smooth, Allenian sights and sounds.

Author
Max Scheinin
 Released 1996
A Woody Allen film, "Everyone Says I Love You".
Starring: Alan Alda, Woody Allen, Drew Barrymore, Lukas Haas, Goldie Hawn,
Gaby Hoffman, Natasha Lyone, Edward Norton, Natalie Portman, Julia Roberts,
Tim Roth, David Ogden Stiers, Scotty Bloch, Patrick Chranshaw, Billy
Crudup, Trude Klein, Robert Knepper
Rating: **1/2
Letter grade: B-
Everyone Says I Love You begins quaint and charming; two young lovers
struggle to sing Just You, Just Me, to modest results. Well, it's the
thought that matters. The pace picks up quickly as the young DJ introduces
herself. "We're not your normal family from a musical comedy" she explains.
Nope. And ESILY isn't your normal musical either; it isn't so much a
musical as an homage to musicals. Mr. Allen clearly loves the genre, but
his love song towards it bears mixed results. There are inspired moments to
be sure; Making Whoopee is sung in a hospital, there's a ghostly musical
number, and a couple big laughs along the way. Allen moves his camera
around hesitatively imatating the manner in which old boisterous MGM
musicals watched their stars. All this is fine; this is Wody Allen, not
Stanley Donnen  and Alan Alda not Gene Kelley. But ESILY isn't really the
attempt to revive musicals it was supposed to be; rather it's just a smile
at old times - the equivalent of a "wish you were here" postcard. 
It begins first rate; as I watched I thought to myself: this could be a
great film. But somewhere along the way Allen loses track. After Drew
Barrymore leaves Tim Roth I realized that it's a one joke movie and the
joke is on the movies people; they are pale and shallow silly things that
move from one date to the next not thinking back.They are only one
dimensional and we never quite feel close enough to them for it to work. 
That's not to say that this is bad; it's well crafted and paced but it is
lacking in a soul. The dialogue isn't really crisp. In fact, I believe that
this is something of a low point for the movie musical. Allen - holding in
his hands the entire genre - walks a fine line between quiet comedy and
self parody. All the contents are here; it's the magic that's missing.
ESILY runs short at 1:40. While it's never really boring or overlong you
might yawn once or twice - like me. While it's enjoyable I have mostly
mixed feelings towards it. I love musicals with all my heart - I really do
- but I still don't quite like this; it left me with an uneasy, unsatisfied
feeling. I can't quite reccemond except to a fellow musical lover to whom I
warn it's not really that great. It  is rated R, for some minor cursing and
one sexual situaation, but otherwise it's fine for the family. I give it
**1/2 and B-.

Author
Nick Schaden
     In "Everyone Says I Love You", Bob (Alan Alda) is devastated that his
son is a conservative Republican. Joe (Woody Allen) is using his charm to
hit on Von (Julia Roberts). It's the kind of stuff we're use to expecting in
Woody Allen movies, with generally satisfying results.
    I won't reveal the plot, as watching out what turns up is one of the
best parts of "Everyone Says I Love You". Many of the conversations during
the movie are absolutely hilarious, in many cases I could barely contain
myself.
    Possibly the best moments in this movie are the little ones. Watching
Woody Allen and Goldie Hawn dancing in Paris was wonderful. The maid of
Bob's home does a great job of playing a despotic role: In one notable scene
after discussing why Italian pasta needs sauce, the maid exclaims "They're
weak!". Even though the musical scenes can get tedious at times, you can see
Woody Allen is poking fun at the genre. However, possibly the greatest
moment of "Everyone Says I Love You" is when Charles Ferry (Tim Roth), an
ex-convict, comes to Bob's house for dinner. At this point in the movie we
see Tim Roth at his tough guy "Reservoir Dogs" best - it's a memorable
scene.
    "Everyone Says I Love You" is another Woody Allen movie that succeeds in
making the audience laugh. It's a solid, well made movie and is definitely
worth a rental at your local video store.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Everyone Says I Love You (1996) ** out of ***** - Cast: Alan Alda, Woody
Allen, Drew Barrymore, Lukas Haas, Goldie Hawn, Gaby Hoffman, Edward Norton,
Natalie Portman, Julia Roberts, Tim Roth, David Ogden Stiers, Billy Crudup.
Written and Directed by: Woody Allen. Running Time: 101 minutes.
You know, there's a reason musicals aren't made anymore. They don't work.
Anyone remember "Newsies"? Why Woody Allen has tried one is beyond me, as
"Everyone Says I Love You" doesn't work either.
There really is no plot to the film. Edward Norton (playing a younger Woody
Allen, which gets annoying since Allen himself is also in the film) wants to
get married to Drew Barrymore to the delight of her parents (Alda and Hawn).
That's it. To fill time, just about everyone gets to sing. And I believe
everyone except Barrymore (who was overdubbed) has their own song to sing.
Usually I prefer Woody's films which he actually appears in over the ones
where he doesn't. Not in this case however, because Allen's character is so
unnecessary to the film. His character's subplot is absurd. How's this
sound: Allen lives in Paris, and his daughter lives in New York. One day,
his daughter happens to overhear Julia Roberts talking to her therapist. For
no reason, she takes detailed mental notes. Now, cut to Venice. Allen has
taken his daughter on vacation. They are having dinner and who happens to
walk by but... Julia Roberts! Allen's daughter then tells him everything
that Roberts likes, so he can be her perfect man. Allen then tries to woo
her (and succeeds? What the...?) The thing is, the daughter giving him
information that she heard Roberts tell her therapist. She was telling her
therapist about stuff like her favorite flower. Is that what you'd talk to
your therapist about? Your turn-ons and turn-offs, getting so specific as
your favorite flower? Between this contrived subplot and the dozens of
musical numbers, none of the characters can be developed and therefore
there's no story.
I just don't like the concept of the musical. Wouldn't it perplex you if you
were having dinner with someone and all of a sudden a musical number broke
out? At one point it seems like one of the characters is about to
acknowledge this singing oddness, but it doesn't pay off. But just because
it's a musical isn't why I dislike it. There's no story to the film, and
only a few laughs. Although, a dance number at the end of the film with Hawn
and Allen is incredibly well staged.
You will get to see some things you've never seen in a Woody Allen film
before, aside from the musical numbers. There's a few seconds of some black
people! There's almost a car chase/action sequence! There's computerized
special effects! But there's no story!
And not to be crude, but I have to mention something. Watch for the scene
where Tim Roth and Drew Barrymore talk out on a balcony or something. It
won't be hard to miss Barrymore, because either it was 30 degrees on the set
that day or she's auditioning to be the model for Schumacher's next Batsuit.
(The password is: massive nipple protrusions). [R]
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It may be partially my fault.  The night before I saw my first new
musical film in years I prepared myself by watching my favorite
musical, Norman Jewison's FIDDLER ON THE ROOF.  This would allow me to
compare techniques, I told myself.  Oh dear.  Not only is EVERYONE SAYS
I LOVE YOU not FIDDLER ON THE ROOF, it is not much of anything.  It is,
in fact, a bigger disappointment than MIGHTY APHRODITE.  That film, his
last but for this, made fun of the conventions of the Greek Chorus in a
play and this one makes fun of the traditions of the musical.  Take two
TV situation comedy plots, sprinkle in some fairly incompetently done
musical numbers and what do you get?  What I got was the obvious
conclusion that Woody Allen has lost the recipe and no longer makes
decent films.  Can it really be true that the director who made films
like LOVE AND DEATH and CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS or even BULLETS OVER
BROADWAY made a film that misfires in eight directions the way this one
does?  Woody Allen in the past has created characters, humorous but
very real at the same time, that the viewer cared about.  That seems
unimportant to him now.  The people in EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU are
paper-thin.  They seem to be no more than just pieces to move around a
game board of uninteresting romantic situations.  Allen is seemingly so
desperate for a laugh he is even stealing gags from THE ROCKY HORROR
PICTURE SHOW--in this case a male dancer in a wheelchair kicking his
leg like a Radio City Rockette.  The old Woody Allen was a font of
comedic ideas and would never have needed to borrow a gag from another
writer.
     Steffi (played by Goldie Hawn), her previous husband Joe (Woody
Allen), and her current husband Bob (Alan Alda) get along very well
with each other.  Steffi and Bob are sort of wealthy hippy-dippy
liberals and activists for contemporary liberal causes.  They all look
forward to the impending marriage of Steffi's and Bob's ditzy daughter
Skylar to the bland and slightly dense Holden (Edward Norton).  Little
do they realize that one of Steffi's causes will cause problems in
their relationship.  A second plot has Joe, unlucky in love, courting
Von (Julia Roberts) making unfair use of information his daughter
gleans from eavesdropping on Von's visits to her analyst.  Allen can
probably now play the luckless schmoe role in his sleep and does it
what would be perfectly but for the fact that much of the audience is
losing interest.  There are a few faint laughs from having the super-
liberal Bob have a neo-conservative son Scott (Lucas Haas), but Scott's
political arguments with his father are only on the most shallow and
cliched level.  Allen is telling stories he can write in his sleep and
writing himself roles for which he can phone in performances.
     Whether it is an attempt at satire of the musical form, or whether
it is just incompetence, one grows rather weary of hearing people sing
who really should not be singing in public.  At first it seems like it
is just Edward Norton who lacked the talent, but as the film wears on
there are more major characters singing when it would have been better
to remain silent.  Allen gets some humor from having very realistic
looking people in the background suddenly joining the production
number.  But after a while having people singing badly, including major
characters, goes a little stale.  Some have found one of the musical
routines, taking place in a hospital, to have some on-target humor.  It
did not do much for me, but a second musical number at a mortuary was
for me the (not-too-high) high-point of EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU.
Allen has some fun with the ridiculous things some dancers do in
musical numbers in the old Busby Berkeley musicals, but the fun rarely
rises above the whimsical.
     EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU was a noble experiment on Woody Allen's
part to try to experiment in the medium of the musical and perhaps milk
some humor laughing at the conventions of the musical.  In theory it
might have worked, but even a musical needs a better story than the
one(s) Allen wrote.  I rate EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU a -1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Ben Hoffman
I screamed all the way through Woody Allen's latest film, stopping only
to catch my breath but maintaining a fixed grin.  Only Allen could have
pulled off so many outrageously funny scenes.  No other writer would
have thought of the scenes that Allen envisioned; no other director
would have dared attempt those scenes if he had ever thought of them;
and no other director could have made the scenes come off perfectly.
Genius.
When Allen realized no one had made a musical in some ten years it
immediately hit him that that is what he should be doing . . . except
it would be an Allen musical than which there are nor ever have been
anything similar.  The songs used in the film, of the 1930s and 1940s
era, are nostalgic but Allen does not rest on that;  the songs have to
further the story, not be inserted merely because they are melodic.
When the engaged-to-be-married Holden and Skylar break up, (Edward
Norton and Drew Barrymore), Holden sings "I'll Never fall In Love
Again."   This holds true for all the approximately 25 songs used. . .
always either carrying the story along or describing the emotions of
the singer.
Every scene is a belly laugh . . . even when tinged with a bit of
nostalgia.  Try these: The engagement ring, the funeral parlor, the
Groucho homage, the hospital, Steffi (Goldie Hawn) and  Joe  (Woody
Allen), ex-wife and her husband, doing a dance.  Then there is
Halloween, there is Charles Ferry (Tim Roth), an ex-convict who is
invited to her home by the liberal Steffi.  And Itzhak Perlman and
Julia Roberts and Alan Alda . . . and on and on.
If a good story about dysfunctional families means anything; if great
entertainment and feeling good mean anything; if brilliant writing and
fast-paced  direction mean anything for Oscar consideration, Woody
Allen and Company deserve a clean sweep. Don't miss the cinema genius
of our times as he works his magic.

Author
James Sanford
         One of the strangest ironies in the history of entertainment is
the popularity of the movie musical during the Depression era. At a time
when much of America was unemployed, teetering on the edge of
destitution, filmgoers flocked to see lavish fantasies about
ultra-wealthy sophisticates who, when they tired of their New York
penthouses, would fly off to look for love on the Riviera or to peruse
the Parisian fashion houses for some new styles. With "Everyone Says I
Love You," writer-director Woody Allen attempts the Herculean task of
reviving this kind of escapist cinema in contemporary terms.
 Allen has put his own twist on the musical genre, however, by
casting actors who are not exactly renowned for their singing: Julia
Roberts, Goldie Hawn, Tim Roth, etc. As these stars valiantly try to
deliver such standards as "I'm Through With Love" and "Just You, Just
Me," it becomes apparent Allen's stunt serves a purpose by humanizing
characters who often seem closer to being stereotypes than real people.
They may be living large and running wild, but at heart these are just
everyday folks who can't carry a tune any better than most of us.
 At the center of "Everyone" is an Upper East Side family headed
up by softhearted activist Steffi (Hawn) and her second husband Bob
(Alan Alda). Steffi's daughter Skylar (Drew Barrymore) is preparing for
her upcoming marriage to lawyer Holden (Edward Norton), but she's also
tempted by a charming ex-con (Roth). Meanwhile, Steffi's other daughter
DJ (Natasha Lyonne) succumbs to passion with a gondolier while touring
Venice with her dad Joe (Allen). She's not the only one swept away by
the romance of the canals: Joe has become obsessed with fellow
vacationer Von (Roberts) and schemes to win her over.
 It's the kind of material that would have seemed effervescent
60 years ago, with RKO producing and Fred Astaire, Ginger Rogers, Edward
Everett Horton and Lucille Ball starring. But in Allen's sweaty palms,
"Everyone" often strains itself trying to entertain. Even when the movie
hits its mark, you're usually aware of how much work it took to get
there.
 Allen's own performance is particularly unsteady and sometimes
downright squirm-inducing. Now past 60, he continues his tradition of
pursuing babes. But while his romances with Mariel Hemingway in
"Manhattan" (1979) and Juliette Lewis in "Husbands and Wives" (1992)
could have been dismissed as typical mid-life flings, his courtship of
the sparkling Roberts invites snickers about whether he's robbing the
cradle or she's robbing the grave. Allen's script actually forces
Roberts at one point to describe him as "sexy and magical"; that she
delivers the line without choking proves she's an underrated actress.
Poor Roberts is also called upon to sing "All My Life," which proves to
be a severe trial for her. On the other hand, Hawn, Alda, Norton and
Roth seem to take to this kind of froth quite naturally. Norton is
particularly winning as he romps through a jewelry store to the tune of
"My Baby Just Cares For Me" and attempts to surprise Skylar with an
engagement ring hidden inside her meal at a chic eatery.
 Interestingly, considering the movie's desire to go for big
effects, its best moments are its quieter ones, such as the truly
hilarious resolution of the conflict between liberals Steffi and Bob and
their ultraconservative son (Lukas Haas) or the genuinely sweet
unresolved relationship between Joe and Steffi, which is unfortunately
ignored until the last minutes of the film.
 It should also be noted the movie's ridiculously harsh R-rating
derives from one word, used as a joke. The rest of "Everyone Says I Love
You" is every bit as wholesome and squeaky clean as any given Ruby
Keeler vehicle. James Sanford

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Woody Allen, Natasha Lyonne, Julia Roberts, Goldie Hawn, 
      Alan Alda, Edward Norton, Drew Barrymore, Tim Roth, Lukas Haas, 
      Natalie Portman, Gabby Hoffman
Director: Woody Allen
Producers: Robert Greenhut
Screenplay: Woody Allen
Cinematography: Carlo Di Palma
Music: Dick Hyman
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     In the past decade, only two live-action, mainstream musical motion 
pictures have been released.  While the first, LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS, 
met with some success, the second, NEWSIES, was a box-office disaster.  
The poor performance of the Disney-backed film seemed to confirm the 
common perception that, as a movie genre, the musical was dead.  Now, 
however, as 1996 draws to a close, two films are arriving to challenge 
that belief.  The better-known of the pair is, of course, EVITA.  
However, another musical has beaten it to theaters by more than two 
weeks:  Woody Allen's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU.
     Anyone who surveys Allen's career as a writer/director/actor will 
find three common threads woven through nearly all of his movies:  wit, 
neuroses, and music.  In EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU, Allen once again 
combines these elements, but with a new twist -- this time, instead of 
relying on standards from the '30s and '40s as background music, he 
catapults them into the fore.  His characters, all using their own 
voices, sing and dance to classics like "I'm a Dreamer", "I'm Through 
With Love", and "Looking at You."  All-in-all, there are something like 
fifteen numbers, with almost every major member of the cast getting an 
opportunity to warble at least one line.
     With EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU, Allen is paying homage to the way 
musicals used to be made, back in the era when stars who didn't have 
great voices were occasionally forced to sing.  Here, it doesn't always 
result in the sort of track you'll want on a CD, but it's nice to know 
that sung lines are not being dubbed, and Allen himself doesn't suddenly 
sound like Elton John when he breaks into song.  Yes, it's almost 
painful to endure Julia Roberts' single number, but it's hard not to 
respect her for trying, or Allen for giving her the chance. 
     The plot, which centers loosely around one sprawling, extended 
family, is extremely complicated, primarily because there are so many 
characters.  For most of the film, Allen makes effective use of his 
ensemble cast; only near the end does the crowd of people vying for 
screen time turn into a detriment.  That's not a surprise, however, 
considering that the last fifteen minutes of the movie are its weakest, 
in spite of a wonderful song-and-dance number featuring Allen and a 
feather-light Goldie Hawn (who can sing).
     The story is told from the point-of-view of DJ (Natasha Lyonne), 
the college-age daughter of Joe (Allen) and Steffi (Hawn).  DJ's parents 
have been divorced for a decade-and-a-half, but they get along well.  In 
fact, Joe considers Steffi and her husband, Bob (Alan Alda), to be his 
best friends, and, when his latest girlfriend dumps him, he flies from 
his home in Paris to New York to commiserate.  DJ also has a step-
sister, Skylar (Drew Barrymore), who is about to become engaged to a 
proper, upright guy in a suit (Edward Norton).  Her stepbrother, Scott 
(Lukas Haas), has shocked the entire family by stating that he has 
joined the Young Conservatives.  And her two half-sisters, Lane (Gabby 
Hoffman) and Laura (Natalie Portman), are trying to summon the courage 
to speak to a boy whom they both find attractive.  Tim Roth is on-hand 
as a tough guy who recalls Chazz Palminteri's gangster from BULLETS OVER 
BROADWAY.  Meanwhile, it's not long before Joe finds himself drawn to a 
younger woman (Julia Roberts), but it takes all of DJ's considerable 
powers of persuasion to get him to overcome his angst and pursue her.
     When it comes to humor, EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is right up there 
with two of Allen's better, recent comic releases, MANHATTAN MURDER 
MYSTERY and BULLETS OVER BROADWAY.  Like those films, EVERYONE SAYS I 
LOVE YOU is overflowing with genuinely funny moments that span the 
spectrum from physical comedy to sly, sophisticated wit.  Allen gets in 
a number of terrific one-liners, none of which I'll reveal here.  His 
comic sense extends to the musical numbers, many of which are done 
tongue-in-cheek.  There's one sequence where ghosts rise from the grave 
to dance around and another where doctors and patients form a chorus 
line.  
     One area where EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU falls a little short is in 
its observations about the human condition.  In his best films (such as 
ANNIE HALL  and HANNAH AND HER SISTERS), Allen has always used comedy as 
the proverbial "means to an end" of saying something insightful about 
how men and women interact with each other.  EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is 
surprisingly shallow in that regard, going for numerous, broad 
generalizations rather than depth.  Again, perhaps this is the result of 
having so many stories to tell.
     Despite some unlikely names, Allen has chosen a near-perfect cast, 
only a few members of which are underused (particularly Natalie 
Portman).  Roberts is luminous.  Norton (PRIMAL FEAR) and newcomer 
Lyonne have abundant charisma.  Roth is a hoot.  Alda and Hawn make for 
a pleasant, albeit slightly off-kilter couple.  And Allen, as always, is 
Allen.  Even Drew Barrymore, playing very much against her sex kitten 
type, is effective.  
     It's difficult not to be impressed by what Allen has achieved with 
this film: successfully reviving the musical comedy in such a thoroughly 
delightful fashion.  The production may be uneven, but it's still 
wonderful to behold, even at the end, when the structure frays around 
the edges. Of course, the real force that makes EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU 
work is Allen himself.  As actor, director, and writer, he once again 
shows that he's willing to take chances.  And, in doing so, he gives us 
a movie that is recognizable as both "a Woody Allen film" and something 
refreshingly different.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Jerry Saravia
Of all of Woody Allen's movies, his latest work, "Everyone Says I Love You," is
his most typical and, paradoxically, his most atypical. It is modern-day New
York mixed with the typical romanticized love story parallels and heartaches.
There's one crucial difference, the cast members break out singing different
songs and ballads from the 30's and 40's at the most inappropriate times.
Allen's hybrid of musical and romantic comedy is not a complete success, but
who cares? It is so funny that you'll forget and forgive its faults. 
Woody Allen stars as Joe, a writer living in Paris who constantly migrates to
New York to visit his daughter, DJ (Natasha Lyonne), and his ex-wife (Goldie
Hawn). DJ lives with her mother and her stepfather (Alan Alda), along with some
half siblings, on Manhattan's Upper East Side. Joe is a lonely guy (a typical
Woody egoist) until he meets the woman of his dreams in Venice (she's played by
the luminous Julia Roberts). DJ is visiting her father at the time and
instantly recognizes her - she's a psychiatric patient of her mother's. When
Joe realizes he shares no common interests with her, DJ feeds him all the
details of her life by eavesdropping on her psychiatric sessions. 
Another major subplot in the film involves Holden (Edward Norton) who is
engaged to Skylar (Drew Barrymore), one of the offspring of the East Side
family clan. He wants to propose to her in a restaurant, and proceeds to give
her the engagement ring which he hides in a custard pie. Skylar takes a bite of
the pie, and what occurs thereafter is one of the most laugh-out loud moments
I've experienced in the movies in quite a while. 
As a movie, "Everyone Says I Love You" is heavily disorganized and messy, but
never boring or uninspired. The deftly funny musical numbers are what gives
Woody's oft-told tale of romance and neurosis an added texture of wit. And yes,
all the cast members sing, and they sing badly but who cares? This is a comedy
musical that makes a mockery of the musical form by having everyone burst into
song at the most inappropriate moments. It's not meant to be "West Side Story."
One of the highlights is Edward Norton (clearly the best singer in the cast)
crooning "Just You, Just Me" at the start of the film, or when he's shopping
for Skylar's engagement ring and sings "My Baby Just Cares For Me." Less
effective (and downright embarrassing) is Woody Allen mumbling the words to
"I'm Thru With Love" (he thankfully cuts the singing short). Two of the most
side-splitting numbers are: "Makin' Whoopee," a production number performed by
hospital doctors and patients with crutches, and "Enjoy Yourself (It's Later
Than You Think)," which is sung by ghosts in a funeral home (When was the last
time you saw ghosts singing a tune?). The true comic highlight is the
effervescent Goldie Hawn doing a flying duet with Woody reprising "I'm Thru
With Love" - it is the one number that shows the absurdity in the charming,
romantic silliness of those early 30's and 40's musicals. 
Beyond the sheer comic inventiveness of the musical strategy, "Everyone Says I
Love You" is too thinly plotted and structured for my taste. The notion of
having the irritating DJ serve as the narrator is dubious and tiresome at best.
It should have been Woody narrating (as he did memorably in "Annie Hall" and
"Radio Days") - he can deliver dialogue with delectable comic timing and
energy. Some characters drift in and out of focus so quickly, you'll be hard
pressed to figure out their purpose. There's too little of Edward Norton and
Woody Allen, and too much of Drew Barrymore unconvincingly smiling and flirting
with Tim Roth, who plays an unrefined criminal.
On the whole, the performances are terrific, and I especially enjoyed the
Woodman's relationship with Julia Roberts (she shines more brightly here than
ever before). I also liked the fast-talking Alan Alda and the sprightly Goldie
Hawn in the best and shrewdest role of her career. And let's not exclude the
siblings of the East Side clan, including Natalie Portman, who has a sobbing
fit and hilariously starts singing, and the wide-eyed Lukas Haas as the
dogmatic Republican son of the family ('The American people should have a right
to bear arms').         "Everyone Says I Love You" is one of the most endearing
of the experimental films of Woody's career. At the ripe old age of 61, he is
still the funniest and most original comic writer of the 20th century. Nobody
else could have tackled a concoction like this, and make it work. Or make it as
funny and strangely moving.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns or comments at faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at
Faust667@aol.com

Author
Michael Dequina
        Like some stars, some movies can coast by on their charm alone, and
Woody Allen's new musical comedy Everyone Says I Love You is one such
film--a trifle, yes, but a cute and enjoyable one at that.
        The thin plot centers on the various romances within a wealthy
family in New York, as narrated by one DJ (spunky newcomer Natasha Lyonne),
a Columbia University student who falls in love with a new guy just about
every month.  The two most prominent storylines focus on DJ's father (Woody
Allen), an--big surprise--unlucky in love nebbish who woos an unhappily
married younger woman (Julia Roberts, thankfully back in light comedy mode)
with information secretly obtained from her psychotherapy sessions (by DJ,
of course); and DJ's half-sister Skylar (Drew Barrymore), who is betrothed
to the nice Holden (Edward Norton) yet later falls for a rugged,
not-so-rehabilitated ex-con (Tim Roth, who all but steals the show)--with
hilarious results.  There are other minor subplots floating around, such as
DJ's two other half-sisters (Natalie Portman and Gaby Hoffmann) battling
over the same boy, but these plotlines aren't fleshed out as satisfactorily
or as memorably as the main two plots.
        The film is, at its heart, an affectionate tribute to old Hollywood
musicals, and this is reflected in the songs, all of which are old pop and
showtunes for the '30s and '40s.  While the songs add to the old fashioned
atmosphere, the fact that they weren't written expressly for the film means
that they don't always advance the story; a lot of times it stops it dead in
its tracks, especially the elaborate, over-the-top production numbers, which
simultaneously celebrate and skewer the genre's surreal conventions.  As for
the singing, most of the cast--from Norton and Alan Alda (as DJ's
stepfather) to Sleepers's Billy Crudup (as one of DJ's paramours) and a
startlingly better-than-most Roth--does an adequate job, with a few
exceptions.  Surprisingly, there is only one truly horrific singer: Roberts,
who brings new meaning to the term tone-deaf.  Allen himself is by no means
OK, but he sort of talk-sings his song, which makes his warbling less
offensive.  The major standout is the vocally talented Goldie Hawn, who
plays DJ's mother and Allen's ex-wife; her dancing and singing showcase at
the close is by far the film's highlight.  She's the only one who seems like
a true musical star.  Oddly and disappointingly enough, one star actually
cheated when it came to singing--Barrymore, whose vocals are dubbed in by a
ghost singer.  I can't imagine her actual singing voice being any worse than
Roberts's...
        The movie musical is, sadly for this musical fan, pretty much dead,
and I don't see this film (or, for that matter, the forthcoming Evita)
miraculously reviving the genre.  But genre revival isn't the aim of the
film.  Everyone Says I Love You simply sets out to be a fun little charmer,
and it more than accomplishes that modest goal.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
Late in "Everyone Says I Love You," Woody Allen and Goldie Hawn, playing 
a divorced couple, slip out of a benefit in Paris and go for a walk. 
After a bit, they sit and chat about the times they've had, about love, 
about relationships. They exchange a gentle, platonic kiss and then, on 
the banks of the river Seine, they dance. As the moonlight reflects off 
the water they dance gaily and, quite casually, Goldie Hawn's feet leave 
the ground. She slides, spins and glides ever so smoothly through the air,
 comfortably, as if she's done it all of her life. Hawn glows as she 
dances in air, so alive that even the law of gravity steps aside for a 
few moments. That elegant, utterly transcendent scene is one of the most 
wonderful things I've ever witnessed in a movie.
"Everyone Says I Love You" is Woody Allen's 26th film and his first 
musical. I've avoided Allen's work for some time. That business with his 
step-daughter was really disturbing, to be sure, but mostly I had just 
grown quite tired of his neurotic shtick and tedious repetition of 
ponderous existential questions. 
Things are quite different in this film, though. "Everyone Says I Love 
You" radiates with an effervescent innocence, with romance and hope. 
Creating a musical appears to have lightened Allen to the point where he 
uses song and dance to undermine his own bleak outlook. In one scene, 
Alan Alda, while seated at his father's funeral, tells the family that he 
never believed in God. "Even if God did exist," Alda's character quips, 
"He did such a terrible job that it's a wonder everyone doesn't file a 
giant class action suit against him." In most Woody Allen films, a line 
like that would be allowed to stand alone, or even worse, lead into a 
philosophical discussion on hopelessness. Not this time, though. Seconds 
after he speaks, the ghost of his father climbs right out of his coffin. 
While Alda and his family stare in astonishment, Grandpa starts singing 
"Enjoy Yourself (It's Later Than You Think)." The ghosts of other funeral 
home corpses join him for in a conga line, dancing and cartwheeling away 
any notion that death is the end.
"Everyone Says I Love You" is filled with moments like that. Even the 
musical form itself is treated as something quite common, as if everyone 
breaks into song and dance from time to time. The conceit is underlined 
by the way the songs are handled. Everyone sings, regardless of whether 
or not they have a trained voice. The combination of lush orchestration 
and ordinary voices has a peculiar charm. The dance numbers also have a 
captivating, haphazard feel. Although wonderfully choreographed, the 
dancers look as if they could stumble at any moment. It all adds up to 
musical numbers that actually feel spontaneous.
Of course, there has to be a story around all those songs, and Allen has 
assembled an impressive cast to tell it. He plays a writer living in 
quasi-exile in Paris, although he remains close friends with his 
painfully liberal ex-wife (Hawn) and her husband (Alda.) Numerous sub-
plots spin involving everyone's kids, including a sweet romance between 
Drew Barrymore and Edward Norton that is interrupted when Barrymore 
becomes smitten with a hardened ex-con (Tim Roth.) Romance returns to 
Allen's life when his daughter D.J. (Natasha Lyonne) matches him up with 
the lovely Von (Julia Roberts). Seems D.J. has been spying on Von's 
counseling sessions and knows her deepest desires and fantasies. She 
feeds the information to Dad, who unethically uses the knowledge to 
become Von's dream date. 
On paper, the plot seems quite complicated, but things flow very smoothly 
on the screen. The multiple storylines really don't matter anyway. Magic 
and happy endings are what the film is about. Allen uses gorgeous 
locations, beautiful photography and the musical numbers to create a 
romantic world where hope reigns supreme and love conquers all. Who would 
have thought the King of misery could have created so much happiness?
