Title
Review for Red Rock West (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Andrew Hicks
        The only gimmick this movie has going for it is that it has 
more twists and turns than the Coney Island Cyclone. In RED 
ROCK WEST, the movie never moves in one direction for long, 
and you discover something new about each of the characters 
every few minutes that puts a complete spin on everything. It's 
musical chairs without the one person having to sit out after every 
round. No, everybody participates in everything here, and there 
are plot twists on a basis regular enough you could set your watch 
to it.
        At the beginning of the movie, Nicholas Cage, having just 
driven more than a thousand miles for a job he was immediately 
fired from, walks into a bar and is immediately offered a job by the 
owner (J.T. Walsh), who mistakes him for someone else. Cage 
expects some kind of busboy or bartender position but instead 
becomes Head Hitman as the owner gives him five thousand in 
cash and a gun, with instructions to kill his wife. Cage doesn't feel 
himself in a position to refuse, but soon finds himself warning the 
wife (Lara Flynn Boyle) of what's coming. The wife immediately 
turns around and gives him ten thousand to kill her husband.
        Cage soon comes to the conclusion that he is better off 
taking the money and running, but on his way out of town, he hits 
a pedestrain and has to turn around and take the guy to the hospital. 
(He may accept money for killing people, but that doesn't make him 
any less humanitarian.) At the hospital, he meets the town sheriff, 
who also owns the town bar. The sheriff is understandibly mad that 
his hitman was about to skip town, and takes him out to the woods, 
where he tries to hunt Cage down. But Cage makes it to a nearby 
road, where he is picked up by a visiting cowboy (Dennis Hopper), 
who is driving into town on business.
        The cowboy learns he and Cage are both ex-Marines and 
insists on buying a Cage a drink. So where do they go? J.T.'s bar, of 
course, where Hopper tells the bartender he needs to see the owner 
about a job he's late for. Cage puts one and one together and realizes 
Hopper is the hitman, which is about the same time J.T. walks in. It 
may seem like I've given the movie's entire plot away, but this all 
happens in the first twenty minutes. The back of the video box tells 
that much.
        RED ROCK WEST keeps the same pace for the next eighty 
minutes, through countless other twists and surprising character 
revelations, until it all ends in a graveyard where half a million 
dollars is buried. This is a decent action thriller, but it takes on a 
camp value with the overacting and unrelenting plot twists. You 
can't take the movie seriously for a second even though it seems like 
it wants to be. And after about an hour of endless manipulation on 
behalf of the writers, it gets completely tiresome.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

RED ROCK WEST (director/writer: John Dahl; screenwriter: Rick Dahl;
cinematographer: Marc Reshovsky; editor: Scott Chestnut; cast: Nicolas
Cage (Michael), Dennis Hopper (Lyle from Dallas), Lara Flynn Boyle
(Suzanne), J.T. Walsh (Wayne), Craig Reay (Jim), Vance Johnson (Mr.
Johnson), Dale Gibson (Kurt), Dan Shor (Deputy Bowman); Runtime: 98;
Polygram Release; 1992)
A nifty postmodern cowboy-noir and black comedy, filmed in a drab
Technicolor that seems appropriate for this film, as the colorization is
not ostentatious and thereby makes the characters appear more real. The
story is aimed at striking your funny bone and getting you dizzy in
following all the plot twists. It features all the familiar noir
clichés: femme fatale, an innocent man trapped in the world of
criminals, and is written by the Dahl brothers and directed with
tongue-in-cheek humor by John Dahl, and despite the clichés, the film
feels original.
"Red Rock West" was first released as a video before it had its
theatrical release in a San Francisco theater, where it proved to be a
hit, which got it a limited run across big market city theaters. It's
the type of film that seems to be best-suited for video, where it still
made its biggest splash.
Michael (Cage) is one lucky s.o.b to get out of Vietnam alive with only
a bum leg when his marine outfit was trapped in a bombed building. But
he doesn't seem too lucky now, as he comes from Texas to Wyoming for an
oil rigger's job his friend said was available. He's turned down because
he is decent enough to own up to his bum leg on his job application, but
he finds himself drifting into Red Rock, on a tip from a local that
there might be work there. At the local bar he orders coffee and the
bartender, Wayne Brown (J.T. Walsh), noticing the Caddy he drives and
the Texas license plates, says you must be Lyle from Texas and slides
over five grand and says the other half of the money will be delivered
when you finish the job of killing my wife Suzanne (Lara). Now most
people who are not completely straight and are as broke as Michael and
have a little larceny in their heart, would have just skipped town with
the dough and laughed all the way to Las Vegas. But not our hero...who
is neither straight nor crooked, just a guy who gets into tight spots
and tries to do what is right. And to him, that means mailing an
anonymous letter to the sheriff about the incident and going out to the
ranch to warn Suzanne. She takes it like a real trooper and offers him
double that to kill her husband.
Michael figures he did all he can here and loads up with junk food and
beer and heads out of Red Rock, past the 'Welcome to Red Rock' sign,
which becomes the film's running gag, as he will pass that sign numerous
times in his inability to get out of town. It's a rainy night and he
smashes into a man on the road trying to flag him down. Not able to
leave him by the road, he brings him into the hospital, where it turns
out the man is Suzanne's lover and he has two bullets in his stomach.
The other twist is that the town's sheriff is none other than Wayne. It
seems he bought the election by giving the voters free drinks. When
Wayne sees him at the hospital, he arrests him and takes him down a
backroad where he unsuccessfully tries to kill him. When Michael
escapes, he is picked up by the real Lyle. All this happens in the first
reel.
>From there-on the plot gets more serpentine, the characters become more
loopy and dangerous, and do-gooder Michael comes up against three
desperate snakelike characters who are willing to do anything to get
their hands on a half million dollars that the crooked sheriff has
hidden away. It's all about the money, with the psycho-killer Dennis
Hopper getting more vicious the more insecure he gets, ranting that Cage
thinks that he is better man than him, with Lara being as cold-blooded
and as immoral as any woman could be, while J.T. is slimy and
calculating.
"Red Rock West" is a playful and off-beat thriller, whose only sense it
makes is nonsense, but one that is highly entertaining, while the film
itself is well executed and the acting is dead-pan funny. So it hardly
matters that this murky story is not plausible and certainly not
cerebral. It has received cult status because of its many plot twists
and zany characters, which means it will pop up on late night cable at
any time in the future and that should be for years to come.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Mark R. Leeper

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  varies (video release precedes theatrical) 
Running Length:  1:37 
Rated:  No MPAA Rating (Violence, language, sexual situations) 
     There's a fine line between coincidence and contrivance, and what
characterizes that demarcation has more to do with enjoyability than
believability.  RED ROCK WEST, a film consigned to cable and video
until a Bay Area theater decided to give it a shot, has a number of
plot elements that don't bear close scrutiny.  Their presentation is so
stylish, however, that there isn't any real incentive to start picking
apart the story.  RED ROCK WEST works well on its own terms, and that's
good enough for ninety-plus minutes of solid entertainment.
     I wish I could say that the film noir genre is undergoing a
renaissance, but many of the recent offerings (including the execrable
SUTURE) have been marginal at best.  The plots don't twist enough, the
characters often aren't grungy, and the cinematography is frequently a
bit too crisp.  None of those faults manacle RED ROCK WEST.
Atmospheric because of its low-budget look, and boasting a marvellous
performance by Nicholas Cage, this film manages to capture the right
spirit from the first scene.
     Michael (Cage) is a down-on-his luck ex-Marine with a bad leg and
an empty wallet.  Driving 1100 miles on the mistaken promise of work,
Mike finds himself in the town of Red Rock with no job, no money, and
little hope--until he wanders into the Red Rock Bar, that is.  There
he meets Wayne (J. T. Walsh), who immediately asks him if he's Lyle from
Dallas, ready to do "the job."  At first, Mike is ecstatic, recognizing
that there's money involved and figuring that he can do anything this
Lyle can By the time he learns that the job in question is to kill
Wayne's wife Suzanne (Lara Flynn Boyle), he's in too deep to back out.
     As grim as RED ROCK WEST might at first appear, it never takes
itself very seriously.  There's a lot of humor in this film, much of
which is supplied by Nicholas Cage's unspoken "why me?"s as
circumstances conspire to pull him deeper and deeper into a quagmire of
which he wants no part.  There's also a running joke involving the
"Welcome to Red Rock" and "You are now leaving Red Rock" signs.
     The crowning irony of this film is that Michael, the supposed hit
man, is a genuinely good guy.  He doesn't get a job because he tells
his prospective employer about his bum knee.  Given a perfect
opportunity, he doesn't steal an inviting pile of $20 bills left out in
the open at an abandoned gas station.  He wants to do right, yet
suddenly he has been hired as a cold-blooded killer.
     Dennis Hopper, whose latest few efforts in front of and behind the
camera have been rather unimpressive, enjoys himself immensely as the
real Lyle, and his scenes with Cage crackle with suppressed energy.
Hopper seems to be at his best playing this sort of character, as was
made abundantly clear in David Lynch's BLUE VELVET.
     Lara Flynn Boyle, never an actress of particular depth, gives a
decent turn as Suzanne, the femme fatal, although her chemistry with
Cage never causes sparks to fly.  He carries most of their scenes
together.
     RED ROCK WEST is a roller-coaster ride of a film, designed for
those who like their thrillers spiced with the unexpected.  While it's
probably not playing at your local multiplex, it more-than-likely is
available at a nearby video store, and I can think of a whole lot
worse--and better-known--titles to slip into the VCR for a night's
entertainment.  RED ROCK WEST is likely to surprise any viewer--in
more ways than one.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
