Title
Review for Redball (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
REDBALL (M).  
(Palace)
Director: Jon Hewitt
Stars: Belind McClory, John Brumpton, Frank Magree, Peter Docker, Anthea 
Davis, Neil Pigot, Daniel Richardson, James Young, Robert Morgan, Daniel
Wyllie, Chris Hatzis, Ray Mooney
Running time: 91 minutes.
A deliberately discordant and jarring opening credit sequence
suggests that we are back in Seven territory.  And even though there
is a vicious serial killer running around in the background of this
nasty, ultra low budget crime thriller shot in Melbourne,
writer/director Jon Hewitt has a completely different agenda in mind.
Redball is a head on, confronting and brutally realistic look at the
pressures facing the police who deal with death and street crime every
day, and the toll it inevitably takes.
Hewitt used to work in a pub near the Russell Street police
complex, and over the years he picked up many stories about real life
investigations and the off duty antics of the cops.  Some of those
tales have been woven into the plot of this hard hitting and often
unsavoury examination of life on the streets and corruption, whether
it be free sex from hookers or taking a kilo off drug dealers for
private use.  Hewitt is no stranger to controversy, as his first
feature Bloodlust is still banned in Britain, and he doesn't pull his
punches here.  Hewitt is a fan of maverick American director Abel
Ferrara, and tries to emulate his uncompromising style with Redball.
The central plot device centres around the hunt for Mr Creep,
a psychopath who preys on young children.  It is a case that obsesses
detective J J Wilson (Belinda McClory, recently seen in the big budget
sci-fi thriller The Matrix) and her cynical and world weary partner
(John Brumpton, from Life, etc).  But far from becoming another police
procedural, Redball is a morally ambiguous film that lurches through
its unflinching examination of this particularly masculine world, and
the camaraderie that exists between street cops, even when off duty.
The cops here seem to have little social life beyond the force, as
they always hang around in tight knit little groups, drinking and
discussing their activities.
Hewitt has the street wise vernacular down pat.  He takes a
scatter-gun approach to his material, and the film unfolds in a series
of energetic short, sharp takes that propel the narrative forward.
Hewitt forces the audience to do much of the detective work in piecing
together the various strands.  A blackly comic running joke about a
dead body floating down the Yarra River lightens the unrelentingly
bleak tone.
However, the overall lack of technical skill and polish behind
this self funded and quickly shot film becomes evident through the
often crude, jump cut editing, which occasionally jars.  Hewitt also
lacked the luxury of being able to do numerous retakes of scenes,
which is occasionally reflected in the performances.  Despite the
limitations of working within a shoe string budget, Hewitt has made
good use of locations within Melbourne.  The hand held camera work
lends an urgency to proceedings, and contributes to the grungy look
that perfectly suits the tone of the film.
 The soundtrack, featuring a number of cutting edge local independent
bands, is often used inappropriately within the context of the film.
Ultimately, Redball lacks the polish and slick qualities of
such films as Serpico, Prince Of The City, Internal Affairs, and even
Joseph Wambaugh's black comedy The Choirboys, which explored the
sometimes shocking off duty antics of LA cops.  It even lacks the
gritty intensity and realism of local tv productions such as Blue
Murder and Wildside.
