Title
Review for Bad Manners (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
Solid performances and some well plotted story elements make this filmed
version of a stage play worthwhile.  Wes and Nancy (David Strathairn and
Bonnie Bedelia) are a long married but "romantically challenged" couple
whose lives are interrupted by the appearance of Nancy's old flame Matt
(Saul Rubinek) and his young, outspoken girlfriend Kim (Caroleen
Feeney).   
Matt and Kim stay with Wes and Nancy while Matt delivers a musicology
lecture at Harvard.  Matt believes that he has found God's influence in
a piece of computer generated music, and Wes obsesses that Kim has
stolen 50 dollars from his wallet.  What follows is an unpredictable
series of events that rivals David Mamet's Oleanna in the whole "no
matter which side you take... you're wrong" area.  You won't see events
coming, and even when the film's over you'll still be wondering about
what you saw.  The more I think about this film, the more I like about
it. 
Note: Bad Manners is based on a Steppenwolf Theater play called Ghost in
the Machine.  I'm guessing that the title was changed to Bad Manners to
avoid confusion with the 1993 Karen Allen movie called Ghost in the
Machine that no one ever saw.  Although won't people now confuse it with
the 1984 Karen Black movie called Bad Manners that no one ever saw? 
Bad Manners is available on DVD from Bell Canyon Entertainment.  It
contains the film in its original widescreen theatrical aspect ratio, a
full length audio commentary track featuring director Jonathan Kaufer
and cast member Saul Rubinek, a behind the scenes documentary featuring
interviews with the cast and crew that runs about 20 minutes, and the
usual cast biographies and filmographies. 
Director Jonathan Kaufer has tried an interesting experiment with the
commentary track on the DVD of Bad Manners.  During the track, several
guest stars (Marcia Strassman, Penny Marshall, Carrie Fisher, Peter
Riegert) appear, thinking that the director and Saul Rubinek are
recording a commentary track for their 1982 film Soup For One.  The main
problem with this though is that these gimmicky guest stars tend to
barge in when Kaufer and Rubinek are saying something INTERESTING about
the film's production.  After the pre-scripted "spontaneous"
interruptions are over, the two rarely go back to their previous train
of thought.  Good idea, bad execution. 
The DVD is very nice despite that one complaint though, and it's one of
the few discs that actually made me take note of its menu screens.  The
disc's menus are done in a blue-white "wintery" style mixed with images
from the film and scored by the Tori Amos song "Putting the Damage On"
which appears in the film's closing credits (a song which is impossible
to get out of your head once you hear it).  Even the DVD credits
selection is entertaining.  My hats off to the folks responsible for
this disc.  [R]
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
