Title
Review for Loss of Sexual Innocence, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
Sony Pictures Classics
starring Julian Sands, Saffron Burrows, Stefano Dionisi, Gina McKee, Kelly
MacDonald, Femi Ogumbanjo, Jonathan Rhys-Meyers, Hanne Klintoe
written and directed by Mike Figgis
As much as I hate to say it, Mike Figgis has only made one film worth
seeing. That film was the gritty, heartbreaking drama "Leaving Las
Vegas". And as I look back at it, the performances of Nicolas Cage and
Elisabeth Shue carried a film that was merely above average. His
second post-"Vegas" film(after the awful "One Night Stand") is the
plotless, narcissistic and dull "Loss Of Sexual Innocence".
"The Loss Of Sexual Innocence" is essentially a series of unrelated
moments in the life of Nic, a British filmmaker. The stories are
supposedly autobiographical, and if that's true, then I have learned
things about Figgis that I'm better off not knowing. The moments in
Nic's life are pointlessly intercut with scenes of a modern Adam and
Eve.
The irony of the film is that we see Nic in so many stages of life,
yet at the end we still know almost nothing about him. I happen to
think that Mike Figgis was just being self-important by intercutting
scenes of Adam and Eve and flashing titles across the screen before
each new segment, so if there's any subtlety to be found, I didn't see
it.
If there is anything redeeming about "The Loss Of Sexual Innocence",
it is Benoit Delhomme's lucid cinematography. There is something
subtle about his own work, even though it can't add any depth to a
shallow film. And what is with the title? This is not a term
paper. The best that can be said about the film is that it's
unconventional, but conventionality may have made this an interesting
character study.
There are certain filmmakers who can turn narcissism into a fine art,
as Vincent Gallo did in last year's excellent "Buffalo '66". Mike
Figgis, however, needs to learn that while independent film is about
our own visions, it is also about how we present those visions on
film. If Mike Figgis stares at a house for five minutes, that doesn't
mean it needs to be translated onto a reel. Where "Leaving Las Vegas"
was compassionate, "The Loss Of Sexual Innocence" is selfish. What a
disappointment.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film


Author
Greg King
THE LOSS OF SEXUAL INNOCENCE (R).  
(Columbia Tristar)
Director: Mike Figgis
Stars: Julian Sands, Saffron Burrows, Stefano Dionisi, Kelly MacDonald, 
Gina McKee, Jonathan Rhys-Meyers, Bernard Hill, Rossy De Palma
Running time: 105 minutes.
Despite an intriguing sounding title, this is boring
pretentious twaddle of the highest order!
British director Mike Figgis alternates between high profile
Hollywood productions such as Mr Jones and Internal Affairs, etc, and
more personal projects.  This low budget film is something of an
experiment for Figgis, and seems clearly destined for the art house
crowd.
This supposedly semi-autobiographical film follows the life
story of documentary film maker Nic (Julian Sands), from his early
childhood through to the present day.  However, it unfolds in a series
of allusive montages, with a heavy emphasis on those encounters that
shaped his sexual outlook and personality.  A parallel subplot also
follows twin sisters (played by Saffron Burrows, from Deep Blue Sea,
etc), who are separated at birth and nearly meet again in an African
airport.
However, the film is virtually plotless and wordless, and
unfolds in a frustratingly non-linear fashion, offering up a
multi-media montage of dream sequences, flash backs and memories.
Figgis constantly switches between time frames and narrative threads
without any discernible rhyme or reason, which will frustrate and
confound most audiences.  To further confuse the tangled threads, the
film also intersperses the central narrative with a rather fanciful
modern day retelling of the story of Adam and Eve and their fall from
grace in the garden of Eden.
Neither Sands nor Burrows seem to understand the complexities
of Figgis' intricately constructed film, and this is reflected in
their lacklustre and uncertain performances.
The Loss Of Sexual Innocence is something of a labour of love
for Figgis, who has been developing this film since 1982.
Unfortunately, most audiences will not share the same passion.  Its
challenging structure and deliberately slow pace will leave most
audiences cold and unimpressed.  Benhoit Delhomme's cinematography is
at times quite beautiful, and creates some striking images.  However,
that is one of the few positive aspects of what is basically a
bewildering, obtuse, overly self- indulgent and ultimately dull
cinematic experience.

Author
Mac VerStandig
Mike Figgis' The Loss of Sexual Innocence is a movie so confusing, so 
boring, and so poorly done that the Better Business Bureau should step 
in and stop any poor, unsuspecting citizen from wasting their money on 
this sad excuse for a film.
The premise of this piece of junk production that is attempting to pass 
itself off as art is nearly unrealizable. Figgis (best known for his 
critically acclaimed film, Leaving Las Vegas) takes several small 
stories involving Nic (John Cowey at age five, George Moktar at age 
twelve, Jonathan Rhys-Meyers at age 16, and Julian Sands at adult age), 
the film's central character, and interweaves them with the biblical 
tale of Adam (Femi Ogumbanjo) and Eve's (Hanne Klintoe) descent from the 
Garden of Eden. There is no apparent rhyme nor reason to the order of 
assembly of these stories, nor any true connections other than a common 
loss of innocence, notably not always of a sexual nature.
Making the plot even more difficult to follow is the film's resemblance 
to many silent picture of the early 1900's, opting for a delightful 
musical score in place of dialogue. The little speech in this film is 
insignificant to the plot, or so you assume because it is almost 
entirely drowned out by the background music.
The Loss of Sexual Innocence leaves its audience asking themselves 
"Huh?" Not only is the viewer totally disillusioned, but it is works 
like this that are constantly making the line between art and junk ever 
more blurry. Perhaps a more fitting title would have been "The Loss of 
Artistic Innocence."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Sony Pictures Classics/Red Mullet film
 Director:  Mike Figgis
 Writer:  Mike Figgis
 Cast: Julian Sands, Saffron Burrows, Stefano Dionisi, Kelly
MacDonald, Jonathan Rhys-Meyers, Rossy De Palma, Femi
Ogumbanjo, Hanne Klintoe
   What makes us adults the way we are?  Freud gave
considerable importance to our upbringing by our parents
during the first five years of our lives, with particular
emphasis on the emotional (and unconscious sexual)
connection from the moment of birth.  Very recent studies
have downgraded the responsibility of parents for the way we
turn out, resting the culpability almost exclusively with our
peer groups and our attempts to conform to their standards. 
As with other issues that get tossed around by intellectuals,
the truth is somewhere between.  But one thing most people
agree upon is the singnificance to many adults of their sexual
thoughts and relationships.  For all the joys that sex has
brought us, it gets us as well into heaps of trouble, as Nic
(Mike Figgis's stand-in for "The Loss of Sexual Innocence"),
discovers all too well.
   Mike Figgis, whose principal claim to directorial fame is his
stunning "Leaving Las Vegas"--about a man (Nicolas Cage)
determined to drink himself to death and a prostitute
(Elisabeth Shue) who demeans herself on a nightly
basis--does not simply contemplate his past quite a bit in his
latest film.  He wants to make sure that folks out there in his
movie audience share his recollections.  Since 1982 he has
planned the making of "The Loss of Sexual Innocence," but
until recently did not have the money to pull it off.  With the
revenue he drew from the success of "Vegas," he now
unfolds a picture which is difficult, challenging, and like so
many other movies that make demands on audience
attention, it rewards those who let the sounds and images of
its non-linear structure flow about them.  "The Loss of Sexual
Innocence" takes as its thesis the view that who we are is
determined largely by our sexual proclivities, thoughts, and
actions.  Figgis pushes his postulate by taking us first (via a
fictional character) to his own boyhood days in Kenya, where
he remained with his folks until he moved to northern
England at the age of eight.
   This is no documentary but actually a series of sharply
edited vignettes of varying intensity and a striking
soundtrack--which offers insights into the filmmaker's principal
influences, including the power that music played in his life
(he had played trumpet and guitar in rock and roll bands) and
the leverage that his stage experience bears on this film. (He
was a member of England's foremost avant-garde theatre
group, "The People Show," which toured the world and
apparently gave him the geographical breadth he puts to
such good use in this movie.)
   Serving up a series of short stories which exhibits the
principal character of Nic (Julian Sands--who appeared as
well in "Leaving Las Vegas") at the age of five, at twelve, at
sixteen, and as a fully grown man--Figgis frequently cuts for
allegorical purpose to biblical scenes of Adam (Femi
Ogumbanjo) and Eve (Hanne Klintoe) both at the time of their
sexual innocence and after they accepted that offer from a
notorious snake.  
   Figgis opens the film with a sudden, commanding close-up
view of the five-year-old Nic (John Cowey), a blond,
intelligent, curious young man who symbolically gets his first
abbreviated inkling of an approaching sexual life by peeping
into an African hut and spying on a half-dressed young
woman slowly practicing her English while an old man sits in
a chair, seemingly oblivious.  The first of the surreal images
in the story--essentially highlighting a father's guarding his
daughter's or granddaughter's innocence--prefigures an
incident that occurs in Nic's teen years, when he makes out
with his girl friend Susan (Kelly MacDonald) only to be
interrupted by the gruff presence of Susan's father (Bernard
Hill).  
   Now married to a disappointed woman (Johanna Torell),
Nic enjoys memories of sexual episodes of his earlier days. 
At one point he sexually embraces his wife when he is
interrupted by an important phone call, while we imagine that
many other hugs will be intruded upon by the demands of
their child. Sexual thoughts dominate dreams as well. The
wife dreams of performing a strip tease to the beats of a jazz
piano while Nic conjures up a flirtation with an Italian woman
(Saffron Burrows) and as she, her boy friend Luca (Stefano
Dionisi) and Nic travel across the Tunisian desert to do a film.
   The connection between Adam and Eve's loss of sexual
innocence after their partaking of the fruit offered by the
snake and the deprivation of Nic's own chastity does not
exactly strike us in the face.  The Bible is a book of
enormous literary value,  offering not simply lessons to guide
our modern lives but parallels as well.  Demonstrating that
correlation is a difficult job at best, but Figgis has broken new
ground in his original film, one which is filled with a dramatic
soundtrack (recorded by Figgis himself), startling and
beautiful imagery (particularly of the Blue People of Tunisia),
and a compelling cast led by the handsome and magnetic
Julian Sands.
   Photographer Benoit Delhomme has done a remarkable
job of capturing the desolation of southern Tunisia's Saharan
region, Italy's Umbria region and the northern English city of
Newcastle which is, not surprisingly in the region of the town
of Carlisle which was Mike Figgis's birthplace.

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Loss_of_Sexual_Innocence_ (R) * (out of ****)
Writer-director Mike Figgis has described _The_Loss_of_Sexual_Innocence_
as his most personal film, and one would be hard-pressed to argue.  So
personal as to be self-indulgent, so self-indulgent as to make not a
single iota of sense to anyone _but_ him, this admittedly captivating but
wholly incoherent and utterly baffling experience will likely leave
everyone else dumbfounded.  That the film has no plot is of little
consequence; I actually applaud Figgis for being so boldly experimental,
studying his main character, filmmaker Nic (played as an adult by Julian
Sands), through key yet completely unrelated episodes throughout his
life.
But when one goes for broke, one can often crap out, and that's what
Figgis has done here in every sense that expression can be taken. 
Despite the stunning cinematography of Benoit Delhomme, his interesting
idea becomes increasingly less so as the film progresses, for few of the
vignettes make any lasting impression.  It is telling that the most
effective of the episodes has the least to do with Nic and, hence, the
entire film: a haunting sequence (eerily scored by Figgis) detailing the
chance meeting of now-adult twins (Saffron Burrows) who were separated at
birth.
But the individual vignettes' lack of interest is the least of Figgis's
problems--his largest is his self-important pretentiousness.  In a truly
headscratching move, he has Nic's (for lack of a better term) "story"
intercut with wordless scenes of Adam (Femi Ogumbanjo) and Eve (Hanne
Klintoe) frolicking in the Garden of Eden.  (Included is a laughably
earnest scene where Adam and Eve watch each other in wonder as they both
urinate.)  The Nic episodes by themselves don't make any collective
impact nor sense, let alone when grouped with the (as billed by the
on-screen intertitle) "Scenes of Nature."  Appropriately enough, Figgis's
artistic fall is best exemplified by his description-defying depiction of
the Fall: Adam and Eve are run out of the Garden of Eden by military
police, accompanied by the requisite barking hounds; awaiting the couple
just outside the gates are swarming paparazzi, who chase them into the
night.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com___________________________________________________________________
You don't need to buy Internet access to use free Internet e-mail.
Get completely free e-mail from Juno at http://www.juno.com/getjuno.html
or call Juno at (800) 654-JUNO [654-5866]

Author
Christopher Null
     Mike Figgis, the genius behind LEAVING LAS VEGAS, has put together
one dense piece of celluloid here, his first outing since ONE NIGHT
STAND tanked last year.
     What's it about?  With roughly 300 words of dialogue in the entire
film, that's hard to say.  Julian Sands, a Figgis standby, plays Nic, a
troubled filmmaker (I think), who may be married to a blonde woman, with
whom he has a child.  He may also be having an affair with a character
played by Burrows, billed only as "Twins," who just so happens to have a
twin sister (also Burrows) that looks different.
     Nic sees his life in frequent flashback at ages 5, 12, and 16
(where he has a fling with MacDonald), and his hair goes from blonde to
brown to blonde again.
     And then there's this whole Adam & Eve and the
getting-kicked-outta-the-Garden of Eden bit, which is some kind of
allegory for Nic's life.
     It explains the title, but not the movie.  I left thoroughly
confused, though Figgis obviously put some work into crafting a luscious
film a la Antonioni (I don't understand his films either), and since I
recognize Figgis's brilliance I'm willing to give him the benefit of the
doubt here.  The ending actually makes sense, despite all this
runaround, but it's not exactly a feel-good movie, if you catch my
drift.
     Anyway, next time, Mike, try a little more dialogue.  Voices are
good.  You'll either love this movie or hate it - I put it right about
here:
Check our 1996 interview with Mike Figgis at:
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/95a45e26914c25ff862562bb006a85f2/0009f1e62e4a8c80862562d5000dd4d5?OpenDocument
Director: Mike Figgis
Producer: Mike Figgis, Annie Stewart
Writer: Mike Figgis
Starring: Julian Sands, Saffron Burrows, Stefano Dionisi, Kelly
MacDonald, Gina McKee, Jonathan Rhys-Meyers
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - http://www.filmcritic.com - Buy my
book!
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom/002-2549101-0837427

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE LOSS OF SEXUAL INNOCENCE
(Sony Classics)
Starring:  Julian Sands, Saffron Burrows, Stefano Dionisi, Kelly
Macdonald, Jonathan Rhys-Meyers, Hanne Klintoe, Femi Ogumbanjo.
Screenplay:  Mike Figgis.
Producers:  Mike Figgis and Annie Stewart.
Director:  Mike Figgis.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, sexual situations, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Is THE LOSS OF SEXUAL INNOCENCE, Mike Figgis' experimental non-linear
tone poem, pretentious?  Of course it is -- you've got to have a healthy
streak of pretentiousness in you to break free from conventional narrative
structure and make something so distinct that it's occasionally
confounding.  Perhaps a better question is whether THE LOSS OF SEXUAL
INNOCENCE is nothing _but_ pretentious.  Even more so than in most films,
the answer to that question will be an eye-of-the-beholder proposition.
Some will see little more than insufferable, gratuitous, iconoclastic
noodling.  Others will see a film that grips you with many of its images
even as it keeps you at an artistic arm's length.
     Though there is no structured "story" to THE LOSS OF SEXUAL
INNOCENCE, there is a focal point in the character of Nic, seen at various
formative stages of his life.  As an adolescent (Jonathan Rhys-Meyers), he
has his first fumbling sexual experiences; as an adult (Julian Sands), he
struggles with a marriage to a wife (Kelly Macdonald) as full of doubts as
he is.  Much of the film deals with Nic's work as an ethnographic
film-maker, working with a crew in a remote African location, while
another sub-plot spins us off into the world of twins (Saffron Burrows)
separated at birth.  And serving as a bridge between all these episodes is
an impressionistic rendering of the Eden story, following the experiences
of Adam (Femi Ogumbanjo) and Eve (Hanne Klintoe).
     What may appear from that description to be a fragmented film
actually feels surprisingly cohesive.  Figgis maintains a consistent tone
for his various images, creating a collection of cinematic short stories
as thematically connected as Hemingway's _A Moveable Feast_.  The piano
music of Schumann and Chopin trades places with Figgis' own compositions,
accentuating some magical cinematography by Benoit Delhomme.  If you allow
yourself to get lost in THE LOSS OF SEXUAL INNOCENCE, and avoid succumbing
to the temptation to figure out what everything "means," it can wash over
your resistance to its unconventionality.  Some of the individual stories,
like a chance meeting between the twins, pack an emotional wallop; some of
the individual visions, like a golden landscape that dissolves into the
ripples of a water reflection, are breathtakingly unforgettable.
     And, to be frank, some of it is just plain weird.  In one sequence,
we are shown the dreams of Nic and his wife.  Instead of giving us a view
of an inner life, the scenes play out like a parody of dream images, full
of dissonant music and shifting realities like a years-too-late outtake
from "Twin Peaks."  Most baffling and annoying to some will be the Garden
of Eden sequences, which conspicuously match a transluscently Nordic Eve
with a strikingly black Adam, both of whom are fully nude in every scene.
There's nothing particularly revelatory about Figgis' account of the Fall
but his interracial First Parents, nothing visually compelling in his
unblinking staredown with innocence personified.  By the time the tale
closes with an absurd vision of paparazzi chasing the now-fallen pair
outside the gates of Paradise, it all starts to look more like a Calvin
Klein ad than a cinematic experiment.
     That's the level on which THE LOSS OF SEXUAL INNOCENCE is bound to
set to itching those who can't stand it when their art looks this
in-your-face art-y.  There are times when Figgis' efforts grow wearying in
their lack of basic resonance with the viewer's experiences.  There are
also times when he hits the nail spectacularly on the head, and times when
the film works on an almost symphonic level.  Mike Figgis wants to use the
cinema the way only cinema can be used, and without question he does so.
The extent to which this mixed bag of mourning and memory succeeds is a
matter for _extremely_ subjective analysis.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Writer and director Mike Figgis is best known for his award winning ode
to the joys of alcoholism and suicide, LEAVING LAS VEGAS.  This time
he's back with a semi-autobiographical movie called THE LOSS OF SEXUAL
INNOCENCE.
Most viewers, including this seasoned one, will be at a loss to say
precisely what the picture is about and what Figgis is trying to say
with it.  The story is bafflingly frustrating yet beautifully intriguing
and unabashedly sexual.  Think of it as a mysterious, erotic tone poem
for thinking adults.
But be forewarned.  Many members of the audience are likely to be
scratching their heads at the end, asking themselves, "What was that all
about?"
Told in overlaying stories that flash forward and back, the stories are
purposefully oblique.  Containing few audible words, the film's sparse
dialog is generally heard, if at all, in whispers or through obstacles
such as glass or fire.  Figgis wants the images and his sublime music to
carry the picture.
Nic, played as an adult with a forceful presence by Julian Sands, is the
central character.  We see his childhood at various ages in flashbacks.
One of these shows Nic as a significantly obese young teen.  Since Sands
is tall and athletic, this casting of the excessively plump boy was a
particularly bad choice.
Anther related story has to do with grown twins (Saffron Burrows) who
were separated at birth and who meet each other in an airport.  The best
part of this story is a long and absolutely adorable sequence of newly
born twins as they stretch and greet the world.
The third story is an unusual Adam (Femi Ogumbanjo) and Eve (Hanne
Klintoe) fable set in a Garden of Eden.  In a movie charged with
eroticism, these sequences are the most playfully sexual.  One scene has
Adam and Eve playing something akin to the kid's game of doctor as they
explore each other's bodies.  In a movie that clearly should have been
rated NC-17, they are shown in full frontal-nudity as they observe each
other standing and urinating.  This story contains the most nudity this
side of a porn flick.
The most controversial scene in the movie is the expulsion of Adam and
Eve from the Garden of Eden.  Using a loud and shrill version of
Beethoven's Ode to Joy, Figgis makes the purge take on a Naziesque feel
as the once innocent young lovers are chased by hidden boogiemen with
flashlights.
The various stories are interrelated in ways imaginable and
unimaginable.  The movie is best savored when you turn brain off and
treat the movie as a completely sensory experience.
The picture is at its most satisfying in its sexual escapades.  Besides
the aforementioned Biblical references, two other sexual scenes stand
out.
One, starring Jonathan Rhys-Meyers as the 18-year-old Nic, takes place
in the living room of Nic's date.  As they kiss and he tries without
much success to escalate the activities, they are ever on their guard,
lest they wake her father.  This funny and charming scene is one that
most of us have experienced before, and Figgis's staging is convincingly
natural.
Another erotic episode takes place in the kitchen after the grown Nic
and his wife have put their young boy to bed.  As she cuts carrots, he
begins to seduce her from behind.  We observe their lovemaking like
voyeurs through the kitchen window.  Again, Figgis's staging is dead-on,
and their passion has a visceral intensity.
Confusingly mesmerizing and handsomely filmed, the movie defies
deconstruction but speaks to you through its subliminal messages.  When
you leave, you're more likely to feel the movie in your subconscious
than to think about it directly.  Fight the urge to understand it.  Just
enjoy it.
THE LOSS OF SEXUAL INNOCENCE runs 1:41.  It is rated R for strong sexual
content, full-frontal nudity, violence and profanity.  Consider the
movie NC-17 and for adults.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
