Title
Review for Parent Trap, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
David Sunga
Written by:
David Swift, Nancy Meyers & Charles Shyer. THE PARENT TRAP is a remake
of David Swift's 1961 screenplay which was based on Erich Kastner's 1950
children's book "Das Doppelte Lottchen." 
Starring: 
Lindsay Lohan, Dennis Quaid, Natasha Richardson, Elaine Hendrix, Lisa
Ann Walter, Simon Kunz.
Synopsis: 
THE PARENT TRAP is a Disney remake of the 1961 Disney movie of the same
name. In the 1998 version , Lindsay Lohan plays two twins named Annie
and Hallie who were separated shortly after birth, and raised by each
single parent, respectively. For example, Annie was raised by her
mother, a Londoner, so she has never met her American father. Meanwhile
Hallie was raised by her American father, so she has never met her
British mother. 
By coincidence the twins meet each other at a summer camp, and after a
prank-filled rivalry, Annie and Hallie come to realize that they are
actually sisters. Filled with curiosity about the parents they never
met, they decide to switch places, one going to London while the other
to California. Soon afterwards, they hatch plots to reunite their
divorced parents and live as one happy family.
Opinion:
THE PARENT TRAP is one of those lighthearted, highly entertaining
family-values comedies that people of any age can enjoy. It has
slapstick pranks, family reunions, romance, and an exciting fencing
match. And to top it off, the heroes are kids and the parents are the
same age (instead of the typical 90s movie pairing of ancient sugar
daddy with hot-bodied young gal). 
The talented Lindsay Lohan is effective and charming playing two
different eleven-year-old girls: Annie and Hallie. Lohan does so well at
it that she easily persuades us she is two different people, who,
through eerily coincidental characteristics, come to realize they are
twins, although they've been raised oceans apart. Come to think of it,
every character in THE PARENT TRAP - - from Dennis Quaid and Natasha
Richardson as the parents to hired servants Lisa Ann Walter and Simon
Kunz - - manages to be warmly funny and appealing without stealing the
show or going over the top. 
We're all used to disappointing Hollywood remakes, but thankfully, THE
PARENT TRAP is quite refreshing and fun. Everyone does such a top notch
and balanced job in THE PARENT TRAP that the 1998 version is just as
good or better than the original. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Lindsay Lohan, Dennis Quaid, Natasha Richardson, Elaine Hendrix,
Lisa Ann Walter, Simon Kunz.
Screenplay: David Swift and Nancy Meyers & Charles Shyer, based on "Das
Doppelte Lottchen" by Erich Kastner.
Director: Nancy Meyers.
The danger of revamping a Disney classic is that it becomes unbelievably
difficult for the successor, to fill the shoes of the original. Try as
you might to revive the magical feel of the first Parent Trap, somehow
the nineties version lacks the same charm and grace, that made the first
an instant hit.
For beginners, Lindsay Lohan, the new Hallie and Annie Parker, who try
to reunite their long separated parents, somehow lacks the adorable
cheek of the original Hayley Mills. The basic story line is much the
same from memory, throw in a butler and a maid and the matchmaking
begins. If one word were needed to describe this film, it would be
incredibly perky.
If one knows the story line already, you may question why two seemingly
sensible adults, like Elizabeth James (Natasha Richardson) and Nick
Parker (Denis Quaid), would split up so quickly after the birth of their
daughter's; each taking a twin to care for on opposite sides of the
earth. There is no answer, and the question remains unanswered. They
just need to be apart, or the novelty of two girls finding out they're
twins would be lost, and the fun, pranks and plotting would not begin.
If anything, this movie brings some hope to those children who are
hurting after the separation or divorce of their parents. However,
Disney has a rather simple minded knack of superficially dealing with
such problems - the magical ending suggests that everyone lives happily
ever after. Unfortunately, the reality is that many parents don't get
back together, and the children carry much of the pain of family
break-ups into their adult life. Perhaps, the more truthful, unhappy
ending, which Disney has so obviously avoided, is the fact that
Elizabeth James and Nick Parker would in reality never get back together
again. But such is the policy of Disney, that this remote possibility
could never be so.

Author
Alex Fung
THE PARENT TRAP (Walt Disney Pictures - 1998)
Starring Lindsay Lohan, Dennis Quaid, Natasha Richardson,
  Elaine Hendrix
Screenplay by David Swift and Nancy Meyers & Charles Shyer, based on
  the novel DAS DOPPELTE LOTTCHEN by Erich Kastner
Produced by Charles Shyer
Directed by Nancy Meyers
Running time: 127 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   The remaking of classic films, always a risky artistic proposition,
   is under scrutiny more than ever these days by the cynical and savvy
   masses -- consider the current sentiment of disapproval at Gus Van
   Sant's ongoing recreation of Alfred Hitchcock's PSYCHO, prompting
   cineastes to collectively shake their heads and wail in dismay.
   "Don't remake masterpieces!" thundered Roger Ebert on a recent
   episode of his weekly television program.  "If it works, don't fix
   it!"
   While film buffs passionately rail against remakes, it's easy to
   understand why studios continue to churn them out at prodigious
   rates.  There's a certain name recognition carried over from the
   earlier versions which reduces the effort involved to sell the new
   flicks to the public -- no longer is there a need to enticingly
   sketch the movie's elements ("There's a guy, see, and he *really*
   loves his mother...") when everybody's familiar with the original --
   and a nostalgic fondness that's culled from audiences' memories of
   the tried-and-true predecessors.  Even skeptical cynics are counted
   upon to grudgingly drag themselves to the theatre to partake remakes
   of old favourites, if only to witness how the new version bastardizes
   their beloved original.  Remakes aren't always risk-free commercial
   endeavours -- witness, for example, at the crash-and-burn of Jeremiah
   Chechik's edition of DIABOLIQUE (that he's behind the helm for the
   upcoming cinematic adaptation of THE AVENGERS is suddenly not
   particularly reassuring) or the decidedly mediocre performance of
   Andrew Davis' recent A PERFECT MURDER -- but there's a bit of a
   safety buffer.
   No studio in recent years has been cannibalizing its past hits as
   much as Disney.  Admittedly, none of the revisited originals would
   classify as masterpieces -- I feel safe assuming THAT DARN CAT!
   didn't *just* miss the cut on the AFI list -- but Team Mouse is
   meddling in a particularly tempestuous kettle: beloved family
   classics.  I suspect that the public would scarcely bat an eye should
   a half-assed version of CITIZEN KANE churn out the pipe, but a
   filmmaker who desecrates iconic crowdpleasers like THE WIZARD OF OZ
   had better assume a new identity and move to the tropics.  So far,
   Disney's faring remarkably well -- among others, FLUBBER, DR.
   DOLITTLE, and THE NUTTY PROFESSOR have been unqualified box-office
   hits -- but with the release of the Nancy Meyer-helmed version of THE
   PARENT TRAP they're treading on especially shaky ground.  (The 1961
   original, a cross-generational hit starring Hayley Mills, was so
   revered by the younger set in its day that this edition's top-billed
   actor, Dennis Quaid, freely admits that his involvement in the
   project was due to his child.)
   Avowed curmudgeons would do best to avoid the newest version of THE
   PARENT TRAP, a film so sunny and cheerful that extended exposure will
   cause surly audience members to undergo allergic convulsions.  A rare
   picture whose photobook conclusion feels truly earned rather than
   obligatorily appended, its slick, high-spirited nature and eager,
   almost desperate willingness to please is winning, and the film
   benefits from its great casting (Mr. Quaid, charming; Natasha
   Richardson, luminous; Lindsay Lohan, darling), but in terms of
   fundamental filmmaking and storytelling it's sometimes irritatingly
   uninspired.
   Obviously, there's a requisite of faithfulness to the original film,
   and one hardly expects inventive or groundbreaking filmmaking in a
   carefully-crafted family picture, but novice director Ms. Meyer has
   the frustrating tendency to repetitively go for the most obvious gag
   possible, making the entire two hour-plus experience vaguely tedious.
   If there's a blatant establishing shot of a needlessly perfunctory
   swimming pool, you can bet that somebody's going to fall in.
   Likewise, even sly visual send-ups aimed at older audiences are
   similarly telegraphed; Beatles fans should spot the film's quick
   homage coming a mile away.  Most of the humour is similarly impaired:
   breezily pleasant but not particularly witty.  (I did like one line
   regarding the villainess' spelling aptitude.)  It's all competently
   helmed, but not particularly engaging.
   I found the film's first half hour to be especially worrisome.  It
   starts off well enough, with both separated twins Hallie Parker (Ms.
   Lohan) and Annie James (ditto) arriving at summer camp to inevitably
   reunite, but when Annie and her mother's trusty butler Martin (Simon
   Kunz) spontaneously burst out into a choreographed hand-slapping,
   hip-swiveling dance, it all seemed a bit Too Precious.  Later scenes
   including Hallie arriving for a late-night poker session, decked in
   black leather and sunglasses and backed by a rock guitar soundtrack,
   and an insanely elaborate camp prank staged like a Wile E. Coyote
   scheme weren't very reassuring.  Fortunately, the picture does pick
   up when the two girls finally realize their blood ties and set out on
   their grand master plan to reunite their long-divorced parents.  (And
   I enjoyed the scene where naughty Hallie and Annie are banished to
   the camp's clearly-labelled Isolation Cabin, which is probably bigger
   and better furnished than my house.)
   The bulk of the film rests upon the capable shoulders of Ms. Lohan,
   who seamlessly plays both twins (often opposite "herself") and imbues
   Annie with a reasonably credible British accent.  The lively young
   freckled redhead is great fun to watch and makes for a wonderfully
   charming set of protagonists, full of spunk and sly spirit, although
   ultimately her dual roles act simply as a device to set up the
   rekindling romance between Nick Parker (Mr. Quaid, who's given a
   great introductory shot and whose wide grin is disarmingly likeable)
   and Elizabeth James (Ms. Richardson).  He owns a vineyard; she's a
   bridal gown designer; they're obviously made for each other, and it's
   just a matter of time before all the pieces fall into place.  As a
   dramatic obstacle, a vampy fiancee named Meredith Blake (gamely
   played by Elaine Hendrix) is introduced, and the film provides comic
   relief in the form of the kooky help -- the aforementioned Martin as
   well as Nick's straight-shooting nanny Chessy (Lisa Ann Walter) --
   but it all boils down to the romantic core of the picture, whose
   spectre dominates the final third of the film and is played out with
   warmth and simplicity.
   Overlooking some of the story's implications -- what sort of parents
   would shield their daughters from the knowledge that they have a twin
   sister? -- it's interesting to examine the basic appeal of this
   story.  I think it's derived not from wacky hijinx, but from the
   empowering notion that the twins are able to right a wrong and
   against all odds succeed in reuniting their parents; in this case,
   Daughters Know Best.  This film has a bit more of the former than I'd
   prefer, but thanks to fine performances by the cast, the latter
   aspect shines through with good-natured amiability.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"...a first screenplay unaccompanied by a powerful agent or industry
 sponsor is generally a pathetic fetus of a film, nothing more."
                               - Andrew Sarris

Author
Matt Williams
Ahhh...Disney is back with yet another remake.  This time, they tackle
The Parent Trap.  The result is remarkably amiable and entertaining, if
a bit long.
Hallie Parker and Annie James are twins (both played by Lindsay Lohan),
each of whom never knew of the other's existence.  After their parents'
quick marriage, and even quicker divorce, the two girls parted ways,
Hallie living with her dad, Nick (Dennis Quaid), in California, and
Annie living with her mother, Elizabeth (Natasha Richardson), in London.
However, a quirk of fate has reunited the girls together at a summer
camp.  After piecing together their relationship, the two set in motion
a plan to reunite their parents.  Hallie and Annie will switch places,
going home with the wrong parent.  When the mistake is realized, Nick
and Elizabeth will have to reunite to swap the kids back. And when they
do, romance will blossom once again, or so the girls hope.
As the center of The Parent Trap, Lindsay Lohan holds her own.  The twin
special effects are done seamlessly, with few "showy" scenes.  Lindsay
manages to imbue each twin with a such personality and style that it's
easy to forget there's only one actress playing both girls.
Dennis Quaid and Natasha Richardson make a good match as the parents.
They are ideal parental figures, and a cute couple together.  You root
for their reconciliation as much as the twins.
The supporting cast boasts some good comic talent. Both Elizabeth's
butler, Martin (Simon Kunz), and Nick's nanny, Chessy (Lisa Ann Walter),
are charmingly funny.  And Elaine Hendrix is appropriately witchy as
Meredith, Elizabeth's rival for Nick's heart.
With a running time over two hours, The Parent Trap is much lengthier
than the traditional kids' film.  There's enough going on that older
kids shouldn't have a problem, but the younger ones may get antsy.
Saccharine yet satisfying, The Parent Trap is entertaining enough for
both kids and adults.  Even those familiar with the original should find
something new to like here.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE PARENT TRAP (1998)
Starring:  Lindsay Lohan, Dennis Quaid, Natasha Richardson, Elaine
Hendrix, Lisa Ann Walter, Simon Kunz.
Screenplay:  David Swift and Nancy Meyers & Charles Shyer, based on "Das
Doppelte Lottchen" by Erich Kastner.
Producer:  Charles Shyer.
Director:  Nancy Meyers.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild profanity)
Running Time:  125 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There are probably equal reasons to fear for the worst and hope for
the best in considering a remake of Disney's 1961 film THE PARENT TRAP.
On the one hand, you have Disney's recent track record plundering its own
vaults for tiresome, frantic "updates" like 101 DALMATIANS, THAT DARN CAT
and FLUBBER.  On the other hand, you have the film-making team of Charles
Shyer and Nancy Meyers, who infuriated purists by daring to remake FATHER
OF THE BRIDE then turned out a thoroughly charming father-daughter
relationship story which in some ways improved on the original (Martin
Short's over-the-top Franck-o-phone notwithstanding).  Which would rule:
1990s Disney scatalogy-mongering, or Shyer/Meyers restraint and family
appeal?
     It's a pleasure to report that the 1998 model of THE PARENT TRAP
offers far more of the latter than the former, though it's far from an
unqualified success.  The story again concerns two young twins --
California girl Hallie Parker and Londoner Annie James (both played by
Lindsay Lohan) -- who never knew of each other's existence until they meet
at a New England summer camp.  It seems that their parents Nick (Dennis
Quaid) and Elizabeth (Natasha Richardson) impulsively married then
impulsively divorced years earlier, dividing everything down the middle
incuding their children.  With each one intrigued by the prospect of
meeting the parent she has never known, as well as the prospect of
bringing Nick and Elizabeth together again, the two girls decide to switch
places when returning home from camp.  There turns out to be one major
snag in the plan, however:  Nick's new fiancee Meredith (Elaine Hendrix),
a gold-digging manipulator who spells nothing but trouble.
     What's most right about THE PARENT TRAP is that it avoids what has
been most wrong about other recent Disney remakes.  From the opening
credits sequence, which depicts Nick and Elizabeth's whirlwind marriage to
the tune of Nat King Cole's "L-O-V-E," THE PARENT TRAP seems to have a
modicum of class and an interest in telling a story without explosions or
flatulence.  There are some high-spirited pranks as the girls compete at
camp, and a bit of slapstick during a camping trip, but mostly it's just a
pleasant, amusing diversion that could have been made 30 years ago like
the original.  A high-concept premise rarely feels this low-concept.
     The one thing it couldn't have had thirty years ago is 11-year-old
Lindsay Lohan, the film's captivating star.  Child actors are trouble
enough, and child actors in their first feature film even more so, but
Lohan's good-natured sweetness is infectious.  She even adopts a quite
serviceable English accent which should make more veteran actors (are you
listening, Kevin Costner) hang their heads in shame.  Lohan is just part
of a solid cast, including Hendrix as a juicy villainess and Lisa Ann
Walter as Nick's acerbic housekeeper, which gives the story plenty of
humor and warmth.  And it's a nice touch to see Joanna Barnes, reprising
her character from the original PARENT TRAP in the appropriate role of
Meredith's mother.
     As is the case with most remakes, it's tough to argue that THE
PARENT TRAP was crying out for a contemporary re-telling.  This version
brings nothing revolutionary to the table, drags through some sluggish
spots in its two hour running time, and never really builds much chemistry
between Quaid and Richardson.  Most disappointing is the climactic camping
trip where the twins torment the hapless city girl Meredith; the sequence
is too short, the editing too choppy, and the resolution far too abrupt.
THE PARENT TRAP is basically the kind of film usually described with a
dismissive word like "cute," which is certainly accurate enough.  "Cute"
films are becoming harder and harder to find, however, and this one keeps
things light enough to sidestep any of Shyer and Meyers' more saccharine
impulses.  Every once in a while, uncomplicated and inoffensive fun feels
just right.

Author
Mark O'Hara
It's been too long since I've seen the original 1961 THE PARENT TRAP to 
make comparisons.  Let it be enough to say that I watched the remake 
with four boys, ages 11-13, and not one of them griped that it was corny 
or a "chick flick."
First-time director Nancy Meyers summons first-rate performances from 
most of the cast.  Lindsay Lohan stands out in the role of twins Hallie 
Parker, the Napa Valley native who loves her single father, and Annie 
James, the skillfully accented Londoner who meets her sister at summer 
camp.  It must have taken planning and patience to keep the girls' 
manners straight and separate - not to mention to shoot around a 
stand-in;  the result is seamless and uncanny.  There's even a scene in 
which the girls play poker, one of them - we think the stand-in - 
holding her face away from the camera.  But suddenly she turns and we 
see Lohan again.  In fact there are very few scenes, in which the girls 
appear together, that have not been carefully executed.  As an actress, 
Lohan is poised and confident, and her red hair and freckles make 
viewers forget Hayley Mills.
Much of the lightness of tone - and it is a welcome lightness - comes 
from Simon Kunz's portrayal of Annie's butler.  At once a father figure 
and fun-loving pal, the loyal Martin gets many of the laughs in the 
picture.  And he comes by them honestly;  it does not even seem cheap 
when he dresses in leather or in nothing but a Speedo.  Martin is not 
afraid to cry, and meets a sympathetic counterpart in Chessy (Lisa Ann 
Walter), employee of Nick Parker (Dennis Quaid) and nanny to Hallie.  A 
budding romance between the servants actually adds charm to the film, 
though the idea of it sounds sappy and cliched.  As the twins' father, 
Quaid turns in a solid but not an outstanding job.  Natasha Richardson 
is a bit more flamboyant, especially in scenes that have her 
straight-laced Elizabeth swallowing too much airline booze.  No, along 
with the dual main role, it is the supporting roles of the servants, 
along with a little help from Elaine Hendrix as gold-digging Meredith, 
that propels the story into an above-average film.
Pace is very important in this film, especially since Meyers and 
co-writer Charles Shyer avoid fart jokes and crotch kicks.  The 
slapstick humor at camp comes across well, and the very premise of the 
girls switching roles so that their parents would be forced to see each 
other lends unity of plot.  Once again the acting makes for some 
touching reunions, with each 11 year-old never having seen one parent.  
I think what moves the story along so quickly is the editing.  The 
scenes are only as long as they need to be, no fillers stretching them 
out.  For instance, Annie and Hallie offer each other extensive 
coaching:  each must duplicate the other's knowledge and lifestyle.  
These scenes are properly summarized.  
On the whole, THE PARENT TRAP appeals to such a wide audience - 
including adolescent boys - because it tells a story of human triumph.  
It is also intelligent and innocent,  a double threat to most movies 
that ooze or explode out of the huge conglomerates that happen to own 
studios.


Author
Cheng-Jih Chen

Ooh!  A live-action Disney children's movie!  I'm not used to rambling
on about these, so, please, be gentle with me.
This is a variation of the venerable story of twins, separated at
birth, switching places.  The trick here is that they conspire to bring
their long-divorced parents back together again, despite being
separated by 6000 miles.
Playing the parents are Natasha Richardson and Dennis Quaid.
Richardson was apparently chosen because she's British, is at the right
age, and has the glamor you'd imagine your long-lost mom would have
(yes, wishes are fulfilled in this movie, but it's Disney).  She plays
this perfectly well.  I'm not sure about Dennis Quaid.  The twins are
played by Lindsay Lohan, who, backed by her acting double and special
effects, is shockingly convincing at being in two places at once.  If
you didn't pay attention (like foolish old me), you'd believe there
were twins there.
The first part of the movie, with the twins meeting cute at summer
camp, was on the painful side.  All the cliches of precious,
mischievous kids are pulled from the usual bag of tricks.  Yes, even
the "Bad to the Bone" song playing when one of the twins struts up to a
camp poker game in dark sunglasses.  Maybe I'm just grump, but I hoped
that one twin would be made of antimater and would annhilate the other
one on contact, ending the film, or that one would turn out to be the
evil twin, Garth, but, alas, it was not to be.
The movie actually picks up once the whole camp thing ends.  They
switch places, so each can see their mum or dad, as appropriate.  Minor
fun with culture shock, touristy drives through London and Napa Valley
(yes, Mom's a designer of wedding gowns, Dad owns a winery, like most
people on the planet).  The scheme of getting mom and dad to meet has
to be hurried, because Dad has met a thin, young blonde (TYB), and,
after an 8 week whirlwind courtship (apparently occurring entirely
while the girls are at camp), they're going to get married.  The TYB,
of course, is evil.
The twins' cover is blown by the clever grandfather in London, and the
observant housekeeper in Napa.  Plus a dog: animals are smart.  Stuff
happens, everyone meets at a nice hotel in San Francisco, people have
shocked-happy looks (mom and dad) or shocked-shocked looks (evil TYB),
and, after some hijinks you know the rest.  It's not "The Usual
Suspects".
I saw this with zero expectations, and, despite having every fear
confirmed in the first part, was pleasantly surprised by the end of the
movie.  Yes, "The Parent Trap" is too long by about 20 minutes (and I
don't just mean the camp scenes), but it's not bad at all.

Author
Bob Bloom
 It's difficult to dislike The Parent Trap.
 Sure, it's about as realistic as an episode of The X-Files. It's a movie
that is set in some fantasy land where all the people have perfect teeth,
the kids are smarter than the adults and everyone lives happily ever after.
 Actually, it's a Disney remake of a popular 1961 confection that starred
Hayley Mills as twin daughters who meet and then connive to reunite their
long-divorced parents.
 The main plot is faithfully followed in this glossy makeover.
 It's a movie that, if you really would take the time to analyze, you would
find many problems, both thematic and sociological.
 Why, for instance, would a parent hide the fact from a child that she has
a  sister, and a twin at that?
 Wouldn't it be rather traumatic for the twins meeting for the first time?
 Little items like this are ignored in this Nancy Meyers-directed item.
 For this is a movie for children, as well as baby boomers who hold fond
memories of the original.
 For the rest of you, bah, humbug, stay home and rent Breakdown.
 The main appeal of The Parent Trap is young Lindsay Lohan, who assays the
dual roles of Hallie and Annie. Hallie lives with her father, Nick (Dennis
Quaid), in Napa Valley, Calif.
 Annie lives with her mom, Elizabeth (Natasha Richardson), in London.
 The girls meet at summer camp, where as in the original, they start out as
rivals, before discovering they are sisters.
 From there, the plot follows the familiar path of the girls switching
places, then plotting to reunite their parents.
Lohan is a very appealing young actress, and it is her charisma that grabs
and  holds the viewer. She literally shines from the screen.
 Overlooked by the script, as well as the audience, is any resentment on
either girl's part of being abandoned by the other parent.
 No, it's all hugs and kisses and tears of joy.
 Quaid and Richardson look wonderful in their undemanding roles.
 One historical note: Joanna Barnes, who played the "other woman" in the
original film, appears in the small role of the mother of this version's
"other woman," Meredith, an overly nasty performance by Elaine Hendrix.
 The Parent Trap is entertaining, filled with laughs and sentimentality.
It's simplistic in its outlook, which will make it even more appealing for
the younger audience members.
 At a little more than two hours, this Parent Trap may drag in a spot or
two, but overall it should hold the attention of most youngsters.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Steve Rhodes
The spunky Lindsay Lohan, the lead in Disney's remake of THE PARENT
TRAP is one of the best new actresses in years.  A stunning 11 year-old
redhead with a freckled face, she charms the audience in her every
scene.  Rather than attempting to recreate the Hayley Mills role from
the 1961 classic, she brings her own vivacious freshness to make it a
completely different movie, albeit with the same plot.
     Whether you like the original movie or not, you will love the
delightful remake.  Part comedy and part romance, the movie can even
bring the audience to tears with its considerations of the bonds that
exist between parent and child.
     The film's lovely script is by Nancy Meyers and Charles Shyer, the
writing team for the wonderful FATHER OF THE BRIDE movies.  They have a
talent for blending in just enough silly comedy to win the hearts of the
youngest members of the audience, while still keeping the story
intelligent and the characters richly drawn.  Meyers, who tries her hand
at directing for the first time in this film, has a good sense of timing
and a knack for staging that ranges from the sweet to the slapstick
without ever going overboard.
     In the story, two twins, Hallie Parker and Annie James, both played
by Lindsay Lohan in a seamless bit of Disney magic, are off to the same
camp.  Hallie lives with her dad, played by Dennis Quaid in one of his
better performances, on the estate of his sumptuous Napa Valley
vineyard.  In contrast, Annie and her mother Elizabeth, played
charmingly by Natasha Richardson, live in the hustle and bustle of
central London, where Elizabeth is a wedding dress designer.
     Both families are rich enough to have their own butlers, although
Americans would never call them such, of course, since it would imply
some sort of class system.  Martin (Simon Kunz) works for the mother,
and Chessy (Lisa Ann Walter) is employed by the father.  Both have more
than enough personality to be the stars of their own movies.  They are
more like part of the family than hired help, and they significantly add
to rather than merely complement the storyline.
     The setup for the plot is that the girls do not know they are twins
and have never seen their other parent.  After a fencing match at camp,
they are shocked to pull off their masks to see their own reflection in
the other person's face.  Thinking at first that they only look alike
but aren't related, they begin playing a series of practical jokes on
each other in an intense but good-hearted version of peer rivalry.
These scenes will send the younger members of the audience rolling in
giggles, but they are done with enough class to amuse the adults as
well.
     Putting together a torn picture from the QE2 of a single parent
each, they realize their kinship.  In a scene that may put goose pimples
on your skin, they hug each other voraciously.  Imagine being an only
child and meeting the twin whom you never knew you had.  Wanting never
to be torn asunder again, they devise a plan to bring their divorced
parents back together.  By swapping places, each will get to meet the
other parent.  And when their trickery is discovered, the parents will
be forced to meet when they unswap them.
     The girls have such genuine chemistry for each other that the
audience is rooting for them to pull off their big scheme.  And when the
scenes occur where they meet their other parent for the first time,
don't be surprised if you get a little teary eyed.  Each thinks their
new parent is nothing short of terrific.
     From this point on, the story has the good judgement to focus more
on the relationship than the gimmicks of the impersonations.  Still, the
old game of "which twin is which" is fun.
     Next to the standout performance by Lindsay Lohan is the acting by
Elaine Hendrix as the 26-year-old gold digger, Meredith Blake, who has
set her sights on marrying Nick's money.  Driving a red BMW convertible,
talking incessantly on her cell phone, and generally fawning all over
Nick, Meredith sees dollar signs behind every grapevine.  Impeccably
dressed, she is light years away from being interested in becoming a
soccer mom.  She plans to ship Hallie off to boarding school at the
first possible opportunity.  When the two twins start conniving ways to
eliminate her, the film is at its comedic best.
     Perhaps the most amazing part of THE PARENT TRAP is its universal
appeal.  It will delight all sexes and ages, even adults with no
children.  Few films can pull this off, but THE PARENT TRAP does with
almost complete success.
     THE PARENT TRAP runs 2:03.  It is rated PG for reasons that are not
immediately obvious, and the movie should appeal to all ages.
     My son Jeffrey and his buddy Nickolas, both 9, loved the movie and
each gave it ****.  They particularly liked the twins and the butlers,
and their favorite scenes were those at camp as well as the camping
scene at the end.

Author
Jeremiah Rickert
Starring: Dennis Quaid, Natasha Richardson, Lindsay Lohan
Directed by: Nancy Meyers
     Disney's remake department must be working overtime, trying to
ressurect their "wonderful" "hits" of the past.  We've seen remakes of
such "classics" as "The Shaggy Dog," "The Computer Who Wore Tennis Shoes"
"The Absent Minded Professor," and now "The Parent Trap."  Most of these
have been rather horrid attempts at injecting the 90s into concepts that
were borne of the 60s.  However, "The Parent Trap" outclasses all of these
others in several respects.
     Our story, as in the original, concerns a set of identical twins
living with single parents. Annie James and Hallie Parker are the twins
(played convincingly by newcomer Lindsay Lohan) who meet at summer camp.
They discover that their parents (Dennis Quaid and Tony award winner
Natasha Richardson) separated soon after they were born, each taking one
of the twins with them.  The girls were then raised without knowledge of
each other.  However, they both end up attending the same Summer Camp one
year and after at first becoming rivals at the camp, they then realize
they are twins with the same parents.  They concoct a plan to switch
places with each other, so they can meet the parent they never knew, and
then force their parents to meet again when they're unswitched.  After
switching and enjoying time with their "new" parent, it is discovered that
their father plans to remarry to a 20-something gold-digger who is only
after his money (played with slime by Elaine Hendrix).  The race is on to
get everyone in once place again and convince their father that it's their
mother he should marry.
     The parents are Nick Parker (Dennis Quaid) and Elizabeth James
(played by Tony winner Natasha Richardson).  Parker runs a winery, and
is an outdoorsey type, while James is a London Wedding Dress designer,
with a growing reputation.  Each of them seems to have done well without
the other.  
     There is some fantastic comic relief provided by each parents' hired
help.  Lisa Ann Walter (Eddie) plays Chessy, the crass, down-to-earth
housekeepr for Nick, and Simon Kunz (Goldeneye, 4 Weddings and a Funeral)
plays Martin, Elizabeth's bulter.  Each of them cares for the girls almost
as much as their parents and each gives a hand in straightening things
out.  
     The film kept me interested throughout its entirety, something that a
lot of recent big-budget films have failed to do.  The jokes range from
the very obvious to the very subtle.  In other words, there's stuff for
the young kids to laugh at, as well as the adults in the audience.  The
acting is all more than adequate, except for perhaps Quaid.  Having seen
the original, I always saw Nick Parker as a little rougher than Quaid's
portrayal.  The late Brian Keith, in the original version, was a man who
had some money, but didn't know what to do with it, was befuddled when it
came to things like dressing up and acting refined in front of a woman,
Quaid was a little too adjusted to these things, which doesn't ruin the
movie, but it takes away an element that could have made it better.  They
don't really explore the conflict between the two worlds that the new
parents live in.  Farm life is a far cry from a London design house.
     Meyers direction does the job just fine, she also had a hand in the
screenplay.  I have to give her a bravo for the long fencing duel fought
by the two twins.  Besides being rather hilarious, it had a lot of homages
to the classic duels of the past, with lots of posing, strutting, and
general braggadacio.
     Overall I was entertained by this "little" film.  It's by far the
best of the recent Disney remakes, and was more entertaining than most of
the summer blockbusters.  
Of the $6.75 that I paid for my ticket, it was worth every penny.
Copyright 1998 Jeremiah Rickert
--

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Walt Disney Pictures
 Director: Nancy Meyers
 Writer:  Eugene David, Nancy Meyers, Charles Shyer
 Cast: Dennis Quaid, Natasha Richardson, Lindsay Lohan,
Lisa Ann Walter, Elaine Hendrix
   In the movie "Love and Death on Long Island" Giles De'ath
(John Hurt) tells young Ronnie Bostock (Jason Priestley) that
if Shakespeare were alive today, he'd be making movies like
"Hot Pants College."  An exaggeration perhaps.  A more
realistic project for the Bard, were he alive now, would be a
film like "The Parent Trap."  Nancy Meyers's romantic comedy
has the elements that Elizabethan audiences were so fond of:
mistaken identity, outrageous coincidences, and parallel,
romantic subplots.  If Dan Quayle were a member of the
Academy, he'd vot, er, vote an award for "The Parent Trap"
not because it's Shakespearean ("what's that"?) but because
it epitomizes family values.  How could it not?  "The Parent
Trap" is essentially the story of twin girls, eleven years old,
who are despondent because each one is missing one
parent.  When their folks got divorced while the little girls were
just a few months ago, one went to live with her dad in
California's Napa Valley while the other hung out with her
Mom in the Belgravia section of London.  The twins were
quite comfortable financially, but you just can't beat the
healthy, two-parent family.
   The 1998 film is a re-make of the sunny 1961 comedy
which starred Hayley Mills in both roles.  They appeared
together in various scenes then, but you could always tell that
they were just one kid pasted onto the other.  With special
effects at the current high level, only an expert could tell that
Walt Disney productions needed to pay only one salary.
   The story begins as Martin (Simon Kunz), London butler to
clothing designer Elizabeth James (Natasha Richardson) bids
a tearful goodbye to Elizabeth's daughter, Annie (newcomer
Lindsay Lohan), who is about to spend an eight-week season
in a camp in Maine.  Coincidentally, the twin sister she has
never met, Hallie Parker, is also a camper, a girl who lives
with her dad Nick (Dennis Quaid) in the Napa Valley
vineyards.  At first, they spot a resemblance.  It takes them
quite a while to compare notes and to realize that they have
matching DNAs, and from that time on, they are determined
to live together under one roof with both parents.  They
concoct a delightful plan to bring their folks together by
rekindling their romance.  As in all romantic comedies, the
man and woman must encounter many obstacles, becoming a
collective only in the final scene. The principal deterrent here
is that dad is about to marry a gorgeous publicist, Meredith
Blake (Elaine Hendrix), so the girls must use all their charm
and cunning to get her out of the picture.
   The two-hour length of the movie may signify that director
Meyers--who wrote the screenplay together with Charles
Shyer and David Swift--is targeting an adult audience.  The
movie does have an appeal to kids (it's from the sort of novel
that junior high school teachers used to call a girls' story). 
But while the excellent Lindsay Lohan is in virtually every
scene, "The Parent Trap" is really about the parents.  We
don't know why they broke up so soon, almost twelve years
ago. After all, they enjoyed an idyllic honeymoon aboard the
QE2.  All we grasp is that "he made me nuts," as Elizabeth
says in passing.  In other words, you don't spend your life on
the QE2 and re-marriage, even with yet another honeymoon
on the Big Lady, is likely as not to end in divorce.  We don't
want to think of that possibility, though, because everyone in
the film--with one exception--is so charming and bubbly.  The
one character we don't like is the money-grubbing publicist,
Meredith, who may have a thing for Nick's physique as well,
but who simply does not like kids or camping the way he
does.
   "The Parent Trap" is filled with comic moments: the kids
play ingenious but devastating tricks on one another in camp
and in a couple of cases, they give their nemesis, Meredith,
enough rope to hang herself in Nick's eyes.  Lisa Ann Walter
and Simon Kunz are the congenial subplot, butlers of the
principal adults, who mirror their bosses with their own
romance.  Natasha Richardson, usually known for tougher
roles, is enormous appealing as the vulnerable albeit
successful woman, Dennis Quaid's grin is as fetching as ever,
and Lindsay Lohan turns in a striking turn with flawless British
and American accents as the girl who puts her folks through
an experience twice upon a time.

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Nancy Meyers
Writers: Nancy Meyers and Charles Shyer (based on the 1961 script by
David Swift and the book "Das Doppelite Lottchen" by Erich Kastner)
Starring: Lindsay Lohan, Dennis Quaid, Natasha Richardson, Elaine
Hendrix, Lisa Ann Walter, Simon Kunz, Polly Holliday, Maggie Wheeler,
Ronnie Stevens, Joanna Barnes
I actually am a fan of the original 1961 or so Live-Action-Disney flick
of the same name starring Hayley Mills twice as a pair of twins,
separated at birth by divorcing parents, never to come in contact with
the other so the parents never have to meet again.  And everyone should
know how I feel about remakes, especially of films I happen to enjoy (my
fallacy: unless you're going to either capture the same exact spirit of
the original or do something different with it or maybe even both, just
wrack your brain and come up with a *gasp* new idea).  This remake was
not originally on the top of my viewing list, and was actually quite the
opposite.  Contemporary Live-Action-Disney films are not one of my
favorties, anyway: they're usually unfunny, alienating, and a big fat
bore, at least to anyone over the age of 11 and above the IQ of 10.
This one, however, is shockingly not bad.  In fact, it's actually good.
Not the original good, but what's great about it is that it doesn't
necessarily retread the original or capture the same exact spirit as it
does become entertaining for the same exact reasons the original was
entertaining.  Because it's cute and innocent fun.  Because it has a
pretty killer plot that is endlessly fun to follow along with.  Because
the lead star is immensely appealing.  Because the parents are also
immensely appealing.  And (I'm repeating myself) because it's cute and
innocent fun.  There's nothing too risque about it, save the plot (the
idea of separating twins and denying them the truth for years is
ominously selfish, but that is precisely the point of the movie), and
it's aimed directly at either kids, adults who want to remember the
original, or young adults who want to remember what it was like to be a
kid.
I, personally, am somewhere between the second and third.  I can vividly
remember when my taste in movies wasn't so weird or diverse (the names
Godard and Kubrick weren't even a glimmer in my right eye back then),
when I would tune in every Sunday night for a couple years to see ABC's
"Wonderful World of Disney," where they'd show you a Live-Action and/or
Made-for-TV Disney flick an hour per week.  I can remember my mom taking
my sister and I along with all my friends and their mothers to see all
the rereleased Disney films (like "Lady and the Tramp" and
"Pinnochio").  And, most sadly, I remember every single Christmas,
without fail, there were a barage of children's animated half-hour
shows, made exclusively for the Christmas season, that I wouldn't dare
missing.  I can even remember seeing the made-for-TV "Parent Trap II" on
TV one night, and after I had seen that one over and over and over
again, I saw the original "Parent Trap."  It's more of a late childhood
movie, because it deals with the issue of divorce, but it deals with it
in a Disney-ized version.  It's playful, and witty, and charming, and if
I saw it for the first time right now, having never experienced that
part of my childhood, I'd probably dismiss it.
I'd probably do the same for the new version of the same movie if I
hadn't seen the original at such a perfect age.  Watching it, I could
remember what fun it was to watch a Disney film, and how divorce for me
started to get me thinking about the possibilities of my
seemingly-perfect parents splitting up, and how it affected my
adolescence.  And also how it brushed that fear off with a smooth
stroke, and pointed out that even in the most fucked-up of situations,
things could always work out if you, well, manipulate things a bit, at
least for the better.  This new version did that for me, but it's also
charming in its own way.  It has a new cast, a contemporary feel, and,
for the first time in awhile for a Live-Action-Disney flick, a tone that
isn't corny or condescending, but just right.  The moments that would
otherwise seem corny are actually affecting in a safe kind of way.  And
for the first time since the original film, the kids actually know
better than the foolish adults.
The story is basically classic by now, repeated almost as many times as
Kurosawa's "The Seven Samurai": a pair of twins (played here by Lindsay
Lohan, just like they were played by Hayley Mills in the original) are
separated at birth by their divorcing parents.  One, Annie, is sent to
live with the mother (Natasha Richardson, resembling her mother, Vanessa
Redgrave, more than I had ever noticed) in London, where she lives with
her parents and her devoted, foppish butler (Simon Kunz), as she works
as a swingin' fashion designer.  She grows up refined and classy, but
also with a keen knowledge in sports and poker-playing.  The other,
Hallie, is sent to northern California with her father (Dennis Quaid) to
live on a vineyard with their pseudo-maid (Lisa Ann Walter), and grows
up rugged yet charming.  They both meet at the same camp, one that Annie
wants to go to to become more rugged.  They feud because they look
all-too similar, and are thus in tight competition, which results in
some nasty pranks, which winds them in seclusion together in a private,
out-of-the-way cabin.  There, they become friends, then learn about
eachother.  Once they know everything, they concoct a scheme to switch
places so the one can meet the other parent, whom they've only heard
of.  They learn about eachother's lives in detail, they make sure they
look alike (which requires hair cutting and, notoriously, ear-piercing -
a scene which is like the kiddie version of the hypodermic needle scene
in "Pulp Fiction"), and when the end of summer comes, they switch and
hope for the best.
Lindsay Lohan doesn't necessarily copy the acting style of Hayley Mills
in the original.  But she comes off just as appealing as she did once.
She does, though, add a couple new things: she makes the California twin
a little more appealing and the London twin a bit more frank and
snobbish than the snotty and proper original, respectively.  She also
adds on an American and British accent to each one, with one faking the
other accent throughout, and if you really take notice, you can see that
the fake ones' accents aren't exactly perfect.  She's also incredibly
appealing, not merely cute, which is especially notable since this is
her first feature film, and we know how notorious child actors are,
especially in their first films.  She makes a great protagonist, and it
only helps that the supporting cast is equally appealing.
Dennis Quaid, in fact, hasn't been this likable in about a decade - his
big dumb smile and near cocky attitude is what has made him a notable
actor in the past, not just that he's Mr. Meg Ryan.  Ditto Natasha
Richardson (except that she just hasn't ever been this likable period).
The two make a winning couple, maybe not so winning as Maureen O'Hara
and the late Brian Keith in the original, but they still work for this
film.  Instead of the bickering that ensued in the original, the film
adds another dimension and another angle to their characters that was
amiss in the original: during the opening credits, we see glimpses from
their courtship on the QE2, where they fall quickly and madly in love
with eachother, and when back together again, the film's more smarmy
scenes come off as actually sentimental, but in that great way, not the
migraine-inducing way as in many such films.
This all brings this new "Parent Trap" to a level of entertainment that
hasn't really existed since, well, the original film years ago, still my
money the best Live-Action-Disney flick of all time.  This is because it
has a form of intelligence and wit that makes such plot points as an
otherwise standard villainous love interest subplot (a gold-digging
Sharon Stone type, played by Elaine Hendrix, who's deliciously tormented
by the twins later on in the film) a treat instead of a bore.  Like the
original, this film transcends all the crap that it very well could be
(case in point: "It Takes Two" starring the Olsen Twins) because it
treats the children as the smart ones, and the adults as the silly ones,
not the other way around.  And because, above everything, it knows
exactly how to be charming without biting off more than it can chew.
However, in comparison with the original, it could be a bit better.
Certain scenes work well, but not nearly as well as they worked in the
original.  I liked the way the parents fought over past dilemnas and
then fought over falling in love again better than I liked watching two
old flames getting back together over a bottle of wine - somehow,
feuding is always more cinematic and pleasing than mere reminscing, a
lesson extracted from the Howard Hawks/Cary Grant films of yesteryear.
And as much as this film transcends mere cutedom, compared to the
original, this film almost drowns in cutedom.  The original, though not
gritty, was far more stylized and just as suitable for adult audiences
as it was for young audiences.  As such, this remake may never be nearly
as great or classic as the original film, but it at least knows how to
treat its source material with dignity and respect, and how to create
virtually the same effects without bordering on plagerism or petty
annoyances.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Sanford
         Disney's release schedule of late brings to mind that old
phrase about everything old being new again. In the past two years
alone, we've been forced to sit through remakes of everything from
``101 Dalmatians'' to ``That Darn Cat.''  Now the powers that be have
dusted off ``The Parent Trap,'' the fondly remembered 1961 Hayley
Mills picture about identical twins who scheme to reunite their
long-divorced parents. Talk about a risky idea: Mills fans generally
hold ``The Parent Trap'' in the same esteem Shakespeare scholars
reserve for ``Hamlet.''
  But everyone can heave a collective sigh of relief. The 1998
``Parent Trap'' proves to be a perfectly pleasant experience, thanks
largely to newcomer Lindsay Lohan, who capably assumes a dual role as
American-raised Hallie Parker and London-based Annie James. Lohan's
got comic timing, a knack for effective imitation - her British accent
sounds exactly like her screen mom Natasha Richardson - and she's cute
without being cloying.
  Not that her expert adult supporting cast doesn't more than
carry its own weight. A robust-looking Dennis Quaid, as Hallie's
vineyard-owning dad, and the radiant Richardson, as Annie's
dress-designing mom, both bring surprising sparkle to their roles. You
can tell from the start they belong together because of their
stunning, matching smiles.
  The gold-digging blonde obstacle on the road to reunion is
assayed with just the right amounts of vinegar and saccharine by
Elaine Hendrix, who poses like Sharon Stone and takes a pratfall like
Lucille Ball. And the work of Lisa Ann Walter and Simon Kunz, as the
household helpers who come to Hallie and Annie's aid? Completely
endearing.
  The story is just as absurd as it ever was, requiring the
audience to believe that a divorcing couple would A) split up their
twins, and B) move to opposite ends of the world to stay apart from
each other and never inform the sisters about their past. But although
``Parent Trap'' gets off to a worrisome start with some wobbly summer
camp scenes that clumsily set up the action, the film shifts into gear
about half an hour in and cruises along pleasantly toward its expected
happy ending.
