Title
Review for Titanic Town (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
TITANIC TOWN
(Shooting Gallery)
Starring:  Julie Walters, Ciaran Hinds, Nuala O'Neill, Ciaran McMenamin,
James Loughran, Barry Loughran, Elizabeth Donaghy. 
Screenplay:  Anne Devlin, based on the novel by Mary Costello.
Producers:  George Faber and Charles Patterson.
Director:  Roger Michell.
MPAA Rating:  Unrated (could be R for profanity, violence and adult
themes)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In a scene early in TITANIC TOWN -- a drama set in Belfast during the
early days of the Troubles circa 1972 -- British soldiers go on a
house-to-house raid of a neighborhood called Andersonstown. One of the
raided residences is that of Bernie (Julie Walters) and Aidan McPhelimy
(Ciaran Hinds), quiet and non-political parents of four children. While
neighbors rage in the street at the soldiers' actions, Bernie's response
to the impending invasion of her home expresses concern of a different
kind. She frets that the army will find the beds unmade; when they search
under her daughter's bed, she laments to the child, "Ah, the dust!"
     It's a small bit of business, only one of many in the film, but it
shows how interested director Roger Michell and screenwriter Anne Devlin
(working from Mary Costello's autobiographical novel) are with
establishing character. Over the course of the film, Bernie becomes a bona
fide political celebrity, though not a much-beloved one. Incensed over a
friend's death at the hands of an IRA sniper, Bernie dares to criticize
the IRA's tactics. She joins a peace movement, and finds her criticism
drawing the ire of IRA sympathizers in the form of vandalism and threats. 
Nevertheless she perseveres in an effort to collect signatures for a
petition calling for a change in IRA tactics. What's extraordinary about
Bernie is that she's so un-extraordinary. She's simply a house-proud 
mother concerned more with keeping her kids alive than making a statement. 
At her core, she's a woman who likes the beds made, and with no dust under
them.
     This simple focus on a simple but very determined woman helps TITANIC
TOWN avoid the most common pitfall of films set against a political
struggle: It never stops to lecture about the futility of war or to make
any other grandiose statement about the events that form its backdrop. 
Walters delivers a witty, thoroughly engaging performance as Bernie, who
stumbles into a position as spokesperson by sheer accident. She's
convincing both in Bernie's political innocence -- reading a list of IRA
demands to a British official with no clue as to how implausible they are
-- and her gradual embrace of the spotlight. TITANIC TOWN paints a picture
of a world where life can't be separated from politics, and where one
person's odd brand of heroism is born of sheer necessity.
     Bernie is such a solid center of the film that its sub-plots often
feel fairly thin by comparison. There's unrealized potential in Aidan's
character, an ulcer-ridden man whose resentment of his infirmity bubbles
over into resentment of his wife's very public actions. There's also a
romantic angle involving Bernie's 16-year-old daughter Annie (nicely
played by newcomer Nuala O'Neill) that doesn't always feel connected to
the story as a whole, despite the framing structure of the story as
Annie's reminiscence of her mother's fame. TITANIC TOWN draws its strength
from Bernie's incongruous involvement in matters previously beyond her
comprehension. Nothing else in the film is ever quite as compelling.
     That one story is still compelling enough to keep TITANIC TOWN moving
briskly, and to offer a vivid insight into the chaos of 1970s Belfast. 
Ultimately, despite its milieu of wide-scale violence and strife, it's a
film that works thanks to its small moments: avid reader Annie looking out
at the war in the streets with a gasp of, "Agincourt!"; a woman dropped
suddenly in her tracks by a stray bullet; Bernie deducing the location of
the IRA meeting spot through keen recollection of interior design. Films
about Big Issues need those small moments to keep them human. TITANIC TOWN
is never the monolith its title might suggest. Tragedy sometimes appears
in a form less like a sinking ship than like an unmade bed.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Of all the films about The Troubles, Northern Ireland's 25+ year
politico-religious struggle with its neighbor from across the Irish Sea,
the newly-released "Titanic Town" brings the day-to-day horrors of a family
forced to cope with British occupation to the fore better than any other.
        Less intent on airing its own political views, the focus in Roger
Michell's film is on the McPhelimy's--mother Bernie (Julie Walters), father
Aidan (Ciarán Hinds), and their growing family of four.
        And it's the daily difficulties of raising children under such extreme
conditions that makes this true-life saga so powerful.  British troops run
rampant through their West Belfast housing estate, conducting nightly
raids; Saracen tanks and armored vehicles carve huge furrows across their
lawns; and the sounds of gunfire, explosions, breaking glass, and screaming
neighbors are a constant.
        Michell made "Notting Hill" and here's another fine film that looks a
foregone conclusion on the surface yet proves to be surprisingly potent
once it starts to get inside the means and motivations of its central
characters.
        The Irish Republican Army's claim that they are "for the people" is
questioned in this story of a naďve yet courageous Catholic woman who
challenges both the Provisionals and the British government by forming a
peace movement.  All that Bernie McPhelimy wants, at least initially, is to
establish a normal living environment for her family.  Normal in the sense
of "no shooting during daylight hours," that is.
        Walters is a knock-out as the attention-seeking Bernie who puts her family
in the frontline by expressing her views publicly, in town meetings and
later on television.  Walters' Irish accent is impeccable and her
performance truly dominant; this is easily the actor's best role since
"Educating Rita" (in fact, she might well have bettered herself here).
        Hinds is no less impressive in a more subdued role.  With a look of Alan
Bates, his Aidan is a scared, powerless man whose ulcer causes him to
double up in pain every time a mortar shell cracks or a brick comes
crashing through the dining room window.  A particularly telling scene
shows him watching from an upstairs bedroom window while his wife grapples
with an armed demonstrator on their front stoop.
        In addition to the film's absorbing central theme, there's also a
well-developed subplot in which Annie, the McPhelimy's teenage daughter (an
outstanding Nuala O'Neill), fosters a relationship with a young medical
student (nicely played by Ciarán McMenamin).  Their introduction on a
double-decker bus is a stunner: before they've exchanged so much as a
couple of words, the bus is stoned and firebombed by demonstrators in the
Falls Road, a particularly volatile section of the city.
        It's scenes like these in which "Titanic Town" (named for the place in
which they built the ill-fated liner) hits home time and time again.  For
all the false hopes and promises of a ceasefire, for all the political
rhetoric, those affected the most are the living, breathing inhabitants of
the city of Belfast.  And in this gritty, realistic, and excellently acted
film, those daily horrors are uncompromisingly brought to life.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Shooting Gallery
 Director: Roger Mitchell
 Writer:  Mary Costello (Novel), Anne Devlin
 Cast: Julie Walters, Ciaran Hinds, Nuala O'Neill, James
Loughran, Barry Loughran, Elizabeth Donaghy, Ciaran
McMenamin, Jaz Pollock, Caolan Byrne, Aingeal Grehan
   Every schoolkid used to know that Aristophanes'
"Lysistrata" was the theater's first antiwar comedy.  To put an
end to fighting in various Greek city-states, the women of one
community decide to lock their husbands out of their
bedrooms until the testosterone-laden creeps lay down their
arms for good. The technique worked.  Though the history
books give contradictory evidence, most men would rather
make love than war.
   In a similar vein, "Titanic Town," based on an
autobiographical novel by Mary Costello and scripted by Anne
Devlin, weaves a yarn based on actual events during the
1970s when the Troubles were at a peak in Belfast, Northern
Ireland.  In this tale, the women do not as a community try to
put an end to the endless shootings that are taking place in
Andersontown, located in West Belfast.  In fact from the looks
of at least one particular foul-mouthed citizen, locking the
husbands out of the bedrooms might even be considered a
blessing by the menfolk.  Instead, just one woman takes it
upon herself to give peace a chance in her community, and
while she does not ultimately succeed, she shows what a
single, ordinary, middle-aged and struggling person can do to
excite the sentiments of thousands of people including a VIP
politician and his staff.
   Filmed on a council estate in Enfield, a suburb of North
London, and also partly in Belfast, "Titanic Town," features
sporadic shootings that sometimes tragically take the lives of
innocent civilians.  On one side, British troops, originally put
there to protect Catholic families as well as Protestants, are
often shot at as they patrol the neighborhoods and make
frequent arrests of people suspected of being with the Irish
Republican Army.  For their part, their IRA are guilty of not
only shooting down soldiers who are maintaining the
domination of Great Britain throughout the counties of
Northern Ireland but often accidentally shoot blameless
civilians as well.  
   While some neighbors, led by the fiercely vocal and foul-
mouthed Patsy French (Jaz Pollock), are unalterably opposed
to the presence of British troops, others, particularly Bernie
McPhelimy (Julie Walters), more or less say "a plague on
both your houses" and have contempt for both the extremist
wing of the IRA and the soldiers who are targets of their
bullets.  While Bernie's ulcer-ridden husband Aidan (Ciaran
Hinds) tries to reign in his newly political wife, their sixteen-
year-old daughter Annie (Nuala O'Neill) is enjoying her
seventeenth summer: a first love with medical student Dino
(Ciaran McMenamin), who later proves to be other than he
appears.
   Directed by Roger Michell with a light hand to emphasize
the humor of an ordinary apolitical citizen's rise to partisan
fame as the leader of a woman's peace movement, "Titanic
Town" is the sort of film which, if helmed by an Oliver Stone
would be brimming with bursts of fire, explosions, and flying
bodies.  Though Michell positions in his share of firepower to
give the audience the feel of extreme tension in an otherwise
insipid neighborhood, his focus is on the drama of a mundane
woman's 15 minutes of fame as she rallies 25,000 signatures
on a petition which she gets to present to the Secretary of
State for the province, George Whittington (Oliver Ford
Davies).  As Whittington, Davies' patronizing attitude toward
the energetic Bernie and her co-conspirator, Deirdre (Aingeal
Grehan) seems to go unnoticed by the petitioners. 
   Academy Award nominee Julie Walters ("Educating Rita")
does a knockout job as a somewhat flustered housewife who
takes on the British army, the I.R.A., and the dissenting
members of her own household.  Performances are strong
across the board.
Not Rated.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
