Title
Review for Just Visiting (2001)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
JUST VISITING (2001)
Rated PG-13; running time 88 minutes
Genre: Comedy
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.just-visiting.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0189192
Written by: Christian Clavier, Jean-Marie Poire, John Hughes
Directed by: Jean-Marie Poire
Cast: Jean Reno, Christian Clavier, Christina Applegate,
Malcolm McDowell, Tara Reid, Matthew Ross, Bridgette Wilson
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsjustvisit.html
As JUST VISITING opens up, the rich baritone voice of Kelsey Grammer
briefly narrates the background story.  Apropos, as a line from
Grammer's FRASIER TV show, spoken by Niles' pet bird [in "To Kill A
Talking Bird", for my fellow Frasierholics], came to mind while I was
watching this movie:
      "Cute, but stupid!"
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
In 12th-century Merry Olde England, the Earl of Warrick was a playa-hata
of the highest order.  The target of the Earl's hatred was Count
Thibault of Malfete (Jean Reno), a French nobleman who was engaged to
Lady Rosalind (Christina Applegate).  Through witchcraft and trickery,
the Earl manages to separate Thibault from his Maiden Faire; and when
the Count enlists the aid of an Old English Wizard (Malcolm McDowell) to
try to right the wrong which was done, Thibault and his trusty servant
Andre (Christian Clavier) get sent "through the corridors of time".
Only, the Wizard discovers something went terribly wrong.
Fast forward to a modern-day Chicago museum, where Thibault and Andre
experience some serious culture shock when they come face to face with
not only modern technology, but also the face of Thibault's betrothed.
But what's this?  The museum curator is not Lady Rosalind, but instead,
Julia Malfete (also Christina Applegate).  Name ring a bell?  Add in
Julia's scheming, two-timing boyfriend Hunter (Matthew Ross), Amber
(Bridgette Wilson) the slimy two-timee, and Angelique (Tara Reid), a
"servant" herself who sees Andre as a soulmate - and...wait for it...
The Upshot:
Of all the fish-out-of-water movies that I've seen in my lifetime - and
I've seen a lot of scrawny minnows - none have come close to the fun of
the best of them, MOSCOW ON THE HUDSON.  To this day, my husband and I
still quote it ["Kah-ffee! Kah-ffee! Kah-ffee!"]; and I got a kick out
of recognizing the Russian waiter in HEARTBREAKERS as having been the
clown Anatoly in "Moscow" (Elya Baskin, for the record).  I seriously
doubt that we'll be having such fond reminiscences regarding JUST
VISITING.
"Visiting" wasn't a _bad_ movie, not necessarily; or at least, not
completely.  It was good for a few quick grins, maybe even a healthy
laugh or two.  I'm as amazed as anyone that Christina Applegate could
even share a movie set with the likes of actor Jean Reno, without him
wiping the floor with her; after all, with MARRIED WITH CHILDREN and
JESSE on your resume, you don't exactly get called to read Shakespeare,
y'know?  And the time-out-of-place hook had its cute moments (lampooning
the stereotype of how the French don't bathe, the Wizard's outfit,
Andre's Issues with cars, and the like).  But after the hook wore off
(and it wore off pretty quickly), JUST VISITING labored on without much
of interest to Say - no doubt under heavy John "Breakfast Club" Hughes
influence.  It finally crawled to its silly end [and could they have
picked a more turgidly foul song for the closing credits? peeyew!], at
which point I found myself making notation of the bad editing during the
ObChaseScene.  Ok, show of hands: who *didn't* see that coming?
Here's the thing that irked me the most, and it's the same thing that
bothers me when it happens to Frasier on FRASIER: you have Andre, played
by actor (and, notably, co-writer) Christian Clavier - who would by no
stretch of the imagination be considered your typical Hollywood babe
magnet - and you have Cute Young Thing Angelique (Tara Reid, who, along
with Clavier, were the best things about "Visiting")...and nobody seems
to think twice about that matchup?  I know that Love Conquers All and
all, but have the ubiquitous They *ever* had such mixed matchups the
other way around, with a rather frumpy looking chick hooking up with a
Studmuffin?  _Without_ it being played as parody or pathos?  I'm no
feminazi, but render unto me a break!
I like a good, mindless popcorn flick as much as the next guy, as
witnessed by my high rating for HEARTBREAKERS; unfortunately, the
not-so-good JUST VISITING runs out of steam way before you get to the
icky pseudo-butter at the bottom of the bag.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
[minor spoiler warning]
Here's Proof that I've become desensitized to Bug-Eyed Black Movie
Characters, and have Moved On: I didn't even notice the slight
resemblance the Black security guard seemed to have to Amos.  Or was it
Andy?
Ok, seriously, though I obviously noticed Sgt. Bugeyes, I also noticed
similar reactions in the White kids and adults in the museum.  And
wouldn't *you* bug out if you saw someone melt before your eyes?  Hmmm...
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Some things just lose it in the translation.  I haven't seen the
original flick that JUST VISITING was based on, but I'll betcha francs
to croissants that it was better in the original French.
JUST VISITING (rating: yellowlight):
JUST VISITING is good for a few scattered chuckles, but it's no French
tickler.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Nothing like a large breath mint after a lavish dinner.  However, the 
ones in Jean-Marie Poiré's time-traveling, fish-out-of-water comedy, 
JUST VISITING, taste a bit funny since just moments before they were 
deodorizing the water in the urinals in the men's room.  Relying heavily 
on such bathroom humor, the movie is something of a crowd-pleaser, but I 
found it worth little more than some smiles.  
A remake of the 1993 French film LES VISITEURS, JUST VISITING concerns a 
12th century French nobleman, Count Thibault (Jean Reno), and his 
servant André (Christian Clavier), who are accidentally sent into the 
future by a wizard.  "Lost in the corridors of time," they turn up in a 
Chicago museum in April of the year 2000.
In his strange, new world, Thibault is aided by museum curator Julia 
Malfete (Christina Applegate), who turns out to be 30 generations 
removed from the woman, Rosaline (Applegate), whom he was about to marry 
back at his old castle.  The story's on-going joke is that Julia doesn't 
realize that he is from the past, even if he does talk, act, dress and 
smell very strange.
The movie's shtick is one long series of physical comedy gags, the best 
of which are in the trailers.  When Thibault and André first see a car, 
they attack it with a vengeance, since they figure it must be a hideous, 
fire-breathing dragon.  They use their swords to smash it to pieces, 
starting with the spearing of the radiator.
When Thibault and André see a toilet, they wash their faces in it and 
use the long white towels beside it to dry off.  A $2,000 magnum of 
Channel #5 perfume is used for drinking and then bathing.  And the 
automatic icemaker in the kitchen causes a classic Vaudevillian falling 
down routine.  
Rather than going on with the slapstick examples like the freeing of the 
"Family Feud" figures "trapped" in the TV set, let me end with the one 
serious note in the movie.  It stands foursquare against slavery.  Makes 
you want to go straight home and emancipate all of your servants.
JUST VISITING runs 1:28.  It is rated PG-13 for violence and crude humor 
and would be acceptable for kids about 5 and up.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
When it comes to poking fun at a country, France is an easy target. Sure,
they eat snails and don't wipe themselves after they shit, but we'll let
that slide.  The funniest thing about the French might be their sense of
humor...or complete lack thereof.  Bad Jerry Lewis films aside, two of the
country's most popular comedies (The Visitors and Little Indian, Big City)
are moronic, fish-out-of-water stories that failed in the U.S. and were
remade as even worse American films (Just Visiting and Jungle2Jungle,
respectively).
Why these two films?  One could contend the French enjoy the
fish-out-of-water genre because they all smell like fish out of water
themselves.  These are the kind of tired films that usually star Brendan
Fraser (Encino Man, The Scout, Blast From the Past, Monkeybone) and tank
domestically at the box office.  I'm not sure which is more of a shock -
that these films are so popular in France, or that they keep being remade
into unwatchable American movies.
The original Visitors, which was nominated for eight César Awards in 1994,
starred Jean Reno (before The Professional put him on U.S. radar) and
Christian Clavier, who also co-wrote the film's script.  Both stars and
co-writer/director Jean-Marie Poiré are back for this remake, which will
probably be one of the most unfunny films of 2001.  Visiting begins in 12th
century Sussex, where the French Count Thibault (Reno) is about to marry a
beautiful Englishwoman (Christina Applegate...can you believe Married With
Children debuted 14 years ago?).  Through some bunk involving a jealous man
and a witch, Thibault is given a potion that makes him hallucinate and kill
his new bride at their reception.
They sure knew how to do things right in the 12th century, as witnessed by
Thibault's immediate incarceration and scheduled beheading.  As he waits for
his date with the guillotine, Thibault and his faithful servant André
(Clavier) are visited by a wizard (Malcolm McDowell) who plans to rescue
them via time travel.  But he forgets to put an important ingredient in his
potion, and Thibault and André get trapped in the bowels of time...meaning
they end up in present-day Chicago.
Most of the film's comedy is supposed to come from Thibault and André being
amazed and frightened by every modern convenience, from cars to urinal
cakes.  None of it works.  Equally as weak is the story, which involves a
bookish museum curator (Applegate again) who thinks Thibault is her
long-lost cousin, but turns out to be his 30th generation descendant.  The
fact that Julia looks like Thibault's beloved makes absolutely no sense, and
the fact that they're related means they can't do it, which rules out any
typical screen romance.  Instead, the filmmakers throw us a romance bone in
the form of Tara Reid (American Pie), who both falls in love with the idiot
André and proves she's just as untalented as her own idiot fiancé, Carson
Daly.
Visiting is just plain awful, from the unoriginal script to the ridiculously
fake backgrounds used in the 12th century scenes.  The acting is bad, and
the direction is even worse.  The film offers a couple of laughs
(literally), and both come at the expense of the script's absurdity.
1:28 - PG-13 for violence and crude humor

Author
Bob Bloom
 Just Visiting (2001) 2 stars out of 4.. Starring Jean Reno, Christina
Applegate, Christian Clavier, Matthew Ross, Malcolm McDowell, Tara Reid
and Bridgette Wilson-Sampras. Screenplay by Christian Clavier &
Jean-Marie Poire and John Hughes. Based on Les Visiteurs written by
Jean-Marie Poire and Christian Clavier. Directed by Jean-Marie Gaubert.
Rated PG-13. 88 minutes.
 It appears something was lost in the translation when the creative team
behind the 1993 French comedy blockbuster Les Visiteurs remade it for
Hollywood Pictures as Just Visiting.
 Just Visiting has moments of hilarity, but it lacks a cohesion. It
plays more like a linked series of comedy sketches than a feature film.
 Reprising their roles from the original film are Jean Reno as Count
Thibault of Malfete and Christian Clavier as his servant, Andre. Also on
board are the original director, Jean-Marie Gaubert, as well as
screenwriters Clavier and Jean-Marie Poire. The American addition to the
screenwriting team is John Hughes.
 Yes, that John Hughes, the man behind the obnoxious Home Alone movies.
 It would be so simple to blame the filmís failures on Hughes, but they
go deeper than that. Basically, the problem with Just Visiting is dead
time. The sequences in which Reno as the 12th century nobleman, and
Clavier, as his always-hungry lackey, are not involved are static. They
are merely redundant expository filler.
 Ah, but when Reno and Clavier are on screen the movie comes to life.
Even though it grows a bit wearisome watching the duo repeatedly act
confused, overwhelmed and confounded by modern technology and culture,
the bits are funny ó if not overly obvious.
 The two wash themselves with water from the toilet, Thibault covers
himself with Chanel No. 5, Clavier wolfs down dog food as if it were a
sirloin steak. Well, you get the idea.
 Clavier is the filmís scene stealer. His willing-to-please Andre is a
wide-eyed buffoon, always looking for a morsel or a damsel.
 Christina Applegate is rather bland as Julia, Thibaultís modern-day
descendant, while Matthew Ross does nothing but mug outrageously as her
scheming fiancé, Hunter.
 Malcolm McDowell has a couple of funny bits as the inept wizard who
accidentally transports the two Frenchmen to modern-day America.
 Reno wisely plays it straight as the chivalrous and romantic count. He
is a good actor and knows that the best way to get a laugh in certain
situations is to play them seriously. This he does throughout, and it
helps keep Just Visiting afloat.
 Just Visiting is merely so-so. It has its moments, but lacks a certain
quality that would raise it above the merely routine. At 88 minutes,
itís an uneven venture offering scattered laughs and a guffaw or two.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com. or at
bobbloom@iquest.net Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Jean-Marie Poire.
Cast: Jean Reno, Christian Clavier, Christina Applegate, Tara Reid, Bridgette 
Wilson-Sampras, Malcolm McDowell, Matt Ross.
2001 - 88 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for mild profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, April 7, 2001.
In its native France, 1993's time travel comedy, "Les Visiteurs," became a 
breakout hit that ended up outgrossing "Jurassic Park" in that respective 
year. When it was finally released in the United States, it flopped, but 
Hollywood's viewpoint was that all it needed was an American remake for it to 
become a financial success. In a rare move, the original's director, 
Jean-Marie Poire, and main stars, Jean Reno and Christian Clavier, have 
reunited for "Just Visiting," which is cursorily enjoyable, but  almost 
instantly forgettable.
In a prologue set in 12th-century England, the honorable Count Thibault (Jean 
Reno) is preparing to marry his beloved Rosalind (Christina Applegate). When 
he becomes victim to witchcraft and ends up accidentally killing his fair 
love, he seeks out the help of a wizard (Malcolm McDowell) to cast a spell on 
him and his goofily faithful servant, Andre (Christian Clavier), to send them 
back in time to the moment preceding Rosalind's untimely death. 
The spell goes awry, however, and Count Thibault and Andre end up awaking in 
Chicago, circa 2000. In an entirely different place and time than they have 
ever known, they are both mystified and frightened of the inventions and way 
of life in the modern world, standing as two fish helplessly out of water. 
Almost immediately after landing in the present day, they have a chance meet 
with Julia Malfete (Applegate, in a dual role), a 
great-great-great-great-great descendant of Rosalind, who takes them in and 
helps them in finding a way back home. 
With a screenplay by Jean-Marie Poire, Christian Clavier, and John Hughes, 
"Just Visiting" takes its time in setting up the premise, but finds much 
physical comedy once things get going. The movie is very funny some of the 
time, and occasionally clever, but is so slight that it offers nothing 
worthwhile outside of a few laughs. The featherweight plot lacks an urgency 
that fails to ever involve the viewer in the goings-on, and with the end 
credits comes a feeling of time that could have certainly been more 
well-spent.
Jean Reno and Christian Clavier, as Count Thibault and Andre, expertly play 
two 12th-century men humorously floundering in the 21st-century, and no 
wonder--they played the same exact roles in "Les Visiteurs," unseen by 
myself. Their characters never feel like anything other than pawns, though, 
so it is difficult to invest any interest on their returning to England and 
setting things right. 
The American actors who surround them are all rising young actors whose 
involvement in such a minor, wasteful effort boggles the mind. Christina 
Applegate (1998's "The Big Hit"), as both Rosalind and Julia, is a bright 
actress whom I've admired ever since her days on TV's "Married...with 
Children," and she is very good here, trying to keep a straight face amidst 
the insanity that is brought with two men from medieval times transplanted in 
the year 2000. Matt Ross (2000's "American Psycho"), as Julia's slimy 
fiancee; Bridgette Wilson-Sampras (2001's "The Wedding Planner"), as his 
mistress; and Tara Reid (2000's "Dr. T and the Women"), as a free spirit who 
catches the eye of Andre, have one-dimensional supporting roles.
As a movie that just happens to be playing on cable late one night, "Just 
Visiting" might be a harmless way to spend an hour-and-a-half before heading 
to sleep. As a  theatrical release, its aspirations are hopeless, and its 
chance of financial success is about as promising as "Battlefield Earth 2." 
Hollywood Pictures would have been best off had they just left well-enough 
alone.
 http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/DustinPutman.htm
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Hollywood Pictures
 Director: Jean-Marie Gaubert
 Writer:  Christian Clavier & Jean-Marie Poire & John Hughes
based on "Les Visiteurs" by Jean-Marie Poire and Christian
Clavier
 Cast: Jean Reno,Christina Applegate, Christian Clavier,
Matthew Ross, Tara Reid, Bridgette Wilson, John Aylward,
George Plimpton, Malcolm McDowell
   Who do you think would fare better...a 21st Century New
York City resident suddenly transported 800 years into the
future, or a 12th Century European conveyed about the same
number of years into today's Chicago?  This question might
conceivably pop into the minds of the audience for "Just
Visiting," and in fact is probably the only thought that would
stimulate the brain in a movie which, despite good intentions
and a couple of superior performances, is overwrought with
pratfalls and dated slapstick humor.  We can only guess what
this country would be like in the year 2801, but since modern
time travelers presumably know how to read and have kept
up on books like Alvin Toffler's "Future Shock," they might be
in awe of what they see but would not react to the culture as
do the folks in Jean-Marie Gaubert's film.
  A re-make of Jean-Marie Poire's 1993 French blockbuster,
"The Visitors"--which broke all sorts of records in its home
country--"Just Visiting" introduces Americans allergic to
foreign films with English subtitles to the broadly comic tale of
a reluctant tourist who agrees to swallow a wizard's potion in
order to keep his head on straight after killing his intended
bride, Rosalind, while under the influence of a sorcerer's
LSD-like concoction.
  Jean Reno and Christian Clavier relive the roles that
charmed the French eight years ago, this time speaking a
perfectly good English with a delightful Gallic accent.  Reno,
introduced to a broad cross-section of American moviegoers 
in the action-adventure thriller "Ronin," shows his mettle (so
to speak) as a knight in shining armor, specifically the Count
Thibault, who drags around a wide-eyed, Sancho-Panza-like
servant Andre (Christian Clavier--who co-write the script to
both this version and the original French interpretation). 
About to wed the fair Rosalind (Christina Applegate), he
becomes the victim of a plot by an envious earl who is
himself seeking Rosalind's hand.  Having stabbed his fiance
to death while under the influence of this villain, Thibault
escapes the executioner by swallowing a flawed potion
administered to him by a wizard (Matthew McDowell) and
together with his paunchy servant lands in a Chicago
museum where he springs to contemporary life.  By a
pleasant coincidence, he meets up with Julia (Christina
Applegate in her modern guise) who he believes is his bride
only to realize after much coaching that she is his
descendant thirty generations removed.  Eager to get back to
his own time--since failing that, Julia would never have been
born--he sprints and travels up and down Michigan Avenue
and environs by foot and on horseback seemingly
unencumbered by his iron getup and immense sword.  The
one-joke film is essentially a series of skits based on his
misadventures in the magic land that would draw millions of
others from his home continent to its shores.  By the
conclusion of the story, Thibault learns the meaning of
humility, his servant Andre the essence of freedom--while
these medieval wayfarers ironically teach the lovely Julia,
bullied by her browbeating boyfriend Hunter (Matthew Ross),
the meaning of women's liberation.
   "Just Visiting" appears targeted to a youthful audience,
given its predilection for pratfalls and fondness for faux pas. 
During the course of the journey, Thibault and Andre trash
the most formal restaurant in Chicago where Andre
consumes chicken a la umbrella, eat "mints" used to
deodorize a urinal, use a $2,000 bottle of Chanel #5 as bath
oil and generally proves that the last thing most modern
women would want is a knight in shining armor...most
women, that is, but not the newly emancipated Julia or her
gardener neighbor Amber (Bridgette Wilson-Sampras), who
develops a crush on the peasant.  The pratfalls become
repetitious, but Christina Applegate surprises as a performer
who has retained the good looks that charmed admirers of
the ribald and usually hilarious TV series, "Married...with
Children."  Happily, with just eighty-eight minutes to gross us 
out, these visitors do not overstay their welcome.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 88 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
JUST VISITING (2001) * 1/2 Directed by Jean-Marie Poiré aka 
Jean-Marie Gaubert. Written by Poiré , Christian Clavier, John 
Hughes. Photography, Ueli Steiger. Cast: Jean Reno (Count Thibault), 
Christian Clavier (André the servant), Christina Applegate (Julia 
Malfete), Malcolm McDowell (the wizard), et al. A France-USA 
coproduction by Gaumont.  88 minutes. PG-13
In 1993, the French comedy "The Visitors" became the most profitable 
French film ever. It dealt with a 12th century nobleman (Jean Reno) 
and his servant (Christian Clavier)  getting magically transported 
into modern France. "The Visitors 2, " by the same writer-director 
and leading actors, followed and bombed. Now the Count and his 
servant are resurrected in "Just Visiting," a remake of the first 
film, but this time the medieval characters are transported to 
today's Chicago.
"Just Visiting" is in English. It was released first in the USA in 
early April 2001, and soon after, in France, as "Les Visiteurs en 
Amérique."
And it's pretty weak. I won't go into the so-called plot. It hurt 
enough to watch much of it without hurting again by describing it in 
print.
Time-travel movies come in many shapes. They can range from poor 
(many titles) to pleasantly innocuous funny stuff (A Connecticut 
Yankee in King Arthur's Court) to smart, entertaining but "serious" 
items such as The Time Machine and the superior Time After Time. The 
current item is a comedy-farce.
The main actors have a vague, burlesque kinship to Don Quixote and 
Sancho Panza.  On the plus side we get some good special effects, 
transformations, morphings and the like; some lush -- if totally 
false-- medieval spectacles; a couple of nice minutes of salsa; etc.
Those are minor aspects. What we get overwhelmingly is an avalanche 
of physical gags of which pitifully few are well thought out. The 
great majority of them deals with body parts and functions. It's 
bathroom, toilet, scatological humor.
"Just Visiting" is, of course, not a screwball comedy any more than 
items with the Three Stooges are. Consequently the actors perform in 
forced and sweeping ways--which is to be expected.
I cannot speak in comparatie terms about Christian Clavier (André, 
the servant), who also co-wrote the script. He is a popular French 
comedian with whom I am not familiar.
Jean Reno, however was the stylized hitman in another French 
production by Gaumont, "The Professional" (1994), shot and set in New 
York City. It was a good movie which got better when its French 
release added almost about a half hour of footage removed from the US 
version. Otherwise, Reno's several roles in European films are 
unknown in the USA, except for sharp-eyed viewers who might spot him 
in the bit role of a hitman in "La Femme Nikita" (1990), and for 
those who have seen the misguided action pic "Ronin" (1998) where he 
was second banana to ) where he was second banana to Robert De Niro.
Christina Applegate became a star as the dynamite sexy but dumb 
schoolgirl in TV's 1987 series "Married... With Children" when she 
was about 16, and very pretty. She played her stupidity with 
intelligence. Since then Ms Applegate has been in several movies, 
none of them memorable so far as I know.  In "Just Visiting" she does 
what she can with her part, is not as beautiful as in her TV days, 
and not one-hundredth as funny.
Malcolm McDowell plays the Wizard with the same freneticism as most 
of the other cast members. He gets to act in broadly farcical ways, 
grimaces and all (like much of the cast), and to perform magic. His 
scenes are even more incredible than the average ones in the movie. 
McDowell's early movie career (late 60s to early 80s) was a triumph 
which included the lead role in classic works. He was the lead player 
in  Lindsay Anderson's "If," in Kubrick's "A Clockwork Orange," in 
the undervalued "Time after Time" (as H.G. Wells),and others. Now 
poor Malcolm is not even listed in the credits of many of the "Just 
Visiting" reviews.
Even in movie fantasies there should be a method in their madness, a 
logic within the illogic. This is lacking here. Example: when Andre 
and a girl go on a shopping spree for clothes, how do they pay for 
them?  In a drinking scene, how come the Americans who join the 
French in singing, sing....in French. How does the wizards' 
heavy-duty magic equipment get into his hotel room? Etc. etc. etc.
Perhaps this is nit-picking on my part. Some of those objections may 
have lent themselves to suspension of disbelief -- as for instance in 
practically all movies with Danny Kaye. But there is too large an 
accumulation of them and not enough good stuff to compensate for the 
bad.
No doubt, I did laugh at some bits. This accounts for my generous 
one-and-a-half stars. I am almost certain that kids who, like most 
normal people, are at the inevitable stage of relishing body gags, 
will give the film a higher grade than mine.
PS.  The director and co-writer is Jean-Marie Poiré who sometimes 
uses the name Jean-Marie Gaubert. Why? No idea, but that's HIS 
problem. J-M is not  woman as some Anglophones might think. Jean, 
means John, Juan, and such.
Double or hyphenated first names are common in France. Think 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Jean-Luc Godard, Jean-Philippe Mathy. Note too 
that following the hyphen, a name like Marie does not feminize its 
bearer.
Jean-Marie Whatever started out as a screenwriter for others, then 
wrote and directed his own movies. Few, if any, are known in the USA 
other than the first "The Visitors."
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 
