Title
Review for Space Jam (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chad Polenz
Space Jam
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1996, PG, 81 minutes [1 hour, 21 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Michael Jordan (himself), Billy West (voice of Bugs Bunny, Elmer
Fudd), Dee Bradley Baker (voice of Daffy Duck, Tazmanian Devil), Wayne Knight
(Stan Podolak), written by Leonardo Benvenuti, Timothy Harris, Steve Rudnick,
Herschel Weingrod, produced by Daniel Goldberg, Steven Paul Leiva, Ivan
Reitman, directed by Joe Pytka.
"Space Jam" is like a short movie they incorporate with thrill rides at big
amusement parks: it's not big on plot and is really just a long
advertisement. However, this film is funny and enjoyable and I can respect
that.
The Looney Toons characters (Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Porky Pig, etc.) have
entertained us in the form of animated shorts for years, and this film proves
their gags and routines can still work in the form of feature films. We seem
to have forgotten cartoons were designed to make us laugh (not to be overly
dramatic musicals), and this film not only re-establishes that concept, but
does it through an original, humorous manner. 
On the planet Moron Mountain (now there's a cartoon name if I ever heard
one!), a fat, greedy, cigar-smoking alien (voiced by Danny DeVito), who runs
a fledging amusement park, sends five scouts to Earth to kidnap the Looney
Tunes characters to enslave them as novelty acts for his show. 
Back on the "real" Earth, former basketball star Michael Jordan is
struggling with his baseball career and finds himself annoyed by his new
bumbling assistant Stan (Knight, the only fictional real-life character in
the film). The initial atmosphere is a bit choppy as Jordan is upstaged by
the professionalism of Knight and Bill Murray (as himself), but he isn't bad
and I couldn't help but be curious.
The five-inch tall aliens arrive in the land of the Looney Toons packing
powerful weapons and attempt to kidnap the 'toons. Using cartoon logic, Bugs
Bunny (voiced by West) convinces them the only way they can be kidnapped is
if they beat them in a game of basketball. So the aliens make their way to
the "real" world and steal the talents from some top NBA players (through
some very funny scenes), which causes them to morph into gigantic monsters.
So Bugs travels to the "real" world and brings back Michael Jordan, hoping he
can help them win.
An interesting subplot begins to develop regarding the players (Charles
Barkley, Shawn Kemp, Mugsy Bouges, Patrick Ewing, and Larry Johnson) who were
robbed of their talents and essentially become zombies. We get some slapstick
jokes, but it keeps with the cartoony nature of the film. When the players go
to strange means to get their talents back, the comedy works in both a
childish and mature manner: childish in the delivery, but mature in the witty
content. Throughout the film are  parodies children wouldn't understand, but
are still good anyway (including a hilarious "Pulp Fiction" spoof).
Describing the final act would be pointless wouldn't it? It's as cliche and
cartoony as they come, but I didn't mind.
"Space Jam" isn't anything genius, but it's a good, decent movie. Mixing
animation with live action is a difficult process to synthesize, especially
when the comedy is cartoony in nature (and using people who aren't really
actors), but this film has a lot of wit and cleverness that more than makes
up for its rough edges. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Author
Craig Good
Here I was, all pumped up in my best Gomez Addams "Let's watch a train
wreck" mood, and all "Space Jam" could deliver was a fender bender. No,
it couldn't deliver the kind of down-in-flames badfilm experience of a
"Star Trek V", "Hudson Hawk" or "1941". Instead it's just a humorless,
overdesigned and underscripted bowl of soggy Wheaties, breakfast of
champions. Imagine a movie in which Bill Murray isn't funny.
Well, that's not quite true. Bill did get me to laugh once with his
line right after Michael Jordan gets sucked down a golf hole. But by
the end of the movie I couldn't remember the line anymore.
I'm not going to blame Jordan for being a bad actor. As an actor I'm no
better, and if someone dangles that kind of pay check in front of me
I'll do "Space Jam II". Besides, even though pro athletes are
professional entertainers, we wouldn't be too hard on Placido Domingo
or even Kenny G.  if it turned out they couldn't play basketball in the
NBA. And asking Jordan to carry a movie is every bit as absurd. No,
Michael walks away from this pretty unscathed.
It's the Warner Bros studio which needs to hang its corporate head in
shame.  If there were laws in the world of art, what they did to their
own legacy would be a felony. Someone really needs to send them a
telegram and let them know that Mel Blanc is dead. None of the voices,
except Tweedy and a couple of mice, came anywhere within the ballpark
of the old classics. Worse, none of the animation can hold a candle to
them.
The character design of the new characters is so unreadable and
indistinct that it makes Don Bluth's work look like the Renaissance.
The style of the staging is straight TV generation garbage: Extreme
angles and manic movement with absolutely no sense of character. Not
once did I think that any of the animated characters was thinking.
Rather, they were yanked around by a vacuous script which could only
have been written by a committee of ten year olds. At several points in
the show we glimpse clips of the old Warner Brothers shorts. I had the
same reaction to them as to the baker's dozen of "homages" in ID4: "Are
you *sure* you want to be reminding me of what a *good* movie is like
right now?"
Not only did they not understand their own short films, but in their
headlong rush to throw money on the screen they lost the whole conceit
of their "Who Framed Roger Rabbit" -- uh -- homage. When we get into
Loony Tune Land or whatever the heck it was called, Bugs and the gang
are running around with fancy pseudo-3D tone mattes on them. Shouldn't
they only look like that in the "3D woild" as Bugs calls it? Oh, well.
This is just the tip of a frustrating iceberg which waits anybody who
sets sail in a sea of thought anywhere near this movie.
And speaking of money, where *did* it go? I know that animation is
expensive, but for half the price of the rumored budget of $140 million
they could have done some good computer graphics instead of those
inflated balloon guy effects which can surely be done by teenagers on
home computers these days.
So if you were hoping for either a good movie or one that was so bad it
was good, save your money and see "The English Patient" or rent "Star
Trek V", respectively.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    An animated tribute to North Carolina's most famous native not
currently crusading against radical homer-sexual agendas, SPACE JAM is
both a surprise and a disappointment.  Who would've thought that such a
commercially crass premise (ninety minutes of Hare Jordan) would yield
such a fun family film?  While the brilliant colors, frenzied
characters, and pulse-pounding soundtrack are a dandy distraction for
the wee ones, Mom and Dad are guaranteed a good time by the many flashes
of adult humor, like a PULP FICTION gag here, a bit of sexual innuendo
there, and all of those gloriously exaggerated (and refreshingly
politically incorrect) speech impediments.  (Watch when Daffy coats the
lens after a particularly moist monologue.)
     Animation fans are also in for a treat, though they're likely to
lament the absence of any discernible edge.  Missing are the Toons' twin
trademarks:  rapid-fire wit and violent physical humor.  Sure, the final
reel breaks loose, but most of the gags (and the animated characters
themselves) are lamer, tamer versions of the originals.  Even a bigger
letdown is how... familiar the whole experience is.  What does SPACE JAM
say about our exposure to celebrities-- and the entertainment industry
as a whole-- when a well-attended, decently- reviewed blockbuster can be
built by simply casting a bunch of basketball stars, cartoon characters,
and one actor (Bill Murray) as themselves?  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     We need to clear up a widely held misunderstanding.  Most of the
country by now has heard of the hugely popular Warner Brothers film
SPACE JAM.  Most of you by now are aware that it is a mixture of
animation, featuring all your favorite Looney Tunes characters, and
live action, featuring various sports stars from the NBA.  So far; so
good.
     Now, you are probably under the impression that Michael Jordan
ACTS in this movie.  This is patently false.  What Michael Jordan does
is APPEAR in the movie; he never acts.  With the except of a single
brief smile, he manages to maintain a dispassionate and deadpan look
throughout the picture.  Since he gets $40,0000,000 a year in product
endorsements, perhaps his actor's salary was just pocket change to him.
More likely, he just can not act -- most of us can't.
     Michael Jordan is certainly a great athlete, and he provides a
good clean-cut role model for youngsters, but this does not an actor
make.  The good news is that the cartoon characters in the film are
excellent and the story by Leonardo Benvenuti, Timothy Harris, Steve
Rudnick, and Herschel Weingrod is well developed and quite funny.  This
is one of those rare examples of a good movie with a lead that is DOA.
     SPACE JAM opens with a seven year old Michael Jordan displaying
amazing talent at shooting hoops.  He dreams of being a star in the
NBA.  After a collage of real stills and video memorabilia of his rise
to glory, we come to a grown Michael Jordan who has conquered
basketball and gone onto baseball.  Until this point the story is
little more that a schmaltzy autobiography.
     Never fear, the animated characters are here.  A group of cartoon
aliens under the direction of the evil Swackhammer (voice by Danny
DeVito) have an amusement park called Moron Mountain.  The guests are
becoming bored so Swackhammer sends the aliens off to capture all the
Looney Tunes.  Daffy Duck (voice by Dee Bradley Baker) takes one look
at the pip-squeak aliens and laughs, "Oh, fear clutches my breast!"
When they turn a chicken into a skeleton with their ray gun, he changes
his tune.
     The Looney Tunes challenge the height-challenged aliens to a game
of basketball to see whether the Tunes have to go to Moron Mountain or
not.  Ever confident Daffy ridicules them with, "Too bad you can't
practice getting taller, boys."  They then go and suck the talent and
stature of various NBA heroes which makes the aliens look like major
steroid abusers.
     Back up on earth Bill Murray and Larry Bird are playing golf with
Michael Jordan.  Costume designer Marlene Stewart has Murray in a
classic example of how not to dress on the golf course.  Below his
umbrella hat is a travelogue shirt followed by plaid Bermuda shorts and
finished up with falling down old socks and battered shoes.  The Looney
Tunes pull Jordan into the Tune world and enlist his help in defeating
the aliens.
     The picture works as a feature length cartoon.  The Looney Tunes
are as funny as I ever remember seeing them.  There are constant jokes
about product royalties.  Daffy kisses his rear because it has a big
Warner Brothers logo pasted on it.  Daffy and Bugs Bunny (voice by
Billy West) grouse about not getting any money from all the lunch boxes
and other toys with their faces on them.  Daffy tells him, "We've got
to get a new agent.  We're getting screwed!"
     This "screwed" line is funny, but it is this and a couple of
others where the humans talk about getting their "butts whipped" that
gets the film a PG rating rather than a G.  Since there are so few G
shows made, it is a shame that the producers went for a more bankable
PG picture.  Yes, there are many teenagers and adults who will not go
to G films thinking subconsciously that they are only for little kids,
but why do the studios keep pandering to these prejudices?  Changing
these few lines would not have made the picture one scintilla less
funny.
     All the Tunes are hilarious in the show, but Daffy is the best
mainly because he gets the best material.  He refers to the human
environment as "3D land."
     No one is immune from the jabs in the show.  They even go after
arch rival Disney when Bugs remarks, "What kind of a Mickey Mouse
outfit would name their team The Ducks?"
     My favorite scene is the highly charged announcement of the
players at the big game where Jordan and the tunes play the alien hunks
with the NBA talent inside.  Two small mice steal the microphone from
the sleeping announcer and manage to boom out each player's name and
stats.   When Bugs enters the arena, the mice call out on the PA,
"Standing at three foot three, four foot if you count the ears, is Bugs
Bunny."
     Along with the humor, the show is upbeat and full of energy thanks
to the strong live action direction by Joe Pytka and animation
direction by Bruce Smith and Tony Cervone.  Joe Pytka's only other film
is LET IT RIDE which I hated back in 1989.  Here he redeems himself in
my eyes.  I had great fun watching the film as did my son, my wife, and
my 70 year old parents.
     Technically the film is a success as well.  The colors are bright
primary ones that radiant joy.  Other than the lifeless lead and the
little bit of needless bad language, I think the show is good fun, and
I believe your family will too.
     SPACE JAM runs just 1:27, and if you stay until the very end, you
will get one last treat on the screen.  It is rated PG solely for a few
mildly offensive words.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence.  My son
Jeffrey, age 7 1/2, loves the show and gives it "ten thumbs up."  He
has a strange scale that I have never quite been able to chart.  He
thinks that SPACE JAM would be fine for kids three and up, and I agree.
I recommend this picture to you, especially if you have kids, and I
give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Michael Jordan, Bugs Bunny, Wayne Knight, Bill Murray, 
      Theresa Randle, voice of Danny DeVito, Lola Bunny, Daffy Duck, 
      Wylie Coyote, Elmer Fudd, Porky Pig, Larry Bird, Charles Barkley 
Director: Joe Pytka
Producers: Ivan Reitman, Joe Medjuck, Daniel Goldberg
Screenplay: Leo Benvenuit & Steve Rudnick and Timothy Harris & 
      Herschel Weingrod
Cinematography: Michael Chapman
Music: James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers 
     Joe Pytka is known best as a TV commercial director.  He's the man 
behind the "Thank you for your support" Bartles & James ads, the "Bo 
knows" Nike ads, and the Ray Charles "Uh huh" Diet Pepsi ads.  In fact, 
according to his bio, he has directed some 5000 commercials.  With SPACE 
JAM, his second feature film, make that 5001.  This movie, which could 
just as easily be called THE MICHAEL JORDAN WORSHIP SHOW, plays like a 
90-minute homage to His Airness, selling his every virtue.  By the end 
of this picture, Jordan, whose status as a pop icon has never been in 
dispute, has been elevated to the level of a demi-god.  
     It was inevitable that Jordan would eventually get into the movies.  
After all, Shaquille O'Neal has already made the move, and Jordan has 
more charisma and presence both on and off the court.  The decision to 
have him play himself is the right choice, since Jordan's acting range 
seems to be on par with that of Steven Seagal.  SPACE JAM's problem 
isn't that Jordan is the star, but that the tone is sickeningly 
reverential.  There are only a few times when SPACE JAM dares to poke 
fun at its leading man, and, on those occasions, it does so gently. 
Opportunities for satire exist, but Pytka pulls nearly every punch.  The 
bland results lead to a movie whose entertainment value is fine for 
kids, but marginal for adults.
     On the other hand, any movie that features the delightful Looney 
Tunes characters can't be all bad, and, indeed, the writing for Bugs 
Bunny and friends is as crisp as ever (except when they're bowing and 
genuflecting before His Airness).  Just about everyone from the Warner 
Brothers cartoon world is there, from Bugs and Daffy to Foghorn Leghorn 
and Marvin the Martian.  There's even a new character, Lola Bunny, who 
gives Bugs a love interest and adds a little sex appeal to the otherwise 
all-male cartoon character roster.  Road Runner and Wylie Coyote are on 
hand as well, the latter chasing the former.  I wish there had been more 
of these two -- they were always the funniest the Looney Tunes had to 
offer.
     The story, which would like to follow in the footsteps of the 
groundbreaking WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT?, mixes live-action and 
animation.  Technically, the film isn't quite up to ROGER RABBIT's 
standards, but it's a huge improvement over Ralph Bakshi's COOL WORLD, 
which mingled Gabriel Byrne and Brad Pitt with a bunch of sleazy cartoon 
creations.  Certainly, from a visual standpoint, there's nothing wrong 
with SPACE JAM.  In fact, a few sequences are positively dazzling.  
     SPACE JAM is about a big-time basketball game between the Looney 
Tunes team and the Monstars, a group of aliens under the lead of the 
evil Swackhammar (voice of Danny DeVito) who have stolen the powers of 
NBA stars Charles Barkley, Patrick Ewing, Muggsey Bogues, Larry Johnson, 
and Shawn Bradley.  In order to stand a chance against this seemingly-
invincible team, Bugs summons Michael Jordan to Looney Tunes land and 
explains that if the good guys lose, they'll be taken back to the 
Monstars' home planet as slaves.  Jordan, who has been playing baseball 
on Earth, agrees to help, although he wonders how rusty his basketball 
skills are.  He is soon put to the test as the contest begins.
     There are a number of exceptionally clever moments in SPACE JAM, 
some of which are visual and some of which lie in the dialogue.  Several 
of these pass quickly or occur in the background, so it takes a keen eye 
to spot them.  A couple of the better, more obvious ones include a nod 
to PULP FICTION and a biting dig at Disney.  Bugs, in response to 
Daffy's suggestion that they name their basketball team after his 
species, quips:  "What kind of Mickey Mouse organization would name 
their team the Ducks?"
     Bill Murray, Larry Bird, Charles Barkley, and a host of real-life 
sports figures have cameo appearances.  Aside from Jordan, the only 
human with any significant screen time is Wayne Knight, who plays an 
irritating baseball publicist.  Strangely, however, amidst all the two-
dimensional cartoon characters, the flattest figure of all is Jordan.  
The basketball star's power might be the drawing card for SPACE JAM, but 
the Looney Tunes group steals the spotlight -- at least as often as 
Pytka will let them.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Kong
Michael Jordan in a film, why not?  He's done just about everything else.
Space Jam is a strange mix of biography and fiction.  Taking from the life
of Jordan and mixing that with the Looney Tunes.  Space Jam takes place
somewhere between Jordan ending his baseball career and starting back with
basketball.  The story involves aliens from the planet Moron Mountain, who
need some new attractions for their theme park.  It seems that the patrons
of Moron Mountain are just bored with the current attractions.
Accidentally they run into the Looney Tunes on TV.  So, five little aliens
are dispatched to take the Looney Tunes back to Moron Mountain. But, in a
turn of events, they have to challenge the Tunes to a game of basketball.
The Tunes think they have it made out for them, until the little aliens
morph into super star basketball players.  The Tunes need some help, who
else can the call upon but the basketball great, Michael Jordan?
The biggest attraction in Space Jam is not as much Michael and his
basketball skills, but the well integration of animation with live action.
The animation consists of a mix of computer-generated animation and cell
animation.  Bugs, Daffy, Taz, and friends look better than ever.
Michael Jordan in his first movie role does well.  Though this is not
saying much since his role is not all that taxing.  Other basketball
players, such as Charles Barkley and Patrick Ewing, are also featured, but
only in brief.  The real stars of Space Jam are the Looney Tunes.  The
Tunes are a hoot to watch, like always.
Space Jam is a wonderfully entertaining movie that is well suited for both
the adults and the children. Don't miss this one. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Michael Jordan, Wayne Knight, Bill Murray, voices of Danny
DeVito, Billy West.
Screenplay:  Leo Benvenuti & Steve Rudnick and Timothy Harris & Herschel
Weingrod.
Producers:  Ivan Reitman, Joe Medjuck, Daniel Goldberg.
Director:  Joe Pytka.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild profanity, adult humor).
Running Time:  85 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Michael Jordan and Bugs Bunny share top billing in Warner Bros.' live
action/animation extravaganza SPACE JAM, but I'm going to go out on a limb
to suggest that it was made more for those who grew up with His Airness
than for those who grew up with His Hareness.  Jordan is a superstar in an
era where the line between entertainment and marketing is more like a
faint smudge, and SPACE JAM is a film which defines the state of the art
in tie-ins:  action figures, Happy Meals, clothing, soundtrack albums and
on and on and on.  That kind of emphasis on merchandising made it a long
shot for artistic merit, but I hoped the Looney Tunes could make for some
genuine lunacy.  No such luck, Doc.  SPACE JAM is a sporadically amusing
cartoon for a rapid-edit audience with too little of the classic Warner
wit.
     The story involves an extraterrestrial entrepreneur named Swackhammer
(voice of Danny DeVito), owner of an outer space amusement park called
Moron Mountain which is in need of a new attraction.  Swackhammer thinks
earth's wacky Looney Tunes characters are just the thing, so he sends five
diminutive henchmen to bring them back.  Head Looney Tune Bugs Bunny
(voice of Billy West) cleverly convinces the tiny aliens to play a
basketball game for their freedom...at least he thinks it's clever until
the aliens steal the talent of NBA players including Charles Barkley,
Patrick Ewing and Larry Johnson and become the Monstars.  In an attempt to
even the odds, Bugs recruits Michael Jordan, currently in the middle of
his basketball retirement and playing baseball for the minor league
Birmingham Barons.  Thus begins the Space Jam, with Michael lacing up the
high-tops again to save his two-dimensional pals from intergalactic
slavery.
     Anyone who has seen Michael Jordan in any of his several thousand
commercial appearances (McDonald's, Gatorade, Nike, Hanes) should not be
surprised to hear that he has very little screen presence.  Jordan has
exactly one facial expression when trying to act -- eyebrows raised, lips
pursed in a wrinkled smirk -- and he runs the gamut of emotions from
affable bemusement to amiable bemusement.  That makes it challenging 
enough for him to work with another human actor, weighing down an
otherwise amusing scene where a star-struck catcher feeds Jordan
information about what pitches to expect.  When he is expected to react to
animated characters, he is utterly lost.  It isn't that much of the comedy
involves interaction between Jordan and the 'Tunes; mostly he is asked to
be pleasant and dunk in slow motion.  There just seems to be no particular
reason why Jordan couldn't have been animated himself, where an artist
could have made him more...well, animated.
     Of course, the animated segments have their own problems.  Make no
mistake, SPACE JAM is going to be entertaining to 10-year-olds, relying
on the slapstick violence which has always characterized Looney Tunes.  
What's missing is the subversive, adult-oriented humor of the Looney Tunes
of old, and not "adult-oriented" in the sense that it was crude.  The
classic Warners cartoon capers took the time to build both visual and
verbal gags, but director Joe Pytka doesn't believe his audience will have
that kind of patience.  SPACE JAM's idea of sharp satire is a reference to
the Disney-owned Mighty Ducks NHL franchise, and it is disspiriting to
find the 'Tunes scraping for laughs by uttering lines like "Nice butt," or
"We're getting screwed."  It also seems strangely appropriate that Bugs
Bunny is voiced by Billy West; with its bodily functions humor, SPACE JAM
seems less like a vehicle for Bugs than one for West's other cartoon voice
roles, Ren and Stimpy.
     SPACE JAM only really comes to life when Bill Murray appears as
himself.  Murray's comic persona is the human descendent of Bugs Bunny, a
wiseacre rebel unfairly smarter than his adversaries, and he is a riot in
his scant minutes.  He is also virtually the only reason for an adult to
slog through SPACE JAM.  For the kids, it provides well-known 'Tunes; for
the teens, it provides well-known tunes (covers of "Fly Like an Eagle" by
Seal and "Basketball Jones" by the truth-is-stranger-than-fiction pairing
of Barry White and Chris Rock); for both, it provides perhaps the most
well-known athlete on the planet.  SPACE JAM is a commercial construct,
and it feels like it.  How sad that a brilliant comic creation like Bugs
Bunny has to ride shotgun with a wooden basketball star, all to provide a
set of collector's cups.
