Title
Review for Drôle de Félix (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Olivier Ducastel and Jacques Martineau, the creators of everyone's favorite
AIDS-themed musical, Jeanne and the Perfect Guy, are back with the decidedly
non-musical The Adventures of Felix, the tale of a young, gay Arab traveling
from Normandy to Marseilles to meet the father he never knew.  It's a
typical arthouse road-trip flick, in that nothing exciting happens and,
despite his fear of being beaten because of his race and sexual preference,
everyone Felix meets is nice, helpful and unbelievably tolerant.  While
that's the kind of thing you'd like to see in everyday society, it doesn't
make for a very thrilling motion picture.
Felix (Sami Bouajila) has just been laid off as the film opens.  He has also
come across some letters written by his father to his recently deceased
mother.  The return address is from Marseilles, so Felix decides to track
down his dad, intending to hitchhike the back roads the entire five-day trip
(culminating on Father's Day, no less), at which point he will meet his
live-in boyfriend, Fabian Barthez-wannabe Daniel (Pierre-Loup Rajot), for a
vacation.  He doesn't pack much, but does take a subtle rainbow-colored
kite.
Felix meets a different traveler every day (and every 20 minutes in
film-time - you can set your watch to it), and each becomes somewhat of a
temporary family member to him.  The different segments have titles like "My
Little Brother" and "My Grandmother," so that you can tell who is playing
which role.  The titles are a help when Felix has sex with the person we're
told is his "Cousin."  I mean, it could be a second cousin, right?  There's
nothing wrong with that.
While each of the travelers helps Felix in his journey to Marseilles, they
also use him for something as well, whether it's moving furniture or
babysitting.  And every morning, no matter who he wakes up next to, Felix
flicks on the television to watch his favorite soap opera while he downs his
daily cocktail of AIDS-fighting drugs.  And then the closing credits rolled
and I went home.
1:35 - Not Rated but contains nudity and adult language

Author
Robin Clifford
Felix (Sami Bouajila, "The Siege") lives a contented life with his
boyfriend Daniel (Pierre-Loup Rajot) in the little town of Dieppe in
Northern France. When he is laid off from his job, after discovering the
address of the father who abandoned him before he was born, he decides to
journey to Marseilles, in the south, to find the man he never met in "The
Adventures of Felix."
Writers/directors Olivier Ducastel and Jacques Martineau made their debut
with the musical comedy "Jeanne and the Perfect Guy," embracing that
typically American genre. Their second effort, "The Adventures of Felix,"
once again borrows from America with a tale of a young man who hits the
road to find himself. Felix is happy with his life in Dieppe, but when the
ferry company he works for falls prey to the economics of the Chunnel, he
is out of a job and at loose ends. When he goes through his late mother's
papers he learns that the father he never knew is living in Marseilles,
hundreds of miles away.
Felix makes the snap decision to journey to the south, puts together a
supply of "cocktails" for his HIV virus, kisses Daniel goodbye and heads
off on foot. He refuses to use trains and wants to avoid big cities as he
hitchhikes across France to find his destiny. Along the way, a series of
chance encounters with various strangers teaches Felix that family is not
always made up of blood relations. On the road, he witnesses a race-related
mugging that turns into murder and, frightened for his own safety, runs
away without telling the police.
Following this harrowing experience, he has his first chance meeting that
begins the unconscious construction of his ideal family. His journey brings
him to Rouen, and the film's first title section, "my little brother,"
where he meets Jules, a young art student who becomes smitten with Felix.
They steal a car and develop a chaste, brotherly affection before Felix
must move on. He next meets elderly Mathilde (Patachou), in the chapter
titled "my grandmother," and soon learns that she, too, has a fondness for
the same TV soap opera that Felix has grown addicted to. She wants him to
stay with her, but he must continue on his way to find his father.
In the weakest chapter of Felix's road trip, titled "my cousin," he meets a
railroad worker (Philippe Garziano) and has a brief sexual encounter before
heading off, once again, toward Marseilles. He next helps a stranded lady
motorist, Isabelle (Ariane Ascaride), and shags a ride with her and her
three kids (each with a different daddy) in the sequence titled "my
sister." He is torn by the inner turmoil of not going to the police about
the murder he witnessed and Isabelle comforts him just as a sister would.
On the final leg of the journey titled "my father," he meets an older man,
a fisherman (Maurice Benichou), who enlightens him about the real facts of
life and family while they fly Felix's kite, just like a father and son.
"The Adventures of Felix" has a number of things going for it as we follow
Felix on his journey of discovery. First and foremost is the charming
performance by Sami Bouajila as Felix. He is a likable guy, fighting his
HIV with his doses of "cocktails," and lights up the screen as he makes the
long walk, often with dance and song, to find his father and himself. As he
encounters each member of his new family, promising each that he will send
a postcard when he arrives at his final destination, he grows a little bit
more spiritually and emotionally. Bouajila does a terrific job holding
center stage on the screen.
The cast of characters making up Felix's new-found family are nearly as
charming as the star, each in their own way. Patachou, especially, is
wonderful as the grandma character and a kindred spirit to Felix. Ariane
Ascaride, along with her kids, gives a perf that really makes you think of
her as the sister that the young man never had. Only the "cousin" chapter
lacks the emotional depth of the rest and feels like a perfunctory addition
to Felix's "family."
"The Adventures of Felix" does not reinvent the road movie, but it does
provide a charismatic telling of a young man's journey to find himself and,
to his surprise, his discovery is dramatically different than he expected
at the beginning. It helps that cinematographer Matthieu Poirot-Delpech's
crisp lensing compliments the story perfectly as Felix moves across the
French countryside. I give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Laura Clifford
THE ADVENTURES OF FELIX (DROLE DE FELIX)
When Felix (Sami Bouajila, "The Siege") loses his job, he decides to travel
from Dieppe to Marseilles to visit the father he never knew.  He buys his
teacher boyfriend Daniel (Pierre-Loup Rajot) a ticket to meet him in a week's 
time and sets off on a journey that will net him a family of a different kind
in "The Adventures of Felix" (Drole de Felix).
The writer/director partnership of Olivier Ducastel and Jacques Martineau
("Jeanne and the Perfect Guy") begin their film by establishing Felix'
loving relationship with Daniel in the coastal Normandy town of Dieppe.
Daniel is amused to discover that Felix has become addicted to a soap opera
during his job on a commuter ferry boat, Felix has a run-in with an
inexperienced kite flyer and he visits the local clinic for his HIV cocktail.
These three experiences will gain new significance as part of Felix' trip.
Once Felix hits the road, his adventures are titled as 'My little brother,'
'My grandmother,' 'My cousin,' 'My sister,' and finally 'My father.'  These
relationships are all symbolic and recognized by the audience well before
Felix makes the connection.
Sami Bouajila has our good will before he sets out on the road, where his
tendency to break out into song and dance as he travels makes him even more
endearing.  His first significant encounter, where he witnesses a fellow
Arab being beaten in a racist attack in Rouen, will haunt the rest of his
journey.  Felix bounces back by assisting a young art student, Jules (Charly
Segue), a seventeen year old who sneaks Felix into his bedroom for the night
hoping for romance.  The two 'borrow' a car and later Felix takes Jules into
his first disco (they get thrown out when Jules' age is discovered).  Felix
defines their relationship as like a younger/older brother, disappointing
Jules but leaving him with new life experiences, and moves on.
Felix is prodded awake by Mathilde (cabaret singer Patachou in a marvelous
comedic performance), a firecracker of an older woman who insists that he 
carry her groceries.  This sequence is rich with warm humor, as Felix does the 
chores Mathilde's son never gets around to while his sexuality makes her 
relive her wild youth ('I was a hot tomato.').  Their shared morning ritual of 
pill taking and soap opera viewing over breakfast highlights the similarities
between two diverse individuals.
'The Cousin' sequence, where Felix meets a railroad worker (Philippe Garziano)
and shares outdoor sex and some kite flying, is perfunctorily handled and
doesn't mesh well with the film's themes or pacing.  Felix moves on to assist a
woman on the side of the road.  Isabelle (Ariane Ascaride, "Marius et
Jeannette") is going in Felix' direction, but must make stops along the way
to deliver her three children to their three respective fathers.  The kids
provide some hilarity, especially when young Tonio (Adrien Auzias) challenges
Felix' conventional ideas about family.  Felix' final encounter with an
old fisherman (Maurice Benichou) leaves them both with fresh outlooks on
life and is satisfyingly poignant.  A worried Daniel meets up with a more
self aware, but still boyishly engaging, lover ready to take a romantic
holiday.
Director of Photography Matthieu Poirot-Delpech captures the glories of 
his north to south French locations in brilliant color while the classical
guitar score provides a Middle Eastern flavor.  Except for that one abruptly
handled sequence, Ducastel and Martineau deliver a socially conscious,
humanistic, funny road movie that's always engrossing.  "The Adventures of 
Felix" and its star have charm to spare.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE ADVENTURES OF FELIX (DRÔLE DE FÉLIX), jointly written and directed by
Olivier Ducastel and Jacques Martineau, is a gay romance and road trip that
never amounts to much of anything.  Although handsomely filmed by Matthieu
Poirot-Delpech, the picture is about as memorable as a nondescript television
soap opera, which is something that the lead character, Félix (Sami Bouajila,
THE SIEGE), dotes upon.  Much of Félix's life consists of popping pills (he's
HIV positive, something the film doesn't dwell on), guzzling bottled water and
watching his favorite morning soap opera.  He seems to like his life, but it
doesn't make for a particularly compelling narrative.
As Félix travels across France, the story is broken into chapters labeled with
the nicknames ("My Little Brother," "My Grandmother" and "My Sister") that he
gives to the strangers that he meets.  Although Felix has a live-in boyfriend,
he sleeps with some of the strange men that he meets along the way.  He's not
above a casual life of crime either, as, on a lark, he steals a car. Oops, the
car has a baby in it.  Better return the baby -- but not the car -- to the
baby's screaming mother.
If there is an audience for this slice-of-life story, it might be as an erotic
tale for gay men.  Félix is a handsome guy, and there is a lot of open mouth
kissing and passionate embraces shown in the movie.
Personally, I found only one section cute.  When Félix hitches a ride with a
stranger whom he dubs "my sister," Isabelle (Ariane Ascaride), he gets in a
humorous argument with one of her three children.  Each of her three children
came from a different father, men whom she met in her travels.  She also has a
live-in boyfriend.  The argument with the child is over what to call his "four
dads."  As the boy sees it, the live-in boyfriend is his father, but Félix
argues that this man is the only one who is in no way his father.  Félix tries
to argue that the boy has one real father, two step-fathers, and one non-father,
the live-in boyfriend.  It's a wacky moment that recalls Abbott and Costello's
famous "Who is on first?" routine.  But even this incident will be forgotten by
tomorrow morning.  I've already forgotten the rest of movie, and I just saw it
an hour ago.  Thank God for notes.
THE ADVENTURES OF FELIX runs 1:35.  The film is in French with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but might be an R for language, sexuality, violence
and nudity and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 10, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
