Title
Review for Hanuman (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
This film was screened at Cinequest 10, the San Jose film festival.
Hanuman is the revered monkey god of Hindu mythology, and this film is
a reflection of the anthropomorphic deity in the fact that his spirit
is examined, and also by the fact that many of the primary characters
in the film literally are monkeys.
The film is set in the south Indian countryside near a Hanuman temple,
and it follows two parallel stories. One is among monkeys that live
near the temple, and the other is in the human world. Hanu is a young
member of the troop who is in love with another young monkey who
happens to be the princess daughter of the troop leader, Long Tooth.
Long Tooth is angry that his regal daughter is interested in a
commoner, so he chases Hanu to the fringes of their society. Tom
(Robert Cavanaugh) is a Briton whose father was a renown archeologist
who researched the Hanuman temple when Tom was a young boy. When Tom
discovers that the artwork of the temple is being looted for profit,
he impulsively decides to travel to India to continue his father's
inquiries and to hopefully try to end the plundering of the
antiquities. Eventually, the two kindred spirits cross paths.
The film is a mix of curiously contrasting halves. The storyline
following the monkeys is consistently cute and entertaining, whereas
the storyline following the humans is poorly written, horribly acted,
and completely unimaginative. It feels as if a story was developed
with only monkeys, but the extra human plot was tacked on to make it
reach a desired running length.
Clearly the film required a great deal of craftsmanship to work with
the monkeys. Voluminous footage must have been shot and painstakingly
edited. The result is a cohesive and clever plot. Indeed, it seems
that the monkeys in this film are better actors than the humans. The
insipid human-based plot demonstrates the ugly result of mixing bad
acting with bad writing. It is unimaginable that a performance could
be worse than the one given by Cavanaugh.
The incompetent portions of the film may be ignored and accepted for
viewers who are only interested in the monkeys, and thus it might be
enjoyable for children. However it does contain some violent content.
Marginally recommended. Although the film contains vivid
cinematography and outstanding coordination of animal footage, it is
drowned by a weak plot and horrid acting. The film may be enjoyed by
young children, but it is barely bearable for adult viewers.
