Title
Review for Trembling Before G-d (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
The billboards have been taken down, the endless parade of TV spots has
stopped, the lines around the block are now non-existent, and the summer
movie fiasco of 2001 has come to a close.  With too much time on our
hands and the ugly notion that we can really make a difference,
filmcritic.com presents the winners and losers from four painful months
of J. Lo's acting, seven sequels, another dinosaur movie, horrible
remakes, and Michael Bay's first financial failure.
"        The Mummy Returns - Brendan Fraser and company return to defeat those
damn mummies.  Our response: Chock full of what is best described simply
as bizarre nonsense." - 1 1/2 stars
$98 million budget - $202 million gross - Winner: Universal 
"        Shrek - CGI animation at its finest as a lonely ogre finds friends,
defeats a dragon, and falls in love.  Our response: "Zings along,
providing fun and thrills at every turn." - 3 1/2 stars
$60 million budget - $261 million gross - Winner: Dreamworks
"        Pearl Harbor - Bay and Bruckhiemer's revision of the Japanese WWII
attack.  Our response: "Another step toward the Disneyfication of our
collective memories." - 2 1/2 stars
$152 million budget - $195 million gross - Loser: Disney (after all the
marketing costs)
"        Angel Eyes - J. Lo finds love in a sappy story of two lost souls
looking for redemption.  Our response: "A standard love story about two
standard people." - 2 stars
$38 million budget - $24 million gross - Loser: Warner
"        A Knight's Tale - Classic tale of squires and swords set to a loud,
classic rock score.  Our response: "Fun?  Yes, but the movie as a whole
feels goofy and a little cheap." - 3 stars
$41 million budget - $56 million gross - Winners: Fox and Sony
"        The Animal - Rob Schnieder becomes a Frankenstein full of animal
parts; hilarity ensures.  Our response: "I'm almost ashamed that I
laughed out loud so much." - 3 1/2 stars
$22 million budget - $56 million gross - Winner: Sony
"        Moulin Rouge - A tragic love affair set to song and dance at the
infamous Parisian brothel.  Our response: "Nothing short of the rebirth
of the movie musical." - 4 1/2 stars
$52 million budget - $55 million gross -- Winner: Fox (barely, but the
soundtrack made money, right?)
"        What's The Worst That Could Happen? - Martin Lawrence and Danny DeVito
battle wits over personal property - insert comedy here.  Our response:
"The jokes are cheap, predictable, and come solely at the expense of
others." - 1 1/2 stars
$45 million budget - $32 million gross -- Loser: MGM
"        Evolution - Duchovny's post X-Files feature film about an alien
invasion.  His agent must love him.  Our response: "The plot is a
wholesale rip-off of Ghostbusters." - 2 stars
$80 million budget - $38 million gross - Losers: Sony and Dreamworks
"        Swordfish - Hackers and gratuitous breast shots litter this Travolta
super spy thriller.  Our response: "Plods along like a video game for
the mentally challenged." - 1 1/2 stars
$80 million budget - $69 million gross - Loser: Warner Bros.
"        Atlantis: The Lost Empire - Disney's big summer movie about the lost
city and the explorers destined to discover it.  Our response: "An
eye-popping mix of action, adventure, and sweeping visual landscapes." -
4 stars
$90 million budget - $81 million gross - Loser: Disney
"        Tomb Raider - The big-screen adaptation of the popular video game
starring Angelina Jolie.  Our response: "Even the teen hormones that
live in all us guys are squashed by this one." - 1 1/2 stars
$80 million budget - $130 million gross - Winner: Paramount
"        Dr. Dolittle 2 - Eddie Murphy returns in one of his most successful
roles to date as the doctor who talks to animals.  Our response: "Never
really sells the humanization of its animal characters." - 3 stars
$72 million budget - $110 million gross - Winner: Fox
"        The Fast and The Furious - Fast cars and Vin Diesel combine for a
high-octane cops and robbers story about illegal street racing.  Our
response: "Homogenized into a regurgitated episode from Starsky and
Hutch." - 2 1/2 stars
$38 million budget - $141 million gross - Winner: Universal
"        A.I. - Spielberg's completion of Kubrick's original vision to tell a
story of a robot boy finding love in a desolate future world.  Uh huh. 
Our response: "The jumble of stolen plots, sets, and characters becomes
so daunting the film degenerates into utter nonsense." - 3 stars
$90 million budget - $78 million gross - Loser: Universal and Dreamworks
"        Cats and Dogs - The Cold War between cats and dogs is brought to life
with CGI and animatronics.  Our response: "It sounds ugly but hey, it's
a kids movie and that's the audience that will love it." - 2 1/2 stars
$60 million budget - $91 million gross - Winner: Warner Bros.
"        Kiss of the Dragon - Superstar Jet Li and action maestro Luc Besson
team up for an action-packed adventure set in Paris.  Our response: "Jet
Li has finally returned to prime ass-kicking form in his latest kung fu
extravaganza." - 4 stars
$25 million budget - $35 million gross - Winner: Fox
"        Scary Movie 2 - Those crazy Wayans Brothers run the horror film satire
gauntlet again; this time, no Carmen Electra.  Our response: "There's a
fine line between funny and just plain sick; this movie goes way beyond
that line." - 1 1/2 stars
$45 million budget - $71 million gross - Winner: Miramax
"        Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within - CGI big-screen adaptation of the
popular video game series. Our response: "Visually awe-inspiring and
groundbreaking." - 3 1/2 stars
$137 million budget - $32 million gross - BIG Loser: Sony
"        Legally Blonde - Reese Witherspoon plays dumb blonde attending Harvard
to win back law school boyfriend.  Huh?  Our response: "Manages to
maintain a certain sense of charm." - 3 stars
$18 million budget - $86 million gross - BIG Winner: MGM
"        The Score - Method acting duel among De Niro, Norton, and Brando in a
brilliant cat-and-mouse heist.  Our response: "Makes you feel like
you're handing De Niro a bolt cutter." - 4 1/2 stars
$68 million budget - $68 million gross - Even: Paramount
"        America's Sweethearts - Julia Roberts stars.  Leave it to Billy
Crystal to muck this up.  Our response: "The jokes aren't funny, its
pace is choppy, and the whole affair comes off as a vanity project." - 2
stars
$48 million budget - $90 million gross - Winner: Sony
"        Jurassic Park III - Sam Neill returns to that dinosaur-infested island
to outwit those pesky Raptors once again.  Our response: "Loud,
smash-and-crash monster movie fun at its finest." - 4 stars
$93 million budget - $173 million gross - Winner: Universal
"        Planet of the Apes - Marky Mark Wahlberg battles those damn, dirty
apes in Burton's remake of the classic.  Our response: "An insult to the
intelligence and wit of the original film." - 1 star
$100 million budget - $167 million gross - Winner: Fox
"        The Princess Diaries - King Ralph meets Pretty Woman in this Julie
Andrews comedy about a young woman and her kingdom.  Our response:
"There isn't anything distinctive to make it particularly memorable." -
2 1/2 stars
$30 million budget - $95 million gross - Winner: Disney
"        Rat Race - Individuals in Vegas race for a satchel of money in this
It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World revision.  Our response: "It's summer
junk food for the soul." - 3 1/2 stars
$48 million budget - $40 million gross - Loser: Paramount
"        Rush Hour 2 - Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker trade punches and insults
with bad guys.  Again.  Our response: "The clash of genres feels
intrusive and awkward." - 3 stars
$90 million budget - $250 million gross -- Winner: New Line
"        American Pie 2 - Lesbians, homoerotic tendencies, super glue, and MILF
-- the boys are back in town.  Our response: "It ain't Woody Allen, but
damn if it isn't utterly hysterical." - 4 stars
$30 million budget - $175 million gross - BIG Winner: Universal
"        The Curse of the Jade Scorpion - Woody Allen's latest about insurance
scams and hypnotic love. Our response: "Occasionally brilliant, as only
Allen could spin the archetypal, mismatched, sparring couple movie." - 3
stars
$26 million budget - $20 million gross - Loser: Dreamworks
"        Osmosis Jones - The Farrelly Brothers weave a strange story about man
and his virus -- using both live-action and animation.  Our response:
"Just a handful of chuckles by the film's end." - 3 stars
$75 million budget - $35 million gross - Loser: Warner Bros.
"        The Others - Big screen screams with Nicole Kidman and a spooky
house.  Our response: "There are very few chills until the finale." - 3
stars
$17 million budget - $85 million gross - Winner: Miramax
"        American Outlaws - The legend of Jesse James illustrated with
Hollywood's cutest.  Our response: "The movie is full of old, outrageous
tales about the Wild West." - 1 1/2 stars
$35 million budget - $22 million gross - Loser: Warner Bros.
"        Captain Corelli's Mandolin - Nic Cage and Penelope Cruz heat up the
screen in this WWII drama.  Our response: "It's a sweet but flawed
wartime romance." - 3 stars
$57 million budget - $40 million gross - Losers: Universal and Miramax
"        Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back - Kevin Smith's token characters are on
a road-trip to stop a movie's production.  Ironically, they should have
stopped this film's production.  Our response: "Smith has fallen for the
same grab bag of pop culture that teen comedy producers eat with a
spoon." - 2 1/2 stars
$22 million budget - $45 million gross - Winner: Miramax
"        John Carpenter's Ghosts of Mars - Carpenter's sci-fi western is light
on the crazed colonists on Mars plot but heavy on directing.  Our
response: "A hapless mishmash of poorly constructed dialogue and
ill-conceived action sequences." - 1 star
$28 million budget - $15 million gross - Loser: Sony
"        Summer Catch - Freddy Prinze Jr. plays Tim Robbins' role in Bull
Durham in this quirky sports comedy about life, love, blah blah blah. 
Our response: "It's definitely not a sports movie, and it fails pretty
miserably at being a romance." - 2 stars
$17 million budget - $35 million gross - Winner: Warner Bros.
Our math is sketchy and some films are still tracking, but Universal is
the summer's runaway success, with three of its six films being sequels
of already known quantities.  On the flipside, thanks to the disastrous
Final Fantasy Sony is the only studio that failed to recoup its budget
through theatrical grosses -- and the studio only gets to keep half of
that!
Adding up the totals, here's where the studios stand so far.  For those
of you who shelled out good money on a summer full of losers, shame.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
