Title
Review for Mission: Impossible (1996)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Sometimes excessive, but fairly consistently good director Brian
DePalma (CARRIE, DRESSED TO KILL, SCARFACE, BODY DOUBLE, THE
UNTOUCHABLES, and CARLITO'S WAY) takes a TV classic and brings it to
your local monsterscreen.  As the movie going public now knows,
megastar and suburb actor Tom Cruise plays point man Ethan Hunt in
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  The film has Cruise's usual good acting, some
excellent stunts (actually done by Cruise), and many effective uses of
the TV theme music (Lalo Schifrin) with its heavy beat, but for me the
film was a disappointment.  Although I think the film is worth seeing,
much of the script (Willard Huyck, Gloria Katz, David Koepp, and Robert
Towne) is plodding and tedious.
     The plot of the story is that the IM force (Jon Voight as Jim
Phelps, Emmanuelle Beart as his wife Claire, Kristin Scott Thomas as
Sarah Davies, Emilio Estevez as Jack, and Ingeborge Dapkunaite as
Hannah) is supposed to foil the theft of a list of our covert agents in
Eastern Europe, but things do not turn out as the IM force would like.
This puts them on a big cat and mouse game where it is not clear who
are the bad guys, and who are the good until the end.  There may or may
not be a mole.  It's that sort of story.
     We also have Vanessa Redgrave as Max, Henry Czerny as CIA agent
Kittridge, Ving Rhames as ex-IMer Luther Stickell, and Jean Reno as
ex-IMer Krieger.  Evil seeming, but is he really, Kittridge gets lots
of overwritten lines like, "If you want to play with the devil, that's
fine with me.  I just want to make sure you do it in hell."  Jim Phelps
gets similar lines including the Biblical one of, "thou shall not covet
thy neighbor's wife."
     I have already said that Cruise is consistently good in all of his
picture including this one.  Most of the other IM actors have a lot of
talent, but I didn't see much of it in evidence in this movie.  Jon
Voight has not given a convincing performance since RUNAWAY TRAIN
(1985), but the potential remains.  Emmanuelle Beart is absolutely
wonderful in the just about to be released in the US, NELLY AND
MONSIEUR ARNAUD.  Kristin Scott Thomas was brilliant in RICHARD III
earlier this year.  Emilio Estevez specializes in poor performances in
terrible movies like THE MIGHT DUCKS, but can be good as in REPO MAN
(1984).  Only Ingeborge Dapkunaite have I never seen before.
     Other than Tom Cruise's excellent acting ability and body, the
only reason to see the show are the action sequences.  They do not
happen that often and some, as in the computer room, are mercilessly
slow, but most are fresh and fascinating.  The best is the
quintessential chase on top of a train.  Here they decide to do it on
the super fast French TGV and add enough elements to make it
fascinating and unusual.  If the script had created characters I cared
about, which it didn't, then I would have been more impressed by this
scene because I would worry that someone would get hurt.  Another
excellent action sequence has to do with a blown fish tank.
     Technically, the shows a few realistic aspects like the user
groups on the Internet (only alt.stuff and sadly not
rec.arts.movies.reviews) and adds on a lot of outlandish technology
like a computer console in a sealed room that has an unbelievably
complex security system guarding it.  Suspending disbelief and going
along with this was no problem for me.  It is close enough to reality,
and this is like a James Bond film anyway.
     MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE runs 1:50.  It is correctly rated PG-13 as
there is no sex, no nudity, a little bloody but cartoon level violence,
and fairly mild language.  It would be fine for kids say 9 and up.  I
was disappointed by the way the show drags a lot, but the action is
good as is Cruise so I give it a thumbs up and award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
From rhodes_steve@tandem.com Mon Jun 10 15:05:14 EDT 1996
Article: 3658 of rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: nntphub.cb.att.com!not-for-mail
From: rhodes_steve@tandem.com (Steve Rhodes)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Subject: REVIEW: MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE (1996)
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Date: 10 Jun 1996 18:27:29 GMT
Organization: Tandem Computers, Inc.
Lines: 82
Sender: ecl@mtcts1.att.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Approved: ecl@mtcts1.att.com
Message-ID: 
Reply-To: rhodes_steve@tandem.com (Steve Rhodes)
NNTP-Posting-Host: mtcts2.mt.lucent.com
Summary: r.a.m.r. #05429
Keywords: author=Rhodes
Originator: ecl@mtcts2
Status: RO
     Sometimes excessive, but fairly consistently good director Brian
DePalma (CARRIE, DRESSED TO KILL, SCARFACE, BODY DOUBLE, THE
UNTOUCHABLES, and CARLITO'S WAY) takes a TV classic and brings it to
your local monsterscreen.  As the movie going public now knows,
megastar and suburb actor Tom Cruise plays point man Ethan Hunt in
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  The film has Cruise's usual good acting, some
excellent stunts (actually done by Cruise), and many effective uses of
the TV theme music (Lalo Schifrin) with its heavy beat, but for me the
film was a disappointment.  Although I think the film is worth seeing,
much of the script (Willard Huyck, Gloria Katz, David Koepp, and Robert
Towne) is plodding and tedious.
     The plot of the story is that the IM force (Jon Voight as Jim
Phelps, Emmanuelle Beart as his wife Claire, Kristin Scott Thomas as
Sarah Davies, Emilio Estevez as Jack, and Ingeborge Dapkunaite as
Hannah) is supposed to foil the theft of a list of our covert agents in
Eastern Europe, but things do not turn out as the IM force would like.
This puts them on a big cat and mouse game where it is not clear who
are the bad guys, and who are the good until the end.  There may or may
not be a mole.  It's that sort of story.
     We also have Vanessa Redgrave as Max, Henry Czerny as CIA agent
Kittridge, Ving Rhames as ex-IMer Luther Stickell, and Jean Reno as
ex-IMer Krieger.  Evil seeming, but is he really, Kittridge gets lots
of overwritten lines like, "If you want to play with the devil, that's
fine with me.  I just want to make sure you do it in hell."  Jim Phelps
gets similar lines including the Biblical one of, "thou shall not covet
thy neighbor's wife."
     I have already said that Cruise is consistently good in all of his
picture including this one.  Most of the other IM actors have a lot of
talent, but I didn't see much of it in evidence in this movie.  Jon
Voight has not given a convincing performance since RUNAWAY TRAIN
(1985), but the potential remains.  Emmanuelle Beart is absolutely
wonderful in the just about to be released in the US, NELLY AND
MONSIEUR ARNAUD.  Kristin Scott Thomas was brilliant in RICHARD III
earlier this year.  Emilio Estevez specializes in poor performances in
terrible movies like THE MIGHT DUCKS, but can be good as in REPO MAN
(1984).  Only Ingeborge Dapkunaite have I never seen before.
     Other than Tom Cruise's excellent acting ability and body, the
only reason to see the show are the action sequences.  They do not
happen that often and some, as in the computer room, are mercilessly
slow, but most are fresh and fascinating.  The best is the
quintessential chase on top of a train.  Here they decide to do it on
the super fast French TGV and add enough elements to make it
fascinating and unusual.  If the script had created characters I cared
about, which it didn't, then I would have been more impressed by this
scene because I would worry that someone would get hurt.  Another
excellent action sequence has to do with a blown fish tank.
     Technically, the shows a few realistic aspects like the user
groups on the Internet (only alt.stuff and sadly not
rec.arts.movies.reviews) and adds on a lot of outlandish technology
like a computer console in a sealed room that has an unbelievably
complex security system guarding it.  Suspending disbelief and going
along with this was no problem for me.  It is close enough to reality,
and this is like a James Bond film anyway.
     MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE runs 1:50.  It is correctly rated PG-13 as
there is no sex, no nudity, a little bloody but cartoon level violence,
and fairly mild language.  It would be fine for kids say 9 and up.  I
was disappointed by the way the show drags a lot, but the action is
good as is Cruise so I give it a thumbs up and award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, PG-13, 110 minutes [1 hour, 50 minutes]
[thriller/action]
starring: Tom Cruise (Ethan Hunt), Jon Voight (Jim Phelps), Emmanuelle Beart
(Claire), Henry Czerny (Kittridge), written by  David Koepp, Robert Towne,
Steven Zaillian, produced by Tom Cruise, Paula Wagner, directed by Brian De
Palma, based on the television series created by Bruce Geller.
In Hollywood, the way to make an audience think a movie is well crafted and
full of detail is to make the plot very confusing but the individual events
interesting. "Mission: Impossible" is probably the epitome of this type of
mindset, as it follows it to the letter. Some of the scenes and events are
pretty interesting, but from beginning to end it's nearly impossible to
follow as a whole.
Although the movie is based on the television series of the same name, it
bears little, if any, resemblance to its inspiration. It starts off in the
spirit of the series by showing a team of super sneaks and computer hackers
trying to sabotage a foreign embassy banquet. There is Tom Cruise as Ethan
Hunt, the fearless agent who plunges deep into "enemy" territory under a
perfect disguise. There is Jon Voight as Jim Phelps, the wise old leader who
coordinates the team via super advanced technology. And there are also two
women (Emmanuelle Beart and Kristen Scott-Thomas) undercover, along with the
wiseass hacker (played by Emilio Estevez in an uncredited role). 
At first their teamwork seems to have a lot of potential to it; the
chemistry between the characters more than makes up for the loopy plot. It's
interesting to watch them use such fantastic technology, such as micro
cameras inside their glasses, and lots of computer hacking. The story doesn't
seem like something to take seriously, and it even could have been a good
satire like James Cameron's "True Lies." Unfortunately, something terrible
goes wrong and all the team members start getting killed, except for heroic
Ethan Hunt of course. And just as all these bad things start happening to the
characters, the same thing happens to the movie.
Ethan escapes and makes it back to the group's makeshift headquarters and
from here on the film has a huge snowballing effect with conspiracies,
espionage, computer crime, money laundering, and any government-related,
white collar crime you can think of. There are the token scenes as Ethan
starts to put clues together and realizes things that were under his nose all
along. Scenes like these can have a  chilling effect when done properly (a la
"Sneakers"), but it doesn't occur here because the story is too hard to
follow. For example, Ethan's mission was called "Job 314," and when he sees a
Bible, he realizes it's a code for the book of Job, chapter three, verse 14.
He even figures out someone's e-mail address from this quote!
You have to give this movie credit, it knows it's confusing, but at least it
throws in a lot of individual, [supposedly] suspenseful scenes. One such
incident involves the breaking into CIA headquarters with sensors so
sensitive alarms will go off even if a drop of sweat hits the floor. Break-in
scenes like this all always the same - the heroes barely accomplish their
mission by doing tasks at the last possible nanosecond and just when they
think they're in the clear, an accident happens and we get a terrific battle
and/or escape scene. 
The ending is an action/adventure extravaganza; the enemy turns out to be
the person you'd least expect with a lot of double crosses and tricks. Tom
Cruise peels off a mask to reveal his face so many times, it's difficult to
tell if his character is the same person in every scene. There is a scene
with fantastic stunts and special effects with a helicopter chasing a train
through a tunnel... if you've seen the highlights you know where this is
going (not to mention the whole movie for that matter).
I don't know why "Mission: Impossible" was made the way it was. You would
think the filmmakers would realize how confusing it is and try to clear up
the story a little, but they probably just assumed the whole reason to make
it and to watch it is for the special effects and the neat gadgets. Yes,
these elements are well done, but what good will they do if we have no idea
what's going on? 
Please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Your mission, should you choose to accept it, is to spend 
nearly two hours of your life on the umpteenth TV-show remake of 
the past few years, featuring over-the-top dramatic acting, an intrusive 
musical score, a slow and incoherent plot, generic espionage retreads 
and few-and-far-between action sequences that pale in comparison 
with more recent, better movies. I accepted the mission but found it 
impossible to enjoy.
        Tom Cruise makes his foray into action films in MISSION: 
IMPOSSIBLE, a foray he shouldn't have made. He plays Ethan Hunt, 
a spy for IMF (Impossible Missions Force, not I'm an MF), who is 
disavowed from the organization toward the beginning of the film, 
after his team of agents (including Emilio Estevez) is killed in action. 
You'll soon wish Cruise went down with his ship, though, because 
what follows the opening action sequences is over half-an-hour of 
bad drama, most of which involves Cruise coming across French spy 
Claire, played by Emmanuelle Beart. She may be famous in France but 
not America. And MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE won't be the crossover 
vehicle to do it because, even though she's stunningly beautiful, 
she can't act to save her anorexic life.
        Cruise adds her to his new team, which also includes 
Marsellus Wallace and The Professional (Ving Rhames and Jean 
Reno), for his independent mission of rescuing a computerized list 
containing the names of all the major secret agents of the world. (I'll 
trade you a James Bond rookie card for two Hunts and a Professional.) 
There's more to the plot, of course, but to tell you the truth, I didn't 
know what the hell was going on half the time. MISSION: 
IMPOSSIBLE is apparently too plot-driven to stop and explain 
the plot. And no, I won't stop to explain that last sentence.
        MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE is a failure as far as action films go. 
The most successful ones in the past few years (the DIE HARD and 
LETHAL WEAPON trilogies, for starters) have had a sense of humor 
about the fact that the stunts are so far-fetched, but MISSION: 
IMPOSSIBLE begs to be taken seriously. There is no comic relief 
to the film at all except scenes that play in an inadvertently funny 
way because they're so serious.
        Emmanuelle can't act and Cruise shouts most of his lines 
("THEY'RE ALL DEAD!") while Danny Elfman's thundering score 
brings back memories of the worst melodramas of the 40's and 50's, 
movies in which the orchestras almost drowned out the dialogue. 
So I guess it's a good thing Cruise yells all the time. And Elfman, I 
love you man, your music is great, but it's best left with grandiose, 
Gothic films like BATMAN and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS. To 
Elfman's credit, though, without his score, the only thing left 
would be the eight reprises of the overplayed "Mission: 
Impossible" theme. Might as well have thrown Mancini's "Peter 
Gunn" theme in there too. I don't think I've heard that enough 
million times in movies.
        Ultimately, it boils down to the fact that we've seen all this 
before. The only two action scenes (out of five) of any interest are 
ones that seem like they were outtakes from other movies. The scene 
in which Cruise and Reno break into an office using state-of-the-art 
technology was exciting, yes, but it might as well have been Robert 
Redford and the whole SNEAKERS crew. And the overly far-fetched 
climax on a train might as well have come from a James Bond 
movie... or any of the others from Indiana Jones to UNDER SEIGE 2 
to feature people climbing on moving trains. If you're remaking a TV 
show, you've already got one foot in the originality grave, but when 
you steal action sequences too, your movie ends up six feet under.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
John Robertson
Starring: Tom Cruise, Jon Voight, Emilio Estevez, Emmanuelle Beart, Henry 
Czerny, Jean Reno, Ving Rhames, Kristin Scott Thomas, Vanessa Redgrave, 
Ingeborge Dapkunaite 
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for Mission: Impossible is someone 
in the mood for an action thriller, with a keen mind for details coupled with 
the ability to suspend disbelief for a little while.  The Perfect Person for 
this film would probably give it a 9 out of 10.
There is an episode of The Simpsons, when Marge and Homer go to a movie called 
"The Stockholm Affair", a taut, political thriller.  As the movie progresses, 
Homer makes comment after comment, like:
Misison: Impossible made me feel alot like Homer Simpson.  
Mission: Impossible is a fast moving, stylish thriller, based on the 
television show of the sixties.  Tom Cruise plays Ethan Hunt, disguise expert 
and point man of an expert team of super spies with a reputation for doing the 
impossible.  The movie begins with Cruise and his team of experts performing 
another mission -- only this one goes horribly wrong.
Cruise escapes, only to discover that he's now considered a traitor.  How will 
he get his clean name back?  By performing another impossible mission, of 
course!
There are several different types of scenes to this movie, and they all work 
in different ways.  When Cruise and his pals are performing missions, it's a 
tight suspenseful film, very well-done.  When Cruise is trying to figure out 
what's really going on, it's a cerebral film.  When Cruise is forced to 
abandon plans and improvise, it becomes a top-notch action film.  I have no 
complaints with any of the three types of scenes you see in Mission: 
Impossible, but you do need to be able to follow closely and use your mind or 
suspend your disbelief in turns, something that isn't too easy to do.
Cruise works well as the charismatic lead of the film, though his acting is 
strained at times.  The supporting actors acquit themselves similarly -- 
effectively, but not flawlessly.  Interestingly, Emelio Esteves appears 
uncredited in the film, only to make a rather quick and brutal exit.  
When you talk about summer blockbusters, Mission: Impossible fits the bill.  
It's not a perfect film, but it thrills you, engages your mind, and lets you 
leave the theater thinking.  It's pretty hard to follow at times, and you do 
start to feel like a certain member of the Simpsons, but you could do much 
worse.
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson. Retransmit freely if unedited. My opinions 
are solely my own, and in no way reflect those of my employer. 
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to give the 
reader a new way of understanding my rating. Rather than give a film a score, 
either overall, or on several attributes, the Perfect Person Rating tries to 
identify the type of person would enjoy this movie the most. Since a reviewer 
is by nature someone with a great deal of experience in what they are 
reviewing, their experience may not be the same as someone who has less 
experience, is less jaded, or more attuned to the subject. Hopefully the 
Perfect Person Rating will go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a 
simple rating scale. Comments are appreciated. 

Author
Michael Redman
[Note: This appeared in The Bloomington Voice (Bloomington, IN) May
30, 1996]
     Supposedly based on the television series from the late sixties
and early seventies, this film directed by Brian De Palma is only
barely. It does have the series title, a character's name (although
certainly not the *same* character) and some hi-tech gobligoop, but
that's all that connects it to the original.
     The series featured a team that pulled off a complex operation
each episode that featured disguises, split-second timing and usually
completed its task without anyone from the outside knowing what had
happened.
     The movie gives us a 'James Bond-Lite' lone agent (Tom Cruise) who
blows up a bunch of stuff.  The first few minutes lull the audience
into a false sense of a Mission: Impossible film with a group assigned
to catch the thief of a NOC list naming undercover agents.
Unfortunately for the team and the film, most of them shortly meet an
untimely demise including Emilio Estevez, easily the most interesting
Mission member.
     The only survivors are Cruise and Emmanuelle Beart ("Manon Of The
Spring"), an actress of skill but in a fairly worthless role here.  The
spy bosses have known for some time that there was a mole on the team
and since Cruise survived, decide that it is him.  Cruise and Beart
have to go after the bad guys while ducking the good guys. Any of this
sound familiar?
     The film is an action movie disguised as a mystery in the guise of
Mission: Impossible. And not a very good one of any of them.  The few
action scenes are physically impossible although well paced.  The
mystery is easily solved moments after it is posed.  The one remaining
M:I character, Jim Phelps (Jon Voight, originally Peter Graves) has
nothing in common with the original. Fans of the series will not
recognize much.
     Cruise's boyish appeal complete with trademarked grins doesn't
play very well. Bond he ain't. Besides the disappearing and uncredited
Estevez, there are only two actors with much charisma.  Veteran actress
Vanessa Redgrave shines in what is an unusual role in films:  an
extremely sexual older woman. Oddly cast, big tough-looking Ving Rhames
("Pulp Fiction") is fascinating as the kind-hearted but devious
computer hacker.
     Selling out even at mid-afternoon matinees, the movie has enough
explosions to rake in the big bucks for Paramount and make it  a summer
blockbuster. If you're looking for quality though, you might want to
save your money.

Author
Ife Hsu
(Paramount Release 1996)
Starring: Tom Cruise, Jon Voight, Jean Reno, Emmanuelle Beart (sp), etc.
Director: Brian DePalma
Running Time: 1:55h
Overview: Motion feature based on TV series about a covert team
assigned to ultra-secret missions revolving espionage, theft,
security bleaks, etc.  Movie version focus on the demise of this
team as it faces an unknown double-crossing agent who aims for
personal gain/objectives. It is a cat-and-mouse chase as  agents
of the covert team try to capture invisible enemy while battling
own agency who has diswowed their membership.
Brian DePalma's Mission Impossible is desperately trying to
replace Twister as the summer blockbuster for 1996. Given recent
string of disasters (Bonfire of Vanities, Raising Caan, etc.),
DePalma tries his best to strenghten a somewhat predictable plot
with hair-raising special effects and a variety of technical
gadgets. But above all, this is Tom Cruise's show.  As an actor,
Cruise has proven that he can carry a movie, but he is also a
co-producer. Finally, Paramount's marketing ploy has made this
film as anticipated as Jurassic Park or possibly Batman (1989). 
There are really three 'Mission Impossible' shows: Setup,
Comeback, Survival-of-Fittest.   
In the Setup, the team is assigned to gather irrefutable proof
for the capture of an international spy trying to steal a secret
list containing names of field agents.  Without revealing the
outcome, I will only say that this Mission Impossible has other
predictments involving the Agency itself. 
Comeback is the attempt from the agents to find a solution to
the problems caused in the Setup. The solution requires another
Mission Impossible.  This sequence brings the best suspense
moments in the movie. Suffice to say that Cruise does stretch
his acting and body in this sequence.
As a conclusion, Survival-of-Fittest proves once again that
plausibility is not a given in Hollywood. The infamous train
sequence is truly awesome and eye-catching, and totally
unbelievable.  As Cruise goes to capture his invisible enemy, he
defies the laws of Physics and Human Conditioning.   
Two sad notes: The female protagonist (newcomer Emmanuelle Beart
(sp)) shows very limited acting range. Her role was already
small compared to Cruise, but she was easily dismissed even in
key moments.  The plot is rather predictable. Like its TV
counterpart, clues are given out during the movie, but it took
no genius to determine the identity of the secret agent as well
as the Setup sequence. It is sad to say that the expression
given by Ms. Beart revealed all the mistery at that time.    
Despite plot weaknings and uneven acting, I do recommend this
movie as a lighthearted summer diversion as it should be. 

Author
Yamamoto
What do you say to people you sort'a know?  I mean what do you do when 
you come across people you casually know but nothing beyond that?  Ok, 
so you say "hi" since you don't want to come across like you treat them 
like a plague but then what?  Uneasy silence?  Isn't that more awkward 
than if you didn't say anything at all?  If you ingore them, at least 
you don't have to deal with the person.  On the down side, they'll 
think you're prude or something.  Do the opinions of those who you 
really don't care matter?  Then again, you could aways tell 'em you had 
a bad day...
Speaking of having no real good solutions, MISSION IMPOSSIBLE came out 
and I had to go check it out.  It's a spin off from the old TV series 
of the same name.  Yup, it's packed with actions.  Minimum dialogs.  
And will keep you on the edge of the seat.  Yeah, what else is new?  
They got all kinds of cool toys but upgraded to today's technology.  
And of couse the cold war is over so different kind of villain is 
needed.  Of course the guys have to accomplish impossible missions to 
save the day.
No nakkid boobs.  No bullets.  7 dead bodies.  19 on the vomit meter.  
No moon shots.  What we got here are:  playing dead-fu, smoking in the 
airplane-fu, attack of killer briefing-fu, breath freshner from hell-
fu, finger printing-fu, glasses-fu, attack of killer elevator-fu, 
exploding car-fu, exploding bubble gum-fu, finding religion- fu, 
hellucinations-fu, attack of trackable software-fu, sweat-fu an of 
course knife-fu.  Video hall of fame nominations to Emmanuelle Beart 
for saying stuff like "Jim is dead" and to Ving Rhames for saying 
stuff like "There was no physical evidence" and to Jon Voight for 
saying "When did you know".  And of course to Henry Czervy for saying 
stuff like "He wanted us to know" and to Tom Cruise for saying "I'll 
always remember you this way."  Three stars.  Shaggy Bob says wicked!
Spoiler - The cold war is over but deep undercover agents are still 
about.  A half of a list of all the agents has been stolen.   The team 
has to not only recover the list but also pin the guy who took the 
first half and the buyer.  If you recall any of the TV series, it's not 
all that hard to do.  But what do you do when there's a traitor in your 
midst?  Who can you trust?  Better yet, who can you not trust and why?  
Of course, to prove your innocence, you have to break in to the most 
secure place in the world.
Alien Alert!  Ok, so Bob Dole quit his day job to see if he can get a 
better one.  I guess with all the free time he now has, he came out 
with a brilliant plan to cut down on welfare.  In it, he restricts aid 
to 2 years and upto 5 years during one's life time.  Correct me if I'm 
wrong but isn't the reason why you get welfare because you can't find 
a job?  And peoeple want goverment to solve the problems.  Not unless 
we elect people who knows what they're doing.
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that reply key now.

Author
Kris Srinivasan
        Any movie that kills Emilio Estevez off in the first fifteen
minutes has something going for it.  Unfortunately, this and the familiar
theme music are the only worthwhile things about Mission Impossible,
directed by Brian DePalma.  The first problem is that this film has
absolutely no connection with the TV show whatsoever, aside from the
music.  The TV show was about an Impossible Mission Force whose deft
teamwork, orchestrated by Jim Phelps, allowed them to counfound evil
dictators of mythic banana republics from inflicting their sordid schemes
upon the world.  Teamwork was the key.  This film is set up as a cross
between James Bond and DePalma's "Blow Out," where the John Travolta
character was the victim of real and imagined conspiracies from all
directions.  It was Travolta's vulnerability that made that film so
exciting and claustrophobic.  In this film, Tom Cruise is basically
omniscient (believe that?) and so there's no fun going on here whatsoever.
        The story is about as contrived as contrived gets, and is full of
holes.  There are basically two memorable sequences: one involves breaking
into a Kubrickesque computer room -- a task that could have been made much
easier had the characters a whit of common sense (suffice it to say that
the alarm system is disengaged when the computer operator is in the room); 
the second involves a high-speed train, a helicopter, and the Chunnel and
does not have to be seen to be disbelieved.  The actors are all miscast,
especially Emannuelle Beart as Jim Phelps wife, who cannot act, and Ving
Rhames as a computer hacker(!), who looks lost and embarrased to be in
this movie.  Tom Cruise is no James Bond, and Jon Voight looks more like
Bobby "the Brain" Heenan than Jim Phelps. 
        Brian DePalma's career has been bafflingly erratic.  At his best,
he beats Hitchcock at his own game ("Blow Out," "Carrie," "Body Double")
but this is not his best.  The screenplay was partly written by Robert
Towne, who wrote the best scenario of the seventies in "Chinatown," but
this script is perfunctory at best, and terrrible at worst.  The
cinematography has a comic book red/blue emphasis, which is nice to
look at, but the suspense sequences are all telegraphed and this movie
even features the old "killer who talks too much before shooting thus
giving the victim time to think of an escape" trick.  Please don't spend
your money on this; it'll only encourage Hollywood to make more. 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tom Cruise, Emmanuelle Beart, Jon Voight, Vanessa Redgrave, 
      Henry Czerny, Ving Rhames, Jean Reno, Kristin Scott-Thomas, 
      Emilio Estevez
Director: Brian DePalma
Producers: Tom Cruise and Paula Wagner
Screenplay: David Koepp and Robert Towne
Cinematography: Stephen H. Burum
Music: Danny Elfman; "Mission Impossible" theme by Lalo Schifrin
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     The first star vehicle of the summer of 1996 is also the first 
major disappointment of the season.  MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, the big screen 
resurrection of the popular late-'60s/early-'70s series, fails to 
generate much in the way of excitement or intrigue. This globetrotting 
adventure looks like an opportunity for Tom Cruise to play James Bond  -
- a role he is totally unsuited for.  The writing for last year's 007 
return, GOLDENEYE, isn't a lot better than that for MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, 
but, as an action hero, Pierce Brosnan is considerably more debonair and 
charismatic than Cruise.
     There's no Bond in MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  Instead, the lead 
character is Ethan Hunt, the point man for Jim Phelps' IMF (Impossible 
Missions Force).  Phelps (played by Jon Voight, not Peter Graves) 
receives assignment messages from his boss, Kittridge (Henry Czerny), 
via video transmissions rather than old-fashioned tapes.  His group's 
latest job is to prevent something called a "NOC list" from falling into 
the hands of an international arms dealer (Vanessa Redgrave).  If placed 
on the open market, the NOC list would put every United States deep 
cover agent in danger of exposure.  However, when they embark on this 
mission, the IMF runs straight into an ambush where everyone is killed 
except Hunt and Phelps' wife, Claire (Emmanuelle Beart).  Because he 
survives the carefully-orchestrated massacre, Hunt is suspected of 
turning traitor.
     Fans of the TV series expecting a faithful translation may be 
disappointed.  Except for a few nods to its small-screen predecessor, 
this MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE is a vastly different, autonomous entity.  Nine 
years ago, director Brian DePalma used a similar approach for a superior 
version of THE UNTOUCHABLES, but lightning hasn't struck twice.  
Teetering on an uncertain edge between action flick and thriller, 
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE doesn't succeed well as either.  There are some 
high-energy moments, but none offers more than a moment's edge-of-the-
seat excitement.  Too much of what happens in MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE comes 
across as fait accompli.
     The predictable plot generates little interest.  It's pathetically 
easy to guess the mole's identity despite the screenwriters' attempts to 
obscure the issue.  The overall storyline contains a legion of gaping 
holes -- the more you think about it, the less sense it makes.  Weak 
character identification allows TWISTER to seem like a masterpiece by 
comparison.  In fact, taken as a whole, TWISTER is a significantly more 
involving spectacle.
     Megastar Tom Cruise (who also co-produced the movie) struts and 
smirks his way through his role in a way that makes Hunt easy to 
dislike.  It's not a particularly good performance, either.  Cruise's 
supporting players form an interesting group, although not necessarily 
the kind of names one might expect in a big-budget action film.  They 
include a highly-respected French actress, Emmanuelle Beart (MANON OF 
THE SPRING, NELLY & MONSIEUR ARNAUD); a veteran American actor, Jon 
Voight (MIDNIGHT COWBOY); FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL's Kristin Scott-
Thomas; and the internationally-renowned Vanessa Redgrave.
     What does it say about the current status of American motion 
pictures that three of Paramount Pictures' big 1996 releases, MISSION: 
IMPOSSIBLE, A VERY BRADY SEQUEL, and STAR TREK: FIRST CONTACT, are TV 
series regurgitations?  If this movie is any indication, originality 
isn't high on the studio's list of priorities.  TWISTER has taken a 
critical drubbing because of its style-over-substance approach to 
entertainment, but MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE is a worse offender.  The 
substance here isn't appreciably stronger, while the style is less eye-
popping.  Due primarily to several deftly-crafted action sequences, 
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE boasts a few memorable moments.  Keeping in mind 
what's expected from would-be summer blockbusters, this movie isn't a 
disaster, but, all things considered, there's little reason to make it a 
high priority for theatrical viewing.

Author
Michael Redman
Supposedly based on the television series from the late sixties and early
seventies, this film directed by Brian De Palma is only barely. It does have
the series title, a character's name (although certainly not the _same_
character) and some hi-tech gobligoop, but that's all that connects it to the original.
The series featured a team that pulled off a complex operation each episode
that featured disguises, split-second timing and usually completed its task
without anyone from the outside knowing what had happened.
The movie gives us a `James Bond-Lite' lone agent (Tom Cruise) who blows up a
bunch of stuff.
The first few minutes lull the audience into a false sense of a Mission:
Impossible film with a group assigned to catch the thief of a NOC list naming
undercover agents. Unfortunately for the team and the film, most of them
shortly meet an untimely demise including Emilio Estevez, easily the most
interesting Mission member.
The only survivors are Cruise and Emmanuelle Beart ("Manon Of The Spring"), an
actress of skill but in a fairly worthless role here. The spy bosses have
known for some time that there was a mole on the team and since Cruise
survived, decide that it is him. Cruise and Beart have to go after the bad
guys while ducking the good guys. Any of this sound familiar?
The film is an action movie disguised as a mystery in the guise of Mission:
Impossible. And not a very good one of any of them. The few action scenes are
physically impossible although well paced. The mystery is easily solved
moments after it is posed. The one remaining M:I character, Jim Phelps (Jon
Voight, originally Peter Graves) has nothing in common with the original. Fans
of the series will not recognize much.
Cruise's boyish appeal complete with trademarked grins doesn't play very well.
Bond he ain't. Besides the disappearing and uncredited Estevez, there are only
two actors with much charisma. Veteran actress Vanessa Redgrave shines in what
is an unusual role in films: an extremely sexual older woman. Oddly cast, big
tough-looking Ving Rhames ("Pulp Fiction") is fascinating as the kind-hearted
but devious computer hacker.
Selling out even at mid-afternoon matinees, the movie has enough explosions to
rake in the big bucks for Paramount and make it a summer blockbuster. If
you're looking for quality though, you might want to save your money.
[This appeared in the 5/25/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Miles better than the lackluster GOLDENEYE, but oh what a tangled
plot they weave when they recreate TV. Entertainment by proxy?
Advance posters for MISSION:IMPOSSIBLE showed Tom Cruise's hawklike profile
with the words EXPECT THE IMPOSSIBLE. I was all set to expect the
impossible: a smart, engaging thriller from the Hollywood TV recycle bin.
They got it halfway right. M:I is a thriller, and it is occasionally smart,
but it's more confusing then engaging and bears an in-name-only resemblance
to the TV show it was cribbed from.
The TV show, for those of us who were still a twinkle in Dad's eye when it
aired, featured a gang of top-secret government agents who go on one mission
of derring-do after another. It was another of TV's many attempts to cash in
on the James Bond franchise and also echoed the greater sense of trust
people had in institutions of "law and order" in those days. The M:I movie
seems to have been dragged into the '90s without much real thought as to how
faintly absurd it seems now. In fact, in one scene, there's a TV interview
with a Senator who expresses grave doubts over just what the government is
doing with its "black operations" funds. In the '60s, Mr. Phelps would
probably have walked in and set the man straight with a We're Trying To Keep
Your Country Safe speech. In the '90s, the audience was ready to chime in
with "You said it, brother!"
Suffice to say the material feels dated from the git-go. How has it been
re-worked? The usual Hollywood Hi-Tech Injection has been applied to the
movie: explosions, guns, chases, violence, gadgets, gizmos, and totally
inaccurate and absurd uses of computers and the Internet abound in this
movie. There isn't a moment where anything that's happening is remotely
plausible, but it's filmed well, and paced nicely -- even if half of what we
see is an invitation to guffaw in contempt.
What about Tom Cruise? Tom Cruise is an excellent actor and he turns in fine
work here, but the basic idea of the story was never about an Angry Young
Rebel. The original IMF people were team players. The movie turns quickly
into a Cruise solo vehicle and does away with the "problem" of team dynamics
by having the rest of Cruise's team killed off quickly. A-ha.
I mentioned guffawing in contempt. See if you can follow this -- if you're
reading this message, there's a good chance you're Net-literate. Early in
the movie, Cruise's character sends email to someone named "John@3:14".
What's wrong with *this* picture? Or what about the CIA computer room which
has every kind of detector EXCEPT a motion sensor. Why? Because if there WAS
a motion sensor in the room, there would be no reason to break in and give
us a flashy scene of Cruise hanging by wires and hacking into a mainframe
upside-down. I'm not even going to try to criticize the final chase, which
breaks the laws of physics at an insane rate and ultimately turns into a
kind of exhibition house for many of director Brian de Palma's favorite
fetishes.
So what have we got here? A loud, overly complicated, flashy,
not-very-interesting movie that has all the lasting strength of a caffeine
jolt, and had me giggling in all the wrong places.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     For seven years, from September 1966 to September 1973, perhaps
the best-written program on television was "Mission: Impossible."  The
program leveraged off the popularity of the James Bond films, but in
fact, the writing and style was more like 1973's Best Picture, THE
STING.  Virtually every episode was of the same format.  The Impossible
Mission Force would be given some task to perform.  The instructions
would come on perhaps the most famous television prop of those years,
the self-destructing tape found in some mysterious location.  The team
leader would thoughtfully dig through a stack of dossiers of possible
candidates for the mission though, with the exception of the occasional
guest star, the team he chose would almost always be identical to the
team he chose the previous week.  And then the team would go into
action.  Most of the program would then be the IMF doing a sequence of
mysterious activities, obviously with purposeful intent.  Each episode
was a puzzle and a mystery.  But instead of being a who-done-it, it
would be a what's-going-on.  Pieces of a sort of Rube Goldberg machine
were being assembled.  The viewer might have no idea what the pieces
added up to and why they solved the initial problem.  Then at the end
the machine was set in motion.  In fascinating detail all the pieces
would fall into place.  We could use a real MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE movie.
We did not get it.  Instead we got a second-rate mystery film on an
espionage backdrop with one good tense sequence and a tepid James
Bond-style finale.
     Twenty-three years after we last saw him, Jim Phelps (now played
by Jon Voight instead of Peter Graves) is still around running
operations for IMF, the Impossible Mission Force.  He has a new team
featuring the talents of the hard-edged Ethan Hunt (Tom Cruise playing
an E. Howard Hunt-like character with a few new characterization
wrinkles for Cruise).  The mission as the film begins is to stymie an
attempt to steal a list of agents with the code-names and real name.
This is the kind of mission that the IMF should be able to do with
their eyes closed.  This time, however, there are unexpected turns for
the IMF and Hunt finds he must on his own solve a mystery and face a
mission on his own.  Even with this basis the puzzle format of the
original series could have been honored.  The script could have
followed a mysterious sequence of preparations for the tasks he has to
perform, but that is approach is thrown out.  Instead we hear what his
objective is--and it does sound very difficult--and then we just follow
him as he does it.  There are no hints as to how he will perform that
task, we just watch has he does it.  The only real puzzle for the
viewer is to guess who is doing what to whom, and it is not made very
difficult.  The clue that leads to the solution of the mystery is an
extreme contrivance involving a character senselessly giving himself
away.  Perhaps somebody thought that modern audiences might not take
well to being asked to puzzle about something that is not
straightforward and simple.
     Tom Cruise does get a chance to burn a little in anger and to show
a little confusion, but in general his character is internalized and
this is not a difficult character to play.  This might have been a good
role for Kevin Spacey to play.  Second billing goes to the Jon Voight
whose Jim Phelps overshadows much of the film though he quickly
disappears from sight.  Somewhat more memorable is Vanessa Redgrave as
a mysterious woman from the dark side of the night world.  Cruise is
teamed with Emmanuelle Beart of MANON OF THE SPRINGS, UN COEUR EN
HIVER, and more recently NELLY ET MONSIEUR ARNAUD.  Beart is a talented
actress, but this is not her kind of role and she brings nothing to it.
Danny Elfman does bring something to the musical score, but mostly his
touch is not needed.  I got a genuine chill down my spine with the
spectacular opening rendition of Lalo Schifrin theme done with a full
orchestra.  For me that was the high point of the film.  One of the
low-points with the disco version under the closing credits.
     In the final analysis, the big fault of MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE is
that the title makes promises that the script cannot fulfill.  There
are better spy films that have come and gone with far less fanfare.
Perhaps this would have worked better if Zallian had followed through
and written the script.  A better script would have gone a long way to
improving this film.  I rate it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael McCrann
MISSION IMPOSSIBLE is one of those megastar, megabudget summer action
flicks that immediately makes one ponder the question; Why do top secret
places have such large ventilation ducts in their ceilings?  In GOLDENEYE,
a spunky, Russian waif manages to hide in the duct in the ceiling of a top
secret satellite-radar center in a desolate region of Russia to avoid
detection by a thighmaster crazed villanette.  MISSION IMPOSSIBLE has the
spunky Tom Cruise breaking into CIA Headquarters in Langley while
suspended like a marionette from a ventillation duct,  the size of which
would make it a suitable site for the 1996 Republican national convention.
MISSION IMPOSSIBLE, the Brian DePalma revisionist version of the 60's TV
show is a slick, polished piece with good looking men in trenchcoats
talking to other good looking men in trenchcoats via hidden microphones
all while standing in alleys or briskly walking down the rain soaked
cobblestone streets of Prague.  Cruise's character, Ethan Hunt,  the
cocky, arrogant imp on which Crthe members of his IMF spy team killed in
an apparent ambush.  Since Cruise survives, post ergo proctor hoc, he is
automatically assumed by the brass to be the mole that caused it all. 
>From there on, the plot is all too familiar -  Avoid those who are trying
to kill you, assemble a cast of competent outcasts,  clear your good name,
and avenge your fallen comrades.  So much death.  And to what end?  Why,
the noc list of course.  What's a noc list and why is it so important to
world security?  This little tidbit is never adequately explained and
tends to make all of Cruises adventures self-serving.
Besides being hackneyed, the plot is peppered with the usual spy cliches. 
Cruise uses a rubber mask to disguise himself on  three separate
occassions.  He utilizes more exploding chewing gum than Pee Wee Herman. 
And of course, the good guy is really the bad guy who faked his own death
in the beginning.  Just like Pierce Bronsan in GOLDENEYE, Cruise is a poor
judge of character.
Of course there are many additional problems with MISSION IMPOSSIBLE that
screenwriters, David Koepp and Robert Towne, failed to reconcile.  Such as
the lack of a compelling villian and the purpose of ornamental characters
like Ving Rhames.  But perhaps, the most disturbing thing about MISSION
IMPOSSIBLE is that it fails to live up to the standard set by the TV show.
 The show had intrigue and suspense and the movie has Cruise.  The show
had focus.  Dictators ousted from power by exploiting  their
vulnerabilities.  The movie has Cruise.  The show tried to save the world.
 The movie tried to save Cruise.  If Tom's boyish smirk is enough for you,
then by all means, make  your boyfriend  take you to see this film. If you
want more from your movie, do not accept this mission and go rent
GOLDENEYE.         
From mikem30@aol.com Mon Jun 10 15:04:59 EDT 1996
Article: 3657 of rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: nntphub.cb.att.com!not-for-mail
From: mikem30@aol.com (Michael McCrann)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Subject: REVIEW: MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE (1996)
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Date: 10 Jun 1996 18:26:56 GMT
Organization: America Online, Inc. (1-800-827-6364)
Lines: 48
Sender: ecl@mtcts1.att.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Approved: ecl@mtcts1.att.com
Message-ID: 
Reply-To: mikem30@aol.com (Michael McCrann)
NNTP-Posting-Host: mtcts2.mt.lucent.com
Summary: r.a.m.r. #05428
Keywords: author=McCrann
Originator: ecl@mtcts2
Status: RO
MISSION IMPOSSIBLE is one of those megastar, megabudget summer action
flicks that immediately makes one ponder the question; Why do top secret
places have such large ventilation ducts in their ceilings?  In GOLDENEYE,
a spunky, Russian waif manages to hide in the duct in the ceiling of a top
secret satellite-radar center in a desolate region of Russia to avoid
detection by a thighmaster crazed villanette.  MISSION IMPOSSIBLE has the
spunky Tom Cruise breaking into CIA Headquarters in Langley while
suspended like a marionette from a ventillation duct,  the size of which
would make it a suitable site for the 1996 Republican national convention.
MISSION IMPOSSIBLE, the Brian DePalma revisionist version of the 60's TV
show is a slick, polished piece with good looking men in trenchcoats
talking to other good looking men in trenchcoats via hidden microphones
all while standing in alleys or briskly walking down the rain soaked
cobblestone streets of Prague.  Cruise's character, Ethan Hunt,  the
cocky, arrogant imp on which Crthe members of his IMF spy team killed in
an apparent ambush.  Since Cruise survives, post ergo proctor hoc, he is
automatically assumed by the brass to be the mole that caused it all. 
>From there on, the plot is all too familiar -  Avoid those who are trying
to kill you, assemble a cast of competent outcasts,  clear your good name,
and avenge your fallen comrades.  So much death.  And to what end?  Why,
the noc list of course.  What's a noc list and why is it so important to
world security?  This little tidbit is never adequately explained and
tends to make all of Cruises adventures self-serving.
Besides being hackneyed, the plot is peppered with the usual spy cliches. 
Cruise uses a rubber mask to disguise himself on  three separate
occassions.  He utilizes more exploding chewing gum than Pee Wee Herman. 
And of course, the good guy is really the bad guy who faked his own death
in the beginning.  Just like Pierce Bronsan in GOLDENEYE, Cruise is a poor
judge of character.
Of course there are many additional problems with MISSION IMPOSSIBLE that
screenwriters, David Koepp and Robert Towne, failed to reconcile.  Such as
the lack of a compelling villian and the purpose of ornamental characters
like Ving Rhames.  But perhaps, the most disturbing thing about MISSION
IMPOSSIBLE is that it fails to live up to the standard set by the TV show.
 The show had intrigue and suspense and the movie has Cruise.  The show
had focus.  Dictators ousted from power by exploiting  their
vulnerabilities.  The movie has Cruise.  The show tried to save the world.
 The movie tried to save Cruise.  If Tom's boyish smirk is enough for you,
then by all means, make  your boyfriend  take you to see this film. If you
want more from your movie, do not accept this mission and go rent
GOLDENEYE.         

Author
Scott Renshaw
     During one fifteen minute sequence in MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, I was
reminded of what a masterful director of suspense Brian DePalma can be
when he is on his game.  In that sequence, government undercover operative
Ethan Hunt (Tom Cruise) is attempting to break into a CIA computer
facility to steal information which will help him clear his name after he
is suspected of being a double-agent, with the assistance of a team of
other disavowed agents (Ving Rhames, Emmanuelle Beart and Jean Reno).
That facility, however, is filthy with security systems:  laser sensors,
heat sensors, pressure sensors, sound sensors.  As Cruise attempts to
download files and get out of the booby-trapped room safely, DePalma
creates the kind of suspense that most directors of action only dream
about -- you're wondering not only _if_ Cruise will be caught, but which
alarm will go off first.  The CIA set piece is crisply edited, and set up
and executed with skill and flair.  For those fifteen minutes, DePalma is
a genius again, and MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE is all you could ask a summer
adventure-thriller to be.
     This had to come as a dream assignment for DePalma, whose career has
been a virtual relief map of peaks (THE UNTOUCHABLES) and valleys (THE
BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES).  It's telling that you won't see DePalma's name
anywhere in the advertising campaign for MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE -- he's
obviously not considered much of a selling point -- but it's the kind of
job that can put a guy back on the A-list.  What a shame that with the
exception of those furiously tense fifteen minutes, DePalma seems to be
spending most of his time on damage control.  The film is full of cockeyed
angles, extreme close-ups, flashbacks and slow-motion, as DePalma tries to
create the illusion that somewhere buried in all the busy detail of plot,
something is actually at stake in MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.
     Just to demonstrate that I understand the point of MISSION:
IMPOSSIBLE, I will observe that it is a premise, a property, a franchise,
an identifiable name to be exploited.  It is an espionage thriller which
comes conveniently after GOLDENEYE has demonstrated that there is still a
market for espionage thrillers, and it is yet another escapist
entertainment like TWISTER which treats story and character as luxury
items not afforded by budgets in the neighborhood of $70 million (a very
comfortable neighborhood).  The problem is that MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE
carries on as though the story _is_ supposed to matter -- that we're
supposed to care enough about Ethan Hunt as a character to want to see him
succeed in his quest to vindicate himself, that we're supposed to
understand there is a personal, mentor-like relationship between Hunt and
his team leader Jim Phelps (Jon Voight), that we're supposed to identify
any personal qualities in any of the individuals who comprise Hunt's IMF
teams.  There are scenes throughout the film which suggest that we're
supposed to find the relationships between people relevant in some way,
and instead I found myself scratching my head and wondering where,
precisely, I was supposed to have picked up that information.
     Even DePalma makes several puzzling choices during the film,
including an ill-advised sequence which shows us through flashback that
Hunt knows someone is lying to him, making a scene which comes later
thoroughly anti-climactic.  Still, he seems most of the time to be trying
his best with a script by David Koepp and Robert Towne (and which featured
story assistance from Steven Zaillian) which is both simplistic in premise
and ridiculously convoluted and confusing in the execution.  There is one
extremely well-handled and unexpected development quite early in the film,
and it offers the hope that MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE is going to avoid the
predictability bug.  However, at its heart MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE is about
one real question -- who is the real traitor -- and I found myself waiting
for the inevitable revelation through a morass of ridiculous leaps of
logic.
     MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE's two other action set pieces will certainly have
their fans, and there are moments of excitement and cleverness in both of
them.  But I found the opening sequence brutally edited, and if you've
seen any trailers or commercials for the film (and how could you miss
them), you've seen the best moment in the big high-speed train finale.
No, there is only one real reason to see MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, and that is
those fifteen precious minutes when you are reminded that a scene without
special effects can be gripping because it was put together by a superb
craftsman, a director who can momentarily make you forget about a sloppy
script, and make you care about the fate of cardboard cutouts.  

Author
Lewis Butler
Mission Impossible is a good movie that has been taking a lot of critical
hits from people who seem to have been expecting DIE HARD IV meets
GOLDENEYE.  MISSION IMPOSSIBLE is not that kind of movie.  What this movie
does is present a fairly intelligent plot that is highly detailed and makes
the horrible mistake (for a summer movie hopping to be a blockbuster) of
not spoon feeding every plot point to the audience.
There are no stupid pauses in the action to explain what's going on,
there's no extra effort made to guide the audience along with the gizmos
and gadgets.  The movie shows you what is happening, and then expects you
to be able to figure out the details.
There is a wonderful sequence towards the middle of the film that sold me.
Tom Cruise is talking to character A about the possibility of Character B
being a mole.  The entire time he's engaged in this conversation, Cruise
keeps flashing to a sequence on how Character A could have been the mole.
The juxtaposition of the converstation against what we see Cruise thinking
is a brilliant, and effective, device.  However, I could hear the
grumblings in the audience, they didn't seem to understand what was going
on.
Tom Cruise fits into the role of a spy very well.  He has a certain
presence on the screen that makes him quite believable.
There is, as there always seems to be with the special effects wonders of
recent years, a certain amount of suspension of belief.  One sequence in
particular has Cruise surviving an explosion when he is thrown by the
explosion onto the roof of a moving train.  Hollywodd seems to have decided
on several conventions in action films that boggle the mind:  cars have no
trouble driving through security gates (why anyone would build a security
gate that a car can drive through remains unanswered); explosions throw
heroes clear and kill villains; guns are highly inaccurate weapons; and
there are others, of course.  Still, those "mistakes" are so established in
the genre that they've become conventions.  The audience expects them.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL ">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme>
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data

Author
Jerry Saravia
Back in 1996, I made the comment that Tom Cruise's films seemed to be less 
than stellar achievements. However, since then he has proven to be a solid 
actor with "Jerry Maguire," "Eyes Wide Shut," and "Magnolia." Mostly, Cruise 
has become the Dick Clark of superstars who never seems to age and always 
plays righteous, good all-American boys a'la "Top Gun."  Like some of his 
lesser achievements, "Far and Away" and "The Firm," "Mission: Impossible" is 
somewhat fluffy and mediocre yet it boasts some electrifying, entertaining 
sequences amidst all the muddle. 
Based on the hit television series of yesteryear, Tom Cruise plays Ethan 
Hunt, an able protege of veteran IMF (as in Impossible Mission Force) agent 
Jim Phelps (Jon Voight), and along with Phelps's team of undercover 
operatives, they attempt to capture a Russian agent with plans to steal a 
disc containing the identities of American agents stationed in Europe. Whew! 
Of course, something invariably goes wrong with Phelps's master plan and it 
is up to Hunt and a surviving female operative (Emanuelle Beart from "Nelly 
and Monsieur Arnaud") to uncover the enemy who may be a former IMF agent. 
The movie begins to lose track of an always intriguing premise - corruption 
at the heart of an organization, which in this case is the IMF. There are 
multiple twists upon twists upon some clever turns, and lots of latex 
disguises courtesy of ILM. The elaborate plot does become a bit confusing 
after awhile, but at least we have action scenes to marvel at. 
There are two terrific action setpieces that are as thrilling and enticing as 
anything I've seen since 1993's "The Fugitive." In one spectacular sequence, 
Hunt descends froma ceiling onto a computer room which has a heat sensitive 
alarm that can be triggered if the room temperature is above 98 degrees. This 
sequence is filled with unbridled tension thanks to director De Palma's 
uncanny choice of camera shots and editing strategies. The sequence, though, 
works mainly because the soundtrack is filled with such utter, complete silenc
e that all you can hear is Hunt's drops of sweat. 
Another titillating sequence occurs when the impenetrable Hunt is fighting 
the villains on top of a super speeding train, which is also dragging a 
helicopter. Scenes like this give "Mission: Impossible" an edge that 
literally keeps you on the edge of your seat. 
The ultimate flaw in "Mission" is that the plot is so convoluted that we stop 
caring about certain characters, including Phelps (a far too restrained Jon 
Voight) and the luminous Emanuelle Beart (Phelp's wife), both of whom become 
as one-note as you can expect. This is really Cruise's show all the way (he 
is also the producer) and he inhabits every single scene, making the 
character of Ethan Hunt knowing, charismatic, witty and resourceful, like 
just about every other character Cruise has played.  I can't imagine anyone 
else playing the role with the same level of sincerity - if only he would age 
a bit. This often feels like "Risky Business" crossed with the James Bond 
genre. 
Cruise has some able support from bald-headed Ving Rhames ("Pulp Fiction"), 
Jean Reno ("The Professional"), whose character has the tools to break into 
any security system, Henry Czerny as the coldly calculating IMF chief, and 
the wonderfully restrained Vanessa Redgrave (!) as some kind of underground 
mastermind. There is also a funny, unbilled cameo by Emilio Estevez. Only 
Voight and Beart seem to be sleepwalking through the proceedings. 
Another plus is veteran director Brian De Palma who does a professionally 
slick job fo directing, though his trademark style of nervous energy is 
largely absent this time. For better or worse, "Mission: Impossible" is 
fitfully exciting, electrifying nonsense...and terribly confusing and 
impossible to follow.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com 
or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Though you can't take your eyes off of it, director Brian DePalma's
hotly anticipated adaptation of the classic '60's spy series is a
misfire of near-colossal proportions.  *Huge* amounts of effort and
talent are up on the screen and, yet, the movie fails to meet the
most-simple of narrative standards:  it doesn't draw us into the
characters.  Period.  Minutes pass, scenes change, but that crucial
connection never happens.  Blame the lousy pre-credits opening, for
starters.  What the hell are we supposed to make of a surveillance
expert (Emilio Estevez) watching a black-and-white video of what appears
to be a bad Russian soap opera?  Huh?  This terrible sequence was
reportedly *much* more elaborate, until the test audiences got hold of
it.  God help us.  Now, the scene runs about five minutes and that's all
the introduction we get.  Almost no chance to identify the characters,
nor assimilate the action, nor get a feel for the film's tone.  Needless
to say, the movie never recovers from this misstep.
     What we later learn is that said soap stars are really a team of
secret agents.  They work for Mr. Phelps (Jon Voight, looking very old),
a shadowy government figure who must owe Blockbuster Video some serious
bucks because all of his tapes keep self-destructing.  (The character of
Mr. Phelps is one of the few elements retained from the television
series; another is composer Lalo Schifrin's cool theme music.) The story
has Mr. Phelps accompanying his IMF team on a doomed mission to Prague,
to intercept someone who's selling the real names of secret agents.
(Said list is largely responsible for turning the plot screws.  Would
you like some fries with your MacGuffin?) Problems ensue, bad things
happen, and the team's point man, Ethan Hunt (Tom Cruise), is
immediately suspected as a traitor.  Notice that I'm not telling much of
the plot.  The rest of the story has Hunt on the run, ducking his
superiors while trying to catch the real bad guys.
     The whole thing is far more convoluted than I can describe here.
And the tone isn't much better.  DePalma tries be both serious and silly
and it doesn't work.  The major components of the movie are too heavy;
the handsome cast, the top production values, etc. all but squeeze the
cheese right out of the film.  So, instead of integration, we get a
study in contrasts:  fine actors like Kristin Scott-Thomas playing
straight to somebody wearing obvious old-age make-up.  Or, those
imposing international locales that are announced to the audience in
gigantic letters on title cards.  Or, my favorite, the dramatic
confrontations and the crazy angles that capture them.  Holy tilted
camera!
     The camera tilts are absurdly appropriate, though, given the film's
low Believability Factor (BF).  When Cruise's character escapes from a
restaurant, for example, he blows up an aquarium that releases enough
water to supply a small city.  (BF=0.09) And there are *many* such
goofs, gaffes, and general "head-scratchers" scattered about.
Respectable writers David Koepp (JURASSIC PARK), Steven Zaillan
(SCHINDLER'S LIST), and Robert Towne (CHINATOWN) are listed in the
credits.  I wonder which one was responsible for that amazing "Internet
magic" that Hunt performs?  Or who thought it believable that Hunt would
retreat to a government-sponsored safe house, after said government was
now hunting *him*?  As the movie is nearly devoid of any humor, these
unintentional amusements-- like the sight of Vanessa Redgrave wearing
what's either a bad wig or a bad dye job-- provide some critically
needed chuckles.  (One *intentional* gas is the film's standout
sequence, involving the theft of a computer file from a secured room at
the CIA Headquarters.  It's vintage DePalma and *far* more exciting that
the speed-train-helicopter-into-the-Chunnel-chase finale.)
     Still, MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE should generate both good returns and
good word of mouth.  Working with an array of accomplished actors,
lavish locales, and cool camera tricks, DePalma has created a convincing
illusion.  He's made the quintessential Hollywood product:  a well-
produced and well-promoted thrill machine.  If the applause at the
screening that I saw is any indication, *many* people are going to enjoy
this movie and many people are going to think that they've really *seen*
something.  For the rest of the us-- those already sensitive since that
terrible TWISTER blew through-- we can roll with what's awful and still
have some fun.  After all, the director *is* Brian DePalma.  He knows
how to handle trash and turn it into something that's entirely
watchable.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Alex Christensen
3 of 4 stars; nearly incoherent but fun
The pitch: "It'll be like _Sneakers_ meets _Top_Gun_!"
        The summer movies are officially upon us, may heaven be merciful. 
Don't get me wrong. I am looking forward to this season, not just because 
of the big-budget studio films like The Arnold Movie and The Big Reptile 
Movie and The Jim Carrey Movie, but also because of some independents or 
risk-takers like _Trainspotting_, from Danny Boyle, the director of 
_Shallow_Grave_, Francis Ford Coppola's _Jack_, starring Robin Williams 
("Oh, I _hate_ that disease!"), and the star-packed _A_Time_to_Kill_, which, 
I am convinced, will bring a much-deserved Oscar to Samuel L. Jackson, 
and I do not even have to see it to say that.
        That is why I was looking forward to _Mission:_Impossible_, from 
director Brian DePalma, the twisted, disturbed man who brought us _Carrie_, 
_The_Untouchables_, and _Carlito's_Way_. Unfortunately, 
_Mission:_Impossible_ is not up to his usual standard. Oh, it is 
certainly watchable, even entertaining, but there is too much missing to 
class it with even his average pictures. Is this just the burden of 
being too successful, a big name? Maybe so, but even factoring this in, 
_Mission:_Impossible_ is still not much more than a star-driven, 
big-budget B movie. _The_Bonfire_of_the_Vanities_ offers more pathos and 
emotional involvement, and MELANIE GRIFFITH is in it!
        There is probably not much reason to be so down on it. Some have 
already second-hand tried to evaluate the rumors and buzz coming out of 
production to assess blame with the many screenwriters who were brought 
in to write and rewrite the thing during shooting, or with Tom Cruise, 
the producer, for exerting too much control over DePalma, etc., etc. That 
would be a waste of breath. The only and true culprit is Hollywood, which 
does not care to take a half-second to try to make an okay movie really 
exceptional, as long as it can draw an audience. And _Mission:_Impossible_ 
is guaranteed to do that. One of my friends heard that the movie was 
opening Wednesday, but she could not make it to that showing. So I said, 
"Why not wait until Friday, so you can read my review and see if it's 
worth going to?" "Yeah, right."
        So I have no illusions about my poor power to add or detract from 
the huge box office this movie will bring in, or for that matter any 
movie critic's. It will make two hundred million dollars, and Tom Cruise 
will be able to pay the mortgage. (Whew! I know we were all worried for 
the kid.)
        And nobody will feel too ripped off, either. After all, it is not 
painful to watch the movie, and (primarily, I am convinced, because of 
the old _Mission:_Impossible_ theme by Lalo Schifrin) when the action is 
really cooking, it moves as fast and powerful as anything ever has on screen.
        The problems, then, are not overwhelming. Here they are. The plot 
is pretty much incomprehensible. If you bother to try to follow it, or 
retrace it, you will immediately find an inconsistency. Then you will 
think, "Wait. Is that really an inconsistency?" You will sit forward in 
your seat and convince yourself something deeper is going on for a 
second, then realize you were right the first time. It was just an 
inconsistency. Do not panic. It is just a movie, after all. Something 
will blow up soon and that will be fun. Especially if they play the 
music. Doot! Doot! Doot! Doot! Doo-doo-doo! Another problem is that few 
of the very, very good actors are utilized to their fullest. Kristin 
Scott-Thomas, Emilio Estevez, Henry Czerny, Jean Reno, Emmanuelle Beart, 
Ving Rhames, all have range that is never explored. And just a little 
exploration might have added some weight or substance to the story that 
would make it more than just a twisty little nothing of a film. As it is, 
though, Cruise is competent, and Vanessa Redgrave steals the movie, 
making Cruise look like a choirboy who has been singing too high for too 
long.
        When you think of Cruise films, this will never top the list. 
When you think of DePalma films, this will never top the list. When you 
think of action films, this will never top the list. When you think of 
films made from semi-popular sixties television series, this probably 
would not even make the top five. Oh well. You can't have everything, I 
guess. Still, you can't help but feel that a couple of weeks more in 
pre-production, a nice quick script rewrite by Quentin Tarantino or 
Carrie Fisher or Elaine May, or even just a bit more Lalo Schifrin, 
take-no-prisoners theme music could only have added.
        As it is, I would have to say to head in with low expectations, 
don't think too much, and make sure to pay matinee price, because it is 
worth it.

Author
Pete Nelson
Note: There will be some spoilers in here.
I have a few points to make about this movie.  First of all, it's not
an action movie.  About 90% of the good action sequences in the movie
you've already seen - in the commercials and the previews.  The only
major action sequence is the helicopter scene in the tunnel, and
that's at the end of the movie.  So, if you're looking for a good
action movie, save your dough.
Second, the casting is a bit odd too.  Ving Rhames (Marsellus Wallace
from Pulp Fiction) plays a hacker.  While he's not a bad actor, it's
very hard to picture big, burly tough-guys as hackers.  Also, Emilio
Estevez seems like a promising character, but he is killed off in the
first fifteen minutes of the movie.
Finally, at the end of the movie, I still wasn't sure who the good
guys were and who the bad guys were.  Either the plot-web was too
tangled or I'm just not very good at figuring these things out.
A couple pieces of trivia I saw in the movie:  While it's never used,
Ethan Hunt's (Tom Cruise) alias is Phillip Douchette.  Also, John
Voight's character gives away the location of Ethan to the people
looking for him.  He's going to be on a train.  You can see the word
"Voit" on the train ticket.  May mean something else, but it's an odd
coincidence.
To sum up, if you like a good spy-type mystery, you'll probably like
this.  If you're looking for a great action movie, go see Twister.

Author
Christopher Null
     You heard it here first:  When big "Mission: Impossible" fans leave
the theater after seeing the film version of their favorite TV show, the
most common opinion will be, "I'm pissed off."
     Telling you why would spoil what little plot MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE
actually has, so I won't.  Instead, let me try to shed a little light on
what is a messy, uneven production that had so much promise but delivers so
little.
     Tom Cruise, surprisingly, is not to blame.  The only A-list name in
the production, Cruise stars as Ethan Hunt, the disguise expert in the IMF
gang.  Something of a rebel in the bunch, Hunt finds himself embroiled in a
mission-gone-wrong that should have been a cakewalk.  With the whereabouts
of his crew unknown (including Emmanuelle Beart, Kristin Scott-Thomas, an
uncredited Emilio Estevez, and Jon Voight as boss-man Jim Phelps), Hunt
finds himself the target of a "molehunt" from IMF bigwig Kittridge (Henry
Czerny).  Hunt then tries to play cat and mouse to expose the real mole and
the bad guys and save his skin in the process.
     And getting to the blowing up of stuff is director Brian De Palma's
primary goal here.  In the process, he lets the story fall into new realms
of ridiculousness and "What the hell is going on?" Syndrome.  Respected
writers David Koepp (JURASSIC PARK), Robert Towne (CHINATOWN), and Steven
Zaillian (SCHINDLER'S LIST) appear to be running on fumes.  After a dozen
silly and unlikely plot twists, you really stop caring about the whole
thing and just sit back in the hopes of an impromptu explosion.  (And there
are many fewer of these than the trailer would have you believe.)
     MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE's success (or lack thereof) hinges on two big
scenes:  the big break-in scene (in the trailer, where Cruise is hanging
from a wire in a computer room), and the big finish (in the trailer, where
Cruise is propelled from an exploding helicopter onto a train).  While both
scenes are good, there's nothing new in them.  In fact, the break-in is
virtually identical to a similar scene in SNEAKERS.  Yawn.
     The free and inaccurate use of high-technobabble makes the production
look worse than it is, and Danny Elfman's score is surprisingly flat.
While the acting is on-target, never getting too far over-the-top, the
movie simply starts with a whimper... and, you guessed it... self-destructs.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com
-Screenwriter-Producer  /  Novelist-Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Patrick Lester
Best Part:  Theme Music in Action Scenes - Old TV Show Music turned so-so 
chase scenes into spine-tingling fun.
Worst Part: Actress who played John Voight's wife.  1) Take diction lessons 
2)SPEAK UP!!!! 3) Women w/Big Lips went out with Kim Basinger.
Part that did work:  Having "MAX" be sophisticated older woman - What she 
lacks in youth she makes up in sex appeal - RUFF!!
Part that did not work:  Cool black dude who was a tough, rougue 
CIA....Computer Hacker?!?!?!?!?!?!?!
Big Miss:  Movie That could have resurrected Emilo Estives' career,  but he 
dies in first 10 minutes.
Big Hit:  Another $100 million dollar movie, For Tom Cruise, Keeping him 
high on the A list. 
