Title
Review for Unbearable Lightness of Being, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Jeff Meyer
Quick three film reviews, so I can start up on the Seattle Film Festival (yes,
here we go again -- a pre-festival report will be out before the Thursday night
starting gun).
Not much to say other than very entertaining film and a few comments:
    Noticed the poster as I went out -- this film is the first film in years
    that had everyone who had the entire solarsphere of critics behind it.
    Siskel & Ebert, Reed, NEW YORK TIMES, the L.A. paper, TIME, NEWSWEEK,
    VILLAGE VOICE, and (I believe) a favorable quote from Kael.  When did
    this last happen?  GONE WITH THE WIND?  (Waters would love that on his
    ad -- "The first film to gather universal praise since GONE WITH THE
    WIND!").  And David O. Selznick never had to overcome having shot
    someone eating dog doo...
    Basically, this is the same as one of those Kurt Russell Disney films
    where the school outcasts have good things happen to them with a minimum
    of struggle in a Happy Environment.  Except that these people are
    outcast which ol' Walt would never have approved of (let's face it --
    Kurt Russell an outcast?  ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK, maybe, but he had
    Adrienne Barbeau...).  And, more importantly, Water's never loses his
    spoofing, satirical bite -- in fact, it runs concurrently with the
    starry-eyed plot, neither stealing cycles from the other.
A solid $4.50 film.  Take the kids, they'll love it (the 10-year-olds in the
audience were really enjoying it, and I'd deem everything in this film
wholesome for 10-year-olds, or even 6-year-olds).
So this is what all the hoopla is about.  Well, it's a good film; my main
observation would be that the best part of the thing was John Lone's
performance as the Emperor, and that's the one thing the film didn't get
nominated for (which keeps my opinion of the awards at it's previously low
level).  Nice ending, but rather bloodless for an epic.  You can either do an
epic without involving interesting characters intelligently or ridiculously,
but it needs to be pervaded with an overpowering sense of the
Larger-than-Life.  A little schmaltz doesn't hurt, either -- yeah, I liked
DR. ZHIVAGO.
Again, a nice ending.  $2.50 film, see it on Economy Hour.
This is one of those films that becomes manically annoying during its length,
but leaves you with a favorable impression because the ending is good enough to
wipe out what came before.  It's one of those love stories which follows the
lives of several characters over a period of years.  It works, but it has
drawbacks.  Daniel Day Lewis (what *has* this man played in before?  His face
looks very familiar -- oh, wait, I know, MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE) and the
actress who plays his lover tend to be rather hollow through much of the film.
The actress who plays his wife, though, comes off very well, and damn near
saves the film during the last half-hour.  Good parts: their early encounters,
the invasion of Czechoslovakia, their return, the move to the farm (I have
great affection for merry older rural people.  And pigs.)  Bad points: Day and
his character's lover's affairs, the photo-session scene.
Two Points:  Why is this film considered more "sexually honest" than others?  I
keep hearing that from all sorts of newspaper reviews.  What, every guy is out
boinking a lover while his wife sits home and suffers?  They squeal more
realistically during intercourse in this film?  I guess film journalists live
fairly Bohemian lives...
And... do you think that the Czech couple really die in the end?  Or is it
that Day's character, in his typically egocentric manner, is day-dreaming
about his lover's reaction to news of their death?  I go for the former, but
either way, it's a damn inventive way to end the film, and very satisfying.

Author
Brian Koller
The Unbearable Lightness of Being (1988)
Perhaps the worst aspect of "The Unbearable Lightness
of Being" is the satire-prone title, which many people
undoubtedly interpreted as "The Unbearable Length of an
Art Film".  It is true that at 171 minutes, the film
drags a little in the second half.  But the title, which
refers to Tereza's explanation for returning to Czechoslovakia,
is far more pretentious than the film itself.  In fact,
the film has more warmth and eroticism than anything
else.  The film's backdrop may be the 1968 Russian
invasion that toppled the progressive Czech government,
but the script is much more interested in following
the frequent sexual liasons of its lead characters.
That is not to say that politics aren't present,
only that they provide a context.  The communists are
subtly sinister bureaucrats, using intimidation and
blackmail to put fear in the hearts of the people.
But whenever politics threatens to dominate the film,
the characters leave Prague, and the script can again
focus on philanderings and infidelities.
Daniel Day Lewis is Tomas, an ingratiating brain
surgeon with a talent for seducing beautiful women.
(The film's signature line is "Take off your clothes".)
His favorite partner is Sabina (Lena Olin), who shares
his free-spirited philosophy.  Tomas begins a committed
relationship with Tereza (Juliette Binoche), whom he
eventually marries.  But he is unable to stop philandering.
Meanwhile, Soviet tanks arrive in Prague.  Our leads
flee to Switzerland, where Sabina begins an adulterous
relationship with naive Franz (Derek de Lint).
While Olin was the only cast member to receive a significant
acting nomination (Golden Globe Best Supporting Actress),
Binoche and Lewis are equally good.  Daniel Day Lewis
may be the best actor of this generation, and he is as
convincing here as he was with drastically different (and
more challenging) characters in films such as "A Room with a View",
"My Left Foot", and "In the Name of the Father".
"Being" received Academy Award nominations for Best Adapted
Screenplay (Jean-Claude Carriere and Philip Kaufman, based
on the Milan Kundera novel) and Best Cinematography (Sven Nykist;
the film was shot in France due to Czech politics).  The
Golden Globes nominated "Being" for Best Picture.
Still, much credit must go to Kaufman, as his direction
makes the characters sensual, credible and compelling.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Manavendra K. Thakur
Cast: Daniel Day-Lewis, Juliette Binoche, Lena Olin, Derek de Lint,
Erland Josephson, Pavel Landovsky, Donald Moffat, Daniel Olbrychski,
Stellan Skarsgard, Tomek Bork, Bruce Myers, Pavel Slaby, Pascale Kalensky,
Jacques Ciron, Anne Lonnberg, Laszlo Szabo, Vladimir Valenta, Clovis Cornillac,
Leon Lissek, Consuelo de Haviland.
Credits: Directed by Philip Kaufman. Produced by Saul Zaentz. Screenplay by
Jean-Claude Carriere and Philip Kaufman. Adapted from the Milan Kundera novel.
Directory of Photography: Sven Nykvist, A.S.C. Supervising Film Editor: Walter
Murch. Costume Design: Ann Roth. Production Design: Pierre Guffroy. Original
music and arrangements by Mark Adler. Musical selections from the works of Leos
Janacek.
     Upon examining the list of credits for this film, bells and lights should
be going off in every direction.  Saul Zaentz (AMADEUS, ONE FLEW OVER THE
CUCKOO'S NEST) produced.  The film was shot by Sven Nykvist, the "painter with
light" who has won universal praise for his work with Ingmar Bergman and other
directors.  The film was edited under the watchful eye of Walter Murch, who won
Oscars and acclaim for his editing and sound work in films like APOCALYPSE NOW,
THX-1138, and THE CONVERSATION.  The cast is a potpourri of prominent and
excellent actors from England, Czechoslovakia, France, Sweden, and Holland.
The director, Philip Kaufman, is American; he's known mainly for the 1978
remake of INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS and THE RIGHT STUFF.  Finally, the
script is based on the internationally reknowned novel written in 1984 by Milan
Kundera, a Czechoslovakian expatriate living in France.  Seeing the list of all
that high-power talent is almost enough to make the breath quicken and the
mouth water; the potential for greatness seems ready to explode in an artistic
flowering.
     Then the intrigue of the subject matter arises: just what is a film with a
title like "The Unbearable Lightness of Being" about?  One borrows a copy of
the novel from a friend to satiate the desire to know.  On a strict narrative
level, it turns out that the book concerns the erotic liaisons between a
brilliant brain surgeon in Czechoslovakia named Tomas, his wife Tereza, and his
mistress Sabina, as well as Sabina's lover Franz.  But this is no trashy
Harlequin Romance.  Their romantic exploits are set against the 1968 Soviet
invasion of their homeland, which abruptly terminated the newly-found artistic
and political freedoms during the period of "socialism with a human face" known
as the Prague Spring.
     But then an unpleasant realization sinks in.  The path from the novel,
which quite deserves all the praise it has been given, to a film is fraught
with many possible missteps.  Why?  Because interspersed within the romance and
politics are Kundera's numerous philosophical asides and metaphysical
discussions -- which form the real core and gem of the novel.  Consider this
excerpt from Part Two (which is entitled "Body and Soul"):
     Even in this abridged passage, one can see how deftly Kundera integrates
his ruminations with his character's actions.  That is what gives the novel and
its title substance and depth; no other novel in recent memory about the
travails of young lovers begins with a three-page reflection on Nietzchean idea
of eternal return and Parmenides' division of the world into pairs of
opposites.  And Kundera's remarkable word choices and striking juxtapositions
elevate the novel to its proper place as a great work of modern literature.
     But therein lies the problem with the film: any filmmaker, no matter how
talented, will most likely be at a loss as how to transfer the full richness of
the above excerpt to the filmic medium.  The best one can probably hope for is
an intelligent and sensitive recounting of the narrative in a manner that
remains faithful to the more metaphysical aspects of the book.  While Ingmar
Bergman or Alain Resnais (HIROSHIMA MON AMOUR) might be the first choice to
guide the novel to the screen, Philip Kaufman and his actors leave no doubt
that they have made as good a film as possible from as unfilmable a novel as
this.  Unfortunately, the film leaves one hanging for more.
     Perhaps the best scene in which this becomes evident is the scene near the
beginning after Tereza has just unexpectedly arrived at Tomas' apartment in
Prague.  As she and Tomas make love for the first time, she screams loudly in
his ear.  In the book, the scream "was not an expression of sensuality....
What was screaming is fact was the naive idealism of her love trying to banish
all contradictions, banish the duality of body and soul, banish perhaps even
time."  In the film, however, all one hears is Tereza shouting for a second or
so.  There is no indication whatsoever of the metaphysical significance of
Tereza's screams.  This is indicative of how straightforward the narrative has
been made in the film, and it is painful to sit through knowing that so much is
lacking on the screen.  The book's central categorization of all things into
"heavy" and "light" and Kundera's constant exploration of the boundaries of the
two is so subdued in the film as to be virtually absent.
     Yet what remains on the screen does have strengths of its own.  The acting
in the film is uniformly superb, from Daniel Day-Lewis as Tomas, French actress
Juliette Binoche as Tereza, and noted Swedish actress Lena Olin as Sabina down
to the few moments the popular Polish actor Daniel Olbrychski has onscreen as
an Interior Ministry official who tries to convince Tomas to recant an article
critical of the communists that Tomas had written years before.  Kaufman draws
thoroughly on the skills of his actors, and there is no mistaking that this
most American of directors has successfully produced a quintessentially
European character study.
     Technically, the film is dazzling in several moments.  In one scene,
Tereza hallucinates while swimming in a pool that the row of women exercising
at the poolside have been replaced by a grinning Tomas forcing the now nude
women to do squat-thrusts.  The camera shows the women from Tereza's point of
view as she alternately surfaces and dives into the water.  The crisp colors
and the sharp, seamless editing between the real and the unreal as the camera
bobs above and below the water surface makes up in visual appeal for the loss
of the inner meaning (explained in the book) of Tereza's hallucination.  
     Also, the sequence in which Tereza and Tomas photograph the Soviet tanks
and troops as they roll into Prague is a breathtaking cinematic tour-de-force.
Kaufman and his crew brilliantly integrate archival footage with their own
recreation of the Russian invasion -- complete with authentic clothing, props,
automobiles, and tanks.  Daniel Day-Lewis is even provided with a gold tooth
crown that was popular among Czech men at the time.  Kaufman's crew maintained
such a high degree of accuracy that Kundera, who lived through the invasion,
could not distinguish archival footage of the invasion from scenes of Kaufman's
recreation.  During this sequence, Kaufman integrates virtually every technical
aspect of filmmaking -- lighting, photography, editing, sound, color, art
direction, acting -- with such astonishing clarity that the sheer cinematic
strength of those scenes carries the film in a direction the book never could
have.
     And the narrative does manage to include some of Kundera's philosophical
gems.  In one dinner table conversation, Tomas castigates those who initially
welcomed the communist regime for not following the mythical example of
Oedipus, who, says Tomas, at least had the courage to punish himself (by
gouging out his eyes and leaving home) when he realized that he had killed his
father and slept with his mother.  Kaufman also deserves accolades for the
caring sensitivity with which he brings the nudity and eroticism of the book to
the screen.  That Kaufman manages to avoid cheap exploitation in an industry
that revels at every opportunity to increase box office appeal is in of itself
a major accomplishment.
     Unfortunately, by the end of the film's 168 minutes, all of the film's
inner strengths fail to compensate for the loss of the inner secrets of
Kundera's novel.  Kundera himself has said that "If the novel has a function,
it is to discover the ambiguity of things.  My obsession as a novelist is to
transform all answers into questions."  That ambiguity is, sadly, missing from
the screen translation.  Kaufman had the blessing of Kundera's intimate
involvement and approval of the choices he made while writing the script, and
Kaufman also benefited from Kundera's experience with filmmaking (Kundera was
once a professor at the Prague National Film School, where Milos Forman was
among his students).  With all the talent involved in the making of this film,
Kaufman has achieved what to him must be a supreme personal triumph.
Nevertheless, it is disappointing that one must be familiar with Kundera's
novel to fully appreciate the qualities that made the story of Tomas, Tereza,
Sabina, and Prague so memorably special.
As is undoubtedly apparent from the filmography, THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF
BEING is a departure from the material that Philip Kaufman has previously worked
on (except, perhaps, for his 1983 adaptation of Tom Wolfe's bestseller).  His
films have only recently begun to attract critical attention.

Author
James Brundage
Written by Philip Kaufman and Jean-Claude Carriere
Starring Daniel-Day Lewis (The Last of the Mohicans), Juliette Binoche (The
English Patient), and Lena Olin (Night Falls on Manhattan)
Produced by Saul Zantz (The English Patient)
 When I first watched The Unbearable Lightness of Being, I was dating a poet
who had read and loved the book.  Not wanting to involve myself in reading
the book at that point, I rented the movie instead.  I loved it then and I
love it now, but, at this point in time, I can compare it to the novel by
Milan Kundera.
 The two are both vastly similar and vastly different.  As an adaptation, it
succeeds in transcribing the events of the novel, but does not do as well in
successfully demonstrating its points.
 The Unbearable Lightness of Being focuses on Tomas (Daniel-Day Lewis), a
Don Juanist terrified of commitment and a surgeon at a Prague hospital.  He
is trapped between his platonic and semi-erotic love of Teresa (Academy
Award winner Juliette Binoche), a photographer and his wife and a erotic and
semi-platonic love of Sabina (Lena Olin), a painter and his mistress.
 Teresa is haunted by terrible nightmares and suicidal urges brought on by a
love of Tomas clashing with a hatred of his "lightness" or the ability to
view sex as entertainment and not commitment.  Sabina, on the other hand, is
having to deal with her very first tinges of jealousy as the only man she
may have ever truly loved is now obviously in love with another woman.
 As a necessary subtext, this occurs at the same time as the occupation of
Czechoslovakia by the Soviet Union.
 This is where the book and the movie, a perfect joined atom before, begin
their fission.
 In the book, a major point was a philosophical protest to the occupation of
Czechoslovakia, to the point where the book devotes some one hundred pages
entirely on this subject.  In the movie, it is a subtext and a backdrop.
The few times that it does appear, it does a cameo.
 Those cameos, on the other hand, are so powerful in their own respects that
they would be academy-award cameos.  One such is a magnificent black and
white re-creation of the invasion of Czechoslovakia, which is packed with
all of the emotional content that the one hundred pages of the book could
muster and more.  Kudos to Walter Murch, the cinematographer of the film.
 Following the invasion, Sabina, Tomas, and Teresa emigrate to Geneva,
Switzerland, where they end up in the same predicament that they were in at
the beginning of the film.
 Returning to the part of the story that the film harks on, The Unbearable
Lightness of Being is successfully able to ponder: polygamy or monogamy?  It
also, despite numerous sex scenes and adulterous encounters, paints more
poignantly than any other film the damage that Tomas' "lightness of being"
(polygamy) does to a faithful person.
 Teresa loves Tomas enough, however, not to try to change him.  Instead, she
herself attempts to experience this "lightness of being", trying modeling
for nude photographs by and taking nude photographs of Sabina and a very
unsuccessful adultery with an Engineer.
 Teresa is unable, of course, to feel this lightness, and instead is only
faced with an increasing sadness as she fails again and again.  The sadness
is perfectly transmitted to the screen thanks to Juliette Binoche's
performance.  She was, is, and forever will be one of the actresses that
does good in any role.
 This is not a date movie.  The question laid unto the viewer is too heavy
for a couple in the early stages of their relationship to ponder.  Nor is it
what the other critics say: "The most openly sexual American film in ages."
(Rolling Stone).  Sex was used to advertise it, and, although it plays a
major role, the movie and the book are both about love, not sex.
 As far as the adaptation goes on other methods, there are several things
left out.  Teresa's family, mentioned extensively in the book, is brought up
only once in the movie.  Sabina's affair with a man named Franz is a quick
event in the movie, but a major plot of the book.  Also, the desire to
protest towards freedom is more focused on in the novel.
 This is a movie for those few willing to accept the challenge of an
intellectually stimulating film with a long running time, difficult
philosophical questions, literary references, and political means and
motives.  If you can deal with that, which I KNOW is a lot to ask, then
please pick it up.  Please enjoy this film.  And, should you enjoy the film,
please read the book.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING is
     not a light film, but it is by no means unbearable either.
     Philip Kaufman, who makes very entertaining films, makes one
     that only sounds like an exception.  171 minutes of solid
     entertainment with a title you can use to impress your
     friends.  Rating: +3.
     It certainly sounded like it was going to be a drag: THE UNBEARABLE
LIGHTNESS OF BEING.  You can expect a bad time from a film whose title is
sort of verbal fruit cocktail.  It sounds like an obscure contemplate-your-
navel sort of film.  But on the other hand, it is directed by Philip
Kaufman.  He put together THE OUTLAW JOSEY WALES, though Clint Eastwood took
over direction from him.  He did direct THE RIGHT STUFF.  He directed the
remake of INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS and co-wrote RAIDERS OF THE LOST
ARK.  These are NOT contemplate-your-navel films.  These are really
entertaining pieces.  On the other hand, more than one good director has
gone bad trying to produce his or her personal vision of what is art.
Reluctantly, I went to our local art theater and saw the best film I have
seen yet this year.
     THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING bears no small resemblance to DOCTOR
ZHIVAGO.  Tomas is a young successful doctor who gets a wife and a mistress,
finds his life upset by political events, and eventually finds a new
equilibrium in spite of the political events.  Where it differs is that the
political event is the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia instead of the
Russian Revolution and that in some ways the women are equally attracted to
each other, so that the triangle really is a triangle rather than a "V".
Attractive Czech surgeon Tomas (played by Daniel Day-Lewis) seems to collect
lovers like stamps.  His favorite phrase in both business and pleasure is
"take off your clothes" and with remarkable regularity business turns into
pleasure.  In a trip to a nearby spa town, he tries to seduce a barmaid
(Tereza, played by Juliette Binoche) only to find that she follows him back
to his apartment in Prague.  She enjoys sex with Tomas but is jealous of his
other lovers, including an artist Sabina (attractive Lena Olin).  There are
hints throughout the film that Tereza may be a repressed lesbian who finds
herself attracted to Sabina.  On the other hand, Lena is a bisexual who does
not repress anything but the will to make some sort of commitment.  This
triangle could have made for very high-level soap opera, but the Soviet
invasion casts a new light on everything and forces each of the three to
come to a better understanding of themselves, and also tests their
character.
     The eroticism of the film--if that is really what was intended--is
little more than amusing.  But you know that when you feel yourself actually
missing a character whom you haven't seen on the screen for a while, you are
watching a well-made film.  And once again Kaufman has made a long film (171
minutes) that seems much shorter.  Rate this film a +3 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Philip Kauffman
Writers: Jean-Claude Carričreand Philip Kauffman (based on the novel by
Milan Kundera)
Starring: Daniel Day-Lewis, Juliette Binoche, Lena Olin, Derek de Lint,
Erland Josephson, Pavel Landowsky, Donald Moffat, Stellan Skarsgĺrd, Tomek
Bork, Daniel Olbrychski
"The Unbearable Lightness of Being" is one of the great stories about sex
primarily because it knows exactly how to tell it.  Here's a film that
takes eroticism completely seriously, existing on some kind of other plane
of being...a light plane if you will.  The entire film feels like one
sustained thought about eroticism, but it also contains thoughts on sex,
promiscuity, and the way that life constantly interrupts this kind of
being, and that sex is something that is truly a many splendored thing, but
it's also something that cannot be sustained.
The film is a 3 hour thought on all of this, told in a light-weighted,
almost ethereal tone which has prompted certain groups to refer to it as
"The Unbearable Lightness of Boring."  In some ways, these people are
right: few things occur in this film, and scenes are extended beyond what
they usually would last in a standard film.  But this film isn't interested
in details, or really telling a story as it is with establishing the
correct mood, and saying some very deep things in the process.
The story itself could be interpreted as melodrama: a promiscuous doctor,
Tomas (Daniel Day-Lewis, with big Ben Stiller hair), marries a somewhat
eccentric country girl, Tereza (Juliette Binoche, very pre-"English
Patient"), but also conducts affairs with numerous women while still
staying emotionally faithful to Tereza.  Tomas has always been a womanizer,
and in the first scene of the film, tells a nurse at his hospital whom he
has had some relations with to take her clothes off because he "missed
something last night."  And she does.  When he marries Tereza, it's a tough
thing for him to do because, unlike him, Tereza is not a person who can
have meaningless affairs, and Tomas's cheating on her worries her.
There's another main character: Sabina (sweedish actress Lena Olin), who is
introduced with a title card that says she's the only person who
understands Tomas and his "lightness of being."  She too is promiscuous,
and she is shown at one time conducting an affair with a man named Franz
(Derek de Lint) who sleeps with her, then shows up one night at her
apartment to announce that he's left his wife and wishes to live with her. 
This frightens Sabina chiefly because she too is falling in love with him
and still wants to keep on living the way she does.
There are few other characters, most who come and go in the film, much like
Franz does.  But we are introduced to a few people who pop up every now and
then, including a chief surgeon at Tomas's hospital in Prague played by
Donald Moffat (who played the president in "Clear and Present Danger"); and
other characters who show up for only a brief period of time and then
disappear, like an Engineer played by Stellan Skarsgĺrd (who recently
played Proffessor Lambeau in the overrated "Good Will Hunting) who has an
all-too brief affair wit Tereza at one point in the film.  The triumverate
of characters are all the film is really interested in, and this creates a
closed vaccuum that the film lives in, protecting it from outside forces,
like these supporting characters who show up now and then.
The film also introduces politics and a war, as it takes place in Prague
during the "Prague Spring" of 1969.  It really could be any war, but this
war is special because it deals with communism and the freedom of
expression.  As the film goes on, Tomas becomes more and more outraged by
this war, and his entire livelihood is threatened, as well as Sabina's and
Tereza's.  The war of course is symbolic of reality's way of crushing the
finer parts of life, like sex and other forms of emotional liberation.  Sex
for Tomas and Sabina is a form of escapism, but this kind of living becomes
endangered because it has no center in reality.
The war scenes are handled nicely: without any real detail and with horror.
 The film never truly establishes what war it is, but later tells us that
it has to deal with communism.  The film is not concerned with such petty
details as the cause of the war, or even the outcome.  Such things are not
necessary to the film.  It wants to show the effects it has on the people
in the film, the way it causes them to have to break from their state of
being, and enter into reality.
But the film sustains a kind of hypnotic pull to it.  It's scenes are often
lengthy, filled with humor and a certain kind of eroticism.  Philip
Kauffman (who directed the first NC-17 film, "Henry and June," a couple
years later) directs the film with a light touch, making everything seem
effortless, and nothing but the war sequences coming off as jolting.  The
scenes themselves have lots of risque things going on which never seem to
attract attention themselves like they would in, say, a porn film.  We
delight in seeing them because they come off so nicely and with such a
gentle yet firm touch.
One scene imparticular stands out in the mind.  That's a scene where
Tereza, who's a photographer and just has gotten a job in Geneva (after
they've retreated there), discovers that to get more jobs, she has to
photograph naked women.  She visits Sabina, who's also in Geneva, and asks
her to pose nude for her.  Sabina agrees, and what occurs is so perfecly
orchestrated that it comes off as a 10 minute sustained breath.  Everything
they do is so sensual that I would be shocked if anyone was able to move
during this scene.  It's an example of how minimalism works perfectly in
creating eroticism: the two women never have sex, but they come so close
that it still comes off as satisfying.
The ending of this scene is perfect, with an intrusion into this form of
escapism that brings reality back to the foreground.  The entire film is
like this, dealing with sex on an intelligent level.  It views sex as a
form of escapism in life, and because sex can never last forever, there are
constant intrusions, spoiling the moment.  This is one of the only films
that view sex and promiscuity in a positive light.  It views it so kindly
because of the more philosophical ideas of it: it is a way to forget about
the terrors of the world, and while it's going on, we are almost not aware
of any outside influences and problems, like war or even STDs.
It also views this kind of living as something that some people have and
some don't.  While Tomas and Sabina have it, Tereza doesn't, and her few
attempts to gain it for herself come out as horrible and tragic.  But Tomas
and Sabina easily live with this kind of living, save for the constant
interruptions they have that break the moment.
You also have to respect how this film is so ungraphic about sex.  Despite
the fact that the subject of this film is sex, it doesn't have tons of
graphic sex or all sorts of nudity.  Yes, there is a little bit of both,
but the film does not become excessive at all.  It views sex as a kind of
hypnotic mystique, making it all the more erotic and sensual.  We never get
nasty close-ups, or linger over sex for long periods of time for the reason
that some person may find it fun to jack off to.  It has a deep respect for
sex, and Kauffman directs this with ease, but also the right amount of
restraint.
The title of the film is perfect: it's cynical, witty, and pretty much sums
up what this film is dealing with.  "The Unbearable Lightness of Being" is
about the way that having sex without the emotional entanglements is
something that will only last a short time.  Judging by this idea, as well
as the tragic ending, one might come to the conclusion that this kind of
living is bad, and that it will only lead to more horrible parts of life. 
But this story takes another angle, showing that while this kind of being
is not eternal, it must be enjoyed while it is happening.  Same goes for
this film, which, while it lasts, is a spellbinding film that transports us
to a whole other dimension of being, is interupted with a couple intrusions
of war and other horrors, then gets right back to where it was before. 
What other film treats sex so profoundly and with such love?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
