Title
Review for Playing Mona Lisa (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Matthew Huffman's PLAYING MONA LISA, Alicia Witt, as 23-year-old 
pianist Claire Goldstein, is fairly charming in a movie that almost 
never is.  As sweet as her favorite Ho-Ho's, Claire is an attractive 
redhead who woofs down junk food like carrot sticks but stays as skinny 
as a fashion model.  A flat and fairly lifeless comedy, PLAYING MONA 
LISA generates only a couple of chuckles and not even many smiles.
Soon after the movie starts, Claire is shown playing her heart out in 
the famous Tchaikovsky Competition.  After that, the screenplay by Marni 
Freedman and Carlos De Los Rios drops the whole young artist angle like 
a hot potato.  It does reappear briefly a few times in the narrative.  
Although we are supposed to assume that Claire is still a competitive 
musician, she never bothers to practice, and music plays almost no part 
of her everyday life.  This is one of many unbelievable aspects of the 
script.  Another is the way that Claire discusses intimate details of 
her sex life with Bennett (Harvey Fierstein), her gay music professor.
Claire's parents are played by Marlo Thomas and Elliott Gould, the 
latter being a member of my red-flag list of actors who make me question 
the quality of any movie that hires them.  Her mother is the typical 
overbearing Jewish mother so popular in the cinema, although the story 
takes pains to alternatively minimize and maximize the family's Jewish 
heritage.  Her father is mentally out to lunch.  For those of you who 
aren't fans of Gould be warned that you have to endure a smarmy scene 
with Gould and Thomas dancing on a rooftop, as well as an even worse one 
of them staring at a tablecloth in one of the most unbelievable drug 
hallucination scenes on record.
The movie, which is devoid of almost any comedic energy, likes to toss 
out throwaway lines and ideas.  Claire ridicules her best friend Sabrina 
(Brooke Langton, head cheerleader in THE REPLACEMENTS) for having an 
affair with a bigamist (Ivan Sergei), but nothing more is said about his 
wives.  At other times the movie wants to be taken as an old-fashioned 
screwball comedy, complete with quirky characters in every room.
James Glennon's drab cinematography with its washed-out colors manages 
to make San Francisco look downright dreary.  Even the film's sound is 
singularly dull, as if the theater had just installed heavy curtains on 
the walls.  Overall, the picture reminds one of those movies that you 
see at film festivals in which you just shake your head and think to 
yourself that they'll never get a distributor.
Is there anything at all unusual about PLAYING MONA LISA?  Yes, reading.  
Several characters are shown reading for the pure pleasure of enjoying a 
good novel.  In an electronics-infatuated age reading books is a 
wonderfully retro idea.
PLAYING MONA LISA runs 1:38.  It is rated R for drug content, 
sex-related dialogue and brief language and would be acceptable for 
older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
     Playing Mona Lisa follows the life of Claire Goldstein (Alicia
Witt), who slowly unravels as various forces of nature turn against
her.  Claire's life is not unlike the movie as a whole, which starts off
strong but meanders to a non-ending that is unlikely to leave anyone
very satisfied.
     Claire is a "brilliant" 23-year old pianist, which is apt casting
for Witt, considering she is also a real-life piano prodigy.  On the eve
of her graduation from the San Francisco Academy of Music, Claire's life
starts to come undone.  First she doesn't make it into a big piano
competition.  Then she gets dumped, then evicted, then just plain whiny
as she realizes her family (with whom she is now forced to live) is full
of freaks.
     Subplots galore include messy wedding preparations for sister
Jenine (Molly Hagan) and a neurosis for dad (Elliott Gould), but Claire
is the centerpiece of the film -- and rightly so.  Witt is radiant as an
actress, and the few times she's been able to strut her stuff at the
movies (see Fun), she's stolen the show.  Unfortunately, Mona Lisa's
rambling storyline portrays Claire as so incapable of motivation that
she is literally paralyzed with inaction, so Witt doesn't have much
range to show off.
     The bulk of the film becomes a hand-wrenching "How will Claire get
by?" when she really just needs to get off her ass and stop bitching.
There's nothing overly compelling about her self-made tragedy --
everyone's been dumped once in life -- so it's hard to be overly
sympathetic.
     Fortunately, Witt is so dazzling she largely overcomes the
limitations of her character and makes Playing Mona Lisa (a reference to
some advice her friend gives her about creating a healthy state of mind)
mostly watchable.  It's not great cinema, but it's worth a chuckle or
two.
Director: Matthew Huffman
Producer: Sid Sheinberg, Bill Sheinberg, Jon Sheinberg
Writer: Marni Freedman, Carlos De Los Rios
Starring: Alicia Witt, Harvey Fierstein, Brooke Langton, Johnny Galecki,
Ivan Sergei, Molly Hagan, Elliott Gould, Marlo Thomas, Estelle Harris,
Joe Mazza, Tammy Townsend, Sandra Bernhard
