Title
Review for King and I, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
This is a multi-part message in MIME format.
You cannot compare this 90-minute animated feature with 1) the
2 1/2-hour Rodgers & Hammerstein Broadway musical, 2) the two-hour
live-action movie, starring Deborah Kerr and Yul Brynner, which won
five Oscars in 1956, or 3) the 1943 novel, "Anna and the King of
Siam," based on the real Anna's authentic memoirs.  This is a cartoon
aimed at rugrats who could not possibly sit through either of its
stage and film predecessors. It's an introduction to the enduring
musical classic, that's all. Viewed in that light, it's fun but
Broadway musical purists will hate it, calling it a travesty.  The
story begins, not when widowed British schoolteacher Anna Leonowens
(voiced by Miranda Richardson with singing by Christiane Noll) and her
son (Adam Wylie) arrive in Bangkok to meet the King (Martin Vidnovic),
but while they're still at sea. They're threatened by a typhoon and a
huge, fire-breathing sea serpent, conjured up by the Kralahome (Ian
Richardson), the King's evil advisor. Anna brings Western culture to
the splendor of Siam (now Thailand), and she finds its stubborn,
irascible ruler quite attractive.  "Whistle a Happy Tune,""Getting to
Know You," and "Shall We Dance" still sound lovely, and parents should
know that, in this version, the King doesn't die. Instead, more
emphasis is placed on silly animals - like Tusker, a baby white
elephant; Moonshee, a mischievous monkey; and Rama, a regal black
panther. The animation is colorful and pretty but shows little of the
depth and detail of Disney features. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "The King and I" is a juvenile 4. But, unless you're desperate
for a G-rated movie, I'd advise waiting for the video.

Author
John Sylva
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
The King and I, a Warner Brothers animated, musical feature, recycles the
classic story of a woman who challenges the heart of a King, with obvious
results.  When Anna (Miranda Richardson), a British schoolteacher, travels to
Saim to educate the King's (Martin Vidnovic) children, she learns that the King
is treating his people unfairly, and must say something to the greedy ruler. 
Meanwhile, the King's Prime Minister (Ian Richardson), the stereotypical
villain, plots to overthrow the King, taking the throne.  The last, and most
predictable, main subplot deals with the King's son (Allen D. Hong), and his
love for a servant, Tuptim (Armi Arabe), and how he conflicts with his
feelings, and the ancient laws of Saim.
Not even the lone strong character of Anna can save the unbelievably horrible
waste of talent, as The King and I's problems could fill the blank pages of a
journal.  I will only note the major difficulties, for it would take pages to
elaborate on every detail.  The screenplay, written by Arthur Rankin, Peter
Bakalian, Jacqeline Feather, and David Seidler, which is based upon the play
written by Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein, has some of the worst
dialogue written in a film within recent memory, as every time the obnoxious
king would shout, "Etc, etc, etc," I would cringe.  Literally.  Speaking of
cringing- I did quite a bit of this during the rather short film, which is a
classic display of terrible filmmaking.  Besides the repetitive dialogue from
the King, on the whole, the songs seem out of place, and unlike the lyrics, are
unmagical.  The sole song which is used cleverly is "Getting to Know You,"
which is used as Anna shows the children the great outdoors, which they have
never been exposed to.  Unlike Disney animated features, the King and I's songs
don't add to the film, and are as uneffective as could be.  Take the following
scenario as an example, as the sheer horror of the King and I's music is at its
worst.
Martin Vidnovic voices the King without effort or emotion- You hear the saying
two negatives don't make a positive?  Believe it!  With the terrible dialogue
that the King has, along with his awful voice track, the King is completely
unbelievable, only shows mild signs of any personality, and the only thing that
changes in the King is that he says "Etc., etc., etc.," more and more as the
film progresses.  No personality at the beginning of the movie, none at the
end.  And where does this character's personality change?  Hey, I thought Anna
was supposed to change him!  Isn't that the whole plot?
The Prime Minister's hideous sidekick (Darrell Hammond) brings his share of
cringes as well - Oh no!  Another one of his teeth fell out! HARDY-HAR-HAR!  He
is supposed to bring laughs for the kidlets, but even at age five I would have
cringed while watching him.
By the way this review is going, you may think the reasoning for my hate for
this film is due to not liking animated films- Hence why I hate this movie,
because The King and I is a disgrace to animation.  Animated films, such as
1994's The Lion King and 1998's The Prince of Egypt, are among my favorite
movies of all time.  The animation team does design their share of well
animated settings, so this makes it easier to take my mind off of the annoying
King, until I realize that day and night switch back in fourth within seconds.
I have not read the play, or seen the Oscar winning, 1956 film adaption, but
from what I can tell, the screenplay for the 1999 version completely butchers
the play, for The King and I is never magical, nor interesting.  If it wasn't
for Miranda Richardson, who voices Anna with feeling, The King and I could earn
the title, "Worst movie of the decade."  Instead, The King and I will just go
down as among the year's worst.
The Bottom Line- Avoid this movie at all costs.  Not even young children, the
target audience in this film, will enjoy it.  Not the slightest bit.

Author
Matt Williams
The King and I at first seems like simply an animated adaptation of the
Broadway musical. But, upon closer inspection, it is a actually only
partially an adaptation, mixing in new "kid-friendly" (and very
familiar) characters and subplots. Unfortunately, the two never quite
mix, and the resulting movie is too adult for kids, and too childlike
for adults.
Those familiar with the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical will recognize
the rough outline of the plot.  A British schoolteacher, Anna (Miranda
Richardson, Christiane Noll singing), travels to Siam to be the tutor to
the children of the King (Martin Vidnovic).
Forbidden love is very much the subject of the film, occurring not once,
but twice.  Anna falls in love with the King, but, more unforgivably,
the King's eldest son falls in love with a servant girl.
The cartoon adds another plot, in an attempt to keep the kiddies
interested. The King's advisor, The Kralahome (Ian Richardson), is
plotting to steal the throne of Siam for himself.  He plans to use his
wizardly powers of illusion to convince the British to move in and
replace the King. To add comic relief, he has a bumbling (and rather
stereotypical) sidekick, Master Little (Darrell Hammond).
It is the addition of this secondary plot that leads to many of the
problems with The King and I.  Children will find the "forbidden love"
plot dull and uninteresting, and adults will find the evil wizard plot
painful and distracting.  Rather than seeming like one film, able to be
enjoyed on multiple levels, The King and I feels like two half-completed
films, neither of which is satisfactory.
This might be forgivable if both plots could stand by themselves.
However, the romantic plot has been gutted to a mere shell of itself.
And the scheming-royal-counselor bit was done much better (and with much
more humor) in Aladdin.
The animation of The King and I is better than your standard
direct-to-television fare, but not by much.  It certainly doesn't hold a
candle to most recent animated feature films.
The film's strongest point is easily its music.  Despite all of the
nonsensical distractions onscreen (whose idea was it to add a fire
breathing dragon to this story?), the tunes still manage to hold their
own.
The end result of The King and I is rather pointless.  Children who are
too young to be entertained by the main plot will find only slight
distractions in the questionable comic relief.  Older kids would
probably enjoy the 1956 musical just as well.  It's certainly hard to
recommend a film that plays better with your eyes closed.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Richard Rich.
Voices: Miranda Richardson, Christiane Noll, Martin Vidnovic, Ian 
Richardson, Darrell Hammond, Allen D. Hong, David Burnham, Adam Wylie, 
Sean Smith.
1999 - 90 minutes
Rated G (no objectionable material).
Reviewed March 21, 1999.
In the last two weeks of filmgoing, not one, but two films have 
contained characteristics that only the worst director of all-time, Ed 
Wood, could be proud of. The recent "Wing Commander" turned out to be 
one of the very worst movies of the whole decade, while in the new 
animated film, "The King and I," a quality-butchering remake of the 
famous Rodgers and Hammerstein musical, one sequence changes from day to 
night between shots. This foolish mistake might be at least a little 
understandable in a live-action picture, but keep in mind that this 
particular movie wasn't even filmed, but drawn!
In a children's adaptation that sticks to the bare minimum in the story 
department, there truthfully isn't much do discuss in the way of a 
premise, except that a 19th-century schoolteacher named Anna (voiced by 
Miranda Richardson) arrives at the kingdom of the stern King of Siam 
(Martin Vidnovic) to teach his eight children, while the King's evil 
brother, Kralahome (Ian Richardson), plots to destroy him, as well as 
his oldest son, so he can become the King and take over the palace.
To get a taste of how desperate for ideas "The King and I" actually is, 
take, for example, the ludicrous opening scene in which Kralahome 
creates a giant water serpent to cause Anna to shipwreck. Does Anna 
naturally shudder in fear? No, not at all. Why, she decides it would be 
a perfect time to sing the upbeat and delightful song, "I Whistle a 
Happy Tune!" Unfortunately, the film goes even further downhill from 
there, and the only element that kept it from becoming a thoroughly 
unbearable experience was the memorable, if one-dimensional, character 
of Anna, a head-strong woman who speaks up when she disagrees with 
things, and deeply believes in what is right and wrong. Amazingly, 
however, Anna disappears for long stretches of time to concentrate on 
the dull, predictable subplot involving the King's son and his 
blossoming romance with a kind-hearted servant whom he is forbidden to 
be with. Multiple awards for anyone who can guess what happens with this 
couple by the movie's end...
If animated films are expected to be money-makers, they've got to have 
at least something going for them, and obviously Warner Brothers doesn't 
have anything going for them. The animation itself is strictly 
amateurish and Saturday morning cartoonish; at several moments the songs 
are nearly drowned out by the loud, forgettable music score; and the 
overall story follows the basic slapdash formula of all animated films: 
a female protagonist; a male love interest who needs reforming; some 
cuddly animal sidekicks; and a dark, canniving villain that has magical 
powers, not to mention a clumsy, bumbling sidekick. Sigh. As the 
characters repeatedly say to the point of near-monotony throughout, 
etc., etc., etc.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In order to adapt the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical classic, THE KING
AND I, for more modern tastes and sensibilities, the new animated movie
employed no less than 5 writers (Arthur Rankin, Peter Bakalian,
Jacqueline Feather, David Seidler and Brian Nissen).  So what did this
assemblage of script doctors come up with?  Dental floss.
The villain's assistant is a heavily stereotyped Chinese man, Master
Little, who is built like a very pregnant basketball.  He's a
mid-nineteenth century man who worries about tooth decay.  The sight
joke in the opening sequence has him flossing away.  And that's about as
funny as this dead-on-arrival movie ever gets.
The vastly altered story is so minimalist that the movie plays like a
music video.  Between songs, the movie tosses the audience only the
barest outlines of a plot.  Even this might be tolerable if the singing
weren't so incredibly bland.
If your kids, like mine, have never seen the original play or movie,
they may come away with a very negative view of it.  When you try to
explain to them that this can be a sweet musical with some wonderful
songs, don't be surprised if they stare at you in total disbelief.  Most
amateur musical productions provide more lively singing than this motion
picture production.
I've criticized DOUG'S 1ST MOVIE, THE RUGRATS MOVIE and other recent
kids' movies for being no better than the television series upon which
they are based.  This version of THE KING AND I, however, sets a lower
standard.  It isn't even as good as most kids' television series.
The quality of the animation is particularly annoying.  The characters
lack proper fluidity, moving in small jerky motions as if the filmmakers
tried to cut costs by reducing the amount of changes between one
animation cell and the next.  In addition, the animators need to study
the natural movements of the human body.  Their characters walk with a
spastic awkwardness, rather like a robot trying to mimic a human.
The uninspired writers fall back on the old cliche of an animal
companion as a way to pump up the comedy.  This time they go for a
simian sidekick, but he isn't the least bit funny.  They also throw in a
bit of the witch from SNOW WHITE in an attempt to enliven the drama, but
it is horribly out of place.  Do we really need a magic mirror in THE
KING AND I?
The truly frightening line comes at what looks like the end of the
movie.  "It's not over yet!" the villain yells.  Chills went down my
spine as I realized he was right.  We had another quarter of an hour to
endure.
THE KING AND I runs 1:27, but feels much longer.  It is rated G and
would be acceptable for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, said the movie almost put him to sleep.  (His
head was on my shoulder through over half of the movie.)  He gave it
just one *, complaining that none of the characters or the songs were
interesting.  He thought the writers did an especially poor job of
explaining any of the motivation, which made the story confusing.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY:  http://www.sick-boy.com
Warner Bros.' second serious foray into the animation market is just as
ineffective as its first (the anemic The Quest for Camelot).  Here, they
hack about forty-five minutes off of the popular 1956 Rodgers &
Hammerstein musical starring Deborah Kerr and Yul Brynner, who reprised
his Broadway role and nabbed the Oscar.  And, believe me, you'll be
thankful for every minute that's missing.
The story is the same as it always was – Anna (voiced by Miranda
Richardson, Merlin) is a widowed English schoolteacher who travels to
Siam to teach the children of its overprotective and strong-handed
King.  She butts heads with His Holiness almost immediately and must
also deal with the obligatory evil cartoon guy who wants to dethrone the
existing King and rule the country as he deems fit.  This guy also has
magical powers, at one point conjuring up a dragon to attack Anna's boat
before her arrival.  Luckily, Anna is able to fend the serpent of with
her amazing power of song.
The King is as empty as Paul McCartney's stomach at an all-you-can-eat
ribs festival.  The animation is horribly jerky and the evil guy's comic
sidekick (voiced by Saturday Night Live's Darrell Hammond) is downright
offensive – unless all Asian men are really short, stupid, bald, and
have both rotting teeth and bad accents.  And the songs – don't get me
started on the songs.  You'll probably be better off waiting for the
real remake – not of the musical, but of the 1946 Oscar winner featuring
Rex Harrison and Irene Dunne – which will star Jodie Foster as the
British governess and Hong Kong action legend Chow Yun-Fat (The
Corruptor) as the King.  (G – 1:28 for mild violence and the possibly
offensive portrayal of the entire Asian race)

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Richard Rich.
Voices: Miranda Richardson, Christiane Noll, Martin Vidnovic, Ian 
Richardson, Darrell Hammond, Allen D. Hong, David Burnham, Adam Wylie, 
Sean Smith.
1999 - 90 minutes
Rated G (no objectionable material).
Reviewed March 21, 1999.
In the last two weeks of filmgoing, not one, but two films have 
contained characteristics that only the worst director of all-time, Ed 
Wood, could be proud of. The recent "Wing Commander" turned out to be 
one of the very worst movies of the whole decade, while in the new 
animated film, "The King and I," a quality-butchering remake of the 
famous Rodgers and Hammerstein musical, one sequence changes from day to 
night between shots. This foolish mistake might be at least a little 
understandable in a live-action picture, but keep in mind that this 
particular movie wasn't even filmed, but drawn!
In a children's adaptation that sticks to the bare minimum in the story 
department, there truthfully isn't much do discuss in the way of a 
premise, except that a 19th-century schoolteacher named Anna (voiced by 
Miranda Richardson) arrives at the kingdom of the stern King of Siam 
(Martin Vidnovic) to teach his eight children, while the King's evil 
brother, Kralahome (Ian Richardson), plots to destroy him, as well as 
his oldest son, so he can become the King and take over the palace.
To get a taste of how desperate for ideas "The King and I" actually is, 
take, for example, the ludicrous opening scene in which Kralahome 
creates a giant water serpent to cause Anna to shipwreck. Does Anna 
naturally shudder in fear? No, not at all. Why, she decides it would be 
a perfect time to sing the upbeat and delightful song, "I Whistle a 
Happy Tune!" Unfortunately, the film goes even further downhill from 
there, and the only element that kept it from becoming a thoroughly 
unbearable experience was the memorable, if one-dimensional, character 
of Anna, a head-strong woman who speaks up when she disagrees with 
things, and deeply believes in what is right and wrong. Amazingly, 
however, Anna disappears for long stretches of time to concentrate on 
the dull, predictable subplot involving the King's son and his 
blossoming romance with a kind-hearted servant whom he is forbidden to 
be with. Multiple awards for anyone who can guess what happens with this 
couple by the movie's end...
If animated films are expected to be money-makers, they've got to have 
at least something going for them, and obviously Warner Brothers doesn't 
have anything going for them. The animation itself is strictly 
amateurish and Saturday morning cartoonish; at several moments the songs 
are nearly drowned out by the loud, forgettable music score; and the 
overall story follows the basic slapdash formula of all animated films: 
a female protagonist; a male love interest who needs reforming; some 
cuddly animal sidekicks; and a dark, canniving villain that has magical 
powers, not to mention a clumsy, bumbling sidekick. Sigh. As the 
characters repeatedly say to the point of near-monotony throughout, 
etc., etc., etc.

Author
Michael Dequina
Doug Funnie (voice of Thomas McHugh), the 12-year-old star of Jim
Jinkins's ABC and Nickelodeon animated series _Doug_, indeed has his
first film, but if there's to be a second, he'd best find a vehicle more
interesting to flesh-and-blood moviegoers over his age.  As it is,
_Doug's_1st_Movie_, in which Doug and his friend Skeeter (Fred Newman)
befriend a gentle monster from a polluted lake, is a suitable
entertainment for its target audience.  It's simple, good-natured, and
tackles an environmental theme with an admirable lack of preachiness. 
That said, for adults, the film is pleasant but hopelessly vanilla. 
While the film will hush up the kids for its lean 77 minutes, but the
older ones in the audience (read: parents) will find their attention
wandering elsewhere.  Still, families can do worse for a night at the
movies...
...such as Warner Bros.'s curious animated version of Rodgers and
Hammerstein's venerable musical _The_King_and_I_.  Since animation is the
only medium in which the movie musical is still alive and kicking, using
the form to adapt a successful stage production is a natural and
undeniably intriguing extension.  Plus, there is no need to worry about
coming up with snappy tunes when there is a tried-and-true score at one's
disposal.  (And, indeed, the classic songs "I Have Dreamed" and "Shall We
Dance?" are a pleasure to hear in this film, as they would in any
setting.)
Yet this _King_and_I_ is the most stupefyingly incompetent animated
feature to reach the big screen in recent memory--even worse than
Warner's misfire of last year, _Quest_for_Camelot_.   Like _Quest_,
_King_ features some ragged, Saturday morning-level artwork and animation
(granted, so does _Doug's_1st_Movie_, but at least there it's more or
less intentional) and some clumsily integrated (to say the least)
computer-generated effects.  But while I can see how the flighty _Quest_
could divert the young ones in the audience, _King_ is a film with no
clear audience.
The story is still basically the same: sometime in the 19th century,
British teacher Anna Leonowens (spoken by Miranda Richardson, sung by
Christiane Noll) develops a warm friendship with the initially icy King
of Siam (Martin Vidnovic) while tutoring his many children.  But, in
accordance with the Disney mold, director Richard Rich has given the tale
more kid-friendly trappings.  Toning down the material is not necessarily
a bad thing--witness Disney's triumphant, underappreciated
_The_Hunchback_of_Notre_Dame_--but here the material is _dumbed_ down;
the addition of cuddly animal companions, portly comic sidekicks, a
sorcery-using villain, and a ridiculous action climax simply distract and
never feel like necessary and natural outgrowths of the source story. 
(_Hunchback_'s wisecracking gargoyle device didn't always work, but for
the most part, it was convincingly handled--as possibly being a figment
of Quasimodo's imagination.)  Hence, adults who are engaged by the basic
story and the music will likely be annoyed by the obligatory kiddie
concessions.  
But what about these kids, for whom the alterations were made?  The
broad comedy garnered some giggles from the children in my audience, but
most of the time I heard a lot of murmuring, some whining, and I felt a
general sense of antsiness.  This is because the story of Anna and the
King, while all-ages-appropriate, is a mature, subtly cerebral one.  And
the lushly orchestrated Rodgers and Hammerstein tunes, while timeless
standards, aren't exactly of the bouncy, "Hakuna Matata"-like jingle type
that leaves kids humming on the way out of the theatre.
Animating any traditional Broadway musical makes for an intriguing
experiment, and indeed _The_King_and_I_ is one--albeit in the wrong,
train wreck-like sort of way.  Based on this disastrous result, one can
only hope that Warner Bros., which holds the feature film rights to
Andrew Lloyd Webber's _The_Phantom_of_the_Opera_, doesn't decide to
sidestep the casting controversy and opt to go the animated route.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com___________________________________________________________________
You don't need to buy Internet access to use free Internet e-mail.
Get completely free e-mail from Juno at http://www.juno.com/getjuno.html
or call Juno at (800) 654-JUNO [654-5866]

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
STARRING    (the voices of): Miranda Richardson, Martin Vidnovic,
                Alan Hong, Armi Arabe, Ian Richardson, Darryl Hammond
DIRECTOR:   Richard Rich
WRITERS:    Richard Rogers, Oscar Hammerstein II, Arthur Rankin,
                Peter Bakalian, Jacqueline Feather, David Seidler
RATED:      G
RELEASED:   1999
        Warner Brothers' "The King and I" is an animated retelling
of the Rodgers and Hammerstein stage classic, or at least that's what
it claims; in truth, it's more mockery than homage.  The film is the
cinematic equivalent of Cliff-notes, to be employed by those who don't
have the attention span for anything longer or more intellectually
challenging than a "Road Runner" cartoon.
        At cursory glance, the plot appears to be the same: a British
schoolteacher named Anna (Miranda Richardson) is offered a job as
tutor to the King of Siam's children.  She accepts, on one condition:
she wishes to be given a house of her own, located outside the palace
walls.  Although the king (Martin Vidnovic) agreed to this stipulation
via letter, he is much less reluctant to grant the wish once Anna and
her son actually make it to Siam.  But the teacher is a fiercely
determined woman, not afraid to stand up for her rights; soon the
king grows fascinated with the intelligence and charisma of the new
arrival.  Although the monarch and the teacher come from varying
backgrounds, they are eventually able to put aside their differences
and strike up a friendship.
        That's about where the similarities between the two versions
of the story end.  This new animated incarnation cheerfully jettisons
all the thought-provoking aspects of the original work (like the
conflicting emotions the king feels over the issue of slavery, or
his confusion over how the world could've been created in six days
according to the Bible, when science clearly says it took millions
of years).  This "adaptation" (I call it butchery) is strictly
vanilla fare, with all the meat watered down to the point where it
tastes indistinguishable from the broth.
        So what does director Richard Rich do with the leftover
space which remains after he's stripped away half the story?  Why,
add a bunch of cartoon staples, of course.  Since it's impossible to
make an animated feature without including a number of easily
marketable animal sidekicks, the film gives Anna's son Louis (Adam
Wylie) an obnoxious pet monkey.  The King himself gets a jet-black
panther named Rama, and slave-girl Tuptim (Armi Arabe) befriends an
adorably big-eyed baby elephant that seems to be in this movie for no
other purpose than to give Warner Brothers a stuffed animal that's
guaranteed to fly off toy store shelves.
        The original "The King and I" had no central villain, per se.
The King wasn't a bad man, just ignorant of British culture.  But
since you can't make an action figure out of "ignorance," this
adaptation has turned the King's Prime Minster, Kralahome (Ian
Richardson), into an archetypal evil villain stereotype.  He appears
to be the twin brother of Aladdin's Jafar, both physically and
mentally: Kralahome possesses sorcerer's powers, has mad ambitions
of ruling the kingdom, and will stop at nothing to dethrone the
king (although he takes time periodically to leer and break into
demented laughter, to make sure the audience knows that he's evil).
And just as Jafar had the obnoxious Iago for a sidekick, the prime
minister is followed around by a short, fat, incredibly stupid
companion named Master Little (Daryl Hammond).  Little is just as
flat and cliched as his boss; although the children at the screening
I attended seemed delighted by his madcap antics, I found him
infuriating, particularly during a ridiculous subplot involving
Little's tendency to involuntarily lose his teeth.  Why does a story
that's supposed to be a tragedy need such obnoxious comic relief?
        I say "supposed to be," because this film turns the thought-
provoking scenes of the original story into a trite, giddy smile-fest.
Gone is the heartwrenching moment in which the king dies of a
mysterious illness (which appears to be a broken heart), replaced
with a chase scene involving a hot-air balloon and a couple of
elephants.  I expected the king to be a brave man, but who knew he
was a Jackie Chan-wanna be?
        Perhaps most disappointing is the way the original tale's
emotional axis, the forbidden love affair between Tuptim and a
freeman, is relegated to a status of irrelevance.  The affair
ends tragically in the original film, giving the king (and the
audience) much to think about.  But here, Tuptim's love interest
is none other than the crown prince himself (who was a boy in the
earlier version, but appears to be roughly sixteen here); therefore,
all sense of tension is immediately irradicated.  Obviously the
king is not going to harm his son, so these scenes play off as
nothing more than cheap formula: the conclusion that they'll live
happily ever after is foreordained, but nonetheless, cliche' requires
the inclusion of a romance, leaving a story that proceeds so
transparently that there is no way for us to be surprised by
anything we're seeing.
        The movie is not devoid of merit, however.  The animation is
spectacular-- so good that the film may actually be worth a peek
simply to bask in its remarkably vivid colors.  Of particular note
is a montage of scenes in the palace gardens, which are rendered so
brightly and beautifully that I actually whispered the word "Wow."
The tune "Getting to Know You" also puts in a stellar appearance
here: in the original movie, the song is performed by Anna and the
children in their palace classroom; here, Anna takes the kids on
a field trip to the village just outside the palace gates (which
the kids have never seen).  It gives new meaning to the lyrics, and
is clever and touching at the same time.  Had the film been daring
enough to reinterpret the material in this fashion more often, rather
than "dumb it down," it could've provided a fresh new slant on a
beloved story; as it stands, it's the only such moment in the movie.
        This remake of "The King and I" is painfully disappointing.
It adheres to the belief that children are idiots who won't be able
to fathom a tale that possesses some depth and intelligence, and
steadfastly refuses to raise any issues worthy of thought and
discussion.  Instead, we're given an overabundance of cuteness, a
false-feeling happy ending, and cartoon cliches.  This isn't so much
"The King and I" as "The King and I and His Kids and the Villagers and
a Pointless Romance and a Bunch of Animals and Cardboard Villains and
our Merry Life Together in the Magical Land of Dreams..."; or, as the
king himself might say, "Et cetera, et cetera, et cetera."

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com

Author
Greg King
Rogers and Hammerstein's enduring musical about the prim
English governess who tamed the humourless king of Siam returns to the
screen in this animated tale from Warner Brothers.  For most, the role
of the stern but enlightened king is indelibly associated with the
late Yul Brynner, who performed it countless times on stage, in the
film version (for which he won an Oscar), and even in the short-lived
tv series.  Although he does a moderate job of voicing the character
here, Martin Vidnovic lacks Brynner's commanding presence.
Miranda Richardson provides the voice of Anna, the English
widow who travels to Siam in the 1860's to educate the king's
children.  She unwittingly becomes caught up in the intrigues of the
villainous Kralahome (voiced with sinister relish by Ian Richardson,
from Dark City).  With his incompetent, overweight sidekick Master
Little (Darrell Hammond), the Kralahome attempts to usurp the throne
away from the king.  It is this character who provides the bulk of the
film's humour.  Anna also helps the king see the error of following
traditional ways when his attitude threatens the romance between the
crown prince and a slave girl.
Created mainly in Asian studios under the direction of Richard
Rich, the standard of animation is largely uninspiring and fairly
straightforward, and the film lacks real impact.  The King And I
follows the formula for this type of animated film long set by Disney,
but without the same sense of flair or imagination.  Amazingly, there
are numerous continuity goofs throughout the film.  The producers have
deliberately aimed it more at juvenile audiences, who will probably be
unaware of the original movie.  Many of the familiar songs (including
Getting To Know You and Shall We Dance?) remain, but there have been
numerous other changes made to accommodate younger audiences.  Thus,
in true Disney fashion, we get a number of cute animals, including a
troublesome monkey, a black panther, and a pair of rare white
elephants, which will appeal to children.  Adult audiences will find
little here to excite or entertain.
For the most part, this version of The King And I is rather
dull stuff, and many in the audience will quickly tire of it.
