Title
Review for All Stars (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
    The recent wave of films from the Netherlands, and some other parts of
Europe, shows one thing that Hollywood has yet to learn. That one does not
need massive budgets to make films, and that with some clever work, and well
thought out acting, a small film can look much better than many high budget
productions that show more gloss than dedication. ALL STARS is one such
film. For all its obvious lack of a large budget, the film incorporates many
funny moments into a very nice package, and manages to make the film very
entertaining for anyone.
    It is the story of a bunch of guys that have been together for many
years playing soccer as a team. As they approach their 500th game, and they
are having a harder time fielding a complete team, we come to see that there
are other problems that they all have individually. Many of them go way back
to their days as youngsters. Others are results of not to early experiences.
    The film, more than anything else, is a nice, gentle study of
friendship, and what it has taken to keep these guys together for so long,
despite their many directions, and work. But the film, while being sensitive
to many of the characters never loses sight of its funny moments, and makes
sure that everyone of the guys has a laugh, or enjoys a funny moment.
Meanwhile, all this stuff is not fun for some, but it is not enough for all
of them to break up each other's friendships, even when it may be adding
some terrible stress to a few families that have gotten here along the way.
    One mother is upset because her husband lies about his Sunday outings.
One other has a "father" who used to be their coach. It turns out that he
was adopted, and couldn't exactly leave the old man to go to games but had
to. His girl friend is not any more inclined to understand their
relationship, which is not revealed until the old man is dead. And then
there is Bram, who has been gay all this time, and no one knew it, but he
has not had the courage to tell any of them. His plight comes alive when he
does not respond to a girl that likes him, but can not get a response out of
him... it is one of the films finer moments, and so gently filmed, that it
is hard for us, to dislike the film, its direction and style. And of course,
one of the guys is unfaithful, etc, etc, and nearly ruins his own
relationship to a woman that is pregnant and whom Bram happened to have
liked when he was a kid.
    There are few films that pack such a wallop of a story, that is, so many
things to go after, and manages to keep things going for a long time, and
never really bore the audience. It does so, at times, by crossing to moments
of comedy .. like three of four of the guys have an awful time making it to
the game, it is raining cats and dogs, and the referee drops the ball on the
muddy pitch, and declares the game suspended. After all the trouble, justice
is served by the weather. Like can be trying sometimes. But amidst the funny
stuff of the away game at the "farm", one of the guys manages to get his
mouth in trouble, and then some. All the stuff that we always look back and
find funny and amusing when we look at it all later in life.
    ALL STARS is far from a film that demands attention from the audience,
but it has a sudden charm that attracts you to its story and plight of each
character easily enough. it is shot with ease, nothing slick, or fancy here,
just plain good camera work, and well designed use of the film, which might
have suggested that these people had to do their work under the direst of
needs and consequences, and the result is a charming film, that is very
enjoyable.
    The acting is rather nice, and each character is actually pretty well
defined giving the idea that an ensemble has been developed and designed to
prepare this thing for shooting. it's hard to tell if there are any stock
characters here, as they are all different and have their own agendas.
Reviewed by Pedro Sena.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1998. All Rights Reserved.
