Title
Review for Sib (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 MK2 Productions 
 Director:  Samira Makhmalbaf
 Writer:  Mohsen Makhmalbaf, Samira Makhmalbaf
 Cast: Ghorban Ali Naderi, Azizeh Mohamadi, Massoumeh
Naderi, Zahra Naderi, Zahra Saghrisaz
   A recent article in the New York Times science section
refers to that perennial question: does money buy happiness? 
Agreeing with the sentimentalists, sociologists firmly agree
that once you have enough for the basics and then some,
additional increments don't mean all that much.  Though the
American standard of living has tripled since 1947 (contrary
to what people say about the good old days when you could
buy a newspaper for two cents), Americans have proved in
surveys to be equally happy from 1950 to 1959, from 1960 to
1969, and from 1990-1999.  In fact even people in prison
were found to be on the whole as happy as those who are
not, which brings us to a startlingly original film, "The Apple." 
The picture by the 18-year-old director Samira Makhmalbaf
(the youngest director ever to have a movie play in a
principal section of the Cannes Film Festival), opens on the
faces of two 12-year-old girls. They are smiling, and they
continue to beam and grin throughout the 85-minute film. 
Why is their happiness unusual?  It is peculiar because they
have been imprisoned every day of their lives.  Their father,
now 65 years old, and their mother, who is blind, kept them
locked in their homes so that they were never exposed to the
sun, to other people, to the games that all children need if
they are to become socialized.  
   "The Apple," which could be called for want of another
genre term a dramatized documentary, portrays Zahra and
her twin sister Massoumeh as the daughters of two Turks
living in Iran, specifically in a run-down section of southern
Tehran.  Their 65-year-old dad explains early on to a social
worker who has heeded the neighbors' complaints and has
come to his residence that he keeps his girls with him at
home because he fears that they will be defiled by the local
boys.  The social worker takes the girls away from their
father, sending them to an agency which bathes them
apparently for the first time in weeks, gives them short
haircuts, and outfits them with new, clean clothing.  The girls
are returned when their father promises to keep the gate
open for them, but he promptly reneges, draws new
complaints from the neighbors, and is given a unique
punishment by the social agency.
   The story, about girls who are so unsocialized that they'd
have been better off being brought up by wolves, is arresting
enough.  What makes "The Apple" particularly compelling is
that the actors are not only non-professionals: the parts are
played by the involved people themselves.  The bearded
father, who wears Coke-bottle glasses, agreed to this
Pirandellian arrangement because he believed that the movie
would clear him from the dishonor which he feels was
heaped upon him by a society that did not understand his
apprehensions.  Newspapers and TV exaggerated, insisting
that the girls were chained up.  Their dad, who insists that
this never happened, believes to this day that he had done
the right thing.  
   Truth to tell, there are few professional thesps who could
match the old man's performance.  Breaking into lilting prayer
in which he invites God to take him from this vale of tears,
the guy draws sympathy from the audience for his sincerity. 
Speaking metaphorically, he compares the sun to boys, and
flowers to girls: "If the sun shines upon the flowers, they
fade."  If anyone disbelieves that the road to hell is paved
with good intentions, "The Apple" will wipe the doubts away. 
The young girls, Zahra and Massoumeh, are a pathetic duo
despite their frozen smiles.  They have been so "protected"
from the outside world that they scarcely know how to walk,
and their conversation is more unintelligible than that of the
goat that hangs around outside their home.  The animal
knows even how to eat an ice cream pop in a more mannerly
way than these young women, who appear retarded at first,
but as they play with others whom they instantly befriend,
they seem to grow intellectually and emotionally in leaps and
bounds.
   The apple of the title is metaphoric, standing for the sexual
knowledge with which Eve tempted Adam.  That piece of fruit
figures in various scenes.  In one situation, the girls take the
fruit from a vendor, not even realizing that they are stealing. 
In the most transparent metaphor, a boy of about nine years
dangles an apple on the end of a pole, urging the girls to
jump and try to reach it.
   "The Apple," which features improvised dialogue from the
neighbors who complained to the social agency, says
something about the power of women in Iran.  Though we in
the west may believe that all Fundamentalist states are alike,
it's significant that a social worker has the power to disagree
forcefully with the man of the house, to take the girls away
from him, and in one humorous incident to lock the man
inside his own house as a taste of his own medicine.  "The
Apple" is unusual and evocative in many different ways: in its
image of a society caught between medievalism and modern
striving; in the spontaneity of the actual people involved in the
publicized actions; and in the speed with which the film was
wrapped.  It's certainly not as charming as the amazing
"Children of Heaven" or "The White Balloon," but stands as a
striking example of Iranian cinema verite.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

APPLE, The (SIB) (director: Samira Makhmalbaf; screenwriter: Mohsen
Makhmalbaf; cinematographer: Ebrahim Ghafouri/Mohamad Ahmadi; editor:
Mohsen Makhmalbaf; cast: Massoumeh Naderi, Zahra Naderi, Ghorbanali
Naderi, Azizeh Mohamadi; Runtime: 85; 1998-Iran/France)
"The Apple" is the first feature by Samira Makhmalbaf, the 17-year-old
daughter of the Iranian filmmaker, Mohsen Makhmalbaf (Gabbeh). It is
based on a true event and uses the actual family involved in relating
this odd but wonderful story, which is told in a wryly humorous manner.
In the poor section of south Tehran, 12-year-old twin daughters,
Massoumeh and Zahra, are locked in their one-room house, kept from going
outside, from attending school, from any contact with the outside world,
left unwashed, barely able to speak except in gurgles, and are without
friends. The father is a 65-year-old impoverished, poorly educated,
unemployed religious fundamentalist, who gets hand-outs from people who
ask him to pray for them. The mother is blind, fearful of life, and
unwilling to let the girls be free because of her insecurities and
mental unbalance. The father's reason for keeping the girls locked
behind bars for their entire life is that: "My daughters are like
flowers. They mustn't be exposed to the sun or they would soon fade." He
also claims that his blind wife can't watch the children and he must
lock them in or else the girls could get touched by boys and be
dishonored.
This ignorance is bliss tale, a tale with no given solution, seems like
it is a documentary, but instead it mixes fact and fiction, as it adds
setup fictional pieces to its factual story; and, this national story in
Iran, which was widely reported in their media causing a national
scandal, plays here with a dazzling sense of wonderment and complexity.
It was a condemnation of how girls are treated differently than boys,
because the boys would have been allowed to play outside and therefore
would have never been imprisoned. It makes a potent statement about
women's rights in a country where women are seen as inferior, and it
also symbolically calls for more freedom for all people. Samira, now
that she had the consent of the real people involved to film their
story, went right ahead with the project, securing help in the script
and in the editing from her famous and controversial father, as she was
able to shoot this simple story within eleven days. She has made it a
story that calls attention to the ethics for all women in Iran, not
caring how controversial it would seem to the authorities.
Inexcusably, after so much psychological damage has been done, a
petition to the Welfare Department, sent by the neighbors of the Naderi
family, is shown onscreen, and a social worker shows up at their door to
question them, taking the children to the orphanage to wash up and be
interviewed, before deciding what to do with them. They make an
agreement with the parents that the children are not to be locked in
anymore, but must be allowed to play in the street, and the twins are
thusly returned to the parents.
When the social worker visits them again, the children are still locked
up. The social worker then takes action, freeing them to go play in the
streets, while locking the parents inside to let them know how it feels.
The neighbors are seen reacting to the girls on the street and the
social worker's presence, either praising her for bringing the girls
back or wondering why she didn't keep the girls with the Welfare
Department. The girls get into trouble when they try to buy ice cream
from a boy vendor without money and then stealing the ice cream, meeting
a couple of girls who teach them how to play without hitting each other,
and they chase after an apple a playful boy dangles by a string from his
apartment window. The social worker gives the father a hacksaw and tells
him that is the only way he will leave his imprisonment.
What will happen to the girls in the future is anybody's guess. The last
shot of the film, if it is an omen of the future, then it is a scary
one, as the blind woman leaves the house and meets the same playful boy
dangling the apple and ends up chasing the same apple her daughters
chased. Who knows what will happen in Iran, and what fate awaits those
who are blind or have been imprisoned and venture out into the unknown,
but for the teenage filmmaker, that is the only way to go to secure
freedom.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
