Title
Review for Air Bud (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Scott Renshaw
    In an early scene from AIR BUD, young Josh Framm (Kevin Zegers), a
fatherless and friendless boy in an idyllic suburban neighborhood, rolls a
ball into some bushes and is startled when something rolls the ball back
to him.  Josh leaves a trail of sweet treats to lure his mysterious
companion into the open, whereupon emerges...a squat little
extraterrestrial with a telescoping neck.
     Well, actually, it's a sweet-tempered dog, recently escaped from his
nasty owner, an inept clown named Norm Snively (Michael Jeter).  Even
though the owner doesn't care enough about the dog to name him, he still
shows up to claim his property once he realizes the boy has his dog.  The
boy refuses to give up his new friend, however, because he has come to
love...the little beagle named Shiloh.
     Well, actually, it's a golden retriever named Buddy.  From the
trailers and promotions for AIR BUD, you might be expecting a rambunctious
sports comedy about a bad-team-made-good in the recent Disney tradition,
with a hoops-playing pooch leading a basketball team to victory -- sort of
THE MIGHTY DOGS.  With a few token exceptions, it's nothing of the kind.
Screenwriters Paul Tamasy and Aaron Mendelsohn want AIR BUD to be a
touching story of a lonely boy and his dog, something warm but slow-paced,
something decidedly _not_ THE MIGHTY DOGS.
     Given the formulaic drivel Disney usually passes off as live action
entertainment, that noble goal alone should have made AIR BUD worth
supporting.  Unfortunately, two cosmically bad decisions gummed up the
works.  The first of these you can chalk up to Tamasy and Mendelsohn, who
make the mistake of attempting to evoke the most beloved lonely boy and
his dog story of recent years (Steven Spielberg's E. T.) while 
incidentally evoking the best lonely boy and his dog story of this year
(the recent video debut SHILOH).  Young Kevin Zegers is a decent enough
actor, but he's fighting against some tough precedents when he tries to
make his friendship with Buddy uniquely compelling, as well as fighting
against Charles Martin Smith's languid direction.
     The second mistake is purely the fault of Disney's marketing
department, which will be luring unsuspecting kids and their parents to
what they believe is going to be a slapstick comedy.  Buddy's impressive
basketball tricks might make a nice five-minute visit with Letterman or
Leno, but they're not the stuff a feature film is made of.  With the
exception of one minor chase scene and the big basketball game finale
(which features the ridiculous fiction -- and anyone who has ever been to
a middle school basketball game will realize this -- of a middle school
basketball game with a score in the 80s and a team which runs a pivot game
reminiscent of Medowlark Lemon-era Globetrotters), AIR BUD is achingly
slow. Twice as many children in the screening audience were roaming the
aisles as were enraptured by the less-than-antic antics of Josh and Buddy.
     It's tough to knock a family film which dares to avoid bodily
function humor, but AIR BUD simply has no focus or direction, a fact made
abundantly clear when the ridiculous basketball game finale gives way to
an even more ridiculous courtroom finale.  The custody battle for Buddy is
even more of a chore to sit through than the rest of the film, and it does
families the service of explaining to children that our legal system is
based on dotty old judges with delusions of Solomonic wisdom.  AIR BUD is
really deserving of praise for only one reason:  it's not what it's being
sold as.  Three cheers for the curative powers of false advertising.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kevin Zegers, Wendy Makkena, Michael Jeter, Bill Cobbs, 
      Eric Christmas
Director: Charles Martin Smith
Producers: Robert Vince and William Vince
Screenplay: Aaron Mendelson, Paul Tamasy
Cinematography: Mike Southon
Music: Braham Wenger
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     When you consider motion picture concepts that never should make it 
past the planning stage, a dog playing basketball has to be near the top 
of the list (alongside a remake of CASABLANCA and a big-screen version 
of LEAVE IT TO BEAVER).  Nevertheless, because this is Disney, a company 
that's never met a dumb animal movie premise it didn't like, AIR BUD not 
only survived development hell, but emerged to plague the late summer 
box office.
     Someone should consider a law banning Disney from making sports-
related movies.  I still shudder every time I think of their ANGELS IN 
THE OUTFIELD remake.  THE MIGHTY DUCKS movies are the worst examples of 
crass commercialization.  And now there's AIR BUD, which lavishes the 
same kind of sickeningly skewed attention on basketball that the Mouse 
Corporation had previously bestowed upon baseball and hockey.  Somewhere 
along the way, Disney confused "family entertainment" with "mindless 
stupidity."  
     AIR BUD starts out like a severely watered-down version of the 
recent (and infinitely better) SHILOH.  12-year old Josh Framm (Kevin 
Zegers), a newcomer to the quiet town of Fernwell, Washington, makes 
friends with an abused golden retriever.  The dog, named Buddy, has run 
away from its nasty owner, the sniveling Norm Snively (Michael Jeter).  
After proving over a two week period that he is responsible enough to 
care for the dog, Josh is allowed to keep him.  Then, one night, while 
Josh is shooting baskets, Buddy reveals an amazing talent:  the ability 
to sink a lay-up.  Soon, the dog has become the mascot for Josh's school 
basketball team, and, with Buddy's support, they appear headed for the 
finals.  That is, until Snively gets wind of who has his dog, and shows 
up to claim the animal.
     In actuality, the first hour of AIR BUD is watchable, since all 
it's doing is recycling diluted elements from SHILOH and HOOSIERS.  
During the final thirty minutes, however, things become painful (to the 
point where I used the mantra "It's almost over" to keep from walking 
out).  Does Josh's team win the championship?  Does the dog save the 
day?  Does Snively get what he deserves?  Does anyone not know the 
answers to these questions?
     Early during the end credits, AIR BUD makes note of the fact that 
"no special visual effects were used in the filming of the basketball 
sequences."  That's fine, but, to involve me in a movie, something a 
little more impressive is required than a dog that can bounce a ball off 
its nose.  There is no attempt to fashion anything more ambitious or 
interesting than an obligatory storyline around this circus act.  And 
director Charles Martin Smith makes some ill-advised choices in 
developing AIR BUD's tone.  For the most part, the movie is presented as 
a simplistic melodrama that takes itself far too seriously (with 
occasional, unfunny instances of slapstick comedy thrown in at odd 
moments).  A movie featuring a basketball playing dog should probably 
use a somewhat less earnest approach to its subject matter.
     In the acting department, the weakest performer is the human lead, 
Kevin Zegers.  Zegers is adequate at best, but, at a time when there are 
an increasing number of superlative adolescent actors, that's not good 
enough.  In Zegers' defense, however, it should be noted that it's 
difficult to give an effective performance while constantly being 
upstaged by a dog.  Meanwhile, Michael Jeter is irritating as Snively -- 
watching his scenes is akin to enduring someone scraping their 
fingernails across a blackboard.  Bill Cobbs is suitably wise and 
helpful as the school's janitor-turned-coach.  And Wendy Makkena, who is 
best known as one of the singing nuns in Whoopi Goldberg's SISTER ACT, 
radiates maternal sweetness as Josh's mother.
     The screenplay is credited to Aaron Mendelson and Paul Tamasy, and 
it's astonishing that the attention of two writers was needed to fill in 
the blanks of this by-the-numbers script.  Once upon a time, I emerged 
from movies like this thinking that I could easily pen something with 
more originality and intelligence.  What I eventually realized, however, 
was that those qualities are not what studios like Disney are looking 
for in their family fare.  They want familiarity and banality, and AIR 
BUD wears both of those characteristics with the comfort and fit of a 
second skin.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     You're a twelve-year-old boy with a big problem.  Your mom's going
to be home shortly, and you've got this enormous, stray dog in the
bathroom that looks like it's been living in garbage and smells like
dirty socks.  Your challenge is to coax it into the bathtub.  With the
dog cleaned up, maybe your mom will break her rules and let you keep
it.
     Although the dog weighs as much as you do, you engage in a
wrestling match with it.  You lose.  Finally, you resort to subterfuge.
You know that he loves basketball as much as you so you throw a
basketball into the tub.  When the dog lands on the ball, you jump on
him and scrub like crazy.
     Then there is the drying conundrum.  The dog is a hyperactive wet
mop that resists sitting still for more than a few seconds.  Solution?
The leaf blower from the garage.
     All of this notwithstanding, AIR BUD, Disney's latest live action
film is not a comedy, which is not to say that it isn't funny.  As the
bath sequence, set uproariously to "Splish, splash, I was takin' a
bath," amply demonstrates, the picture can be quite humorous.
Moreover, the film's marketing ("He sits.  He stays.  He shoots.  He
scores.") positions the film firmly in the comedic camp.  The part of
AIR BUD, however, that works best is the older Disney theme,
popularized in the OLD YELLER tragedy, of a boy and his love for a
newfound dog.
     Cast almost exclusively with relatively unknown actors, the film
has a charm and a presence that is immediate.  Kevin Zegers plays the
lead, Josh Framm, as a lost kid.  Unlike most kids' shows where "lost"
is synonymous with cynical and angry, Josh is a good kid who has had
his underpinnings removed.  His dad had died the year before, and his
mom, played sweetly by Wendy Makkena, has now moved him to a new town
where he doesn't know anyone.  Although he loved playing basketball
with his dad, Josh has become despondent.
     In a parallel story, a mean clown -- are there any others in the
movies today? -- loses his trick dog on the way to dumping him in the
pound.  Michael Jeter plays Norm Snively, the clown, as both vicious
and stupid.  If his entire part of the story had been either removed or
at least significantly rewritten, the picture would have improved
enormously.
     The other theme to the plot has to do with that standard formula
of sports films, the team who wants to win the championship.  The
players on this team make the MIGHTY DUCKS look like pros.  Never is
their ascendancy to the state championship finals credible, but the
movie frequently ignores the drive to win the big game anyway, which in
itself is pleasantly unusual.  Equally surprising is that the credits
tell us that "no special visual effects were used in the basketball
sequences."
     The most touching scenes are set outdoors.  Mike Southon's
cinematography, Elizabeth Wilcox's sets, and Brahm Wenger's dreamy
music give a cold but hopeful beauty to these scenes.  The best are set
at an abandoned schoolyard with a derelict basketball court next to it.
It is there among the richly colored autumn leaves that Josh meets
Buddy, the trick dog, and learns of his amazing ability to shoot
baskets.  The handsome yellow dog is perfectly chosen.  He has an
infectiously happy smile and a huge tongue that seems forever like it
wants to lick someone.  The bond between Josh and Buddy is genuine
without ever being staged for cheap sentimentality.
     A typical coach ("If you can win on the courts, you can win at
life") recruits Josh to be what is derided as the team's "water boy,"
but Josh goes on to become a player.  The coach is fired for cruelty to
his players and is replaced by old NBA player named Arthur Chaney.
Chaney, who is played with a reserved charisma by Bill Cobbs, preaches
teamwork over everything else.  "If you're just out there for yourself,
you'll lose," he cautions.
     When Buddy crashes a basketball game, he becomes an instant hero.
As Principal Pepper, played too giddily by Nicola Cavendish, puts it,
Buddy is "a basketball-playing dog, a regular Michael 'Woof' Jordan."
     Easily the best visual in the film has Buddy with four custom-made
basketball shoes in the big game, playing for his first time on the
team.  And as shown in the trailers, this sequence is the show's
funniest.  When the opposition coach complains, the referee consults
the rule book and declares, "Ain't no rule says a dog can't play
basketball."  Later the referee asks Coach Chaney, "Does he dribble?"
"No, but he might drool a little," replies the coach.
     AIR BUD runs about 1:30.  It is rated PG for mayhem and would be
fine for all ages.  My son Jeffrey, age 8, loved it.  He rated it
"excellent," and claimed it would be on his top ten of the year list
and maybe number one.  I recommend the show to you and your whole
family and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark O'Hara
This summer has not offered the goods to kids under 13 or parents who 
enforce the ratings system.  For example, I couldn't take my 10 year-old 
daughter to DOCTOR DOLITTLE because of its PG-13 status.
But we went today to AIR BUD:  GOLDEN RECEIVER, a rather unwieldy title 
but a decent film for kids.  And only the second theatrical release this 
summer, I believe, rated G.  (MULAN is the other.)
The sequel to last year's AIR BUD, this film expands upon the premise of 
a dog's prowess at basketball.  With a quick opening that does its job - 
moving fast and reinforcing Bud's craftiness and basketball expertise --  
the story unfolds easily and reintroduces us to Josh Framm (Kevin 
Zegers), now an eighth grader, and his mother Jackie (Cynthia 
Stevenson).  After a series of events that complicate the plot, we 
discover the family dog's amazing skill at catching a football.
The football motif is corny and fun;  it makes the viewer remember the 
type of film she is watching.  This is a kids' movie, and it's all right 
that a dog catches passes and eludes tacklers.  It's even all right that 
there is no objection whatever that Bud dresses in a cute quasi-uniform 
and scores touchdowns against other eighth-grades football teams.
The complications are what doesn't work so well.  
First, Gregory Harrison plays Patrick Sullivan, a handsome veterinarian 
who cares for Bud.  It's refreshing, by the way, that Bud likes him back 
- a turnaround from many family pets' uncanny instincts and hatred of a 
human character.  It's Josh who feels threatened when Patrick begins to 
date his mother.  Even though Josh is himself a personable adolescent 
and not an obnoxious stereotype of a teenager, he shows a sulking 
attitude when Patrick and Jackie grow close.  Why would a smart and 
supportive father figure turn off a boy like Josh?  Are a couple of 
shots of  Josh's deceased test-pilot father enough to make us believe 
Josh's motivation to act like he does?
Another subplot involves a sinister but comic Russian duo, played by 
Nora Dunn and Perry Anzilotti.  Their motive is greed when they set out 
to complete their circus of stolen animals with unique talents.  Dunn 
and Anzilotti prove solid caricature actors as they pursue Bud.  Their 
schemes and fates provide quite a few chuckles when the subplot surfaces 
now and again.  What is missing is the connective tissue.  In the first 
BUD, Josh came in contact with the baddie, who was the dog's original 
owner.  Here, however, the Framm family never even sees the Boris and 
Natasha clones.  Yes, the slapstick adds another funny dimension to the 
story, but by the end we feel as if an alarm were set but failed to go 
off.  Too many details, including a threat to fire the lovable football 
coach, come to naught.
Cynthia Stevenson turns in a credible performance as Jackie.  She brings 
a mousy, compassionate quality to Josh's mother.  The film, with its 
general audience rating, does not show much intimacy between Jackie and 
Patrick, but the actors convince us that a happy ending is possible.  As 
I stated before, it's the relationship between Josh and Patrick that is 
oddly bloodless.
The animal training deserves some mention.  Four big, feathery dogs were 
used to portray Bud, and the editing is slick and watchable.  Somehow 
this dog manages to catch everything thrown his way.  Even though we can 
tell the pigskin is half-inflated, the effect is cute.  And the pooch's 
uniform is precious:  white-painted, ancient leather helmet, smallish 
shoulder pads that make him look half bulldog, and blue jersey featuring 
"K 9."
The film gave me a few belly laughs, which is a sort of litmus test I 
apply to comedies.  Even though AIR BUD:  GOLDEN RECEIVER is a B-film, 
it appeals to a G audience.  That and the laughter it provides are 
enough to earn our money at the box office.


Author
Jamie Peck
Walt Disney / 1:30 / 1997 / PG (gooey sentiment, overacting)
Cast: Kevin Zegers; Wendy Makkena; Michael Jeter; Bill Cobbs; Eric 
Christmas 
Director: Charles Martin Smith 
Screenplay: Aaron Mendelson; Paul Tamasy 
Disney's "Air Bud" tells a boy-and-his-dog story with a twist -- the 
pooch is quite an accomplished basketball player. Granted, for a family 
comedy, it's not a very funny or successful idea to begin with, but it 
doesn't seem to matter -- "Air Bud" is surprisingly solemn. Save for 
occasional moments of forced slapstick, the movie wags its tale with a 
straight face -- not a very enjoyable approach. If "Air Bud" had 
realized its own absurdity, then it possibly could have been better. 
Here, we're actually asked to cheer a moment when the dog marches out to 
save the big game, clad in two pairs of sneakers and even a jersey. Its 
number? K9. Yeah, whatever. 
The movie opens as golden retriever Buddy (as himself) escapes from his 
current owner, abusive clown-for-hire Norm Snively (Michael Jeter). He 
ends up in Fernwell, Washington, where mopey new-kid-on-the-block Josh 
(Kevin Zegers) is trying to cope with the move and the recent death of 
his father. Buddy, Kevin. Kevin, Buddy. Once the dog proves his on-court 
prowess, Kevin's self-esteem rockets. They both win places in the 
school's basketball team, with the animal as their mascot. But before 
they can make it to the finals, Snively surfaces to reclaim Buddy. 
Everything plays out just as one would think: Heavy on predictability, 
light on an actual story. The movie follows a calculated chain of events 
-- Kevin's gloom fades, Snively gets his comeuppance and Buddy contracts 
rabies and must be executed Old Yeller-style. Okay, that last one's a 
lie, but at least it would have been a quicker send-off than "Air Bud"'s 
courtroom climax -- no joke! There's even a faux-cute musical montage 
where a reluctant Buddy gets cleaned-up to "Splish Splash." Paint cans 
are spilled and newspapers are buried, all in the name of formula. 
The end credits note that "No special visual effects were used in the 
basketball sequences of this motion picture." That very well may be 
true, and although to see a dog sink shots is quite a sight, a movie 
cannot exist on feat alone. But "Air Bud" doesn't seem to be interested 
in anything else. A friend of mine insists he saw Buddy a while back on 
a segment of David Letterman's "Stupid Pet Tricks." I can't think of a 
more appropriate connection -- this movie is a stupid pet trick. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Walter Frith
Family film entertainment like any other form of movie presentation is judged
differently by different people and while some films aimed directly at
children are unappealing to older teenagers and full grown adults, I must
admit that as an adult I absolutely loved 'Air Bud'.
Cynics who believe that family films are too cute to be considered 'serious'
entertainment are entitled to their opinion but 'Air Bud' is an extremely
well crafted movie with an admittedly worn out but sometimes refreshing
reminder that dog really is man's best friend. There are no special effects
in this movie using computer generated pretender devices but rather a golden
retreiver with a snout for sinking basketballs with a ration of close to
100%.  I'm sure he's missed a few shots in real life but in the movie he has
a talent that is harnessed in the right place at the right time.
The film begins with a clown (Michael Jeter) who uses his feeble skills in an
attempt to entertain children but he is terrible at his profession and
birthday parties only become perky when he introduces kids to his golden
retreiver, Buddy who performs tricks to the delight of the youngsters.  He is
a cruel and abusive owner and Buddy's cage falls off his pick up truck on the
way home one day and Buddy is free and becomes adopted by a young boy named
Josh (Kevin Zegers).  Their friendship unfolds rather slowly until trust is
developed and Josh begins to play with Buddy using his basketball.  The
procedure is simple: toss a ball to Buddy and his snout will knock the ball
up and into the net everytime.  Josh is also trying to make it on the
school's basketball team and doesn't have much luck with a hard edged coach
who is eventually fired and replaced by the school's janitor who used to be a
pro basketball player for the New York Knicks back in the 1950's.  Buddy
becomes the team's mascot as Josh joins the team and the new coach teaches
values and principles to Josh which he applies accordingly.
Actor turned director Charles Martin Smith (you remember him as Toad in
'American Graffiti' and as the accountant Oscar Wallace in 1987's 'The
Untouchables') does a wonderful job capturing expressions from the dog's
every move and builds a bondable story utilizing the animal to stand out from
all the humans.  It's intelligently made and can be enjoyed by the youngest
child and the oldest adult.  It's a movie free of corporate advertising and
marketing at fast food restaurants and that's rare for a Disney production so
they deserve high marks for this one and it's probably the best Disney
production since 1994's 'Angels in the Outfield'.  In a summer of explosions,
special effects and rare family entertainment, 'Air Bud' is a pleasant,
harmless and emotional comfort which is no classic but is a film that I hope
becomes passed down along with other quality films such as 'Babe', 'Aladdin'
and 'The Lion King'.
