Title
Review for Amati Girls, The (2000) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rachel Gordon
Did you hate those cheesy PBS after-school specials when you were a
kid?  The ones where the smallest conflict was made into a volcanic
crisis but all was miraculously solved within a half an hour's time?  If
your answer is "yes", stay away from The Amati Girls.
Written and directed by Anne De Salvo, this sickeningly saccharine 91
minutes revolves around a supposedly tight-knit, triple-generation
family of women.  Each character embodies the ultimate in annoying
stereotypes, from selfless martyr to irresponsible wanderer.  And of
course, they each have a male in their life to represent the standard
issues of women's liberation from 30 years ago.
These issues are blatantly imbued through four sibling daughters, the
product of Dolly (Cloris Leachman, Hanging Up) and a recently deceased
father.  As Dolly is obsessed with taking care of her burial details,
the girls come together to discuss and judge her life and each other's.
Grace (Mercedes Ruehl, The Fisher King) allows her husband (Paul
Sorvino) to walk all over her.  She is the ultimate Energizer bunny for
her family.  Her special skill besides homemaking?  She always knows
which saint to pray to.  Denise, (Dinah Manoff, in her first role in
eight years) defends her right to remain single as she searches for a
storybook romance.  Is Mark Harmon the one, after he had the nerve to
tell her she couldn't sing professionally while he's still supporting
her through auditions?  Christine (Sean Young, Blade Runner) is
currently separated from the father of her child (Jamey Sheridan)
because he is far more focused on being a successful ad man than caring
about his family.  To round out this list of polarities is Delores (Lily
Knight), a young woman who is mentally damaged and treated like a thorn
in everyone's side.
Do any of these women deserve respect?  They certainly don't try to
improve their situations.  Grace admits she surrendered her needs to her
own husband as Christine complains her marriage just can't work.  What
does Christine do to comfort her disappointed daughter each time Daddy
doesn't show up?  Sit around the house all day and complain, or go to a
relative's house.  To complain.
These issues are dealt with in the same conversational fashion prevalent
20 years ago.  Christine argues with her mother that she wants out of
her marriage.  She proclaims that women expect more these days, to be
happy instead of accepting a life of servitude to their husbands.  Her
mother stereotypically replies that she is glad she got married when she
did because at least she had "stability."
The blandness of this dramatic work comes inherently from overly emoting
dialogue: "Mom, he gave nothing in return!"  "Christine, he gave me my
children."  "Paul, you're gonna die alone because your whole life is
alone."  This last said by a male co-worker who leaves Paul to work on a
major project by himself so he can read his child a bedtime story.  "How
did you know Aunt Loretta was the one?"  "Because she had a good heart,
what else do you need?"  This is just a small sample of the
excruciating, explicit dialogue.  The entire movie sounds this bad.
On the flip side of one exasperating emotional note after another, the
structure shifts to provide easy endings to conflicts without natural
plot devices to go with them.  Dolly suddenly allows Delores to have a
boyfriend, after explaining that some people are picked by God to go
through life without significant others.  Of course, Paul and Christine
work things out when he skips a big project to come to their daughter's
ballet recital.  Sheridan, Harmon, and Ruehl exit with the least amount
of shame, using silence just as well as their quiet dialogue.  If only
the other characters had been so lucky.
It's this type of storytelling that keeps women from being able to write
and direct projects that are intelligent and worthwhile.  Ugh.
Director: Anne De Salvo
Producer: James Alex, Melanie Backer, Steven Johnson III, Michael I.
Levy, 
Henry M. Shea Jr.
Writer: Anne De Salvo
Starring: Cloris Leachman, Mercedes Ruehl, Dinah Manoff, Sean Young,
Lily Knight, Lee Grant, Paul Sorvino, Jamey Sheridan, Mark Harmon 
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
